THE MIRROR OF TRUE Nobility and Gentility.

BEING THE LIFE OF The Renowned Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius Lord of Peiresk,
Senator of the Parliament at AIX.

Written by the Learned Petrus Gassendus, Professor of the Mathematics to the
King of FRANCE.

Englished by W. Rand, Doctor of Physic.

Vivit post Funera Virtus.

London, Printed by J. Streater for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

portrait of Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius NICOLAVS CLAUDIUS FABRICIVS DE PEIRESO
SENATOR AQVENSIS (...)


To the ingenious and learned Gentleman, the worshipful John Evelyn Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
MUch about ten years are fled, since my learned friend Dr. Benjamin Worsley
brought me first acquainted with the name and fame of Peireskius, and knowing
that I delighted to busy my self in that kind, wished that I would render his
History into English. And not long after, my good friend Squire Harlib seconded
his Motion, and put the Latin Book into my hand, to take home with me and
peruse and consider of. Which I did; but finding it so knottie a piece, both in
respect of the matter, and the press and elegantly concise style, of the
learned and judicious Gassendus, I had not the courage to venture upon it; but
restored my friend his Book, without any more ado: Since which time having
(during our intestine broiles in England) spent an ordinary Apprenticeship in
Contemplation of the Belgic Provinces of Holland, Utrecht; Brabant, Flanders,
and their many fair Cities and Universities, of which that of Lovaine seems
likest ours, as much resembling Cambridge, in many respects: not long after my
return, I was a fresh importuned by another friend, to let our Countrymen
understand the Life of the renowned Peireskius. Which at last, though with very
much dissidence, I did undertake and accomplish; and how I have therein
acquitted my self, you are best able to judge; who besides your parts of wit
and learning, know by experience the labor and care belonging to such works,
and are best qualified to excuse an oversight or mistake. You know that
Gassendus a general Scholar, and one of the greatest wits in Europe, and a
perfect Master of the Roman Language, comparable to any of the ancients, could
not have taken in hand an Argument, that would have more effectually called
forth, and employed the utmost of all his Activities, than to write the Life of
this rare French Gentleman, whose sprightful curiosity left nothing unsearcht
into, in the vast and all-comprehending Dominions of Nature and Art.

Having finished the Story, I was long in Quest to whom I might pertinently
dedicate the same, being apparelled, a la mode d'Angle terre: and pertinency I
have always esteemed the Soul of a Dedication. While this care was upon me, it
was my good hap, accidentally to over-hear the Character of your worthy self,
so expressed in a Booksellers shop in Cornhil, where I was then reading, that
I concluded, you were the only man I ever heard of in England, whose Peireskian
Virtues, did challenge this Dedication. And upon enquiry, learning your name,
and remembering that I had bin once civilly entertained by you in the company of
my deceased Kinsman Dr. Rapha Rand of Goddalming, at our Fathers house of
Wotton in Surrey; I concluded, that the sutableness of your Genius with that of
Peireskius, the respects my Kinsman aforesaid, frequently found at your Fathers
house, both when sickness required his presence and at other times; and your
Fathers civility to my self, having been once his guest at bed and board, with
your own kind entertainment of me after his death; and finally the constant
affection of that worthy gentlewoman your near kinswoman, and the relict widow
of my Cosen aforesaid, upon all occasions expressed toward me; did necessitate
me to cry Heurica, and to conclude that Peireskius could not more justly be by
me presented to any other than your ingenious self, to receive his first
entertainment into England. None can, I persuade my self, more prize him; no
man is more fit effectually to recommend him to the acquaintance of our English
Gentry. That from him they may learn, That knowledge, which is the highest
perfection of Man, by which he differs from B^asts, must needs be the principal
accomplishment of a Gentleman: and that the compleatly-knowing man, must be
Janus-like, double-fac'd, to take cognizance of Time past, and to understand
the world from its cradle, as far as any Monuments of Antiquity can give Light,
as well as of the late-past, or present times, wherein he lives. Hunting and
Hawking, are exercises allowed to preserve and increase health and strength,
but no genuine and proper Characters of a Gentleman; which he that wholly gives
himself to, while he catches a Bird or Beast, he loses himself, and becomes
like one of them, gaining little to speak of, but an humor inclinable to
Tyrany, like that of Nimrod the mighty Hunter, and Proto-Tyrant of the world.
From our Peireskius, it is to be hoped, through your example and
recommendation, the English Gentry will for time to come understand ^ow to
improve their great leisure and Faculties of Person and Estate, so as to render
themselves in the highest measure fit to serve God, by serving the
Commonwealth in the most weighty concernments thereof. And that the complaint
of that most noble, ingenious, and pious Gentleman Mr. George Herbert sometimes
University Orator of Cambridge, may hereafter be out of date, which as yet is
too seasonable and necessary; and because I fear little laid to heart, I shall
not think it tedious, or any ways impertinent here to recite the same, as it
is recorded in his Church Porch, page the third, staff the fifth, where, after
his most ingenious and pithie manner, he thus schools and chides our English
Gentry;

Fly Idleness; which yet thou can not fly
By dressing, mistrissing, and Complement.
If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry
Against thee: for his Light was only lent.
God gave thy Soul brave wings; put not those feathers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers.
Art thou a Magistrate? then be severe:
If studious, copy fair what time has blur'd;
Redeem truth from his jaw's: If Soldier,
Chase brave employments with a naked sword
Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
If they dare try, a glorious Life or Grave.
O England full of sin, but most of sloth!
Spit out thy Phlegm, and fill thy Breast with Glory,
Thy Gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth
Trans-fus'd a sheepishnesse into thy Story:
Not that they all are so; but that the most
Are gone to Grass, and in the Pasture lost.
This loss springs chiefly from our Education.
Some Till their Ground, but let Weeds choke their Son:
Some mark a Partridge, never their Child's fashion:
Some ship them over, and the thing is done.
Study this Art make it thy great design;
And if Gods Image move thee not, let thine.
Some, great Estates provide, but do not breed
A mast'ring mind; so both are lost thereby:
Or else they breed them tender, make them need
All that they leave: this is flat poverty.
For he that needs five thousand pound to live,
Is full as poor as he that needs but five.
The way to make thy Son rich, is to fill
His Mind with rest, before his Trunk with Riches:
For Wealth without Contentment climbs a Hill,
To feel those Tempests which fly over ditches.
But if thy Son can make tea pound his measure
Then all thou addest, may be called his Treasure.
So far the Noble Herbert, whose complaint may justly be renewed at this day.
And seriously (Sir) it is a sad thing to consider, that the Gentry of England,
called to serve their Country in its highest and dearest concernmen^s, have in
all Ages hitherto, been for the most part necessitated to see with the Eyes of
others, and forced to serve the Dictates of mercenary men, that have advised
suitable to their own Interests, Factions, and Trades, instead of following
their own well-informed, unbiassed and generous understandings. All which has
sprung from want of convenient Education, and improvement of their younger
years. It is to be hoped, the next Age will be reformed in this kind, which God
grant. And to that end, I beseech you (Sir) gently to accept, this
testification of my respects to you, and to receive this worthy French
Gentleman with those civilities, your Travels in France, and his worth shall
prompt you to, and recommend Him and his Story, his Virtues and
Accomplishments, to the Imitation and worthy Emulation of our English Gallants.
For who so fit to do this, as your Ingenious, Industrious Self? Unless Fame be
a very loud Liar in this particular, the greatest and most considerable
difference betwixt Evelyn and Peireskius, is in those kind of things which
Epictetus calls ta ouc eph' hemin, See Epictetus his Encheiridion or Manuel,
Chapter 1.
such as are to Soma he ctesis, doxai, archai; and in a word, hosa ouc hemetera
erga, And whereas Peireskius, that he might more freely converse with the
everflourishing Lady-Muses, and (as may be collected from a Passage or two in
his life) distasted peradventure, with the scolding Humor of his Mother in
Law, and the shallow Impertinencies of the Gentlewomen of that Country and
Age, wherein he lived; denied himself the Contents of a married Estate: you
(Sir) have had the happiness to choose a Gentlewoman (as I am credibly
informed, so accomplished, that Peireskius, were he now living, would count it
no time lost, to be in her Company, and enjoy her ingenious converse. A
Gentlewoman, in whom the English Gravity, being moderately allayed, sweetened
and spirited, by the mettlesome Air and Education of France, has arrived to
such a perfection, as to be no Hinderance, but a meet Help to her beloved Lord,
in his most manly Concernments. I must not therefore omit to recommend
Peireskius to her likewise; that her worthy acquaintance may bring him into a
more charitable Conceit of Womankind, then to think all time lost, as to
Wisdom, which is spent in their Company. To you both therefore, Worthy Couple,
true yoak-fellowes, I dedicate my great Pains in this small, but very material
History. Beseeching Almighty God to make you the happy and joyful Parents of
many fair, wise, and well-bred Children, that may tread in their Parents
steps, and as living and speaking Statues, effectually present your names and
virtues to succeeding Generations; and that he would so season your Hearts,
with the Fear and Love of his divine Goodness and Majesty, as that you may
direct all your rare endowments received from his bountiful Providence, to the
greatest good of your native Country, and all your kindre, viz. Mankind. So
shall you in the highest measure, your Sphere is capable of, advance the Glory
of God, the welfare of your Country and kind, the unspeakable Pleasure of your
own applauding Consciences here in this World (not to speak of the grateful
acknowledgement of others) and your Eternal Felicity in that World that is to
come where righteousness shall dwell, at the Resurrection of the just. Amen.
Such, truly generous and worthy Couple, is the hearty Prayer of

The real Honourer of your Peireskian Virtues. William Rand.
From my House, near Cripplegate in London, January the 30th. 1656.
TO THE Great, Wise, and Good PRINCE, Ludovicus Valesius, Earl of Alais.
Master of the Light-Horsmen throughout France, and Viceroy of Provence.
Petrus Gassendus wishes all Health and Happiness.
GREAT PRINCE,
I Am now about, at your Request, to write the Life of the most renowned
Peireskius. For presently upon your happy arrival into this Province, you
mourned to find your self, by the great envy of the Fates, bereft of his
Society; and very punctually questioned me, whom you knew to have bin most
familiarly conversant with him, touching his Studies, Manners, and conditions.
It was your pleasure also to learn the favor of his Countenance from his
Picture, and to visit those places, in which there did remain some footsteps
as it were, and marks of his Presence; viewing his Habitation, where he was
wont to sit, and captivate the most excellent men, with the Enchantments of his
Learning, Wit, and Eloquence. In a word, you were so far ravished, with the
Admiration of his Virtues, as to have a principal hand in persuading me to
write his Life; and were for that Cause willing to dispense with my Attendance
upon you, that I might in this my Retirement, the sooner accomplish that work.
And I might, indeed, justly excuse my self* in regard of my own insufficiency:
yet I thought not fit to make any long demur, when I considered my manifold
Obligations.

For in the first place, as for what concerns your self, I should be very
uncivil, if I should not satisfy your Request, who, when I was as far from
thinking of, as deserving any such favor, I was after such a manner invited to
wait upon you; that ever since, your good will toward me, has bin so free and
sweet, so full of all Courtesy and Gentleness, as I could wish or desire. I
found, truly, by experience, how justly you were the Admiration, Love, and
Delight of all Provence; which finds it self happy in such a Viceroy, in whom
Philosophy, and the Art of Government, are equally tempered, and mutually
allayed.

Moreover, you do so associate the Studies of Peace with the Art of War, and
so reconcile Mars and the Muses, that it is a doubtful Case to resolve, whether
your Generosity as a Soldier, or your Learning, as a Scholar, is more eminent;
and though this immortal Honor be inherent in your Family, yet is there no man
in the famous and royal Valesian stock, that can be compared to you. But these
things shall be recorded elsewhere: At present, I cannot sufficiently commend
this carriage in you, that every where, and upon all occasions, you vail your
Authority to Virtue, and think it not strange to seek and find Arguments of
Kingly Praises, in such as are not of Royal Blood. You think it inconsiderable,
under what Garments an heroical mind, lies shrouded and concealed; provided
there be a divine soul within, you are always ready to express your Reverence
thereunto. A great example whereof you have given, and to be reckoned among the
worthy deeds of great Captains and Commanders; in that you have already by your
Commendation elevated a Man of the Senatorian Rank, for the rare endowments of
his mind, unto the Dignity of Princes; and take care, that his Fame may never
be extinguished; nor can this affection of yours ever be forgotten, the
Commendations whereof, Virtue her self will trumpet forth, to the days of
Eternity.

In the next place, as to the Man himself, I should be unthankful, in refusing
to do that, which his rare love to me, and bountiful Inclination to all, do
require at my hands. For his love truly, to me, was so great, that it is easier
for me to conceive it in my mind, then to express the same in words; and it may
suffice to say, that I account it a great happiness, that he prized me so
dearly, and that it was his pleasure to have me so frequently with him, and to
make me privy to all his thoughts and intentions; and besides other matters, to
utter his last words, and breathe out his very soul it self, into my bosom. In
consideration whereof, since no man ought to prize the memory of that dear
person more then my self; truly, you do but spur a free Horse, when by virtue
of your Authority, you require that of me, whereunto out of gratitude, and by
the Rights of friendship, I am already very much inclined. For, seeing that as
often as I think, speak, or hear of that man, I feel my mind filled with a most
intimate and sweet passion of joy and pleasure: how can it choose but delight
me, upon such terms, to recount the Series of his life, as that it may be
communicated to all the World? Shall I not, thus employed, seem still to enjoy
his most courteous and civil Converse, and so to pass away the sweet and
pleasant hours; and shall I not then exceedingly satisfy my own mind, when I
have contributed, all that in me lies, to the reflourishing glory of so great a
friend? And as for that good will which he bore to all men, I never read or
heard of a man, that was more earnestly sollicitous, or made it more his
constant business, to benefit Mankind. For though he might have given way to
many, in respect of Estate and Fortune; yet no man could exceed him in the
prudent manage of what he had, and in willingness to do good. Well therefore
did he merit that Kingdom which he held, and deserves for the future to hold,
in the minds of Men, especially Students, whom he never ceased to excite
encourage, and cherish by his Learning, Counsel, Authority, Favor and Purse.
Witness all good and learned men, who with one unanimous consent, acknowledge,
that there never was a more generous Mecaenas and Patron of the Muses. And
therefore, though it seem impossible, that his renown should ever be
extinguished; yet must we at no hand give way that the same reproach should be
fastened upon us, which may justly be imputed to that Age of Mecaenas. For
seeing his History has not by any Writer of the same Age, bin delivered over to
Posterity; it is come to pass, that we have received hardly any notice of him,
save his Name, so dearly esteemed by learned Men: And because it may be feared,
lest the like may happen to this our Mecaenas, it is all the reason in the
World, that those who familiarly converst with him, should take care, that
future Generations may know; who and what for a Man he was. For the Fame and
Memory of things, resembles the evening Twilight, or shutting-in of the day,
which being at first exceeding clear, does by little and little, in such sort
vanish away, as to be swallowed up in darkness; and therefore History is
needful, as a Torch, to bring the same to light.

Moreover, I acknowledge, that this duty is incumbent upon none more then my
self; since no man could more fully and thoroughly know him, in regard of my
long and familiar living with him. Whereunto may be added, that after his
death, I had the opportunity and access to make such Queries, and both from
diverse Letters and other Monuments, to learn such things, as every one could
not so easily come to the knowledge of. And this is indeed, the very cause,
that whereas so many rare men might have performed this task, they have
nevertheless all conspired with you, in soliciting me to set my hand to the
work.

In the last place, as to what concerns our Country, this present Age, and
Posterity, I were altogether injurious, if I should refuse this Employment. To
our Country; because it would seem a kind of Impiety and Unnaturalness, if I
should suffer that light to be covered, wherewith, as it has hitherto shined,
and bin illustrated, so may it for the future, exceedingly glory and boast it
self thereof: if I should suffer that Ornament to be neglected, than which I
durst almost say, there never was, nor ever will be any more magnificent. For,
not only whole Europe, but Asia also, and Africa, and the very newfound World
it self, had their Eyes, by means of him, fixed upon this Province; and there
was not any where, any learned man, or lover of good things, who affected not,
either to visit him, or at least to correspond with him by Letters.

In the next place, to this present Age also; forasmuch as it is concerned,
that Posterity should understand, that Nature was not therein worn out and
barren; but that she was able to produce a great and rare Man, fit to be
propounded for an Example to after-Ages. She is indeed much to be magnified,
for having summed up in him a^one, and drawn together all the virtues of all
Ages; and being able so to transcend her self, as to express in him, what ever
excellency the Poetical Age fained in Pandora. Finally, to the succeeding
Generations themselves; who will be exceedingly delighted to know that Man, to
whose singular Affection, they will acknowledge themselves very much indebted;
with Imitation of whom, some peradventure, will be so far possessed, as to
endeavor to raise themselves, as Phoenixes, out of his Ashes, not without some
benefit to Mankind.

I shall therefore, to come to an end, make such a Description of his Life, as
shall approve it self to the Readers, rather by the simplicity and plainness of
the Narration, then by any borrowed colors of forced Eloquence. Others may, if
they please, with a more elegant Pen, polish, and reduce into the form of an
History, such Commentaries as I shall only digest as loose materials, after the
way of Annals, and according to the course of years. For my intent is, only to
play the part of Dames, and if any shall blame me for not having made any
choice, while I deliver so many petty businesses; I shall answer with him, that
even the very crumbs which fall from the Tables of the Gods, seem worthy to be
picked up. Neither will it prove peradventure, a thing unpleasing to those, who
like you, desire to be thoroughly acquainted with great men, not only in regard
of their illustrious actions, published to the view of all the World; but also
with reference to their private transactions, and such as they themselves would
not willingly have the World acquainted with.

Forasmuch, as things done in the public view, and sight of the Sun, have in
them something that is forced and affected, something that is acted and
personated, so that from them it is very hard to know, what lies hid under the
skin, and in the Heart; but things done far from witnesses, and without any
design of gaining reputation, and consequently, free from dissimulation, and
without any Mask or Vizard; these are they which indeed discover a man, and
show his inside, which to discern is exceeding profitable, For that is it,
which encourages us to the imitation of excellent Actions, when as even in
Heroic Persons, we find some tokens of our own infirmity, and consequently we
despair, not so much to imitare their Virtues, as when only their most great
and elevated Actions are related. But if some shall expect, deeds more
illustrious and honorable, than what I am to relate, they are to take into
consideration, that every man cannot be a Scipio or a Maximus, that we should
Record his Battails and Triumphs. Those men deserve abundantly to be commended,
whom though fortune has not raised to the greatest Wealth and Dignities; yet
bear they greater minds, are of a more generous Virtue, and undertake far
greater Designs, than any man could expect from men of their Condition. And
such an one was Peireskius, whom I shall give out for no other than a man of
the Senatorian rank and order; and who nevertheless so carried himself as to
transcend all Encomiums and Panegyricks. For two things there are which I shall
chiefly prosecute, for which he was exceedingly commended; the one was great
Learning of all kinds, with an unquenchable thirst after Knowledge; the other
an unwearied care to advance all ingenious and liberal Arts, with a munificence
toward all learned men, which was perfectly Royal, and Princely. And upon
these two Points, there is, truly, no danger at all, that I should seem to
utter any thing hyperbolically; for, I shall speak to the very faces of learned
men, among whom he was famously known, and who will be so far from finding
fault that I have spoken too much, that I fear rather they will blame me for
having bin too sparing. But that I may not dwell in this Epistle, Give me
leave, most excellent Prince, ere I shall come to relare those things which you
desire to know, to begin with his Ancestors: that from the knowledge of them
may appear, why it is that all Authors with one voice, have most constantly
termed him, The most Noble

Peireskius.

Books Printed for John Streater, and are to besold by the Booksellers of
London.
THe Vale-Royall of England; or, The County Palatine of Chester, Illustrated.
Wherein is contained a Geographical and Historical Description of that Famous
County, with all its Hundreds, and Seats of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Freeholders; Its Rivers, Towns, Castles, Buildings Ancient and Modern: Adorned
with Maps and Prospects, and the Coats of Arms belonging to every individual
Family of the whole County. Unto which is added, An excellent Discourse of the
Island of Man.

The Resinement of Zion: Or, The old Orthodox Protestant Doctrine justified,
and defended against several Exceptions of the Antinomians: methodically
digested into Questions, wherein many weighty and important cases of conscience
are handled, concerning the nature of Faith and Repentance, or Conversion to
God. By Anthony Warton.

De Morbis Foemineis: The Woman's Counselor; or, The Feminine Physician.
Modestly treating of such occult Accidents, and secret Diseases, as are
incident to that Sex.

Pharmacopaea: Or, Rhaenodaeus his Dispensatory. Treating of the whole Body of
Physic: Performing the Office of an Herball, as well as an Apothecarie's Shop.

An History of the Wonderful things of Nature: set forth in ten several
Classes. Wherein are contained, 1. The Wonders of the Heavens. 2. Of the
Elements. 3. Of Meteors. 4. Of Mineralls. 5. Of Plants. 6. Of Birds. 7. Of
four-footed Beasts. 8. Of Insects, and things wanting blood. 9. Of Fishes. 10.
Of Man.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS.
The First Book.
PEireskius was descended from that most ancient Family of the Fabrii or
Fabricii, whose Original was from Pisa in Italy, being transferred from thence
into this Provence in France.
Province in the days of St. Lewis, so called, King of France, and in the year
of our Lord, one thousand two hundred Fifty and Four. For our Histories record
that Hugo Fabrius making one among the Gentlemen of Pisa, that had engaged
themselves in the holy War, was by St. Lewis aforesaid brought into the Coasts
of Provence, when returning out of the East he landed at Years, Arcas, or
Nieras, which was anciently termed Olbia. Where being detained by sickness,
and commended by the King at his departure, he grew into so much favor and
became so powerful with the chief Men of that Place, as to be able to compose
their differences, when they contended about the Government of the Castle and
City. After which, marrying a wife out of the Sollerien Family, he settled
himself to make his constant abode at Years. That place being afterward
assigned for the Princes patrimony, he was chosen Provost or Governor thereof,
in the year -- 70. by Charles the First, Earl of Provence and King of Sicilie,
who loved him as dearly as King Lewis did. Soon after he began to make diverse
Fortifications both in the City and in the Castle; but his Son Aycardus
finished what he had begun, leaving his name to one or the Gates which even at
this day is corruptly called Casabria. Hugo Fabricius had another Son besides
Aycard, named Paul, whom Charles the second made chief Judge of Marseilles:
Also another named William, who having returned safe from diverse travels, built
an Hospital for the accommodation of Pilgrims going to and coming from the
holy Land. But, to be short, there succeeded these a noble Progeny, renowned
for seats of Arms, Learning and Piety; who in their several Ages and Families
were Governors of Regium, Spinosa, Gramusa, Saint-Julian, St. Janit, St.
Laurence, Laverna, Calase, Pe^risea, Valvesium, and Riantium.

Yet, for all our haste Antony must not be passed over in silence, who was the
Grandchild of Aycardus in the Fourth Generation: to whom and to his Son
Raimond, there are extant to be read at this day in Nostredame very civil
letters of King Renatus, which he wrote when he was about to undertake his
Expedition for Naples. Raymond was brought up with Renatus from a Child, in the
Court of King Lewis, the second; and besides Antony, he had another son
called Amadis who because he was the younger brother, he bore in his Coat of
Arms which was a swart Lion in a Golden field, a scarlet label for distinction
sake. It is recorded, that he also was Governor of Eres, and of intimate
acquaintance with Charles the Third, to whom the King of France, did soon
succeed. From him the family was again divided into two Branches: for he had
two Sons Fulke and William, both of them expert Soldiers and skillfull in the
Laws. For having borne Arms in the Expedition of Pidmont, after their return
they gave themselves wholly to the study of the Laws. For, William the younger
being adopted by his great Uncle Elziarius Portanerius Brinoniensis a learned
Man; he went to Orleance and Vierron to study the Laws; and having married a
wife who was an Arvernian, he settled his abode in that Country: and to express
his gratitude he took unto himself the Coat of Arms of the House of
Portaneria, which was a Bend with Roses argent, in a field Azure. And he left
behind him, besides Hugh a famous Lawyer, another Son named John, the father of
another John, who begat another John, the Father of that John who is now Master
of Requests, having two Honorable Ladies to his Sisters viz. the Lady
Magdalena wife to the ilustrious Chancellor of France and the Lady Mary, wife
to Philbertus Pompadorius Viceroy or Governor of the Limosins.

But Fulke after the Supreme Senate was erected at Aix, in the beginning of
the soregoing Age, did plead causes with great commendation, and was many times
by the Governors of that Province taken in, to sit with them as an Assistant,
and employed more then once to Lewis the twelfth, and to Francis the first. Who
perceiving the Learning and Integrity of Fulke, made him a Senator by his bare
command, in the year -- 32. And when the Emperor Charles was about to invade
Provence, he joined him as Counselor to Annaeus Monmorantius General of his
Majesty's Forces. Also that good Advice is worthy to be recorded which he gave
to Monmorancie which he also practiced, transporting the ancient Records of the
Crown into the Castle of Baulcs; by which means those precious Monuments
escaped burning, when as afterward the Palace of Aix, was fired by the Duke of
Savoy his Soldiers. Moreover, when the City could not hold out against the
Emperors forces, he advised the Citizens to withdraw themselves, and that
they might not leave any thing therein to relieve the Enemy, he began in so
good earnest to exhort them to destroy their food and what else might advantage
the Enemy, that he himself was the first that emptied his Granarie into a
well, and staved his vessels of Wine and Oil and let them run about the
Streets. Fulke being dead, his Son Nicolaus was made a Senator in the year --
45. whose virtue also was taken notice of, not only by Claudius Sabaudus
Governor of Provence and Earl of Tenda; but also by Charles the 9th. himself.
Who taking away the Senate, and setting in place thereof a Coutt of ten
Chief-Justices, it was his pleasure that Nicolaus should be one of the ten: and
he gave of his own accord to his Brother Charles after he had brought his
forces off, from the Expedition of Corsica, and behaved himself there exceeding
Valiantly, the Lordship of Brigantium to him and his Heirs.

And now that we may draw near to the Father of our Peireskius, Nicolaus left
two Sons, Claudius and Reginaldus. Claudius had a small and infirm body, but a
mind truly generous and mettlesome; so that from the year -- 72. in which he
was invested with the Honor and Dignity of his Father and Grandfather, he was
much renowned both in the Senate and the whole Province, and exceeding favored
by Henricus Engolismensis great Master of the French Knights of Malta, and
Viceroy of Provence. But Reginald being brought up from a boy with Renata
Duchess of Ferraria and Daughter of Lewis the twelfth, when she betook her
self to pass over her old days at Montargis, he gave himself to study the
Law, and was made one of the Lords of the Subsidies and the Church's Patrimony;
and a Master of the accounts. And when those troublesome times of the Henotick
faction or league happened, he and his Brother remained constant in their
Loialtie to the King, and (which Bernardus Nogaretius Valletanus at that time
Viceroy, counted a notable piece of service) he procured by the power that he
had the Castle of Eres and all that Coast to revolt from the Duke of Savoy. And
whereas his Brother lived a single life he himself married Margareta Bomparia,
who of her Fathers side was descended from Knights and Praesidents; and on her
Mothers side she did belong to the families of Vallevoria and Forbinus. Now we
have heard it reported, that she was of so neat and comely a countenance, and
so composed; that when Catharina Medicea the Queen Mother was visited at Aix by
the Ladies of that place, she made choice of her alone among all the rest upon
whom he would vouchsafe to bestow the honor of a Kiss, And this Reginaldus
Fabrius it was, and this very Margarcta Bomparia, whom our Peireskius of whom
we treat did acknowledge for his Parents.

But because he was born at Beaugensier; we must take notice that this Town is
seated in a very straight yet exceeding pleasant valley, enriched by the
Interfluxe of the same River Gapell, It is distant from Tolon on this hand, and
from Eres on that, just as far as those Cities are distant one from the other,
namely, about three Province mi^es; and being seated North of both, it likewise
far excells them in goodness of Air. The nearness of situation was the
cause, that his Ancestors having their abode at Eres, did not only procure
certain Country houses in that Town, but in their retirement thither, they
dwelt in an ancient Castle, which is now demolished: for the House with those
goodly Gardens joining to it, was not yet built; into which that water might
more safely and plentifully be derived from the adjacent River, Claudius built
a fair Aqnaeduct or Conduit.

Peireskius therefore was born in the Castle of Belgenser or Beaugensier
aforesaid, 1580.
when his Parents did retire thither by reason of that memorable Pestilence,
which, in the year 1580. began to rage all over Provence, but especially at
Aix. He was born upon the first day of December in the year aforesaid, near
upon seven a-Clock in the Evening. Which I therefore mention, that I may not
seem negligent touching the Circumstance of time; but not to give an occasion
to Fortune Tellers, to calculate his Nativitie, and tell his destiny after his
Death, with more certainty then they were able to do, during his life. For it
is wonderful to consider how many lies the Astrologers have told, either in
respect of years which he never lived, or of Wife and Children and other things
which he never had; or touching many other things which he attained. Moreover,
his Parents having lived together diverse years without a Child; his Mother for
that cause, as soon as she perceived that she was great, with child she took
up a resolution that the Child's Godfather should be no Noble Man; but, such was
her piety, the first poor man they should meet with. Whereupon, when he was
carried to be Christened, they called the first poor man they met, and he
answered for him at the Font as Godfather, and named him by his Uncles name
Claudius. But his Uncle coming in just as they were conferring the name, he
would have him called likewise by his Grandfathers name, whereupon he was
called Nicolaus. Claudius. Nevertheless not only while he was a Child he was
commonly called Nicolas without the Addition of Claudius: but also when he was
well in years, even as also Authors term him frequently Nicolaus Faber,
Fabrius, or Fabricius. And here we may take notice of a great mistake of the
learned John Seldom, who takes that same Nicolas Faber who is cited by Baronius
and was Scoole-Master to the most Christian King Lewis the Thirteenth, for our
Faber Peireskius. For in his preface to the History of Eadmerus Cantuariensis,
mentioning those Epistles of Lantfrank recorded by Baronius, in the eleventh
tome of his Annals; He acknowledges himself (says Seldom) if I mistake not
that he received the Copy from that most renowned and Learned man Nicolas
Faber Petriscius, a worthy Judge of the Court of Aquens, and my very much
honored friend. And indeed Baronius cites Nicolas Faber, but he adds
Parisiensis not Petriscum, which Epithet was given this Faber of ours from a
Town in his Mothers juridiction, which is called in Latin Petriscum and in
French commonly Peiresc, from whence he had his most renowned name; which I to
the end it might be rightly pronounced, have rendered it Peireskium, and not as
many others Perescium, Perezium, or the like.

It is reported that when he was hardly two months old, an ancient woman that
was a witch entered the Chamber, and threw down before his Mother an hatchet,
which she held in her hand, saying that she had brought it her again; from
which time the mother lost her speech, and the child his crying; and both their
heads were so depressed upon one shoulder, and held so stiffly in that posture,
that they could not bend them. The story says further, that when his Uncle
knew it, he caused the Old Woman to be beaten who was found in the chimney with
her neck upon one of her shoulders, who as soon as ever she lifted up her head
to signify that she had beating enough and to desire them to hold their
hands, she said, which appeared to be true, That the mother and the Child were
both well. This I heard, not only from others, but from Peireskius himself, who
did relate the story to me just as his Uncle was wont to tell it. Doubtless
it is a very strange thing, that an Old Hag bowing her own neck, should dart out
spirits with so strong a Nerve, as to turn the Head of one distant from her, in
like manner aside, and tie the tongue of another with the like violence to it,
wherewith she held her own; so that neither their Heads could be stirred, nor
their tongues loosed, until she remitting of her rigor should let loose the
distended, yet, as it were, unsensible strings. Many such accidents as these
are usually referred to the Devil; yet, though the most good God may suffer
innocent babes to become the objects of their malice; and though Satan may some
ways make use of miserable old women to such intents and purposes; yet (I say)
it is a clear case, that the greatest part of these stories are fables, or have
no other foundation than the symptoms of certain diseases, to which Infants are
subject; Also it is certain, that these tales are most frequent in the country
among the common people, whose credulity is awakened and cherished by every
slight occasion.

A year and an half after, viz. in the month of June, in the year 1582, 1582.
famous for the reformation of the Calendar then made, he had a brother born
who was named Palamedes. This is he who was afterward, from some place where
he had jurisdiction, called Valavesius; at what time also Nicolas began to be
called Peireskius. For till they had past their youths-age, they were called
sometimes Fabricii, otherwhiles Calasii, which name was commoly given to their
father and uncle from a town called Calasum, which they governed. When
Palamedes was born, his father was absent about business at Grenoble: and his
mother died the second month after he was born, being 22 years old. And their
father Reginald took another wife, but not till fourteen years after. Her name
was Catharina Vassalla Caradetea, being descended from illustrious ancestors
both on father and mothers side: her ancestors on the fathers side were
princes of Achaia; by her mothers side they were allied to the Fliscani of
Genoa. She was a widow when he married her (having had for her former husband
Olivarius de Thulia, one of the Senators) with one only daughter living, named
Marchisa, who was afterward married to Palamedes. By this second marriage, he
had besides other children, which all died either in their childhood or
youths-age; Susanna who is yet living, being married to Henricus Seguiranus,
the first President of the Masters of the Accounts, and of the patrimoniall
Senators.

To return to Nicolas, he always looked upon, and respected his uncle as
another father, and that not without cause. For he intending that he should
succeed him in his Dignity, took especial care to give him ingenuous
education, judging that it was in vain for a child to be happily born, and not
liberally educated. And he was so much the more encouraged to be careful in
this point, because he saw in him even from the cradle, a vertnous mind adorned
and rendered more amiable by a beautiful body. For he was scarcely weaned from
the breast, when he began to discover his Genius, being very attentive to
whatever he saw and heard: and he was always accustomed with a most pleasing
countenance and sweet voice, to demand of his nurse, his father, his master,
and of any else that came in his way, what every thing was, and how and
wherefore it was made. So when he was first taught his letters, and delighted
to be handling of books and papers, he would frequently ask what was the
argument handled in those books, and because he took it hainously that any
should make answer, that it was above his capacity to understand, they were
fain to invent somewhat or other, and relate it to him as the argument of the
said books, which he might hear with pleasure. These things indeed are small
matters in themselves, but worthy consideration in regard of his years, and
that it is a pleasure to see trees bearing fair buds and blossoms. Old men, I
am sure, have admired these things and told them to me, avouching that he never
was taken with, nor never relished any childish thing.

When he was seven years old, 1587.
and was educated with his brother at Brinonia, where the Court of Subsidies
and Accounts were then kept, because the pestisence was at Aix, he desired that
he might be instructed in the San-Maximitan College, which had the repute to
flourish in the studies of learning. Nor is it a thing to be past over in
silence, how he persuaded his father, 1588.
to commit his brother, being younger, to his care, that he might oversee his
young studies: 1589.
nor must it be forgotten, how he was from this time forward, in stead both of
a father and a master to his brother; and how his brother did reverence him
both as a paret and master, A year being passed over, and the plague beginning
at Sanmaximinus, they were called to Belgenser, and a year after from thence to
Aix, where their uncle then abode.

Afterward when the civil wars grew hot upon the death of Henry the third,
1590.
they were sent to Avenion, where they studied five whole years in the Jesuits
College. And Peireskius was wont to relate, that he was much indebted to
Antonius Colombatius, and Andreas Valladerius; whom he heard, they being the
chief Professors of Humanity. For he said they were wont to abate him somewhat
in other studies, that he might surely addict himself to the reading of
Histories, not neglecting in the mean while the study of poetry, and of the
Greek tongue. For those Learned men rejoiced that there was not so much need to
guide his Course, as to show him the way a far off; for which they deserve
Commendations, in that they would not burden his Noble breast with that
servitude, which makes many altogether hate the studies of Humanity and polite
literature; or too much to accustom themselves to mean matters. Also he was
wont to tell how mightily he was encouraged, when they also publicly commended
him, because he had the whole History of Justin, and the Metamorphosis of Ovid
at his fingers ends; and could never make an end of consulting with Books,
whereby he might come to know all the particular circumstances of every matter.
For which cause he was a verse unto all plays and shows; that he might give
himself wholly to the reading and transcribing of all particularities. Wherein
I conceive he over did; for the mind must be unbent by fits, nor must a man
study presently after meat; which because the Overseer of his studies were not
sufficiently careful of, hence it came that he was pained oftentimes, in his
stomach and in his head.

He had well high finished the 15. year of his Age, 1595.
when he returned to Aix, where he studied Philosophy an whole year. His Uncle
was desirous that he should Learn in the mean while to handle Arms, ride the
Horse and exercise his limbs with dancing. But because these exercises robbed
him of other more pleasing hours, he performed them indded, to please his
Uncle, but no longer then his Masters were by that taught him; for he would
never practice by himself: so much better did he account it, to be always
reading, writing or hearing some point of Learning. About this time there was
brought to his Uncle, a piece of Golden Coin of Arcadius, which was found at
Belgenser. He presently desired to have it, and when he had read the Letters
about it, and had set down the Emperors name whose Coin it was, he brought it
presently to his Uncle again, who to gratify him, gave him not only two other
pieces of ancient Coin, but also Books, by which he might be further
instructed in the knowledge of such Antiquities. And from this time forwards
his most curious mind began to burn like fire in a wood for he began eagerly to
seek out, and collect all the ancient Coins which he could come by, being
eagerly bent to read and Interpret their Inscriptions, upon which occasion also
he began to seek out all kind of Inscriptions, whether belonging to Sepulchers
or others, and studiously to observe them.

Then he was sent with his Brother to Turney, 1596.
that he might there go through a Course of Philosophy (as they were wont to
call it) his Brother being as yet taken up with Humanity. And being in a
special manner inflamed with the study of the Mathematics, he eagerly drunk in
that Cosmographie which was there taught, assuring himself that History
without it and Chronology, was altogether in the dark and unintelligible. And
therefore after the use of the Sphere he Learnt the use of the Astrolabe;
writeing diverse Letters to a workman, and expostulating the matter with him,
because he had long since promised to make him an Astrolabe, but had been
negligent in the performance of his promise. In that mean season, he abated
nothing in his studies of Antiquity (upon which account he was dearly affected
by Petrus Royerus one of the professors) nor in his studies of Humanity in
general, in which he was as it were his Brothers Master and Instructor. But to
do all this he was fain to sit up late in the night at his study. Hence it was
that partly by reason of the natural weakness of his Constitution, partly by
his continual labors and late watchings, he increased the weakness of his
stomach formerly contracted, which made him use a powder which in his Letters
to his Father, he called his Digessive powder. And because I have mentioned his
Letters, it is seasonable to observe, that from this time forward, he was
accurate in his style, writing his Letters over and over again in several
papers, which it has been my hap to view; by which it is appatent that he used
no phrases which were luxuriaot or undigested. For he evermore expressed what
he intended with common words; yet not without that Elegancy and civilitie,
with which in testifying his good will, observance, and gratitude, in excusing,
commending, congratulating, and such like passages, he was admirable. For, to
instance, writing to his mother in Law upon occasion of certain Tokens received
from her, he thus expressed himself, Foelices videmur, o matter, quod beneficiis
tuis cumulamur: sed infoelices tamen, quando sic illis obrisimur, ut agnoscendo
impares simus. That is, I account my self happy, dear mother, in the frequent
expressions of your love; yet am I therein unhappie, that their multitude is
such, that I cannot sufficiently acknowledge or requite them. And while he
wrote thus, he returned the best Tokens he was able; for even in those younger
years, he could not endure to be overcome with kindness, as far as his ability
would give him leave. Suitable hereunto writing to a friend equal to himself in
years, and even then hating ingratitude; I would lay violent hands upon my self
(says he) if I might be justly accused of the least neglect of my duty to my
friends. From the same grateful inclination it was, that he commended the care
of his Instructers, that they might by that means receive from his Father and
Uncle, far larger Gratuities then had been promised.

To come again to his studies. His Uncle was not willing that he should spend
three years upon Philosophy: 1597.
but after he had spent a year at Tournon, he would needs send for him back
again to Aix, that he might study Law, because when time should come, he was to
be one of the Senate. This also he desired while he was yet at Tournon, for he
wrote unto him that he should timely take in hand the Manual of Rubricks: but
he to deferr yet a little longer the study of Law, wrote thus by way of excuse;
Your desire was (Uncle) that I should seriously addict my self to the study of
Oratory: That shall therefore, if you please, be now my business, because this
place is very convenient for that purpose, and I will then begin to study the
Law, when I leave this City: Howbeit you may please to command me what you
shall think most couvenient; for if you shall persist to require my return, I
shall in all things show my self ready to fulfill your pleasure. Therefore
being called home, he addicted himself to study Law under the Turorage of
Franciscus Fortius Andinus, who being an Advocate in the Court at Aix, and very
skillful to teach the Laws, was withal able to compare with any man, in the
more polite studies of Humanity. This man being much resected by the Parents of
Peireskius, began with much care to read unto him the Institutions; and he
himself partly through occasion of this study, and partly that he might not
wholly intermit the course of those learned Studies which he had begun, he took
in hand of his own Head to make a Catalogue of those Emperors, who had made the
Laws. He made also a Catalogue of the Consuls and other Magistrates in their
order, searching every where for their Coins, that he might know the Lawmakers
as well by their Countenances as their Acts. Also he endeavored to get the
Pictures of all the most famous Lawyers, that so when he met with any of their
Reports and Interpretations, his memory might be strengthened by calling to
mind their Countenances. Also there was at the same time at Aix, Petrus
Antonius Rascasius Bagarrius, a most skillfull Antiquary: for afterward Henry
the great, moved by the famous report that went of him, sent for him; and made
him the Master of his Jewels and Rarities. Peireskius therefore did, at spare
times frequently visit him; to question and learn of him, and he admiring his
Sagacitie and Learning and friendly embracing his ardent desire of further
knowledge, joined with modesty, he could not conceal any thing from him; 1598.
for he both showed him diverse Rarities diverse days together, and also brought
forth his Books to strengthen and make good his own conjectures and
explications, making no bones to allow and commend the peculiar Interpretations
of Peireskius.

When the year was over, he went again to Avenion, where he had a private
Master named Petrus David, a Burgundiau, who was afterward a Judge in
criminal causes at Semur in his own Country. This man likewise besides his
ability in Law, was also well seen in the more polite studies of Humanity and
Antiquity; and that made him well content, that Peireskius, to the study of
Law, joined his care in searching after Antiquities. And therefore it was that
he wrote frequently to Bagarrius touching Coins and other rarities. Once he
sent him a writing of all the Rarities which he had observed in the Closet of
one Romeus Arelatensis, and among other things he sent him the pattern of a
sculpture of Deianira ravished by Nessus, which was engraven upon a neat Jasper
stone. Sometimes also having gained fair pieces of the Coins of Nero and
Vitellius, he sent them to his Uncle, beseeching him to beautify them, and
make them like the Hercules and Agrippa, which he had by him adorned. He also
entreated him to send him a certain Ring, which he hoped to change for a
Cornelian or Onyx stone, which he he said was graven by a most excellent
workman, and of inestimable value though unknown to him that had it. I ser down
these passages instead of many others, that it may appear how skillfull he was,
even at that Age in these kind of Curiosites. But he that most of all did feed
his curious mind, was Petrus Antonius Ghibertus of Naples, who was then Auditor
to Cardinal Aquaviva. For he showed him certain rarities such as had never
been seen before; and among other books he lent him, for diverse days together,
some of Hubortus Goltzius his setting forth, which he had not before perused.
Moreover, seeing that he was of a quick and piercing spirit, he advised him to
make a journey into Italy, where he should find, especially at Rome,
curiosities wherewith to satisfy his desires.

He was 18. years of Age, when thinking to take a journey into Italy, he did
learn the Art of swimming. Before that, he was wont in the summer to wash
himself in the lesser stream of the River Rhodanus which runs by the Head of
the Island Barthalasse and into which the Brook Serga empties it self. Once
upon a time he felt the ground which he had wont to find even and fort, to be
grown hard with little round balls or bunches, like hard boiled Eggs when their
shell is peeled of. At which wondering, he took some of them up and carried
them home, that he might show them to his Master and demand of him the reason.
But the miracle was increased when a few days after returning to the River, he
sound those little balls or lumps turned into persect pebble stones, which he
observed likewise to befall those which he had carried and laid up at home. And
upon this occasion he began to play the Philosopher and to enquire into the
Generation of stones; but of that, hereafter. Finally having a longing desire
to visit Rome, and fearing that his Parents would not give way, he requested
only that they would send him to Padua, which was then famous for Law-studies.
Now he thought with himself, that the year of Jubilre being at hand; he might
upon that occasion go from Padua to Rome.

In the beginning of the year 1599. the Cardinal Joyeux being to return into
Italy, 1599.
intended to go to Ferrara: Because Pope Clement the second was come thither,
to take posession of that Territory fallen to him by the Death of Alphonsus
Attestinus the second of that name; therefore the Cardinal directed his
journey thither, and not to Rome. And therefore Peireskius had a great desire
to put himself and his Brother into the Cardinals retinue; but his Parents
consented not. For they resolved to satisfy his laudable desires; but they
thought it best that they should stay till Autumn, both that the weather might
be more temperate, and that the youths might inure themselves to another
Climate, rather in the winter then the following summer, as also that
necessaries for their journey might be the better provided. For in the first
place there was a tutor to seek, who might regulate both their studies and
behavior; though the modesty and discretion of them both, but especially of
Peireskius was such; that it was rather a point of Honor, then any matter of
necessity to appoint them a Tutor. Wherefore, Paulus Gudanes Fonvivius a
Gentlem an of Berne, who was returned from his Travailes in Italy, Poland
Germany, and other Countries and had seen the several Humors of many Nations
and their Cities; and whom the Chancellor Bellevre had resolved to send with
his own Son; he was chosen to be their Tutour.

With him therefore they departed about the beginning of September, and
Peireskius chose rather to set out at the Haven of Cannes then any where else,
both that he might visit an ancient Monastery situate not far off in the Island
Lerius, as also that he might view in passing the ancient Monuments of Freius.
When they were come to Geniia and had sufficiently viewed those magnificent
Palaces, they were yet to sail by Porto-Venere and L'Ericy; but Peiresk us
would go the rest of the way by Land, both because he was sick at Sea, and
because he intended curiously to view some things which he had in his mind. For
he had made himself by his own Industry a Iournall Book, and was resolved not
so to travail right on from City to City, but if he heard of any thing worthy
observation here or there, he would turn out of his rode and go thither, if he
had a mind to it. For which cause, he never of his own accord joined himself in
Company with any Strangers; and when others joined themselves to him, he would
use some civil excuse to intimate before hand, that they must shortly part
Company. And these digressions of his at the very beginning, had like to cost
him dear, for turning out of his way to see the Mines of Massa, one of the
Baudity or Robbers so called, had so took upon him to be his guide, that
unless she had been timely discovered, he would have brought him where he
should have had his throat cur. Having staid a while at Luca, he desired to
view a rare Closet of Curiosities which was at Pisa: but he could not do it
before he had visited Liburnum, and returned thither again. And I remember
among other things which he was wont to tell us he saw there, how he wondered
most at a sprig of Coral which grew upon a dead man's skull: which I therefore
observe, because this was none of the least reasons which moved him to go and
see men fish for Coral: of which we shall speak hereafter in its place.

Briefly to pass over other places, he went from thence through Florence,
Bononia, Ferraria; and when he had staid a few days at Venice, he finally
settled his abode at Padua. He had been there hardly a few months, when his
virtue began to be renowned through the whole University. For though he and his
brother were frequent hearers and visiters of the Professors of Law, and
namely of Jacobus Gallus, Bartholomaeus Silvatcius, Joachimus Scainus, and
Ottonellus Piscalcius: yet did he visit all the other learned men of the
University, and quickly brought them into an admiration of him. Among the rest
Thomas Segetus, the very same whom Lipsius had commended in the third Century
of his Epistles, did so testify his good will and respects unto him, that he
put down this by way of preface and title, GENIO GALLIAE NARBONENSIS, INGENIO,
ET MATURAE, IMMATURO AEVO, NICOLAI FABRICII VIRTUTI SACRUM PRIDE. NATAL. CHRISTI
M.D.IC. that is, To the Genius of Provence in France; to the wit and in unripe
years ripe virtue of Nicolaus Fabricius, I consecrate this testimonial. And
that rare man Erycius Puteanus, not only praised by Lypsius, and afterward his
Successor in the University, but now already ordained to be, both the Kings
Chronologer, and chief Professor of Oratory at Millain, made use of this
following Inscription: CUI GRATIAE ADOLESCENTIAM ORNANT, ERUDITIO JUVENTAM,
PRUDENTIA SENECTAM; IS ADULESCENS VOLUPTATEM AMICIS CREAT, JUVENIS HONOREM
PATRIAE, SENEX UTRUMQUE SIBI. TU VERO, NICOLAE FABRICI, CUNCTA SIMUL AMICIS,
PATRIAE, TIBI; IN SPE AETATIS, ET FLOREM JUVENTAE, ET FRUCTUM SENECTAE
PROFESSUS. PATAVII DC. KAL. FEBR. That is, He whose youth is adorned by the
Graces, his mature age with learning, and his old age with wisdom, is a
Pleasure to his frieuds in his youth, an Honor to his Country in his riper
years, and both to himself, in his old age. But as for thee, O Nicolas
Fabricius, Thou art all at once to thy Friends, thy Country, and thy Self; for
in thy hopeful years thou discoverest at once both the blossoms of youth and
the fruits of old age. 1600.
Padna, the Kalends of February 1600. And these are the testimonial
Inscriptions, which among many others I thought good to relate.

And as he drew the eyes and attentions of all men, so was he best known and
most dear to the renowned Johannes Vincentins Pinellus, who being by original
and blood from Genoa, and born at Naples, made choice of that city, wherein
quietly to pass his days, giving himself wholly to promote good Arts and
ingenuous Literature. For he had provided a most complearly furnished Library,
and a Storehouse of all most exquisite rarities and curiosities; so that he
furnished all the learned men of that age, both far and near, with such books
or other things, as they stood in need of. He being most skillful in all
curious things, did stir up all men to study, and kept open house to entertain
the discourses and acquaintance of learned men, both Italians and other
Contrymen. Lipsius, and Scaliger, and Thuanus, and Casaubon, and Pithaeus,
have given testimony of his worth; and who not among the learned? He therefore
being such a man, fell presently in love with the Genius of Peireskius, as
being so very like his own: So that he did both admire and reverence virtue and
learning grown up and almost come to maturity in a Youth. There are many
Letters yet to be seen, whereby he testified the greatest familiarity possible;
one while asking his advice in many particulars about coins, the places where
matters mentioned in stories had been acted, touching the answers which he was
to return to the demands of Ursinus, Velserus, and others: otherwhiles giving
him thanks for his interpretations of hard matters and places in anthors, for
sending him books. patterns of rarities, copies of manuscripts, and other
things: sometimes by way of requital sending him such books, rarities,
inscriptions, letters, as he had received lately from Rome, or other parts;
otherwhiles inviting him to know, discourse, behold, pass his judgment, and
the like, all which to particularize would be redious; not to speak of the
Letters, which to the number of sourty he wrote to him, when he was at Venice,
Florence, or Rome, all very familiar and full of testifications of the greatest
good will imaginable.

Now Peireskius was wont to go once a quarter to Venice, both to receive moneys
to defray his necessary charges by Bills of Exchange, and also to enjoy the
society of learned men, lovers of Antiquity, such as Father Paul Sarpi,
Dominicus Molinus, and many others; likewise that he might see what ever in
that city was of repute for costlinesse or rarity. To which purpose he was very
much assisted by the authority of Philippus Canaius Fraxineus, the most
Christian King of France his Ambassador there; he himself also making such
friends, as by whose authority he attained the sight and knowledge of what ever
he desired. The chief of which was Fridericus Contarenus, Procurator of St.
Mark, who having a study richly furnished with rarities, was nevertheless
unacquainted with the value thereof, till Peireskius showed him what every
rarity was, and how to be valued; what the Greek Inscriptions both of Moneys
and Tombs did signify, and the like, by which he gained a singular interest in
his affections. And not only in his, but his whole Families, which was the
rise of that acquaintance which he had with Angelus Contarenus, when as twenty
years after he was Ambassador for the Republike in France; and with Vincentius
Contarenus, who six years after setting out a book of Diverse Readings, So far
as from France (says he) the most noble Nicolas Fabricius, excellently skilled
both in the Laws and in all Antiquities, did think sit very lovingly to advize
me. I pass over Johannes Mocenicus, who had very rare curiosities, I pass
over Bembus the Knight, all whose stock of rarities, in a manner, which he had
received by tradition from Cardinal Bembus, he bought up. I pass over the
Patriarch of Aquileia, in whose closet he was wont to relate, how he had seen
to the number of 300 very rare Achates, or Agats, precious stones so called:
besides many others of other kinds. I will only relate what Putean being at
Venice wrote to Pinellus on the 11th of the Kalends of June, in that Epistle of
his which is extant, being the 82 of his Promulsis. I was, says he, in the
house of Scaramellus: I saw the monument of Septumia, though to little purpose:
all things were so justly expressed, that verily I know not whether I should
more admire the industry or the memory of our Fabricius, or both, who in great
haste had so happily painted it forth, or directed the hand of him that
afterward did so happily paint and form it. From which we may observe how
industrious and diligent he was in observing every thing.

But going to Venice about the end of August, he discovered his longing desire
and design of going to Rome; for though the Porta-sancta were not to be
opened, nor the Jubilee celebrated till the beginning of the following year:
yet he was of opinion, that if he should wait there some months beforehand, he
should not lose his time. He had been informed that shortly the famous marriage
of the most Christian King with Maria Medicea, who is now the Queen Mother, was
to be celebrated at Florence; and he would not for any thing, but be present at
the Solemnity to behold the same. Wherefore after he had written to Padua, and
particularly to Pinellus, sending him certain Inscriptions and other things,
and withal entreating him to write by him to his friends at Rome: he departed
in the beginning of September, hiring a Bark to Ferraria, or at least as far as
to Francolin. But he came not to Florence till the twentieth day of the month,
because what ever he met with worthy the sight, he stayed so long as to take a
perfect view thereof. But he made his longest stay at Bonnonia, because Julius
Caesar Velius, who was reputed a most exquisite Antiquary, being much taken
with his sweet converse, would needs hold him the longer to enjoy his company.
Nor could that good old man forbear to write most cunning Letters touching his
happiness in the acquaintance of Fabricius, which were full of wonderful
commendations. Pinellus, I am sure, calls them most cunning Letters, commending
Fabricius that he was none of those, who in their travels do nothing but post
from place to place, and therefore according to that of Seneca, are wont to
have many hosts, but few friends.

Coming to Florence, he received Letters from his parents, and among some
recommendatory Epistles, he found one from Charles of Lorram the Duke of Guise
and Lieutenant of Provence, to Nicolas Brularrus Sillerius, who was afterward
Chancellor of the Kingdom, and at present the Kings Ambassador at Rome, being
come thither to celebrate the marriage. He therefore desired to have Peireskius
and his brother in his family, that by his countenance they might have a more
free admittance to see every thing. But besides the Solemnity, he was chiefly
delighted to see those brave Libraries, where he took notice of, and that I may
so speak, almost adored the monuments both of great princes and of learned men,
by whom good letters began to be restored to the world. I shall not speak in
particular of the Pandects, which though they were most charily kept up in the
palace of the great Duke, yet he found means to see them, being well assured,
that the learned world could not produce a more illustrious monument of
Antiquity than they were. Also he made himself friends there, but none, as I
remember, more constant than Richard Richards, a Student in the knowledge of
plants and marbles, who conducted him up and down to show him the public
edifices and gardens. After a month he went to Sena where his greatest care
was to salute Celsus Cittadinus, who was then writing a book, touching the
original and progress of the Latin and Italian tongues. Finally, departing
thence, he came to Rome about the end of October.

Now it is not to be expressed, how soon he became famously known at Rome; not
only because the letters of Pinellus and others, had already made his name
renowned; but, also principally, because as soon as he began to frequent the
company of the learned men there, he made them exceedingly both to admire and
love him. It were long to recount the excellent Personages, whom he there
honored as friends, by all which, for his sparkling wit and most temperate
manners, he was highly respected: but because I cannot pass them all over in
silence, they that deserve in the first place to be mentioned, are those two
great Cardinals, Baronius and Bellarmin. The former of which was astonished,
when he heard him discourse in his presence, touching the Inscriptions inserted
in his Annals, and other abstruse points of History. And what may we suppose he
thought, 1560.
when he showed him certain precious stones, and diverse pieces of coin, upon
which the Basilidians, Valentinians, and other heretics, were wont to write
certain barbarous words, thereby to conceal their opinions? For he had
collected many of these, to illustrate what he had inserted into his second
Tome from the Amethyst of Fulvius Ursinus, touching the word A B P A X A O, or
A B P C X, by which the Basilidians did signify the most high God, containing
seven Angels, which governed the seven Heavens; as also their 365 Virtues,
equal in number to the days of the year; and this by reason of the seven
letters, and their value in numeration (adding together the numbers, according
to the place of each letter in the Alphabet) and such like considerations,
which he likewise afterward explaned in certain Letters to Natalitius
Benedictus. But Bellarmin hearing the same things, with other matters touching
heresies and all ancient history, was at a stand which he should commend most,
whether his sagacity in searching out, his sharpness in conjecturing, his
judgment in choosing, his memory in relating, or his pleasant and delightful
manner of expressing himself. But he was justly enamoured with his meek and
gentle manners: for to omit other instances, when he preached in a familiar way
to instruct his Parishioners, he had him for his Auditour, sitting for the most
part in the midst of the common people.

The next to be mentioned is Jacobus Sirmondus a Jesuit, even at that time of
great repute; for with him he contracted a most intimate friendship, with whom
he did communicate all his studies. The next is Laelius Pasohalinus, who had a
most goodly Closet of Rarities, and who so admired his Learning and loved his
Disposition, so that he had it once in his mind, and was resolved to give him
what ever he had that was rare, to carry away with him: After him comes that
same most renowned Fulvins Ursinus, a name of all others most known and framed
among the Lovers of Antiquities, who by reason of certain Interpretations,
which Pincllus had wrote unto him, had a burning desire to be acquainted with
Peireskius, The next is Philippus Pigafetta, to whom whereas Pinellus had not
at first written, it is wonderful with what Commendations he did expiate that
forgetfulness. After him, comes the self same Ghibertus with whom he been
already acquainted at Avenion, who went abroad with him and showed him diverse
things. The next was Paulus Gauldus a Learned Gentleman of Virentia, who also
led him to many places, and having wondered at him when he saw him in the House
Pinellus, he was now astonished at him in Rome. Also Petrus Stephanonus,
Dionysius Octavius Sada, must be remembered, and generally all the Learned men
which were in the City, with all the Lovers of good Arts and Letters. But we
must not forget Arnaldus Cardinalis Ossatus at that time the Kings Argent at
Rome, a man singularly remarkable for Learning, Prudence, Integrity and
sweetness of manners: who could scarce ever be fatisfied with the Company of
Peireskius, and when he came to visit him, he could never dismiss him without
Regret. Nor must we forget Abbas Moutanus, Uncle to the Archbishops of Arles,
who, moved more by the Commendation of the Virtues of Peireskius, then that of
his Nephew the Archbishop, would have him to be in a manner his perpetual
Guest.

It is hard now to express with what eagerness of mind he sought out
diligently all the monuments of Antiquity. For in the First place he desired to
know the situation of Rome, and the Grounds which it had contanied. When he saw
the tops of the mountains so low which he had imagined so high, he wondered at
it. He was amazed among the rest to see the Hill Palatinus so quite desolate,
which was anciently as populous as any. He enquired if by any means he might
come to know the utmost bounds of the Pomaerium both in the times of the Kings
and under the Emperors: and as he diligently marked all the gates and ways, so
did he most diligently examine the Aurelian, because of the relics thereof,
which are yet to be seen in Provence. Then passing through the Quarters and
Streets, he would fain know, as much as might be, where stood the Temples of
the Ancients, their Chapels, Altars, Groves, Sepulchers, Sanctuaries,
Schools, Libraries, Amphitheaters, Theaters, Wrastling-places,
Horse-race-places, Places to represent Seafights, Fields, Musick-Rooms,
Markets, Faires, Granaries, Armories, Baths, Hotbaths, Waters, Bridges,
Colossuses, Spires, Columns, Statues and a thousand other things which in his
reading of Authors he had observed, and noted into Books which he carried about
with him. And he could hardly be satisfied with beholding, when he found any
ancient piece remaining, whether it were whole or mangled.

In this manner he spent many days about the Pantheon, a rare piece of
Architecture, in considering the same and conferring therewith, all that
Ludovicus Demontisius had reasoned touching the same. Also, because he knew
there were kept in the Vatican a statue of Hercules, and Laocoon with his two
Sons, most exquisite pieces, and esteemed by Michael Angelus for wonders of
Art; therefore he went more then once to view them. Also he went diverse times
to see the two statues of Alxander and Bucephalus, which are yet extant as
monuments of the famous Carver Phidias and Praxiteles. So, he went diverse times
to see the Sepulcher of C. Sestius Epulo, in the way which is termed Ostiensis,
because of the most ancient and noble Relics thereof, yet abiding. So he
diverse times viewed sundry Obelisques or Spires, but none oftener, then that of
Constantine; for the digging up, Transportation and erection thereof, he could
not sufficiently praise the generous design of Pope Sixtus the fifth. So also
the pillars, but especially one of Traian and another of Antoninus. The former
that he might satissie Pinellus, who was not contented with an whole volumne
thereof (that is of the History of the two Dacian Wars, waged by Traianus,
according as Alphonsus Ciaconus had gathered it out of the Column) written:
and therefore he desired Peireskius both to get him a more perfect Copy of
that Book; and that he would compare those pictures of Persons, Arms and
Gestures which were in the Book with what was to be seen upon the Column it
self. The latter, that is the the Column of Antoninus, that he might cause the
Picture of Jupiter raining gently upon the Army of the Romans, and throwing
thunderbolts upon the Head; of their Enemies, to be diligently drawn therefrom.
And indeed when afterward he presented a draught thereof to Scaliger, to
illustrate what Eusebius had written of a War between Antoninus and the Germans
and Hungarians in the first year of the 138. Olympiade: This, said he, is one
of the most notable things and best worthy to be seen, among all the Monuments
of Antiquity, which it was my good hap to see at Rome.

Nor was he only desirous to have the pictures of these things; but also of all
other rare Statues, which he sought out in the Capitol, in the Vatican, in the
Farnesian and Caesian Houses; also in the Gardens and Vineyards, and, to be
brief, in all private and public places; taking painters with him, for to draw
not only Statues and other works which were entire; but also broken Statues and
the Ruins of ancient Buildings, where ever he met with any. Also he was wont
to carry along with him certain choice Coins, which he would compare with the
statues, searching out the Age of every one, and for the most part discerning
the hand of the Workman: for his Acutenes was such, that he could discern in a
moment, what was truly ancient, and what only by imitation. Also he would have
Copies of all Inscriptions savouring of Antiquity, endeavoring by his
Sagacitie to supply such words or Letters as were eaten out, and to restore
such as were in a manner desperate. Moreover he perused as much as he could,
though not so much as he desired, such Manuscripts as were preserved in the
Vatican Farnesian or other Libraries, and such as seemed to him most rare, he
noted in his Table Book In like manner he noted down the Vessels, Pfctures,
Images, and what ever he met with worthy of observation in sundry
Conservatories of Metals, Conservatories of Images, Sore-houses, Studies,
Walks, and Galleries: to pass over an innumerable Company of things which
either he bought with his money, or by exchange, or had given him; and of which
he obtained at least the Patterns, the Figures in moles, the Seals or Stamps.
One thing grieved him, viz. that he could neither obtain nor any where so much
as see the Coins of Tullius Hostilius and Servius Tullius mentioned by
Goltzius; nor yet those other Coins, mentioned with these Inscriptions Col.
Aquae-Sextiae. Col. Arclate. Col. Avenio. Col. Arausio-Secundanorum, and such
like; which in love to his Country, he most earnestly sought for, but in vain.

By this means, he caused himself to be exceedingly admired, not only at Rome,
where all Learned Men were ambitious of his friendship, but in sar remore
places, whithersoever the same of him did spread it self. And at this time it
was, that his great acquaintance began with Natalitius Benedictus, a man most
amply furnished, with most exquisite Rarities, who dwelt then at Fullinium; and
with Adolphus Occo a Physician of Augsburge, who was then setting out the
second time a Book of the Coins of the Roman Emperors: not to speak of those
he knew before, as Hieronymus Rubens at Ravenna, Caesar Nichezola at Verona,
Antonius Tolentinus at Cremona, Caesar Camnanus at Vicentia, and many in other
places. But it is wonderful how famous he grew, at Padua especially, as the
Letters sent him about that time by Laurentius Pignorius do testify; who,
though himself so skilled in Antiquities, did yet profess that he Learned more
out of one of his Letters, then out of ten Volumes of Antiquaries. And who
admired not only the abundance of the things which he collected, but the rare
choice that he made, when as, of two pieces, of Constantines Coin which were
sent him, he said he knew them as men are wont to know the Lion by his claw.
The like Expressions were written by Emundus Brutius, Georgius Ragusaeus,
Jacobus Papifavius, Martinus Sandellus, and whom I ought to have named first,
Marcus Cornarus the most worthy Major of the City, with whom he afterward
exercised friendship by Letters as long as he lived. But in what esteem he was
at Padua this one thing does testify, that whereas the Print of a Sapphire
being sent thither from Augsburge, with an Inscription in which the word
Xiphiae did puzzle all the curious Antiquaries; Pinellus writ unto him
referring unto him the Examination and Judgment thereof. I omit how he
satisfied their Doubts, and gave Light to that word, chiefly from Strabo, who
from Polybius makes mention of the hunting of the Xiphia, which was a
Sea Monster.

As for what concerns the state of new Rome, there was no Temple College, nor
Hospital, which he went not into: no magnificent Palace, no famous work of any
of the Popes, which he visited not: no Picture of Raphael Urbin, Michael
Angelo, Polydorus Caraevagius, Titianus, or any other famous Painrer, which he
viewed not. Likewise the Burning places, and secret Caves under the ground,
places full of Veneration and Monuments of Christian Piety and Constancy.
Also he was present at the Performance of Religious Ceremonies, as much as he
thought he might with safety. For, being but or a weakly complexion, he was
loath to thrust himself into a tumultuous Crowd of People. And therefore, as
concerning the usual solemnities of the Jubilee, he saw and observed them as
far as he was able; but he committed the Care of seeing all close at hand, to
his Brother Valavasius, as being the stronger of the two, from whom he was to
receive the Relation of all. 1601.
The same he did with Reverence to the Ceremonies (as they are called) of the
Lords Supper: about which time, both he and his Brother, that they might see
the Pope, waiting upon those poor Men whom he daily feeds, and sitting with
them at Table in the same Hall; they bought the turns of Two poor men, and
putting on their Clothes, they were present among the rest, and though the
Pope knew who they were, yet he pleasantly dissembling his knowledge, and
taking no notice of them, they saw all.

The feast of Easter, being over at Rome, and after he had distributed diverse
tokens which he received from home, and also had sent some to Pinellus, he
journeyed to Naples. It were superfluous to reckon up, how far and how often he
went out of his way, to enquire after diverse places both in Latium and
Campania, celebrated by Authors. Then he was, he said, most affected, when he
saw and diligently viewed those places recorded by Virgil, 1601.
as Cajeta, Cuma, and their Relics; Mons Misenus the Avernian Lake, and such
like. As also the Places where they say Cicero and Lucullus had their Country
Houses; or where Sciplo Africanus and Virgil were buried: and such other
matters relating to great Personages. He said moreover, that when he entered
into that Cave, or, as Seneca calls it, that long and dark Prison, viz. the
Mountain Pausilippus, which was dug a mile throrough, which he past and repast;
it grieved him that the Man who had attempted so rare an Action, so much for
the accommodation of Travelers and shortening of their Journey, was either
altogether unknown, or not certainly known at most. For he judged that he was
more worthy of Commendation then Xerxes, who warring against Greece, did not
only separate the Mount Athos from the Continent, but also dug a way thorough
the midst of it.

As soon as ever he came to Naples, he could not contain himself, but he must
visit the two Porta's, those famons Brethren. Now after he was brought in to
the elder Brother, whose name was Johannes Vincentius, he was so taken after a
little discourse, that crying out as a man in admiration, he led him in to his
younger Brother Johannes Baptista, that he likewise might be stricken with the
like Admiration. And Peiresk^us was wont to relate, that though Johannes
Faptista was already well in years, and venerable for his hoary hairs; yet
that he was wont with such Reverence to observe the Commands and be at the Beck
of John Vincent his Brother, that he could not give more respect to the
presence and commands of his Father. And as he of his own accord gave them many
things, so did he receive the like from them again: nor did he only see what
ever they kept in their studies, and precious treasuries, but he was present at
their Experiments of all kinds almost, intimating to them his earnest desires
that way. Hence it was that he grew exceeding familiar with both of them; and
they afterward maintained mutual friendship by diverse Letters which past
between them, and sundry kindness; they did one for another. He visited
moreover the study of Ferrans Ineperatus, which was likewise very well
furnished with Ratities of nature: also that of Adrian Williams, Mars
Gurgushlola, and of Mathaeus Capuanus Princeof the Conchans although he was
fain to go out of the City to him. Moreover he diligently sought out of all
Monument; of Antiquity; and certain Columns, above the rest, he would needs
have drawn out, being of Corinthian work; also Apollo with his Tripes, and some
such live Figures. Also he enquired and learnt as much as he could possible,
touching such Families as had been translated from Naples to Provence, and of
such Provencian Families as had been translated from thence to Naples. And
knowing that in the Church dedicated to Saint Clare there were many Sepulchers
of Kings and Princes of the Royal blood of kin to Charles the First, who (as
we said before) was Brother to St. Lewis King of France: therefore he viewed
them very lilizently, drew out the chief of them, and writ out the Epitaphs.
Moreover he carefully enquired after the Sepulcher of Simon Portius a famous
Philosopher not long since deceased: for indeed Pinellus had desired him to
enquire if there were any Sepulcher of his to be seen, especially with an
Inscription.

There dwelt then at Naples a certain Woman which was famous for her holiness
and the course of life which she led. She being called to Rome in the days of
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and examined and approved of by the good
Bellarmin, was said to be rapt into an ecstasy, as soon as she received the
Eucharist, so that just in the posture wherein she received it, upon her knees,
so she remained, immovable and stiff as a stake, her eyes being open and she
not seeing, nor feeling at all over her whole body. And therefore Peiresk^us
would not leave that City, before he had seen and tried so wonderful a matter.
And indeed he could not obtain his desire without much ado; but he, as one that
could break thorough all that stood in his way, obtained his will at last, and
carried with him Johannes Porcelletus Malliancus, who was afterward Bishop of
Toul. He saw her therefore and tried her, and when he related it, he was wont
to admire whether any such thing could happen by the Art of Man; nor was he
easy to believe Cardan, who reports that he could cast himself into such a
kind of ecstasy, as often as he pleased.

After he had sufficiently viewed the Cirty and admired the Elegancie and
Pleasantness thereof, he desired nothing more, then that he might go to the
mount Vesuvius and contemplate that place, where the great Pliny died. That
being accomplished, he was exceedingly desirous to see Sicilia, and to pass as
far as to Malta. Now there were three things which he chiefly desired to see,
the Straights of Scylla, the Burning of Aetna, and the Antiquities of Syracuse:
but Fonvivius would not consent, nor would he ever go to any place without his
Tutors consent. Wherefore it sufficed him to go round about all that Country,
and likewise to return again to certain places, as toward the Puteoli and
Baiae, that he might see with his eyes two buildings under ground, which were
termed, Piscina mirabilis and Labyrinthus, that is, the wonderful Fishpond and
the Labyrnith, And I know not whether I should add, how when he considered the
shore near the Puetoli and toward Baiae, and asked to see that kind of dust
which would in the Seawater turn to stone; how there was likewise discovered
unto him, among the Sands a certain lead-coloured dust, wherewith Sculptures,
especially such as are made on the Onyx stone may be preserved. And whereas, on
that shore Coins were sound almost eaten asunder, he conceived the cause
thereof to be sulphur, which is thought not discernable, by sense, in all those
Coasts; a blackish Vapor arising withal from the Sea, with a corrosive
faculty in it.

A month after he went again to Rome, that he might take leave of his friends,
bestowing diverse gifts amongst them, and sending some to other parts. For he
had resolved with himself to return to Padua before the Solstice and great heat
should come; and therefore after a few days he left Rome mourning for his
Absence. He bent his. course to Perusia, both for the Universities sake and
that he might behold the Lake of Thrasumen. From thence he turned ande to
Eugubium, by reason of a Brazen Table which was lately there sound, with an In
cription upon it in the Old Hetruscan Language. Then having at Assisium saluted
the Monument of St. Francis, he visited Natalitius Benedictus at Fullinium, who
most earnestly expected him. Then he saw at the Mount Falco among the Relics
of St. Clare, three remarkable found Balls which had heen found in her
Gallbladder being of an exceecing light substance. Then having done his
devotions at the so famous Chapel of our Lady of Loretto, he went to Ancona,
and from thence to Urbin, that he might get a License to peruse the Dukes
Libraries: departing thence to Pisaurum and Ariminum, he came to Ravenna, where
Hieronymus Rubens that same famous Physician and scearcher out of the
Antiquities of his Country, longed to embrace him, and to show him, in the very
seat of the secret treasury, I know not what Relics of Gothish Barbarism,
and the Ornaments of the Emperors and contemporary Kings, with these names;
ATHALARICUS RIX, WITIGES RIX, THEOD OHA TUS and such like; Also to show him
certain Ornaments of Gallia placidia in I know not what Church, which Vellius
conceived were not ancient: finally that he might give him with his own hand a
Copy of the History of Ravenna. From thence he came to Venice, where having
saluted his friends to their great Contentment, he was desirous to be
thoroughly acquainted with Axtonlus Possevinus an excellent Man of the society
of Jesus, to whom when he desired Letters commendatory, Sirmondus writ Back
unto him in these words. Why do you seek a Broker, seeing you are able to make
your self known, and beloved, of all you shall come to? Finally not many days
after, that is to say about the middle of June, he came to Padua, where he was
received with so much joy, that a Man would have thought, that some god of
Students was come to Town. But his return did most of all rejoice the good
Pinellus, who sound himself drawing toward death, by reason of certain
Lingering Diseases which had a long time troubled him, and which were now grown
worse then formerly. A day could not suffice to hear what he had sound; not to
look upon what he had brought away; nor to understand the Interpretations which
he made, of such things as seemed obscure. I know not whether I should do well
to relate, how Peireskius, being wont to boast among his Acquaintance of the
happiness he had in making Baronius and Bellarmin his friends, the good
Pinellus was thereby moved to relate what had happened to himself touching
those two Cardinals? When (quoth he) the Popethree years ago came to Ferrara,
they vouchsafed to visit me, but concealing their names, and in a disguised
habit, saying that they were only a Couple of Priests. I, by their Pictures
which I had, knew presently who they were: but making as if I knew them not, I
brought them into that part of my study where the Pictures of famous men hung,
and theirs amongst the rest. And showing to Baronius the Picture of Bellarmine,
Honest friend (quo th I) does not this Picture exceedingly resemble this
companion of yours? And showing Bellarmin the picture of Baromus; Does not this
also (quoth I) excellently resemble that companion of yours? Whereupon
perceiving that they thinking to deceive, were themselves deceived, they
discovered themselves, and lovingly embraced me.

Furthermore, Peireskius foreseeing that after a year was over, he should be
sent for home again into his own country; therefore he set himself seriously
to the study of Law, which he had intermitted of late: yet so ordering his
time, that he had leisure for many other things. For besides diverse kindnesses
(of which hereafter) performed for learned men, he made continual progress in
the knowledge of abstruse Histories and remotest Antiquities. Of which he gave
a remarkable instance, when a controversy arising among the curious, touching
the mount Argaeus, he discoursed from a jasper, and diverse pieces of money
coined at Caesarea and other places, the original and the various ceremonies,
wherewith that mount was anciently adored in Cappadocia. Also he continually
studied such languages as he thought might be useful to him. For he learnt so
much of the Hebrew, both in the vulgar and Samaritan character, and of the
Syrian Dialect, and the Arabian Idiom, as he thought necessary to interpret the
inscriptions of shekels, and other such like pieces, being instructed by a
certain Jew dwelling at Padua, whose name was Rabbi Solomon. As for the Greek
tongue, he took more pains in the study thereof, both because of the diverse
Institutions of the Greek Emperors, and the Original of the Law it self,
which is reckoned to be from Greek fountains; as also for the study of
Philosophy or wisdom, and the most ancient monuments of Poetry and History,
which remain in that language; also for the explication of jewels, marbles, and
coins, whose inscriptions are in Greek, in the illustration whereof, it seemed
to him a goodly thing and full of delight to spend his serious endeavors. And
therefore, when he wrote unto any man that was a Lover of Greek, as for example
to Occo (who was always accustomed to strew his Epistles with Greek sentences)
he also was wont to testify his learning in that kind, sometimes by putting a
Greek verse in the front of his Letters, otherwile interweaving some Greek
sentence, verse or prose, in some convenient place of his Letters; as to the
foresaid Adolphus Occo, when he wrote thus, Fortunate senex te divae illius
antiquae and venerandae, (...) filiae, non jam (...), sed (...) duplici nomine
Germanum dicent. shat is, Happy old man now will the daughters of that aneient
and venerable Goddess Mnemosyne call thee no longer Adolphos, He alludes to
his Nation because a German.
but Adelphos [that is, Brother] or, frater Germanus, in a twofold respect.

Nor was he only studious of Humanity, but he took great pains also in the
Mathematics, being from this time forward dearly beloved of Galileus, whom he
first grew acquainted with at the house of Pinellus, and much admired him for
the engine he invented to drain out the waters, which then infested the city.
Also he was very industrious to search out the causes of wonderful things in
Nature. For he both diverse times asked diverse Philosophers, touching those
three. Suns and threefold Rainbowes which were seen the seventh day of
February, about the 21 hour of the day. Also intending to Philosophize,
touching fishes and other things turned into stone, he both procured great
store of them, and placed them in a corner of his study, and likewise obtained
a platform or description of that mount, which at Vincentium abounds with such
things. And what any man knew touching things dug out of the earth, minerals
and metals, either by rewards, or by gentle entreaties he gained the
communication thereof; but especially at Venice, where, as he said, he saw and
observed many rarities in the Arsenall or Armoury there; yet was there nothing,
which he more delighted to behold, than the forming of Alum into an
octahedricall figure, so as to make a body that had eight sides. Also he
frequently visited the rarer sort of gardens, to search out the several siens
and virtues both of homebred and sorrain plants, intending to send some of them
into Provence, and others likewise from Provence, sometimes to the garden of
Pinellus, otherwhiles to other friends. And he was wont to be present, not
only at the public dissections of the Anatomists, but also at the private
ones of Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aqua Pendente; who out of the singular good
will he bare to Peireskius, did admit him to be present; when of a parcel of
eggs upon which an Hen did sit, he took out every day one, that he might
thereby make observation of the formation of the Chick, all along from the very
beginning to theend. And so much as touching his studies.

It sollows that we now show, how from this time forward learned and studious
men did acknowledge that Peireskius had taken the helm of learning in his hand,
and began to guide the Commonwealth of Letters. I mentioned before, how that
when he came from Rome, the most excellent Pinellus began to be worse than
ordinary in point of sickness, and to tend toward the grave. He therefore,
not long after, viz. about the beginning of August departed this world, near
seventy years old: to the great grief truly of all good and learned men; but of
Peireskius more especially, who accounted him as another father, and did
reverence him accordingly. But though he left the whole learned world sensible
of its loss, occasioned by his death; yet was it a comfort that he seemed to
have delivered his Lamp to Peireskius, leaving him the successor of his
virtues and studies. For he had so molded himself according to the manners of
Pinellus; he became so animated with the study of noble and brave things, and
advancing of good Arts, that he might justly be thought to have inherited his
heroical virtues. For the clearer evincement whereof, I shall collect some
testimonies to witness the truth of what is suggested in this particular.

And in the first place I shall cire the famous Paulus Gualdus, who wrote the
life of Pinellus, and of whom mention was lately made. He, after he had
lamented the death of that worthy man, and said, That Nature was sparing in her
production of such personages, and that they had need to live Met huselahs age,
who should look for another Pinellus, viz. such an one, whose study might
restore the studies of Humanity to their splendor, whose riches might be laid
out in collecting the most renowned books; and whose Dignity might be a
Patronage to learned Men; at last he adds. Verily, if our Age shall produce
such another, sure I am it cannot be any save Nicolas Fabricius a Frenchman of
Aix in Provence, a most renowned young Gentleman, who at Rome and Padua, when
he was but a youth in comparison, did so earnesty and eagerly embrace Pinellus
and his studies, that he seemed to us, and all learned men delighted with these
studies, a very Miracle.

This was indeed an excellent Prediction: But let us consider likewise the Wish
of Erycius Puteanus, then (as we said before) Professor of Eloquence and
Chronology at Millain. He writing to Peireskius, O the wound (quoth he) Which
we have received by the death of Pinellus! That never to be forgotten man is
gone away, satisfied with honor and renown, and secure of his own fame: But he
has left us in Grief and want and the muses in mourning weeds. Who shall
stand up in his stead and take sorrow from us and Sackcloth from the muses?
Not only Learning but Wealth also is requisite for such a work. Who will be the
Man? Does mymind deceive me? or are you the man called to this work to be what
Pinellus was? I wish it, I vow it; and so God save thee thou hopeful young
man. And here peradventure it will not be unpleasing to insert the answer of
Peireskius; which was in these words, You tear my soul in pieces with grief
while you rip up that wound which is made in my mind by the Death of that
incomparable man. It Is not without cause you double your mournful and
sorrowful words; you justly bewail our hard hap; and cause enough you have,
while you invite us all to mourn, and exclaim, Who will take grief from us and
Sackcloath from the Muses? But in the Conclusion you make us laugh, when, as if
you would prophecy, you, add that I shall be what Pinellus was; and seriously
wish the same, as if it were a thing possible. Which is all one: as if when an
huge Fir Tree is Cut down, you should wish that some low shrub, might aequal
the Strength and Tallnesse thereof. But your love to me forced this vow and
wish from you, when you were thinking of some other thing, for which I suppose
you never imagined you should he called in question. And in case, I wishing and
vowing the same thing to you, should say with the Poet TUNUNC ERIS ALTER AB
ILLO, THOU SHALL TO HIM SUCCEED, these, I am sure, who thoroughly know you,
will say, that I am no vain Prophet; for in this case there is need of your
help and not of mine. A witty and neat answer verily; how beit he takes no
notice of that which was most truly said by Putean, that to undergo such a ask
there was also need of Wealth as well as Learning.

There were likewise other very elegant Letters which passed betwixt them, one
of which is printed in the second Century of the Epistles of Putean, wherein
about the beginning of the next year which was 1602. he, after a most becoming
way, complains, that he was termed Deorum Genus one of the immortal Race of
the Deities. There were, I say, other Letters written: but I have collected
what is useful to my present purpose, by which it is easy to undentand, how
fitly Janus Gruterus in the Preface to his great Volume of Inscriptions, did
join together by way of Commendation Erycius Puteanus and N'colaus Fabricius,
calling them, Young men who excel all others.

Whouse to haunt the Muses sacred Springs,
And drink dry Aganippes Waterings.
Moreover, that great Volumne was in the Press, when Pinellus departed this
life: and Peireskius supplied such things as were to be inserted thereinto, not
only out of the Treasuries of Pinellus; but also from what he had observed and
written-out at Rome, Venice, and other Places: as appears by that which is so
frequently read at the bottom of the Inscriptions, Ont of the Papers of
Nicolaus Fabricius.

I come now to Marcus Velserus, at whose request Gruterus obtained those
Papers. He was almost equal to Pinellus, and his singular friend, flourishing
at Augsburg, where he was one of the two that Governed the City. Though I hold
my tongue, his own writings, and all Learned men having had experience of his
munificent and most ready Assistance, do sufficiently speak, how brave a man
he was, and how great a soul he had. Velserus therefore, in Letters which he
wrote to Peireskius, did testify that he so highly valued him and his
friendship, that there was nothing that Pinellus lest behind him, which he had
rather inherit: yea and he also not only acknowledging him to be the heir of
the Virtues of Pinellus, but conjecturing that he should be likewise the
successor of his own, he began to love him as if he had been his Son. not
ceasing so long as he lived, by frequency of Letters to restifie his affection.
In this one thing he dealt hardly with him, constantly refusing to let him have
his Picture, which Resolution he held toward all others, that most
passionately desired the same. 1602.
Yet Peireskius caused him, as he had done some others, to be drawn when he
knew not of it, hiring a Painter to stand in a secret place, where he might see
his Countenance. And so he obtained what Occotold him it was in vain to hope
for, when he received this answer from Velserus, Cato major was desirous that
Posterity should enquire, why no Statue had been erected for him: contrarily,
it lies me in hand, I suppose to take heed, least any hereafter should, wonder
if not disdain and ask, what Ambition it was, that made me creep into the
Society of those famous men, whose Images or Pictures, Fabricius pretends to
Collect. I forbear to tell how excellently our Peireskius ansvvered that
passage of his: for, writing back to Occo, Cato (quoth he) said both wittily
and discreetly, that he had rather posterity should enquire why he had no
Statue, then why a statue was erected in Memory of him; yet he never, that I
ever read of, refused to suffer himself to be painted or figured out in a
Statue; witness those many Figures of him, which go up and down even at this
day. And therefore neither ought Velserus, the true Picture of Cato, to refuse
the same; to which end I pray you entreat him, that he may not refuse, and give
not ever (I again beseech you) until you have persuaded him.

After Velserus, Josephus Justus Scaliger must follow, that renowned Person,
more famously known then, to need my Commendation. He (I say) must follow to
make it appear how freely and cheerfully Peireskius devoted himself to him and
other Learned Men. For he, truly, exceedingly applauded his own good fortune,
that such a friend had succeeded into the Place of Pinellus. That you may
understand the occasion, it was thus. Scaliger had writ to Pinellus, to procure
him, certain Hebrew Books, also certain Coins of the Scaligers that had been
Princes; and sent with all certain things of his own and fathers wriring, which
they had written with their own individual hands; also both their Pictures, as
he had desired him. Carolus Clusius wrote at the same time, and sent one of his
Books of the History of rare Plants, and the Picture of Lobelius which was
desired: not to speak of the Letters which Scaliger sent to Carolus Leberoneus
Bishop of Valence, who dwelt then at Padua. They came to Padua when not only
Pinellus was dead, but Caesar also the Duke of Atheruntium was gone out of the
City, who was Pinellus his Brothers Son. And because he had left Order with
Gualdus, that if any Letters came to his Uncle, he should receive them and send
them to him to Naples; therefore Gualdus received all, and before he sent them,
did make Peireskius therewith acquainted. Whereupon Peireskius set pen to paper
and wrote back to Scaliger, acquainting him with the death both of Pinellus and
the Bishop, and assuring him that what he had sent would be thankfully accepted
by the soresaid Caesar: he took upon himself the Care of procuring those Hebrew
Books, and Coins, which he had desired Pinellus to get for him: promising that
he would at least by the first opportunity send him some which he had already,
offering also to communicate some other things in his Custody, tending to the
Illustration of the family of Scaligers, which because he had in Veneration,
he added, that he could not let those Pictures of him and his Father go, before
he had procured Copies of them. He wrote, in like manner, to Clusius; and it
cannot be expressed, how much they professed themselves obliged to so generous
a disposition and such singular Humanity. Which occasioned this speech of
Scaliger in a Letter to Velserus, which is inserted into the third Book, in
which, I received (quoth he) those Coins of the Family of Scaligers together
with yours and our friend Fabricius his Letters; for which I give you thanks. I
have not yet received those Hebrew Books, which he sent me out of Italy;
because they are among the goods of Raphelengius, which are not yet arrived. As
soon as I shall receive them, I will both write to him, to give him thanks,
and you shall be sure to hear again from me. Now this Letter was written, on
the fourth of the Ides of May.

And to acquaint you with some others to whom he cheerfully lent his
assistance: In the first place, what ever Pinellus had taken in hand in favor
of Learned men, he endeavored with all his might, to accomplish and bring the
same to perfection. For he left no stone unturned, nothing unessaied that he
might effect what Pinellus had promised to Prosper Alpinus a very famous
Physician, about the gayning of a Treatife touching a third Sect of Methodicall
Physicians. And whereas we should speak of those, whom after the example of
Pinellus he assisted, one may serve instead of all, viz. the foresaid
Pignorius; who interpreting the Table, of Isis (that is to say a famous Brazen
table, full of Aegyptiun Hieroglyphics, which being a Relick of Petrus Bembus
the Cardinal, was at that time kept as a rarity, in the Library of the Duke of
Mantua,) gives thanks in the first place to Velserus, but then adds, and to
Nicolas Frabricius Lord of Chalasium, a young Gentleman most illustrious by the
Splendour of his family and and his own profound Learning; who has not only
bountifully communicated, most rare relics of Antiquity (wherewith he is
most richly furnished) for the use of my self and other students; but has been
very careful that we might have the use of the Rarities of othermen. By his
Industry it is, that not only at Venice, I have upon all occasious had access
to the rare Coins, and prccious stones of the most illustrious Fridericus
Contarenus, Procurator of St. Mark; and of Johannes Mocenicus: but also at
Rome, I was admitted to the rich Treasury of that gallant man, Laelius
Pascalinus, out of which I was furnished with Coins, Gemms, Seals; all rare.
From the said Fabricius, I must acknowledge to have received all, which I
publish to the world, out of the precious Treasuries of Natalitius Benedictus,
from which these Augmentations of ours have received both strength and spirit.
For, all which we have produced, to Illustrate the History of Epiphanius,
Irenaeus, and the other Fathers, touching their cudgelling of the ancient
Sectaries, came from thence. These things I have set down at large; because
they confirm much of what has been said before.

And I shall add, as touching Pignorius, how when he wrote his book of the
Antiquities of Padua, Peireskius procured for him of Johannes Vincentius Porta,
that which he afterward did commit to writing, as also Philippus Tomasinus,
touching an arm of Titus Livius, viz. how the Citizens of Padua took an arm
from among the bones of Titus Livius (which they kept) and bestowed it upon
that renowned Patron of learning, Alphousus King of Arragon, he most earnestly,
by Antonius Panormita his Ambassador, desiring the same in the year of Christ,
1451. And when no body knew what was become of this arm, Peireskius took
occasion to send certain tokens to Porta, as it were in recompense of the
Effigies of a certain marble, wherein was expressed the ancient manner of
putting Soldiers sub jugum, under the yoke or Gallows; and withal, earnestly
desired him to write him word, what he could, by his great sagacity, discover
touching the said arm. Who returned him by way of answer, that neither King
Alphonsus being prevented by death, nor yet Panormita, could accomplish the
burial of the said arm, according as they desired: but his successor, being
Secretary of State, had placed it under a marble stone, without the Oratory,
with this Inscription: Here lies the arm of Titus Livius the Historiographer,
which was in times past procured by Antonius Panormita, and many years after,
buried in this place, by Johannes Jovianus Pontanus. Nevertheless, this marble
had not been seen for many years last past, by reason of a Chapel built
thereupon, by a Covent of I know not what Friars.

Moreover, as Peireskius was bountiful toward Pignorius; so was he likewise
to Ulysses Aldrovandus, that same famous writer of the History of all kind of
living Creatures; who had of him many Coins, especially Asiatick toward the
Illustration, of what he had already published touching the Symbolicall use of
Living Creatures, and was now again fitting for the Press. And he writing from
Bononia, did very gratefully promise, to make honorable mention, of him by
whom he had been assisted: but being soon after taken blind, he could not
perform what he had promised. Johannes Baptista Villalpandus promised the same
thing, caresully enquiring after his Name, Country, and Condition, that he
might acquaint the world, from whom he had received the Shekels, and many
others things toward the amplification of his Treatise of Hebrew Money, after
those large Commentaries upon Ezechiel. Also, it falls here fit to tell, how
Sirmondus, though he would receive of Peireskius at his departure from Rome, no
Coins but such of which he had two at least of a sort; yet he desired and
obtained of him, after he was come back to Padua, more then two hundred of
Greek Coins alone. For he had collected at that time above a thousand of that
kind, which had never been so much as mentioned by such as wrote of Coins: and
having such as had been coined both before and after the Roman Empire, in all
the chief Cities of Greece and Asia, of which he made up the Succession of the
Princes of the Selucidae, from Alexander to the Romans: for this cause,
Sirmondus desired to know this succession, that after the Example thereof, he
might set down and make a succession of the Princes of Egypt. But we must not
dwell too long upon these matters.

To proceed therefore having spent now almost three years in Italy, he began
to make provision for his return. And, he was, indeed, desirous to pass from
Venice to Augsburge, both that he might there visit Verserus and Occo: as also
that from thence he might, passing along the River Danow, view the bordering
parts of Germany and Hungary, and pass at last through the Euxine Sea and
Thracian Bosphorus unto Constantinople, intending afterward to travel as much
of the Grecian Territories as he could, But Fonvivius his Tutor was absolutely
against that motion, either because he thought his Father and his Uncle would
not approve of it, as being too long a digression and very full of hazard; or
else because he himself was called back again to Paris. Peireskius therefore
not in the least daring to do any thing contrary to his Tutors mind, ordered
his Business so, that in the first place he did by Letters take leave of all
his friends in Italy, of whom he could not take leave in Person, and by the
tender of his service, and tokens also for the most part added thereto, he
obliged them unto him. So he did likewise by his Friends in other Countries,
and especially Scaliger, to whom besides the things aforesaid, he sent certain
Coins which he had newly received from his friends at Verona, and some other
things appertaining to the Family of Scaligers. Then he collected all the rare
Books, Gemmes and other exquisite things he could come by: thinking with
himself, that he should not find such plenty in his own Country. Being ready to
depart, he put them all, with his other baggage into certain Chests, which he
directed to Genua, from thence to be conveyed to Marscilles: he only reserved
some things which were most rare and colly, to go with himself, and fare as he
fared. For, when he had viewed what he thought good in Liguria, he was defirous
to pass through Gallia Cisalpina and so come to Lions, there to see how he
might receive Letters from his friends, and to send to them again. Finally,
leaving hehind him a great miss of himself, at Padua especially, and at Venice
(not to speak of Augs-burge, where Velserus failing of the exspectation he had
to see him, mourned as if he had lost half his Soul) he began his journey.

He made his first stop at Vicentia to salure his friends there, and to see
that Mountain, whose delineation he had desired; as we before hinted. Also he
viewed at Gustosa that same conveighance of the wind by pipes and channells:
also he heard and set down in his Table Book, the History of him that brought
the wind out of a place a good way off, through a passage under ground into his
house, in such manner; that at last, he could cut, and distribute the same,
this way and that way as he pleased himself. He came then to Verona, where his
chief care was to look after the Sepulchers of the Scaligers; the Pictures
whereof, because he could not then obtain, he did afterward compass them by
the medi^tion of Caesar Nichezola and Marcus Antonius Montanus. When he was at
Mantua, there he saw and noted down many things in the Dukes Chamber of
Rarities, so that when some years since he understood, that it was plundered,
when the Germans destroyed the City, he could scarce sufficiently comfort
himself for many days together; such a loss he e^eemed it. Among the rest, he
curionsly viewed that same Egyptian Table, that he might satisfy many
scruples, of Pignorius thereabouts. Having seen Cremona, he would needs step
aside to Brixia and Bergamus, and come to Millain, where not only Putean and
the two Septalii, and other friends; but especially that never to be enough
praised Archbishop and Cardinal Fridericus Borromaeus, Founder of the
Ambrosian Library, which even then began to be frequented, did most courteously
entertain him many days together. From thence, departing through Ticinum,
Novaria and Versellis, he came to Taurinum, and thence over the Alps to
Geneva; were having run over many Books, and viewed the Lake Lemmanus, he went
to a village called Tononom, that he might become an Eyewitness of those
wonderful things which were then said to be performed by persons possessed
with the Devil. Having passed over the Lake, and viewed the bordering parts of
Switzer-Land, he was pleased to perform his devotions at the famous Church of
St. Claudius, especially praying for the Health of his Uncle being of the same
name. From thence he would have gone out of his way to Semurium, that he might
salute that same David, who was sometimes his Master, and to see those Houses,
in which Genebrardus died three years before: but the condition of affairs in
Burgundy being altered and made dangerous, by the Faction of Marshall Biron did
deter him from that Purpose. He turned therefore aside to Lions rather, where
receiving money he bountifully remunerated his Tutor, who was (as we hinted
before) to go to Paris.

Moreover, though he loved his Country and Parents, yet he cunningly desired
not to go directly home, but to depart to Mon-pellier, where Julius Pacius of
Beriga, a Lawyer of Vicentium, was reported to profess Law with great
Commendations. For because he had not satisfied himself in the study of the
Laws, and was resolved neither to require nor accept the Title of Doctor,
without gaining singular honor in testification of his Learning; therefore he
would not go home, least he should be compelled whether he would or no, to
commence Doctor, and that he might first become more Learned under so famous a
Professor. And therefore he went to Monpellier about the beginning of July, and
presently put himself and his Brother to board with Pacius. And he presently
acquainted his Father and his Uncle with his Intentions, who never suspecting
such a thing, were somewhat afraid, lest that he had not sufficiently plied his
Law-studies in Italy. For besides his going aside to Mon-pellier, they saw
sufficiently, both by the Chests which they received from Genua, and those
remaining choiser Rarities, of which he disburthened himself at Mon-pellier,
that he must needs bestow so much time in the Collection and knowledge of them,
that there would remain little or none, to study the Laws.

Which when he came to understand he made a kind of Apology, whereby to remove
that suspicion, viz. That he had cut off none of the time which was due to his
Law-Studies; but look what hours other young Men did bestow in Games and
Plays, in Compotations, or Dalliance with women, that he spent in gaining of
Antiquity. And that Mass of Antiquities which they saw, was at least a token,
that the money which he had been furnished with, was not consumed in naughty
and Dissolute Living. And that he likewise knew, that the study of antiquity
was not unusefull toward the knowledge of the Laws, seeing without that, most
places of the Digests and the Codes could not be understood; and that they
themselves might find so much by experience, seeing for example sake
Interpreters knew not what to make of those Virtolas ex Smaragdis often
mentioned by Ulpianus and Paulus which himself could understand, by means of
some which he had got at Rome out of certain Ruins, and which he would send to
them; A thing which had not been seen now for many Ages together. That there
was likewise among his Baggage, many relics of that kind of money which the
ancients termed Aes grave (because they were wont to weigh it) and among the
many parts of the Roman As, there was a Quadrans, which upon the one side had
the image of a Sow by means of which and other pieces stamped in like manner
with a Bull and a Sheep, money was termed Pecunia a Pecudibus, from Beasts
marked upon it. Also they should find almost innumerable things besides, of
which to hear him discourse in their presence, must needs be a matter of
delight unto them both. Finally that both himself and his Brother had placed
themselves with Pacius, not because they thought themselves less knowing in
the Laws, then others of their years; but because they desired to know somewhat
more excellent and beyond all others.

This defense which he made for himself did wonderfully please his Parents, and
his Uncle especially, who was inflamed with so great a desire to see him, that
ere three months were well over, he would needs send for him home. He came
away therefore; and reached his Fathers House in the month of November: but he
brought Pacius along with him, that so he might avoid being kept at home, if by
no other means, yet at least under the pretense of accompanying Pacius back
again. But his Brother was left behind, because being then newly recovered from
sickness, he could not undertake the journey with safety. It is not my purpose
in this place to recount, with what exultation Peireskius was entertained when
he came home, nor how highly Pacius was respected. I shall only say, that the
rare Man, Guillelmus Varius, who was then President of the Senate of Aix, and
was afterward (as shall be told in its place) made Chancellor, could not
sufficiently admire so excellent a wit, and so rare Learning, joined with so
much modesty; nor be satisfied with asking and hearing what he related so
knowingly, so clearly, and with so much sweetness.

A few days after being upon this return with Pacius to Mon-pellier, he would
needs go out of the way to show him the Fountain De Vau-Cluse, not more famous
for the plentiful streams of water issuing therefrom, then for the Loves of
Petrarch and Laura: as also that tryumphant Arch, which is to be seen at Orange
thought to be built C. Marius, thought he judged it to be rather the work of
Fabius Maximus; and likewise the City of Avenion, and the Bridge of Wardon or
Guardon, built with a triple row of Arches, and certain rarities at Nismes,
which he had not before seen, though he had been there two years together.

Now as soon as he returned, he fell to study the Laws with so much Alacrity,
that he daily spent ten whole hours therein; yet he was wont every day to
spend some hours, especially toward Bedtime, in the studies of Humanity and
Antiquity. Which Pacius did not wholly dislike, being wonderfully delighted to
hear him discourse of diverse things, especially belonging to the ancient Laws;
yea, and he did not only give way, but advized him, I may say, to see those
ancient Monuments of Antiquity at Narbon; but especially that Altar which was
vowed and dedicated to Augustus, of which being dug up thirty years before,
he got the Picture printed at Bordeaux with the Illustrations of Elias Vinetus.
For, the Book of Inscriptions of Gruterus, was not as yet brought unto him, in
which he afterward observed, that the Tribuneship of Augustus, which Tacitus
records to have been the 37th. in order, was by this very Inscription the
thirty eighth.

Moreover, because Pacius was very willing to discourse of matters pertaining
to natural Philosophy; he took all occasions to ask him Questions touching the
more abstruse causes of Nature; especially at such hours as were allowed him
for his Recreation. Thus happening one night upon certain scales of fishes,
that shone in the dark, he gathered them together, and conveyed one
privately into the study of Pacius; and afterward entering with him, he on
purpose, put out the Candle which he carried before him, that he being first
amazed and then wondering at the light, he might ask him the Cause thereof.
Pacius referred it to the Heat which was caused by Putrefaction. But Peireskius
asked him, Why therefore the Heat could not be felt, neither in those Scales,
nor in rotten pieces of wood? Why heaps of Corn growing hot by putrefaction,
and quick lime wet with water and other things being so very hot, did not shine
in like manner? Why, if glow-wormes shine by reason of heat, other living
Creatures which are much hotter, should not also shine? To which Pacius
answered, that the Heat which the Schools call virtuall might suffice; and
that befides, a certain disposition in the matter was requisite, which is found
in things which are not hot to the sense, but not in those which are sensibly
hot. I shall not stand to say how that when these and such like reasons could
not satisfy Peireskius; nothing seemed to him more probable, then that all
light is a kind of flame, though very thin and exceeding subtle: which may be
known by the Light of the Sun, which being contracted and thickened is wont to
burn; just as a vapor, is nothing but rarefied water, which being again
compacted and thickened, reassumes the form of water. And whereas the direct
or primary Light of the Sun, is yet pretty compact, so as it gives a sensible
Heat; yet the reflected or secondary Light thereof, becomes so thin that the
Heat thereof is not perceptible by sense. And therefore it is no wonder, that
the small Light of fish-scales and such like things is not sensibly hot, seeing
it is much more subtle then the Secondary Light of the Sun, in presence
whereof it becomes invisible. And that hotter things do not shine; the reason
may be, that the vehemence of the heat stirs up foul vapors and smoakie
fumes, which suffer not the imbred light to flow out pure, so as to become
visible.

Moreover, being very curious in the knowledge of Anatomy and Plants; for that
cause, as often as he could, he would get into the Kings Gardens (which had
been four years in furnishing) unto Richerius Bellivallius, who was Teacher of
both, unto whom the Company of Peireskius was allwaies most welcome and
delightful. Also he went oftentimes to Franciseus Ranchinus, who adorned his
rare skill in natural Philosophy and Physic by adjoining thereto the
knowledge and search of Antiquities. Touching Johannes Dortomannus, what shall
I say, whose rare Learning and singular Affection toward him, he was ever wont
to commend? He made use of him for his Physician. When he had a Light Fever,
and was vexed with a more grievous pain of the Hemorrhoids then formerly he
had felt, also with some difficulty in making his water. I know not whether I
should add that which he often related, how Dortomannus visiting him upon a
time when he was sick, and being demanded why he came latter then he was wont
to do, made answer, that he came from a memorable Consultation about a woman of
Beaucaire, who had been with Child three and twenty months. She being married
the second time, and having in her former husbands days brought forth diverse
Children with whom she had gone Nine-moneths; by her latter husband she
brought forth three; the first of eleven months, 1603.
the second of fourteen, the third of eighteen: and because from the danger of
her foregoing Labors, she judged that the greatest danger of all was
impendent from this fourth; therefore she consulted with Physicians, to know
how she might (if possible) escape this danger likewise. And I remember that I
objected that he should consider whether it was not the same woman whom not
long since Antonius Saporta and other Physicians, from some such occasion
concluded to be out of her wits. But he avouched it was another, adding that
she not long after brought forth a child, with long hair and Teeth; and that
she got her Husband to promise her, that he would touch her no more in a
carnal way.

But be it how it will (for I shall not undertake for the truth of this story):
partly by reason of Sickness, and partly because of his vehement studying, it
fell out that he wrote seldom to his friends. Whence it followed, that having
forborne to write for four whole months together, some Letters also which he
had sent into Italy being lost, it was frequently reported at Rome and Padua
that he was dead; and Pignorius wrote a consolatory Letter to his Father; But
Gualdus finding the report to be false, wrote unto him as to one raised from
the dead, sweetly calling him cruel, because by his negligence in writing he
went about to kill with grief such good and constant friends. For, they would
not allow of what he had wrote, how, that he must expect to hear seldom from
him, till he had finished his studies of the Law. Wherefore, he was in
conclusion compelled to write often; and not only to his Italian friends, but
also to Velserus, Scaliger, and Clusius. And because it was too far about, to
send Letters from Augsburge and Francfort to Holland, therefore Scaliger
advized, that they should mutually send their Letters to Paris, to that same
rare president Jacobus Augustus Thuanus, whose renown is vaster then to be
comprehended by any Commendation. For because Scaliger had found by experience,
both that he exceedingly loved him, and that out of his singular Respect to all
good all Learned men, he was most ready to do him any office of Love; therefore
he made no scruple to commit the care of such Letters as should come from both
of them to him. So that upon this occasion first of all, began that great
Acquaintance between Peireskius and Thuanus, which was afterward cherished and
maintained betwixt them.

But he wrote most frequently (and good reason) to his Farher and Uncle: but
chiefly that he might not be called home till the end of that year which was,
1603. And because he knew that the Citizens of Aix were at that time
endeavoring to procure not only a Royal College for the study of Humanity
and Philosophy; but also to adorn their ancient Universitie and make it
illustrious with Kings Professors; therefore writing to his Parents, he was
very earnestly careful, that there might be a Large stipend allowed the chief
Professor of Law to the end that Pacius might be called to that Universitie.
For he very well knew that both the Count Palatine and the Overseers of the
Universitie did invite him with mighty promises to Heidelberge, where he had
already for diverse years together given a sufficient proof of his abilities;
but he was both desirous that the Universitie of Aix might boast it self of
such an Ornament; and he was likewise troubled that he should fail of the
great hopes he had conceived, to make him at last a Roman Catholic.

But when he could no longer withstand the Desires of his Uncle, who having
resigned to him his Senatorian Dignity, had, ever since the beginning of the
year, labored to get the Kings Patent; he came at last to Aix, that he might
receive the degree of a Doctor; which was necessarily required. But he came not
before he was perfectly exercised, getting leave to defer his coming till the
latter end of the year, both that he might bring Pacius with him to keep his
Christmas there, and that in the mean time he might the better prepare himself
to keep diverse Acts. For seeing it was then the Custom in the Universitie of
Aix, that no man should be admitted Doctor, before that (besides other trialls)
he had defended his Theses three days together; therefore it was necessary for
him to collect Miscellaneous Theses, both out of the civil and Common Law, and
to cause them to be printed. Moreover, because being upon one day to receive
the Doctorall Ornaments from his Uncle, and resolving to confer them the next
day himself upon his Brother; therefore he would have time to search for such
things as might be requisite to explain the Original and Antiquity of these
doctorall Ensigns and Badges.

He came therefore at last with Pacius to Aix in Mid-winter: 1604.
though he took not his Degree, till the 18. of January the year following. It
would peradventure be tedious, if I should but briefly run over the heads, of
the things which, with large testimony of his Learning, he discoursed in those
several Acts which he performed for his Degree. Let it suffice to say, that he
carried himself with so much alacrity and vigor, that he did not only ravish
all the bystanders with admiration; but he seemed also to Pacius even very
much to exceed himself. Two days after, when he was to confer the Doctorall
Ornaments upon his Brother, it cannot be expressed with what sweet content he
filled the Minds of his Hearers. For, from a certain statue of Metrodorus; with
his hat, Arcadian Cap, and Labells, with his Philosophers Cloak, and ring on
his lest hand: also from certain Statues of Hippocrates with the like Cloak
and an Hood upon it: from a certain Inscription of Eubulus Marathonius, and a
Statue with Labels, not about his Neck but his Head: from the like Statues of
Plato, Theophrastus, Phavorinus, and others: out of certain Gothic Pieces,
upon which there were Mitres not much unlike Caps; in a word, out of
innumerable other Monuments; he showed how the use of these Ornaments came from
the Greeks to the Latins, and so down to us; and how from the Philosophers and
ancient Priests, it was by degrees introduced among the Professors of several
Sciences in our modern Universities: All which he confirmed by frequent
Citations of Counsels, Fathers, Poets, Historians, and Orators.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS. The Second Book.
THe solemnity was hardly finished when the Patent aforesaid was to be
presented to the Senate, lest a years time should be lost. It was therefore
given in, and commanded to be recorded: yet Peireskius procured, that he should
not therefore presently be admitted, and entered into the Catalogue of Senators;
both because he would not seem to thrust his most loving Uncle out of that
number; and because he feared, lest if he were once obliged by office, he
should too soon be deprived both of the Liberty to study, and that opportunity
of Traveling. Moreover writing unto his friends, and pretending his
emploiments concerning his Commencement as an excuse of his long silence, he
signified withal that he was compelled against his Mind, to take upon him the
Dignity of a Senator: to which he received diverse answers; the most,
congratulating with him, as supposiing that he was already received into the
Senate. Among these, was Scaliger, who both commended this new Dignity and
congratulating his Doctorship, added, that he had formerly been at Aix, and was
a witness how severely the University did examine such as were to be
graduated. Velserus also was one, who did not only congratulate with him
touching his Degree and new Senatorian dignity but added withal an Admonition
and fatherly exhortation: telling him among other things, that he must not be
faint-hearted: the office of a Senator though it were thorny, yet was it so
only at the first; time would make every thing easiy: nothing would be required
of him above his strength; God would assist him; he was bound to assist his
Country; and some other things to the same purpose. Pacius also in like manner
exhorted him, as soon as he was returned to Mon-pollier, in an Epistle
dedicatory, wherein he dedicated to him his Analysis of the Imperial
Institutions; howbeit because he knew that he was not yet received into the
number of the Senators, he only dedicated his Book to him as one designed to be
the Kings Counselor in the Senate of Aix.

Nor shall it seem tedions in this place to transscribe the very words of the
dedication and Exhortation. Thus therefore Pacius addressed himself. But unto
you, my Fabricius, I send my Writings. For seeing you, who retain the Virtues
of the ancient worthies, when with your sweet natured Brother you departed from
my House to return into your Country, did conser upon me excellent Tokens or
Presents, leaving behind you a Testimony of your own good will and the good
will of your Uncle and Father (two most bountiful and worthy Gentlemen) to me
and mine: it concerns me likewise, that I may observe that ancient and most
laudable Custom, to return some Testimony of my thankfulness. And what could
I present more acceptable to you, then the fruit of those studies and that kind
of Learning, in which your most noble family does exceedingly flourish? You
want no money neither have I any to spare: but these kind of studies you love
and exercise your self in; and you are wont readily to confess that you have
profited by my Lectures, and Exercises. Also you are pleased to make me a
sharer of that great Commendation, which worthily, you gaind in the taking of
your Degree of Doctor, as if by my Admonitions and Instructions you had been
assisted to advance your self to that high pitch of Learning where to many
aspire in vain. Touching which new Honor of yours and your good Brother, I
rejoice with you from my very Heart; and exhort you again, that you would now
assume the minds of Senators; and now turn all your thoughts to the
Commonwealth, which requires your Help, making the public good, the
perpetual object of all your Counsels. Nothing can more become you, nothing
can be more pleasing to your Parents (for you acknowledge your Uucle to be
another Father) nor more acceptable; nor can any other thing render you more
illustrious. So far, Pacius.

But Peireskius, though he continued in the mind to join himself when time
should serve to the Senators, and not intermit wholly his study of the Law,
which he had taken upon him: yet having obtained a delay, he applied his mind
to more tree studies, to court the sweeter and more delightful Muses, to
advance good Arts, and to help, as much as in him lay, all the Promoters of
learning. And, in the first place being by diverse solicited to marry, he
preferred a single life; being persuaded within himself, that he could not take
care for a wife and children, and be free to follow his studies, and patronize
learned men. And therefore, when his father, without his knowledge, had almost
made an agreement touching his marriage with the only daughter of the renowned
John Ceppedaeus, first President of the Accounts, he earnestly begged of him,
that he might not forsake his resolution. For he had in such a manner dedicated
himself, and betrothed himself, as it were, to Pallas and the Muses, that he
should count it sacrilege to think of any other marriage. As for the example
of Pinellus, though it was deeply rooted in his mind, yet would he not propound
the same to his father; yet he propounded the example of Varius, because it was
present and illustrious; adding that he had, more than others a domestic
example before his eyes, which he supposed he could not imitate, without
commendation. He therefore imitating his uncle gave his brother leave to marry;
who therefore the summer following took to wife the foresaid Marchisa, daughter
of Olivarius de Thulia, by whom the third year after he had a son, whom his
uncle Claudius, being then living, as Godfather, called by his own name.

Moreover, not long after he was made Doctor, it was his pleasure to take a
view of all the seacoast, both to search out all the monuments of Antiquity,
and to get the rarest plants which that Country afforded, which were to be
sent to the garden of Belgenser. The reason why he began with the Antiquities
of Freius (which to have seen once, as he went into Italy, did not content him)
was because he was to conduct some Gentlemen of his kindred, who had been to
solemnize his Commencement, as far as Draguignan. But his chiefest desire was
to see a work worthy the Roman name and renown, viz. A rock cut quite through,
or a large hollow channel dug in the steep side of an hill, by which an arm of
the river Siagne, was to be brought five Provence-miles, through the turnings
and windings of the valleys and the woods. Now it would be tedious to reckon up
all that he observed and collected in his whole progress: It shall suffice to
say, that thence he took occasion to write and send many things to his friends.

But among the rest, he made great account of a certain Consulary piece of
coin, which he said was not to be had, not being so much as mentioned either by
Goltzius, Ursinus, or any other writer; which he sent to Pignorinus, that he
might show it to Fridericus Contarenus. Also he made great account of certain
Inscriptions of Flaminius and Dudistius, touching the filling up whereof (for
some letters were eaten away) he consulted chiefly with Velserus. Also he
highly esteemed other choice rarities, which he sent to Scaliger, and certain
(I know not what) shells of sea-fishes, by occasion whereof he wrote unto Pena
the Physician, touching the shell of a Brand-goose or Sea-duck, which was
fashioned like the shell of a Limpin. But to speak in particular of Plants, he
took along with him an Herbalist, skillful in the knowledge of all plants, at
all times; and therefore he did not only send plants into his own garden; but
he sent also roots of most of them to Clusius, and among the rest of
Tragacantha, whence Gum Tragant (or, as the common people say, Cum Dragon) is
received, of Aristolochia or Birthwort, of Asphodelus or Daffodill, and of the
two sorts of Arbute-trees so called. Withal, he signified the desire he had to
enjoy the company of Clusius a while at Belgenser, where he would show him a
Styrax or Storax tree, being a low shrubby tree, with leaves like those of a
Quince tree, and flowers or blossoms not unlike the blossoms of an Orange tree,
and in the sweet smelling liquour that comes from it, not inferior to the
Storax of Syria: which grows within a mile of the Town, and not to be found in
any other place. Also he would show him a Lentisk tree, which sweats mastich,
no less than the Lentisk trees of Chios, which are accounted the best. Also he
would show him some other things, which he should hardly see elsewhere.

When he returned, he began to think of erecting a Covent of Heremites of
Camaldoli, in that goodly Desert, by the Chapel under a rock, which being
dedicated to Saint Mary de Angelis, is almost in the mid way between Massilia
and Aix. The reason whereof was, because when he lived at Padua, he exceedingly
liked the Orders of those kind of Heremites; and a learned man of that Order,
called Elias, was then at Aix, about a Novice that was to be received, or was
newly received. Peireskius therefore, delighted with his company, kept him
there many months together, nourished him in the Desert, and often would visit
him, and stay diverse days with him. In the mean while he procured, that by a
decree of the Citizens of Massilia and Aix, such a Covent should be desired.
Also he procured leave to erect the same from the Lord of Mimet, in whose
Lordship the place was, and bought the ground round about the place. He used
all diligence possible, by the mediation of the Bishop of Padua, and the
Cardinal P^ll^vicinus, to move the Superiors of that Congregation, not only
to leave Elias there, but to send some other religious persons, the better to
stock the new Covent. He entreated that they would at least send some to view
the place; and sent money to bear their charges. And great hopes he had: but,
at the last, all his labor proved in vain. In like manner, his second
endeavors for Pacius, succeeded not according to his desire. For whereas in the
beginning of the Spring he had so wrought the matter, that those of Aix had
resolved that Pacius should be chief Professor of Law, and that his stipend
should be two thosuand four hundred pounds Tours, a year: he went himself to
Monpellier with a Counselor of Aix, to remove any difficulty that might stand
in the way. Nevertheless, he returned without effecting what he went for;
Pacius pretending, that he expected three thousand pounds, besides what he
might occasionally gain; but his wife was in deed and in truth the cause, who
hating to dwell in a Catholic City, chose rather to go to Heidelberg.

Presently after, he sell sick: of which sickness he hardly recovered in the
beginning of the Summer. The wonderful tenderness of his skin proved very
troublesome; for on whatsoever part of his body his clothes did sit never so
little hard, a red swelling would presently arise with vehement itching. This
gave him occasion to consider the cause of those spots and marks, which many
bring from their mothers wombs. For it came into his mind, that it might in
like manner fall out, that look on what part of their bodies women with child
did lay their hands, when they have a longing desire after somewhat, on the
same part of the child in the womb, the stain of the thing longed for, is
printed. This he told more than once, and particularly not many years before
his death, when we were philosophizing about the image of a dog, seen in the
urine of a man bitten by a mad dog. But the difficulty was, why the mark should
not be made rather in the mothers body than the child's: yet he was convinced,
that the child in the womb was one body with the mother, and nourished and
quickened with the same kind of nourishment, and the same spirits in all its
parts, even as it was at first formed of seed that came from all the parts of
the body. And therefore its tender body was affected with the same accidents as
its mothers: and any mark might be so much the easilier imprinted thereupon,
while with the spirits carrying the imagined shape, it is, by that touch of the
mother, as it were imprinted; by how much it is tenderer than the body of its
mother. And this I remember has been confirmed by a memorable example which I
have heard reported; viz. How a woman with child, in a town of Provence called
Cippieres, about threescore years since, being stabbed with a dagger, a child
was taken out of her womb, which had so many black and blue marks, as the
mother had stabs, and in the self same parts. And the reason why at the time
when those kinds of fruits, as Cherries, Strawberries, and the like, being in
season are red, the imprinted characters likewise of those fruits upon the
child in the womb, are of a more lively red than at other times; the cause may
be said to be the disposition of the air at that season, which is fit inclined
to raise up like spirits: as wine in the Hogshead is wont to work, when the
Vine trees flourish. But so much may serve to have spoken of this subject in
this place.

Peireskius recovered of his sickness, chiefly by the use of baths, his blood
being thereby tempered, and his body rendered more transpirable, by opening the
pores thereof. And it was in the mean while a great refreshment, that he gained
in that time two most delightful companions. The one was the noble Franciscus
Villanovanus Baron of Flayoscum, natural brother to the Marquess of Transium,
who being excellently skilled in the Greek tongue, and all kind of History, was
perfectly acquainted with well near all the monuments of Antiquity in whole
Provence, which he had at his fingers ends. The other was that same famous man
Franciscus Malherbius, who was afterward the great Master and Controller of
the French Language, and without controversy, Prince of Poets. For both of
them visited him; and whereas to the former he was endeared, because he was his
Countryman, and delighted in the same kind of studies; the commendation of
Varius gained him the latter, and the renown which he had in Provence, since
the time that he was Secretary to the great Prior of France aforesaid. For
hereupon Peireskius began to be acquainted with the Poems of Malherbius, to
admire them, and to commend them to those of other countries. For when as in
the month of September, that same memorable siege of Ostend was finished, and
those lovely verses, Area parva Ducum, etc. were turned into French verses, not
only by Varius, but also by Malherbius, he sent them presently, both unto
others, and to Scaliger himself, whom he supposed to be Author of the Latin
verses. I forbear to mention how Scaliger wrote to him again, that the Author
was Hugo Grotius, a most rare young man; as for himself, being grown old, the
Heliconian Maidens turned their backs upon him long ago; by which he also
excused his not sending the verses which Peireskius had desired of him for
Pinellus.

Passing the Autumn at Belgenser, or Beugensier, he beheld that same rare
concourse of the three superior Planets, which happens but once in eight
hundred years, which is justly called the Great, or rather Greatest
Conjunction. And a wonderful thing it was, that there should arise in that
Conjunction, a star like Jupiter in greatness, which abode more than a year in
the same foot of Serpentarius, just as another star abode in the Constellation
of Cassiopaeia, two and thirty years since, and another three years ago in the
Constellation of the Swan. But because Peireskius had not then a Celestial
Globe by him, whence he might be insormed of the names of the fixed stars;
therefore he was very apt to think that new star to be one of the old ones,
especially when he saw that the light thereof was not flat and dull, like that
of the Planets which stood about it, but that it twinckled and sparkled
wonderfully, 1605.
just as the fixed stars do. Some months after, he received letters from
Pignorius, and was informed that it was a new star, and that Galileus observed
it, even then when it changed from an evening into a morning situation: but
because he fell into the disease, which had much troubled him at the beginning
of the Spring, and because his Father, Brother, Uncle, Mother in Law, and some
of the Servants were sick, therefore he forbore to take pains to make
observations thereof. But when afterward he looked to those parts of the
Heavens, the star was then so diminished, that being not a whit bigger than the
fixed stars standing about it, which always keep their station, he took it for
one of them, and judged that it was vanished. But in after years he could not
sufficiently grieve, that he had not more studiously regarded so rare a
spectacle, which in its season might easily have been observed.

About this time, when he went from Marseilles to Belgenser [Beaugensier] he
would needs take his way by Castellet, to visit the Parish Priest called
Julius, whom he already dearly affected, by reason of his ingenuous curiosity.
Being by him led a little without the village, they met a Keeper of mules.
Mulettour, carrying a branch of myrtle, with a broad leaf and full flower,
such as Peireskius had never seen, nor knew that there was such a thing in
Nature. Wondering therefore at the Plant, he would be brought into the middle
of the wood, where it grew, and caused the same to be taken up, that it might
be manured and propagated. But he would not have it set in the garden of
Belgenser, because there was no body that would have a sufficient care thereof;
but rather into Julius his own Garden, for he was confident that he would be
exquisitely careful thereof. And he indeed did manure it as was fitting, till
such time as the plant remaining with safety, might be propagated into the
Garden of Belgenser. This I thought good to mention, because a Myrtle Tree with
a full Flower, was a thing unknown in Europe; and the thanks is due to
Peireskius, that it is now to be seen in the Kings Gardens, at Rome, in the
Low Countries and other Places. I say nothing, how we owe the knowledge of that
kind of Mushrompe called Fungus Coralloides, to him likewise; Touching which
when Clusius wrote back to him, I will make mention (quoth he) in the Addition
which I shall make to my History of exotic Plants, which I hope will shortly
come forth, of your name, acknowledging that I had the knowledge of that kind
of Mushrompe from you.

But here I should have told you, that Mr. Du-Vaix.
Varius was so exceeding delighted with his Company, that while he was at Aix,
he would continually in a manner have him at his Table. Also he would have him
to journey with him and travel into the Country to take the Air. And when
about the beginning of June he was to go to Marseilles, to visit Carolus
Neovilla Alincurius the Kings Ambassador returning from Rome, he took him
along with him for his good company, to salute the said Ambassador. And when
he was resolved to proceed to Paris, he asked him if he would not go see the
City and Court. He pro^essed that he desired nothing more, especially in such
honorable Company; but he said his Uncle was unwilling, who when upon another
occasion he would have gone thither about business, would not let him go,
pretending that his Brother was shortly to depart. For there was a business
then in agitation before the Kings Council, about the payment of certain Scots
or Taxes, which those of Rians pretended to be due from Reginald, by reason of
certain Lands which he had. But Varius took the business upon himself, to
procure that he should rather be sent; and indeed persuaded his Uncle, that he
was over tender, and that it was an injury rather then kindness, to hinder
one of so rare a towardliness, from the Consummation of his Virtue. Wherefore
his Uncle, because he reverenced Varius, giving his consent (as for his Father,
he never openly denied him any thing) Peireskius accompanied Varius, in the
beginning of August 1605.

But it is incredible to relate, how soon he became famous at Paris, by the
Commendation, partly of his own Virtue, and partly of his friend Varius. The
first Man that he longed to see, was the Renowned Augustus Thuanus; as well to
give him thanks for his exceeding Civility and lindnesse, as to receive any
thing that might have been sent him from Scaliger. And himself was wont to say,
that it cannot be expressed how joyfully he entertained him. For he admitted
him presently both into the Kings and his own private Library; showed him
whatsoever records he kept up under lock and key, to assist him in the
Composing of his History; opened his very heart and Bowels to him, brimfull of
wonderful sincerity. He then informed him of many things, which he inquired
after concerning the Learned men of Italy; and because he wanted some
particulars, to furnish the commendatorie Testimonialls of the said Learned
men, he promised to procure what he desired by Letters from his friends.

When he visited him the second time, presently Isaac Casaubon, was sent for,
who had the Charge of the Kings Library under Thuanus. He, at the very first
meeting was so affected, that it is hard to say whether he admired or loved him
more. For the truth is, he received so many things, and learnt so much of him
that he could not sorbear to speak thereof, both publicly and in his private
and samiliar Epistles. For in the first place printing his Notes upon the
Epistle of Gregory Nyssen to Eustathia, Ambrosia and Basilissa, he made
mention of a piece of brass money of the Coin of Rogerius King of Sicilie,
which (quoth he) among many others with Inscriptions in Arabic, and diverse
Images of several Princes, the most Learned Fabricius Peireskius a Senator of
Aix did show me. Moreover when Peireskius discovered to him the Errors which
are in Ursinus and Goltzius, who giving more heed to Jacobus Strada then the
ancient Coins, had corrupted diverse of the Sirnames of certain Emperors,
reckoned among the thirty Tyrants under Gallienus, and namely of Marcus
Piawonius Victorinus and Lucius Aelianus, (whom they made falsely to the Marcus
Aurelius Victorinus, and Spurius Servilins Lollianus, contrary to what appears
upon the Coins, which he let him see) Casaubon gave him very great thanks;
saying moreover, I bese^ch you by our newly begun and yet most ancient
friendship, if possibly you can, that you will communicate to me what you have
of that kind. Doubtless that way which you have undertaken to clear up the
dark passages of Antiquity is the most sure and only way. I eagerly expect what
the great Scaliger will observe touching these kind of Antiquities: but I
foresee, there will be place for your gleanings after his Harvest. For it was
an happy thing that you should meet with these Coins, which have given you
light in such dark paessages. But that I may not be tedious, I shall only add
what he wrote unto him a year or two after, in these words. I beseech God to
grant all health and happiness to so great a Patron of the Muses. And I beg of
you: that as you have already judged me worthy of your favor, so you will
proceed to assure me of the same, and be entreated to go on as you have begun
of your own accord. I do already find that I am much indebted to you, and doubt
not but I shall be farther obliged hereafter, if you shall meet with any
opportunity to assist me in my studies. I know not whether you have heard, that
the most Serene Duke of Urbin, has sent me that Copy of Polybius, which you
told me of: and therefore I am chiefly beholden to you, for that kindness etc.

Casaubon is a man well known and renowned among the Learned, so that by him
you may judge of the rest. For what need I speak of Fronto Ducaeus, Papyrius
Massonus and some others, to whom he carried commendations from Velserus? Of
Nicolaus Faber, Jacobus Bongarsius, Scaevola, and the San-marthani Brethren,
Franciseus Pithaeus Peter's own Brother (...) almost an innumerable company of
(...) with whom he grew then familiarly ac^ua^ited? It is better to tell you
that there was no famous Library, which he ransackt not, but especially and
besides the fore-recited, that of San-Victoria, in which he told us that he saw
besides many other things, one which he most regarded, viz. All the Acts of the
Maid of Orleance, with an Apology for her, and her Picture, of all which a
great Book was written, by the Command of a certain Abbot, who lived at the
same time. Also he talked of many things which he had seen in the studies of
private Persons, as namely of Johannes Jacobus Memmius Rociacus, a man
illustrious as well for his generous disposition and proper Virtue, as the
worthy family he descended from and his hopeful issue, who is yet living in
an happy old Age, Prince of the Counts of the Consistory. Also of Renatus
Poterius Bishop of Bellovacum or Beauvois, of whom he reported, that he was
honorable for histase Learning. Likewise of Panlus Patavinus, whose thousand
Manuscript Books he commended; yet made more account of his Chamber of
Rarities. And though he saw it exceedingly well surnished, yet would he of his
own accord, needs augment the same, with the Coins of diverse Kings, both of
the first and second Family. For he gave him some, in which the names of the
Kings were read, as for example, of Clotarius Crowned with a Crown of jewels
(after the manner of Constantime who instead of a Crown of Laurel, used one of
Jewels) and some with the names of such Counts under wh^ (...) any was coined,
as of Filarius of Rhemes, (...) In scription Remus fit. In like manner (...)
^mended the Rarities and Books of Franciscus Olivarius Fontanaeus. And
Bagarrius being now keeper of the Kings Jewell-House of rarities, it was no
more then reason, that he should see all that there was to beseen. Moreover he
approved of the design of transferring all the store of Rarities of Franciscus
Pererius Gentleman of Aix, excellently furnished with most rare Curiosities,
into the Kings Storehouse: for he confessed, there were yet many things
wanting, that it might be esteemed worthy the name of a King.

And because among other things, Bagarrius showed him an exceeding neat
Amethyst, wherein was engraven the Countenance of Solon by the Hand of that
famous Graver Dioscorides, who wrought for Augustus; hereupon he took occasion
to teach him, what was meant by those little holes in the Inscription, which he
showed him in the Seal standing in this order.

inscription

For he said they were holes wherein little N^iles had been fastened to hold
Greek Letters made of metals, which did express the name of the Graver, or
DIOKOYPIDOY, but they must be read backwards as the manner is in all
Ingrossements and Seals. This he made manifest, when having drawn in a white
paper those holes, as above, he drew lines between the said holes, which
expressed those Letters in this manner.

inscription

Thus he said he interpreted certain holes which were seen at Assisium, in I
know not what old Church. For when as no man could tell what they signified, he
divined that it was an Inscription or Dedication made JOVI OPT. MAX. Which he
demonstrated by certain lines completing the Holes after this manner.

inscription

So he hoped he should interpret a certain Set of Holes in the Cathedral
Church at Nismes, called Domus quadrata, when he had got a pattern thereof.

But to return to Paris, there was hardly any public monument, which he did
not examine, of which he did not pass his Judgment. For the second month
after he came thither, he sent Letters to Flayosceus, in which he wrote that he
had not indeed as yet seen the Monuments of the ancient Kings at Saint Denis:
but he had already convinced of falsehood those tombs built for Clodovaus at
Saint Genoveses, and for Chilpericus at Saint Germins. And a few days after he
said when he came to judge of those at Saint Denis, I could find nothing (quoth
he) elder then the times of St. Lewis, that gave me satisfaction; and I am of
opinion that all those most ancient Tombs, were built at one and the same
time, and that not long before St. Lewis. And that which pleased me most, is
the Tomb of our Country-woman Margaret, the eldest Daughter of Beatrice, wife
to Saint Lewis. Finally commending the ancient Seals which he saw, (bringing
their Representations away with him) in the Treasuries of St. Denis, St.
German, St. Maurus, and others, as wherein were contained the true Effigies of
Charles the great Hludovicus pius, the Emperor Hlotarius Pipin, King of
Aquitania, Charles the bald, Charles the Simple, and other Kings of the second
Stock or family: these (quoth he) do sufficiently refute those tombs and
Statues of these Princes made four or five hundred years ago.

I must likewise speak of his Study, of all other things worth enquiry after:
for there was no wonder of art, nor rare work of nature which he heard of,
which he did not carefully view, as Aedifices, Rare works, Engines, Plants,
Animals, Metals, and other things dug out of the Earth; In a word, all things
which were worthy of observation. And in the mean while, he kept correspondence
with his friends far and near, by Letters; and when he had very carefully
enquired of Paul Servita, of Scaliger, of Casaubon, and of other Learned men,
if they knew what was become of Juvencus Caelius Callanus, the Dalmatian, whose
Manuscript Book of the Life of Attilas, he had brought with him from Venice; he
intended to cause it to be printed.

In the beginning of the Spring the year following, 1606.
Varius being shortly to return into Provence, he obtained, with small labor,
leave to go see England, especial being to accompany the Illustrious Antonius
Boderius, who was sent thither as the Kings Ambassador. Nor did Varius only
suffer that, but praising his intention (wherein Thuanus, Memmius, Mericus
Vicus and other friends did agree with him) he took upon him to procure, that
his Father and Uncle, should approve of the Fact. When he departed, Peireskius
would bring him on his way as far as Orleance; and before he returned from
thence, he viewed more attently then formerly, the ancient remains of
Holy-Crosse-Church, which he accounted to be at least a thousand years old: and
likewise besides other Statues and Images both of Charles the Seventh, and his
little Daughter Joane; he would see those which were kept (as was said) in the
Guild Hall; and particularly, he perceived that the Picture wherein the King is
represented with a beard, and St. Michaells Collar, is not perfectly in all
respects true. Moreover, it was now the beginning of May, and Boderius
departing, he was cast some days behind, being forced to ride post, that he
might overtake him at Callis. When they were at Sea, there were very few in the
whole Company, that were not Sea-sick, by reason of the Tossing of the ship,
and the Steam of the Sea. Peireskius to prevent the same in himself, left the
rest of the Company, and sat by the Mainmast, where he was not so sick, as
they were. The reason being asked, he said there was least Agitation in that
part of the ship; and that therefore he withdrevv himself thither, that he
might not be Stomach-sick as the rest were, who being in the Head or Stern,
were much more rossed.

Being arrived in England, and having, after the Ambassador, saluted King
James, he was tenderly respected by him, who sent for him diverse times: as when
he was to relate the Story of a famous drinking Match. For it fell out, that in
a certain feast of Learned Men, Doctor Torie drank a huge Cup to Peireskius
himself: Whereupon he excused himself because of the largeness of the Cup;
because he was not wont to drink pure wine; because of the weakness of his
stomach; and because he was not accustomed to drink: But when no excuse would
serve his turn, he required at least, that he might be allowed after he had
pledged Dr. Torie, to begin to him again as he pleased. All the company
consented. Whereupon taking Courage, as being constrained by necessity, he
setcht off the Lusty Bowl of wine, and causing it to be replenished with
water, he began to Dr. Torie and (as if he meant to temper the wine he drank
immediately before) drank it quite of again. He, as if he had been
thunderstuck, or newly dropped out of the Clouds, had much ado to come to
himself, and because it was a bargain from which he could not go back, he puffed
and blowed, he put the cup to his mouth and took it away again, so often
pouring out in the mean while so many Verses out of all the Greek and Latin
poets, that he spent the day well near, ere he could get the water down his
unaccustomed throat. And this was the story, which the King having heard from
others, would needs have it from his own mouth. Also he was admitted into the
Chamber where there was a solemn Convention or Assemby of his Majesty and the
Peers, and sat among the chief of the Lords.

As for the Learned men which he met with either at London, or Oxford, or in
other places, the first was Mr. William Camden, who has merited so much of his
Country, Britannia, with whom falling once into a discourse of the Antiquity of
the British Language, to which the Language of Bretagne in France does belong,
after he had asked him about many words used in several Countries of France,
he demanded among the rest what Arelate or Arles and Tolo or Tolon might
signify: to which Camden answered that Arelate in the British tongue did
signify a City standing on moist or marish ground; and that Tolon signified an
Harp, peradventure by reason of a neighboring Promontory called Citharistes
or Harpers Hill. He learned also of Camden other such like Interpretations, by
which he was brought almost to be of the mind of Strabo, Tacitus, and other who
write that the Frenchmen and the Britains, had at first but one and the same
Language. The next was, Sr. Robert Cotton, eminent amongst the honestly curious
fort of men. Also Jacobus Collius and his Father in Law Matthias Lobellus, the
Kings Herbalist, both whom he was desirous to oblige. Also Albericus Gentilis,
Sr. Henry Savill, Johannes Nordenus, and many more. Nor must I pass over, the
then Learned young Man John Barclay, whom how much he affected, shall be shown
hereafter. But he was wont to greive that he was not acquainted, neither with
Dr. Gilbert who wrote the Book touching the Nature of the Lodestone, nor with
Thomas Lydiate a a famous Mathematician. I shall not here recount the many
Libraries, wherein he observed such books as were most rare; nor the studies
which he saw, and out of which he procured all precious rarities he could. But
above all others, he made great account of a precious stone, which cost an
hundred and fifty pounds Tours, by reason that Aetio was graven thereupon, with
a Phrygian Tiara or Turbant upon his head, being supposed to be the father of
Andromache the wife of Hector. I shall only tell you, how that because he would
depart sooner than was hoped, he left a great miss of himself, both in the
Family of the Ambassador, and among his learned friends, who making afterward
sundry times mention of him, it shall suffice here to extract a saying of the
foresaid Camden, in his description of Britain, where speaking of certain coins
belonging to this matter in hand, he says, Such as these were never dug up any
where else, that ever I heard of, till of late the most noble Nicolas Faber
Petriscius, excellently skilled, and most acute in judging of ancient Coins,
showed me some of the same kind, which were found in France.

And he had stayed indeed somewhat longer in England: but because he had
promised to be absent but three months, therefore a month after he went into
Holland, which from the first he was resolved to take a full view of, though he
kept his intent secret. When he was to depart, a company of young Gentlemen
would needs bear him company, who came from France with Boderius. But they were
taken up with the exercise of Arms and other studies; whereas he proceeded to
make it his chief business to find out learned men. And in the first place he
saluted such as he understood to be most renowned at Middleburg, Dort,
Roterdam, Delft and the Hague: but this he did only in passing and cursorily,
because his chief care was to visit Scaliger, whole abode was at Leiden.

His resolution was to speak with him first under the notion of a stranger:
wherefore he changed his name, and presented him with a Letter commendatory, as
written by Peireskius. When Scaliger had read it, he embraced him exceeding
courteously for Peireskius his sake. After much discourse, diverse books being
occasionally brought forth, Peireskius desired to write a few sines out of one
of them: whereupon having given him pen, ink, and paper, and reading unto him
that which he desired to write out; he had no sooner writ a line or two, but
Scaliger knew his hand, whereupon he fell to embrace him, in most amiable
manner, complaining how he had beguiled him. And falling afterward into a most
delicious discourse of diverse matters; Scaliger among other things declared,
that he intended to make a second Edition of Eusebius (for the first Edition
did not altogether please him) and of his Fathers Commentary upon Aristotle de
Animalibus: but that afterward, nevertheless, he was intended to return into
France, and to lay his bones by the bones of his Father Julius. And when
Peireskius replied, That he would not then die in a false belief [that is, a
Protestant] Scaliger wept, but gave him no answer. Peireskius having expounded
to him diverse coins, and especially shekels, he bestowed upon him (though
against his will) a rare Semi-shekel, whose interpretation he admired above all
the rest. He also gave him again by way of requital many things. and which was
most delightful to him, he gave him the desired and expected draught of the
sepulchers of the Scaligers, with the verses written upon the said sepulchers,
which he brought along with him to that end. For he had received the said
draught but the March before from Verona, nor could he get it before, though he
writ often about it, because Nichezola had been sundry times sick, and because
Sylvius Donius, who first began the work, died while he was about it. One thing
there was, about which Peireskius would fain have asked Scaliger, but he never
durst do it, lest he should trouble him: that was, his book touching the
Quadrature of a Circle, which he had printed twelve years ago, and which was
presently by Franciscus Vieta, and Adrianus Romanus (and afterward by
Christofer Clavius, the best Geometrician among the Jesuits) and other learned
and expert Mathematicians, convicted to be erroneous. For he had been
forewarned, that if he should harp upon that string, it would stir his choler.
And as concerning his pedigree, he would not make show of the least doubt,
whether he were indeed descended from the Princes of Verona, whose stock he
said did end in him: yet with a little more freedom, and as desirous to know
how he should answer others, he laid before him, what was objected by
Scioppius, Guillandinus, and others.

After Scaliger, his care was to visit Carolus Clusius, who being over
fourscore years old, began to be troubled with the gout, as also Scaliger had
begun to be troubled therewith, a few months before. He found him taking care
that the figure of the Fungus Coralloides, or Corall-fashioned-Mushromp, which
he had sent him out of Provence, with almost an innumerable company of other
kinds of Plants, Roots, and Seeds, might be printed in the second Appendix to
his History of Outlandish Plants. And he seasonably advertized him touching
some Indian Plants, in the description whereof he had erred, and some which he
had never heard of before, producing withal the descriptions of them,
according to the Fruits showed him at Paris by Vespasianus Robinus. After
Clusius, he visited the chief Lights of the University, and particularly
contracted friendship with Bonaventura Vulcanius, who was then busied about the
Edition of Procopius, with Dominicus Baudius, who besides his skill in History,
was an elegant Poet, and with some others. But he was wont to grieve, because
Heinsius was then absent from Leiden, whom he heard Scaliger more than once
commend.

He went afterward to Amsterdam, where he could hardly be satisfied with
questioning about, and viewing so many excellent rarities, which are brought
out of both the Indies, to that famous Mart. He went to Enchuysen, to see the
closet of rarities of Bernardus Paludanus, where he could have spent his whole
life with content. In his return, staying a while at the Hague, he would not
depart till he became acquainted with Hugo Grotius, who though a young man, was
adorned with mature learning of all sorts: Also he stepped aside to Scheveling,
to make trial of the carriage and swiftness of a wagon, which some years
before was made with such Art, that it would run swiftly with sails upon the
land, as a ship does in the sea. For he had heard how Grave Maurice, after the
victory at Nieuport, for trial sake, got up into it, with Don Francisco
Mendoza taken in the fight, and within two hours was carried to Putten, which
was fourteen miles from Scheveling. He therefore would needs try the same,
and was wont to tell us how he was amazed, when being driven by a very
strong gale of vvind, yet he perceived it not (for he went as quick as the
vvind) and when he savv how they flevv over the ditches he met with, and
skimmed along upon the surface only of standing waters, which were
frequently in the way; how men which ran before seemed to run backvvards;
and how places which seemed an huge way off, were passed by almost in a
moment, and some other such like passages.

At Delft, he was pleasantly entertained by Abrahamus Gorlaeus, whom it was his
hap to find, taking care to have certain Greek Coins engraven, some of which he
had sent him from Paris, having formerly given him to the quantity of a
thousand, which he had brought with him out of Italy. For Gorlaeus was
endeavoring to supply such Coins as were wanting, which he had promised in his
Dactyliotheca [or Treasury of Rings and Seals, a book so called] therefore he
committed the copy, which was shortly to be printed, to Peireskius, that he
according to his candor might weigh the same, and blot out what he did not
like: and he faithfully followed his corrections, especially in somewhat which
he had writ touching Trajan. And here he was wont to relate a thing worth
observation, viz. How Gorlaeus, though unacquainted with the Latin tongue, yet
understood all Latin books concerning Coins, after the same manner as
Forcatulus understood all Mathematical books: so effectual is obstinate
labor, springing from a most vehement defire of knowing any thing. He saw also
at Delft a Nun yet remaining alive, ever since the Hollanders had apostatized
from the Roman Catholic Religion; having formerly seen at Utrecht a Canon [a
kind of Friar] permitted to live according to his first profession. And whereas
he admired not only all the monuments of Antiquity, which were remaining at
Utrecht; but also whatever the Domination of the Dukes of Burgundy lest
remaining; so did he most of all admire, and exceedingly commend the
Hollanders, because they refrained from demolishing the Temples, preserving the
Quires untoucht, with the Scutcheons of the Knights of the Golden Fleece
annexed thereunto, which were institured in the days of Philip surnamed the
Good.

But he intended to return tho^row Brabant, Flanders, and the rest of the
Belgic Provinces, having first obtained a sase conduct or pass from the
Hollanders and the Archduke. And first of all he came to Antwerp, about the
end of July, where he contracted friendship with Andreas Schottus, and Carolus
Scribanius, learned men of the Society of Jesus; also with Aubertus Miraeus,
Dean of the Church, and excellently skilled in the Belgic and Ecclesiastical
Histories; and with Nicolaus Roccoxius, a man exceedingly delighted with the
study of Antiquities, and with Henricus Sedulius, Author of the life of St.
Elziarius. Afterward, when he came from Mechlin to Lovain, nothing so much
grieved him, as the death of Justus Lipsius, that same excellent Light and
Load-star of all good literature, extinguished a few months before. For he
hoped quickly to have obliged him as well as he had done Scaliger, by all kind
of civilities and services. He grieved likewise that Adrianus Romanus, that
famous Mathematician, was not there at that time, whom he exceedingly longed to
reconcile to Scaliger. After he had seen the Academy, and the learned men which
were therein, he would needs go to the house of a certain Physicians widow, to
see a couple of Hares with horns, which were said to have been brought from
Norwey. And because he found one of them dead, he would buy, what ever it cost
him, both the horns thereof, and the pictures of both of them.

At Brussels he became acquasnted with Carolus Bromanius, Count of Brovey, and
some others; but he was most of all taken with the samous Painter Venceslaus
Cobergus, who had then in hand a rare quadripartite work of the Architecture,
painting, and writing of the Ancients; of the images of the Gods; of the Coins,
or rather Medals, or brazen pieces, from Julius Caesar to Galienus. Moreover,
he was wont to tell of diverse discourses he had with him, concerning the
several parts thereof, but especially the last, because of the opinion of
Cobergus, that these Medals could not be money; his chief argument being,
because the stamp which was upon them, would ask the workman two months to
make it; so that, seeing there could not above two hundred be coined by the
same stamp, the price of the work would have amounted far above the value of
the money. Touching this discourse, I only remember that Peireskius made
answer, that they used the labor of their servants, which cost them nothing;
and Cobergeus replied, that this was done, when it was forbidden to servants,
not only to paint any thing, but to learn the Art of Painting.

When he was about to depart from Brussels, he wrote a very learned Epistle to
Sir Robert Cotton, and sent him also the prints of diverse moneys, and namely
one of Commodus, by reason of the unusual orthography of the word Brittania,
with a doublet and singlen. Then he salnted at Gaunt Laurentius Deebrotius,
whom he knevv in Italy. At the Isles, Florentius Nallaeus, a learned Canon,
Author of the Liturgick Antiquities. At Tornay, Dionysius Willerius, a Canon
and Chancellor, and Hieronymus Winghemius also a Canon; the one a rare
Antiquary, the other exceedingly addicted to the knowledge of rare Plants. At
Doway, William Richardotus, the son of John the President, with whom he kept
sriendship ever since his being in Italy; and Andreas Hojus, Greek Prosessour,
whom I have heard relate, with what delight he was present at the most sweet
discourses of Peireskius and Richardotus.

And in this place, truly mention ought to be made, before any other, of that
rare Prince, Charles Duke of Croy and Arschot, who kept him ten days together
in his renowned house of Beaumont, continually contemplating innumerable
curiofities, and rare jewels of Antiquity, most rich boxes of Medals, wherewith
that most curious and learned Prince had beautified his most noble study; yea,
and at his departure, forced him to take with him all the Coins he had, as well
gold as silver, made under the ancient Kings of France; also to the number of
sixty Greek pieces; besides certain ancient vessels, weights and measures;
whereas he would not accept of Peiresk^us any thing, save one brass Coin of
that same John, who in the days of Theodosius and Placidius Valentinianus,
seized upon the Empire. Upon which occasion it coms into my mind how he brought
out of Flanders pieces of Coins of the Friend; Kings, forty golden ones besides
silver, of the first stock; and of the second fifty silver pieces, besides a
golden one of Lewis surnamed the Godly, which he highly esteemed, because he
not only counted it to be very rare, but was apt to think there was not
another to be had.

The time now drew near, when it was said there would be rare ceremonies
performed at Fontain-bleau, at the Baptism of the Prince Dauphine that is to
say, the eldest son of the King of France. For his Godfather was said to be the
Pope; and the Popes Nuncio, Maffeus Barberinus, was to stand in his stead.
Wherefore, about the end of August he left the Low Countries and coming timely
enough, he was present at the solemn pomp, which was performed on the 24th day
of the month following. Meanwhile he heard from home, that his mother in Law
was dead, and that his return was expected, for the ordering of diverse affairs.
And therefore bidding adieu to his friends, partly in person, partly by
letters; he returned into Provence about the beginning of the month following.

Being returned home, he refused not the counsel which his father and brother
chiefly had devised (for his Uncle was somewhat against it) which was to buy
the Barony of Rians; in whose jurisdiction, because the Manor of Valaves was
feated, therefore it was the Original cause of many Suites and Contentions.
Whereupon he himself undertook to bargain and contract with Ludovicus
Grollaeus Medullioneus, Marquis of Brisack, and went on purpose to him into
Dauphine; and returned sped, about the beginning of the year following, 1607.
which was 1607.

After his return he busied himself about many excellent designs, but with
none was he more delighted, then in procuring a manisold description of the
remainders of the City and Haven of Carthage. For he conceived diverse
excellent Authors could by no other means be reconciled; and he intended
thereby to gratify Casaubon, with whom he had discoursed, chiefly about the
Situation and form of the Haven, and yet he knew his doubts were not fully
satisfied. He wrote also at large to Alardus a Canon of Compiegne, about
Coins, and among things touching the use of the Golden Spurroi^l.
Shilling in France, even to the Beginning of the third Stock, showing that two
and twenty of those Shillings weighed an whole pound (though the mony-pound
consisted but of twenty of them) and demonstrating that the Solidum or
shilling, was not always given out for twelve Silver deniers only. but
sometimes for more, even to the number of Forty. He was in the mean while taken
with a most troublesome disease in his Eyes, of which he was searce freed in
the middle of the Spring.

Then did his Uncle begin exceedingly to provoke him, that he should set
himself to obtain the Senatorian Dignity, which was long since ordained for
him. For he grew sickly, and was exceedingly molested with pains in his joints,
for the abatement whereof, he was resolved to go to our Bathes at Digne, before
the Summer: but fearing lest he might happen to die in that journey, he was
resolved not to set foot out of the City, before he had seen his Ne phew
received into the Company of the Senators. As for Peireskius he evermore
invented dilatory Excuses as handsomely as he could; howbeit; his Uncle carried
him, one day, concealing his purpose, to Varius, that he might urge him to
nudergo the necessary examination; and so join himself to the Senate. Whereupon
Peireskius supposing that the business could be now no longer delayed, he
desired only eight days, that he might be the better provided for his
examination. It was the middle of June; and, a yearly Vacation, consisting of
three months in which the Parliament was not to sit, was at hand: and
therefore he was forced to make haste, because he could not be examined and
approved save before the Parliament sitting. He came therefore prepared, and
approved himself before the Assembly on the first of July.

A Law was proposed to him to expound out of the first Book of the Code, by
which the Emperor Gordianus did enact, That he that had received no Legacy,
nor feoffment in haste, nor inheritance, or any donation by reason of death
could not leave any thing by way of feoffment in haste.

In the exposition of which Law, he forgot not to mention that which is
recorded by Valerius and Salustius touching the gallant behavior of Scipio
Aemiltaenus, who being by Masinissa King of Numidia, who dearly respected him,
made Heir of his whole Kingdom, by his last Will, earnestly desiring him, to
part it equally by way of Inheritance, amongit his Fisty fo^^ Sons which he had
living, he did so punctually perform the same, that he kept nothing at all for
himself. Nor did he pass over in Silence how Aristotie in his Politics
detests the Laws of the Carthaginians and Locrensians, some of which had
equal Patrimonies, others could not sell what they had; that ancient
Inhetitances might abide the longer in their respective samides; for besides
other Inconveniendes hence it would come to pass, that the Citizens would
grow lazy both in gaining and possessing their Patrimonies.

I pass over other things, that I may touch upon that which made him most
admired. For though it was believed that he would come very well p^epared, in
re^pect of the Theorie and Questions of Law thereunto pertaining; yet in p^^int
of the Practice, and forms of proceeding in the Courts, it was thought he was
not so well provided. But his manner had been to let slip no occasion, neither
at Paris nor at Aix to question the Practitioners, Proctors, Attorneies,
Ad^ocates; and he would nore in his Book what ever he Learned from them by word
of mouth, or by pe^using the Instruments and Deeds of all Linde, Al^^ he
profited by the Counsel and Example of Aut^xius Thoronius one of the best of
the Sena^ors and most s^i^ed in the Laws; nor would he (...) any word pass
him in the whole prac^^^ce of the Courts, whose notation and canse he did not
^^^rch into, that he might the better understand the use thereof, and fix it in
his Mind. In a word he was with great Applause and Commendation, enrolled among
the Senators.

After this, his Uncle grew exceedingly desirous to go to Digne, but the
increase of his disease, and the extreme heat of the Sun, hindered him: for the
Dog days were at hand, in which it is the manner to abstain from all manner of
Bathes. Also Peireskius desired to go with his Uncle, both by his service to
restifie his perpetual Gratitude, and that he might visit the Lord Flayosceus,
who having married the only Daughter of Guilelmus Falconius Prosene call of
Digne, abode with his Father in Law. But his Uncle would not suffer him, either
because he would not have him absent from his Senatorian Employment in matters
of Judicature, or that he might not go from Varius, who could hardly endure
that he should be from him; or that he might not neglect the Charge he had,
having been requested to oversee Cayerus the Painter, while he drew the
pictures of the Kings of France upon the Arched Sieling of the Palatin Hall.
For himself alone was able to surnish a long Beadroll of their true Pictures,
which he had drawn from Coins, Seals, Sepulchers, Glassewindowes, and other
the like monuments: and I remember, when he could not for a long time get the
true Face of Hngh Caput, he ofrentimes said that he owed thanks to the
excellent Augustns Galandns, because, of him he procured it, being Printed upon
a piece of wax from the Seal on which it was graven. His Uncle therefore went
without him, when the Dog-daies were over.

Varius indeed, minding to do them both a Courtesy, resolved in the month of
September to come and bring Peireskius with him, that they might both together,
visit his Uncle and both together take a view of that Country. And some
footsteps of Antiquity, indeed, they met with, worthy of observation: but
notthing seemed more wonderful then out Country Bathes, in a Vault under the
a Rock, which a stream of hot water running by, does so warm, that gently
procuring sweat, it is exceeding good against all phlegmatic and cold humors,
especially if they be first prepared and made fluxive, by a certain Bath, which
is termed the Virtuous Bath, by reason of its rare activity, whereby it works
wonderful Cures, such as no other Medicines could effect. Moreover they were
likewise desirous to see those Serpents which were wont to fall from a very
high Rock facing the south, at the Root whereof are hot Baths and Baths
especially, because they were harmless and void of Poison: but they are not
wont to fall down, save in May and June, and for the most part coupled together
in the way of generation, or at least two at a time; for being netled with an
itching desire of Generation, they glide up and down out of one clift of the
rock into another, till not regarding the Praecipice, they fall down.

And here (peradventure) I shall do a thing not unpleasing to our Countrymen,
by recording two things, touching which they heard Peireskius discourse. The
one was at the House of Peter Trichauud president of the Court of Enquests, at
St. Martins, who being accus^omed to make his abode at Digne in the summer
time, entertained him at his House with Varius. For when as the Cause of the
Heat which is in the waters of natural Baths, was demanded, and Guillelmus
Alamandius said, that it was not an actual but a potentiall fire, that was the
cause; he replied that it should rather be an actual fire burning in the
Cavities of the Earth, which thereby growing hot, do heat the waters which run
through them; for neither Bitumen, nor Brimstone, nor any other material, only
potentially hot, can heat water, either passing through, or being insused
therein, no not if it were impraegnated with Vitriol, Nitre, and other such
like mineralls. He added that the sumes or Vapors of the Bath-waters, passing
into the clifts of the rocks, did so work upon the serpents, that they did
either hinder the generation of Poison or correct the same; by the same reason,
as wormwood works the same effect in Pontus, according to Plinyes relation.
Which Pliny, seeing in one Place heseemes to grant, that the Poison of Serpents
is in their Galls; and that, when they intend to engender, they vomit up their
gall; it ought not to seem strange, if, when these Serpents do couple
themselves and so fall, they are void of Poison.

The other was at the House of Sr. Antonius de Bouonia a Bishop, who the day
following invited them both and Mr. Trichaud with them to a feast. For whereas
from the Scurcheons of the houses of Porcelet and Ville-neufve, which
Flayosceus had showed him in two Chappells in the great Church, he had
discoursed of the times, in which we had excellent Prelates out of those
Families; a Question arose touching the time and Titles in and by which Avenion
and the Country of Venaiscin, came to belong unto the Pope. And whereas the
rest of the Company, could give no further account, then that Queen Joane sold
them to Pope Clement the sixth, in the year one thousand three hundred sorty
and eight, for fourscore thomand Florens; he related the whole story, from the
year two hundred and nine, in which Raimond the Sixth of that Name Earl of
Tolonse, being a favourer of the Heresy of the Albigenses, and believed to be
Author of killing the Legate, was by Pope Innocent the third again
excommunicated. For, from that time he began to be spoiled of his Dominion; and
nineteen years after, such a Transaction was made at Paris, as thereby it was
agreed, that Raimond his Son and Father in Law to Alphonsus Earl of Poictiers,
should have only the City of Tolouse, with a few adjacent places; the rest of
the places beyond the River Rhodanus, should belong to the King of France, and
those on this side the river to the Pope. And because the People of that
Country, were not well pleased, because they were frequently summoned to Rome,
they took Ra^monds part. Wherefore Pope Roniface the Eighth of that name, would
have no more Appeals made to Rome; and Clement the fifth, the more to gain
their affections, would also keep his Court there. And when in the Rome of John
the 22th, Clement the 6th. was made Pope, Sale was made of all the Rights
belonging to the Earl of Provence, since the Division made between Raymondus
Berengarius Earl of Provence, and Alphonsus Earl of Tolouse, in the year 1125.

These things and many more he related, and in conclusion accompanied Varius
who returned three days after. As for his Uncle, that he might preserve the
Health which he had recovered, and that he might pass the remainder of his
days with greater Tranquillity, at his return, he went not to Aix, but to
Beaugensier. Peiresk^us went to meet him, and did not only accompany him home,
but was resolved not to depart from him, but to be always at hand to serve
him: but his Uncle would not suffer it, desiring rather that he should return
to Aix, because of the Festival of St. Regimius, at what time the Parliament
should re-assemble. Peireskius therefore returned, and it grieved him the
less, because he heard Varius with that sweernesse of Language which was
natural to him, make an oration touching Discord and Concord, and of the Love
of Justice and of the Magistrates which administer the same.

After which he began so to execure his Office, that nothing was found wanting
in him. For although Varius when he shared out the Business of the Court would
not at the first, burden him with the consideration of many causes, but
committed a few only to him; which he was wont so leisurely and acutely to
weigh and ponder according to all the Rules and Circumstances of the Laws,
that having made most pithy Breviates of the Instruments and Deeds, he would
afterward most distinctly and wirh the greatest fidelity possible, report
them to the Court. But when he was to give his judgment touching some cause,
reported by another, he was wonderfully delighted, when time was allowed for
deliberation, or when he had received, the state of the Case before hand from
the Parties in suit, for he was ashamed to give his voice one way or another,
unless he were perfectly furnished to justify the same. Moreover, because he
was oftentimes in doubt, because of the perplexity of some Cases, he was wont
to go to the forementioned Thoronius, who would satisfy his Scruples; nor did
he make any bones, to propound the more weighty Causes even to Varius himself,
who by the exceeding clearness of his most grave and sound Judgment, would
illustrate the same. And this he did chiefly at his Evening discourses; for
Varius invited him every night to a frugal Supper, that they might discourse
freely without any body to take notice what they said.

But because he could not tell how to spend any time idly, therefore there was
enough remaining for him to study good Arts, and to maintain his correspondence
with Learned men. Among other things, he procured an exquisite Anatomy to be
made of a great Tortoise (a cubit long) which being taken out of the Martigian
Sea [Mer de Martigues] he had kept about three months, and fed it with little
fishes. And whereas many rarities were observed in that Section, this was none
of the least, that the shoulder blades were situate before and not behind. That
the Aspera Arteria or Wesand, was halse a cubit long, and divided into three
branches, three fingers breadth from the Lungs, producing small certain twigs
as far as the kidneys and bladder, That the rings thereof were perfectly round,
as well on the Gullet-side as elsewhere, and of a Cartilaginous or gristlely
Substance, and that the Larynx had no Epiglottis. That Veins were distributed
into the Intralls thereof, not only from the Vena Portae, but very many also
out of the remaining hollow part of the Liver; from which part the Porus
Cholidochus, or Gallpassage did proceed double, into a Gut twelve fingers long.
That there was no distinction of great and small Guts, no Appendix of the
Caecum, also no spleen, no fat encompassing the Heart (yet it swam in water
which was enclosed in the Peri-cardium or Heart-Bag) and some other such like
things.

He found out somewhere not far from the City, a great number of, not only the
Bones of Men, but likewise of other Living-Creatures; also of Plants, Leaves,
Flowers, and such like, turned into a stony substance: which he forthwith
distributed, almost all Europe over. He sent also with them certain stones
shaped in the form of Like the Diamond on Cards.
Lozenges both Chrystalline and Rubie-coloured, which were dug out the ground
in Rians: which were herein admirable, in that when they were divided into
small particles, each particle was shaped after the same Diamond or Lozenge
fashion. Also when he sent them to Paris, he added a great Quantity of sundry
sorts of the Shelfish and other fishes, which are found in the Mediterranean or
Midland Sea, of monstrous shapes: also the skin of a Sea-Cat, and innumerable
other things, which he sent chiesly to the famous Painter Daniel Monsterius,
from whom he exspected the Pictures of Varius, Thuanus, Casaubon, and
Malherbius.

When he sent into Italy, and namely to Gualdus, he heard to his great grief,
that Baronius was dead, and wrote unto Flayosceus and others touching that
lamentable accident. When to the Low Countries, he condoled with Villerius for
his loss of a piece of money coined by Adrian, on the Backside whereof was
sigured, as Villerius judged, a Phoenix: but, in Peireskius opinion, a Stork:
which he gathered from the length of the neck and legs, whereas the Phoenix is
usually represented rather like an Eagle: also from the Serpent placed at the
feer thereof, and the inseription of the word PATRI, whereby the natural
affection of Hadrian toward Trajan was set forth. Finally, by some other very
convincing tokens, whereby he endeavored to comfort the man, showing that the
thing which he had lost, was not so rare as he imagined: so he comforted him
touching the loss of a Jasper stone, which represented the Argaean mountain:
which he did, himself wanting in the mean time consolation, by reason that a
certain servant had stolen from him the golden Coins of the first Emperors,
certain Onyx stones, and other precious stones, most rarely engraven.

Mean while his uncle Claudius fell into a deadly sickness, not long after the
feast of the Three Kings [Twelfth Day] the year following 1608, Peireskius did
visit him in the Christmas Holidays; and because he left him well and in
health, he was wonderfully cast down when he heard of this sickness, which on
the seventh day after he began to keep his bed, berest him of his dearly
beloved uncle. The good old man had given order, that his heart and intrals
should be buried at Beaugensier, and the rest of his body carried to Aix, to
the sepulcher of his Ancestors. This therefore was performed with great
funeral pomp, the Court being invited (as the manner then was) with a
Panegyric Oration, by John Peter Olivarius, a most virtuous Senator, unto
which Varius gave consent by another rare Oration, which is extant among the
funeral Orations printed after his death, being the sixteenth in number. At
the end whereof may be seen what esteem he had of Peireskius, seeing he so
highly commends the care of his uncle, in choosing and providing such a
Successor. I know not whether I should relate that which the whole City
admired, how the most faithful dog of the deceased old Gentleman, followed the
Coarse all along, stood waiting upon the bier, could not for many days be
gotten from the Tomb, and after he was brought back to the house, stood a long
time still before his picture.

Peireskius, his grief being somewhat abated, composed himself, as formerly, to
attend upon his Senatorian Office; and in like manner he ceased not to set
aside some good hours for the service of his studies and studious friends and
acquaintance. For in the first place he wrote sundry Letters to diverse friends;
but larger to none than to Laelius Pascalinus, touching the mistakes of Ursinus
the pictures of the French Kings, Seals, Coins, Titles (chiefly confuring such
as conceived that Charles the son of Pipin usurped the name of Great) statues
of Players; touching his Aetio, whom though Velserus conceived to be a Painter
of whom Lucian makes mention in Herodotus, he persisted in his opinion, by
reason of the Phrygian Tiara, or royal Diadem, conceiving that it was to be
reserred rather to the father of Andromache; touching Hercules pillars, the
Ostien Port, and other things of inexhaustible curiosity. In like manner, he
treated with Fontanaeus touching moneys; and with Strada, especially concerning
ancient Coins: with Claudius Frereus, Master of the Requests, and afterward
chief President of the Parliament at Grenoble, touching the French History:
with the San-marthani [brethren so called] about Genealogies; with Pignorius
touching purple; with Nicolaus Faber, and with others about a thousand things
besides.

Moreover, he made innumerable observations, touching such kinds of fishes as
are wont to be cast away when they are caught, as unfit for food, which he
caused to be salted, or otherwise preserved at Martigium [de Martigues] and all
other places; also concerning shellfish, plants, and other things (which he
variously distributed up and down) especially when about April he sojourned at
Beaugensier with Varius; where he discoursed most deliciously touching many
things by him produced, which the other had never seen before. For they
discoursed touching a blue Seafish shell, found in the Olbien field or
Country, out of which a color is extracted bearing the same name; as also out
of a certain Marble which resembles the Lapis Lazuli, touching a starred stone
resembling Coral, and streaked like a star; touching the Lepadites, or Lepas,
being not unlike the shell of a single-sheld Seafish, all which were dug out
of the fields of Casteler. Also of a streakedstone called Conchites, which he
had out of the Antipolitan country, and the territories of For: touching jeat
and yellow Amber, dug at the Tower de Bevons. By occasion whereof he fell to
argue, that Amber was a thing which naturally grows in the earth, 1608.
and is from thence dug out. For they dig it also up in Sicily; where, by the
violent force of running waters it is discovered, and carried as far as to the
Sea, and beaten back by the waves of the Sea, it is often found upon the shore.
And that therefore he said, It is probable that the Amber, which they fish out
of the Baltic Sea, was plucked out of the earth by the violence of land-waters,
and brought into the Sea, especially seeing it contains in like manner flies,
and other such like creatures enclosed therein. And therefore that it was
fabulous which has been reported by some, that there are very great trees in
Norwey, out of which this kind of Amber drops like a Gum, and then congeals and
becomes hard.

The truth is, nothing in this whole year did more please him, then that he
observed and philosophized about the bloody rain, which was commonly reported
to have fallen, about the beginning of July; great drops thereof were plainly
to be seen, both in the City it self, upon the walls of the Churchyard of the
great Church, which is near the City wall, and upon the City walls themselves;
also upon the walls of Villages, Hamlets and Towns, for some miles round about.
For in the first place he went himself to see those where with the stones were
colored, and did what he could, to come to speak with those Husbandmen, who
beyond Lambesk, were reported to have been so affrighted at the falling of the
said tain, that they left their work, and ran as fast as their legs could carry
them into the adjacent houses. Whereupon he found that it was a fable which was
reported touching those Husbandmen. Nor was he pleased that the Naturalists
should refer this kind of rain to vapors drawn up out of red earth alost into
the Air, which congea^ing afterward into liquour, fall down in this form;
because such vapors as are drawn alost by heat, ascend without color, as we
may know by the alone example of red Roses, out of which the vapors that arise
by heat, are congealed into transparent water. He was less pleased with the
common people, and some Divines, who judged that it was a work of the Devils
and Witches, who had killed innocent young children; for this he counted a mere
conjecture, possibly also inju^^ous to the goodness and providence of God.

In the mean while an accident happened, out of which he conceived he had
collected the true cause thereof. For some months before he shut up in a box a
certain Palmer-worm which he had found, rare for its bigness and form: which
when he had forgotten, he heard a buzzing in the box, and when he opened it,
found the Palmer-worm, having cast its coat, to be turned into a very
beautiful Butterfly, which presently flew away, leaving in the bottom of the
box a red drop as broad as an ordinary Sous [or Shilling.] And because this
happened about the beginning of the same month, and about the same time an
incredible multitude of Butterflies were observed flying in the Air: He was
therefore of opinion, that such kind of But terflies ressting upon the walls,
had there shed, as their excrement, such like drops, and of the same bigness.
Wherefore he went the second time, and found by experience, that those drops
were not to be found on the house tops, nor upon the round fides of the stones
which stuck out, as it would have happened, if blood had fallen from the sky;
but rather where the stones were somewhat hollowed, and in holes, where such
small creatures might shroud and nestle themselves. Moreover, the walls which
were so spotted, were not in the middle of Towns, but they were such as
bordered upon the fields, nor were they on the highest parts, but only so
moderately high as Butterflies are commonly wont to fly. Thus therefore he
interpreted that which Gregory of Tours relates, touching a bloody rain seen at
Paris in diverse places, in the days of Childebert; and on a certain house in
the Territory of Senlis. Also that which is storied touching raining of blood
about the end of June. in the days of King Robert; so that the blood which
fell upon flesh, garments, or stones, could not be washed out, but that which
fell on wood might. For it was the same season of Butterflies, and experience
has taught us, that no water will wash these spots out of the stones, whiles
they are fresh and new. When he had said these and such like things to Varius,
a great company of Auditors being present, it was agreed that they should go
together and search out the matter, and as they went up and down here and there
through the fields, they found many drops upon stones and rocks: but they were
only on the hollow and under parts of the stones, but not upon those which lay
most open to the skies.

Soon after he received out of Italy, and sent to Thuanus the commendatory
Elogies of certain men, as of Hierenymus Columna, Gabriel Faernus, Cruceius,
and such like, of whom he intended to make mention in his History. Scaliger had
sometime entreated him, that he would renew his commerce which he had
established in the East, by the Agencie of Peter Ostagerius, who was in times
past his Host at Marseilles, for the buying up of Samaritan, Egyptian, and
Arabic books; grieving that for the space of fifteen years which he had spent
in Holland, he had not heard a word of the Samaritan Pentateuch, which
Ostagerius had promised to endeavor to procure for him. Peireskius therefore,
having indeed formerly endeavored somewhat in that business, did now bestir
himself more earnestly, giving order that the foresaid book, among many others,
should be bought in Egypt, and conveyed to him. But the ship in which it was
coming, was pillaged by Pirates, and the book could not be recovered, but was
utterly lost. And so was Scaliger deprived of that most desired book, nor did
he ever receive the answer which he had so much expected, which came happily to
the hands of Peireskius after his death. For Scaliger had written to the
Samaritans of Egypt, and to their chief Priest Eleazar, who dwelt in a City
called Sichem, asking them diverse questions, about the observation of the
Sabbath, and other Fessivals, about the Messiah, and how they named him; and in
conclusion, he desired of them a copy of their Pentateuch, or five books of
Moses. They answered him in two Letters; but because they fell into the hands
of Genebrardus and others, they were detained, till such time as Scaliger being
dead, Peireskius both obtained them, and caused them lately to be turned into
Latin, by the exceedingly learned Johannes Morinus. Also about this time he
reassumed his care of calling Pacius to profess at Aix, and, which is more,
of procuring that he might not any longer persist in an un-orthodox Religion:
but very many things did intervene, which did again frustrate his manifold
cares and endeavors.

His brother Valavesius was at that time in Paris, about the business of
Rians: and because he should have some months vacation from his business,
therefore Peireskius entreated him, that at least for his sake he would go see
England and the Low Countries, and salute his friends there, presenting such
tokens as he should send them, and procuring certain rarities for him. Also he
exceedingly entreated him, that he would go to Aquisgranum, that he might there
disigently view what ever monuments were remaining of Charles the Great, write
out the Inscriptions, and cause all the Pictures to be copied, which he should
meet with, in Ecclesiastical Books, Glasse-windows, Copes or Vestments, Stones
or any other things; not neglecting to get the Platform of places and
ornaments, the Copies of Charters, and the Prints of Seals, prece or pretio,
for money or fair words. He added that it so repented him when he was in
Holland, that he went not to Aquisgrane, that, were it not that he confided in
his brother, he was resolved on purpose, and for no other intent, to make
another voyage thither. Moreover, his brother did all which he desired of him
to the full, with wonderful care, diligence, and fidelity; himself in the mean
time, after the beginning of the year went to Monpellier, about the self same
business: for the Marquisse of Oreson had sued Brisack, for making sale of the
whole Jurisdiction of Rians.

He returned about the middle of the Spring, 1609.
being tormented with a most inexpressible toothach, and not long after his
Father fell into a most dangerous disease, himself also, being taken with a
fever, which was very lasting, and when it went away, left him so weak, that he
was hardly well recovered by Autumn. And here I must record, what he himself
related often. When he had no appetite, but loathed all meat, so that he wasted
away, Jacobus Fontanus a famous Physician, and his kinsman, asked him, if there
were nothing which he had a mind to eat. He said there was, but he was very
well assured, that it would not be allowed him. Whereupon he was urgent to know
what it was. He told him, Musk-melons: the Physician replied, Take heart, and
be of good cheer; for I do not only permit, but advise, yea and charge you to
eat of them; but eat them at the beginning of your meal, without bread, and
drink a little pure wine before and after: which advice he followed, and did
well upon it; so that all his life time after, he did in this manner eat
Musk-melons without any prejudice.

When he was recovered, he diverse ways assisted diverse learned men, as
Johannes Taxilis, who was writing somewhat touching the new star which appeared
in the great Conjunction aforesaid; Gasparus Bricius, a Parish Priest in the
same City, a good industrious man and observant of the Celestial Bodies;
Johannes Baptista Hansenius, whom he grew acquainted with at Rome, in the
learned family of Cardinal Baronius, and who by his procurement was chief
Rector of the School at Aix three years together. And these, with other learned
men he obliged, while he was yet in a weak condition of body, his disease being
only abated, not perfectly cured; which was in much measure caused and
lengthened, by the loss of three excellent friends, who died in Holland.

The first of which was Scaliger who had newly begun his Commentary of Hebrew
moneys, when he was taken with a dropsy, through distemper of his liver, which
the fourth or fifth month after, on the 21 of January, brought him to his end.
The second was Clusius, who through weakness of nature, rather than the gout,
which had newly seized him, died on the fourth of April. His Posthumus works
were set forth by his Executour Franciscus Raphelengius, wherein Peireskius was
frequently metioned, as in this following passage for example. There was
brought out of Ginny into France an ear of corn not unlike the former the
picture where of was sent to Clusius from Aix in Provence, by the most noble
and honorable Nicolaus Fabricius Lord of Peiresk. And afterward. The following
picture of the Gum Tragant-tree was sent from Aix in Provence, by the most
magnificent and noble Gentleman Nicolaus Fabricius Lord of Peiresk, Counselor
to his Majesty of France in the Parliament of Aix, with Letters to the most
renowned Clusius. And again: Here may be added an Epistle of the most learned
Mr. Doctor Fontane, which was sent to us from Aix, by the most magnificent and
most prudent Gentleman Nicolaus Fabricius Lord of Peiresk, in the Letter which
he wrote to the most famous Clusius; which though it came to us after the death
of the renowned Clusius aforesaid, yet we conceive it worthy to be inserted in
this Supplement. Moreover, mention was made in that Epistle, of a certain rare
Aloes tree, which having been planted in a Garden at Avenion, an hundred years
since, sprouted forth about the beginning of May in the year 1599. and within
45. days shot up 32. foot high, according to the feet of Provence, which make
24. Paris feet, and near half a foot over. Of which kind also, I afterward saw
diverse sprouting forth in Provence and especially at Draguinan. The third was
Abrahamus Gorlaeus, who dyed before he could finish his work in hand, which he
called Paralipomena.

And there wanted but little for Varius to make a fourth. He, when it was
Vacation, in the month of September, went to Antipolis, in the Kings name to
take possession of that Place, being gained to the Kings Patrimony. And when he
had visited his Brother Peter Varius Bishop of Vintium, he fell into a most
dangerous Fever, which lasted full out a month. Which when Peireskius came to
hear, he could hardly be kept, though sick himself, from vifiting his sick
friend. Which though he could not do, he was extremely sollicitous or rather
anxious how he might help him. Among other things, he wrote to Marseilles and
provoked Carolus Cassaneus a famous Physician to visit him, and provided for
him a Coach and a Bark, that he might go with speed either by Land or by
water, as he pleased. He sent almost every day one or other to carry him some
exquisite Medicines or choice matter of Diet, and to bring word, what was the
condition of the Disease. And as soon as ever there was hopes of Recovery. he
sent him the easiest Saddle he had: howbeit Varius could not be brought back,
save in an Horse-litter.

Afterward, during the time they were both upon the recovery in the remaining
part of Autumn, and spent whole days together in familiar discourse, can you
imagine their discourses were void of Learning? One discourse I cannot omit,
which Peireskius himself, did afterward often relate, and which was the
occasion of some alteration even after his death. The occasion whereof were
diverse assemblies which all the kingdom over were newly called together, by the
Kings command, to consult about the making of some perpetual Statutes,
touching the Value and use of Coin. For whereas seven years ago, the King had
made a Proclamation, that a Piece of Gold which had wont to go for threescore
Shillings, should for the time to come be worth threescore and five; it was
since grown to be worth seventy shillings and more. Whereupon Varius desiring
his Opinion, Peireskius answered, that it was scarce to be hoped that any stop
can be put to so growing a mischief. For the cause thereof was the Traffic
with Neighbor Nations, where gold was higher prized then it is with us. For at
that time Gold with us was twelve times as dear, as silver; but in Spain it was
thirteen times as dear, and that by reason of a very late Proclamation, whereby
the King of Spain had raised the Value of Gold a tenth part higher, not
altering at all the Value of Silver. In which, truly, he did not imitate our
King, who raising the Value of Gold, raised likewise the Value of Silver, that
the proportion between them might not seem to be altered. He added; Although
not only our King, but the King of England and other Princes, should by new
Proclamations vary and en hanse that proportion; yet would it still happen,
that each particular Prince and State, through emulation either raising the
estimation of Gold, or diminishing its weight, or at least, intrinsecall Value
of Silver, no constant Rule could be set. For there would never be wanting,
either occasions of wars, by which their Treasuries being exhaust, they would
be forced to help themselves that way; or Nations politic enough, by this
artifice to keep the purer sorts of Gold and Silver Moneys at home, or to draw
them out of other Countries.

For an Example hereof we have the Romans, with whom their As aereus, and
Denarius Argenteus, with their Solidus aureus [monies so called] were by little
and little so debased, that at last they grew quite out of use; and
particularly the Solidus aureus it felf, which at first was exchanged for two
of those Golden pieces which were termed Solati, came at last to so low a
Value, as to be exchanged only for a Silver Coin, which did also degenerate,
that we may reckon it came to the Value of our usual Shilling or Spur-roiall,
But not to seek so far for exams ples, it may suffice that we consider the
Value-of that piece only which is termed Solatus, whichs in the space of an
hundred years last past, has so increased, that the internal goodness of the
Solidus or spur-roiall decreasing withal, it is now valued at twice so many
Solidi or spur-roialls, as in days of old. Nor is it probable that it should
so rest, but questionless in a few years it will come to pass, that the value
hereof will arise, to a triple or quadruple proportion, and the Solidus, mean
while, shall not only be diminished in weight, but will become wholly Brass,
and then also lose of its weight. Nor was this a vain Conjecture: seeing the
Solatus has been some few years since by public Proclamation valued at a
hundred and four Solidi; by occasion whereof Peireskius himself, being yet
alive, made it his observation, that Gold was near Fifteen times the value of
Silver.

But to return to the Discourse of Peireskius, when he had showed occasionally,
that the Roman AS first weighed an whole pound or welve ounces; and grew
afterward to be diminished unto two, to one, yea and lower: and the Denarie
weighing in the times of the Kings the third part of an ounce, under the
ancient Rpeublick weighed only a sixth part, under the latter Republic a
seventh, under the first Caesar's an Eighth or a dram (equal to an Artick
dram): finally the Solidus was at first the eight and thirtieth part of a
pound, afterward the fortieth, the forty fifth, fiftieth, and so forwards:
Varius then asked, what difference there was between those Pounds and Ounces,
and such as we use? Peireskius answered, that he was himself in that point not
sufficiently satisfied. For he had indeed in his Custody ancient weights, of
thirty pounds, ten pounds, three pounds, and pounds a piece; which he had
compared, with the Paris pound Standart of sixteen ounces; and all he could
find, was, that twelve Roman Ounces were aequivalent in weight to about ten
ounces of Paris. I say about ten Ounces; for in some weights he found an
excess, in some a defect, to three, four and five drams. And although learned
Budaeus has written that the proportion is very near one and an half, as
supposing that a Roman pound, with half an Ounce addition, was aequall to a
pound Marck or eight Ounces of Paris, at least. Howbeit he durst not yet
determine the matter; because those Denaries had likewise been worn, and he
waited till he could obtain from Rome a pattern of that Congius or
Gallon-measure which being in the days of Vespasian consecrated in the
Capitol, was yet extant, being preserved in the Farnesian Palace; and,
containing ten pounds of wine or water, might be a means to discover, how many
pounds and Ounces of Paris might be contained in such a weight.

He allowed of what he said, and asked him how many he thought the Roman
Congius or Gallon did contain of our Pints? To which Peireskius answered, that
it must likewise be determined by the measure aforesaid; but in the mean time
he was of opinion, that the Roman Congius contained about three Pots or Pints
of Provence, and that the truth thereof might be certainly found out, if the
proportion between the ancient Roman Foot, and the foot now in use, were known.
For as the Romans defined their Amphora which contained 8. of the foresaid
Congii or Gallons, to be a Cubick foot; so they ordained that their Congius
should be in widnesse half a Cubick foot. Afterward, in process of time, he
obtained not only one, but two patterns of the Congius. but he never had
leisure sufficient, to search into the matter fully accordingly to his desire;
and after he obtained the latter Pattern, he soon after died, or he had,
without question, experimented the Difference.

But because I according to my ability, have supplied that care of his, I know
not whether it will be too great a digression to relate what I have don.
Doubtless. I am obliged to gratify our Countrymen, who have hoped that
Peireskius would compare the weights and measures of the Ancients, not only one
with another, but with such as are in use with us. In a word therefore, we used
the same Cautions which Lucas Paetus and Villalpandus did use; for we filled
the vessel to the top of the Neck with pit water, then weighed it, subducting
the weight of the vessel. And we found the water, which according to the Roman
weight was to be ten pounds, or an hundred and twenty Ounces, to be seven
pounds lacking two drams according to the Paris pound; or an hundred and eleven
Ounces and 2. drams. From which proportion we afterward collected, that the
Roman Ounce does contain five hundred thirty six of those granes, whereof five
hundred seventy six are contained in the Parisian Ounce, so that being
contracted into Drams, there fell to every Roman Dram, threescore and seven
granes: which we therefore conceived to be the weight of the Denarie coined by
the Caesar's, which is said to have weighed a Dram.

This being done, it was not hard to express the value of the Denarie
aforesaid, and of any other the like Coins, by our moneys which we use,
especially since the late new Proclamation in the year 1636. Forseeing from the
prescribed value and weight of Silver, we gather that an ounce of Silver is
worth threescore Shillings of Tours: therefore the Roman Denarie was of the
Value of seven Shillings and five Denaries of Tours, with the third part of a
Tours Denarie (and so it will very little exceed the value of a Spanish Real)
and this we may understand to have been the days wages of a Soldier not only
with the Romans, but also with the Greeks, because a Denarie and a Dram were
of equal value. And therefore a Quinarius or Victoriatus will be worth three
Shillings and eight Denaries of Tours and the eight part of a Denarie; a
Sestertius will be worth one Shilling and ten Denaries and the third part of a
Denarie. And because, for examples sake, an Hebrew Shekell was according to
Josephus, of the value of four Drams or four Roman Denaries; therefore it was
worth 29. of the Shillings of Tours aforesaid, with nine Denaries and a third
part of a Denarie of Tours. Hence likewise because the thirty Pieces for which
our Savior Christ was sold by the Traitor Judas, being called Denaries, seem
to have been thirty Shekells; therefore we collect their Value to have been
forty four pounds Tours, thirteen Shillings four pence, or four Denaries.

As for the Comparing of those Roman weights with the weights of Provence, we
have observed, that the self-same water aforesaid, or ten pounds Roman, did
weigh 9. pounds of Provence with the third part of an Ounce. We have observed
that the Pound of Paris compared with our Standard of Provence, does contain as
many Ounces, with four ounces and a dram over. But it is to be noted, that our
Clarke of the Markets, so orders the Standard, that he adds to every pound
weight from one to an hundred an ounce, because of the Wast of such Commodities
as are bought by whole sale and sold out again by retaile: so that an hundred
pounds of Paris, which should weigh an hundred twenty nine of our pounds and a
third part of a pound; do weigh, as it is ordered, only an hundred twenty two
pound, fourteen ounces and a dram.

And whereas we might compare the Roman measure, both with the measures of
Paris and Provence, by means of the weights aforesaid; I shall only add, that
we found upon trial that fourteen Paris Pints, did make just eleven of our
Provence Pots or pints so called; and the great Measure of Paris containing two
hundred and eighty pints, contains four of our Provence measures which we call
Meillerolle, with twenty eight pots or pints over; our Meillerolle aforesaid
containing forty eight Pots, each of which weighs three pounds Provence and a
quarter. From whence you may gather, that the Roman Congius does contain two
of our Pots of Provence with almost five Sixts over; or three Pints Paris and
very near half a pint over: and you may understand, for examples sake, how much
Novellius Torquatus the famous Tosse-pot of Millaine drank, who is reported to
have fetched off at one draught, in the presence of the Emperor Tiberius, three
Congii or Roman Gallons of wine; for which he was afterward called Tricongius.
Also you may know, how much according to our measures the Urna did contain,
which held four of the Congii; and the Amphora which held eight; and the
Sextary which was a sixth part of the Congius; and the Semi-sextary which was a
twelfth part, and was also termed Hemina and Cotyle, where you may observe, if
you please, that the Parisians do call the fourth part of their Pint
Semi-sextarius, because it comes very near in quantity to the Roman
Semirextarie.

And so much, by the way, touching the Modius Liquidorum, the great measure of
Liquid things: but as for the Roman Modius Aridorum, or their Bushel to
measure dry Commodities, which contains an hundred and forty four Boxes or
wooden measures, fourteen of which have been found to equalize the Weight of
five Heminae or ten Pannals according as we have reckoned their weight; such a
Modius, I say, is equivalent to ten of our Charges or burdens and very near
three Pannalls. And this is that which it chiefly concerns our Countrymen to
know in this Subject, unless I should add, that we divided the Parisian Foot,
into a thousand parts, and observed that our Provence Palm or Span, which is
the 8th. part of a Can or Rod, does contain only seven hundred sixty and three
of those parts: but the old Roman foot contains nine hundred and six of the
said parts; the English foot nine hundred thirty three, that of Holland 966;
that of Lions and Grenoble a thousand fifty and two; and that of Florence, one
thousand, eight hundred and two. But of this, enough and too much.

I return now to Peireskius, who soon after, in the year 1610. went again to
Mon-pellier, And having effected his business according to his hearts desire,
he returned, in the beginning of May, at which time he happened to dream a
dream, 1610.
which as often as he related to me (which was diverse times) he would always
premise, that if another should have related it unto him, he could not have
believed it. There was in his company Jacobus Rainerius a Citizen of Aix, who
was wont to lodge in the same chamber with him, and their lodging was at the
white Inn, between Monpellier and Nismes. Now Peireskius was in a dream, and
talked to himself obscurely of I know not what strange business: whereupon
Rainerius awaked him, asking him what was the matter. To whom he replied, Alas
and well away, what a sweet and pleasant dream have you robbed me of! I dreamt
I was at Nismes, and that the Goldsmith offered to sell me a golden piece of
Julius Caesar's coin for four Cardecues; and I was just ready to give him the
money, that I might have the piece, whereas by your unseasonable waking of me,
the Goldsmith vanished out of my sight, and the piece of coin out of my hands.
Soon after, not thinking of the dream, he went to Nismes, and while dinner was
making ready, he walked about the Town.

Now it happened wonderfully, that he hit upon a Goldsmith, and asking him if
had any rarities, he answered that he had a Julius Caesar in gold. He asked
him, what he would take for it, he said, Four Cardecues. Whereupon he presently
gave him the money, took his Julius Caesar; and so was his dream wonderfully
and most happily fulfilled. Wonderfully, I say, for he might easily think upon
Nismes, whither he was to go the following day: he might well dream of that
piece of Coin of Julius Caesar, which waking he had often desired: and that he
might meet with it in that City wherein there were so many relics of Roman
Antiquity: and he might dream of a Goldsmith; for to men of that trade such
pieces are commonly brought by them which dig them up: he might dream of an
indifferent price, such as Goldsmiths rather than Antiquaries are wont to set
upon such commodities: he might have thought of four Cardecues, with which as a
moderate price a Goldsmith might be content: Finally, a Goldsmith, and at
Nismes, might have such a piece at such a price: but that all these should
concur, and that the event should answer to the dream, is altogether
wonderful. Yet Peireskius was not the man that would conclude, that this dream
did therefore proceed from any preternaturall cause; if such dreams had often
happened, he might peradventure have thought so: but knowing the sport which
Fortune is wont to make, he reckoned this accident only among those rare cases
which are wont to amaze the vulgar, such as they likewise relate of Eudemus the
familiar acquaintance of Aristotle at Pherae, and of the two Arcadians at
Megara, and some other such like: howbeit, the truth of all such like
Histories, rests wholly upon the credit of the Relatours.

Afterward Peireskius stayed certain days at Arles, that besides many other
observations elsewhere, he might curiously search into certain rare monuments,
at the monastery of Mon-majour. And when returning from thence, he came near to
Salon, a Post met him from the Archbishop, to acquaint him speedily with the
unheard of and lamentable death of King Henry. Being wonderfully daunted, he
made haste nevertheless to comfort Varius, who was already acquainted with the
thing, and was beginning to endeavor, by sending Messengers and Letters, to
preserve the Inhabitants of Provence in their obedience. Moreover, it is not to
be forgotten, how at the very beginning of the year, and before Peireskius
departed from Mon-pellier, there was brought him out of Spain an Almanac, or
yearly Prognostication, made by Hieronymus Ollerius of Barcellona, and the
November foregoing printed at Valence, in which the lamentable accident
aforesaid was clearly foretold. For he had so set down the circumstances of his
nativity, and certain principal things which had happened concerning him, that
no other King save Henry the Great, could be thereby intended. Which when he
had showed to Varius, and acquainted Josephus Galterius Prior, and the Lord of
Valetta therewith, a man excellently skilled in all the Mathematical Arts, but
especially in Astronomy; though no great heed were to be given to Astrologicall
Predictions, yet it seemed a matter not to be slighted, as concerning the life
of so worthy a Prince. Whereupon Varius presently sent the book to the King.

I shall not stand to relate, how that great and truly generous Prince,
commending the care of Varius, did contemn and slight the Prognostication: but
because the event proved it to be true, and Ollerius himself afterward writing
a Prognostication for the following year, did wonderfully boast thereof;
therefore I must needs say that, which at least may make it doubtful, whether
it was from the stars, or some other hints rather, that he conjectured the said
event. For, as for the vanity of Astrology, it is needless for me to speak
any thing in this place, especially seeing the nativities calculated 3 years
since did prognosticate no ill, till four years more were past. Nor am I one of
those that are in the least suspicious, that the prophet had some traffic with
evil spirits, which might reveal and presage the same: only, I say, it is
possible he was acquainted with the plot, by which so an abominable, and not to
be named Parricide was committed. Sure I am, it could not be perfectly
concealed, neither in Spain, nor in Italy; for even the Kings Ambassadors, and
namely, the most excellent Johannes Bochartus Lord of Champigny, then Agent at
Venice, had already pre-advertized his Majesty thereof. And it was sufficiently
proved, that all the Seafaring men of Marseilles, who for two months before
came from Spain, brought word that there was a report spread abroad in Spain,
that the King of France either was already, or should be killed, by a sword or
knife. Also. Peireskius related and writ to Malherbius, that which may fitly be
here inserted, viz. How on the Saturday, three days after that the kings death
was published, there passed through Aix a most illustrious Venetian, of the
family of the Priuli, who had been Agent for the Commonwealth at Paris, and was
then going to be Agent at Madrid; who, when he went to visit Varius, told him
among other things, how journeying through Millain, he saluted there the Earl of
Fontane: and having, by way of discourse, expressed what a mighty Army his
Majesty of France had in readiness; the Earl answered, he was not at all
afraid thereof, because the death of one man would shortly overthrow the same.
But I must not harp too long upon this string.

Not long after, Peireskius received Letters from Pignorius written the third
day of the same month, wherein he was made acquainted, that Galilaeus, by his
newly invented Telescope, had discovered certain great and wonderful sights,
concerning the Stars, and principally four new Planets, which are carried about
Jupiter, which he had called the Medicean Planets. For, in the beginning of the
former year, which was 1609, Jacobus Metius of Alcmair in Holland, while he was
compounding and fetting together sundry sorts of glasses, to try their effects,
he happened accidentally upon that same comparison and composition of a unequal
and a concave glass, by which, especially the Tube being interposed, he that
looked through the same might see small things grow great, and things distant
brought near (whereupon the invention of the Telescopium, or Perspective-Glasse
is attributed to him; though Johannes Baptista Porta had already published some
such thing in print) but Galilaeus only by the rumor of such a thing which he
had heard, began to invent not only the cause of the effects of the Telescope,
or Perspective-Glasse; but also the way to make one; whereupon after diverse
essays and trials, he hit at last upon the way to make a most exact one. And
that was it, by which in the two first months of the tenth year aforesaid, he
accomplished those observations, which he published in March, under the Title
of Sidereus Nuncius, or the Heavenly Intelligencer.

Peireskius therefore being acquainted therewith, himself with great ardency of
affection, that he might obtain his Book and a Telescope, or Prospective glass
as soon as possibly he could. But though he got a Book, yet was it long ere he
could obtain an exquisite Telescope, though he got some both from Italy,
Holland, and Paris, as soon as they began to be made there. And this was the
reason that before November he could not discover, nor observe the Planet's
aforesaid moving about Jupiter; at least he could not perceive their full
number. But as soon as he discovered them, it is wonderful with what joy he did
contemplate so rare a sight. For presently he showed the same to Varius, and
other friends; and that he might lose no time he made him an Observatorie, and
invited the foresaid Galterius, and kept him diverse days, and spent almost two
whole years together in his observations with him. His Brother was yet at
Paris: wherefore he never ceased to urge and solicit him, till he had caused
diverse glasses for prospectives to be made, which he sent him to the number of
Forty. For he hoped at last to obtain some of the best sort and such as
Galileus made use of.

Meanwhile notwithstanding, having contemplated certain revolutions, he began
to consult with Galterius about framing of Hypotheses and Tables of their
Motions. Wherefore Galterius having undertaken the business, prevailed in a
short time so far, that be determined as exquisitely as he might, the times in
which the said Mecicean Stars did first finish their Circum volutions viz, the
outtermost in 16. days and 16. hours: the next in seven days three hours and
an half: the third in three days, thirteen hours and an half likewise; the
innermost, in one day, 18 hours and an half. I reckon not the minutes, because
though computation was made even to the Seconds (as Astronomers speak) yet
daily experience taught, that there was still somewhat to be added and
diminished, so that there still remains something for the Obervation and
diligence of following times to amend. I only touch upon these things, to
intimate, how vehemently Peireskius endeavored, that this new Invention might
be speedily perfected. For he made choice likewise of Johannes Lombardus a
diligent Man to assist in the observations; and of Petrus Robertus a Candidate
in Physic and Johannes Baptista Morinus a Candidate in Philosophy two young
Men, to assist Galterius in the arithmeticall comptuations, which would have
been too tedious for him alone to calculate.

Also he got the observations which Johannes Keplerus the Emperors renowned
Mathematician, and others also besides Galileus, had made; that by comparing of
them, the Hypotheses might be perfected. Also he caused a an Artificial
Machine or Sphere
mechanical Theorie or Instrument to be made like the Vulgar one of
Peurbachius; that the Roots of the Motions being praesupposed, the Places of
the Medicean Stars might be calculated for years, months, days, and hours,
Also he gave them names, that they might be the better distinguished one from
another. For seeing Galileus had called them all in general, the Medicean
Stars, he would not by any means change that Appellation: but yet he chose out
certain Princes of the Medicean family, whose names he would confer upon the
several Stars. And because he was bound, saving the Honor of the Family, to
give the names of two renowned Queens, which that house had yielded France,
unto two Stars: therefore he gave the name of Catharine to the outmost Planet;
to the other, which shines more gloriously then the rest, the name of Mary; to
that which follows, the name of Cosmus Major, and to the innermost Cosmus
minor. He purposed afterward to publish in print both his Oblervations and
Tables; but understanding, that Galileus was earnestly endeavoring the same
thing; therefore, lest he should seem to go about to snatch away the Honor
which was due to him, he desisted from his purpose.

Finally it came into his mind to assist the Geographers in delivering the
Method of finding out the longitude. For seeing the motions of these Planets
are exceeding swift, and their Configurations every night different; therefore
he conceived, that if observation were made in seveverall places East and West,
at what moments they happened; the distances of places, according to the
variety of times, might most punctually be known: and that consequently,
Geographical Maps and Carts might be so amended and perfected, that for time to
come the Art of Navigation might attain the highest pitch of perfection.
Wherefore he sent Letters to this effect to Jodocus Hondius at Amsterdam,
wherein also he desired, that he would send him the name and Country of him
that invented the first prospective Glass; for as yet he knew not that it was
he whom we mentioned before. He wrote also largely to his Brother in Paris,
desiring him to send several sorts of Prospectives, which he had ordained to
make observations in sundry places, but especially in the Eastern Countries,
and in the new world [West-Jndies] whither some of his friends were shorly to
go. And afterward he obtained indeed some observations, principally, from the
forenamed Johannes Lombardus, who went Eastward as far as Aleppo; but they did
not sufficiently satisfy him; nor could he conceive, though all the
Configurations of these Planets were set down in the Ephemerides, that the
invention could prove so general, as he had hoped. For he knew that Seafaring
men could not make any observation, either in the day, or when the sky was
cloudy, nor when Jupiter was in conjunction with the Sun, or when in the night
he should be beneath the Earth; nor for half a year when they should be on one
side of the world and Jupiter on the other; and such like Cases. Wherefore he
laid that care aside, supposing that Galileus or Kepler at one time or other,
would take this Charge upon them, and by their dexterity perfectly finish the
same. Doubtless, it did not alittle rejoice him, when he heard that Galileus
intended to finish the Method and acquaint the Hollanders therewith, who so
earnestly desired to find out the secret of Longitudes.

Moreover though Peireskius was about this time very much employed; yet ceased
he not to take care of many things for the advancement of knowledge. It was in
the year 1611. that in the little Garden which Peirskius had belonging (...)
his house at Aix, 1611.
Tulips were first seen. For in the said garden, he had the Autumn before set
some of their Bulbous roots, which Winghemius had sent from Tornay. Now he was
wont to relate, how at the same time, when the garden was manuring, a parcel
of earth being heaped together, a little Bitch which he kept, called Marphisa,
sought her whelps, whom he had caused to be thrown away, and buried them under
that heap of earth, and lay by it certain days, not suffering any one to come
near, though to bring her meat. I do not well remember, whether that Bitches
name was Sultana, whose death, though he was much troubled at, yet was he glad
of the experiment occasioned by her.

She gave suck to three puppies, which with the mother were all sick of the
same disease. One of the puppies being dead and cast away, the mother likewise
died. No body understanding the cause, he sent for an Anatomist, and caused her
to be opened to see her entrals. And they found all along her guts, certain
bunches of little white knobs, like the seeds of a Gourd or Cowcumber; so that
they seemed to be a sort of those worms, which are by some termed Vermes
Cucurbitales. Now they were beneath larger and harder, and upwards they became
smaller and softer, so that at the top there appeared nothing but a confused
whiteness. Peireskius therefore not liking such things as were brought from
Surgeons and Physicians, for the cure of this disease, commanded (led by I know
not what Genius) that they should bring him some Treacle; some of which when he
he had laid upon the foresaid matter, he observed, to the great amazement of
himself and the bystanders, how it began to melt, and run downwards. Whereupon
he commanded, that some of the Treacle should be given to the two whelps which
were living, supposing that it was an Antidote for the disease. And one of the
whelps being at the last cast, died as they were giving it; the other being
stronger, took the medicine, and grew persectly well thereupon.

The self same year happened that so much tallt-of story of Ludovicus
Gaufridus, reported to be a Conjurer, and of Magdalena Paludana, possessed with
a devil through his witcheries. Which business much troubled the whole Court
of Parliament; but Peireskius especially, who was very much busied thereabout,
and writ very near the whole History thereof at large. And for a time indeed he
was in the same opinion with the common people, moved chiefly by those
sensleffe scars, which were sound upon both their bodies, and believed to be
tokens of witchcraft; but he began afterward to doubt, whether in the whole
business there were not some secret imposture, or dotage. Howbeit, he always
justified the sentence of the Court, by which the Magician was condemned to be
burnt: who had, howsoever, libidinously profaned and destroyed the sacred
mysteries of Religion. He said moreover, that though Magicians have not so much
commerce with the Devil, as is supposed, yet ought they to be punished for
their bad mind, in revolting from Almighty God, and imploring the assistance of
evil Spirits. In like manner, though after they have anointed themselves, they
are not indeed transported into those meetings, as they imagine, where they may
act all kind of abominations; yet is their will to be punished, whereby they
desire and endeavor to accomplish such a thing.

Now that which wrought most with him was an imposture, whereby not long after
a certain Priest of Marseilles was accused of Magic, being discovered by a
certain Devil, which Gaufridus was said to have conjured into a poor woman. For
he was freed by the Court, having been first pricked all his body over, to find
out those same insensible places stigmatized by the Devil, which could no where
be discovered. And Peireskius did call the matter so much the more in question,
forasmuch as three years after he was informed by Winghemius, that the like
story had happened in Flanders, viz. touching a Canon that had been pricked all
his body over, and was at last pronounced guiltless. Which is doubtless a
notable warning, that we give not so easy credit to the Devil, whom the
Scripture styles the father of lies; nor to a silly woman, who partly by the
weakness of her nature, partly through the vehemency of vapors disturbing
her brain, partly through malice, or hatred, and partly by a conceived opinion,
long cherished and deeply rooted in her mind, may easily deceive. As for those
Stigmata, or insensible parts, Peireskius was in doubt, whether or no they were
true signs of a Witch, especially after that he knew it was a matter
controverted by Martinus Delrius, and other very learned men. For peradventure
they might be natural, and belong to some peculiar of that disease which is
termed Elephantiasis; or at least, the Magicians might make them upon their own
skins, as with a Caustic, and in their troubled fancies persuade themselves,
they received those brand-marks from the Devil, just as they imagine they
receive those ointments from the Devil, which they themselves make, and give
one to another, confidently persuading themselves, that by virtue thereof they
shall be transported to those wicked assemblies of Devils and Witches.

Peireskius was all this year somewhat crazie in his health; but he was worst
about the beginning of the Summer; howbeit, he fell not into any notable
sickness, neither ceased he his wonted studies. Yea, and he judged himself
sufficiently strong to be with Varius, who lay sick forty days together of a
most grievous Ague, at a Countrey-house near Marseilles, which he had, called
Florida. I shall not relate how diligently he endeavored to serve him; one
thing only I must not pass over. Varius amended but slowly, because he had no
appetite, but wonderfully loathed all kinds of meat. Now while Peireskius
diligently endeavored to find if there were any thing which he could long for,
and would of purpose intermingle discourses of pleasant meats; it happened upon
a time, that Varius did occasionally intimate, that the Trouts which are caught
in the lake of Geneva, were not unpleasant in taste. He therefore closely
marking the same, by his great diligence, procured a fair Trout taken in the
foresaid lake, and put into paste to be presented him from some other friend;
which Varius nevertheless, by the expedition, judged to be one of Peireskius
his adventures.

In like manner he endeavored to provoke his appetite by presenting him with a
dish made of the Tongues of certain Birds called Phoenicopteri, though it was
in the winter, at which time only those kind of Sea-birds are taken in the
Moors of Arles. Those tongues were not much less then Kids-tongues: and yet
because they seemed sweeter in the eating, Varius would not say, nor could
divine what they were, till Peireskius brought forth that verse of Martial.

Dat mihi Penna rubens Nomen, sed Lingua gulosis Nostra sapit.
My name I have from my red-feather'd Coat
My Tongue's a Bit to p'ease a Glutton's Throat.
Then he asked him, How the flesh of those Birds tasted? To which he answered,
that he wondered why Apicius in Pliny, and the Emperors Caligula and Vitellius
in Suetonius, and Heliogabalus in Lampridius, and some others had accounted it
for such a dainty dish; for it was of an unpleasant or at least of no exquisite
taste, like that of all other water foul, and smelt of fish; and therefore the
Inhabitants of Provence, did for the most part, throw the flesh of those Birds
away, making use only of the Skin and Feathers, to cover the flesh of other
Birds, when they are to be served in, at pompous Feasts.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS. The Third Book.
1612.
THe following year he went again to Paris: for Valavesius had sent for him
thither, at what time he supposed the Business of Riantium would come to a
final hearing. And it is so fell out, that while he tarried by the way, the
Judgment was passed in the mean time, of which he was iuformed by Letters which
he received as he was upon his journey; but because he undertook the same not
so much for the Business sake, as out of desire to see his friends, therefore
he would not return; but proceeding more courageously on his way, he came to
Paris; just when his Brother was to have departed. But his good Destiny kept
him still in the City: for he fell into a disease, which held him with such
vehemency an whole Month together, that unless his most dear Brother had
come and stood by him, he could hardly have recovered out of the same. And
though he recovered his former health in the month of June, yet would he not
depart without his Brother, who deserred his departure till November. His
pretense was, that the late Judgment touching the Business of Rians was not
altogether decretory or final: for to understand the ancient Law of Provence,
sometime was interposed, to hear what the Assembly of the States would say.
Whereupon, because such an Assembly could not be gathered without the Duke of
Guise, who was Viceroy, and he could not till then leave the Court, therefore
Peireskius resolved not to retun till then.

It is needless here to recount, with how much joy and how great esteem of his
Virtue, he was entertained by Thuanus, Campinius, Rociacus, Faber, and other of
his friends and rare men, whom we spoke of before, and such as had already
knowledge of him either by Face or Frame. It is needless to reckon up the kind
offices whereby he obliged very many Learned men, not only such as were in the
City, as (besides the forenamed) Johannes Savato, Carolus Labbeus, and others;
but also in other Places, as in the other Cities of France, in Italy, England,
and the Low Countries.

And whereas he was always busied in the Advancement of Liberal Arts, his
care in the observation of the Heavenly Bodies, was of all others most
remarkable, and his Discourses which he had thereof with Mathematicians and
other Learned Men. Whence it came to pass, that no man was better acquainted
with the new Phenomenon, no man labored with greater ardency and constancy to
know the same. So that it was accounted almost a miracle, that being distracted
with so many other Cares, he could gain so exact a knowledge of these kind of
things. For he declared many things not only touching the Phenomenon
themselves, but also about the making and use of the Telescope or Prospective;
for for which purpose he was wont for the most part to carry some with him both
to observe the fabric of the Instrument and the way to use the same. And when
he took pains about the Medicean Planets, he observed somewhat, which will not
prove ungrateful to such as are pleased with these studies.

Viz. He observed that Jupiter passed beyond the Lions Heart to the North, on
the 30. day of June, a little before evening; and that Venus being horned, went
yet more to the North, between the evening aforesaid and the Evening of the
first of July next following; in which likewise she passed a little beyond a
Conjunction with Jupiter: whereas even the Moon at that time, being the most
Northern of all, stood very near conjoined to the self same Lions heart
aforesaid.

In like manner he observed two Eclipses, one of the Moon and another of the
Sun. And as for that of the Moon which happened the 14. of May, he had noted in
his Papers, that the Clouds hindered him from observing any thing, save that
the Eclipse was begun, and increased near to the fourth part of the Diameter
when the Town Clocks did variously strike nine, and it was by his own watch
nine, and half an hour over; and that it was augumented almost to the
Semi-diameter, when by the Town Clocks it was half an hour past nine, and by
his own Watch ten. But he vvrote somevvhat more exquisitely about the Suns
Eclipse, which happened the thirtieth day of the same month; viz. how he
observed that the Sun was become like the Moon when she is near half dark,
when it was nine a clock in the morning by the Town-clocks, and a third part
of an hour over. Afterward at half an hour after ten and somewhat more, he saw
the Eclipse increased; but at eleven of the clock it began to decrease, and was
reduced to the center of the Sun. A little after, there was scarce a digit
over: Finally, when it was twelve a clock, wanting the sixth part of an hour,
the Eclipse ceased. Which I set down, that you may see that there was no
diligence, at the least, wanting in him. And he wished asterward, that he had
observed all things more exquisitely: yet he thought there was enough done,
whereby he might with extreme delight compare his observation with one made at
Rome of the Moons Eclipse, which Johannes Remus Quietanus; a famous Physician
and Mathematician, had made; and with two, touching both Eclipses, made at
Hasnia, by the renowned Christianus Severinus Longomontanus, who was the
Affistant of Ticho Brahe.

About this time there came forth a book in the Italian Tongue, entitled
Squinitius, wherein the Venetian Liberty was examined, from the very
foundations of the Republike. Which book, because it seemed to contain rare
skill in the History of the Empire, and the Gothish Kings, therefore it was
presently believed (as many at this day think) that Peireskius was Author
thereof. But the truth is, I can bear him witness that he never intended such
a thing; but contrarily, he always so reverenced the Majesty of the Republike,
and his friends which he had therein, that he was rather inclined to do any
service thereunto, than to act any thing in cisgrace thereof. Nor do I enquire,
whether the Author of this book was Antonius Albizius, that noble Florentine,
who had two years before set out the Pedegrees of Christian Princes, as some
were of opinion; or, which is more likely, the renowned Marcus Velserus, of
whom we have frequently spoken, by reason of his excellent learning, and
singular propensity to the House of Austria. I shall only say, that some have
unjustly suspected, that Gualdus and Pignorius did either assist in the writing
thereof, or communicated their notes for him to digest: for they were more
ingenuous and greater lovers of their Country, than to be stained with such
impiety. But to be sure, Peireskius never dreamt of such a thing.

Moreover, being about to depart from Paris, and taking leave of his friends,
he undertook among other things to send to Mericus Vicus at the beginning of
Winter a pair of Phoenicopteri, or Red-wings, birds so called. For he had a
great desire to bring up some of those birds, not only for their
Scarlet-colored wings (which makes our Contrymen call them the Flaming
Birds) nor the longnesse of their thighs and neck, which made Juvenal term this
bird Phoenico-pterus ingens; but chiefly becanse of the manner of their diet,
with which Peireskius related, some of them had been kept by Varius. For he
related how they did eat their meat rather in the night than in the day (which
meat was commonly made of bread moistened with water); how they could discern
the approach of cold weather, and would come to the fire, so as sometimes to
burn their feet; and when one foot pained them, they would go upon their other
foot, and use their bill in stead of the burnt foot; how they slept standing
upright upon one foot, with the other drawn up to their breast amongst their
feathers; that a little sleep served their turn, and such like. At his
departure, he was most exceedingly grieved for the death of his most loving
friend Nicolas Faber, who not only many days before had commended to the King
that rare man Thomas Billonus, when he did present his most laborious and
admirably happy Anagrams. In his journey, he was vexed with great difficulty of
urine.

After he was returned, nothing so much grieved him, 1613.
as an injury which one of the Senators had done unto Varius, both before the
Nativity, and at the beginning of the new year; wherefore he never was from him
all that while, save eight days, during which he was troubled with a grievous
disease, about the end of April. His brother in the mean while returned to
Paris, and he sent diverse tokens to his friends by him. Also he sent many
things into Italy to Pascalinus, Benedictus, and others, with whom he
discoursed about diverse Subjects, and of whom he likewise desired some things
for his friends. Among whom was Casaubon, as also Henricus Polanus the
Mint-Master, who desired him to procure for him out of Italy, diverse books hard
to be found, as also ancient weights, or at least the comparison which had been
made between them and those of Paris. Another while writing to Paris, he made
it his chief business to commend Hannibal Fabrotus, a famous Lawyer, rarely
adorned with the knowledge of polite Literature, both to Thuanus, and to other
of his friends, who had already heard of his learning.

As for what concerns other learned men, Sirmondus setting out, not long after,
Notes upon Sidonius Apollinaris, did relate a Constitution, which Cusanus took
to have been made by Constantine the Great, and Scaliger judged that it was
made by Constantine the Tyrant; but Peireskius showed, out of a Civil Law book
so called.
Code of Arles, that it was rather made by the Emperors Honorius and
Theodosius, being written to Agricola, President of the Gallick Provinces,
touching the holding of an Assembly of the seven Provinces, once every year at
Arles. Moreover, Jacobus Fontanus dedicating to him his Commentaries upon the
Aphorisms of Hippocrates, has these words in his Epistle Dedicatory, The pains
that I have taken in composing this book, I desire may pass into the world
shielded with your patronage, who gloriously shining with the abundance of all
Virtues and Sciences, will chase away the evil speeches of all censorious
Detractours, and cause that this work, which is useful for Physicians, may be
delightful also, seeing your repute is so great, not only with them, but with
all others that are addicted to the studies of learning, that they cannot
challenge to themselves any virtue, without the knowledge of your testification
and acceptance thereof.

There was also at the same time a book set out and dedicated to him by the
foresaid Taxillus, containing his judgment of that new star, which was seen
nine years agone. But Peireskius could neither approve of his design, nor of
his judgment; because he, contrary to better Authors, which even Peireskius
had furnished him with, did argue that the foresaid star was below the Moon, and
no higher than the upmost region of the air. For he could not endure, that men
should seek out subtilties, to establish the old opinions of the Schools,
contrary to evident demonstrations and observations, as if that time could
teach nothing, and that experiments were not to be preserred before dark and
cloudy reasonings. For which cause at the same time, he very much commended the
candid ingenuity of Pacius, whose judgment being demanded concerning those
spots in the Sun, which were now discovered by the Prospective-Glasse, he
desired time to consider of it, professing that he was confounded, and judging
that from new Observations, new Hypotheses ought to be framed.

About the same time there was a great rumor spread abroad, touching the bones
of certain Giants, which being found in Dauphine, the King commanded that they
should be sent to him: for the report went, that there was found in a certain
feigned place, not far from the stream which runs between Rhodanus and Isara, a
sepulch^e made of Bricks, thirty foot long, twelve foot broad, and eight foot
high, with a stone upon it, wherein was this Inscription THEUTOBOCHUS REX.
Also, that when the sepulcher was opened, there appeared the Skeleton of a man,
twenty five foot and an half long; ten foot broad between the shoulders, and
five foot deep upon the chest. That the scull was observed to be five foot
long, and ten foot in compass. Which prodigious spectacle being viewed an
whole day together, the rest of the bones turned to ashes; there remaining
only those which were carried to Paris, and seen by every body viz. a part of
the lower jaw bone, two Vertebra's of the backbone, some pieces of a rib,
shoulder blade and thighbone; the other thigh bone, the shank, an huckle-bone,
an heel; besides some fragments which were not sent to Paris, as namely, of a
thigh bone, and likewise two teeth. Moreover, it was reported, that there were
sound about fifty pieces of silver Coin, with the picture of Marius upon them,
and on the other side, the letters MA, being the beginning of his name; from
whence they would needs have it concluded, that Theutobachus the Teutonick King
being vanquished by Marius, was buried there, a man of so tall a stature, that
Authors report him to have been higher than the trophies which were carried as
tokens of victory, and that he was wont to leap over sour or five, yea, six
horses.

Moreover, as Peireskius questioned the truth of the report, so he considered
with himself, what might give occasion to such a fable, especially after he had
read over a book, which Nicolaus Habigotus, a Surgeon of Paris, had written
thereof. He questioned not but that such bones were found in that place, and he
granted that they might be the bones of some more ancient Giant; but he could
never be persuaded that they were his bones, whose they were reported to be.
For in the first place, neither Theutobochus, nor his Subjects used the Latin
tongue, so that they should make a Latin Inscription upon any tomb which they
would erect; nor would the Romans, in case (according to the kindness they
used toward their enemies) they had built the tomb, have made it of bricks
(for a plaistered work it was not, which was not then in use for Sepulchers)
but of marble, or at least of some other stone, whereon they might engrave a
memorial both of their victory, and of the kindness expressed to their
enemies: also they would have chosen an high, or (at least) a stony place: and
not on so sandy and infirm, as that was, lest it should easily come to be
overwhelmed, or overturned. Also he wondered that the stone, with its
Inscription, was neither kept, nor showed, which ought to have been sent to
Paris with the bones, and that the Sepulcher was not left untouched, or (at
least) some remarkable Relics thereof; as the Lord of the place, who was
curious to spread the report of the Giants bones, could not but desire. It
increased his suspicion, in that the dimensions of the scull were said to be
taken, it being found whole; and yet that it should turn to dust so soon,
whiles other bones remained firm. For the hatchers of this fabulous story
seemed to fear, lest by diligent inspection thereof, and comparing the same
with some dead man's scull, the truth might have been more easily found out.

As for the Coins, he said, Those letters did not signify Marius, whose former
name Caius would not have been omitted, nor would the name Marius have been set
down to halfs, but entire after the Roman manner; but, that it signified
rather MAssilia [Marseiles] which was then a Republike; and to which, as a
Grecian City, that fashion of Coin was proper, and not to the Romans. And
because not long ago; nor ^ar from that place, many such pieces had been found,
and he had received some from the renowned Frerius, of whom we spoke before,
for that cause he suspected, whether or no the places, as well as the times,
had not been feigned.

And whereas Theutobochus is recorded in story to have been taller then the
Trophies, that argues him to have been ten or twelve foot high according to our
Vulgar feet, for such was the height of the Trophies which were carried in
Triumphs (reckoning in, the height of those that carried them and the length of
their Arms lifted up) and such the Stature of the Heroes was reported to have
been ( viz. halse as high again as the ordinary Stature of Men) but not 25.
foot. Nor is that which is written of his leaping over or bestriding four or
six Horses, so to be understood, as if he had stretched his thighs so wide, as
to bestride them all at once; but because it was his custom to pass from one
Horse to another; that is, to change his Horses often; because he soon wearied
them with his Heaviness. Which may be gathered in that Florus (who recorded
that passage) tells us, that he was wont to mount upon four or six Horses,
whereas when he fled he had hardly an Horse to carry him, intimating that he
had not such a Multitude of Horses with him as his custom was to have for his
own use. Finally he discoursed many things, both touching the place of the
Victory, and touching the Triumph, a Part or Pageant whereof was Theutobochus;
and of some other things, whereby the Credit of the foresaid Report was
weakened.

He obtained also in his latter years some fragments of these kind of Bones:
but by looking upon them he was more confirmed in his opinion, supposing at
last, that these great Bones which we often admire at, when Sepulchers are
dug up, to be Elephants Bones; as if the Lords of those Beasts had prized
them, or peradventure intended to abuse Posterity, by their so careful burying
of them. Also he was of opinion, that Bones are sometimes showed which have
been dug out of Sands or other Places, where they had been casually overwhelmed
with Earth; since it is hard to find a man deserving credit, who has seen those
Sepulchers, so built, with his own eyes; only we credit such us sell them, show
them or p^o^esse that they found or dug them up. Which made him often wish
that some man that could neither deceive nor be deceived, would sail into
Sicilie, and make Inquisition about those Bones of Giants which are said to be
dug up, not far from Palermo, especially the Sculls. For he hoped, that such a
man would use that ingenious Speech of Suetonius, That at Capreae there are
great Bones of vast Beasts, which are said to be the Bones of Giants. But
enough and too much of this Subject. 1614.


The year following proved a cruel year by reason of the death of diverse of
his renowned friends. For he understood by Letters which Gualdus sent him being
dated in April, that Contarenus the Procurator was dead at Venice, Lalius
Pasealinus at Rome, and Nichezola at Verona. Also he heard afterward, that the
most excellent Velserus died at Augsburg on the 24. day of June; and soon after
Casaubon died in England. Yea and he also himself in a Letter which he wrote in
the Month of May, to Natalitius Benedictus, makes mention of the Duke of
Arschotan as dead. In another Letter he makes mention of the death of
Marquardus Frcherus a Lawyer and Historian, who died at Heidelberge, whose
friendship Velserus had procured him. 1614.
I know not whether there were any more; but he was wont to reckon the fifth
year after as most unhappy through the death of a number of his most dearly
beloved friends.

He added, that it was a comsort to him, that in the mean while, it was his
happiness to gain the friendship of diverse other very rare men. One was
Johanues Franciscus Vidius a Balneo, Archbishop of Patracum and then the
Vicelegate of Avenion. For afterward they became very great friends, either
while he was at Avenion; or while he was the Popes nuncio to the Princes of the
Low Countries, and to the most Christian King; or after he was made Cardinal,
being rarely and remarkably virtuous. Another was Francisus Savarius Brevius,,
who was a long time the Kings Agent at Constantiople, and who returning then
from Rome, was at Aix in the beginning of the Spring; and had with him Gabriel
Sivinta of the order of the Maronites of Mount Libanus, already famous for
expounding the Oriental Languages, into whose friendship Peireskius accounted
it most delightful yet more and more to insinuate and confirm himself.
Another was, Guilelmus Catellus, a great light in the Parliament of Tolouse, to
whom he communicated diverse things, partly belonging to the History of the
Earls of Tolouse, and partly to the Languedoc Commentaries; which he himself
does somewhere witness, where he terms Peireskius a most Learned and curious
Gentleman.

Another unhappiness wherewith he was exercised the same year, was a most
grievous disease, which for two whole months did so afflict his Father, that
he out of the extreme love he bare him, was scarce ever out of the Chamber or
from his Beds side. It was in the mean while some solace unto him, that he
received some Rarities out of the Low Countries, and especially the Picture of
Jacobus Metius, who invented the Telescope or Prolspective Glass, which
Winghemius procured him; that he obtained from Arles, the nine Muses expressed
in Marble; and another, of the two Muses with Homer in the middle, and this
inscription O MHP... and some other things, which with diverse pieces of Coin,
he sent forthwith to Natalitius Benedictus, Also he reserved some spare hours
for reading, which therefore it was his pleasure chiefly to spend in reading and
weighing the History of Provence, which Caesar Nostradamus did then set forth.
And to speak a word of his Censure thereof, he did not wholly like the Style,
which for a great part of it was poetical: nor did he like his giving credit
to I know not what Commentaries, against which certain authentic Monuments
were exstant: nor his transposition of times, and his beginning of the year
constantly at the Kalends of January, which he should rather have reckoned from
the day of Christ's Nativity: nor his seeking to affix ancient Nobility upon
some new Upstarts, and taking the same away from ancient Families ^ or passing
the same over in silence. These and some such other things he did not like.
Howbeit he would excuse these faults, because the Author not being able to know
all things himself, did rely upon the credit of others; and he much commended
his Ingenuity, in that he chose to begin the Catalogue of the Earls of
Provence, rather from Gilbertus, whose story was indubitably true, then from
Boso (so called); touching whom and his Successors to Gilbertus, the opinions
of Authors were so various.

I let pass, how Peireskius endeavored to give light to the darkness of the
History, from the Testimony of Instruments and Authentic Acts and Records. For
he observed, how that to Rothboldus, who lived before the year one thousand,
there did succeed not only Boso (touching whose progeny he could only find that
he had a Son named Rothbold) but also another Son named William, who also left
a Son o^ his own name, who with his Brother Gauzfred was an Earl. To whom
succeeded Bertramnus, who reigned partly with his Uncle Gaudfred, partly with
William his Cousin-german. And that Bertramnus had a Son called William and
another named Gauzfred, who was also Earl. And that it was probable that
Gilbert was the Son of William; but there wanted authentic Instruments to
attest the same, seeing Franciscus Claperius interposed Odo. Nevertheless he
made a question touching that same Odo, whom he writes to have lived from the
year 1039. to the year 90. whereas he had evidently found, that in the
intermediate years viz. 42.63. and others, William and Grauzfred did Reign; and
that also in the 90th. year, besides Gilbert, there was also an Earl of
Provence named Raimundus Sancti Aegidii, who might be peradventure the Son of
Gauzfredus.

I pass over likewise, how he afterward observed many things, wherein both
Claperius and Nostradamus were overseen. For they (for example sake) made not
only Douce to be the Daughter of Gilbert and Tiburges, who was married to
Raimond Earl of Barcellone; but also Phaitis, who was married to Ildefonsus
Earl of Tolouse: so that by this means the Province came to be divided between
Raymondus and Ildefonsus, in the year (as we hinted before) 125; whereas
nevertheless Phaitis was rather the Daughter of Raimondus Sancti Aegidii and
the Countess Alvire; so that consequently by that division the smaller part of
the Province fell to Phaitis, because compensation was made to the Earls of
Ruthen and Givalden, whom Douce Daughter of Tiburgis had born. They also made
him to have by Douce another Son Gilbert, who had for Daughter Stephanitis, who
was married to Raimundus Bauleius; whereas there was never any such second
Gilbert, and Stephanitis was not his Daughter, but Daughter of that same first
and only Gilbert, and therefore the Sister not the Niece of Douce, though not
by Tiburgis but some other wife, either Geriberga or Francisca. I will say no
more, lest I become troublesome: seeing it is sufficient that I have touched
upon these things, to show the care which Peireskius took, about his Fathers
Sickness and the Adventures of his friends.

A little after, happened that most grievous and cruel disease wherewith
himself was afflicted. For in the Month of November, he went to Roquebrune, a
town near Freius, being one of those who notable to pay their debts, did
satisfy their Creditors with their Lands; a special Comittee of such as should
canvase and judge of the business being appointed, and Peireskius for one. And
because he had resolved not to return to the City before he had seen the
business he was sent about accomplished; therefore he desired leave of Varius
to abide there, who by diverse Letters most full of affection had given him to
understand, that his absence was very troublesome unto him. He desired the same
of his Father, who had invited him to the Wedding of his Sister Susanna, who
was married to Seguirannus aforesaid, the January following. And indeed he
could willingly have been there, especially his Brother Valavesius being
absent, the Nobility of Provence, 1615.
having sent him to the general Assembly or Parliament of whole France which
was to be kept at Paris, the King being above fourteen years of Age: but being
careful of his Health; he thought it best to abstain from Travailing,
especially at that season.

But to come unto his Sickness; he returned about the evening of the Kalends
of February, from viewing I know not what ancient Monuments, when he saw a
black cloud arising from that part of the sky, where the Sun is seen to arise
in Winter, which warning him to make haste, yet could he hardly get soon enough
to Town. From the said cloud there exhaled an almost intolerable stink; which
made him conjecture that it was exhaled from Strongyle and those other Hills,
which are wont to vomit fire and smoke. The same cloud a little after, and that
night following, powered down such a Quantity of Hail, that it hindered people
from passing, till it was shovelled out of the way. The third day there
followed so much snow, that I remember how traveling at that time from this
City to Aix, I was detained three whole days at Vallansole; the ways were so
filled with the plenty thereof. 1616.
But Peireskius was from that time taken with most unspeakable pains, almost
all his body over; but especially in his back, along the backbone. So that he
could neither lie, nor sit, nor stand. He could endure, having on either side a
servant supporting him, with their shoulders under his arms, to go a little.
And his continual want of sleep was no small vexation; for though he were very
sleepy, yet the pains still kept him waking. Being carried to Aix, he found
little amendment all the rest of the year. All his hair came off his head,
whereupon it happened, that in stead of thick and stiff hair, which he always
was wont to have (for upon occasion of admiration, or some starting, he was
wont to feel them stand on end, yea, and to lift up his cap) there came thin
and soft hair in the room, which continued so ever after.

The Spring now approaching, in the year 1616 he seemed to be on the mending
hand, when as the Haemorrhoides brake forth, which bitterly vexed him. Yet did
not the disease so much torment him, as that he was hindered from waiting upon
Varius, as he had intended. For Varius being often sent for by the King, to be
Master of the Rols, and Keeper of the Broad-Seal, was now to go to Court, and
all Provence was come to Aix, with tears to bring him on his journey, and take
leave, as it were, of their parting Father; but Peireskius his disease seemed
to stop him alone, of all the rest, from performing this office. He had been
ten days vexed with this infirmity, when Varius visited him, bid him farewell,
and trusted him with the key and care of his books and rarities. Whereupon he
rose from his bed, and causing an Horse-litter to go beside him for some part
of the way, he made trial at first, if he could but a little endure the Horses
back. After he had tried this a while, he felt his strength so to increase,
that whereas at first he durst scarce think of riding a few miles, he became at
last able to hold out the whole journey.

It is needless in this place to relate, with what applause Varius was
received by the King, Queen Mother, Princes, Nobles, and all good men; with
what a generous protestation he took his oath, as Keeper of the great Seal; and
with what constancy and integrity, he did afterward perform that Office. It
suits best with our matter in hand, to tell you that Peireskius was a great
solace and refreshment unto him, in the midst of all his weighty cares; and
among other things, did note in a peculiar manner, and set down in writing,
every memorable accident which did befall him. And therefore he chose his
lodging very near, that (as they were wont at Aix) he might every day enjoy his
company at their frugall suppers, and have familiar discourse with him late at
night, for he had in a manner no other vacant time. And Peireskius made a law
to himself, that he would commend no cause to Varius, unless it were of some
learned man. Which he also diligently observed in Provence, being always
afraid, though Varius were his most loving friend, lest he should prove
troublesome unto him. But he always excepted learned men, both because he
could not refrain himself, when they were concerned; and he knew the
disposition of Varius, who as he was very just, so he could not endure that the
servants of the Muses should be vexed, and delayed, with the perplexities of
Lawsuits.

Hence he proved a large Sanctuary, always open to all learned men; for to him
all had recourse that had business in Court, especially such as had to do with
Varius; and no man ever went away, whose patronage he did not cheerfully
undertake. The first that made experience of his care, was Johannes Barclaius
aforesaid, who after he had published his book De Summo Pontifice, and was not
so much in favor with his King and Contrymen, as formerly, as soon as ever
he heard that Peireskius was at Paris, he secretly withdrew himself out of
England, and crept into his friends bosom. And he did not only receive him
with very much humanity, but procured Varius also to embrace and receive him
under his Patronage. When he was to depart to Rome, he sent Letters before hand
to all his friends on the way, and caused him to receive many friendly offices
by that means; but especially at Marsile from his kinsman Viassius, famous
among the Poets of this age, who retained and cherished him diverse days, and
providing him of a ship, sent him away accommodated with all things necessary.
I omit to tell how Peireskius was no less careful about the wife of Barclay,
his son, and John Ludovicus Debonaerus his wives brother, when four years after
they were to go to him at Rome.

The first thing likewise which he did toward the advancement of Learning, was
the publishing of an Inscription, which being dug up in Rome at Porta Capena,
did coutain an Elogie, or commendation of Lucius Scipio, the son of Barbatus,
for his expedition into Corsica, For he no sooner had gotten a copy from
Aleander and Pignorius, but he fell to work with all his might, to illustrate
and expound the same. For he was of opinion, that there was hardly a more
ancient to be seen, or one of an older-fashioned character; that the
Grammatical construction was quite different from the vulgar, yet savouring of
the ancient times; finally, that things might here out be learnt, which must
otherwise remain unknown; as what that verse of Ovid means, which is as yet not
understood:

Te quoque, Tempestas, meritam Delubra fatemur,
Cum poene est Corsis, obruta Classis aquis,
A Church we grant, o STORM, thou oughtst to have,
Who sunkst our Fleet, wellnigh, in Corsick wave.
For thus went the Inscription, HONC. OINO. PLOIRUME. COSENTIONT. R. DUONORO.
OPTUMO. FUISE VIRO. LUCIOM. SCIPIONE FILIOS BARBATI. CONSOL. CENSOR. AIDILIS.
HIC FUET. A. HEC CEPIT. CORSICA ALERIAQUE URBE. DEDET. TEMPE, TATIBUS. AID.
MERETO. And therefore because the explication of Sirmondus did most of all
please him, who proved that this Inscription was made in the 494th year after
the building of Rome; and consequently but a year later than the Dail^i^^
Inscription, or that of the Columna Rostrata, hitherto accounted to be the most
ancient, both for the Orthography, Phrase, and matter contained; therefore,
thus he conceived it ought to be read, HUNC UNUM PLUR IMI CONSENTIUNT ROMAE
BONORUM, OPTIMUM FUISSE VIRUM, LUCIUM SCIPIONEM. FILIUS BARBATI, CONSUL.
CENSOR, AEDILIS HIC FUIT. HIC CEPIT CORSICAM, ALERIAMQUE URBEM; DEDIT
TEMPESTATIBUS AEDEM MERITO: Which may be thus Englished, Very many good men at
Rome do judge, that this Lucius Scipio was a singlar and most excellent man. He
was the son of Barbatus, Consul, Censor, Aedilis; he took Corsica; he built a
chapel to Honoring them as Deities, because they spared him at Sea.
Tempests, not without cause. Peireskius approved this interpretation, and
therefore caused it to be printed, concealing the name of Sirmondus, because he
of his modesty would not take the commendation to himself. But the truth is,
Peireskius did not conceal his name, when sending copies thereof up and down,
he wrote Letters to his friends. Hence it was that Seldom mentioned him in that
same learned work of his, De DIS Syris; where he says this Inscription was
communicated to him by Sir Robert Cotton, who had it out of France from
Nicolaus Fabricius Petriscius, a man most renowned for nobility and learning.
Also the lately mentioned Aleander, who when it was reprinted at Rome, made an
addition and answered the objections that had been made against it. And whereas
among other things it seemed strange, that no mention was made of that Triumph
which Scipio made; Aleander answered, Verily that same quicksighted Gentleman,
who is no less a lover of learned men, than of learning it self, Nicolaus
Fabricius, Lord of Peiresk, does with good reason suspect, that there wants
another Inscription of Scipio, which was counterpane to this of ours. For the
Sepulchers of the ancients were of great Bulk; and it is no absurdity to
think, that as this Inscription was on the one side, so that there was another
Marble on the other side, on which the Triumph, Age, Day of death, etc. were
engraven.

With these and such like matters did Peireskius busy himself, when in the
Month of November the Seal was taken from Varius, and that most renowned
Gentleman restored to the Liberty of a private Life. But Peireskius who
regarded not so much the glory of his Place, as the eminency of his Virtues,
would never forsake him; thinking it an unworthy baseness, if he that had stood
by him in his Prosperity, should withdraw himself, in his adverse fortune.
Howbeit, he was wont to testify concerning Varius, that he accounted it no
unhappy and ominous, but a most happy accident; as by which alone he was in a
capacity of attaining the Tranquillity which he so much desired. Wherefore he
restored the Seal with great Alacrity, and returning from the Court, he would
needs sup more liberally than ordinary with Malherbius and Peireskius, as one
that now had no business to disturb him; and retiring himself, he led a most
quiet and most sweet life; conversing with his Books, his friends and learned
men.

About this time the Business about Riantium was removed from Paris to
Tolouse; 1617.
and his Brother Valavesius, about the Beginning of the following year went
into that City. And although his presence was likewise desired at Tolouse which
as was thought would have much advanced the Business: yet could he never be
induced, for any Danger never so great of the miscarriage of that Suit, to
leave Varius. Yet you must not Imagine, that for all this, he left his care of
the cause of Learning. For he sent an almost innumerable Company of Books to
Learned men in all parts, partly of his own accord, partly being requested by
them; as into Italy to Pignorius and Aleander, and to Scipio Cobellutius then
newly honored with a red Hat and the title of Cardinal of Saint Susanna; and
to whom not long after, the Custody of the Vatican Library was given as a
favor. And into England to Cambden and Seldom and others, who had seriously
entreated him, that he would not envy the Learned Nation of Men, his Learned
notes upon the ancient Coins and his Observations upon that part of France
which is called Gallia Narbonensis. Into Holland he sent, as to others, so
chiefly to Thomas Erpenius, the renowned professor of Arabic; and he sent with
his Books and Letters, certain Arabic Coins, that he might lend his
Assistance in their Interpretation, which he had not yet sufficiently
understood.

I forbear to mention how he received likewise back again many things which he
desired; as from Aleander a model of the Farnesian Congius or old
Galon-measure, with Letters signifying, that he had examined the Water of
Tiber, Fountain water, and other waters, and after manifold comparisons of the
one with the other, he could find no difference at all in their weight. From
Nicolas Alemannus, a year before the Vatican-Library Keeper, he received a
Catalogue of the Poets of Provence. From Andreas Bruggiotus a Supplement to his
Index of the Grek Manuscripts, which were kept in the foresaid Library. From
Pignorius, a Breviarie of the Life of that famous Ludovicus Cornarus, with the
time of his Death; who by his sobriety had procured himself so long a life,
and such a lusty old Age; for he wrote, that he was buried at Padua, the day
after the Nones of May, in the year 1566. From Facobus Colius, a Book, with his
excuse for naming him only Nobilissimus Gallus without any further
Illustration. From Sanderus, Elogies; from Johannes Meursius, diverse of his
works; from Willerius, Genealogies: from Whinghemius Botanick Rarities, and
from others, other; things.

Also about this time, he began to procure Notes upon the Calendar of
Constantine, which 17, years after, Aegidius Bucherus did totally insert into
his Commentaries of the Canon of Paschalis Victorianus, viz. from the 236. page
to the 288. And the truth is, I question not how those papers were gotten, and
by whom imparted to that same rarely good and Learned Man: only I desire the
Reader to take notice, that they were not transcribed, save from that same very
rare Book which belonged to Peireskius, and is at this very day preserved in
his Library. Now he wrote largely thereabout both to Aleander, and to most
other Learned men, who exceedingly desired the publication thereof: for they
esteemed it as a mighty treasure, to correct the Annals and to rectify all
Chronology both sacreed and profane. For examples sake, we may observe therein
the Consulship of Probus and Paternus was not omitted in those Calendars; which
being omitted by Onnphrius, made him to err a year; nor yet the Antecedent
which being also omitted by Baronius, made him miss two years concerning the
Christian Epoche, as has been noted by Scaliger and Sethus Calvisius. But not
to mention any more of this kind, you may by the way hereby understand what the
Learned Jacobus Godofredus his meaning was; when eleven year after setting
forth a namelesse Geographer, and not daring to name Peireskius, because he had
not got his leave to publish the Calendar, he concludes a passage thereabouts
in these words. Though a thing may be contained within the narrow compass of
two or three pages, yet may it notwithstanding be of very great montent; of
which kind we expect shortly some ancient Memorialls, and Consular Annals.

While these things were acting, he was inexpressibly grieved for the death of
his most dearly beloved friend, Jacobus Augustus Thuanus. He could hardly ever
mention him without a sigh, without breaking forth into his Commendations; for
he was always wont to say, that he was one whom his ancient Nobility, his
singular Pierie to God, his Country, and his Prince; his extreme Love to all
Learned and good Men, his unexhaustible goodness and his most ingenuous
manners had made truly Augustus or Venerable. He was comforted in the first
place by his Noble Progeny, in which were already manifest the feeds of their
Fathers and Ancestors Virtues; and especially in Franciscus Augustus the
eldest, who being hardly a grown youth, did already discover in himself the
mind of a Senator; and resolved to view as much of the world with his eyes, as
his Father had described with his Pen. In the next place, because the Care of
the Kings Library, was committed to those Noble and Learned Brethren Petrus and
Jacobus Puteanus, the Sons of Claudius who was a Senator of Paris, being near
of kin to him, who as they always showed favor unto and gratified all Learned
men, so they were evermore most nearly conjoined with Peireskius in the band of
friendship. For he hoped, as the event proved, that they animating the same,
the Genius of Thuanus would survive; and that Noble Seat of the Muses would be
known, by the frequent Assembly of most choice wits, which their candor and
ancient faithfulness would draw thither. His death happened about the
beginning of May.

And Varius being in the beginning of June restored to his place with huge
Applause; Peireskius continued by him, and would not depart, no not in the
Assembly of the Notables, who being summoned out of whole France, sat in
Council at Rouen, about the end of November. He was there the Solicitor of
the Common cause of his own Senate of Aix, (especially concerning a pension by
which the places of Magistrates are made Hereditary) together with a good
man, his Colleague and friend, Honeratus Agutius, who was come to the said
Assembly. And he did not only note down whatever was consulted, decreed and
transacted in the said Assembly; but also because choice men from all parts of
France were there met together; therefore he would not let a man return into
his own Province, before he had endeavored to oblige him by one courtesy or
another, and by frequent discourses, had learned the greatest part (or all
rather) of the rarities which his Country did afford. One thing, which very
much troubled him, was the death of Mr. de Villeroy.
Nicolaus Neovilla Villaregius, that same renowned Chief Secretary to his
Majesty, by whom he was singularly beloved, and who let a great miss of
himself in the Mind of Varius and all good Men. He had in great account a man
of rare honesty and Prudence Elias Deodatus, whom also Peiresk from that time
forward could not but much admire: for besides his other endowments, he had one
thing common with him, viz. that he would leave no man in Eurpe renowned for
Learning, unobliged. Afterward, when he was upon his return; the January
following, he would needs pass through Lisieux, by his Industry to mollify
some Laws of the Chapter against the Bishop; which he did for Varius his sake,
upon whom that Bishop-rick was newly conferred.

Being returned to Paris, there was nothing which he desired more, then to
vindicate the Royal Line from the Plots of one Theodoricus Piespordius
Secretary to the Archdukes or Princes of the Low Countries, who in imitation
of Johannes Valdesius a Spanish Councellor, endeavored to draw the Austrian
family in a succession male, from Pharamond the King of France, and
consequently entitle the King of Spain to the Kingdom of France, by right of
Succession. For he had set out the year before, the Genealogy of the Austrian
Family, drawn from the first Stock of the Kings, through the most Noble Earls
of Habsburg; and a Copy thereof was sent before Christmas by Winghemius to
Peireskius, 1618.
another being formerly sent and presented to the King by the Archdukes Agent,
which Peireskius could not but resent as a most heinous fact. And to confute
the Imposture, he easily made it appear that no Authentic Charter, nor no
Author was cited above an hundred and twenty year Old; viz. before the time
that Trithemius and others, flattering the Emperor Maximilian, were not
ashamed, though disagreeing among themselves, to patch together that long
Pedigree of Ancestors. Moreover, whereas Sigebert of Austria one of the Sons of
the King Clotarius the seventh from Pharamond, was made choice of, to draw the
Austrian family from; the entire succession thereof, could not be made appear
as far as to the Habsburg Princes; whom Piespordius had very absurdly and
untowardly so termed, before the year of Christ 720; whereas it is apparent
that Habsburge was built no longer ago then the year 1027. Also Peireskius
demanded, why those Princes who are feigned to spring from Sigebert, and who
lived in the days of Pipin, and Capet, never complained of the Injury which
was done to them, they being survivors of the stock of Pharamond, and by
Lawful Succession called to the Crown of France.

But because, notwithstanding the Earls of Habsburg, according to the Line
male, had descended from the Stock of our Kings, yet Peireskius knew that by
the Acts of the Monastery of Muren in Switherland lately printed, it was
proved, that the Princes of Austria do belong to the Habs-burgian Family only
by the Mothers side; and that by the Fathers side they pertain only to the
Tiersteinic family, whereof Peispordius and others ought not in the least to
have been ashamed: wherefore with great earnestness of mind, and by writing
Letter after Letter, he took care, that Vicus a friend of his, whom we formerly
mentioned, who was then the Kings Agent in those parts, might cunningly obtain
a Copy of those Acts in an authentic form, that it might be kept amongst the
Kings Records (so fearful was he, lest the Original might miscarry) and
especially that ancient Genealogy which was praefixed before the Acts of those
Princes who had founded Munster. When he had put the matter out of Hazard, he
carefully procured a second Edition, both of all the Acts and likewise of that
Genealogy, which without adding or taking away so much as a fyllable, he
reduced into an evident Scheme or Table.

From which it soon appeared that Wernerus Earl of Habsburg who died in the
year 1096. had a Daughter named ITA de Tierstein or Homberg, that is, in the
Language of the Genealogist, who was married to Rudolphus of Tierstein or
Homberg; who bare Wernerus the Father of Albertus, the Grandfather of
Rudolphus, the great Grandsire of another Albertus, and the great
Great-Grand-sire of another Rudolphus, who was the first Emperor of that name,
and of the House of Austria. And truly, the slight is wonderful whereby both
Franciscus Guillimanuus and Piespordius himself, do in such manner dissemble
that Wernerus was the Son of ITA, as if he had been not Ita's but her Brothers
Son; of whose progeny nevertheless, there is no mention any where made: as
neither of Adelbert another Brother, from whom the Habsburgian Succession, did
pass over to the family of Tierstein, or Homberg. But they were not ashamed to
go contrary to the manifest truth of story, and so to confound things, that
Guillimannus made Ita the Sister of Otto, his Niece; and Piespordius, his
Sister, Wife, Daughter in Law, and Niece by the Sisters side from Wernerus of
Tierstein. And thus Peireskius rejoiced, that he brake the neck of the design
of these flattering Genealogists; and so much the more, because Guillimannus
said, he gave great credit to those Acts of Muren aforesaid, and Gaspar
Scioppius two years after chose this same Guillimannus as his Author, whom he
would follow in that part of the Genealogy of the House of Autria.

I do not well remember, whether it were for this or some other cause, that he
visited the Records of the Chapter at Rhemes, the Canons being commanded by an
order from the King, to let him view all their Acts and Records; and to show
him two peciall Instruments, containing things of great moment. I remember very
well, he was accounted most knowing in the French Histories of greatest
Antiquity, and that he gave a proof of his skill, which I have heard both from
himself and others. For whereas in the month of March there happened a
memorable fire in the Kings Court, to the sight whereof he ran at midnight, in
the company of Jacobus Gillotus, a most excellent Senator; he carried thither
afterward all the learned men well nigh in the City, to contemplate the
statues of the Kings, the stumps whereof only remained, the rest being turned
into ashes. And when no body could tell whose statue that was, which stood with
a mangled face, even before the fire happened; he, because of one place
supernumerary, argued that it was the statue of King Henry of England, which
Charles the seventh did only mangle, and not remove, as unwilling that his own
Statue should stand in the place of the Usurpers.

Nor was he content to undertake only that particular labor against
Piespordius and others; but out of his love to the Kings Majesty, and the glory
of the French Nation, he began from that time forwards, to think of an Edition
of all Authors, especially those of that age, who had written the Antiquities
and History of France. And because he knew that in diverse Churches,
Monasteries, and private Libraries, many Books of that Argument were kept up
unprinted; he took care to search them out: and because he himself was not then
at leisure, he acquainted Andreas Duchesnius a most diligent Historiographer
with his design, who was at that time set upon the same undertaking. He was
then preparing an Edition of the Historians of Normandy: wherefore Peireskius,
to testify his sagacity and industry, he sought and obtained of Sir Robert
Cotton of England, both a namelesse writer of the Acts of Emma Queen of
England, and likewise Wilhelmus Pictavinus, whom he soon after annexed to his
History, and testified that by the mediation of Cambden, They were sent to the
Illustrious (those are his words) Nicolaus Fabricius de Petrisco, Senator in
the Parliament at Aix, one that is an advancer of learning, and my most dearly
beloved friend.

And because Fronto Ducaeus was at that time setting out a Greek Manuscript,
written with great letters, containing a great part of the Bible, and of so
great antiquity, that it was said to have been corrected by Origens own hand,
who averreo that it had been compared with the most ancient Tetraplus:
therefore Peireskius well remembering, that the foresaid Cotton, had a most
precious Greek Manuscript, written in the days of Theodosius, in great letters
likewise, which cost King James a thousand Crowns; therefore, I say, that this
Edition might be more complete, he wrote and sent into England, and passing his
word, and giving security that the Book should be forth coming, he obtained
the same, and let Fronto Ducaeus have the use of it.

Moreover, in Autumn the same year, he was nominated by the King, Abbot of
Sancta Mariae Aquistriensis. And the business which he had in that respect to
transact at Rome, was freely performed by diverse Cardinals, as Cobellutius,
Ursinius, and (he that was afterward) Marquemontius; but by none more
carefully, than by Maffaeus Barberinus, who was afterward created, and is yet
living, Pope. For from that time forward they became acquainted, and their
acquaintance was strenghthened by letters frequently sent to and fro. The
occasion of their first acquaintance was a very elegant Ode composed by the
Cardinal upon Mary Magdalex, the beginning whereof was, Innixa pennis
versicoloribus. For Peireskius having received a copy thereof from Aleander,
and being wonderfully delighted with it, and all the learned men to whom he
showed it, applauding the same; he got leave by mediation of the said Aleander,
that it might be yet further published by printing. The copies being all
vended, he was pleased to print the Poem again, but in a larger form, that it
might be hung up at Sancta Balma (a Rock and Hermitage, famous for the penance
of Saint Maudlen) and other Churches and Chapels of Provence. Yea, and he
thought good, to print it the third time, after he had won the said Cardinal
to frame an Ode in favor of Saint Lewis King of France, the beginning whereof
is, Objectu gemini maris; and after he had made some other Odes that he could
get, by the stealth, as it were of Aleander.

About the end of this year there appeared a famous Comet, to the observation
whereof he exhorted all the industrious men he was acquainted with. Himself
being destitute of fitting Instruments, and not daring to trust himself in the
air, because of his sickliness, made no other observation, save that by the
Perspective-Glasse, he discerned the form of its head, and hov it differed from
the tail, which he compared to the Sunbeams shining through a window. But he
was glad when he heard afterward, that such as dwelt not in Aix might a little
after diligently observe all things thereunto pertaining. And that I may relate
somewhat thereof, for the sakes of those that desire to know such things: The
Comet appeared from the end of November to the middle of January; and because
it rose in the morning, therefore the tail thereof was seen turning upwards
some days before the head appeared. The head was a star somewhat pale, as big
as the fixed stars of the first magnitude (but twinckled not as they do) round
on that side which was toward the Sun, and crisped on the other end. The tail,
or hair, was a thinner Radiation and more white, as long at first as an eighth
part of the Heaven, and broad at the end (which did for the first days, turn a
little toward the South) as much as came to a sixth part of its length. The
first appearance of its head, was there where Scorpio contracts his claws; its
disappearance, or ending, was where the Dragon parting the Bears, does unsold
the end of his tail. For, besides the daily motion, whereby this Comet did rise
and set as the other Stats, it went by its own proper motion from South to
North; but so, as if it had begun at the middle of Scorpio, and had there cut
the Ecliptic, inclining to the West, near sixty three degrees. And whereas at
first this motion was every day two degrees and an eighth part, it became about
the Nones of December, swifter by an whole degree; and afterward it did so
decrease, that at length it languished; as also its tail, which at the
beginning was so long became by little and little so shortened, that at last it
vanished, and became undistinguishable from the head.

Peireskius understanding thus much, could almost have found in his heart to
assent to Kepler, who esteemed that motion to be a passage in a straight line
which was near us, seeing it appeared so swift, nor could be hindered by the
diurnall revolution, as if it had been caused by the revolution of the earth.
And as he knew that a Comet was no Exhalation from the earth, so could he not
be persuaded that it was Eructation from the Sun, or a Concretion of the liquid
Heavens. He was more inclined to the opinion of Seneca, that Comets are as
perpetual, as the stars we daily see; so that when this Comet was seen it was
not then newly made, but only appeared anew; nor did it perish by disso^ution,
but disappeared by reason of the immense distance. Yet it ieemed to him hard to
conceive, being persuaded that the world is finite: Thus much only he easily
allowed, which was demonstrated from the Observations made, viz. that the
motion of the Comet was not only above the Moon, but hardly lower than the Sun.

Touching the direction of the tail of the Comet toward that quarter which was
opposite to the Sun, I need say nothing; especially seeing it belongs nor to
this place to show the reason, why it kept not a direct opposition, but turned
sometimes to the right hand, and otherwhiles to the left hand, by an unequal
kind of Deflexion. Nor need I speak of what it presaged, seeing it is not the
least argument of humane weakness, to be afraid of those things which have
nothing to do with this world wherein we live. At least it is a wonder, that
men will not believe God himself, who commands that we should not be afraid of
the signs of Heaven; forasmuch as he makes not signs of such things, as being
unexpounded, can give no warning. And unless God make a Comet to be the sign
of calamities en^uing, how can the Comet either have knowledge of suture
things, or a desire to discover them? Does not the Comet take its own course,
as all other natural things, being little concerned, what a stir the Nations
of Mankind make one with another? But this Comet was said to foreshew the wars
a^^ ^^ighters which followed: as if before there ^^^ ^een no wars, pestilence,
nor death of Kings! as ^^ no Tragedies were now in action twenty ye^^ ^^^re
They refer all to the Comet, and by the ^ne reason they may refer all the
troubles that small arise hereafter, till a new Comet appear, and make the
former forgotten; though it should not appear till an hundred years hence. But
we have digressed too far.

Afterward Peireskius spared no pains that there might be a general and
particular description of the world, perfected. For, 1619.
in the first place, as he carefully cherished, so he did not a little
encourage Petrus Bertius, who came then newly ont of Holland, to publish his
Geographicall labors. Moreover, because there came out at that time, that same
description of the earth, according to nine Climates, and the Nubiensian
Geography, so called by Gabriel Sionita, who rendered the Arabic Text into
Latin; Peireskius presently sent a copy to Cluverius, and took care that he
should make a Map, wherein the situation of places might be expressed according
to that Geography. Moreover, because there was a report, that Johannes Maerius,
a Sea-Captain of Holland, having detected a large and calm Strait, Eastward of
the Magellanick, and observed new things, Countries and Peoples; sailed happily
about the world, yet for some reasons would not let his observations come in
print; therefore he prevailed so far with Gulielmus Schutten the chief Pilot,
as to obtain a Diary or Journall of the whole voyage, which he presently caused
to be turned into Latin, and printed. And because Maerius went to Law with
Schutten for so doing, he assured him that he would save him harmless, as to
the charge of the Suit.

Nor did this hinder him from attempting the like about another voyage. For it
was constantly reported, that a Hollands ship was returned from the North or
Hyperborean Sea, which had sailed within seven degrees of the Pole; but he
could by no means obtain a description of the course of the voyage. But
however, he commended the Pilot in that though he might have sailed just under
the Pole with less difficulty, than can be imagined, yet he did not do it: for
then having no North or South, no Sunrise, nor Sunset; no use of the
Lodestone for to show the winds, he would not have known which way to make his
course, one way or another.

Again, because he knew that Vincentius Claneus, a Citizen of Arles, having
traveled far and near, had collected very many observations of such things as
he had seen: therefore he sent to seek for them, that (if he were willing) they
might be printed. Whereupon he obtained them: but observing that all the
discourse was infected with arguings, and especially with that opinion, that
the surface of the earth is not round, but flat: therefore he would have the
whole business referred to the learned Nicolaus Bergeronus, ordering him to
select and express after his own manner, what ever he found merely
historical, and containing a credible narration of things. And afterward he
persuaded Blancus to like of that course, saying, That the same had been
observed in the Histories and Relations of Pirardus, Moquetus, and others: that
it should be lest to Philosophers to dispute those questions, and did not
become a Relater to play the Dogmatist, especially contrary to the common
opinion: that the opinion of the earths flatnesse might be mentioned; but so,
as believed by the Barbarians, not defended by him: if he persisted, he would
become a mocking-stock to Learned men, and derogate from the credit of his
Narrations though in themselves true: that he should reap praise enough, sound
and without spot, from the naked History of his Travells: that he would take
care that the work should be dedicated to the King, or to some other, who would
thankfully accept it, and such like: All which nevertheless could not persuade
the man to relinquish his former Intentions.

Moreover, he caused a Chorographicall Map of Provence to be Engraven and
Printed, which had been made by Petrus Johannes Bomparius, thirty years before.
The form whereof, though neat enough, did not please him: wherefore he caused
Jodocus Hondius to grave it again two years after; who likewise displeased him,
both because he omitted the name of Bomparius; and especially because he chose
rather to smi^^ce other Editions, in which the degrees of Latitude are falsely
set down. For, for examples fa^e, Aix is set in the 42. degree and an eighth
p^r^, which ought to have been in the 43. and at half, and one or two minutes
over. Therefore he had it always in his desire to make a new Map, which by new
observations and more exquisite dimensions should present every place in its
due posture, both in reference to the Heavens and other parts of the Country:
but he was by Death prevented.

Finally because he was wonderfully delighted with that which Johannes Baptista
Morinus (of whom we spoke before and who afterward was of great and deserved
repute among the Kings Professors of Mathematics) was wont to relate touching
that same Peregrination of his into the Mines of Hungary; therefore he advised
him to commit the said relation to writing and so to Print the same. And that
he did, but so as to premise an Anatomy of the Sublunary-world, wherein he
Labored to evince, that as the Air is distributed into three Regions, of
which the uppermost is alvvaies hot, the middlemost always cold, and the
lowest sometimes hot and sometimes cold; so was the Earth divided into three
Regions, of which the lowest was alvvaies cold, the middlemost always hot,
and the uppermost being contiguous to the Air, is sometimes hot sometimes cold
according to the temper of the circumambient Air.

But these studies did not suffice him, 1617.
but he must by diverse kind offices besides endeavor to oblige men famous for
their Virtues. For why should I relate how that Pacius being now, according to
his wish, become a Catholic, and defiring to return into his Country, he
procured the chief Professorship of Padua to be bestowed upon him: as also how
when after two year he would return to Valentia, he procured him to be called
by Letters, from the Viceroy and first President of Dauphine, written by the
Kings commands; How when Philippus Jacobus Maussacus a great Ornament of the
Senate of Tolouse, had gotten the forementioned Commentaries of Julius Scaliger
upon Ariftorle his History of Animalls; he encouraged him not a little to Print
the same with Notes; nor was he negligent, in sending them when they were
printed, to all the Learned men throughout Europe, as to Aleander, Pignorius,
and others? How using the help of Barclay, he caused diverse amorous Poems to
be writ out of a Book in the Vatican Library, for to pleasure Gilbertus
Gaulminius, a rare light to good Literature: when he understood that they were
wanting in Theodorus Prodromus, whith was shortly to be printed according to
Salmasius his Copy; as he also testified in his Epistle to the Reader? How he
freed diverse from diverse scruples, as Pompeius Paschalinus touching the Agate
of his deceased Father; Thomas Erpenius, touching the Saracenicall History; and
many such like.

There was at that time an hot contest in Point of Study, between the often
before mentioned very Learned Jacobus Sirmondus and Claudius Salmasius, that
same other glorious Example of polite Learning, touching a famous question,
occasioned a year before by Jacobus Gothofredus, in two dissertations, touching
the Subn^bian Grounds, and the Churches, or of the Diocese, of the civil
Praetor, and of the Bishop of Rome. As for that controversy how far it
proceened, how many Learned men on both sides joined their forces, is not to be
related in this place. Only, I am to say, that Peireskius was as careful as he
possibly conld be, that the matter might be gently handled between them, as did
befit Learned Men. The truth is when Aleander also had interposed himself in
the quarrel, and had sent a treatise from Rome of that Subject, to be printed
at Paris, Peireskius could hardly allow it: and being urged, he caused it
indeed to be printed, but with some mitigation of what he had hinted, touching
the Authority of Counci^s and Popes, and the bitter passages which he had
fcattered up and down, against the opinion which he opposed.

He used the same liberty toward Barclay, who had interwoven in his Argenis a
Dialogue of somewhat too free a strain. For he received about the same time a
great part of that work, which he was to see printed. And the truth is,
Barclay had determined, that both he and Varius should be personated in that
Book; but Peireskius commending his affection, made greater account of the
friendship of Virginius Caesariuus which he had procured him, from whom he had
received Letters, and most elegant Elegiack Verses. Yet Barclay is to be
commended, who testified his gratitude, by all means in his power; as again,
when he received his Family at Rome about this time, he composed an Elegy in
the name of his wife, Wherein among the rest, were these verses.

To speak the Truth God-like a man's name.
de-Vias, I
Chac't grief away by thy dear Memory.
The thought of Peiresk whom the High-God bless,
Did banish from my Mind all Heaviness.
Heaven's bless that mighty Man, this many a year,
To the French Nation. Then they need not fear.
View but this wit, you will say he is Pallas Child,
Which makes him love the name of Virgin mild.
What Muses and what Prudence were of Old,
All that to France, in Peiresk now behold.
Long let him Live and my dear Husband Love,
Long let him Live and Growth of Honors prove.
And these things were done in the year 1620. 1620.
In the beginning and progress of the Spring whereof, he was so troubled with
the Strangnry and other diseases, that he was hindered, to his great grief,
from following Varius, when he went with the King in the beginning of Summer to
pacify certain tumults in Normandy and other Provinces, and afterward to
Aquitania and Bearn. When he began to mend he received Letters from Pius Mutius
of Genoa, certifying that there were yet remaining some relics of Pinellus
his Library. For he wrote that he had found Fifty two Orations of Themistius,
which were saved out of his Library and had never been printed, no not among
those which were published two years since by Dionysius Petavius, a man so
Learned, that I question whether the Society of Jesus has any that exceeds him.
He presently brought that piece of Themistius to him and when he found him
studying about that huge work d. Doctrina Temporum, which he printed a few
years after, he took occasion to speak many things in favor of Scaliger, his
quondam friend.

About the same time he took a curious view of the Treasury of the Chapel of
Sancta Capella. And among the rare and precious commodities contained therein,
he discovered an inestimable Jewel viz. an oriental Agat or Arabian Sardonyx,
a foot long according to the Parisian or Foot royal: wherein were engraven
with wonderful Art five and twenty figure; or pictures, all exceeding white,
in a black Sea, interdistinguished with a certain dark and obscure
yellowishnesse It was adorned round about with Christian figure; and
inscriptions by a certain Greek Emperor, so that when Baldwin had pawned it to
D. Ludowick, and at last it came into the hands of King Charles the fifth of
that name, and was thought to contain some sacred history; it was brought into
that treasury as a Religious Oblation. But Peireskius, when he viewed it and
regarded the condition of the pictures he was satisfied, that it represented
rather a profane Story; and as far as he could gather by conjectures, he
believed it was a representation of the Apotheosis or Deifying of the Emperor
Augustus being dead.

Johannes Tristanus Santamantius a rare Antiquary did lately cause it to be
printed with his Commentaries being cut in Copper. And he professes that he had
first knowledge thereof from Peireskius, whom he calls a man of very rare and
exquisite Learning, so as to exceed all the commendation that he could give,
and renowned through all Europe. He writes afterward how that he first saw this
rare monument of Antiquity in the company of Peireskius, and began to
conjecture what it might represent. But because in process of time he differed
from the opinion of Peireskius, and it has been my hap sundry times to hear
Peireskius discourse the business: therefore it will not be, I hope,
unpleasing, if I shall touch some principal differences of their
Interpretations, in this place, for their sakes who shall endeavor to examine
the matter, having the Achat it self, or its model or the foresaid Book.

That figure therefore which Santamancius interprets to be Jupiter with Aeneas
following him; Peireskius judged to be Augustus, by the help ofthe Goddesle
Roma, lift up to Heaven, and he whom the other would have to be Augustus, he
Interpreted to be Marcellus the Lover of Horses, whom the Fates only showed the
world, Rome intimating that she delivered the Empire of the world, which he
refused, over to Tiberius, that stood next beneath him. And truly, if you
attentively consider the Achat, as far as the Copies do represent the same, you
will acknowledge the Countenance of a Youth rather then of an old Man. In like
manner, him, beneath Marcellus, whom Peireskius took to be Drusus the Son of
Tiberius, with his hand stretched out toward Jupiter, as begging the Kingdom
after his Father; Santamantius takes to be Numerius Atticus, contemplating with
his eyes lifted up, and avouching that Augustus was caught up into Heaven: And
she that sits by Drusus whom Peireskius took to be his wife Livilla,
Santamantius supposes may be Julia the Daughter of Augustus who was banished;
and him that was at the right hand of Jupiter, he believed to be Drusus the
Brother of Tiberius; whom Peireskius supposed to be rather Julius Caesar.
Touching Germanicus, Agrippina, and Caligula they differed not; nor touching
Tiberius neither; save that Peireskius said that the Imperial Robe compassed
with Serpents was Jupiters Target; and the Lance without an head, he called a
Long Scepter, So he took her to be Antonia the Mother of Germanicus, whom
Santamantius took to be Livia; and contrariwise he took her to be Livia, whom
Santamantius supposed to be Antonia. But thus much may suffice to have spoken
of this subject; by the way.

But Peireskius was so overjoyed by finding so rare a Curiosity, that he did
not only invite Santamantius and all other men in Paris to see it; but he wrote
also Letters thereof, into England, Germany, Italy, and all France over. But he
wrote thereof in a special manner to Petrus Paulus Rubeus of Antwerpe, that
most renowned Painter, and lover of all Antiquities, but especially of Achats
in which he was very skillfull; who came in a moment, to see it and set it
forth in lively colors. And Peireskius got a gallant picture of it, which he
kept as a Jewel, besides diverse Impressions thereof in Brimstone, Plaster of
Paris, Paper, which he printed with the Achat it self.

Moreover by a great Providence he got the Impression of another rare Agat in
Brimstone, which was kept in the Emperors own Jewell-house. It was an Agat
somewhat less then the former, which Philip the Fair left as a Legacy to the
Nuns of Poissy (he having had it of the Knights of Jerusalem, who had got it in
Palestine) and being stolen away in the civil wars it was by certain
Merchants carried into Germany and sold to the Emperor Rudolphus Secundus for
twelve thousand Crowns. Now the Impression thereof had been taken and
preserved, and I know not by what hap fell into the hands of Peireskius. Nor
did he only get the Impression, but the true picture thereof likewise, wrought
long-since by the Hand of that famous Painter Nicolas, whose rare workmanship
is seen in the Gallery at Fountain Bleau. I pass over how he Interpreted the
Figures thereon so, as to conceive they represented the Apotheosis or Deifying
of Augustus while he was Living. For, as we read in Josephus, that Herod made a
Colossus or huge Image of Caesar, resembling Jupiter Olympius in form and
Magnitude, and another like a Roman resembling Argive Juno; so it seems that in
these figures Augustus is represented in the habit of Jupiter Olympius,
together with the Goddess Roma, in the habit of Argive Juno: and in one place
Jupiter and Juno are represented leaving their place and giving way; also the
Sign of Scorpio drawing his Claws together [to make room for the new God]
and such like.

Moreover, he was afterward troubled with a most vexatious disease in his Eyes.
But, that I may proceed to show you how many Designs he drove notwithstanding
these Interruptions of diseases: he caused most elegant pictures to be cut in
Copper, to illustrate a Book written by Rex Renatus Earl of Provence,
concerning Tiltings.
Tournaments, which was to be printed; and that after he had obtained from
Johannes Jacobus Chiffletius Vesuntinus a famous Physician, another Book of
Tornaments. Andreas Favinus mentions this care of his, in his Book of the
Theater of Honor, and in his third Book of the Orders of Knighthood. Also he
reassumed his care of the Constantinian Calendar aforesaid, about which he
therefore wrote to Schilderus, a Canon of Cameracum, from whom he had received
it; also to Franciscus Carandelet us, Dean of the same Church, who was
exceeding curious in all good things. He took care about diverse things which
were kept in the study of the Duke of Arschot and Rubeus aforesaid: in which
point he was satisfied by Johannes Gaspar Gevartius, a famous and (if ever any)
a true Scholar, with whom he had already contracted no slight friendship at
Paris. Moreover, he communicated all his rarer Coins with Rambervillerius, who
dwelt at Vic, and Rambervillerius did reciprocally communicate such as he had,
to him.

At the very beginning of the Spring, 1621.
the year following, he lay sick more than a month; so that he could neither
accompany Varius, who was again to go with the King; nor perform those many and
great offices of freindship, which he had intended to Hugo Grotius, then newly
come into France: for he prized him so highly, that he was wont to say; that
France had gained him, in the stead of Scaliger. I shall not mention how
afterward, when Grotius set himself to write the History of his own times,
Peireskius did furnish him with diverse monuments public and private, which he
had by him; also with very many which he had procured out of Italy, namely,
from Antonius Querengus, a learned and famous man, to whom many things had been
sent out of France, because he was writing the Acts of Alexander Farnese Duke
of Parma. About that time there passed through Paris the foresaid Vicelegatus a
Balneo, who was sent the Popes Nuncio into Flanders: who being desirous to see
all things in the City which were remarkable; Peireskius was recovered in a
seasonable time, to lead him up and down to learned men, to studies, to all
rare works, and with great alacrity, though but one, to persorm such offices as
were hardly to be expected from many together.

And this was in the month of July: August followed, the saddest month that
ever he knew. For therein died Mr. du Vair.
Varius, and it extremely troubled him, that during his eight days sickness,
he could not be with him to perfom all the last duties of a friend. Now that
great man died at Tonins in Agennois, at the siege of Clerac, on the third day
of the month, to the great grief of all France. But how Peireskius was
peculiarly afflicted with this accident, it is needless for me to relate. For
his disposition, by this time sufficiently known, with the vehement love he
bare toward him and his continual observances, do speak enough, though I be
slent. All that wrote verses of the death of Varius, did, not without cause
dedicate their said veses to Peireskius, among the rest Hugo Grotius was one,
who thus bespeaks him;

Though thou who wast the comfort of his cares,
By which he steered the State Affairs of France,
Do, more than all, lament with doleful tears,
His fate, as if it were thy proper chance;
Brave Peiresk, who deserve a better lot,
All France is envious at this thy grief.
And since his Country and the World a shot
Must pay, she will not have thee mourn in chief.
Also Petrus Bertius, who among other passages, thus expressed himself:

But, O Peiresk since God will have it so,
Why do we sadly mourn? Let Us set a bound
Unto our griefs: for we must also go,
When Fates do call, though now both well and sound.
To let pass others; I shall only say, That whereas Peireskius was very
careful that Varius might have all the honor which was due to his Dignities
and Virtues, he did it, as being one of the three which were the Overseers of
his last Will (having had a Legacy consisting chiefly of Gothic Coins); and
because he could not sufficiently restifie the affection he bare to his deceasd
friend.

This hard chance was attended by another, which he bare likewise very
mournfully. For Barclay died at Rome, just then almost, when Varius died in the
Camp: so that Peireskius heard of his burial, when he expected from him a
consolatory Letter and an Epitaph, Just about the same time it happened, that
Peireskius urged him to finish his Argenis: wherefore among other things it
grieved him, that Barclay had not finished that Work according to his own Mind.
It was some comfort to him, that he had first gotten a most elegant
pourtraicture of Barclay: to which he would needs have an Eingie subscribed,
ont of the rich vein of Grotius, which also he sent to Debonerus. Nor were
these accidents enough: but there soon followed the death of another, which he
took most passionately. It was the death of Henry of Lorreigne, Duke of
Mayenne, who was slain at Mount-Alban, the sixth day of September. His love to
Peireskius was vehement, and full of candor; which made him take upon himself,
of his own accord, to protect the Abbey of Guistres in Guyenne, and to preserve
the Lands and Inhabitants, during that war.

When tidings of his death were brought, Peireskius was troubled with a pain in
his kidneyes and the Strangury, which lasted eight days; about the beginning
whereof, he was not able to behold that Prodigy, which caused great
admiration, being seen not only in the Camp, but at Paris also, and all France
over, viz. a Remarkable Brightness, which in the night following the Twelfth
day, was seen in the Northern part of the Sky all over, so that for many hours
together, it represented the clearest Sunrise. This was wonderful, the Moon
not shining; but it was more wonderful, to see a vapor which was shed abroad
in the same quarter, distinguished (as it were) into whitish obscure pillars,
set in rows; being exactly perpendicular to the Horizon, and moving very slowly
from the East unto the West. Finally, it was a miracle, to see a little after
(as it were) certain Pyramids or Spires, arising from the white appearances,
reaching to the top of the Sky, very white; out of which there shot vapors
very thin and exceeding white, as swift as lightening.

This I mention, because Peireskius was glad that we observed the same; whereby
he was assured, that it was nothing but a sport of Nature, which many
interpreted to be some military preparation, or the Idea of a Battle. The
truth is, some affirmed that they saw Armies in Battell-aray, and Horse and
Foot marching; and how at last they saw the fight, and bullets flying out of
the guns. It Is wonder they said not, that they heard the sound of Trumpets, and
the cries of the Soldiers; seeing the same credulous and humane frailty was
cause of those other figments. It Is truly credible, that if not all, yet very
many such tales, related in Histories, have proceeded from the same Original,
and deserve no greater credit.

But to return to those sad accidents; I need not speak of the death of
Cardinal Bellarmin, which happened about the same time at Rome. For though
Peireskius was somewhat troubled when he heard of it, yet was he comsorted by
the opinion which he had preconceived, and the fame which was soon spread
abroad of his admirable Sanctity. I am rather to speak of the death of Paulus
Gualdus, which happened in October, the tidings whereof were enough to kill him
with sorrow, for all his great constancy. For we may estimate his grief for
the death of this man, by considering the acquaintance he had with him, at the
house of Pinellus, and the various kindnesses, and most sweet Letters, which
had passed between them for above twenty years together. Peireskius had sent
him a little before, besides diverse Prospective-Glasses, augmenting Glasses
lately found out by Cornclius Drebel, who was likewise of Alcmair, and Engineer
to the King of Great Britain. Moreover, because Gualdus had so long, and so
much loved him; he therefore made exceeding much of his brothers children,
Joseph the Arch-Presbyter, and John Baptist the Knight; especially the latter,
who seating himself at Rome, as he was most studious of all good things, so
provided he himself with a plentiful storehouse thereof.

There was another sad accident, which I know not whether I should relate, at
which he happened to be present, though not properly concerned: which was that
same memorable fire which happened upon the double Bridge which stands on
piles, by means whereof not only the said Bridge was burnt, and the houses
thereon built, but the wares also of the Silver-Smiths, and Mercers which sold
silks, were burnt or drowned. Peireskius quickly ran thither, and beheld the
fire with great grief, and carefully set down all the mischief which was done
by the unspeakable violence of the flames. And he was wont to say, that he
would give any money for a picture that should represent to the life those vast
rolling flames. For Nero saw nothing so horrible, when he beheld Rome on fire;
for those buildings were of stone, but these were wholly in a manner wood: nor
was there such a flood beneath, nor such immense gulfs.

After these things, he began to think of returning home; but he prolonged the
time by little and little, till a year or two more were past. About the same
time the custody of the great Seal was committed to Mericus Vicus, a chief
friend of his, of whom we have made often mention, and to Ludovisus Faber
Caumartinus, both of which were desirous to seem Inheritors of the affection
which Varius had born toward him. Moreover, he continued in the affection and
esteem of the Masters of the Exchequer, who dearly loved him, and that
principally, because he never demanded any thing for himself, but was only an
Intercessour for good and deserving men. Again, he made no end of sending books
up and down. And therefore Canaden especially, It Is fit (says he) that I return
you a thousand thanks for your great munificence, and the great store of most
excellent books which I have received from you.

When he sent to Seldom, he desired him, that if but for his sake, he would
observe the situation of the English Churches, whether to such as entered they
stood East, and whether they look toward the Aequinoctiall, or either
Solstice. For he accounted it a thing worth the enquiry, 1622.
that he might find out (as I suppose) whether our Ancestors worshipped
toward the Winter Sunrise, or some other way; because according to the
ancient tradition of the Church, our Lord Christ, who is termed the East, or
Sunrise, was born when the Sun was in the Winter Tropic. He had already sped
well at Paris in this enquiry: for Jacobus Allealmus, a famous Mathematician,
having examined the matter, found that all the ancient Churches, did decline
from the Aequinoctiall to the Winter Sunrise, that of San-Victorina only
excepted, which declined toward the Summer Sunrise; as for the San-Benedictine
Church, he made no reckoning thereof, which he conceived was termed Bistornata,
because it had been twice turned, or ill turned.

Moreover he procured for Learned men the Copies of very many Manuscripts, as
namely out of the Escuriall and Vatican Libraries: out of which, besides
others, he got a Copy of Syncellus, with which he helped the Learned Johannes
Raptista Altinus, who was then setting forth the said author with Expositions.
And whereas upon that occasion, he had sent to Alcmannus an exquisite
Ichnographiall description of the Porch of Sancta Genovefa, and of diverse other
places, he received of him for the foresaid Altinus, a Copy of the Anecdota of
Procopius, to the end they might be printed. Also he obtained both out of the
Vatican and out of the Ambrosian Library at Millain, certain Copies of
Africanus and other Books of the art of Ordering an Army.
Tactiks, for the sake of Ludovicus Machaltus a Valiant Man, Studious of
millitary Authors and of the Mathematics. He it was, to whom Peireskius did
demonstrate in a certain beautiful Diagram, the way to multiply the species
and appearance of one and the same thing, between Two Glasses, declining
laterally one from another.

Moreover, when Nicolaus Bergerus of Rhemes wrote in French an History of the
public Ways of the Roman Empire, which the Greeks term Basilicas [the Kings
high-waies] he testified in his Preface, that Peireskius acquainted him with an
Itinerarie Table or Map, very necessary for his work. Now it is the same, which
M. Velserus got out of the Library of the Pentingeri (two sheets being first
happily found and illustrated with a Commentary) and which Abrahamus Ortelius
after long looking obtained, and first lest to be published by Johannes
Moretus; and Petrus Bertius, by the advice of Peireskius joined to his Ptolemy.
Moreover Sundry, Offices he performed to diverse Learned Men As to Johannes
Mocenicus, from whom diverse most rare Curiosities had been stolen at Venice:
to Claudius Menetrius Vesuntinus, Studious of Antiquities, and who had Letters
from Chissletius; to one Cuffler of kin to Drebelt, and skillfull in making
Augmenting glasses, who was going into Italy: and to very many more.

Another year was now begun, 1623.
and it was the 12th. day of February, when visiting the Chancellor de Sillery,
and finding there a knot of illustrious and Learned Men, he acquainted them,
that there was Snow fallen of a Sexangular or starlike figure. The business
being observed by the Company; and all counting it to be a prodigy, he
discoursed unto them, how that it was a more usual thing then any man will
believe. For every Winter it does diverse times snow such, like Stars: but no
man observes it, both because those Stars do turn to shapelesse fleakes; and
because falling down single, they quickly melt away, or being mixed one with
another are soon confounded. And that the Contexture was wonderful consisting
of three small strokes crossing one the other, so that six rays are seen
proceeding as it were out of one Center: Nor seems it less wonderful, that
those rays are sometimes naked, and sometimes have as it were leaves and
branches upon them, otherwhiles seeming inserted into a Nave, like the spoaks
of a Wheel and other such like observations, which a friend had informed him
of. Another while he endeavored to show the reason of the snows whiteness,
proceeding from very small bubbles reflecting the Light; and of its starlike
form, proceeding from six aequilaterall trianges, into which figures, circular
bodies do naturally dispose themselves: and nothing seemed to him more probable
then that snow is so med of seems proper thereunto: even as the various sorts
of stones are made in the same manner, receiving their proper figures as Plants
and Animals do.

Whereupon it was by one then demanded, whether these seeds were cause of the
years fruitfulness, seeing Husbandmen avouch, that the fields do then yield
the most increase, when they have been longest covered with snow. Against which
he excepted, that the seeds of snow are one thing, the seeds of Plants another;
nor do Plants therefore spring up more abundantly, because the snow by its
fatness (as some Imagine) does make the Lands fruitful: but because it keeps
in and represses those fat exhalations, which steem out of the Earth, and
turns them into nourishment for the Corn. Which may be better understood, if
we consider, that the said exhalations being hot, the snow is below so melted
as to give way to the growing Plants, being crusted and vaulted above, and when
the warmness of the Spring approaches, it goes away in great fragments, by the
sides of the mountains, leaving behind it the Herbs and Corn grown up. Hence
occasion was taken to discourse of the force of such waters as proceed from
molten snow; so that this must now be acknowledged the cause of the Overflowing
of Nilus; and he having said, that all this water of melted snow did not pass
away in Torrents, but was partly imbibed into the earth, to increase the
fountain waters, seeing the Fountain de Vau-cluse did not run more abundantly,
but was also a little troubled after snow was melted; the whole Company was
very desirous to hear him discourse at large, touching the Original of
Fountains.

Whereupon explaining his opinion, than which he had none wherein he was more
fixed and resolved; he declared that he could never conceive that the original
of Fountains was from the Sea, nor caused by the conversion of Air into water
but that they spring rather from rain waters (melted snow contributing) which
falling far and near, are so drunk in, and pierce so far into the Earth, till
they meet with certain Receptacles or wells, the bottom whereof is stone,
Tarras, or some such matter, fit to hold water; which have beneath certain
narrow passages, by which the Collected water, issues gently, fo that the
stream is continued for many days months and years. For proof whereof he
alleged, that all the most notable Springs were at the bottomes of
Mountains; in which, being of a rocky nature, there are many such Receptacles
or Cisternes, which run at last all unto one: and fountains which arise in
plain grounds, may be derived from the Receptacles of Mountains far off, being
brought along through channels under ground. And that by the same reason waters
might flow not far from the tops of lower Hills; and in case they have not
Receptacles sufficient of their own, they might by the like Passages be brought
thither from the Recepacles of higher Mountains; seeing water flows so far
upward, according to the height from which it first came. Whence also he
collected, that there could be no fountains in the Continent, nor in Islands;
which doubtless are highter then the surface of the Sea, if Fountains came
from the Sea; because water will rise no higher then the place from whence it
fell. For, that waters should spring out in the very tops of the highest
Mountains, as is Vulgarly reported, was not credible, there being no
Eye-vvitnesse to testify the same. And that therefore the Cause why in the
Summer, especially after great Drought, Fountains are dried up, or run very
penuriously, can be no other then that the waters contained in the foresaid
receptacles, are either quite spent or much diminished. Whence it is, that
after Rains the Fountains run again, that is to say, not after leight or
seldom showers, but after large and continuali Raines of many days and months
durance. Yet it is true, as the Scriptures says, that the Original of Rivers
and Fountains is from the Sea; in as much as partly out of the open Sea, partly
out of such waters thereof as enter into the Cavities and secret passages of
the Earth, vapors are raised, which being turned into Rain, do cause
fountains and Rivers, after the manner aforesaid.

He perceived afterward that it was necessary for him to depart, and therefore
he consented at length to the setting forth of that little Treatise De Magnae
Deu^m Matris, Attidisque initiis. Which because it contained an Interpretation
of certain Characters or Hieroglyphics, which were seen upon a certain brazen
hand found at Tornay, which Peireskius received from Dionysius Villerius; he
had been instant for three years, that Pignorius would change his dedication,
and inscribe it to Villerius. Which when he could not obtain, he would not have
the Edition longer deferred, Pignorius reasoning the Case with him in these
words. There are many reasons which make me dedicate the same to you; but above
all, your singular humanity, whereby you have so wholly obliged me and all that
I am, by your daily kindnesses, that I haveinothing remaining which I may truly
call mine own. In the next place, your great and Various Learning, by which you
have wonderfully treasured up in your Mind and thought, all Antiquity, and
whatsoever any where is rare and excellent. Also he caused to be printed two
Books of Mathematical Epistles of Georgius Ragusaeus, or against Arts
divinatory, which he had received from Paulus Gauldus, and which he had left to
his beloved Hannibal Fabrotus the forementioned President of Aix, who abode
then at Paris. So was he very careful, that the works of Varius might be
printed with all Additions possible: which because he could not see done (as
his desire was) before he departed, therefore he lest the whole Care of the
Edition to Duchesnius, to see it finished. In like manner leaving behind him a
new Edition of the Poems of Cardinal Barberinus half finished, with additions;
he committed the whole Care thereof to Viassius who was then at Paris, and
freely proffered his service to that intent.

Moreover, that which so constrained him to hasten his return, was the old Age
and increasing sickness of his Father. Yet would he have tarried till Autumn,
had he not been necessitated to pass through Aquitania, being resolved to view
a certain Abbey, which made him take the more time. Wherefore he departed in
the month of August from Paris, where he had spent seven years and some
months. When he same to Orleance, he received Letters from Debonaerus residing
at Rome, acquainting him that Cardinal Barberinus was chosen Pope, by the name
of Urbanus Octavus. Being glad thereof, he presently wrote an Epistle
gratulatory to the Pope, which how delightful it was to him, both Debonaerus
himself and also Aleander did signify. Also Francisus the Popes Nephew, who
was thence forward called Cardinal Barberinus, signified as much; who was a
man continually devoted to advance good Arts, and a rare favourer of Learned
Men, being himself enchanted with the allurements of all ingenuous studies. He
from that time forward, both sent to and received from Peireskius frequent
Letters, most full as well of Learning as of Humanity and Love.

Departing from Orleance, he had (among others) in his company, the
forementioned Johannes Lombardus, for whom seven years before he had obtained,
and sent him, when he thought not of it, a copy of the Description of all the
Hundreds, or Sub-oivisions, and public Edifices in Provence. His Father
Reginaldus had sent him to hasten his return; and Peireskius was delighted to
have him in his company, because he judged that he would be useful unto him.
For which cause he was fain always to have in readiness pen, paper, ruler,
compass, wax, brimstone, and such like implements; to draw, exscribe,
adumbrate, in Seals and Transcripts, what ever they should meet with, worthy of
observation. And consequently, at Anjou he chiefly desired the Pourtraicts of
the Princes of the family of Anjou, such as he could obtain out of
Glasse-windows, and out of the Churches of St. Maurice, and the Franciscans. He
stayed somewhat long at Tours, because besides many other things, he was much
taken up with the Records of St. Martin, wherein are preserved the Charters of
the Kings, and other very ancient Acts and Monuments. Touching the Abbey, he
was wholly taken up in persuading a reparation, and in designing how to repair
those remarkable ruins, which had happened to the Monastery in the civil
wars. I should be verily too tedious, if I should recount those innumerable
things which he observed all his journey through, and all the testimonies of
honor and good will, which he received at Bourdeaux, Tolouse, and in other
places, in which there was no man considerable for dignity or learning, who
desired not to see and speak with him.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS. The Fourth Book.
IT was now October when he came home, expected indeed by very many, but
chiefly by his Father, who was then somewhat better. And not long after his
return, he presented to the Court a Patent from the King, whereby his Majesty
permitted him to continue in the function of his ancient Dignity, or to
exercise the Office of a secular or lay-person, as they phrased it;
notwithstanding that being made an Abbot, he had assumed the person of a
Churchman. And the Court of Parliament did not assent thereunto, but voted
unanimously, and decreed, that being already admitted into the first Rank, he
should abide perpetually therein; not returning as the customaty course was, to
the inferior Auditory, wherein trials are usually had of criminal Cases.
Moreover, he obtained likewise a Rescript from the Pope, to license him to be
present at the Judgment of capital Causes (because even in the higher
auditory, some select Cases of that nature were customarily heard) but he never
made use of the same; but always when they came to vote, and two or three had
given their voices, for some capital punishment, he was wont to depart, and
give no vote.

As soon as ever he opened his study, he was exceedingly amazed, when he must
his Box, in which he had locked up his chiefest Rarities. There were taken away,
besides ancient coins of Gold, to the weight of a thousand Crowns; a thousand
two hundred precious stones, with sculptures upon them, and some other things
besides. He mist especially amongst his Coins, an Egyptian Talent, or Arsinoe,
the Wife of Philadelphus, of ten Crowns weight, and a golden Spur-royal of
Lewis surnamed the devout, of which we told you before, he thought there was
not the like to be had: Among his engraven stones, a green one with the Head
and Inscription of Servius Sulpitius; and an Onyx which has bin mentioned more
then once, with the Head of Aetio King of Sicilie, and the Ornament of a
Phrygian Tiara: It troubled him the more, because he durst not prosecute
against the party he supposed had stolen them. For he could not do that, lest
the loss should come to his Fathers Ear, who had bona fide, and mistrusting
nothing, given the Key to one of the City, who was used to the House, that he
might out at the study window, prune a vine that grew up: now his fear was,
that if his Father should come to know how treacherously the man had dealt, it
would increase the violence of his Disease. And therefore, he was exceeding
cautious, that nothing might come to his Ear; yea, and when he asked him, if
he found all well in his study, he answered him, that all was right and well.

Howbeit, he neglected not, with singular sagacity, to seek after his lost
things. Whereupon, not to say with what diligence, silence, caution, he sent
his letters, and faithful friends up and down; he proved at last so happy, as
to recover the greatest part of such things as he most respected. To be sure,
he obtained his precious stones, and among the rest, his Aetio, and Servius
Sulpitius: and he accounted it very happy, that he had adorned neither of them
with Gold; for so they would have bin utterly lost, as some others were, to
whom their Gold, was that which sold them off. So, a long while after, he got
his Egyptian, or Theban Talent, for which he took at the first, a journey on
purpose to Marseille, and lost his labor. But as for the Spur-royal of Lewis
the devout, I never heard that he got it again.

This loss troubled his friends a long time, among whom there were some, who
after that they had condoled with him therefore, did with all, congratulate
with him, as one that seemed to be raised from the dead. For a rumor had bin
spread abroad touching his death; which was first raised at Paris, by a raskal
that had some design in it. Wherefore he, as soon as he could, certified them
of what he had found again, and touching himself he wished the most excellent
Cambden might be as well, as he was at that time alive.

After he had gaiued a little rest from these cares, he returned to his old
Trade of assisting learned men. Of which Grotius alone may serve for a witness,
who at the beginning of the new year, I am not idle (says he writing to him)
but I proceed in my work, de Jure Gentium, which if it prove such as may gain
the good will of the Readers, Posterity will be obliged to thank you, who have
stirred me up unto this work, both by your assistance and exhortation. 1624.
And a little after, But you proceed to obliege me, seeing even now you show
your self in good earnest, sensible of my losses; and as, when I was present, I
found you a Patron, so in absence, I feel you a Comforter. I, for my part, am
for your only sake, so obliged to France, that I had rather undergo the utmost
extremity, then leave this place. And again, I sent you a letter, which
contained in it, nothing which concerned you to know; but was only a testimony
of that gratitude, which I do and shall owe to you, for so many exceeding
benefits wherewith I have been by you assisted and adorned. Now that same work
de Jure Gentium, of which Grot^us makes mention in this place, seems to have
bin no other then that famous Book de Jure B^lli and Pacis, which he printed a
year after. Sure I am, when he sent Peireskius one of his said Books, he sent a
letter with it, out of which, take these following passages. Accipe jussis
Carmina caepta tuis (says the Poet) Accept these Verses made at your Command.
But I, most worthy Peireskius, do send to you not a Verse, but a Book begun by
your Exhortation and your Advice. I might add, that my present dwelling in
France, is not a little indebted to you, by whose means I have bin brought
acquainted with most excellent men: so that in this respect also, if any fruit
come thereby, you may justly challenge the same. If I shall say, that it is a
great grief to me, that I cannot enjoy your presence, nor discourses, I shall
say no more then is the very truth; but your noble Brother affords me some
solace in this my loss, vour Brother (I say) not only by Nature, but Humanity,
who, etc.

I pass over his great care to get the Picture of Grotius, drawn by the hand
of Duvricius; and the happiness he accounted it, to have withal, the Pictures
of Salmasius, Petrus Puteanus, Hieronymus Bignonus (that great light of
learning in general, the Laws in special, and of justice in the Parliament)
and other of his friends. He had sent first to the Puteans, the Copies of such
as he had, viz. of Vincentius Pinellus, and Julius Caesar Scaliger, intending
to send likewise those of Paschalinus, Portaeus, Pacius, Cambden, Lobellius,
Barclaius, Maranus, and many more. And because I have fallen to speak of
Pictures, I may well add those which he obtained, about this time, of the Pope,
and the Cardinals Cobellutius and Barberinus. Also he desired to have at the
same time, the Picture of Virginius Caesarinus; but death prevented the
Painter, much about the time when Peireskius returned thanks for a Copy of the
Sagiator of Galilaeus, that is to say, a Book of his, touching Comets, which
Galilaeus had made against the Libra Astronomica, a Book so called of Lothnrius
Sarsius (or by transposition of Letters, Horatius Grassius) which dedicated to
Virginius himself.

Moreover, he was not forgetful of a promise, long since made to the Pope to
procure him some Relics of St. Magddalen. For, seeing the people, some few
years before at San-Maximitan, hindered the same by an Insurrection which they
made, he went now with the Command of the King, the Authority of the
Parliament, and in company of the chief President, making use of the Marshal
and his men, to guard him; and so he obtained at length, that which the Pope
piously desired. Whereupon the Cardinal gave him very great thanks in the Popes
name, who testified likewise, how acceptable his recommendation was, as of
other French Gentlemen, so especially of the foresaid Thuanus, who after he had
viewed the Western parts of the World, was thinking also to visit the Eastern
Countries.

Moreover, He was very busy in ordering the affairs of the Bishopric of
Regium, wherewith the most excellent Cardinal Guido Bentivolus, was endowed at
the Kings Request. Which he did out of that great love and friendship, which he
had maintained with the said Cardinal, ever since he came the Popes Nuncio into
France; in which place he succeeded Cardinal Robertus Ubaldinus, who likewise
had bin a great Lover of Peireskius. Nor must it be forgotten, that in the mean
while, Cardinal Bentivolus, was a most earnest Interceder to gain out of the
rich Treasury of Rarities belonging to Scipio Cardinal Burghesius, diverse
Models of Weights, measures, and other things, to send to Peireskius. At the
same time there was at Rome Claudius Menetrius aforesaid: who also sent them,
and added diverse ancient Weights, with Models and Seals; nor did he afterward
cease from sending Coins, and what ever other Monuments of antiquity, which
Rome could afford, at what price soever.

Furthermore, He was in a manner wholly taken up, in ministering unto his sick
Father. But when his pains seemed to be somewhat allayed in the Summer, he went
to his Country house at Beaugensier, whence ere that he returned, he would
needs go to Tolon, to fish for Coral. For it grows but in few places of our
Seas; but especially in a narrow passage, which is distant from the Promontoty
called Citharistes, but two Provence vence-miles. And because he was informed
that it was an excellent season to pluck the same; therefore he hired a small
Vessel, and chose fitting persons, by whom he was carried till such time as the
tops of certain Hills and Mountains meeting to the Eye in a right line, were a
token of the place he was told of. Then they let down by a Rope a wooden
Cross, with Nets fastened to it; and as soon as they perceived it was upon the
ground, they drew it all about, to and fro, this way and that way, that the
Coral Plants might be entangled in the Net. When they had done so, long enough,
the Engine was pulled up, and he observed how the Nets had broken off, and
brought away many Plants of Coral, with very many dry and rotten fragments,
which had at some other time bin plucked up, and left at the bottom, or had
fallen out, as the Nets were drawn up. Moreover, the Plants which were then
plucked up and drawn out, were neither red, nor handsome, till their Bark was
pulled off: in some parts they were soft, and would give way to the hand, as
toward the tops, which being broken, and squeesed, they sent forth milk, like
that of Figs; and when the compression ceased, we might see them pricked with
little holes, which seemed to be the empty veins, wherein the milk had bin
contained. Which milk, because he was informed to be very caustic or burning,
therefore he was exceeding careful, that none of it might come upon his Skin.
And because by enquiry he had learnt that it was as the seed of the Coral, so
that if it touched any solid thing as a shell of a Fish, a Stone, or the like,
it would engender a Coral Plant, that would grow thereupon: therefore he
conjectured, how Coral might come to grow upon the Scull forementioned. There
were in the Nets many other Plants besides the Corals, also very many living
things were entangled therein; particularly, a Snail without a shell. All which
Mass of varieties being carried to Beaugensier, he caused to be dried in an
Oven, and so preserved. And he observed, that the Snail dissolved into a purple
liquor, and dyed all that touched it with a most perfect purple color: which
made him a little doubt, whether that were not the true Purple, and this liquor
the right Ostrum, which anciently they dyed their Garments with, and which they
termed Murex Tyrius.

The remainder of this and the year following, which was 1625. he could not at
all leave his Father, save so long as necessity required him to wait upon the
Legate. For that year, the Pope to manage the common affairs of Christendom,
had sent Cardinal Barberinus into France, who about the beginning of Spring,
landed upon the Coasts of Provence. He was to have landed at Marseil; but a
Tempest compelled him to put into the Haven of Tolon, whence passing to
Avenion, he was to go through Aix. Peireskius therefore went, and met him about
three or four miles from the City, and took all care possible, that he might
enter the City with those Honors which had bin decreed him, as suitable to his
Dignity: but the Legate for some Reason best known to himself, chose rather to
pass beside the City, and to turn to Lambest: whence the next day he went to
Avenion, but Peireskius went not with him; but the fourth day after, he came
and brought his old Friend Aleander with him, 1625.
whom he had in the mean time kept at his own House, and feasted him gallantly.
For Aleander being taken into the Family of the Cardinal, was in his Retinue,
together with the Noble Knight Cassianus a Puteo, who verily how rare a man he
was, all good and learned Men at Rome do testify, being to him obliged: also
with the divers-times formerly mentioned Debonaerus, whom both for his own
worth, and for the memory of Barclay, he could not sufficiently embrace: also
with Johannes Baptista Donius, a man of profound learning, whom the Cardinal
would needs have for his Secretary, for the Latin Tongue; and with the very
good Ludovicus Aubrius Menilius of Paris, of whom he had received diverse
courtesies, both at Paris and at Rome. And there were diverse other learned men
in his Retinue; but I mention only the special friends of Peireskius.

Moreover Peireskius would willingly have followed the Cardinal, for he was
resolved not to leave him neither at Paris, nor while he was in France: but the
tender affection he bore to his Father, being grievously afflicted with
sickness, could not permit his absence. But his Brother being at Paris, he
wrote unto him, to perform the duty to his Father, which himself could not. He
wrote also to diverse friends, and namely to Rubens, who was then drawing
Pictures to adorn the Gallery at Luxemberg, belonging to the Queen Mothers new
Palace: because he knew, that he through the happiness and sweetness of his
wit, and the plenty of exquisite things which he had, would be delightful unto
him. Also a principal reason why himself could not be from his Father was,
because the two Physicians which his Father always had great hope in, were both
dead: for Jacobus Fontanus dyed, when he himself was at Paris; but Antonius
Merindolus, died a little after Christmas foregoing.

Where I must tell you by the way; the grief which Peireskius conceived for the
death of this man, was as great in a manner as great could be. For both his
rare learning, and very gentle manners, long acquaintance, and most civil
offices, had long since knit them in an extraordinary band of friendship. I do
not tell you what Peireskius did contribute toward this friendship: for it is
fitter you should know that, out of the last will of Merindol, expressed in the
Dedication of his Works. For there he declared, That he would have his Works
pass into the world under the Patronage of the most Christian King:
Nevertheless (says he) I would have my Treatise of Feavors go by it self, to
the end it may carry in its front, a name most dear to me of all others, viz.
the name of Monsieur Nicolas Fabricius of Peiresc, Counselor to his Majesty
in the Parliament of Aix, and Abhot of Guistres, a Gentleman most flourishing
in Riches and Learning, accompanied with Virtue. For I have always found him a
man of ancient integrity, of candid manners, and a continual Patron of my
studies: and therefore I desire by the Dedication of this Book, as by a Bond
and Seal, to testify to all the world, for how many and how great benefits, I
acknowledge my self obliged unto him.

To return to his Fathers Disease: for an year and half he had been tormented
with pains in his Bladder and Kidneys, and a most pertinacious Gout. And a
month or two after, the Disease came to that height, as that little stones
were taken out of the joints of his Feet, and that in so great a number, that
in 8 months space, they did equal his Feet in bulk: and because they could
seldom or never be drawn out, but that ends of Nerves and Tendons were drawn
away with them; therefore within the foresaid time, they were five times
gangraenated. Moreover, Peireskius was always present, not only consulting
about and together with the Physicians and Chirurgions, prescribing both
Medicines and Diet; but also preparing and setting his own hand to every thing,
and what ever his Father took, giving it himself. For that was his Fathers
desire, and it was so sweet unto him, that he found not any thing which did
more mitigate his pains. Being therefore thus continually busied, so that
except some urgent occasions in Parliament required, he was never from his
Fathers side; it was no wonder that himself, besides his frequent Strangury,
had his Haemorrhoids so provoked, that a very troublesome tumor bred in that
Part.

Therewith he was now grievously troubled, about the beginning of October, when
he heard that the Cardinal Legate was upon his return. Delaying therefore to
Physic himself, he first prescribed how his Father was to be ordered; and then
went to the Legate to Avenion. But his Father transcending a little his
prescribed bounds, fell presently into a Catarrhe; whereupon the Physicians
despairing, thought good to send for Peireskius home again. As soon as word was
brought him, he returned, but found his Father so weak, 1624.
that he could be kept alive but two days longer. The good man therefore died
to the great grief of his excellent son: but the coming of the Legate would not
long suffer him, to testify his sorrow; for he was to entertain him, in his
House. For the Coarse was but just carried to the Church, when tidings came
that the Legate was at hand. Wherefore, having brought back the Funeral Pomp to
his House; he presently went forth, and met the Legate scarce half a mile of. He
having performed the due Ceremonies at Church, according to custom, ent^ed the
house of Perieskius; and it was a wonder to see the whole face thereof so
suddenly changed, so that the walls, which because of the Funeral being hung all
with black, did testify sorrow; were presently, being hung a fresh with red,
because of the aproach of the Guest, made to express the greatest
cheerfulness possible. Moreover, as soon as he was saluted by Parliament, and
all the other orders of the City, the Tables were so furnished, that a more
magnificent provision could not be imagined. Eight dineing rooms, were served
at one and the same time, without any confusion, and the high courage of
Peireskius was to be admired, whose Providence was not disturbed by the
sadness following his Fathers death. When all was taken away, the Legate
desired also to view his Study, and to pass over some sweet hours in familiar
discourse, and in viewing the rarities. This, Viasius harpt upon, in his
Panegyric to Urbanus Octavus, in these verses among the rest.

So did we see him in his way from France, 1625.

Unto Peiresk his noble House advance,
That House renowned for Virtue, and the Praise
Of ancient Gentry, and the Muses Baies.
Where all that is left of Athens and old Rome
Inshrined lies, as in a sacred Tomb.
When at his departure he brought him on his way, he was forced to go to
Riants, where, upon pretense of his Fathers Death, the Tenants began to make
some stir; where composing things as well as he could, and the contrariety of
the wind holding the Legate still at the Port of Tolon, he went to him again
thither, and presented him with a couple of Goats with long ears hanging down
so low, that if their heads be a little bowed down, they touch the ground. The
Cardinal having finished this legation, soon after began another. For he went
Legate into Spain; but by force of weather, he was diverse times stayed upon the
Coasts of Provence. But his chief stop was at the Tower of Buquia, which stands
at the ingress of the Martigian Coast, or the Sea Colony; so that Peireskius,
could hear of him and come to him. Which was doubtless a great solace to the
Legate; for besides his most delightful company some days enjoyed, Books were
also brought him, with the reading whereof the tediousness of the time was
abated. Among the rest, there were certain observations, touching the ebbing
and flowing of the Seas, which Peireskius had not long before caused to be
collected by Antonius Natalis a Physician of Provence, who dwelt in Bretagne,
which because they exceedingly pleased the Legate, he promised to do his
endeavor, 1626
to procure more of them. Also he further promised him, That he would acquaint
him with whatever he met with, temarkable in that Legation; and particularly,
that he would procure, which Peireskius chiefly desired, the Epitaphs to be
written out, and Pictures to be taken of the Earls of Barcellone, especially of
Alphonsus surnamed the Chaste.

Moreover, Peireskius returned home troubled with an exceeding great Rheum,
besides pains in his Kidneys, and other disorders contracted by reason of his
Fathers sickness, which would not let him sleep a nights, nor suffer him to
rest so much as in his Bed. Amongst other refreshments, books were not the
least: for he received diverse from sundry his friends, some of which made
mention of him: as one, for example, called Glossarium Archaeologicum,
containing an Exposition of Barbarous Latin words, whose Author was Sir Henry
Spelman of England, who in the Preface to his Work, If I should speak of
persons (quoth he) beyond the Seas, I was in no small measure incited from
France, by the most noble Nicolaus Fabricius Peireskius, his Majesty's
Counselor in the Parliament of Aix, Hieronymus Bignonus, etc. Where you must
observe, that Bignonus and those other persons whom he there mentions, were set
on by Peireskius to solicit Spelman to set out his Book. Also, the notes of
Pignorius upon the Book of Vincentius Cartarus of the Images of the Gods; also
his symbolical Epistles, in the 29 whereof Pignorius recites to Peireskius an
Epistle of Marsilius Ficinus, touching the occasion of the friendship between
him and Bembus, both born on one and the same day, out of a Book, which was in
the study of Pinellus, which you and I (quoth he) knew in its flourishing
condition.

Also he was very inquisitive after diverse Monuments of Antiquity, which he
would have brought to Aix. A principal was a Marble Tomb of most elegant
fabric, which being dug up near Brignolle, he sent a Cart on purpose, and
twenty industrious chosen men, to fetch the same. This Monument, verily, he
esteemed so highly of, that when afterward Rubens was to go into Spain, he
could not tell what better Argument to use, to entice him thither, then to tell
him of the sight thereof; and when he observed therein some Images, which
either through Age or bad usage were defaced, he would needs have from Rome, a
Model in plaster of another, in which he had observed the like figures, that
after the example thereof, he might cause them to be repaired. Also he was
comforted by one Barbleus of Colen, an industrious young man, and skilled in
Physic, who made him paper spheres of all sorts, that is to say, according to
the Hypotheses of Ptolomy, Copernicus, Ticho, and others. Nor must I forget,
how he was exceedingly refreshed with the exceeding courteous society of
Jacobus Lorinus a Jesuit, who had commented upon the Psalms, who when he first
returned from Rome, came to him at Avenion, and bestowed upon him a treatise of
Bellarmines, written with his own hand. Finally to divert himself, he read at
that time a Book termed Arelatense Pontificium, made by Petrus Saxius, a Canon
of Arles. But he took it very ill, that he I know not out of what respect, did
affect to set up the Rights of our Kings, and did not only not oppose, what
might justly be opposed, but went about unjustly to weaken the same: wherefore
he rested not, till by a decree of Parliament the Book was prehibited.

Peireskius was now a little better, when after diverse Letters, both from the
Cardinal Legate, and Putean the Knight, and others dated at Madrid, he was
informed that the Cardinal was to return, and would pass through Marseilles,
in the beginning of September. Thither therefore he went, though not perfectly
recovered, and expected the Cardinals arrival certain days. But he lost his
labor; because, he having a good wind, sailed by, and stayed only a little
while at Tolon; whence he sent some of the rarest things he brought with him
out of Spain to Aix, and excused himself. Which when Peireskins received, he
returned thanks by Letters; in some of which he carefully recommended
Christophorus Puteanus a Carthusian, whose learning and innocent conditions,
did sufficiently testify, that he was Brother to the Puteans of Paris. I stand
not to relate how well the Cardinal took the said Recommendation; for Putean
himself wrote, that he was unable to express, what good will and civility he
had found. Only I think it more pertinent to say, that Putean held a most
brotherly correspondence with Peireskius; for no kindness ever lay in his
power, which he did not do for him.

Here I must nor forget how about the same time he recommended Josephus Maria
Suaresius of Avenion, a very learned young man, who was by that means received
into the Family of the Cardinal. Nor must I forget Lucas Holstenius, the
Darling of learned men, an Hamburger, who was also not long after admitted into
the said family, 1627,
after that his Virtue had bin made known to Peireskius, by the commendations
of the Puteans, and to the Cardinal, by the commendations of Peireskius, when
he was at Paris. Both of them verily did afterward testify their thankfulness,
and by frequent learned Letters, did merit that favor: as for Peireskius, he
let slip no occasion, where by he might do either of them any good.

In the Winter he was again vexed with Rheumatick defluxions, and pains in his
Kidneys; yet did he not cease to write diverse Letters, but principally to the
Puteans, by whose help he was wont to brag, that he saw nigh at hand, all that
was done in the World; as by the help of the Prospective Glass he saw things,
ordinarily out of sight, in the Heavens. Among other things, he showed the
Reason why the Taxes anciently set upon men, came in process of time to be so
diminished. For seeing (quoth he) our forefathers and Ancestors expressed the
rates of the said taxes by Florens [coine so called] which were then of Gold,
and were of greater value then the Solati, it is come to pass, that because
Florens were then valued at twelve silver shillings, or Spur-royals, a Tax of
a Floren is now satisfied with twelve shillings; whereas nevertheless, these of
ours have so far degenerated from the ancient ones, that six of ours amount not
to the value of one of those. We may now say eight, and shortly ten: so that
they who would lay Taxes, which shall not lessen in process of time, must
learn, not to express them by pounds Tours, or any other kind of vulgar money;
but they must estimate them by Corn or some other yearly increase of the Earth,
and compel them to pay accordingly. For seeing the fruitfulness or barrenness
of the same grounds, is much one and the same at all times; the price of the
fruits of the Earth, must needs keep much at one and the same: But the usual
value of money, does not in like manner continue, but continually decreases, as
has bin formerly declared.

Moreover, 1627.
Valavesius did in the mean time, return from Paris, and the business of Rians,
after so many years invincible suits, was finished by arbitration. The year
1627. was beginning, when taking breath after the cares of such like
businesses, he resolved the next Vacation, to take a view of whole Provence, to
gather Inscriptions, partly such as he had not, and partly such as had bin ill,
or unfaithfully taken; and that to gratify the foresaid Donius, who having an
huge Volume of Inscriptions, such as were not in Gruterus, ready for the
Press, he was desirous to interweave those of Provence, which Peireskius
should collect. And he had not indeed leisure to perform what he intended: yet
nevertheless, he left not to solicit Donius, to put out his work, hoping that
in the mean while, there would be a fardle of Provincian to join to the same;
for he liked better, that they should be put all together at the end of the
Book (as the Spanish ones were in Gruters Volume) than that they should be
confusedly interposed here and there, as was usual in others.

Moreover, he began upon this occasion, to treat with Donius, not only touching
Inscriptions, but (he being really a man variously and plentifully learned)
touching his Onomasticon, his Musical work, his Convivales; touching Hetrusian
moneys, certain Justinian Coins, of the ancient kind of Weapons, and many such
like things.

He treated also about the same time, with Nicolaus Rigaltius, his Majesty's
Library Keeper, famous for his very rare learning, touching the Exposition of
those Riddles of Virgil, concerning certain Lands, in which there grew Flowers
with the names of Kings written upon them; and Lands where the Heavens appeared
but three else wide. And when by way of answer he received touching the former,
certain rare observations touching Flowers, strangely variegated in their
colors; and touching the latter, that interpretation which is usually given
concerning a Well, he called to mind among other things, how that a Well was
dug at Rians, out of which a very small quantity of Heaven must needs be seen,
when as in the daytime, at the bottom thereof, a man might see the Stars: the
eyes being plunged as it were by the depth, into the darkness of night, and the
sight of the eye by dilatation (as is wont to happen in a dark place) receiving
plentiful species, or representations, even of the smallest things.

There was then newly come to be Archbishop of Aix, Alphonsus Plesseus
Richelius, a Praelate of remarkable learning, and rare piety, taken from among
the Carthusians; and Peireskius perceiving that he exceedingly loved him, he
used all diligence in the continual testification of his Respects and Service,
thereby to approve himself worthy of his Love. When he went to visit Marseilles
he bore him company, and by that means, he there saluted Gabriel Albaspiuaeus,
Bishop of Orleance, who was then retired thither, and was studying about a
work, which was afterward printed, of the mystery of the Eucharist. In which
he made frequent mention of Books, communicated by Peireskius, calling him, The
Love and delight of Learning, and the Ornament of Provence. Afterward also he
strongly assisted the Archbishop, in the settling of a public Post, who
carrying Packets of Letters every week, by Posthorses to Lions, and bringing
the like from thence, might hold also a weekly intercourse with the Parisians.
And he had indeed long desired such a thing, and more then once endeavored the
same, as a thing of public advantage, and grateful to his friends: but none
before him had sufficiently animated the Archbishop, nor could the Parliament
of Provence be ever persuaded to allow the charges.

Great was the joy occasioned hereby, as of all learned men, who desired to
receive frequent letters from Peireskius, so especially of the Puteans, who by
this means could both frequently, and easily send him what ever newly ptinted
Books, or other novelties; and he also could send them with like facility, what
ever he obtained out of Italy, Africa, and the whole East. For from this time
forward, he kept a more frequent correspondence then ordinary, with the Consuls
and Merchants, resident in all the Eastern parts; that by their means he might
procure Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic Books, with others written in the oriental
Languages.

Whereupon, he soon obtained some, as namely, from Cyprus, an excellent Book,
Peri Aretes cai Cacias, about Virtue and Vice, of Constantinus Porphyrogeneta,
containing collections out of Polybius, Diodorus, Nicolaus Damascenus, and
other Historians, out of which diverse deficiencies in noble Authors might be
made up. It is not to be believed, how small a thing he valued two hundred
pounds Tours, which he gave for this Book, were it only that he conjectured, it
was the Emperors own individual Book, which he had for his own use, because of
the shape of the Letters and their elegancy, the neatness of the binding, and
rare Verses prefixed in praise thereof. Also he obtained that which he had long
sought for, viz. certain Councels of the Christian Bishops, after the recovery
of the Holy Land; for he had long bin persuaded, that there was some Copy, or
other, of them to be had in those parts. He had indeed formerly caused some of
them to be written out of the Vatican Library.

About the same time he wrote unto all parts to assist Holstenius, who was
laboring about the edition of a Noble pack of ancient Geographers. He chiefly
wanted a Description of Thracian Bosphorus, made by Diony sius Byzantius, which
Petrus Gyllius made use of (but only in Latin and imperfect) in describing the
said Bosphorus. And because he thought it likely, that the Greek Text might be
found among the Books of the Cardinal of Armenia, of whose Family Gyllius was:
therefore Peireskius so wrought, that the Bishop of Ruten, searched all the
Library over, and at last sent him a Catalogue thereof, to assure him, that
there was no such Book there to be found. You may be sure he spared not to send
Letters to the Popes Nuncio's, to the Kings Ambassadors, to all the learned men
he knew, (amongst whom verily, I must not forbear to name that same rare Bishop
of Tolouse, Carolus Monchalius, out of whose wealthy Storehouse, so many rare
Manuscripts were brought) that he might at least be assured, there was no such
Book to be found. And it is doubtless, scarce credible, that it is any where
extant: since it has escaped the so great Sagacity of that man. For the same
Holstenius said, not without cause, in a Letter to him, For it has not yet bin
my hap to see any mortal Man surmounting you in the knowledge of Antiquity, or
that could match you in the diligence and felicity of your Researches.

While he was thus busied, he received a Book from the abovenamed Johannes
Jacobus Chiffletius, Physician in ordinary to the Infanta Isabella, touching
the Iccian Port, from which Julius Caesar set sail for Britain. And he easily
dissented from that Opinion which held, Callis to be the Port aforesaid;
however, he wished, that rare man would make a more diligent search, all that
Coast over, and though he had acutely proved that Mardike was the port, yet
that he should consider, whether that name were applyable to a Port, extant in
these days of ours. And the farther Port we read of, seems not to be
interpreted the inferior Port, so as to mean the inferior Coast, which is under
Audomaropolis, and is parceld out by pools of standing water; but rather the
Western, so as to signify one that is nearer, and from whence the passage into
Britain is shorter. But nothing was more delightful to him, then to read
withal that in the Audomaropolitan Lake, there are floating Islands, which
bear both Men and Beasts; and whereupon Alder-Trees, and Willowes, do
pleasantly flourish. Wherefore he was desirous two years after, when I was to
travel that way, that I should take a curious view thereof, and report the
business to him, which I did, and sent him a branch, which I plucked off from a
tall Willow, which swum about, with the ground it grew upon.

He was also sollicitous about that time, touching the observation of that
Article, by which the Council of Trent, condemned clandestine Marriages; nor
did he cease, till he had persuaded certain scrupulous Ecclesiastic Judges,
that it was not only ratified by the Kings Authority in Parliament; but also by
special Decrees of the Metropolitan Synods of this Province. I forbear to
mention, with what ardency he did solicit Aleander, that he would seriously
set himself to describe that Earthquake, with which Aqulia was shaken from the
last day save one of July, and with which the Arch Bishopric of San-severinas,
was reported to be swallowed up, in the Month of September.

Other things I pass over, only I must needs relate his rare modesty, which
made him change the Epistle of a Book, dedicated to him. That Book contained
some spiritual Treatises of Saint Diadochus, Nilus, and Hesychius, which
Aleander Fichetus, a very learned Jesnite printing at Lewis, would needs
dedicate to him. Now he usurped the Booksellers name, and thought he had used
no Hyperbole in commending Peireskius, whose virtue he sufficiently saw, when
he professed Philosophy at Aix, and was a public preacher there. But
Peireskius himself would not bear it; but being to send some Copies to Rome (as
there was no new thing which he did omit to send) he caused that Epistle to be
laid aside, and another to be printed, and prefixed to the Books he sent. In
the Epistle which he would have omitted, were these passages; Your Table, your
House, your Study, are a Starry firmament of all wits, wherein the Heavenly
Constellations, the Stars of all Learning and learned men do briefly shine; so
that all things therein are not guilt with Gold or Silver, but shine as Stars:
the Desks are filled with Stars, where the Books stand like Constellations; and
your self sitting in the midst, and embracing all, give light to all, add grace
to all, bestow life as it were, and eternity upon all; so that to you all
well-writ Books through the world, as the sacred fires of good minds, do strive
to mount as to their Heaven, to receive light from you, and shine again upon
you, etc.

This Epistle brings into my mind, how the year following, when he had received
one of those Books termed Coelum Christianum, begun by Joannes Bayerns, and
finished by Julius Schillerius, Peireskius commended indeed their piety, in
giving to the Planets, instead of the usual names, those of Adam, Moses, and
the Patriarchs; and giving to the twelve signs the names of the Apostles, and
to other Constellations the names of other Saints, or holy things; besides,
figures newly invented, and new Verses made of them but he liked not the design
of perverting all the knowledge of the Heavenly Bodies, which from all
Antiquity, is sprinkled up and down, in all kinds of Books. Howbeit, he was not
seriously afraid, lest therefore Astronomers would change all the names of the
Stars; because they might easily see, they should get no advantage, but much
disturbance thereby. He added, that those ancient Figurations of the Stars,
though profane, were no hinderance to Christian piety; and himself had long
ago observed these Images, which had bin painted upon the vaulted roof of the
Church at Vercellis, a thousand two hundred years ago. Finally he wished, the
same industrious hand, which had engraven these new ones, had expressed those
at Vertillis, commendable for their great Antiquity.

He did much more commend that work of the Rudolphin Tables, which was then
published by Kepler. For seeing they were collected out of the most accurate
observations of the new Atlantis of Ticho Brahe, he judged rightly, that by
their means a more exact knowledge of the celestial motions might be had, then
by any others. And therefore because that work was many years exposed;
therefore he maturely collected div^^s observations, by which they might be
examined. And in a special manner, he entreated the Assistance of those
excellent men Petrus Franciscus Tondutus San-legerius, a Lawyer of Avenion: and
Jacobus Valesius Scotus, General Treasurer in Dauphine; both of them
excellently skilled in all Mathematical Arts, but especially in Astronomy. Also
he was assisted by both of them, to amend diverse faults of the Press; 1628.
and because the latter signified, that he had instructed Eleazar Feronceus, an
industrious Gardner of Herbs, and a very ingenious man, to observe the
celestial Bodies: therefore Peireskius labored to get from him in particular
some observations.

I pass over, how he would needs also have and keep by him some observations
of mine, before I left Paris (wherefore I sent him my Tables) and among the
rest, my observations of that late Eclipse of the Moon, whose chief appearances
being observed at Aix, did show that the middle thereof was in the same year,
the 20. of January, at nine a Clock, and three fifths. Now he sent it to Paris,
Rome, Florence, Padua, Lovain, and other places, that if happily the like
observation had bin made, the difference of the interceding Meridians might be
calculated. For he was always desirous to see Geography reformed, about which
he then wrote to Petrus Bertius, exhorting him, that together with the Edition
of Eusebius, he would hasten the sacred Geography which he had promised. Not to
speak, how he dealt with him to persuade him, that he would set out a Map of the
World, according to the various descriptions of Dionysius, Strabo, Pliny,
Ptolemaeus, and others.

That I may add somewhat touching observations, he exceedingly desired, that
some Interpreter might be found out, who could explain the Figures and
Characters, which were evidently to be seen upon a fragment of Brick-work;
which was, not long before, dug up at Babylon, and sent to him; for he
conjectured it was some of that Brick-work, upon which Pliny tells us (from
Epigenes) that the Babylonians wrote the Observations which they made of the
Stars, for seven hundred and twenty years. Upon which occasion, he was much
taken to consider, that it should come into the mind of certain good men,
doubtless, to ingrave an Inscription upon a stone, at the Gate of the Chapel,
which stands overlooking a Rock at Druentia near Mirebel, of which he was
informed by a friend of his, Joannes Gallaupius Castuellius, who was Heir of
his Fathers Virtues, and Auditor of his Majesty's Accounts. For the said
Inscription contains nothing else but a memorial of that Eclipse of the Sun,
which happened upon the third of the Nones of June, in the year 239. of which
he had formerly notice out of certain Registers; and namely, of our Church; in
which also there is mention of another, seen in the year 1415. on Friday being
the 7th of June, an hour after Sunrise, of so great darkness, that the Stars
might most clearly be seen.

He had heard a little before, of the death of Jacobus Allealmus the
Mathematician: for which he was exceeding sorrowful, fearing the loss of
certain works, both of his own, and of Franciscus Vieta, the most renowned
Geometrician. Even as, not long after, hearing of the death of Fontaneus, he
feared the loss of many rarities and Manuscripts; amongst which he was wont to
commend a Book of Alciats de Rebus Mediolanensibus, written with his own hand.
And it was his desire that rare and good Manuscripts, if they were not quickly
printed, should be kept rather in public, then private Libraries; because, by
that means, they would be less subject to miscarriage. But he desired withal,
that there were some men that should take care, to bring to light by printing,
such as had lain too long in obscurity in the Libraries; for which cause, when
he wrote to Cardinal Barborine, he was very earnest with him, beseeching him,
that out of the great good will he bore to learning, he would cause the Vatican
Printery to be set on work again, that so many rare Greek Manuscripts, might
come abroad into the World. And this he was occasioned to do, by the generous
design of Michael Jayus a Citizen of Paris, who set up a Printery, in which
there was already begun an Edition of the Bible, which would be more complete,
then that which is called Plantains, and the King of Spains Bible; and because
at Rome, Holstenius was willing to take pains in the business.

Also he had heard of a dissertation, which I had long since with Merindolus,
touching the passage of Chyle into the Liver. For I found a way by the Porus
cholidochus so called, the Veins of the Mesentery being obstructed. Having
therefore writ him word, that there was a Book published by Gasper Asellius
Anatomist at Ticinum, wherein he showed how he had discovered certain milky
veins in the Mesentery (besides the commonly noted red ones) which probably
carried the Chylus; he speedily got diverse of the Books, which he sent up and
down to Physicians, which were his friends, experimenting in Dogs, Sheep, Oxen,
and most kind of Animals besides, that which Asellius had written touching his
rare invention. Also when I had given him notice, that Dr. William Harvey, an
English Physician, had set out an excellent Book of the passage of the blood
out of the Veins, into the Arteries, and back out of the Arteries into the
Veins, by secret Anastomoses; and that among other Arguments, he confirmed the
same, by the valves of the Veins, touching which, he had heard somewhat from
Aquapendens, and whose Inventer he was wont to say, was Father Paul Sarpi of
Venice; he would thereupon needs both have the Book, and search out those
valves, and know other things, as those winding passages in the Septum of the
heart, which Harvey denied, but I made appear unto him.

In like manner, being told of the many-pointed tongues of flies, which might
be plainly seen by an Augmenting-glasse; he made many experiments in Insects of
like nature, and especially in Bees, that he might thereby give occasion to
Rigaltius, to mend and illustrate Pliny his Chapter of Bees. Likewise, when
Grotius had signified that there was a many headed Insect, which bred in pieces
of Wood, fallen into the Sea; he did not only look into all Authors, which had
written of any such thing; but he enquired of all Fishers, and other curious
persons, inhabiting upon the Seacoast; and prevailed so far at last that he
found out, if not the same thing, yet a Fish with seven heads, and bodies as it
were in the middle, of unequal length, implanted round about into a certain
navel, or thick Cake, as it were.

These, and such things as these, he spent his thoughts about, when he enjoyed
any rest from the frequent pains of the Hemorrhoids and Strangury. And whereas
in the month of September, to recreate himself, he went to Beaugensier, he
returned time enough, on the last day of the month to be present at a
Town-meeting, and to give beginning thereto, by an excellent Oration: at which
meeting the Consuls of Aix, who were also Proctors of Provence, were wont to be
chosen. Not long after, he was informed of the death of Malherbius his very
good friend, which he took very sadly. And though he conceived, that not only
himself, but all the French Muses, were called upon to mourn; yet was he
comforted, because he saw one to succeed him, who was both his loving friend
and umpire of the French language and Poetry, the excellent Johannes
Capellanius, in whom he always admired to see learning joined with the study
of Wisdom, and gentleness of manners with candor of mind.

Afterward he received a Copy of the Genealogical History of the Royal Family
of France, which the San-Marthani had set forth, and wherein they had mentioned
him with praise, by reason of a Manuscript of Matthaeus Giovanazzius, touching
the Kings of Sicily of the house of Anjou, which he had furnished them with.
And whereas at the same time, a good and learned man Dominicus a Jesu Maria, a
Carmelite Friar, being about to write of the Saints which had been of the Royal
Family, did desire some Monuments of him; there was nothing of which he was
more desirous to inform him, then of Charles the second King of Sicilie, and
Earl of Provence. For being dead he is had in veneration, his whole Body being
kept even to this day at Aix; and in his life time he was so happy; as to see
his son Lewis designed Bishop of Tolouse, and dying before him in repute for
holiness, he saw him put into the Catalogue of Saints; and consequently made
prayers to him: and left money in his will to build the Minories Church at
Marseilles to his honor.

Afterward he labored not a little, that a Channel might be made through
Druentia, or the river Verdun, which runs through Druentia to Aix. For he
conceived, that the City would then flourish and grow rich, when by help of
such a Channel, it might traffic for all necessary Commodities, both with the
upper part of Provence and with the Sea. Seventy years ago Adamus Craponus
Salonensis, had brought a Channel from Druentia, into the stony Feilds so
called, or whole Crautia, and designed this to Aix; and because there was now
need of another Architect or designer of the Works, therefore he wrote into the
Low Countries, to get one of those men, that designed the Channels which were
made in that Country, and that were newly endeavoring to unite the Scaldis
and Mosa, waters so called. And it seemed, that what he had generously
propounded might be happily effected; but that the Plague which happened the year
following, 1629. and the disturbance thereby occasioned, with his diversion to
Beaugensier, did quite frustrate his intentions.

But before we speak of these matters, we must touch upon some things, that he
endeavored in the mean season. In the first place therefore, by occasion of
the aforesaid Edition of the Bible newly begun, he was not content to have
given notice of, and procured from Rome to be sent to Paris a Samaritan Bible,
1629.
which was in the custody of that learned man and advancer of all good
literature, Petrus Valleus, a Senator of Rome; but he sent, himself, into the
East, a sagacious person, Theophilus Minutius of the Order of Minims, to search
for further helps, having first obtained for him a License, both from the Pope,
and from the General of his Order, and providing that he should neither want
money to bear his charges, nor to purchase such Books as were necessary for the
design in hand. And truly he failed not of his Exspectation; for he by very
good luck, soon found and obrained a Samaritan Bible, with the Hebrew and
Arabic joined therewith, (howbeit in the Samaritan Character) and two Syriack
Testaments besides, and many Arabic Books. Nor must it be forgotten, That
Daniel Dayminius, one of those Franciscans whom they call Recollects, took
great pains that these and other Books with diverse Coins, might come into the
hands of Minutius.

Also he gave order to search in Cyprus for those Books, in the company of
which, the Collections of Porphyrogenita aforesaid were found: but they were so
scattered, that they could not be found by any search, though never so
diligent; which grieved him exceedingly, because he judged, by one of the rest,
as of the Lion by his claw, and was in great hopes. And therefore, that learned
Men might, at least, not be frustrated of the benefit thereof, he thought good
to send it to Paris, that Grotius, Salmasius, and other learned Men, every man
in his way might peruse the same, and collect therefrom what he thought most
useful. Moreover, Hugo Grotius was a prime man that made use thereof, who at
his request presently set himself to write out and explain, the illustrious
fragments of Nicolaus Damascenus, which he also with an Epistle dedicatory,
sent to him.

And while there was another that was doing the like by the rest of the Work,
he was desirous in the mean while to procure a second Edition of the
Pharmacopeia of Antonius Constantinus, a Physician of Protence: who about
thirty years before, had endeavored to show, That there was no need of exotic
Plants, and outlandish Medicaments; since by the benignity of Nature, the same
Country which gives men their Birth, does provide both meats sufficient to
nourish, and Medicaments able to cure them. Therefore he sent that Copy, which
he had of the said Book to Renatus Moreus, a great light of the Faculty of
Physic in Paris, who was very well contented to undergo that charge.

About this time, he received a Golden Book of the learned Seldom, De
Arrundellianis Marmocoribus, or Stones with Greek Inscriptions, which that most
renowned Earl of Arundel, had caused to be brought out of Asia into England,
and placed in his Gardens. And it is indeed fit you should know, that those
Marbles were first discovered by the industry of Peireskius and dug up, fifty
Crowns being paid therefore, by one Samson, who was his Factor at Smyrna; and
when they were to be sent over, Samson was, by some trick or other of the
Sellers, cast into Prison, and the Marbles in the mean while made away. Nor
must it be forgotten, how exceedingly Peireskius rejoiced, when he heard that
those rare Monuments of antiquity, were fallen into the hands of so eminent an
Hero; and the rather, because he knew his old friend Seldom had happily
illustrated the same. For, his utmost end being public profit, he thought, it
mattered not whether he or some other had the glory, provided, that what was
for the good of the Commonwealth of Learning, might be published. Now he
conceived, that an inestimable Treasury was contained, especially in those
Greek Inscriptions, which do much illustrate and make known, not only the
Historical, but the Fabulous times also: seeing they describe all things
memorable from the space of eight hundred years before the Olympiads, to five
hundrd and thirty after their beginning.

Moreover, he communicated to diverse friends the part of an Epitaph, which
Adrianus Caesar wrote, over the Horse Borysthenes, which dyed (it should seem)
and was buried in these parts. For a Marble stone was dug up in the fields of
Apt, containing that part of the Epitaph; the remainder being as yet unfound
and undug up. Which Marble Peireskius caused to be brought to his House: and in
the mean while, because the Inscription, about which famous Authors had
contended, might be corrected by this noble Original; therefore he sent thief
Verses to all learned men, copied from that Marble, upon which they were
engraven, in a most near character.

BORYSTHENES ALANUS CAESAREUS VEREDUS PER AEQUOR ET PALUDES ET TUMULOS ETRUSCOS
VOLARE QUI SOLEBAT PANNONICOS IN ARROS NEC ULLUS INSE QUENTEM DEN. Which may
thus be englished,

BORYSTHENES OF ALANUS CAESAR HIS POSTHORSE USED TO FLY OVER THE PLAINS AND
POOLES AND HETRUSCAN HILLOCKS HUNTING PANNONIAN BOARES. Now it is well enough
known, that among those ancient poetical pieces set forth by Petrus Pithoeus,
that whole Epitaph, is readespecially the last of these verses, after this
manner. PANNONICOS NEC ULLUS APROS INSEQUENTEM DENTE APER ALBICUM AUSUS FUIT
NOCERE etc. for he could not tell how otherwise to perfect the said Verses. And
Casaubeon writing upon that passage of Lampriaius, touching Adrian, He was so
great a lover of Horses and Dogs, that he set Tombs over them, relates indeed
this Inscription; but changes nothing of what Pithoeus had done. But Salmasius,
according to his quickness of Wit, endeavoring to salve the sore, conceived it
might thus be read, PANNONICOS NEC ULLUS APROS EUM INSEQUENTEM: but there is
now no need of conjectures, seeing the Table it self is extant.

I pass over, how occasioned by this Inscription, he sent to Angusburge to
know, if that piece of Coin were any where to be had, which Adolphus Occo
mentioned with this In cription on the one side KAIAP SENO ADPIANO, and on the
other side OPYSTHENES with a Gravestone, and an Horse upon it: and how
thereupon discoursing of the flattery of the Greeks in commending the Emperors
affection to this Horse, he accounted it no wonder; seeing they also (and not
the Egyptians alone) raised Antinous his beloved Boy into the very Heavens. He
did likewise communicate the Titles of Constantine inscribed upon a certain
Mile-stone which was dug up at Freius; and the delineation of other Mables
newly dug up, whereon was the Portraiture of Bacchus with the various
incantations of Circe: not to speak of his explications of certain figures
belonging to Plays, and the Thyrsi or Javelins wrapped with Ivy, together
with the Vitta or Garland, and Thistle or Pine apple on the top.

Also, he was very desirous to know what I thought of those Par-helia or diverse
Suns, which were seen at Rome on the twentieth day of March, whose description
and delineation Cardinal Barberinus, having received from the learned and
laborious Christophorus Scheinerus a Mathematitian, of the society of Jesus, he
commanded they should be sent to him. And whereas he would that my opinion
should be published, this only is worth relation, how he received it with
applause, that after the natural consideration, I seemed to deride the opinion
of the common people, who conceive, that these Phenomenon are Presages of
things to come. Unless this be also worth relation, That there being at that
time five Suns seen, (or, besides the true Sun, four bastard ones) there was
hardly ever before so many Suns seen; and how it seemed a wonderful thing, when
the same Scheinerus, ten Months after, on the fourteenth of January, observed
seven Suns visibly appearing in the same City. And I may here add, that whereas
in the month of June, I was in the Low-Counrries, whither he wrote to me of
the appearing Suns, he took a great deal of care, lest by reason of the Plague,
which begun to be very rife in this City, my Library should receive some
prejudice.

But the infection had not spread so far as Aix, and the other lower parts of
Provence; when as, the King being in that part of Languedoe which is situate
immediately beyond Rhodanus, diverse came from the Court to visit and salute
Peireskius. Amongst the rest was Stephanus Haligraeus the Chancellor his Son,
newly returned from an Embassage to Venice; also Henricus Grandis Mr. of
Requests, and Ludovicus Peletarius, the Treasurer, who having taken up their
lodging at his house; when they understood that Thuanus being returned out of
the East, was landed at Marseilles, they all went presently thither with
Peireskius. There were also in Company Drusus Daubrayus Mr. of the Rowls (not
long after the Kings Overseer in point of Justice) Philippus Fortinus Hoguetta,
and others.

July following, he went with Oppedeus the first President, to salute the King.
By which means he saw very many of his Court friends; and when he was at
Nismes, he commended the rare virtue and learning of Samuel Petitus to certain
of the Nobility, as to Michael Marilliacus the Vice Chancellor, Antonius
Ruzaeus Marquess of Deffiat and Mr. of the Exchequer, and others. Petitus had
in hand, a bundle of miscellaneous observations upon good Authors; wherefore he
advised him, as to insert other things, so not to neglect the interpretation of
that Scene which in Plautus his Paenulus, is extant in the Punick tongue. When
he returned to Arles, he there round and obtained a Marriage Ring, touching
which he had many Discourses, by letters, with learned men, upon occasion of
this Inscription, TECLA VIVAT DEO CUM MARITO SEO.

After he was returned, there grew soon a suspicion, that the City was infected
with the Plague. Which he first of all heard in the beginning of August, from
which time he resolved to go to Beaugensier, and therefore he sent his family
before him. For, besides the mischief of the sickness, he foresaw there would
follow a great disturbance of the Orders or States of the City and was sensible
before hand, that his strength would not suffice him to take such pains as
would be requisite, to the stilling of commotions, and keeping off, such
imminent mischiefs as do threaten the City. Yet he was resolved to make trial,
lest he should seem wanting to his Country, and the common safety thereof; yet
was he constrained to depart in the midst of September, having shut up some
servants in his house, to look to the household stuff, and so much of his
Library and Rarities, as he took not with him. He spent at Beaugensier forty
days according to his custom, without any commerce, keeping himself within
his own House and Gardens. All which time he spent in the care of recovering
his health, (for he was not very well) and in manuring the Plants of his
Garden, and most pleasant walks. Also he entertained partly in his own house,
partly in other houses of the Town, diverse of hsi friends, with their families,
especially Bonifacius who were driven out of the City by the Plague;
Borrillius, an excellent man, and well stored with rarities.

Now the Disease raged in the City, 1630.
not only all that year, but part also of the following year 1630. And here I
should relate a great Tumult, which when the Plague ceased, was raised in the
City, and spread into other places, especially in the Autumn. But it would be
to little purpose to renew an unspeakable grief, much less to relate the
public and private causes, which set Heaven and Earth together by the ears. It
may suffice to say, That Peireskius his House hardly escaped plundering, the
next House to it being pillaged, and himself much affrighted, when word was
brought him, That the plunderers had got into his Library and his Closet of
rarities; but he was revived again, when he heard, That though they had
threatened to break in, yet they forbore.

Many visited him about this time, and amongst the rest, there stayed with him,
some pretty while, Henricus Gornaeus Earl of Marchaevilla, who was now upon
his departure, being to go as Ambassador from the King to the great Turk. Also
Philippus Bethunius, who having been formerly the Kings Agent at Rome, was
returned into France, and who afterward did in many Letters testify, how
exceedingly he missed his most delightful society. Likewise Philippus
Nunnesius, and Emmanuel Costaeus, whom being to go into Indie, he obliged by
all kindnesses and gifts possible, giving them Letters to Ludovicus Herriardus
resident at the Court of the great Mogul; and to Lopez Silvanus at Goa, and
others; that so he might procure, besides very many other rarities certain
fragments of Rocks, in which sundry sorts of Jewels were wont to breed.

In like manner Samuel Petitus, of whom we spoke before, stayed some time with
him, whom being suddenly to go to Paris, with what kindnesses he obliged, may
be best understood out of the Dedication of his Eclogae Chronologicae, which he
there printed not long after. For, My Soul (quoth ne) Illustrious Sir, by this
Dedication does witness to the world how much I honor you, how much I am
obliged to you; seeing there is no man this day alive, that is more obliged to
you than I; nor any that I am more obliged to, than to yourself. Yet so as this
Table dedicated to your name, and your name prefixed to this Book of mine, are
a Testimonial of the Hope which I have conceived of your future affection
toward me. For I implore your Patronage to me and mine. Nor must you,
illustrious Sir, deny me your Patronage, so God help you; for I am concerned in
it. For if these Books of mine shall appear under your name, there is no good
and learned man, but will approve of them, as having bin allowed by you, a man
of most exact judgment, and singular learning, etc.

Likewise Henricus Bormalius, a Canon of Leeds, famous for all kind of
learning, but especially for his happy Imitation of the Greek Poets, whom he
had kept longer with him, had not his Employments called him home.

In like manner, Jacobus Buccardus, a Parisian, adorned likewise with all kind
of learning, who that he might have the better leisure to study, and spend his
life in turning over Greek and Latin Authors, was resolved to go and live at
Rome. Wherefore being upon his journey thither, Peireskius detained him as long
as he could, and would have kept him all the Winter, but that he desired
rather, that his learning might become speedily famous in that great Theater of
the World. And therefore he not only gave him fatherly Instructions, but did so
recommend him in diverse Letters, that Cardinal Barberinus did not only receive
him, according to his accustomed humanity, but would needs forthwith enter him
into the Catalogue of such learned men, as he kept in his house. Also Antonius
Natalis a learned Physician, who having formerly his abode at Sivill, gave
occasion to his Commerce in America, and who now brought with him very rare
things out of the new World; and a year after, before he returned to Sivill, he
dedicated to him a certain Apology which he set forth against the Physicians.

Likewise Franciscus Gallaupius a Gentleman of Aix, very learned in the Hebrew
Tongue, and desirous to travel into the East, expected the return of
Marchaevillaeus, at Peireskius his house. He it was, unto whom and Lombardus he
had committed the chiefest care of observing the Eclipse of the Sun, which
happened on the 10. day of June. But in vain, because the Western Mountains,
intercepted the sight of the eclipsed Sun, so that they observed nothing but a
darkness in the Air. For the Sun was eclipsed in the West; for with us at
Paris, it was in a clear Horizon, being two digits obscured; and its greatest
Eclipse was eleven digits, and two and thirty minutes; and it began at six a
Clock, a quarter and a minute and half over.

He spent therefore his time, in the Company of such men as these; interposing
frequent reading, and the manuring of rare Plants; also he studied, and had
diverse discourses touching such things as turn to stone. As concerning Plants,
it may be expected, that I should in this place reckon up the principal of
them; yet I will not stand to speak of such, which though accounted rare, are
to be seen in other Gardens. I shall only touch at some of those which
Peireskius was the first, that caused to be brought into, and cherished in
Europe. Of which the Indian Gelsemine is one, a woody plant, always green,
with a clay-coloured yellowish flower, of a most sweet smell. This was first
brought from China, planted at Beaugensier, and from thence propagated into the
Kings and Cardinal Barberine his Gardens. Of these Joannes Ferrarius, a learned
Jesuit, wrote in those Books, which three years after he set forth touching
the manuring of Flowers. But, it must not be forgotten, that the Cardinal sent
to Beaugensier, a China Rose, the beauty whereof does wonderfully recompense
its want of smell.

The next is a Plant called Lifa, or the Gourd of Mecha, because it was brought
from Mecha, and may be called the silken Plant, because it bears plenty of
threads, not unlike silk, fit to wear into stuffs. Peireskius received at one
and the same time both seeds thereof, which he gave first to Viassius, to sow
and manure; also an whole gourd which within was full of threads, and a piece of
stuff woven thereof.

Also the true Papyrus Aegyptia or Egyptian paper, different from that, which
is described by Prosper Alpinus. For Peireskius received it out of the Country
of Saita, where the right kind is thought to grow. Yet I know not that he
experimented, whether Paper might be made thereof, which would bear Inck. For
whereas at first, seeing that it had broad tufts, he imagined the stalks might
be so wrought together, as that it might be writ upon; he afterward became of
another opinion.

Also the Indian Coco Nuts. Not that these Nuts had not formerly bin seen in
Europe; but because he did likewise try, whether they would grow in our
Climate. And he saw them bud; but whether through the coldness of the Air, or
because they were not well looked to, they came not to that perfection which he
desired.

In the next place, Ginger, which being brought out of India did wax green in
his Garden, from whence it was sent to Paris, to Vidus Brosseus, a famous
Physician, the chief storer of the Kings Garden, and principal shewer thereof;
from whom, and the forenamed Vespasianus Robinus, who was under Brosseus, he
obtained very rare plants.

I say nothing of the broad-leaved Myrtle, with the full flower of the Storax,
and Lentisc-Tree, which yields Mastick: and other plants mentioned before. Much
less shall I speak of the great American Gelsemine, with the Crimson-coloured
flower, nor of the Persian, with a violet-coloured flower, nor the Arabian with
a full flower: of the Orenge-Trees, with a red and parti-colored flower; of the
medlar and sour Cherry without stones; Adams Fig Tree; whose fruit Peireskius
conceived to be one of those which the Spies brought back, that went to view
the Land of Canaan; the rare Vines which he had from Tunis, Smyrna, Sidon,
Damascus, Nova Francia, and other places. Least of all, shall I stand to speak
of the care he took in ordering his knots, and planting his Trees in such
order, as to afford even walks every way between them; in bringing the water
every where into his Gardens; in providing that the tenderer sort of Plants
might receive no damage by the Winters cold, in sending for the most skilful
Florists, to turnish himself with all variety of Flowers: in a word, omitting
nothing that might beautify and adorn his Grounds.

I shall rather tell you, that he made diverse experiments, touching the seeds
and buds of diverse Plants, and ingrafting one thing upon another. But his chief
delight was to engraft, not only Gelsemine upon the Myrtle, but also the Apian,
or Musk-Vine, that he might experiment what a kind of thing the Myrtle Wine
was, anciently so called. And having found by experience that there was a
stone, out of which Mushrumps would grow in a moist place; he found out at
last, that the said supposed stone, was nothing but an huge Buck-fist, or
Toad-stool, reduced to the hardness of a stone. And when as Renatus Moreus
acquainted him out of Mercurius Gallobelgicus, that there was an hand which
grew up out of a Pulpit, he advised him to enquire, if it were not one of those
branched Toadstools which are wont not only to grow out of those stones, but
also out of rotten wood: and whether it were not some imposture, or the
credulity of people, which had raised that fable touching the motion of the
fingers of the said hand. But thus much may suffice, concerning Plants.

Touching his study about such things as are turned to stone, I must speak more
largely, because he had plenty of such kind of rarities, and most frequent
occasion to discourse thereof: and he many times carried his guests that were
curious of such things, to the places themselves, that he might make his
opinion more probable. When therefore in that Hill which is called Collis
Defensus, there were found Comb-fashion'd, Oister-fashion'd, Horn-fashion'd
stones, and others otherwise figured; and in the field which is called, as it
is indeed, the long field, and in the Grotte de Guerin, there were found Leaves
of Oaks, Alders, Holmes, Elms, Nut-Trees, Poplars, Ivy, Bays, and other
Trees, turned after such a manner into stones, that by their Fibers, and
toothed sides, they declared from what Trees they came: he began thereupon to
canvas over again, and to strengthen his old opinion touching the generation of
all kind of stones. For he was not of opinion, that all stones were created at
the beginning of the World: but he conceived, that in progress of time many
were made in such manner, as to owe their original to their matter, and certain
peculiar seeds; receiving their shape, partly from nature, partly by chance.
For the matter of all them being water, or some other liquor or juice, he
conceived that in diverse places were contained diverse seeds of things, and
particularly of stones, which being mingled with the liquor, does curdle the
same, as milk is curdled by the runnet, and imprint its particular form
thereupon. Consequently, That Crystals, Diamonds, and the like stones are made,
when their seeds meet with a transparent liquor, such as they are only capable
to perfect; and other stones, when their seeds meet with a more troubled and
obscure Liquor. And because at that time the foresaid liquor must be contained,
and rest quiet in some cavity and Vessel as it were, or conceptacle: thence it
comes to pass, that even those precious stones, have a thick obscure bottom;
both because the conceptacle is for the most part earthy and unciean; and
because what ever thickness is in the liquor, settles downward, and therefore
makes the Coagulation more dull in the bottom. And that while they are in
coagulation, they are parted, and multiplied, as the grains of an ear of corn,
within the sheath; that Crystal obtains an oblong six-sided figure, the
Smaragd, a twelve-sided figure, the Adamant and Rubie an eight sided figure,
and so of others: this he said, sprung from their peculiar seeds; by means of
which, stones receive their proper shapes, as constantly and regularly, as
Plants and Animals.

As for what concerns the shapes of Oystershels, Snails, Cockles, Periwinkles,
and innumerable other things: this happens by chance; for the living Creatures
being dead, it happens, that their shells and coverings, become the conceptacles
of the foresaid petrifying humor, which being coagulated and hardened, puts on
the shape of the thing containing; after which manner also, Star-shapen stones
may be made, of the cast Skins of certain Worms, being variously creased and
dented.

Moreover, That the more subtle part of the humor, pierces into the very shell
it self, and turns that also to stone, though it become more brittle (so that
in many it will not hang together) continuing nevertheless, whiter then that
which is contained within the same; which besides the thicker parts of the
liquor, may have some of the substance, of the corrupt animal, mingled with it.
And therefore, that it was no wonder, that not only within these shells, but
sometimes also within Crystal, and other transparent stones, we see strawes,
flies, and such like things: the same things happening accidentally to be in
the Conceptacle or Liquor, when it hardens into a stone. And that the leaves of
Plants did turn to stone after the same manner, as the shells aforesaid, viz. a
pure humor soaking into them, which if it be impure, it forms a thick stone
round about, as was seen in a certain stone which he kept in his study, which
being cloven asunder, a flower was contained therein, turned to stone. And so
he conceived the bones of men, and other things, were turned to stone.

And as for the Generation of those many-sided stones, he argued from the
conformation of Salt and Alum, according to their proper figures. And as for
other stones, he called to mind first, what, we said, he observed in his young
years, when he was swimming, in the smaller stream of Rhodanus, into which the
little River Sorga disburthens it self. For he had withal observed, that the
River Sorga was at that time more troubled then ordinary, by reason of an
Earthquake, which happened at the Head thereof; and that by reason that
Rhodanus did then swell with a tempest, it over-flowed for certain days
together. Whence he also reasoned, that it was possible by that concussion of
the Earthquake, that stony Spawn or seed, might be voided forth of the Earth,
and so carried with the waters, that being mingled with the mud, which by
reason of the overflowing aforesaid, did settle and grow together, by little
and little, it might form stones thereof.

Again, as for what concerns the hardening of the said stones; he called to
mind those three stones, which John Brown the Surgeon had given him, which
were newly taken out of the bladder of an Infant. For whereas that which came
first out, was perfectly hard, the second soft, and the third like to run in a
manner; they were all nevertheless a few days after, of the same hardness.

And whereas stones that abide long in the bladder, are supervested with diverse
crusts, by reason of the addition of new matter; he said, it it was the same
thing which we observe in diverse Caves, or Sellers, where the stony water
dropping from above, makes diverse sorts of stones. And whereas diverse grains of
Gravel, being contained in the Bladder, are there cemented together by a clammy
stony humor falling from the Kidneys; he showed that it was the same thing
which happened many times in Mountains and Rivers. For we see many Rocks, which
consist of many small stones, some common matter cementing the same, which
necessarily did afterward become of a stony nature. And he himself had in his
study an Horse-shoo taken out of Druentia, which was so compassed about with
small pibbles from the River, that another stony substance, did join them one
unto another, and all unto the Horse-shoo. The same was leen in a Sword and an
Iron Ring, taken out of the River Rhodanus; and the same in a great Brass
Nail, which being taken out of the Seyne, was sent to him by Lomenius. Whence
he argued both touching the seed of stones, raked from the Mountains, and heads
of Rivers; and touching such stones as are bred daily in the channels of
Rivers; which kind of stones do also naturally incline to a round or oval
figure, save that according to the condition of the Conceptacle, or by rolling,
wearing and breaking, they may come to degenerate therefrom.

And that I may add an observation of his, touching that same stony Gravel; he
was the first that observed, that the said Gravel is naturally so shaped in the
form of a Lozenge or Rhombus, that being looked upon through an
augmentingGlasse, it seems nothing but an heap of little Rhombs joined
together. Whence it is not hard to explain the reason of that pain which Gravel
makes, when it is voided with the Urine; for the acute angles of every grane do
so prick and scratch the passage, that they provoke a most sharp pain.

And being upon a time questioned touching the flexibility or that Whet-stone,
which he received from Jacobus Hallaus of Paris, Master of the Accounts; le
reserred it to Talchum: for he conceived, that a certain moisture, fit to make
Talchum, was so commixed with sand, or those little grains, of which a
Whetstone is composed; that the thickness of the Whetstone, did hinder the
transparency of the Talchum; and the flexibility of the Talchum, did mar the
stifnes of the Wherstone.

So, being asked concerning the stones of Crautia, or the Herculean fields; he
supposed, that all that plain was in times past over-flowed with water, when
Druentia, or Rhodanus over-went their banks, and that the lapidifick spawn
being carried with the waters, did there hard en into stones. He proved it, by
what we see to happen in the Concretion of Salts. For as in a Vessel wherein
the water which is mixed with the salt, is evaporated, greater Cakes are found
in the bottom, then are sticking to the sides, because the saltness does there,
both longer and more abundantly reside: so in the middle of Crautia, which is
the lowest part, the stones are observed to be far greater, then about the
sides; especially in the Maritime and moorish parts, where the stones are
hardly so big as Nuts; whereas in the middle, the stones are for the most part,
as big as a man's head.

That which made the greatest difficulty was, the incredible multitude of
Fishes, Shell fish, and other Sea-Creatures, which were found turned to stone,
even upon the highest Mountain. But because he had observed in a long tow of
Hills, as far a; from Beaugensier, a certain Zone as it were, which was high,
but yet plain and parallel to the Horizon, and even-surface of the Sea, which
was full of such kind of Creatures turned to stone: he made no question, but
the Sea in arcient times had overflowed the same, at least he thought he might
have recourse to the flood of Noah, or to the Creation, before the waters were
gathered into one place. For he thought it unquestionable, that the Sea did by
little and little forsake some Countries, and overflow others; as Aristotle
proved touching Egypt, Polybius concerning the Euxine, and himself concerning
Arles, Ndus, Danubius Rhodanus, and other Ricers, making continents of the
Earth, which they continually bring along in their streams, so that in process
of time, both low places become high, and Seacoasts become Midland-Countries.
For which cause he wrote, that he believed the City of Venice would one time or
other be joined to the Continent, because in a certain tract of time, the
Continent had bin lengthened a thousand, and five hundred paces, or a mile and
half.

Moreover, from hence he made a conjecture touching the formation of Rocks,
which he conceived in the beginning of the world especially to be made by the
abundance of moisture overflowing the whole Earth, and the stony seed
intermingled with the said Earth. Whence it might come to pass, that when the
Rocks were not yet hardened, such Rivers as then brake forth and began to run,
might break their way through the Rocks, seeing those deep Channels on either
side whereof are high Rocks of unisorm contexture and altitude, could not be so
hollowed by the insensible wearing of the water, in case their hardness had
bin perpetual. And this peradventure was the Cause, that the water running from
East to West, and making an hollow way, where the Mediterranean Sea now is,
many Valleys were so opened, that the Rocks and Mountains kept the same
Situation from East to West: of which kind are not only the chief in this
Province, but the Pyrenaean and Appennine Hills, the Rhetian Alps in Europa:
Taurus in Asia: Atlas in Africa: and the most of our Hills are broken and
divided toward the Sea. And, that the Alps which border upon the Sea, and some
lesser Mountains and Valleys, have a contrary Situation, might proceed from
some particular Deflux of water: after the same manner, as we observe after the
overflowing of Rivers, the water which runs over the Banks, does plow up the
congested mud, and make ditches, and consequently swelling Banks, which are
Situate athwart the Rivers course. But of this Argument enough, and too much.

Also he was wont to hold learned discourses touching that Gyantly body dug up
at Tunis, of an almost immense magnitude, as Thomas Arcosius, a man doubtless
of various learning, did signify from those parts. For he wrote, that the
Scull would contain eight mellerolles of Provence, that is to say, a Paris
Bushel and an eighth part. A monstrous size questionless: and therefore
Peireskius advised Arcosius, to view all things with his own eyes, and to weigh
every thing scrupulously; Telling him, that the grinding Tooth which he had
sent him, might be either the Tooth of a very great Elephant, or of some kind
of Whale.

Moreover, he rejoiced much, both at the return of Minutius and for the finding
of a certain Tripod. For he returning with good success from Egypt, brought
many Books with him, especially written in the Coptick, that is to say, the
ancient Language and Character of Egypt; besides others which he had sent with
the Samaritan Books aforesaid. He brought also two Mumies ( viz. dead Bodies
embalmed after the most ancient and costly manner) one of which was very large,
entire, rare, and as by ornaments might be collected, the Body of some Prince.
He brought also some Coins, amongst the which he highly esteemed two Tetra
dragmes, the one Attick, the other Tyrian; and a piece of Coin of Hugo King of
Jerusalem and Cyprus.

As for the Tripod, it was dug up at Freius; and because it was not much above
a Foot high, Peireskius conceived, that it was one of those vetive Tripods,
placed in the Temples, and made in fashion of that principal one, on which
Phoebus standing, and drawing the Spirit from the cave beneath, did rave, and
was thought to utter Oracles. By occasion whereof, he afterward wrote diverse
Letters to Paris, Rome, and other places, to provoke the learned to discourse
of certain unknown mysteries of the Tripod. The middle hole of its threesided
Basis, is triangular, of circular lines: the extremities whereof suhain certain
Anticks which bear up the Bowl; but so that they merely touch one another, and
fall asunder with the least motion. So that he conceived, when that Spirit did
move it self, all Tripods must needs fall, some concussion of the parts being
made. Also, he argued that the Cortina was not that vessel (for the Pithonesse
did not ascend so high) but another Hemisphere of a scaly kind of surface (in
imitation of the skin of the Serpent Pithon killd by Apollo) with which the
foresaid hole was immediately covered: so that the Priest had the Cortine
beneath, and the Bowl hanging over.

Now he took pains only to express, and to approve by conjectures, what might
be meant by that curvi-lineal Triangle. Wherefore there was no learned man with
whom he did not consult thereabouts; himself in the mean time, both touching
that and other parts, pouring forth such streams of Learning, that all men
without controversy allowed him the Bays. Let us near Holstein in the name of
all the rest, For those things (quoth he) which you have written of this
subject, in a good long discourse to Father Putean, you should in vain expect
from me or any other Antiquary: so far have you prevented and outgone all our
care and diligence. I pass over, how to gain a fuller knowledge in this
matter, he sought to get diverse Tripods, especially out of Italy: whereupon
Menetrius sent him some, besides an exquisite description and delineation of
others, which he could not obtain.

About the beginning of the following year, 1631.
the troubles did still continue when the Prince of Condee coming into
Provence, did at length compose the same. In the beginning of the Spring, the
Cardinal having finished both his Legacies, and received at Paris the purple
Cap, he returned to Rome, and taking his journey through Provence, he would
needs see his old friend at Beaugensier. And among other things it was very
delightful to him, to behold, the toresaid Mumie; and to hear Peireskius
discourle of it, and other kinds of embalming: Meanwhile a Question arising,
Whether Egyptians also were wont to pat a Passe-penny in the mouth of the
dead, he thought good to open the coverings, and see if they could find any.
Wherefore as soon as he had unwrapped the Head, he sought diligently, but could
not see any naulum or Pass^^nny in the mouth. When he was about to depart,
Peireskius was bold to entreat him, and increase the weight of his carriage;
for he was to send to Holstenus twenty Greek manuscripts of the Interpreters of
Plato and Aristotle, which he had bought out of the Study of Pacius for two
hundred Crowns, and long since resolved to send them. The Cardinal was willing,
and out of his love to Learning and learned Men ^he took upon him the care of
seeing them convaied.

And here it must not be forgotten, how he took along with him at that time
Gabriel Naudaeus a Parisian of great renown among the Learned, and by his Books
already published, well known, and dear to Peireskius: Wherefore Peireskius
took greatdelight, both to embrace and speak with the man, and to congratulate
his Patron in that he had chose such a man, to assist in his Studies. And truly
he tessified more then once, how much he was delighted with his company, not
knowing whether he should more admire the candor and gentleness of his mind; or
his unexhaustible learning and knowledge of all kind of Books. But how much
Naudaeus did honor Peireskius, and how largely he then tasted of his
beneficence, he did asterwards testify, both in private Letters, and in his
public dedicatory Epistle, prefixed to his Medico-philological Question,
Whether it be more wholesome to study in the morning, or in the evening. For
therein calling him, The Maecenas of all learned men, and fearing the Fortune
of that ancient Maecenas, he yowes to write a Panegyric of his praises, and
why in the mean time he Dedicated this Work to him; The Cause he says, is the
admiration of your Virtue, and the indignation, which long since, I conceived
within my self, that it was not celebrated by the Pens of all leanred men to
whom nevertheless it daily affords matter, to discourse of almost all things,
both learnedly and subtilely. And again, which I was first induced to do by
peculiar reasons of my own, who have bin long in your debt, and do earnestly
desire and long above measure, to give you all tokens possible of the Reverence
and respect, I bear toward you. And in the next place, the Example of my most
excellent and eminent Patron, Johahnes Franciscus Cardinalis a Balneo, who as
at other times he conversed so willingly, and delightfully with you, as with no
learned man more; even so now he remits nothing of his ancient good will, but
loves and honors you exceedingly, though absent. I omit that passage, who have
long since obliged me, by the incredible Allurements of your Love and
Beneficence, and many more.

Having brought the Cardinal to Tolon, and not leaving him, till he was under
sail, he returned to Beaugensier. For sometime he was busied about the Marriage
which Claudius his Brothers Son, endeavored to procure in the County of
Avenion. He gave therefore his consent, that he should take from thence to
wife, a noble Damsel called Margaretta Alresia, bestowing upon him the Barony
of Rantium, and granting him his Senatorian Dignity, only upon condition, that
the whole function should remain unto himself for the space of three years.

Easter was at hand, when a remarkable Palsy seized upon the whole right side
of his Body. For he was sitting without his door, at the entrance of the
Garden, and rested his whole body, as hap was, upon his right thigh, when of a
sudden he felt his said thigh not a little stupefied. Endeavoring to rise, he
could not without the help of his Servant; nor go, by reason of the like
nummedness of his thigh and soot. Presently the Disease seized upon his Arm, so
that he could not write. It crept also into his Tongue, so that he could only
make a noise, but was not able to articulate his words. Also a ringing followed
in his ear, which went not away, till the other parts were freed from the
Palsy. Now he was freed just a week after he was first taken, upon the
occasion of cheerfulness and admiration. For Letters being brought him from
Thuanus, containing an excuse why he came not by Beaugensier, he was much
rejoiced; and a while after, some body singing curiously, an Hymn of the Loves
of the Lilly and the Rose, he was so taken with the sweetness of the Song, and
the elegancy of some strain or other, that, like the Son of Croesus, desiring
to utter some words, and particularly these, How excellent is this! he
forthwith uttered them, and at that very moment, his Limbs were all freed from
the Palsy.

Moreover, he afterward resolved to send Minutius again, to hunt for Books in
the Oriental Languages, being chiefly animated by the practite of that renowned
man Jacobus Golius, whom the States of Holland, in regard of his rare skill in
Arabic and the Mathematics, caused to succeed in the Room of two samous
prosessors of the University, viz. Thomas Erpenius, of whom we spoke before,
and Willebrordus Snellius, whom Kepler justly esteemed to be the most subtle
Mathematician in the World. For Golius, in the name, and at the charge of the
States, having twice gone into the East, had scraped together, and brought to
the University, such a Treasure of Books, that having seen the Catalogue of
them, which I receiving from Golius, and at the request of many causing it to
be printed, did send to him, he was suddenly inflamed with a defire to send
again into the East, it being his aim as far as his private purse would hold
out, to furnish France with the like Books. Now he procured that Minutius
should go in company with Marchevilla, who depatted toward Constantinople, in
the month of July. And he would likewise have had Holstenius, and Buccardus,
and other learned men to have gone with them, who being countenanced by the
Patronage and Authority of the Kings Agent, should have searched the Libraries
in Mount Atho, and other places; but they, though willing to undergo the
journey, could not so soon fit themselves. He got only one more to go, viz. the
forenamed Gallaupius, who nevertheless stayed not long at Constantinople, but
went to Mount Libanus, and so settled himself amongst the Maronites, that he
abides with them to this day.

After the departure of Marchevilla, he was told that there was an Elephant
come to Tolon, which he caused to be brought to Beaugensier, that he might
examine some things, about which four years since, he had wrote to the Puteans,
when the Beast was carried to Paris. It was now brought out of Italy, being the
same which a year before, was showed at Rome: and I wonder what made the owner
thereof tell Peireskius, that he was 14 years old, when as at Rome, the year
before, he gave him out to be but eleven years old, as by the Picture thereof
dedicated to the Knight Gualdus, and the description thereof, made by
Bottifangus, may be seen. Moreover, Peireskius two whole days together, what
with asking Questions, what by making experiments, learned so many things, that
he accounted himself satisfied. Among other things, when he had tried him with
all kinds of meats, especially, commanding to give him sweet things, which he
loved best, so that the Elephant began to know him, and to fawn upon him; he
grew so confident, as (his Keeper doing the same first) to put his hand into
his mouth, and feel how many teeth he had. Now he found on either hand two, in
each jaw, that is to say, just 8. in all, and not only four, as Pliny will
have it. Nor did he only feel his teeth, but by the Governors assistance, he
applied wax thereto, that he might cause both their form and magnitude to be
represented. By which means he became clearly satisfied, that the foresaid
grinding tooth, sent out of Africa by Arcosius, was the tooth of an Elephant
and not of a Giant: nor did he any longer admire, why so few of the Teeth of
the Giant Theutobochus aforesaid, were shown.

Moreover, He would needs have the Elephant painted in a threefold posture; but
especially lying, that the joints might the better be seen, which are between
his foot and his Leg, and between his Leg and thigh; to convince that Error,
which, through the Authority of Strabo, and some others, had gotten foot, that
an Elephant could not bend his Legs, with other fables, built thereupon. And he
was wont, when he spoke of these things, to add, that the ancients could not
but know, that an Elephant had joints, seeing in certain Medals they had
pourtrayed an Elephant dansing upon the Ropes; which would require a rare, not
only mobility, but flexibility of his thighs.

Again, he did not only cause the measures of all his parts to be taken; but
also seeing the Beast was afterward to be carried to Aix, he gave order to his
Brother, and two industrious men, Johannes Lumbardus, and Josephus Suchetus,
that they should cause him to be weighed. Wherefore they did according to his
desire, providing a scale on purpose for the Elephant, and another like a Bowl,
to hold the weights which were Canon Bullets. Thus therefore the Elephant was
found to weigh four thousand and five hundred Provence pounds, which make near
upon three thousand five hundred pounds of Paris; and of the Roman pounds,
which consist but of twelve ounces, very near five thousand.

Afterward he heard to his great grief, of the death of two of his beloved
friends, viz. Aleander at Rome, and Pignorius at Padua; with which two, what
ancient and constant friendship he had, and with what variety of mutual
Offices, and kindnesses maintained, may be understood, by what has bin already
said. And hereupon he more highly prized their. Pictures, which he had already,
hanging them (when he returned to the City) so one touching another in his
study, that they were presently in the eye of any one that should enter. Also
it was a comfort to him, that he heard that Aleander his Funeral was so
honored, that his praises were publicly uttered by the eloquent Gasparus
Simeonius, in a full Assembly of the Roman Academicks; and that the memory of
Pignorius was so dear to that renowned favourer of all learned men, Dominicus
Molinus, Procurator of St. Mark, that he both built him a Tomb, and caused an
Epitaph to be infcribed; which also Philippus Thomasinus, he who deserved so
well of his Country and learned fellow-Citizens, has mentioned at the end of
his discourse, touching the Library and Study of Pignorius. I pass over, how
neither Simeonius, nor Thomasinus, could let go in silence the friendship which
was between those learned men deceased, and our Peireskius.

In this year, and the month of November, a memorable thing happened, viz.
that the Planet Mercury, was first seen under the Sun, or in the Circumference
of the Sun. Keplerus had before admonished in a public writing, all
Astronomers and persons studious of the Heavenly bodies, of this admirable
spectacie: wherefore Peireskius also thought it was his part to attend the
same, and that so much the more, in as much as he had bin persuaded that the
Planet Mercury was seen in the Sun in the days of Charles the great, (out of
Eginhardus and Adelmus, or Ademarus, in the course of the Annals of Aimoinus)
but was since dissuaded, supposing that it was only a great spot like the rest,
which appeared 8: days, whereas Mercury consumes only some hours under the
Sun. He provided therefore a Scene, into which the rays of the Sun were to be
let through a Prospective-glasse, that the appearance of the Sun being
exhibited, the shadow of Mercury might be discovered. And indeed he watched as
much as he could, or did remember (for Keplerus distrusting the Calculation,
would have observation diligently made, three whole days before, from the end
of the noon, whereof he had calculated the middle apparition to be.) But the
apparition ceasing before noon, the presence of certain guests, made him forget
it all that morning, for he accompanied them to hear Mass, and feasted them
afterward liberally.

He complained therefore exceedingly, when he was acquainted with the time, in
which the spectacle appeared, and was afterward exceeding joyful, that I
especially, or, it may be, only, observed the same, being at Paris. For I
observed Mercury from the middle very near of the round body of the Sun,
running into the verge thereof (but so small as he exceeded not the third part
of a minute) and passing out of the said verge, at ten a Clock in the morning,
and 28. minutes, with 6. minutes, and a third part Northern latitude. Whereupon
being very joyful, he sent my observation into all parts, and not it alone, but
also the commentaries which were written thereof, by the excellent and very
learned man Wilhelmus Schickardus, Professor at Tubinga, and by Martinus
Hortensius, a famous Holland Mathematician, who assisted Philippus
Landsbergius, in the making of his Astronomical Tables.

Winter approaching, he began to be troubled with his wonted Haemorrhoids, and
with pains of the stone; so that when the Viceroy the Marshall of Vitrie being
lent into Provence was at Tolon, he visited him indeed, but was fain to be
carried in a Sedan.

Moreover, while he was discoursing; he was troubled, and exceedingly tormented
with difficulty of Urine. Lodging therefore at a friends house, some body
acquainted him, that in the Isle of Zembies, a few miles off, there sprang a
water very effectual for the easing of these pains; and how among others,
Andreas Davoria had found so much good thereby, that he had sent for it as far
as from Genua, and the Captain of the Galleys did often turn in thither, to
drink of that Well, Whereupon Pcireskius presently sent into the Isle, drank of
the water, and found it not only profitable to move Urine, but that it changed
the whole habit of his body; so that being returned to Beaugensier, he seemed
in a short time perfectly recovered.

But this health of his lasted not long, for presently in the spring of the
following year 1632. he was so variously tormented, that he was often given
over for a dead man. For to the pain of the Haemorrhoids and difficulty of
Urine, was added a continual Fever, which seemed to remit a little, about the
14th day, when the Marshal visited him; but it grew afterward worse unto the
24th day; when it was followed by a Quotidian Ague, of about 15. or 20. days
continuance; with an Inflammation and huge tumor in one of his Arms. And as if
all this had bin too little, by occasion of a Clyster heedlesly given his
Haemorrhoids were so hurt, that a Gangrene bred soon after, in those parts.
Whereupon he forthwith sent for Cassaneus; but he being likewise such himself,
could not come to him. Howbeit, he sent Sebastianus Richardus, who had
practiced Physic first at Digne, and afterward at Marseilles, with great
applause; and who so industriously opposed the growing Disease, that he
perfectly cured the same, and left Peireskius not long after, upon the mending
hand.

Moreover, 1632.
the perfection of his Recovery was not a little furthered by the joy,
wherewith he was possessed, by reason of two silver Cups, dug up in a field at
Vallaurien, which they were about to make a Vineyard; and sent him by Ludovicus
Meynerius, a religious man of Lerins, a learned man, and in imitation of his
excellent Brother, a Student of the Mathematics. For because one cup would go
fit into the other he supposed they were of those kind of Cups, which were
called Sunduo and Symbibae; and because near the brim of the inner Cup, there
was a golden Crown, he thought it was thence appatent, what it was among the
Ancients, Vina Coronare, to Crown the Wine. Also by the pointed Letters
OVENICOIMEDOU, he judged, they were of those kind of Cups which were termed
Grammatica, or Literata, letterd Cups, (especially when it was found to contain
thirteen Cyathi [or small Cups so called] according to the number of the
Letters) such as those Cups were of old, upon which were written Caius, Julius,
Proculus: whence thole Verses,

Naevia sex Cyathis, septem Justina bibatur, etc.
Six Cups in Naevia, Seven in Justinia drink.
Also he showed the Reason why they drank in a double Cup, from the times of
ancient Barbarism; For in those days, they drank in their enemies Sculls,
whom they had slain; and the more a man had slain, the more Skulls he drank in,
one glewed to another. But when men came to be civilized, they at length
abhorred that custom, yet they substituted in the room thereof, certain
Vessels resembling Skulls (as these had such a kind of shape) but not so
horrilbe in respect of the matter.

Finally, taking occasion partly from these Cups, partly from an ancient
Hemina, or old Brazen Semi-sextary, which was found at Nismes, (and being seen
at Paludanus, his, or Tornerius's house 3. years before) was afterward by Petit
brought to him: partly from the Alabaster which he received that Summer, out of
the Relics of the Gally, which carried the Popes Nuncio Ceva into France,
after he had repaired it, being broken, and had for some weeks enjoyed, the
most delightful Company of Menetrius: Also from the model of the Congius,
procured by Aleander, which was found to contain of the water of a River in
that Country Gapellus, nine Pro ence pounds and two ounces, by the ordinary
weights; as also from diverse other Vestels which he either had there, or sent
for; by occasion, I say, of these things, he began diverse discourses with
Salmasius, and other learned men, about measures, weights, and Vessels.

For his opinion was, that the Ancients were so industrious, that they made no
Vessel, which did not contain a set measure, and a certain weight. Now he was
confirmed in his opinion, by a Box of weights which he received from Aleander:
for coming to try them, he found that there was contained one within another,
in order, an Acetable, a Cyathus, a Mystrum, a Concha, a Chemin, and Cochlear
[measures so called] besides the utmost Box which contained the rest, being two
pounds weight, and a Quartarius in measure, but so as the handles were turned
inwards. But I pass over, how he was afterward more assured, when returning to
the City, and his study, he found a certain Vessel, in which both the ounces,
and the smaller parts of the Cochlear, were distinguished by diverse Circles;
also he observed all kinds of Vessels, which he had left at home.

But to insist upon what he transacted at Beaugensier, he was also exceedingly
delighted, by the communication of a rare demonstration, whereby the foresaid
Josephus Galterius, perfected the demonstration of Ptolomy, touching finding
the distances and magnitudes of the Celestial Bodies. And he truly according
to his Industry, had studied out the business many years before; but he took
the same in hand again, upon occasion of the Uranometria of Lansbergius, newly
published, wherein the good old man endeavoring to show wherein Ptolomaeus,
Albategnius, Copernicus, Ticho, and other excellent Artists had erred; he
himself seemed to come off, somewhat dully. For he did not distinguish the
lines drawn from the Centers of the Sun and Earth, into a right line, touching
upon the Angle of the Earths shadow, from the true and appearing
semi-diameters, as in a perfect work was requisite; as also he ought not to
consider the appearing Diameter of the Sun from the Center of the Earth, but
from the surface thereof, whence it is seen, Galterius therefore having
considered all things, drew a Diagram and framed a demonstration, and sent all
to Peireskius, who exceedingly rejoiced, and congratulated with him thereabout,
and having procured very many Copies of the demonstration, he communicated the
same with such as he knew to be studious of such things, at Paris, Rome, and
other places.

So when he had gotten a Copy of those Dialogues of Galilaeus, in which from
the motion of the Earth, in the same part of the Surface, every day twice
slack ned and quickened, by reason of the composition of the Diurnal and
Annual motion, he saw the cause declared, of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,
till that time unknown; it is not to be expressed with what pleasure he found
himself affected: And when he observed, that the Book was printed with
Approbation, with what exaltation he cried out, that this Age was happy,
wherein quick-sighted and sagacious men, by explaining the motion of the Earth,
had explained the causes, both of the proprieties of the Lodestone, and of the
flowing and ebbing of the Sea, hitherto accounted most admirable and unknown;
Wilhelmus Gilbertus of Colchester in England having done the one in his Book of
the Loadstone; and Galilaeus the other in this Book of Systems.

Also he was recreated by a Book set out by Chifletius, containing the Coats of
Arms, or Scutcheons of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, emblazoned in the
terms of Heraldry; and having also received letters, in which Petrus Hoserius
(than whom no man was better acquainted with the noble Families of France)
signified, that he also would shortly set forth the Coats of the Knights of the
Order of the Holy Ghost, intimating, that they were ready for the Press.
Likewise an History printed of the Popes of Rome, who being born in France, had
sat in the Papal Chair, made by Franciseus Bosquetus, a Narbon Lawyer, a man
deserving all commendation, and who was then composing the whole History of the
French Church. Also the true description of the Bridge at Ariminum, sent by
Naudaeus, by which he was assured, that the Consulship of Augustus was in XIII.
and his Tribuneship in XXXVIII; for he doubted that there was a mistake in
Gruterus, who says XIV. and XXXVIII. Also Naudaeus sent him withal his own
Relation touching the burning of Vesuvius, which began December the year
before, and yet continued; besides the Relations of diverse others, which he had
got together.

Finally, having resolved to return to Town, the Autumn following, he desired
first to have the Samaritan Books in a readiness, that the way being open, he
might send them all at once to Paris; being very much troubled, that they had
bin there so long wanted: For, to complete the Edition of the great Bible
aforesaid, the learned Johannes Morinus, of the Order of praying Friars, was
taking order about the Samaritan Pentateuch, and the year before having
premised Exercitations thereupon, he made such public mention of these Books,
that Peireskius was afterward wonderfully impatient, till he could send them.
For he having first spoken of the Samaritan Copy, which Petrus a Valle, had
communicated by the procurement of Peireskius; he subjoyned, Besides that Book
we daily expect two other Hebrew Samaritan Books, that by comparing them with
this, our Edition may be every way complete. These were procured out of
Palestine, a few months since, by that most munificent Gentleman, the Ornament
of Learaing, which he is evermore studying to advance, Mr. Peireskius, a most
upright Senator in the Parliament of Aix. The one of those Books has three
Columns, and consisls of three Languages, each Language holding a distinct
Column; etc. Whereupon Peireskius perceived that he was hereby pulled as it
were by the Ear, and put in mind of his engagement: wherefore waiting only for
a safe and convenient opportunity to send them, he would trust them with none
but Dionysius Guilleminus, a man of singular Courtesy; and that had lived in
his Family from a boy; so that he was formerly at Romollae, and now also at
Beaugensier, his Bailie. He sent him indeed to his Abbey in Aquitanie: but he
ordered him before hand, to go out of his way, and carry the Books to Paris. I
stand not to recount. how great thanks Morinus returned for the said Books, and
how he magnified him with praises; only I shall tell you, that he had then
translated, and sent him back the Samaritan Epistles, which were long since
written to Scaliger, as we told you before.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS. The Fifth Book.
HAving spent three years at Beaugensier, he returned to Aix, in the Month of
September. Helias Lainaeus Marguerius, was now come to Town whom the King after
the death of Oppidaeus, had made chief President of the Parliament: and because
Peireskius well knew his integrity, joined with great skill in the Laws;
therefore out of Reverence to his dignity and virtue, he would not go to his
own house, before he had saluted him. Therefore, his Nephew being obliged,
according to custom, to visit all the Senators, he went with him to the house
of every one, and commended him to them, with great alacrity. Nevertheless, it
happened through his labor in that particular, he fell into a pain in his
Kidneys, having loosened a store, which four or five days after, he happily
voided. As soon as ever he was recovered, he fell to his Senatorian
employments, having reserved, as we said before, to himself, the function of
his office for the space of three years: which he did verily, not out of
vanity, or desire of gain; but that he might not want occasion to exercise his
beneficence, especially toward learned and religious persons, and others
well-deserving; being accusiomed to maintain their Rights, and take upon
himself their Patronage.

Moreover, he was recreated by certain Books, which Minutius sent him out of
the East, with diverse Coins, especially the Basilidians; also certain bulbous
Plants, and other such like things. Among the rest, there was one Volume (which
might well be so called a Volvende, being rouled up) smallest in bulk, but by
him most highly prized, being found in a Box at the feet of a certain Mumie. It
was all written with Hieroglyphick Letters consisting of the true Papyrus or
ancient Paper so called, and might well be above two thousand years old. At
another time, afterward, he received great store of Greek Books, ( viz. as
many as two large Chests could hold) but he was not so happy in this purchase,
in regard of the integrity and subject matter of the same Books. For excepting
an Arabian Bible, written in the Arabic, Persian, and Chalde Tongues, with the
Commentaries of Rabbi Solomon; all the rest were either very ordinary Books, or
very imperfect.

But this happened the year following, at what time he was very busy, in
measuring and comparing diverse ancient measures, which, as was before hinted,
he had at home. For, besides the knowledge of all kind of measures, which was
to him most delightful, he hoped he should be able at length by comparing very
many of them, to reconcile many places in Authors, touching measures, which
contradict one another; as where Columella makes a Cochlear to be the fourth
part of a Cyathus, and Fannius makes it the twenty fourth: whereas the same
Fannius and Pliny will have the Cyathus to weigh ten drams; Marcellus and
others, twelve: and other such like places, which he was minded to explain, not
only by conjectures, but with the very weights and measures themselves. For
which cause he endeavored, to get all the ancient Vessels that he could any
ways hear of, to be measured. But he conceived, greatest reckoning was to be
made of the more precious ones, [made of silver, or other costly materials]
because the Ancients were wont in them to affect certain kinds of measures,
also that by that means they might be more acceptable, either as being ordained
for sacrifices, or that being kept in Temples, (for most of them were
consecrated gifts) they might there the longer remain as Standards, or
authentic models of Measures.

He was therefore desirous, that Guilleminus should abide diverse Months at
Paris, to measure such precious Vessels, which were kept at St. Dennis, and in
the chief Closets of Rarities, in that City. But he had especial proof of the
humanity of Rociaeus, who did not only procure him the capacity and patterns of
Vessels, but sent him one Vessel it self, which he compelled him to accept;
whereupon Peireskius wrote him a Letter, most full of gratitude and profound
Learning, wherewith he explained at large, the meaning of the most exquisite
sculpture and ornaments thereof. In like manner, because Jacobus Gaffarellus, a
man renowned for his skill in Hebrew and other endowments, did reside at
Venice, 1633.
he took care, that he should measure those precious Vessels, which being
brought from Cyprus and Constantinople, were kept in the Treasury of St. Mark;
and the illustrious Magnifico Valletanus Knight of St. Mark, interceded with
the Senate, at the request of Peireskius, and procured a License to that
intent. So he dealt with Naudaeus to procure him those at Ravenna; and with
Suaresius, touching that great Smaragdine Charger, which is at Genua, and by
the Genuenses called Scela; and with Menetrius touching many, which he knew
were kept at Rome. Nor must I in this place forget how he had a Crystal
Cochlear, sent him for a token by the generous Lady Foelix Zacchia Rondenina,
learned above her Sex, and Letters withal of her husband Alexander Rondeninus,
wherewith that most renowned Heroina did very elegantly testify, how much she
prized the Virtue of Peneskius. And it seemed a strange thing, that about the
same time Carolus Tabaretius Cadafalcius Prosenescal of Digne, sent him a
larger Cochlear, with three hund-ed pieces of Money coined in the Days of
Gallienus, which were found therewith.

To come to other matters, it was Spring, when as Petrus Seguierius the
illustrious President, was made Keeper of the Kings Seal; whereupon Peireskius
did both congratulate his new Honor, and received Letters from him, wherein
that great Personage did testify, that no Letters were more welcome to him
then from Peireskius, being both his Kinsman, and one exceedingly praised for
his Virtue and Knowledge. At the same time, his Brother Valavesius was chosen
by the King Viguier of Marseilles, to which City he went. For that Magistrate
begins his office every year in the Kalends of May, and continues the whole
year chief President of the Municipial Court. Mean while, I was with him, when
he would needs invite Athanasius Kircherus, a very learned Jesuit, then
residing at Avenion, He was reported to be exceeding skilful in the Mysteries
of Hieroglyphics: wherefore he both sent him diverse Books to help him, and a
Copy of the Table of Isis formerly described. And because he had by him a rare
Manuscript, being Rabbi Barachias Abenephius an Arabian Author, who was
reported to have set down the manner of interpreting the Hieroglyphics:
therefore he entreated him, that at his coming he would bring with him, both
the said Book, and some example of Interpretation, with his own notes. Which
when he had done, it cannot be expressed, with what ardency he encouraged him,
to finish the work which he had begun, and to hasten the printing thereof. He
was afterward called to Rome, to succed in the place of that renowned
Mathematician Christopherus Scheinerus, whom the Emperor desired to have near
himself. Now Peireskius dealt earnestly, not only with Mutius Vitellescus,
General of the Jesuits order, but also with Cardinal Barberinus, that they
would encourage him to procure him leisure, for the speedy putting forth of the
work aforesaid.

He invited also, at the same time, Solomon Azubius a Rabbin of Carpentras, not
inferior to the ancient Rabbis in learning. He brought with him certain
Astronomical Tables, which he had by him; composed at Tarascon by a certain Jew
three hundred years ago, and calculated to the Longitude and Latitude of that
Place. And because he knew what pains the foresaid Schickardus took for the
reparation of Astronomy and Geography,; therefore he procured Azubius to write
a Copy of the aforesaid Tables in Hebrew, which he intended to send to
Schickardus. Now he sent it afterward, and the Interpretation of Azubius with
it, and some Arabic pieces, which he knew would delight him, by that excellent
pains which he had taken, about the History of Tarichus, touching the Kings of
Persia. Moreover, because his answer to the Letter sent him about the Planet
Mercury, did show that he had neither seen that very ancient work of
Aristarchus Samius, touching the bigness of the Sun and Moon, nor certainly knew
whether it were extant in the world: therefore, seeing he had acquainted him,
that the Book was yet extant in Greek in the Kings Library, and that a
Translation thereof in Latin, with the Commentaries of Fredericus Commandinus
had been printed in Italy; therefore, I say, he both procured a Copy of the
Greek Original, and left no stone unturned, until by the help of Naudaeus, he
found out and obtained a Latin Copy likewise, which he bound up both in one
bundle together, with diverse observations touching the motions of the Stars;
all which Schickardus received, when he did not expect, no nor think of such a
thing.

He did the like to Hortensius aforesaid; for knowing, that he desired a Copy
of the Dialogues of Galilaeus, that he might compare what he had wrote touching
the smallness of the Stars, with what himself had wrote upon the same Subject,
by occasion of the small appearance of Mercury: therefore he sent presently to
get one of those Books, and sent it of his own accord to Hortensius, who
suspected no such thing. The like also he did to another, I know not whom: for
understanding from him, that he exceedingly desired a Copy of the Alcoran; he
presently got one at Grenoble, by the assistance of Philippus Lagneus, a good
and learned man, and true lover of Scholars, that he might send it to the man,
who had not so much as asked any such thing of him.

The like also he did to Gaspar Bachetus Meziriacus, who after he had published
Diophantus and other excellent works, was courageously endeavoring to amend
the French Translation of Plutarch, and to illustrate his Castigations with
notes. For he having signified, that he had never seen the Life of Homer in
Greek, written by Plutarch, as soon as Peireskius heard it, he presently
endeavored to get the said Life written out of a Greek Book, which he
remembered he he had seen in the Kings Library, and when it was almost written
out, hearing that it was printed by Henry Stephen, and put before his volume of
Heroical Poets, he presently sent to buy the said Volume, which with Scaliger's
Eusebius, which he also wanted, and Homer's Iliads newly gained out of the
East, with some notes of Porphyrius, and other things unlooked for, he sent to
Bacchetus.

Moreover, he caused to be exscribed out of the Library of Augsburge certain
works of St. Cyril, which the learned Joannes Aubertus stood in need of, to
complete the Edition of that sacred Author: for which cause also, he procured
diverse Libraries in Spain and Sicilie to be searched; especially the Vatican
Library, out of which he gained some things, which to the end that Holstenius
might the more willingly peruse and correct; he procured by way of requital,
that Aubertus in like manner at Paris, should look over, and correct certain
Greek Astronomers, which being desired by Holstenius, Peireskius had procured
to be transcribed, out of the Library of the most excellent Archbishop of
Tolouse. Also, when Duchesnius seriously set himself to publish such Authors,
as had written the History; and affairs of France; Peireskius procured sor him
besides many other Books, both Petrus Bibliothecarius so called, whom he
procured by the sagacity, diligence, and felicity of Naudaeus; and also the
Chronologica fragment a Abbatiae sublucensis, which to procure, he implored the
authority of Cardinal Barberine, and the Assistance of Buccardus.

Diverse others also there were, who at his request commanded many Books to be
exscribed. One was Henricus Memmius, that same renowned Prelate, who excelling
the gentility of his Parentage, by the nobility of his mind, was wonderful
sollicitous to advance Learning and learned men, according to the custom of
his family. Also the Earl of Marchaevilla was one, from whom he received a Book
touching the various sects of Mahumetans; and to whom he wrote what kind of
Sculptures, Achats; Coins, and such like, were to be sought for out of the
East. The aforesaid Felix Zacchia, was also one, from whom he obtained certain
Monuments of the Families of Genna. Also Julius Pallavicinus, himself of Genua,
from whom he received a whole volume of the said Families; besides other things
which he sought to procure of Petrus Maria Boerus, with whom he held perpetual
intercourse: others there were, of whom he sought to gain the Antiquities of
Hadria Pisa, and other renowned Cities; but to name them all, would be tedious.

Nor must it be forgotten in this place, how that having sormerly took care,
that the Coptic tongue might be induced, and propagated all Europe over; and
Salmasius and Petitus, had already much profited in that Language, by a few
Books he had furnished them with; he added more volumes in the same Tongue, and
was very careful that Petrus Valleus might lend him that Vocabulary, which he
had brought out of the East, that he might procure it to be interpreted, and
printed by Salmasius, who was ready to undertake the work. Which when he could
not have granted, he desired him at least, to lend the same to Kircherus, who
was both present, and at Rome, and being skilled in the Tongue already, might
set upon the work.

But he conceived great hopes of obtaining out of the East, both Coptic, and
other rare Books, when he received a Copy of the Epistle of St. Clement to the
Corinthians, which was newly published in print, being lately brought from
Egypt and Constantinople, to England; and when about the very same time, that
very good man Aegidius Lochiensis a Capucine, returned out of Egypt, where he
studied the Oriental Languages, seven whole years together. For he being
received with great exultation by Peireskins, from whom he had had no small
assistance in that Country; he told him of rare Books, which were extant in
diverse Covents and Monasteries. And memorable it is, how he saw a Library of
eight thousand Volumes, many of which bore the marks of the Antonian Age. And
because among other things, he said he saw Mazhapha Einock, or the Prophecy of
Enoch, foretelling such things as should happen at the end of the World, a Book
never seen in Europe, but was there written in the Character and Language of
the Aethiopians or Abyssines, who had preserved the same: therefore Peireskius
was so inflamed with a desire to purchase the same at any rate, that sparing
for no cost, he at length obtained it.

Moreover, the good man aforesaid, having accidentally made mention of a great
fire, which happened in Semus, a Mountain of Aethiopia, at the same time that
the fire happened at Pesuvius in Italy; thereupon he discoursed largely,
touching Channels under ground, by which not only waters, but fires also might
pass from place to place; and consequently Vesuvius might communicate the fire
to Aetna, Aetna to Syria, Syria to Arabia foelix Arabia foelix, to the
Country, bordering upon the red Sea, in which stands the Mountain Semus
aforesaid: whether a long row of arched Rocks do make the Channel, or whether
the fire it self breaking in at the chinks, do make it self way, and create
channels, pitching the same so with a bituminous suffumigation, that it keeps
out the Seawater which goes over it. And that fires under ground do make
themselves way, may be known by the Mountain Puteolus, in the time of Pope Paul
the third, and others at other times made by the eruption of fire. And that the
foresaid Incrustation, or pitching is sometimes broken away, so that water may
enter in, we have a sign in that, when Vesuvius was on fire, the shore of
Naples was somewhat parched, the Monntain in the mean while vomiting forth such
waters as it had drunk in by the chinks, but burning through the admixture of
combustible matter. In like manner, he afterward interpreted that same fiery
Torrent, which flowed from off Mount Aetna one whole year together, running
down extreme hot, two or three miles long, and five hundred paces, or half a
mile broad; the Liquor being a mixture of Sulphur, Salt, Lead, Iron, and Earth.

The year ending, he was greatly delighted to detain at his House for certain
days, the famous Poet Santamantius, who returned from Rome, with the Duke of
Crequy. And though he were wonderfully delighted with his sporting wit, and the
recitation of his most beautiful Poems; yet he took the greatest pleasure to
hear him tell of the rare things which had bin observed, partly by himself, and
partly by his Brother in their Journies to India, and other Countries. He told
among other things, how his Brother saw in the greater Java, certain
Live-wights, of a middle nature, between Men and Apes. Which because many could
not believe, Peireskius told what he had heard chiefly from Africa. For Natalis
the Physician before mentioned, had acquainted him, that there are in Guiney,
Apes, with long, gray, combed Beards, almost venerable, who stalk an Aldermans
pace, and take themselves to be very wise: those that are the greatest of all,
and which they term Barris, have most judgment; they will learn any thing at
once showing; being clothed they presently go upon their hind legs; play
cunningly upon the Flute, Cittern, and such other Instruments (for it is
counted nothing for them to sweep the house, turn the spit, beat in the Mortar,
and do other works like Household Servants) finally their femals have their
Courses, and the males exceedingly desire the company of Women.

But Arcosius (who of late years dedicated diverse Books to him, as Memoriale
Principum, Commentarii politici, Relatiode Africa) related in certain Letters,
what had happened to one of Ferrara, when he was in a Country of Marmarica,
called Angela. For he happened one day upon a Negro, who hunted with Dogs certain
wild men, as it seemed. One of which being taken and killed, he blamed the
Negro for being so cruel to his own kind. To which he answered, you are
deceived; for this is no man, but a Beast very like a man. For he lives only
upon Grass and has guts and entrals like a Sheep, which that you may believe,
you shall see which your eyes; whereupon he opened his belly. The day following,
he went to hunting again, and caught a male and a female. The female had Dugs a
foot long; in all other things very like a Woman; saving that she had her
entrals full of grass and herbs, and like those of a Sheep. Both their Bodies
were hairy all over, but the hair was short and soft enough.

These relations of Africa, invite me to annex the Commerce which Peireskius
settled the following year, upon this occasion. One Vermellius of Monpellier, at
first a Jeweller, had given himself to be a Soldier, and having spent what he
had, he returned to his former Art; and having got together diverse Jewels, he
set sail in a Ship of Marseilles for Egypt, and the next opportunity, to the
innermost part of Aethiopia. When he had brought his Jewels, and all his
precious Commodities thither, he was taken notice of by the Queen of the
Abyssines, who was delighted with Europaean Ornaments; and growing famous at
Court, he was not unknown to the King. It happened in the mean while, that the
King waged war against an enemy of his Crown, who raised an Army of fifty
thousand men. Whereupon Vermellius having gained some familiarity with the
King, defired his leave to train for a small time, 8. thousand Soldiers,
promising, that with so small a Company, he would overthrow that great Army of
his enemies. The King supposing him to be courageous, and industrious,
consented; and he both chose, and so exercised those men which were allowed
him, after the method of Holland, which was unknown in those parts, that in
conclusion, he most happily defeated those great forces. Returning victorious,
he was made General of all the forces of the Kingdom, and wrote to his friends
at Marseilles, to send him certain Books, especially, of the Art military; also
certain Images, and painted Tables, and such like things. Which when Peireskius
heard of, 1634.
and was sure that his friends would do no such thing for him, he provided of
his own accord, and sent to the Man, both sweet Liquors, by most exquisite art
extracted out of Gelsemine, Roses, Oranges, Gilloflowers, which he conceived
would be an acceptable present for the Queen; as also Images, Maps, and
Pictures of Kings, Queens, and other illustrious men and women; and a great
bundle of Books, especially Mathematical, Military, of Architecture,
perspective, and such like. For he thought it an unworthy thing to desert such
a fortune, and not to assist as much as in him lay, a man so conspicuous and so
far off. And because he was confident he would take all very gratefully, he
thought he might well desire of him some Aethiopick Books, obvious
Inscriptions, a description of Mount Amara: also of Religious Ceremonies,
Vessels, and such like things as were unknown to Europeans. And this he
endeavored, being in the mean time distracted with great trouble of mind,
because the Senate, and the Marshal de Vitre, the Viceroy, were at variance.

At the same time also he entertained, and obliged, by continual attendance,
and various Offices of friendship, Franciscus Comes Noallius, who was going the
Kings Ambassador to Rome, and stayed some days at Marseilles, and at Aix. Not
to speak, how that having in his Company, a young man skilful above his years
in the Theorie and practice of Physic, named Petrus Michonus, Burdelotius,
Peireskius would needs have a full enjoyment of his Company, both because of
his proper endowments, and because of the friendship which he had with his
learned Uncle Joannes Burdelotius.

He entertained not long after, Georgius Bolognetus the Popes Nuncio, who
coming for France, took his way through Aix. Now it is worth relating, how he
finding Peireskius busy about the Anatomy of I know not what Eye, he would
needs be by, and understand all his speculations. For he had an insatiable
defire of knowing the Organ of sight, and the true place in which sight is
performed, by impression, and reflection of the Image: so that there was hardly
any kind of Birds, Fishes, or four-focted Beasts, which were to be gotten,
whose eyes were not dissected, that he might observe wherein they agreed, and
wherein they differed. Nor must I pass over in silence, how the better to
gratify me, whom he would have his assistant in that work, he gave a full
account of all in writing to Franciscus Luillerius, Master of the Kings
accounts at Paris, whom he knew to be my singular friend; whose learning,
candor, and affection to all good Arts, and to Justice, and all virtue, if I
should in this place insinuate, I should do it to no other end, then to show
that his friendship was, not without cause, most dear to Peireskius.

Now, because there was much talk of this business, though the truth thereof
were not understood: therefore I think it worth my labor, to make a Narrative
thereof. Between the more ancient opinion, which held that the sight was
performed in the Crystalline humor; and the later, which held, it was in the
tun^ca retina; Peireskius held one between both, viz. that the sight is in the
glassie or vitreous humor. For seeing he judged it most fit, that the visive
faculty should perform its office in the middle of the eye, whence it might
behold the Image in its own situation, therefore he designed this place within
the vitreous humor, in which part the rays of the things seen, being passed
through the Crystalline humor, and reflected from the Retina, do meet
together, as it were in one Center. For, supposing that the Crystalline did by
its convexity, turn the Image the contrary way, he was of opinion, that the
Retina by its concavity, did set the same right again; and that therefore the
faculty ought also to reside in the Center of its concavity, that it might
contems plate the Image, being reflexed by the Retina and restored, and
consequently see the thing in its natural situation. This when he had fixed in
his mind, he thought there remained nothing for him to do, but to search out
the verity of the said Restitution.

As soon as ever therefore he had gotten a little leisure, by means of the
Easter-Holy-dayes, he began to exercise Anatomists, in several kinds of
Animals. Now it seemed generally, that the hinder and innermore circumduction
of the eye, was as a Concave glass, by reason of the inverted reflection, both
of the Cand^e, and other objects. For the Tunica choroides being diversely
colored, is polished like metal, being very apt to shine, by assistance of
that black humor which is daubed upon the back thereof, that blackness also
assisting, with which the inner circumserence is smeared as it were, that the
light or Image darting upon that glass, might more strongly, and distinctly be
painted therein. Now when I name the Choroides, I do not exclude the Retina,
which exceeding hardly, and in few eyes can be preserved so united thereunto,
as not to slip out of its place, when the vitreous humor runs out, and be drawn
together, appearing as it is indeed a widened production of the optic nerve;
but when it is preserved, united to the Choroides, it is so thin, clear, and
transparent, especially being moystened, that it seems to be one and the same
surface, one and the same Looking-glass, on which the Images of things are
imprinted. Now although the Optic, or the middle of the Retina, does not
diametrically answer the Pupilla outwardly opened (for it stands a little
lower) yet the middle of the hinder and colored part which is bright like
metal, does answer the same, and is divided by a certain Circle, as it were an
Horizon, from that obscurity which is in the forepart.

But Peireskius did wonderfully exsult, when after all the humors were let out,
and the Crystalline hung so as to be restored to its proper place well near,
the Image of the Candle was observed to be represented inwardly in the Retina,
not inverted, but in its true situation; and again, when the bottom was so
enlightened, that the Crystalline could only receive the light, the Image which
was inverted in the Retina, was found to be received by the Crystalline in its
right posture. For be conceived it to be manifest, that his conjecture was
right in all points; whereupon, the more to confirm the same, he sought out
diverse Glasses, and Looking glasses, both unequal and concave, reslecting and
transmitting; also diverse Vialls or Glass bottles, in which diversely ordered,
it is wonderful how many and how frequently repeated Experiments he made.

Moreover, he could not easily be removed, from his foresaid opinion; only I
remember, when it was objected, that the faculty of Seeing, residing within the
Eye, should not look outward toward the things themselves, but inwards
toward the Looking-glass aforesaid; and that therefore it could not truly be
said to see the things themselves, besides other things which argued, that the
sight was rather in the Retina; I remember, I say, that he was brought so far,
as to suppole, that the visive faculty might exercise its function, not in the
Retina, nor in the Crystalline, nor in the vitreous humor only: but in the
whole capacity, and extent of Humors and Coats.

In like manner he changed somewhat of his opinion touching the Spectacles,
used by pore-blind and aged people. For having observed, that the image passing
through a concave Spectacle was enlarged; and through a unequal lessened he
imagined, that pore-blind persons did therefore use concave Spectacles, because
they needed the enlargement of the object; and old men unequal Spectacles,
because they required the object to be contracted. But after he was informed,
that the eye placed upon the paper, did see the object contracted through the
concave, and enlarged through the unequal Spectacles ( viz. became the former do
so distract the species, that few parts of the same parts of the object incurt
into the Eye, whereby it appears lessened; but the latter do so contract the
Species, that more parts of the same part, enter into the Eye, whereby the
object appears enlarged) then he so tempered his opinion, as to conceive, that
there was need of enlargement mixed with contraction. Not to say, that in
pore-blind persons who abound with vitreous humor, Concave glasses are
therefore helpful, that the cutting and turning aside of the rays, which were
to be beyond the Crystalline, might be carried on toward the Retina; but in
old men that have the said humor in part consumed, unequal Spectacles are
therefore helpful, that the said cutting and diversion of the Rays, might be a
little drawn aside from the Retina, as if that the sight were to be caused in a
moderate distance from the point of Refraction, after the same manner as in the
Prospective-glasse, the Eye must be somewhat distant therefrom; as Scheiner has
demonstrated.

But whether this opinion of his was true or false; I shall do well in this
place to relate, some things which were either not at all, or not well observed
in former times. For it was apparent, that the Crystalline humor was not in all
kinds of Beasts glewed to, nor coherent with the ciliar circumference: but that
in diverse kinds of Fishes, it did as it were swim in the glassie humor; and
particularly in the Thyns or Tunic fish, it is held up only by two small
fastenings, the one of which is produced from the optic Nerve. Moreover, we
found, that the Crystalline humor was of several shapes in several Creatures.
For although in most creatures it is shaped like a Lentil, flattish on either
side, yet in Fishes it comes more near the shape of a Globe, but in Birds
less. Yea, and in the Thynn or Tunie fish, it is perfectly globous in the
hinder part thereof; but before, it would be plain, save that, leaving a brim
round about, a certain portion is raised in the middle, of a larger Globe then
the hinder part; for their Diameters are one half as big again as the other.
And whereas the said brim is seen in the eyes of certain Birds, and especially
of the Eagle; yet is it not in four-footed Beasts, nor in Men; but the hinder
part being portion of a lesser Globe than the forepart, the Segments cleave
together with the same circumference, the Diameters of the Globes exceeding one
the other, in a Sheep a sixth part; in an Ox, a fourth part; and in others
otherwise. But whether those portions are the portions of Globes or of
Parabolicks, or other figures, is truly hard to judge; especially because when
the animal is dead, the humor begins to flag and fall in; and whether it be
held with the fingers, or hung up, or lie upon a paper, it can hardly choose but
alter its natural shape.

Moreover, we found, that in fishes there was either no watery humor, or very
little (to be sure in the Tunie fish, the Whiting, the Lamprey, and some others
we found none at all) but that there was abundance of the glassy humor. But
among Birds and four-footed beasts, those night-creatures as Owls and Cats have
much watery humor and little glassy. Moreover, we found, that the greatness of
the Eye was not proportioned to the greatness of theanimal. For, whereas Birds
considering the quantity of their Bodies and Heads, have very great Eyes, so
that an Eagles Eye, is almost as big as the Eye of a Sheep; yet among fishes a
a Dolphin, which weighed 1000. pounds weight, had a far less Eye than a Thyn
or Tunie fish, which weighed but three hundred pounds. And a kind of Sea-calf,
which seemed to be of that sort which is first described by Rondeletius,
weighed about eight thousand pound, and yet had an Eye no bigger than the Tunie
fish aforesaid. Also, while Peireskius was taking all the care he could, to
procure the Eye of one of those mighty Whales which are caughr in the Aquitanic
Sea; Josephus Antonius a Dominican of Marseilles, who had been not long before
at the taking of one of them, did relate that the eyes thereof, were hardly any
bigger than a man's Eyes. At which while we wondered, he told us another thing
which was more mavelous, viz. That the said Whale, having a Mouth so wide,
that the Tongue being taken forth (out of which a thousand and six hundred
pounds of Oil were pressed) a man might ride in on Horseback, and not touch
the Roof of the Mouth with his Head, (like Lucians ship that sailed into the
Whales mouth) had notwithstanding so narrow a throat, as it could hardly hold
two Smelts no bigger than a man's little Finger, of which a great company were
found in his Mouth.

Peradventure, I may seem to dwell too long upon this subject; but, seeing we
have already related some things which Peireskius observed in the Eyes of other
Creatures, it is fit verily, that we add what he observed in his own. For he
observed, that his Eyes did so receive the images of things, that they held them
sometime, especially when they were moist, after sleep: So he observed 1000.
times, that when he had looked upon the window, distinguished with wooden bars,
bars, and squares of Paper, he carried the form thereof, somewhile after, in
his Eyes; but with this difference, that if he kept his eyes shut, he seemed to
behold the bars dark, and the Paper squares white, as he had at first seen
'um: but, if he looked with his Eyes open upon a dark wall, then the paper
squares seemed dark, and the bars of the same whiteness with the wall. The
same difference appeared, if he set his eyes upon black clothes, but
illustrated with some measure of Light; for the paper squares were blacket with
the blackness of the garments. The like if he looked upon an open Book; for he
could clearly discern the Letters, there where the bars were presented, but
not where the representation of the Paper squares was. From whence he argued,
that it was no wonder, if the shining of the Light, and the whiteness of the
Snow, do dim the sight, yea, and make a man quite blind, as Histories testify:
seeing that same dull whiteness of the Paper, does so vitiate the Organ, as to
draw a kind of Curtain before it, not presently to be removed. Now he was of
opinion, that as the light of the Sun, and its heat is imprinted upon a
Bononian stone: so the light and whiteness are imprinted upon the vitreous
humor, and by reason of their corpulency, create there a certain shadow of
themselves: but he was afterward of opinion, that the shadow externally
appearing, was not produced from the crassitude of the light or whiteness, but
feigned by a fault which may happen, not only in the vitreous, but also in the
watery, and especially in the Crystalline humor.

Moreover, the Species or representations of objects were so doubled in his
Eyes, that beside the primary and clear one, he saw another secondary and
darkish one, insinuating it self by the side of the former. So, in a Book lying
open, or one a side of Paper while he was writing, he saw plainly both the
white margent, and the beginnings of the lines; yet so, that a fingers breadth
on this side, or in the margent, he seemed to see other obscure beginning of
lines. Also, when he looked, upon a time, at a Hill opposite to the setting
Sun, he saw a threefold appearance thereof; as also looking upon a thread, it
would appear to him manifold; which gave him the first occasion, to mark the
rest.

Moreover, when he knew that I had bin long in that mind, that the axels of
both the Eyes do never concur, nor make (as the common opinion is) an angle in
the thing seen, but do run perpetually parallel, so that only one Eye, is
directed upon the object, while the other rests, viz. that Eye which naturally
is best sighted (for one of the Eyes as well as Hands, is always stronger than
the other) wherefore, it alone sees with that kind of sight which they term
Distinct vision, though the other may see by that kind of sight, they term
Confused: I say, when he knew thus much, he exulted as having made an
experiment, which contradicted a parallelism. For holding his Eyes, otherwise
immovable, only opening the one, and shutting the other interchangeably, he
observed, that the right hand Species passed to the left, and the left hand
Species to the right, so that a cross motion of lines was made, which is
repugnant to a parallelism. Whereupon I warned him to consider, that the
right hand, or distincter representation did belong to his left Eye, which was
the stronger; and the left hand or more confused, to the right Eye, which was
the weaker; and that only one axis was directed, namely from the left Eye; and
that the Species fell into the right, not directly but obliquely, and so made a
crossing: after which manner all things feem double, when we wreath our Eyes,
the sight of both eyes being confused, because the image falls in only
obliquely: but he was not perfectly satisfied, yea and he was of opinion, that
there might arise some difference in the observation of the Celestial Bodies,
if one should peep with his right Eye to direct the Instrument, and another
with his left: nor could he be satisfied, till Schickardus had warranted him
the contrary, in some Letters of his.

But now it is time to leave these matters, and speak of many other things,
which he observed about the same time. Of which the Venae Lacteae, or milkie
Veins in the Mesentery, were a principal; of which we spoke before, and which
now again he would needs seek, in as many creatures as he could, And because he
knew, both from Asellius the inventor, and by diverse dissections that he had
made, that they could not be discerned, save in a Creature yet living and
panting; and that therefore they could not be observed in a man, whom to cut up
alive were wickedness; yet did he not therefore despair, but that if a few
hours after a man was hanged, his bowels were looked into, some appearance of
these Veins might be observed. Wherefore becaused a man that was condemned to
be hanged, (before sentence was pronounced) to be fed lustily and securely
(that there might be that in his Body, which would afford white chyle at the
time appointed) and then an hour and a half after he was turned off, he caused
the Body to be brought into the Anatomical Theater. Which diligence effected,
that his Belly being opened, the whitish Veins appeared, and out of some of
them being cut, a milkie liquor might be gathered; which truly seemed strange.

Moreover, he was careful to observe the several originals of winds. For at
first he was persuaded out of Aristotle, that the Winds were earthy vapors,
which being beaten back by the cold air, fly athwart; and according to the
condition of some Valley or some other place, from whence they issue, or which
they fall upon, they are carried sometimes Northward, otherwhiles Southward:
sometimes Eastward, and otherwhiles Westward: but he found so many difficulties
in that opinion, that he was fain to have recourse to the matter of those
exhalations, and to examine, for examples sake, whether or no Vitriol, Sal,
Nitre, Bitumen, Sulphur, and such like things, when they exhale, do not cause
the several conditions and varieties of winds. Wherefore he would have some
admirable kinds of winds, to be observed in their Original, and the proprieties
of the places, having an eye also to the Minerals, and other things dug out of
the Earth, as also the Plants growing in those places. Wherefore he sent
Manlianus a learned Physician to Peiresk, to observe, in the Mount Coyerus, a
Cave, out of which a cold wind proceeds, so much the less sensible, by how
much a man comes nearer the original thereof: such as is also observed in a
Clift of Mon-ventour on the North side thereof. To observe likewise the Legnian
Lake, not far off, out of which when a fume is seen to arise, a Cloud is
certainly made, which soon after discharges it self into a most cruel tempest;
which is also related of Pilates Lake in Dauphine, and of others among the
Pyraenean Hills. Finally, that he might occasionally observe a fountain at
Colmars, which ebbs and flows at just distances, about eight several times in
the space of an hour.

So, he took care that Budaeus a learned man, should observe the wind called
Ponthia, or Ponticus ventus, on the West side of the Alps Cottiae, at a town
called Nihons. It blows from the North along the River, and exceeds not a
quarter of a league in breadth, nor does it go in length above half or an whole
league at most: save that sometimes, when it is more vehement than ordinary, it
runs diverse leagues, and reaches to Rhodanus. This wind is daily; and when it
blows, makes no intermission, nor fluctuation, but is always of one Tenor. It
arises in Winter about midnight, and dures till nine or ten in the morning; in
Summer from break of day, till eight a clock; in the Spring and Autumn, it
rises at four in the morning and blows till noon. Now it is in Winter chiefly
very violent, especially when the South Wind blows against it; and sometimes
it is so cold, that when it blows, water is turned to Ice in the air.
Otherwise, it is a very wholesome wind; and so are the Corn, and Fruits, and
some Springs in that Place.

So by Antelmus of Freyus, a Priest, and a very good man, he caused that wind
to be observed, which arises at the Hill Malignon, and passes not beyond the
descent thereof; also the conflict of the South East, and North-West winds,
which meeting at Cap Roux, do there destroy one another. A wonderful thing to
tell; nor is it less strange, that the South-East wind is there wholesome, and
ripens the Corn, whereas it is unwholesome, and blasts the Corn at Aix, the
North-West wind working the quite contrary: also that, which was observed at
Cannae, by the foresaid Meynerius, viz. how that none of the cardinal winds
blow there, but only the lateral ones; whereas in other places it falls out
otherwise. But I should be too tedious, if I should insist longer upon this
subject: yet one thing happily ought not to be forgot; how, that such as go into
the Hole or Cave of Lanson (like that of Pausilippus) at both ends, do perceive
the wind blow out from each end; which is a sign that the wind arises in the
Cave, and blows outward; but comes not from without into the same.

Again, he was no less curious, in considering the motion of the mediterranean
Sea, which because it is known to run Westward, by our European Coasts, he
would have inquiry made, whether by the Coasts of Africa opposite to us, it
does not run Eastward: and that by observing chiefly the Country, where, at
the mouths of Rivers, the sand is heaped up; because it is wont to be heaped
up on that side, toward which the Sea forces the River water. This he knew by
the Sands, which are plentifully cast up by Rhodanus. For the Sea carries them
to the Coast of Languedoc, which by that means, becomes void of Havens; for
only since the days of St. Lewis, the Sea has forsaken the Town of
Aiques-mortes, a whole League. And although the Sands of the River Argens, may
seem to be driven upon the Eastern shore, and to have filled up the Haven of
Freius; yet he perceived, that the reason thereof was, because the Gulf de
Grimaud, or the Gulf de Saint Tropes, situate behind the same, drew more
plenty of water, and the Promontory between made the water turn round; which
gyration, or whirling of the water, forced the streams of Argens, and the
mudde or Sand, upon the Eastern Coasts.

Upon the same occasion, he would have the ebbing and flowing, such as it was
observed, both in the Hadriatic Sea, and upon some Coasts of Africa: and when
by observatio^ of the various motions, and Circuits of the Mediterranean Sea,
it was apparent, that the water did perpetually flow out of the Pontus Euxinus,
by Thraciax Bosphorus, the Propoutis and Hellespont, into the Aegean Sea; so
that not only at Smyrna, but in Crete, yea, and almost at Africa, its motion
may be discerned: also being resolved, that the Atlantic Ocean did continually
flow in, by the Fretum Gaditanum, or Herculean strairs; for it flows back only
a fixth part of the time it comes in; and all the intermediate space, which
amounts to an eighth part, the Ocean flows perpetually into the Mediterranean:
Being resolved I say, that these things were so, he judged that he must of
necessity have recourse to channels under the ground, whereby the Mediterranean
empties her waters into the Ocean, and is by that means kept within her due
bounds. For, after the same manner, it is believed, that the Caspian Sea, which
is closed in on all sides, and though it receives so many Rivers, flows not
over; does by a passage under ground run into the Euxine Sea, emptying it self
there, whereas in the middle of the Sea, the waters are sweet; which place, by
Aristotle, is called Bathea, or the Deeps of Pontus.

Moreover, it thundered and lightened diverse times that Summer. And whereas it
was my opinion, that the thunder-fire which burns things on Earth, did not come
from on high, but brake near at hand from a thick Cloud, which contained and
carried the matter thereof, he would have it, that the said fire, though
fluxive, is yet with such violence forced out, that from the middle Region of
the Air, it reaches unextinguished unto the Earth, where it does wonders. He
added, that when six and thirty years ago, the high Altar of the Capucines at
Aix, was broken down with a Thunderbolt, he was then in the City, and as he
passed accidentally through a street, called Preachers-street, he had his eyes
lift up to Heaven the same way. But the wonder was, that he observed in the
middle of the Air, a certain handful of fiery rays, partly streaming out
right, and partly waving; just after the manner as the ancients were wont to
picture the Thunder-fire, in the hand of Jupiter. Its needless to relate, the
answer which I made; I shall rather tell you, that the Thunder-fire having
thrown down a Cross from the top of St. John's Steeple, the Iron beneath which
was fastened in the stone, was found to have a rusty Crust, which was
powerfully magnetic. We did not so much wonder at the Iron, which having bin
purged now many ages, might contract such a faculty; but that the rust of the
Iron should be so powerful, that was a thing worthy of assonishment.

He received in the mean while, from Africa, Seeds, Plants and Animals. Among
which, none was greater, or more beautiful then the Beast, called Alzaro, which
with his head and tail, did represent a Bu^^ but in the rest of his Body, was
like an Heart. His Horns were black, bolt upright, and would grow (as was
reported) to a wonderful height. It was a most swift Beast, and such as could
not be taken, save when it was sucking-young. Now he did not keep that Beast
long; but after he had sufficiently observed the same, and got it painted out,
according to his mind, he sent it to Cardinal Barberino. He received likewise,
not long after, the skin of such a like Beast, from the Earl of Marchavilla,
returning from Constantinople; and upon that occasion, he was desirous to try
(and I know not what hindered him) whether the same thing would betide the skin
of this Beast, which was wont to betide the skin of an Harr. For it was well
known, that an Hearts skin, being by the Curriers put in the bottom of their
fat, and a great heap of Ox and other Hides laid thereupon, would never rest,
after water was put in, till it had got it self up, above all the rest. Which
when we wondered at, we supposed the cause to be the largeness of the Cavities
of the Hairs, which exceeded these of the other Hides (for that every Hair is a
kind of Pipe or Channel is known by the Augmenting-glasse) so that, they being
filled with Air, and being in the water, do bear up like blown Bladders. Also
it is credible, that it makes much for the nimble swiftness of this Creature,
when through heat by running, that cavity in the hairs is filled with spirit;
as it is also probable, that in Birds, that part of the Quils which is void,
being filled with spirit, does assist the Birds in their flight, and helps to
bear them up. But so much of this may suffice.

Shall I relate, how Peireskius caused an high Turret to be built on the top of
all his House, from whence being very lofty, Caelestial observasions might be
made? How many things were observed hereupon, is now no time to relate: yet
must I not omit, the exceeding joy he took, when from thence he beheld Mars,
hiding that Star, which is last in the Virgins Arm-pit. For he was much moved
with what I had told him, touching my observation of Jupiters hiding that Star
which is under the feet of Gemini in December foregoing; so that for some
days, morning and evening, being seen through the Perspective, it was observed
to have pasted to the South thereof, no more then four minutes, on the 19. day
of the said month, at eleven a Clock in the morning: and whereas on the eighth
day of June, about evening, I told him, he might see the like Eclipse caused by
Mars; thereupon, with great alacrity, he was resolved to sit up, nor did he
depart till the eighth part of an hour after midnight; at which time Mars was
conjoined with the said Star, and went but a minute and an half to the South.

Nor must I forget the joy that he conceived by entertaining Thomas Campanella,
that renowned Philosopher, at what time ( viz. about the beginning of November)
the Conjunction of Mercury with the Sun, was to be seen. For he could bear
witness, that the Planet was invisible under the Sun, being in a Conjunction
almost central; which is an argument, that he was then directly above the Sun,
even as he was before seen retrograde under the Sun; and that therefore, he is,
by his motion, carried about the Sun, and that he is not carried in an
Epicicle, detained betwixt us and the Sun. And by the like observation I
evinced the same thing, a year and half before, viz. about the end of April.

But with what humanity he received Campanella, is hard to relate. For coming
to France, as soon as he was at Marseilles and had acquainted Peireskius with
his arrival he sent an Horselitter and brought him to his House; where having
made exceeding much of him certain days together, he sent him to Paris, partly
in an Horselitter, partly in a Coach, giving him (besides Letters to receive
money at Lions) five hundred Crowns at his departure; so that being overcome
and consounded as it were with so great a Beneficence, he protested that he had
before, so much constancy, that he could refrain shedding tears in the midst
of most cruel torments: which now he could not do, being moved with
contemplation of so munificent a Gentleman. This you may suppose that passage
aimed at, which he afterward inserted into the second Tome of his works, about
the end of his Oeconemicks. For, I shall not deny (says he) That a man may
least his friends liberaly, but it must be done sruga^y, and when they have
need: and you shall rather account him your friend, that offers you his money,
than he that offers his life: as that rare and wonderful Gentleman Fabricius
Lord of Peiresk, the Glory of France, and Mecaenas of Philosophers and famous
men, whom continually he entertains, is an example to the world.

For the same time that he was with Peireskius, he saw diverse guests, and among
the rest Montagutius the Propraetor of Autun, who coming to visit the sacred
places in Provence, would visit him also. Moreover, he brought him two ancient
silver Cochlears [measures so called] and some other things, which were got
from out the ruins of Antiquity at Autun, and which Peireskius had a desire to
see. Having measured the said Vessels, especially, that which was most whole
and perfect, it cannot be expressed how he rejoiced, when he found it weighed
two ounces of silver, just as the Sextans of the Ancient Pile of weights
aforesaid, did weigh; and that it contained just two drams of oil, or the sixth
part of a Cyathus, as also the foresaid Sextans contained. Hereupon, he wrote
Letters to the Puteans, both very large and full of profound Learning, taking
occasion chiefly from the Picture of Mercury, expressed upon one of the
foresaid measures; seeing that same two-dram-measure was called Cheme, that
name being taken from a certain shel-fish, whose form is retained by the
Cochlear: and which is consecrated to Mercury; so that both the doubleness of
the dram and ounce, were a Symbol of the double-dealing attributed to Mercury,
as also that kind of shelfish with two valves, and a thousand such observations.

He received not long since, from Venotus the kinsman of Montagutius, a
Cifring-table, dug up likewise at Autun, touching which also he wrote very
seriously, by reason of the difference of some of the Figures, from those which
are written upon the model of a writing Table which he had out of the Study of
Ciaconius, and in the example described in Gruterus, according to that which
Velserus had published, and described out of Occo. And here it may be noted,
that he did not allow of the opinion of Velserus (as it is to be read in
Gruterus) who thought that those two weights under the half ounce and quarter
ounce, were Duellae [weights containing the third part of an ounce viz. two
drams and two scruples a piece] for he was of opinion, that they were rather
Sextulae [such weights as contained the sixth part of an ounce, viz. a dram and
a scruple a piece] which being joined together might make a Duella, one of
which being added to half an ounce, makes two Duella's, as both being added,
make five Sextulae (for half an ounce contains three of them) so that by this
means all the parts of an ounce might be computed, both the duellary and
sextulary parts; which could not be, if the weights aforesaid should design
only Duella's. I add, that if you shall take the foresaid weights for Sextulae,
you will be then able to ma^e eleven parts of an ounce, besides the Unity. For
one Sextula makes two parts; the quarter-ounce, three; the two Sextula's
joined, four; the two-dram with one Sextula, five; the half-ounce, six; the
quarter ounce with two Sextula's, seven; the half ounce with one Sextula eight;
the half ouuce and quarter, nine; the half ounce with two Sextula's, ten; the
half ounce and quarter with one Sextula, eleven.

I shall not here stand to tell, how in the mean time he treated with Ludovicus
Savotus of the use of Brass in Coins, and of the armor of the Ancients, which
was made of brass, and was wont to be put in their Sepuichres: and with
Ludovicus Auber^us Menill^us of counterfeit Sculptures, which Chaducus himself
making, was not ashamed to give out for pieces of Antiquity. Nor again, how he
took care to get all Manuscripts, especially those in Greek, written out, which
treated of Weights and Measures out of the Vatican Library, the Kings Library,
and that of Augsburg; and two Volumes of Onuphrius Panvinius; also a rare book
of the Theorie of Music, which he sent first to Don^us, and afterward
together with an Arabic book and curious Figures, to Marinus Mersennus a Friar
Minim, an exceeding good man learned and curious, and indefatigable in
illustrating the verity of Nature and Religion. Nor, to conclude, many other
things: but I choose rather to subjoyn the modesty wherewith he received a
Dedication of certain collections out of Polybius, N colaus Damascenus and
other Historians, made by a truly learned and famous man, Henricus Valesius,
who published them in Greek, turned them into Latin, and explained them with
Notes.

For he besides other passages, bespake him in these words. For why should I
not call you the Parent and Author of his Book, which was first by you found
out, brought at your cost from the Island of Cyprus, and sent to this City? And
presently after, But now by my endeavors it comes in print, not more
considerable by the Purple of the Emperor Constantinus, then by your name
inscribed in the front thereof: And as for Constantine, let other men speak: as
for you, both formerly you have deserved well of Learning, and will deserve
well for time to come: yet give me leave among your good deservings of Learning
and all learned men, that I may reckon this as a principal wherein I am
properly concerned. And again, Which work of mine, such as it is, I give and
bequeath the same to you, O Nicolaus Fabricius; that this Book bearing your
Titles in its front, may be accounted totally yours. And afterward having said
by way of Preface, that of three and twenty Titles of Excerpta, there was only
one extant, entitled de Legationibus, and divided into two Books, printed
partly by Fulvius Ursinus, and partly by David Haschelius; he made mention also
of this, Which (quoth he) now first sees the Light, through the liberality of
that most famous and learned man, born as it were after a special manner, to
advance Learning, Nicolaus Fabricius Peireskius, under This Title, Peri aretes
cai cacias, Of Virtue and Vice. But Peireskius, being perfectly ashamed, would
not have his name joined with the Imperial Purple: and writing back to
Valesius, he said, it would be sufficient, if dedicating the Book to some body
else, he should only say, that he accidently got a sight of the Book and
procured the use thereof, in an obicure corner, when it came first out of the
East.

The like moderation he exercised the following year, 1635.
when Philippus Rubeus at Rome published and dedicated to him, that most
ancient Inscription of the Columna rostrata C. DUILIOS. M. F. M. N. COS.
ADVORSO. CARTACINIENSIS. IN. SICILIAD. REM. CERENS. and of which we made
mention before; and that with Supplements adjoined, and illustrations by Gauges
Gozzeus. Which nevertheless seemed to be done, not without a Providence;
seeing he was at the very same time taking care, to get not only a Copy of the
said Inscription, faithfully and exquisitely imitated; but also a pattern
thereof in Plaster of Paris, that he might consider all things, and might
examine the judgments and Supplements of Ciaconius, Lipsius, and others that
had taken pains about the same. But I omit how he would also have a pattern of
that other Inscription of Scipio Barbatus aforesaid, that he might thereby know
the most ancient shape of the Roman Letters; because that same Inscription
remained unaltered, whereas the character of the Duillian Inscription had bin
renewed, as appears out of Pliny. So, that he might know the ancient shape of
the letters of Athens, he procured a pattern of that Inscription which is read
in Gruterus ODENI THEIT ON etc. the letters whereof, Scaliger writing upon
Eusebius, thought to be the Ionic characters. Though he did that in part to
satisfy Salmasius, who was minded to illustrate this Inscription, as he had
done certain others, touching the consecration of a Temple, and dedication of a
Statue. Finally, he desired Donius to send him an accurate pattern of the
Eugubine table so called, viz. that brazen one which was found an hundred years
ago at Eugubium, mentioned also by Gruterus; and that because of certain
Thu^can words, in the Interpretation whereof; he hoped he should somewhat
assist, not to say amend, the Conjectures of Bernardinus Baldus.

Moreover, about the beginning of the year, he heard to his grief, that Julius
Pacius was dead at Valentia, whom he did love and reverence since the time that
he first studied the Laws. Mean while Theodorus Cardinalis Trivultius gave him
a visit, who being upon his return to Italy, undertook that Orbicius and other
Tactick Authors should be copied out from the Ambrosian Library, which
Peireskius used his utmost endeavors to procure; because Salmasius had need of
them. Also, not long after, the Cardinal of Lions visited him, who journeying
toward Rome, was desirous to abide some days in his ancient Archbishopric.
And being received thither in great Pomp, because of the good will and
veneration which he had formerly gained in that place, when he both saw and
embraced Peireskius, who was come a little way out to meet him; he could not
refrain from saying, That he more valued the few paces which he had come, then
the many miles of others that came out farther to meet him Also Petrus Aloysius
Caraffa came to see him in his return from Colen and Leeds, being the Popes
Legate.

And Peireskius asking many questions touching that Country, both of him and
his learned retinue one of which was Silvester Petrasancta; he was informed
among other things, that there was at Leeds a certain industrious Jesuit named
Linus, who had filled a glass with water so tempered, that a lilttle Globe
swum in the middle, with the 24 hours written about the same, which passing by
a fixed Index or hand, in order, did show the hour of the day, as if that Globe
did exactly imitate the motion of the Heavens. Which relation was confirmed to
him, both by the Letters of Rubeus, and the Relation of Dormalius, who
returning into Italy toward the end of the Spring, and being detained certain
days at Aix, described the thing according as himself had seen it. Wherefore
Peireskius praised that wonderful invention; and began to cast diverse ways
with himself, what power of Nature could effect such a thing; for he had gotten
many years before, the Engine of Drebel; in the glassy and arched Pipe whereof,
the water would pass and repass, twice every day, seeming in a manner to
follow the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. But he chiefly called to mind, that
which Kircherus had told him two years before, how he had stuck certain seeds
of the Flower of the Sun into a piece of Cork, which following the course of
the Sun, as the flowers use to do, did turn about the floating Cork, and by a
certain hand annexed, point out the hours, which were marked upon the Vessels.
Upon which occasion it came into his mind to pare that swiming stone which
Mersennus had given him, round about, that being rounded like a Globe, it might
serve in place of Cork, to make Heliotropick [Sun-turning] and Magnetic
experiments.

He was in hope about the beginning of the same Spring, to entertain Pomponius
Bellevreus, being to go Ambassador from the King, to the Princes of Italy; but
his journey being shaped another way, his hope of seeing him, was made void; as
also of embracing Franciscus Vayerus a Mosha, whose learning and candor, he had
understood, both by his letters and works, and by the relation of their common
friends.

Moreover, while he expected from Italy, the foresaid tactick, or military
Books, he sent to Salmasius in the mean time, several draughts of Swords,
Daggers, Hatchets or Poleaxes, Haiberts, and other Weapons, which the ancients
used of Brass; and particularly, of two Helmets, the one of which, was sent
out of the Borders of the Samnites, or from Aprutium; the other was found at
the very Lake it self of Thrasymen, with the cheek or ear pieces yet
remaining, and hanging down on either side. Nor did he send him these things
only, to assist him in his writings about the Roman Militia; but also the
Pictures and representations of diverse kinds of Fibulae, buttons or hasps to
perfect that work, which he had taken in hand, touching the apparel of the
Ancients upon occasion of a certain dissertation touching that same Acia
mollis, [neidleful of soft thred] which Cornelius Celsus writes, must not be
used too much twisted, to make Surures and Clasps, or Buttons, to hold the lips
of wounds together. For Alphonsus Nunnesius, and Jacobus Chiffletius, famous
Physicians, contend, that by the word Acia, we must understand a neidle, or
some other Instrument made of metal; but the learned Franciscus Rioya, and
Franciscus Figueroa, (himself also a renowned Physician) said that we are to
understand thereby, a linen or silken thread. Now it is expected, what both
Salmasius will determine of this controversy: as also another friend of
Peireskius, a Dane, called Johannes Rhodius, a Physician; who having made
choice of Padua for his residence, begins to be famous both for his other
ingenuous Learning, and for his excellent skill in the Art of Physic.

Moreover, he sent a rare work touching Animals, written in the Arabic Tongue,
by Ebembitar, and brought lately out of Egypt; after another Copy, procured
with great labor and cost, had perished by Shipwreck. He sent also another
Arabian Book, wherein were the Canons of the Constantinopolitan, the Ephesian,
the Laodicean, the Cesarian, and the Gangrensian Councels: the Canons of the
Apostles, and of St. Clement; the constitutions of Constantinus, Valentinianus,
Theodosius, and I know not what other things besides. He sent the Rituals, or
Service Book of the Copticks, as their Epistles, Gospels, Psalms; and
especially, a Book containing three Liturgies, of Basil, of Gregory, and of
Cyril, with an Arabic Translation.

He sent more; but there was nothing which he more accounted of, then a volume
of the four Evangelists, written in the Elcuphtick or Cophtick Tongue, and
expounded in Arabic; and especially, because the years were expressed, in
which each of the Evangelists wrote. For though at first, there was wanting the
Praeface to Matthew, where the year was to be expressed; and the Praeface to
John seemed to be faulty, sayng, that the story was written in the sixth year
of the Empire of Tarsos, 1634.
instead of Nero, and the thirtieth year after the Ascension of Christ: yet as
concerning the other two, it made it appear, that that of Luke was written by
him at Antioch, in the 12th year of Claudius, and the 20th after the Ascension;
and that the other of Mark was written in the fourth year of the same
Claudius, and the 12th after the Ascension. Now he was of opinion, that there
might be some help drawn from thence, to judge of the controversy touching the
year of the passion of Christ; and peradventure also, touching his Nativity,
which Joseph Scaliger and Seth Calvisius, make to be two years before the
beginning of the vulgar Account; and Laurentius, Suslyga, Joannes Keplerus, and
others, make it more then two years sooner. Wherefore he wrote, not only to
Rome, to see if happily the foresaid Praefaces might be supplied and corrected;
but also again to Egypt, to get, if possible, the like volume more complete.

But how would he have even leaped for joy, if he had known, that which we
afterward understood! viz. that there is extant, an Arabian Book, very like
the former, in the Custody of the illustrious Mon-morius Master of Requests, in
which the Praefaces are all perfect? They relate, according to the Translation
of the learned Hardyaeus, how that the Gospel of Matthew was written in Hebrew,
in the first year of Claudius, and the ninth year after Christ's Ascension: that
the Gospel of Mark, was written in Latin, the fourth year of Claudius, and the
twelfth after Christ's ascension; that the Gospel of Luke was written in Greek
the 14th of Claudius, and the 22th, after the Ascension: 1635.
and that the Gospel of John was written in Greek, the 8th year of Nero, and
the 30. after the Ascension: out of which being more consonant, it is easy to
see, how the other are to be mended.

He sent also into Egypt, to certain Capucines dwelling there; but especially
to Agathangelus Vindocinensis, besides many other Books, two Tomes of the
Annals of Baronius, which were desired, besides the whole work which he had
formerly bestowed upon them; also to Coelestinus a S. Liduina, a barefoot
Carmelite, the Brother of Golius, diverse Books; but especially, the Magnus
Thesaurus Arabicus, printed at Millain, in four Volumes, which being sent
three or four times before, either to him or to others, was lost being taken by
Pirates. It would be too long to reckon up the rest of this kind; seeing that I
must not pass over, what he did in the mean time at home.

He knew the ardent desire, which had long possessed me, of having the several
Appearances of the Moon, and the varieties appearing in each of them, by the
Perspective-glasse, painted out with lively Colors, in their just proportions
and scituations. And for this very intent, I sought for and procured of the
most rare Galilaeus, a Prospective or Telescope, very long and exactly made;
and now I wanted only an industrious Painter, furnished with a good Talent of
patience. He therefore, for my sake, kept not only a great part of the former
year, but the greatest part of this year present, the rare Painter Claudius
Salvatus Alvernates, in his return from Rome, who by my direction, was to
perform that task. He kept also the year following, many months together,
Claudius Mellanus Abbavillaeus, a rare Artist, both for Painting and Graving,
who was likewise returning from Rome; both by his rare skill to paint out the
new appearances, as also to engrave the same, or some other at least, by his
ingenious hand in Brass. For that excellent man clearly saw, that by that
means a kind of Selenographia, or description of the Moon might be made, the
use whereof would be very confiderable, both in natural Philosophy, and in
Astronomy.

In natural Philosophy, to reason about those goodly Phenomenon; especially,
seeing by the order of the several appearances, it seems probable that that
same Globe of the Moon, is some such thing, as this Globe of Earth, on which we
live. For seeing, those greater spots, which have bin known and observed in all
Ages, do answer to our Seas, so that we may discern in them the Oriental,
Occidental, Caspian, and other Seas, with innumerable out-lets, and Bays or
Gulfs: the rest seems to be nothing but Continents, Cheersonesi, Islands; with
their Fields, Hills, Valleys, Lakes, and such like. And, that those Spots are
Seas, seems to be proved by the Evennes of their Surface; because there is
nothing sticking out in them, to cause any obscurity, when the Sun is just
opposite, and through which the Section of a shadow being drawn, is exceeding
plain and even: whereas the other parts are high and low, and full of turnings;
and the Section of the shadow, passing through them, is variously broken, and
interrupted.

Moreover, the litteral parts [about the Seashores] when they are just against
the rising Sun, are sooner enlightened; against the setting Sun, they are later
and slower enlightened, then the Seas beneath them; casting a shadow upon the
parts opposite unto the Sun, like very tall Rocks: so that a long rank of
shadows, does many times cause a blackness. There are also in those Seas, some
shallow places, or knots and ranks of Rocks, in which certain whitenesses
appear, as it were the foaming of the Waves.

Touching the Continents it is strange, that though they are generally white
yet are they all-together heterogeneous, and one unlike another; as if the
varieties of Lands, Woods, Lakes, and such like, did make a various kind of
whiteness. For in other parts we find every where Valleys, Hills, and Plains;
only there are in the middle of the Orb, certain Plains in a row, compassed
about with little Hills. For it is otherwise in other places, which are whiter;
when the Moon is in the full; for the Valleys are more profound, which when the
Sun comes near, or goes away, do appear very obscure, the Sun only inlightening
the Hills which are placed round about; so that there is a certain appearance
of Jewels; and they are very white, because they fully receive the light, being
filled with rays, collected and compacted, by reverberation from the sides.
Howbeit, there are also some parts which besides the gathering together of the
^ight, are wonderfully white (as a remarkable point toward the East, which as
soon as it is enlightened, shows forthwith exceeding white) as if there were in
that part some Chalkie Mountains, or such as are covered with Snow, like the
Riphaean Hills. So also, contrariwise, there are some parts naturally of such a
leaden color, that the greatest light gives them no whiteness, as if they were
some Lakes, or Tracts of black Earth, such as is toward the North and that
obscure place which is not far from the shore of the great Sea; and such
almost is the turning, which compasses that same Bosse which is so conspicuous
in the South. Conspicuous, I say, by reason of the rays which are shed far and
near about it, as if they were a rank partly of Valleys, and partly of Snowie
Rocks; and the same may be said of the rays of another Bosse, which is nearer
the Center; than which, when it is first or last illuminated, no oriental Pearl
is more beautiful. But to run over all these varieties, were an endless work.

Wherefore it shall suffice to note one thing touching the brim of the Moon;
that whereas it appears very eeven, the reason thereof is, because our eye
sees not the hollow places in those parts, by reason of the bending; but it
joins together the Hills which are antecedent, consequent and mixed. For that
the inequality is every where alike, is known hereby, that when the Moon is
horned, there appear, beyond the points, and especially the lower of the two,
certain light rundles, with darkness between them; which seem to be high
Mountains, in the very edge of the Moon. Which is doubtless an Argument, that
there is in that part of the Moon, which is never seen by us, the like
diversity. Which may be hereby confirmed, in that whereas the same visible
parts do not always occupy the brim or edge, (for the Moon by a certain
quivering motion, by reason of her diverse scituations in the Zodiac, and above
the Horizon, seems to be so wreathed about, that now she shows some parts
Eastward, which she hides Westward and now again contrarity, in like manner to
the South and North; so that also the (...), are sometimes nearer, and (...)
from the Center, or middle (...)) yet nevertheless the same variety (...)
observed in the parts discovered. For, (...) solitary spot, for examples sake,
which is seen in the West, as it were a Caspian Sea, when it is next the edge
of the Moon, leaves nothing between it self and the said edge; but when it is
further off, then in the space between, there appear two pretty long spots.

From which, and other the like considerations, it seems agreeable to reason,
that in the Globe of the Moon, as well as in the Globe of the Earth, many
things are daily bred and corrupted, yet is it no ways probable, that they are
like those things, which the Earth affords. For if according to the Proverb,
Non omnis fert omnia tellus, Every Land bears not all things; and experience
shows, that in America there are bred live-creatures, Plants, and other
things, quite differing from what our parts afford, though America and Eurrope
are parts of the selfsame Globe; how much more reason have we to think, that
all things which are bred in the Moon, being quite another Globe or World, are
different from these earthly things. For it is beyond all hope, and belief,
that any perspective can make us discern them, what kind of things they are,
though we hear that there is one now made at Naples, which inlarges the
appearance of the Moon, and demonstrates all things more distinct then ever;
and notwithstanding, that Rubeus wrote to Peireskius some years ago, that
there was with him an excellent Painter, and an honest man, called Hyemus, who
told him, that he saw at Drebbles House, an optic Tube or Prospective, which
was a span in the Diameter, by which one might perceive in the Globe of the
Moon, Fields, Woods, Buildings, and Fortifications, not unlike those amongst us.

And this may suffice to have said touching natural Philosophy; unless
peradventure I should add, that if those obscure parts of the Moon, are as it
were Seas, there will be no cause to wonder, that from thence some moisture may
be drawn down to this Earth of ours, as is apparent by the marrows of
Live-wights, by Shel-fish, by Plants, and generally by all moist things. For it
may be said, that the Rays of the Sun darting upon those moist parts, and
being from thence reflected upon the Earth, do imbibe and carry with them, some
part of that moisture, as when passing through a colored glass, they fret
off, and carry with them some portion of the color: and that this is the
cause, why in the full of the Moon, Bones are fuller of marrow; Oysters and
other Shel-fish, fuller of fruitful moisture; as also other things, by reason
of the plentiful afflux of the Suns Rays, darted from the Moon. After which
manner, truly, the Moon may, when she is new, or thereabouts, be recompensed,
by the repercussion of the Rays of the Sun from our Seas, which is so much the
more plentiful, by how much a greater quantity of light is reverberated by the
Earth, being a greater body, into the Moon; as is argued by that secondary and
weak light, which the Moon shows, besides her silver Sickle, within her
Quarter, viz. so long as by her nearness to the Sun, she is capable of
reflection.

Now, as for what concerns Astronomy, verily a Selenographia, or description of
the Moon, seems to be of great use. For in the first place, from the true
situation, and delineation of the principal parts, with names imposed upon
them, it may be observed and set down, when the Moon is divided into two parts
in knots, where the points are terminated, where the middle point is between
them; so that on the Margin may be set down the cardinal points North, South,
East, West; from which, like other Circles, we may begin to divide it into
degrees. And because the situation of the points, is various, not only in
respect of their distance from the knots; but also with reference to the
various age of the Moon, in as much as either Northward, or Southward, she
draws near to, or departs from the Sun: therefore, from hence we may determine
very near, in what part of her Circuit she is, and how far distant from the Sun.

Moreover, the Moon being opposite in her knots, either soon before, or after
an Eclipse, it may be set down and expressed, what situation the parts hold,
both one to another, and to the Center and brim; that the whole Orb being
otherwise changed, by reason of the quivering motion aforesaid, yet that may be
counted the genuine posture. By this means also, if any Star be hid by the
Moon, it may be expressed at what part the said Star enters, where it goes
out, and whether by its motion through the Moon, it described a Diameter, or a
North or South chord, which by the Degrees written about, may discover the
quantity of the way it made cross the Moon. By which means also; it may be
expressed, if the Moon pass close by a Star, when she is in the same
Longitude with the said Star, and how far distant her brim is therefrom; the
said distance being compared with the distance of two points, or mensurable
places within the Moons Orb.

Moreover, every Quarter may be known and expressed (which the Ancients in the
difficult business of Diameters endeavored to do, but could not come near the
truth, without a Telescope or Prospective, by reason of the deceitfulness of
our sight:) as also the other Apparitions, which are to be described by the
time of some Phenomenon, in such variety, that the self-same return not, save
after many years. For both the forementioned Libration, or quivering motion;
and the distance from the Knots or Bosses, do hourly change; and also the
difference of time causes, that when we look for a like appearance, always
some dissimilitude insinuates it self, requiring a new Picture.

Finally, as concerning the Eclipses of the Moon, the foresaid descriptions
would exceedingly help to know and declare, in what part of the Moon the defect
of light began, where it terminated; where was the total immersion, or
darkening, and where it began to recover light; so that by means of the
degrees circumscribed as aforesaid, it may be known how far these points are
distant spom the Cardinal Points, one from another, and also from the knot or
boss. They are useful also to determine and set down the digits of the defect,
viz. by noting the Points or conspicuous parts, which are either touched or
forsaken, by the Arch of the shadow. And therefore they are exceedingly useful
to describe the Arch of the shadow, by three remarkable places, through which
it passes, at the same time: by which means, the Diameter of the shadow, may be
rarely compared with the Diameter of the Moon. Then which nothing can be more
profitable in this subject; especially, seeing it is apparent, that men
therefore err in describing the time and quantity of Eclipses, because the said
proportion is unknown, and the Moons Diameter is commonly computed, to be a
fifth part greater than it is indeed and in truth.

And if any man shall require a very necessary thing, viz. the true Diameters
both of the Moon and Sun, taken by observation; let him know that they were
diverse times taken in the house of Peireskius, himself looking on, by two
Tables, the shadow of the one being shortened upon the other, at the end of a
small beam or piece of timber, near upon four fathoms long. Nor shall I stand
here to relate the darkness of the place, and other cautions used in the
observation; I shall only say, for their sakes that are delighted with these
studies, that the Diameter of the Sun, in its farthest distance from the Earth,
is thirty first minutes, and twelve seconds; in its nearest approach to the
Earth, it is one and thirty prime minutes, and six seconds; and the Moon's in
her fatthest distance, is twenty six first minutes, and thirty six seconds; and
at her nearest approach, one and thirty prime minutes, and six seconds, even as
the Sun. Which is truly a great abatement, contrary to the common opinion; but
I would have men only to consider, how much the sight is deceived, while the
same thing is measured, according to the several degrees of light and
darkness, wherewith the sight of the eye is affected. To me verily, the same
Diameter of the Moon, when I look upon it in the darkness of the night, seems
larger than at the midst of Daybreak, and then larger than at Sunrise, and
then also greater than at broad day light. Which I give warning of, to
intimate, that it is a more safe way, to make observation by the shadow; as
supposing that the shadow is not liable to so many deceits, as the Eyesight
is. Moreover, Peireskius did wonderfully rejoice, when he found, by experience,
the use of these things, about a certain Eclipse, which was observed on the
third day of March, the middle whereof happened at 8. a clock and forty three
minutes.

Consequent hereunto, he began seriously to think of (which he purposed long
before) assisting Geographers, toward the finding out the difference of
Longitude of several places. For he would have a certain method written, of
observing Eclipses; and he was wonderfully industrious to procure, that the
Eclipse of the Moon, which was to be in August next following, might be
observed, both in Europe, and in diverse places of Asia, and Africa. For besides
our Country men, and those that live more Westerly, he procured, that by the
instigation of Cardinal Barberino, those learned and fa^^o is men Andreas
Argolus at Padua, and Scipio Claromontius at Caesenna might observe the same;
and by the intercession of the said Cardina, he obtained two observations then
made at Rome, and two at Naples, where the most exact was that which Joannnes
Camillus Gloriosus, a rare man doubtless, had made. In like manner he procured
from Gran-Caire in Egypt, an observation made by the foresaid Capucine
Agathangelus, being assisted by Joannes Molinus Dragomannus a Venetian; also
from Aleppo in Syria, an observation, made by another excellent Capucine,
Michael Angelus, assisted by the foresaid Caelestinus a Sancta Liduina.

All whose observations cannot be set down in this place, yet I must needs say,
that Peireskius was herein satisfied by the observations aforesaid, that it was
a clear case, that all Geographical Tables and Maps, do set those places of
Egypt and Syria at too great a distance from us, seeing they do all set Alepo
almost three hours, that is to say, forty five degrees Eastward of Marseilles;
whereas those observations have made it appear, that almost an whole hour ought
to be abated, seeing they have reckoned no more then thirty degrees between the
places aforesaid. Whereupon the business having succeeded so well, he took a
great deal of pains, and procured Cardinal Barberino and the Generals of the
Jesuits and Dominicans, to command such religious persons as lived in both the
Indies, and all other parts of the world, carefully to observe all Eclipses,
and things of like nature. Nor was there afterward any Capucine or other
studious person, that passed through Provence, intending to travel into the
East, or any other way, or to settle his abode in any foreign part, whom he
did not oblige by diverse kindnesses, and to whom he did not enjoin the care of
making such observations, giving them Books, Prospective-glasses, and such like
things; of the use whereof if any were ignorant, he took care before their
departure, both to have them instructed, and that they might experiment their
skill.

And knowing that Galileus had framed a Method (which we mentioned before) to
find out the Longitudes of places, by the Medicean Stars; therefore he desired
Galileus to send him for his own proper use, a Telescope or Prospective-Glasse
of the very best, that he himself might make observations, and communicate the
same with others. Which he did having first writ many letters, by which he
thought he might be allowed to comfort such a friend, and to condole with him
for his hard hap. Moreover, about this time, he took a great deal of care,
endeavoring by means of the most excellent Cardinal, that the Sentence of
Galileus might be moderated, and he restored to his liberty; Which he did of
his own accord, judging that the tury of a friend required as much of him, and
the merits of that man, whose memory would be delightful to Posterity.

About the end of October, he took it very hainously, that the Parliament did
not expect till he had of himself surrendered his Senators office, which he had
reserved three years for himself, when he made his Nephew his Successor;
wherefore, his Brother being at Paris, he procured by the Kings letters Patents
to be restored perfectly to his said office, and that he should exercise the
same five years longer. This was done the following year, 1636.
in the whole course whereof, he was not wanting in his care for the
advancement of Learning. For in the first place, being much taken with the
manifold and rare Learning, wherewith Leo Allatius a very learned man residing
at Rome, did bring to light so many Greek Authors, not seen before, or full of
faults; correcting and translating them, with wonderful felicity; he was
desirous to assist and countenance his endeavors, carefully treating with the
Printers of Paris, to undertake the Edition of his works. Which he did
likewise concerning certain excellentworks of Fortunius Licetus, who was
formerly a famous Philosopher in the University of Padua, and is now chief
Professor at Bononia, very much renowned for his great worth. So, hearing of
the death of the excellent Schickardus, whom the Plague had taken away November
foregoing; he used all diligence possible, that such works as he left
unprinted, might be preserved, and set forth: which he did by mediation and
assistance of Matthias Berneggerus of Strasburge, a renowned man. I pass over,
how by the means of Aelius Deodatus of whom we spoke before, he sent him diverse
Elegies, which when they were to be printed Thomas Lansius the glory of
Lawyers, and bosom friend of the deceased Schickardus, caused a funeral
Oration to be printed therewith; wherein Zacharias Scafferus the renowned
Professor of Eloquence and History at Tubinga, could not forbear to relate, how
that Schickardus had been largely and honorably invited by Peireskius, that to
avoid the troubles in his own Country, he would come and abide with him, where
he should have opportunity, quietly to follow his Studies.

Likewise, he solicited Elichmannus a learned Hollander, to set out the Lives
of Pythagoras, Empedocles, and other Philosophers, which he had by him, in the
Arabian tongue; as also Cebes his Table wherein he had observed that there was
mention of one Hercules Socraticus, a strange person, not to be found in the
Greek Copies of the said Table, and such like things. So, Samud Petitus, being
about a new Translation, with learned Notes upon Josephus; he procured for him,
by the means of Helstenius, the Collation of di^ers places, with three
Manuscripts in the Vatican Library. Also, when Buccardus was busied about
translating and setting forth of Georgius Syncellus and Theophanes, he procured
a Manuscript to be written out, which he both sent to Rome, and received back
again, to get it compared with the Manuscript in the Kings Library; nor could
he be quiet, until it had been compared, and some places therein corrected by
Salmasins, who was then come into France. Likewise he gave occasion to Ismael
Bullialdus, a very rare Mathematician first to write a very large Letter
touching the nature of Light, and afterward to set out a pretty large Book;
after he heard that he had interpreted that Problem to signify Light,
contracted into a Center by a burning-glasse, which was propounded by Baptista
Peissonius the Kings Attorney at Anjou, in these words; Whether there were any
demonstration perfectly logical, perfectly mathematical, perfectly sensible, by
which it might be proved, that there is in Nature a Magnitude not without
Latitude, which at some time and place, is in a point truly Mathematical and
void of all parts, in which nevertheless, the Magnitude aforesaid has parts
adhering to parts.

Moreover he held diverse very learned discourses with sundry persons. For to
Anastasius a Capucine of Nantes he wrote many things touching the Language of
Bretaigne, in which he confessed there are very many roots of ancient Latin
words. For he had formerly disliked Adrianus Scrieckius his making the Teuronic
or Belgic tongue, the first of all Languages, because it was one and the same
with the Hebrew, and therefore the Mother of all the rest: and Goropius Becanus
his preferring the Juytlanders tongue before all others, as containing the
roots of the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and the rest: yet he said he could be
content, they should referr some roots or words of more evident affinity, so
they had there rested, and not gone about to make all alike, and bring them in
by head and shoulders. Now that some words had or might have at first the same
original, he showed by an example taken from the names of Rivers, which he was
wont commonly to derive after this manner, Varus, Guarus, Garumna, Guardonus,
Guavardonus, Verdonus, Rhodanus, Eridanus, Duranus, Druna, Druentia, Durius, or
Duerus, Iberus, Hebrus, Tiberis, Tigris, Ligeris, etc, Besides the vulgar
appellations, which though exceeding different from the Latin, or other more
ancient tongues, yet are they many times known to be derived therefrom; even
by the keeping of one only Letter. Which is no more strange, then that from
these words, Petrus, Jacobus, Johannes, should come Pir, Diego, James Jack, and
others more exorbitant than these, in our Mother Tongues.

Also he discoursed much touching a certain Vocabularie and Grammar of the
Language of Provence, as it was in the time of Petrarch ( viz. after he had
procured both of them out of the Library at Florence which is called St.
Lawrences) also touching those Poets of Provence, called Trobadores, (that is,
Inventors) in those days when even Princes and Kings did cultivate the
Language and Poetry of Provence. In which Subject, he was not little assisted,
by certain Indexes, and Books, which were sent him by the learned Earl
Fridericus Ubaldinus, who sojourned with Cardinal Barberino. Buccardus procured
him this friend, as also Vincentius Noguera a Gentleman of Portugal: not to
speak of Constantinus Cajetanus, famous for ancient Books; nor of Augustinus
Mascardus, with whom Peireskius treated about the Method of History, upon
occasion of a Book received from him, which he highly esteemed for the singular
learnings sake, and elegancy of that man. He dealt at the same time with the
illustrious Marquess Vincentius Justinianaeus, touching those rare Statues,
wherewith he adorned his renowned Gallerie, and part of which, cut in Brass,
and bound up into a Gallant Book, he had received as a token from Cardinal
Barberinus; at the same time, when by way of requital he sent him the two first
Volums of French Historians, digested and published by Duchesnius.

Moreover, he discoursed at large touching the Characters of the Planets, which
he conceived probably to have bin made of the larger Characters of the Greek
vowels, with a little alteration. Also concerning the Astronomer Ptolemaeus his
Country, and certain circumstances of his Body, Mind, and Life; by occasion of
a Manuscript Copy of the Almagest, whose Antiquity was not much short of that
Age, in which the generous and learned Emperor, Frederic the second, caused a
Latin Translation to be made from the Arabic. For therein Ptolemaeus was
termed Phelud^ensis, instead of Pelusiensis: And it is said, that he was no
King; that he lived seventy eight years, was of an indifferent stature, had
small feet and legs, a thick beard, and such like things which I cannot devise
how they could be known. Also there are added certain grave sayings, or moral
sentences of Ptolomy: and, which is most remarkable, it was set down in the
conclusion, that This Book was ^rdaslated at the command of Maimon King of
Arabians, who reigned in Baldach, by Alhazen, the Son of Joseph, Father of
Arismeticus, and by Sergius, the Son of Elbe a Christian, in the 212. year of
the Sect of Saracens. So that according to this account, the Almagest was
translated out of Greek into Arabic, in the year of Christ, according to the
vulgar computation, 1544.

Besides all this, he reasoned at large, touching the long lives of men, upon
occasion of that old man in England, who died November last, having lived an
hundred two and fifty years; and having information from Alepo, by the Letters
of Peter and John Constantine, that there was a man in Persia, known to the
Capucines, and other credible persons, who was now four hundred years old: of
the verity whereof, they were undoubtedly satisfied.

Also concerning Tritons, or Seamen; upon occasion of a certain Seaman which
was seen, as he heard, at Belle-Isle in Bretaigne. Whereupon he procured
Henricus Gondius, Governor of the Isles, to enquire into the business, and
certify him by writing. Now the information was, that as much as was seen of
him, was in the shape of a Man, saving that his Arms were shorter, then for the
thickness of his Body; and his hands greater, and very white in the Palms. He
had thick white hair hanging down over his shoulders, and a beard reaching down
to his stomach. His Eyes very great and fierce; his skin as far as could be
discerned rough, neither white nor black. He was reported to have bin at first
delighted, at the approach of the Vessel, with the fight of Men and Women, and
light-coloured ^loathes; so that he suffered himself to be enclosed in the
Nets: but as soon as they began to use ^iolence, endeavoring to draw him
forth, and before it could be discerned of what shape he was below the navil,
he both easily brake through the Nets, and with small ado, overturned the
Vessel. And that afterward he appeared only a far off, sunning himself upon
some inaccessible Rocks, his lower parts being always covered with water;
sometimes clapping his hands, and making an hissing noise, which was supposed
to be his manner of laughter. Which custom he held (...) some body shot at him
with a Musquet-B^^^a, from which time forward (whether fright^^ ^nly or killed)
he was never more seen: how^^^^ was reported, that there was another seen,
which was supposed to be a Woman (because (...) a beard) ending beneath with a
forked (...) that of a Salmon.

He reasoned moreover touching the ingrafting (...) Animals, after the manner
of Plants; upon occasion of a Sloe, or Bullas-Tree, growing out of a Man's
Breast Bone; for a Shepherd of Tarragon had fallen into a Slow-Tree, and a
sharp point thereof having run into his Breast, in two years time it took such
root, that after many branches had bin cut off, there sprang up some at last,
which bare both Flowers and Fruit. Now he would never be quiet, till Cardinal
Barberino procured the Archbishop of that place to testify the truth of the
story; and Putean the Knight received, not only letters testifying the same,
but also certain branches thereof, which he sent unto him. Now, he became
afterward less scrupulous of the truth thereof, being informed, that the like
had happened in the neck of an Hen in Toscanie; and at Frontignan in Languedoc,
upon the finger of a Fisherman, into which the prickle of a Sea-Scorpion being
run in, it came to such a pass in the end, that a Surgeon took out of his
said finger three little fishes, being of the kind of Scorpions. Howbeit, he
that shall see such things as these, may more safely believe the same. And
considering afterward, that the spurs of Cocks being implanted, where their
Combs grow, do thrive and ^prout; he made no question, but the Horns, of a Kid
might be ingrafted upon the Horls of a Lamb, and that other such things might
be succesfully attempted; committing, therefore, the care of making such
experiments, to certain industrious men.

Also concerning the Crocodile, in which he observed diverse rarities, not only
concerning the motion of his upper jaw; but also concerning the number of his
teeth, which Achilles Tatius said, were more then three hundred, Aelian not
above sixty; but he, in a Crocodile twelve Paris-Foot long and more, which
being sent out of Egypt to Thuanus, he kept a while at his House; found, that
there were in the upper jaw thirty seven, viz. sixteen on either side, and five
just before; and in the lower jaw, fifteen on either side, and four before; at
least if I forgot not. This I well remember, that the Teeth were very unequal
in point of magnitude; and that the upper teeth stuck out, not meeting just
upon the lower, after the manner of carnivorous Land-Beasts; also that they
were transparent.

But it would be too long, to relate every thing: yet one thing there is which
must not be omitted, in which I also had some hand. The learned and
quick-sighted Godefridus Vendelinus, at that time a Canon of Conde, and, when
he passed his youthful age in Provence, dear to Peireskius, desired to have the
greatest or solstitial Altitude of the Sun, observed at Marseilles; to the end,
that being to make a second Edition of his Discourse, about the Obliquity of
the Sun, he might examine the same, by comparing our observation, with that
which was made likewise at Marseilles, by Pytheas, in the days of Alexander
the great. And because he desired to have it done the year last past, but his
letters were received too late from Dormalius: therefore Peireskius provided
betimes this year, to satisfy his desire. For he was most of all afraid, lest
at the very time of the solstice, the Sun should happen to be clouded, or some
accident might befall us (according to the uncertainty of man's condition)
whereby the observation might be hindered. He would therefore go to Marseilles
just in the Whitsun-Holidayes, that he might observe the Meridian Altitude,
both of the Sun, and of other Stars; and consequently the Elevation of the
Pole; and so by inference, at least, his demand might be satisfied.

Afterward, when about the Solstice some affairs happened, which seemed very
likely to detain him, he brake through all, and went at length to Marseilles,
that he might be present, and remove all obstacles which might hinder the
observation. And, indeed there was need of a very high House, which was to be
free within; nor, having searched all the Churches in the Town, could we find
a convenient place: only the Colledge-House, which was newly built at the East
end of the Church, seemed very fitting, by reason of the roof, which was fifty
two foot royal in height, being only intercepted with a boarded floor in the
middle; howbeit, his presence procured the roof to be opened, and the boarded
floor to be broken up in such manner, as to make the place very convenient. And
to what end, or why a Gnomon was used of the height of the House, and which
might be divided into 90. thousand parts, is here no place to tell. Let it
suffice to say, that the Reduction being made to the same numbers that Pytheas
used (whose Gnomon was not divided into more then six hundred parts) the
proportion of the Gnomon to the shadow, according to our observation was, the
same that is betwixt an hundred and twenty, and forty two, with three fifth
parts; which was according to his observation, the same proportion which is
betwixt an hundred and twenty, and forty one, with four fifth-parts.

Now Peireskius would have me, not only write down the Observation, but the
Reasons also, which made me conceive it probable, that the obliquity of the Sun
was not therefore greater in those ancient times, then it is in our Age. And
because mention was accidentally made of that same hollow kind of Dial, which
Eratosthenes and others, and probably also Pytheas made use of: therefore he
wrote in all haste to get either such a Dial, or at least a model thereof,
which he heard to be in the custody of Cardinal Barberino.

Moreover, because Strabo had written much against Pytheas, it was his pleasure
that I should write an Apology for our Countryman of Provence, and vindicate
that man, who first demonstrated the Island Thule, and who is the most ancient
of all the learned men, which these Western parts of the World can boast of.

Finally, he would have me expound that Problem, which till that time had
tormented all Navigators, and Mathematicians, to find out the exposition
thereof. The Problem was this; How comes it to pass, that Navigators, after
they have passed Sardinia, and the Coast of Africa, or at least have saluted
the neighboring Islands, and especially after they have passed Malta, to the
end they may come unto Crete, they must not keep right on, but turn to the left
hand, or to the North, one point of the wind, or the two and thirtieth part of
the Compass; and two points, or half a wind, that they may pass from Crete to
Cyprus, and from Cyprus to Alexandria in Syria? Also how it comes to pass,
that in returning, they cannot sail to Cyprus or Crete, unless they turn aside
half a wind; nor to Malta, unless they turn a quarter of a wind out of the
right way, and that always to the left hand, which is now to the South,
whereas they should rather incline to the right hand, or to the North?

Moreover, When Peireskius plainly saw that all their Answers were mere
Conjectures; he wonderfully rejoiced, coming to know, that all that practice
had its original from that error, by which all hydrographical Tables are made,
while Artists suppose that those Eastern parts differ from us, much more then
indeed they do, as we briefly noted in the former Eclipse: so that by that
means, the distance between Malta and Crete, being thought to be more then it
is; and the error being yet more between Crete and Cyprus, and between Cyprus
and Alexandria; all those doubts may easily be resolved.

For, let us suppose Malta to be under that Meridian under which it lies; and
let us imagine Crete to be five degrees more Eastward then it is, but yet under
the same parallel; it is a clear case, that the right course from Malta to the
place intended, is to leave Crete on the left hand, or Northward: and that
therefore Navigators, that they may not err, must follow the more Northern
wind; which is indeed the true wind, though believed to be different from that,
which being a false one, is yet accounted to be true. Contrariwise, let us
suppose Creta to be in the same Meridian in which it is, and Malta to be 5.
degrees more westward than it is, keeping still the same parallel; it is
likewise clear, that the right wind, or course from Crete, to the place
supposed, is to leave Malta again upon the left hand, or to the South: and
therefore that they may not sail false, they must follow another wind, which is
indeed the true one, but is accounted a fourth from the true. And the same is
to be said of the distance between Crete and Cyprus, and as far as to
Alexandria; yet so, that the error of the distance being doubled, they must now
use half a wind. The matter being therefore apparent, Peireskius called
together a company of Seafaring men, and so expounded the Problem, that they
were amazed, and being questioned about the particular distances, they freely
granted, that of two thousand seven hundred miles commonly reckoned between
Marseilles and Alexandria, at least five hundred might be abated.

But I shall let these things pass, and propound a testimony or two which were
given to his rare affection to learning and learned men, And in the first
place, Kircherus setting forth at Rome his Prodromus Coptus, writes that among
those which solicited the Edition, Peireskius does justly challenge the first
place, as who by an armed entreaty had forced him to set upon the work. In the
next place Mersennus dedicating to him his 4. Books of Music, does thus
bespeak him. This m^st musical Book, ought not to come into the World without
the honor of your name. For although my Harmonia Gallica, will shortly accost
you more largely accoutred, if setting public affairs awhile aside, you shall
please to lend afavourable ear thereto; I thought sit nevertheless, that this
Synopsis should be premised, and that all mortal men should be admonished, that
there is none of the learned, who has had experience of your singular
Benevolence, but admires and adores those virtues wherewith you are perpetually
attended: and that not only those Books, but all others, ought justly to be
dedicated to you. Embrace therefore these Instruments of the Mases, tuned to
sound the praises of gallant men, and contained in these sollowing Books; with
those Hands, which with admirable liberality, are open to all men, etc.

Moreover, as concerning his Gallica Harmonia, he dedicated to him certain
Treatises of Consonancies and Dissonancies, of the kinds of Modes, and of
Musical composition or setting, professing, that they were due to him, because
his bountiful hand had brought them out of darkness, who was wont with so great
munificence, to oblige all Europe, that all learned and good men consess, that
there is no mortal man alive, to whom learning, and learned men are more
indebted. Then he reckons up diverse things, which according to every man's
Genius, he never ceases, either to produce out of his own study, or to seek in
the most remote Countries of the World; receiving all men with so much humanity
and Beneficence, that all which he possesses, seems to be no less common to
all learned men, then the Air and Water are to all Live wights. And therefore
he sticks not to say, that all men would applaud this dedication of his,
whereby Testimony is given to Posterity, that there was a man in this Age, whom
all these ought to imitate, that would be like God, who is perpetually doing
good.

I pass over that mention which Petrus Lasena of Naples made of him, in his
Cleombrotus, or Philosophical discourse touching such as die by drowning in the
water; yet must I not pass over the grief wherewith Peireskius was affected,
when he understood that the rare man aforesaid, died in Autumn, before the
Edition of his Book was finished.

When the Winter was begun, he went to Areles, that he might meet upon the
Borders of Provence, the renowned Joseph Bernetius, who being President of the
Parliament at Bordeaux, was chosen Prince, or chief Praesident of Aix, after
that Lainaeus had surrendered the said Magistracy. For he had known him ever
since the time that he executed the Office of Kings-Attorney, in the grand
Council, with great applause; so that he did exceedingly love and reverence him
for his Virtue. Upon which occasion he saw at Salon, Joannes Jaubertus
Barraltius, Arch Bishop of Arles, the rare Honor of Praelates, whose Learning,
Candor, Piety and Prudence, he could never sufficiently commend. And because at
the same time, he received Letters from the truly good, learned, and renowned
Ant^^ius G^dellus, whereby he signified, that he was shortly to come to the
Bishopric of Grass, whereof he was ordained Bishop; he said, that Provence
would be happy, that should be illustrated with so many rare Ecclesiastical
Lights.

A mortal year followed, being 1637. 1637.
at which time he was exceedingly delighted with entertaining and cherishing
that rare man Jacobus Ferrerius of Agin, a Physician, who being of the retinue
of the Cardinal of Lions, returning from Rome and Lions, brought him many
things, which he had desired. Among the rest there was a model of the Farnesian
Congius, of which we spoke before. Also there was plenty of a kind of wood, dug
up out of the ground, which was lately found out at Aqua-Sparta. Not but that
Peireskius had before, some Pieces of that kind of wood; but he desired to
speak with an Eyewitness, which had seen the place out of which it was dig'd.
And he was indeed informed of that which he desired to know, viz. how that
there were only certain pieces as it were of the Trunk of a Tree; but no
appearance of any boughs, knots or roots; which seemed to argue, that those
parcels of wood were bred in that shape, and were not of the common sort of
wood, which is many times buried in the Earth, and there turns to stone.
Finally, there was a Copy of a Greek Inscription touching the Labors of
Hercules, which before that time, he could never see nor obtain; the Marble
lying concealed in the Farnesian Palace.

At the same time, he was very much pleased with a Marble which was given him
by Arnaldus the Propraetor of Forcalquier, which was dug up at Regium; upon
which there was an Inscription containing a vow paid to Aesculapius; viz. a
brazen picture of Sleep, a Golden chain, with two little Dragons of the weight
of one scruple; a Silver Dagger weighing five ounces and an half (for so he
amended the figures, which were not right in Gruterus); finally, a short Gloak,
or Garment to wear upon the shoulders. Moreover, when it was brought into his
house, he could not forbear to tell, that he had been forty year seeking to
attain the same. For he had a Copy of the said Inscription before he went into
Italy. And truly Pignorius, when in his Symbolical Epistles, he had spoken of
two Dragons, looking one upon another, with their tails knit together, he
added: And this Figure is expressed upon an ancient Marble, which was showed me
long since by that most noble Gentleman, the great lover of all learned men,
Nicolaus Fabricius Peireskius the Kings Councellor in the Parliament of Alx.
And because he remembered, that he had long since seen among the Curiosities of
Laelius Pascalinus, a golden Chain made of two Dragons or Serpents, such as is
here described; therefore he presently wrote to Fra^ciscus Cardinalis
Boncompagnus, into whose noble and curi^us hands those Rarities had fallen,
that he would suffer a Pattern of the said Chain to be made. Which he did for
the sake of the foresaid Tomasinus, who being about to write of the Gifts of
the ancient, might illustrate his work, by the mention and description thereof.

In the midd e of February, the last of eight Chamaeleons, which he had
nourished and cherished ever since summer, died. For, whereas in the foregoing
years he had obtained only one, or two, out of Africa, which were starved and
killed, at the first approach of cold weather; therefore he would needs procure
at last a good number of them, that by all possible care he might experiment,
whether any of them would outlive the Winter. For, because he found that the
Females were full of Eggs: therefore he was desirous to know their forming and
manner of hatching, supposing that the Spring would be the time of their
breeding. Wherefore he covered the Hutch, in which these last were, with
cloths, and placed it in a warm stove, and sometimes brought them into the Sun:
but, whether they had bin hurt by the first cold, though but small; or whether
the place in which they were afterward kept, was too close and hot; or for
that since the month of November, they did eat no meat at all; none of them
could be preserved alive until the Spring. He caused them to be painted diverse
ways, but especially hanging by their Feet and the ends of their Tails, which
is their most usual posture, in which they sleep, and hunt for worms and flies.

For he found the common report, that they live only by the Air, to be a Fable;
and tried them with many things, but found that they were pleased with no meat
so much, as with those small Worms which breed in Meal-tubs, and
Kneading-troughs. Now they are wont to use their Tongues, as the Elephant does
his Trunk, which being near a foot long, they throw out of their Mouths like a
dart; and that so swiftly, that you can scarce discern them with your eye.
Which action they perform by help of a little bone, which where it is forked,
is implanted on either side in the extremities of their throat or jaws, the
rest of the said bone, being round and running the length of their mouths, it
serves to contract or draw in and dart out their tongue; which is hollow like a
Gut, save that on the top thereof, there is a little bit of flesh, which is
somewhat clammy the betttr to fasten upon the prey. Also he found that report
to be false, which says, that Chamaeleons assume the color of such things as
are near unto them: for they are either green or ash-colored, only they show
somewhat black, on that side which is next the Sun, or the Fire; otherwise they
undergo no kind of change.

One thing was rare and wonderful, viz. That the Chamaeleon moves not his eyes
both together; but while he looks with one eye this way or that way, the other
stands still, or is turned the contrary way. Now they can turn them every way,
by means of four little pulley-muscles; having no distinct Iris, only a little
Eye-ball, upon which the Cornea tunica (being as the rest of the Body radiated,
party-colored, and dapled) is terminated on all sides. Moreover, the
Chamaeleons have teeth neatly ranked; certainly not to grind the air, but to
chew the meat which they catch with their Tongues. They have only one Gut, not
coiled or rolled round, but lying in length, only crooked this way and that
way. The Excrement within the same, was very liquid, save in that part which
was near the Dung-gate. Their Liver was divided into two Lobes or Laps, from
the bunchy part thereof, pouring blood into their Heart which had Ears; but no
Trunck ascending and descending: for not only the porta so called, went
directly to the Gut; but the other Veins go also directly to the other parts.
The Lungs being blown; appeared to be a most thin membrane, as big in compass
as the whole Beast it self. In the lower Belly, was no Peritonaeum, only a
Membrane dividing the right side from the left. No Spleen, no Bladder, no
Kidneys; only we observed certain Caruncles, or small bits of flesh, which were
happily the Genitals. In one of the Females, there were above an hundred Eggs,
within a membrane or skinny bag, some of which were as big as the stones of an
Olive, in which we found a yolk, but no White: whereas the small ones seemed to
contain a kind of milkie substance,

What need I stand here to relate the continual care he took, that Valesius
intending to set forth the Orations of Libanius with additions, might get into
his hands such Orations as had never yet bin printed? He had before took care,
to have those written out, which were extant in the Augustane Library: and now
having Dormalius at Rome, who was ready to write out those in the Vatican
Library; he endeavored by the Authority of Cardinal Barberino to procure him
leave so to do. Also he exhorted Buccardus to undertake to Translate the
Epigrams of the Anthologie, of which there was yet no Translation extant: for
himself had written to Salmasius to send that Copy of them, which he had, to
him. And intending to send to Salmasius a Manuscript of Vegetius, four hundred
years old, he would have it compared with another, almost of the same
antiquity, and that by the learned hand of Fabrotus, by us formerly commended,
who noted in the margent many differences, of one from another, and from the
Editions formerly printed. And to what end, should I relate, how ardently he
solicited Kircherus, being to go into Sicily, and from thence to Malta, with
the Landgrave of Darmstadt, that he would endeavor to procure the Altitudes of
the Pole; and that he would curiously observe such things as are commonly
reported of Aetna; and bring back with him Indexes of the principal Libraries,
and especially of the Manuscripts of the Abbot of Ca^ta.

And with what earnestness he expected out of the East, Books of six or eight
Columns, termed therefore Hexapli and Octapli? Amongst the which there was a
Psalter, distinguished into six Columns, and so many several Languages, which
being taken by the Pirates, he would have redeemed at any rate; though it cost
at first but 24. pounds Tours. Wherefore he lest no stone unturned, till
hearing that the Pirates were arrived at Tripolis in Africa, he wrote unto the
Bassa or Governor of that City, using the mediation of friends, who put him in
hopes, that the Book should be sent him. Moreover, it so happened, that some
one or other hearing how much he desired that Book, hoping to receive a great
reward for their pains; brought him a Book charily wrapped up, which they said
had been pawned to them in that City. How much he rejoiced at the first
presentation thereof, it cannot be expressed: but whenas, having taken off the
coverings, he saw it was nothing but the Arabic Dictionary of Thomas Erpenius,
it can as hardly be expressed, how he was daunted; not knowing whether he
should blame the mistake, or imposture of the bringers.

And here I should add such things as he obtained from one place or another in
Africa; as Coins, Inscriptions, and diverse relations of Southern, Northern,
and Oriental Affairs, partly new and partly old, and other such like things:
But it seems better by way of Conclusio, to make mention of that same very
learned Commentary, which Jacobus Gothofredus aforesaid, had composed from the
Roman Laws, touching the Dominion of the Seas, and the Right of gathering up
ship-wrackt goods; and dedicated the same to Peireskius. For among other
things, speaking to him, he has these words; I thought good at this time, to
make you privy to, and witness of, this action; who are such a lover of all
mysterious and excellent Learning, that you spare no cost in seeking helps all
the world over, nor in provoking and furthering such men as are able to take
pains in the advancement and restoration thereof; many of which by your means
are become famous, and that deservedly. Than which practice of yours what can
be more illustrious, seeing the glory w^h is given commonly to Princes, you
have thereby fo happily derived to your own Name? Or what can tend more to
eternity, to which your self have recommended so many, partly by restoring to
light the monuments of the Ancients, partly by exciting the best wits of this
present Age? I must needs confess, for mine own part, that my mind is never
more inflamed to these studies, then when you are wont to incite me thereto:
for I find my self rather powerfully drawn than persuaded, by those Letters
wherewith you provoke me to study, when I am overwhelmed with public
negotiations. And a little after, In regard also of that same singular Candor
of yours, which I esteem as a pattern of ingenuity it self, which you would
have all that write Books to observe, and to be far from all kind of
bitterness. And again, This Book therefore cannot be unsuitable to you, which
so exceeding sitly agrees with your dignity, the Subject of your studies, and
your disposition and manners. I hope also that it will therefore please you,
because it treats of a Subject useful to humane life; and has him for its
Author, who does not only make use of you, as his best and most faithful
friend, but every where boasts of your friendship.

The Spring was now begun, when he entertained the Cardinal Bichius, and with
him Suaresius, his old friend formerly preferred to the Bishopric of Vaison,
who was going to Rome with the Cardinal. He was refreshed at the same time, by
the coming of Franciscus Bochartus Campinius Master of the Requests, and sent
into Provence, with the Title of the Superintendent of Justice. For he
exceedingly loved and honored him, both for the exceeding goodness of his
disposition and rare Virtue; as also for the Memories sake of his excellent
Father, who having been Master of the Exchequer, Chief of the Consistorians,
and first President of the Supreme Senate or Parliament, did always affect
Peireskius. Whereupon Campinius also made so much of him again, and did so
honor him that having a Son born a month after, he chose him to be his sons
Godfather, and would have him give the child his own name.

Afterward followed the famous recovery of the Islands de Lerins, about which
he was wonderfully sollicitous, and the History whereof he accurately
described. Mean while he performed all offices of respect to the first
President and his wife, who in the months of April and May, were grievously
sick. And he saw them indeed recover, he saw the Islands regained; while in the
mean time, his own more hard hap was at hand. For the following June, he fell
into a deadly Disease; of which and his death which followed thereupon, before
I say any thing, it seems convenient to describe more particularly the habit of
his Body, the manners of his mind, and the studies in which he exercised his
Wits. For, although this may seem sufficiently understood, by the course of his
life which we have hitherto described, yet are there innumerable things
remaining to be told, which will give great Light to the Story of his life, the
knowledge whereof, having bin by most learned men desired, cannot prove
unpleasing to any.

THE LIFE OF PEIRESKIUS. The Sixth Book.
HE was therefore (to begin with his Stature) of a middle and decent pitch,
neither too tall, nor over-low. The Habit of his Body was lean, and
consequently, his Veins conspicuous, both in his Forehead and Hands. His
constitution, as it was subject to Diseases, so was it none of the strongest;
which made him in his latter years, to go with a staff. And for the same
reason, his Members were easily put out of joint; especially his left shoulder,
which was three times dislocated. His forehead was large, and apt to be filled
with wrinkles, when he admired any thing, or was in a deep study. His eyes were
gray, and apt to be blood-shotten, by the breach of some little vein when he
blowed his nose violently. He fixed his eyes, either upon the ground, when he
was seriously discoursing upon any subject; or upon the Auditors, when he
perceived that they were pleased with what he said. He was a little Hawk-nosed:
his Cheek; being tempered with red, the hair of his Head yellow, as also his
beard, which he used to wear long. His whole countenance carried the appearance
of an unwonted and rare courtesy and affability: howbeit, no Painter had the
happiness to express him such as he was indeed and in truth.

As for the care he had in ordering his Body; he affected cleanliness in his
Diet, and all things about him; but desired nothing superfluous, or costly. And
truly, though he was careful that the Clothes he wore abroad, might not be
unsuitable to his dignity; yet he never wore silk. In like manner, the rest of
his House he would have adorned according to his condition, and very well
furnished: but he did not at all, in a manner, regard his own Chamber. Instead
of Tapestry, there hung the Pictures of his chief friends, and of famous men;
besides an innumerable Company of bundles of Commentaries, Transcripts, Notes,
collected from Books, Epistles, and such like papers. His Bed was exceeding
plain, and his Table continually loaded and covered with Papers, Books,
Letters, and other things; as also all the Sears round about, and the greatest
part of the floor.

In like manner, as touching his Diet, his care was to have a well-furnished
and gentile Table for his friends and Family, confining himself to a very
slender, and very wholesome Diet. He supt alone in his own Chamber (save that
for the most part, he was content to have me his guest) that he might not weary
out his Family with staying till his Supper-time. And because sometimes dining
with his friends, he fed more liberally then ordinary, acco^modating himself to
Custom, and the Company: therefore, to ease stomach, he would forbear his
Suppers, on such days. He used the ordinary sort of Wine, though he better
liked of White Wind, and desired to have it pretty tart; supposing that being
so, it better quenched his thirst. He tempered it with much water, save in
Musk-million season, whereof eating at the beginning of his meals, he followed
the direction of his Physician, of which I told you. Now he was so great a
lover of Musk-Millions, that though he could abstain from any other kind of
meat as he list, yet toward them, he professed he was not able to master
himself. For custom had made them exceeding pleasant unto him, and the memory
of his health recovered by them, and his frequent experience, that in Musk
million-season he was Those that are subject to these Infirmities, and
otherwise strong and healthy, let them use Cowcumbers well boiled, if they
cannot get, or affect not Musk-millions, and they shall find, I dare say, the
same effect.
never troubled with pains in his Kidneys, nor bred, or voided any Gravel. For
which cause he was wont to temper his Wine with the water of a natural Bathe,
or Physical Spring; ever since the time that going into a Cottage near the
Bathe, and observing both Men and Women very aged, he asked the reason, and
they made answer, that they continually used the Physical or Bath-water, not
only to drink, but to make their grewel, and all kinds of broth, to make Past,
Puddings, Bread, etc.

Moreover, being exceeding sober in drinking, and not curious in his Diet; he
was so continent, that he was never overtaken with the Witcheries of Venus, in
his whole lifetime. And the cause may soon be rendered, in regard that he was
never given to idleness: yet unless sobriety withdrew the Tindar from venereal
Luxury, it will stir of it self, and take fire upon the least relaxation of
mind.

Now whereas I hinted occasionally, that he was wont to eat his suppers late,
this is to be understood only of his later years. For, formerly he was wont to
sup more early, and so as to comport with his Guests, and then to give himself
a little after to writing and reading, and so to continue studying late in the
night, yea and many times till day-dawn; so that he took very little sleep, and
that only in the mornings. But in process of time, finding that this course did
him hurt; he began to leave studying between Supper and Bedtime; whereupon he
soon after found himself dull and indisposed, to his morning studies; and one
business or other continually holding him employed all day long, he found that
he had no time left for study. Whereupon he begun a new course, viz. at four,
five, or at the farthest six of the Clock at night, when the generality of
People begin to think of Supper, he would shut himself up into his Chamber, and
suffer no man to visit him, or to speak with him, unless upon some very urgent
occasion; and so he would continue till nine of the Clock, which he had allotted
for his Supper-time; conversing only with himself and the Muses. Yea, and on
those days on which the Posts did set forth toward Paris or Rome, he was wont
to defer his Supper, till ten or eleven a Clock, and very often, till after
midnight; that he might write more, and larger letters. For which cause he
oftentimes, either detained the Posts in his own House, or if they were gone,
he would by money and fair words, procure them to stay for his Letters.

He went to bed almost as soon as he had supt, and always set his Larum, so as
to wake him quickly again. Not that he was weary of his necessary rest; but
because when he slept above four hours, such plenty of Urine flowed into his
Bladder, that the orifice thereof being shut with too much stretching, he could
not make water. And therefore he was forced to break his sleeps, which he did
more frequently, when the North-west wind blew, or any the least cold air
affected him; for then he was most of all troubled with the stoppage of his
Urine. Another occasion of his frequent awaking, was his inclination to sweat,
which was so great, that the heat of the Bed-cloathes, or of the weather, being
joined to his natural weakness, he was forced to change his shifts, once,
twice, or sometimes three times in a night.

In the morning when he rose, his custom was to keep his head very warm, with
his Hat, or some other covering, till his sweat and heat, conceived during his
sleep, were abated; otherwise the cold Air, entering into the open pores, and
stopping the same, was wont to cause Rheumatick Defluxions and Toothache. For
the same cause when he did write or read, he sat far from the Windows;
otherwise the cold would so pierce into his head and face, or that Cheek which
was next the Window, as by little and little to cause Defluxions, and bring the
Toothach. For this cause also, he did in the daytime, as much as his occasions
would permit, keep himself out of the wind and Sun; which he would sometimes
excuse, by saying, that the Bodies of other men were like Plates of Iron, not
at all affected by the Aires injuries; but that his own weak Body was like a
sheet of paper, which the least drop of water can penetrate.

Therefore he never walked abroad (which was the only bodily exercise which he
used) but when the Air was calm, the Sun clouded, or at least shining very
weakly, and inclining to set. Also he had a Servant with him, that waited upon
him with an hand-Canopy, to keep off the Sunbeams, if need were, and the wind.
And because that might be troublesome to himself, or his Company, therefore he
was wont to choose his walks in Vales and shady places, where he might go free,
and feed his eyes and ears. For delighting more in discour^e then any other
thing in the World, he was wont to procure the Company of such men as were
learned, and of gentle meek dispositions; such as the forementioned Galterius,
Antonius Arbaudus Bargemonius, Provost of the Cathedral Church of Aix, and
other such like; finding himself in the mean while, very naturally delighted,
with the pleasant Verdure of Plants, beauty of flowers, gentle murmur, and
purling noise of brooks, and waterstreams together with the various songs of
little Birds. And therefore it is no won^er, that he adorned his Garden at
Beaugensier, with such variety of Plants; and that besides a rare Channel of
water, he procured the same to be cast up by a curious kind of Fountain; and
that in the winter, he caused Corn to be scattered for the Birds, which haunted
certain Orange and Lemmon-Trees, made into Arbors, forbidding any one to catch
or molest them.

Moreover, he preferred the singing of Birds, before the voices of men, or any
musical Instruments; not but that he was therewith also delighted; but because
after the Music which men made, there remained in his mind a continual
agitation, drawing his attention, and disturbing his sleep; the rising,
falling, and holding of the Notes, with the change of sounds and concords,
running to and fro in his fancy; whereas no such thing could remain after the
Birds Music, which because it is not so apt by us to be imitated, it cannot
therefore so much affect, and stir our internal saculty. He would also for the
same cause, continually breed up Nightingales, and such like small Birds, which
he kept also in his own Chamber; and of which he was so careful, that he knew
by diverse signs and tokens, what they wanted or desired, and presently would
see them satisfied: they therefore, as out of gratitude, would sing unto their
benefactor, Hymns of praise; and whereas in his absence, they were for the
most part silent; as soon as ever by his voice or staff, they perceived he was
coming, they would presently fall to singing.

And because we are speaking of his affection to dumb-Creatures, it can do no
hurt to tell you, that in his Boys and Youths-Age, he was a great lover of
Dogs. Of some of them we have spoken formerly: now he chiefly loved such as he
knew to be gifted with some peculiar Instinct. Amongst which, there was one, of
which he was wont often to relate this memorable passage; how that having
received, from I know not whom, a sore blow, he would not only smell out that
man, as soon as ever he came into the house, but he would perceive him coming,
when he was fifty paces off, and by his sudden barking, would intimate who was
at hand. And by reason of mice which did gnaw his Books and Papers in his
Chamber, he became a Lover of Cats, which he had formerly hated; and whereas at
first he kept a few for necessity sake, he had afterward a great Company, for
his delight. For, he procured out of the East, Ash-colored, Dun, and speckled
Cats, beautiful to behold; of the Brood whereof, he sent to Paris, and other
places, to his friends. And, as nothing could pass his notice, he observed
that Cats go with young, exactly nine weeks; that they conceive, till they are
more then fourteen years old; that they sometimes want a Midwife, to assist
their bringing forth; that they give suck, though they have not conceived; and
the like things.

But, to return to the care he used about himself; it was very plain and
ordinary, even in the times of his sickness; and experience had made him in a
manner, his own Physician. For in the first place, as touching Fevers, he was
wont to cure them by fasting; for he reasoned, that either the matter of the
Fever, its fuel being withdrawn, would soon be consumed; or all Impediments
being removed, it would quickly come to settle and fix.

Moreover, when the Rheum and Cough troubled him, he used nothing but a Crust
of dry bread; of which he always carried about him certain pieces, enclosed in
a silver Box, with some odoriferous juncket, or Confect thereby. For he
conceived, that by the chewing thereof, his spittle withal gently dropping
down, his Windpipe was as it were crusted over; so that the superfluous humor,
would not so exulcerate the same, nor provoke him to cough. To assuage the pain
of the Haemo^rhoids, he used nothing but the yolk of an Egg, to which sometimes
a little Butter or Lard was added. Also he found, that drinking of the mineral
waters, did them much good; and that heat applied beneath, or the least sleep,
did mitigate their pain.

We have told you, how he used the said waters against his stoppage of Urine,
which to provoke, he was wont to bite a linen Cloth, or an end thereof, and
chew it as it were between his teeth, which he did just as he was straining to
make water, and by which means he many times voided his Urine. And when that
would not do, as in great distensions of his Bladder, he would thrust himself
into a narrow place between the hinder part of the Bed and the Wall, there to
be squeezed; for after much endeavoring, he found some help thereby. Nor did
he after every Retention of Urine, void Gravel or stones: yet they came away
frequently, after he had bin pained in his Kidneys, and Ureters. Now he was
wont to make water always in a large Glass, like a Cupping-Glasse, that he
might soon see in the bottom thereof, whether he had bin delivered of any
thing; for he was wont to call his pains, and voiding of stones, his Breeding
or childing. Finally, that he was not troubled with the Gout, as his Parents
were, he attributed to the careful ordering himself in point of Diet; which
thing, as often as his Father was careful of, he fared much the better for it.

Nor must I pass over in this place, that his weak constitution did not hinder
him from behaving himself exceeding patiently, in those Diseases, and vehement
pains. For, the frequency and continuance thereof, seemed to have induced a
certain brawny hardness; but yet his custorn of suffering was perfected and
assisted by Reason, which told him; that, what cannot be avoided, must be
suffered patiently and gently. Truly, his common saying was, That he was not so
much troubled at the evils, whereunto he was subjected, as he rejoiced that
they were not more grievious as they might have bin.

His mind was much the same, in respect of any adverse accident which sell out.
For, when he lost any thing, especially if it were precious, he could not but
be troubled; but he was wont to remper his grief, by considering the thing, not
so much as being lost, as that it had bin possessed, and enjoyed with pleasure.
So he comforted himself with what was left him: for he conceived, that there
was more reason to rejoice, in behalf of that which good Fortune had left
behind; than to grieve for that, which hard hap had taken away. Wherefore he
was wont frequently to say, that who ever seeks after the uncertain good things
of this World, should think, and resolve, that he gathers as well for Thieves,
as for Himself. Sometimes also it happened, that what he propounded to himself,
did not succeed according to his desires, so that he lost all his labor and
charges; yet it comforted him, that he endeavored nothing, but what was
laudable, and that he was able to take the like pains, and be at the same cost
again. For which cause, he ceased not to endeavor the same thing frequently;
as not despairing, but that at last, the business would come to a good issue;
and knowing that one time or another, many vain endeavors, might be
recompensed with one good success; and that a Fisher man ought not therefore to
break his Nets in pieces, because sometimes he makes a draught in vain.

And thus did he fortify his patience and constancy; being nevertheless of his
own nature, somewhat testy. And he was wont to say, that nothing did ever so
much prevail with him to rule his passion, as a sight which he happened to see
in an Augmenting-glasse, or Microscope. For, having enclosed therein a Lowse
and a Flea; he observed, that the Lowse, setting himself to wrestle with the
Flea, was so incensed, that his blood ran up and down from head to foot, and
from foot to head again. Whence, he gathered, how great a Commotion of Humors
and Spirits, and what a disturbance of all the faculties, anger must needs
make; and what harm that man avoids, who quits that passion. Now there were
two klnds of things, for which he was chiefly moved. The one of which, and
the principal was injury, springing from ingratitude. I say injury; for when
his kindnesses were only forgotten, he never seemed to be moved: seeming
rather himself to have forgotten the benefits he had conferred. But when any
man proved so ungrateful, as to be vvithall, an hurt or hinderance to him or
his, in the bringing about of his affairs and purposes: then he would begin
to chafe and grow exceeding angry, yea, and to reproach such persons; and I
remember, how that presently thereupon, endeavoring to reclaim and compose
himself, he was wont to say, that upon such occasions as these, his Philosophy
failed him. The other was the negligence of his Servants, and their untoward
performance of what he set them about. For he was soon moved, if they heard not
at the first word speaking, and came not quickly at the first call; and if they
did not what was commanded, at the time and manner appointed. For, when he was
doubtful of the Ability of any one, or had good reason to suspect, that out of
conceit of their own wit, they would be apt to leave out, and put in, chop and
change: then would he distinctly by peicemeale, and in order, relate how he
would have every thing done; if then it was not done, as he had ordered, he
could hardly contain from breaking out into complaints and chiding. Whereupon,
turning oftentimes to me, he was wont to say, It seems, I must needs have you
for a witness of my Infirmity. For he was wont to contain himself, and not to
give bridle to his passions, save in presence of his familiar friends. And this
was in a manner, the only passion of his mind, which he could not bridle:
howbeit, he would soon be pacified, and come to himself again; and as for his
Servants, he would many times find fault and chide, only to rowse them from
floathfulnesse, and to render them more wary for time to come. Yea, and he was
so inclined toward those whom he accounted ungrateful and injurious, that he
was always more willing to forget, than revenge an injury; and there was none
that acknowledged his fault, whom he would not embrace, and confer new
Obligations upon.

And now that we are speaking of the benefits by him conferred, who is there
that knows not how much he was inclined to Beneficence? Doubtless there was
never man gave more cheerfully, liberally, or frequently. For propounding to
himself to imitate God and Nature, who do not lend, but freely give all things;
it may well be said of him, that he prevented men's wishes, outwent their hopes,
and was quicker in granting, than they could be in wishing. For, a thousand
times, of his own accord, he offered both assistance and moneys too, yea and
really gave the same, to such as never thought thereof. And see his Policy
withal^^ When he sent to Holstenius those Interpreters of Plat^ and Aristotle,
which we spoke of before; and which cost him two hundred gold nobles, he writ
him a Letter, by which it seemed, that he only lent him those Books; but he
writ a brief Letter afterward, signifying, that he did freely give them him;
only he wrote the former Letter that he might have it to produce, to satisfy
such as might importune him for the said Books, as if that he had only borrowed
them. And how often, think you, did he, that which is related of Arcesilaus,
that is to say, put money under the pillow of his sleeping, or otherwise
not-observing friend, when he perceived that he stood in need thereof, and yet
would out of bashfulness have refused the same, if it had bin offered him?
Verily, when it was not in his power so to do, and yet he could not endure to
see another man blush; he used the hand of a familiar friend, that he might
render him that was to receive his benevolence, more confident. Truly, I can be
a witness in this case: for even in his last days, he gave by my hand to a
certain ingenuous person, whom he knew to be in want, and to be ashamed to
signify so much. Nor would I have you think he did it, that he might have a
witness of his liberality; for when he knew the parties, he meant well to,
were not shie to receive his benevolence, he was far from seeking a third
person, thereby to put them to shame. For then he would give it himself, and
not only in private where was none to behold; but he would never afterward
speak thereof, to his most familiar acquaintance. And therefore (for examples
sake) if I came to know of the Money, he bestowed upon Campanella; I had it
from Campanella himself, who both told it in private, and publicly declared
the same; but not from Peireskius, though both of us sojourneyed with him at
that very time. Wherefore, if to one man he gave an hundred Nobles, to another
two hundred, to another three; it came to knowledge by other means, and not by
himself. For indeed, he was none of those odious kind of men, who upbraid the
good turns they have done, which as he that has received them should remember,
so should he which conferred them forget; of which rule never was any man more
observant than he. For he was so far from speaking of what he had bestowed,
that he could never endure that others should mention the same, and would blush
to hear them, being accustomed so to extenuate what he gave, as that he denied
in a manner, that he had given any thing.

But his carriage was quite different, when he received any thing from another.
For he never left publishing the same, and though it were a thing of small
moment, or had cost him dear, yet would he evermore profess himself obliged;
being also accustomed by several offices and observances, to testify his
gratitude. For if any had given him a piece of Coin, a Seal, a Parchment,
Marble, Vessel, or any other thing of great antiquity, brought out of some far
Country, or otherwise rare; then, besides his affectionate thanks, he would
presently enquire, what that man delighted in, or what he stood in need of
probably: as Books, Pictures, Plants, or other things, with which (when he
durst not with money) he would return to the value of what he received, with
use. This may be peculiarly manifested by diverse Books, which he bought at a
very dear rate; but it may suffice for example sake to say, that, because he
knew that many men were delighted with Mercurius Gallicus, the Roman History of
Coeffeteus, Octavius Strada of the Lives of Emperors with Pictures, and other
such like; therefore he would always have a great company of these Books by
him, that when occasion offered it self, he might have somewhat in readiness to
give away. By which it came to pass, that in a small space of time, he has had
eight, ten, and more of a sort of those Books, and given them all away; yea,
and sometimes when he was out of hopes ever to get the like Books again; such
as were Eusebius of Scaliger's Edition, Origanus his Ephemerides, and hundreds
besides.

For he could never forbear to testify, that he was born rather to give than
to receive; and because he took not more pleasure in any thing, than in a gift
well bestowed, that he accounted that day lost, in which he had not upon some
occasion or other exercised his liberality. And therefore wise men wished him
the Riches of Croesus, and the Treasures of Arabia; that he might more fully
manifest that same liberal and great mind of his. For they counted it a wonder,
where he had wherewith to satisfy so great expenses; knowing sufficiently his
contempt of Riches, and how free he was from any taint of covetousness. And
some indeed there were who disliked his course, supposing that he was not
sufficiently careful of his estate. For, his expenses seemed to exceed his
Incomes; which they could judge by this one thing, that he sent to Rome yearly,
three thousand pounds Tours, to be expended. But he regarded none of these
Rumors, and alvvaies counted it great gain to be honorably profuse, while he
sought the advancement of Learning, and the good of learned men. Also that of
the Poet was true of him, Quaesivit nomen, quaerat avarus opes, He sought a
name, let others leek wealth, that are covetous; for verily, whether it were
that he diminished his Revenues, or neglected to amplify them; yet he got so
much Glory and Renown; as others cannot attain, with their immense riches. And
these men that blamed him, should have considered; that Riches are not coveted,
only to expel Hunger, Thirst, and Cold; for a small matter will serve for these
and other natural uses: but chiefly, that a man may live in splendour, and leave
Monuments to propagate his same, after he is dead. For that is the secret End,
at which all mortals aim, how ever they dissemble the matter; which
nevertheless, they do not attain, who study the enriching of their family
never so much.

I stand not to say, that Peireskius was of that mind, as to reckon the world
his Family; and to account all wise and good men to be to him in place of
Fathers, Brothers or Children, with whom he made all things common. I name such
men as these, because, though he neeer denied any thing, to the well-deserving;
yet he made such choice, that he would not give to all indifferently. For when
any one was less deserving, he knew how to temper his liberality. And I
remember, when one desired him to lend him ten Crowns, he answered, that he had
not ten to lend, but he had two which he would freely give him. Which when he
took, and some asked him, Why he did so? It is sufficient (answered he) to
satisfy present necessity, and I would rather be a penurious giver, than a
troublesome Creditor; having found by experience, that many men shun my sight,
because they know themselves in my debt.

Moreover, seeing nothing gains friends so much as Beneficence and friendly
Offices; it is no wonder that he had so many, so good and so illustrious, all
the world over. For his constant care was to provide wherewith to gratify
every man; and when his assistance was implored, he so bestirred himself, as
that he thought he was unhappy, if he had not foreseen and prevented the
necessity of his friend. Wherefore, he knew very well, what was the true
Love-potion; his love especially being so qualified, that he never respected
his own profit, nor would ever let slip any occasion of doing good to his
friends. In like manner, he never asked any thing for himself of Magistrates,
and Great men; but for his friends sakes, and especially for learned men, he
never blushed to Petition for any thing which might do them good. And whether
they attained any thing by his intercession, or by other means, he would
always return thanks; and take upon him both in his own name, and in the name
of the Muses, and Commonwealth of Learning, the restification of gratitude.

Nor did he only love his friends, but those whom they loved; especially their
Parents, Children, Kinsfolks, Allies, he ardently respected; to whom he would
show himself a Counselor, Helper, Protector and Patron. And it is a small
thing to say, that he spared no cost to further his friends affairs; for,
which is much more, he neither regarded his own health, nor the
unseasonableness of the weather, when he knew his friend was in danger. And his
candor and ingenuity was so great, that he never called his friends to account,
for what he had entrusted them with. Yea, and took it very ill, when having
deposited Moneys in the hands of those excellent Brethren the two Puteans, to
be laid out upon Books and other occasions, they would make Bills of what they
had laid out, and reckon what all came to; for it was far from his mind, that
matters should be carried so scrupulously, between him and them. In a word, he
had such a candid and innocent heart, as justly procured him the most loving
and respectful friends in the world.

Moreover, what a comfort may we think he was to his friends, when he visited
them in their sickness, death of children, or being afflicted with any other
casualty? For never man had better and more amiable words; and because he had
bin accustomed to suffer diseases and pains, no man was better acquainted with
what was fit to assuage all kind of maladies. We have known some, that
despaired of life, and were restored by his means; so ingenious he was in
detecting, and so eloquent in relating the Symptoms, Prognostics, and Causes
of such diseases, wherewith they had not bin acquainted, as also of the
Remedies, if not to cure, yet to assuage the same.

From what has bin said, we may understand how delightful his conversation must
needs be to those in health; seeing he so well knew, what things were suitable
to every ones Genius and Manners. For knowing so much as he did, it was easy
for him to discourse of such things to every one as were to him most
contentful; and being always intent to learn, he would only ask after such
things, as he knew the party to whom he spoke, would delight to relate.
Whereupon, being frequently visited by travelers and curious persons, he
would in the first place smell out, with what study they were most
delighted; and then he would show them only such of his Books, Rarities, and
other things which they would be delighted to see; nor would he present any
thing to them, which they did not affect to know. Then he would ask them, what
Rarities they had seen, either in their Country, or upon their journey; and he
had always some like thing either to show them, or to relate as having seen
the same, or read thereof in his Books. Whence it was, that every one was sorry
to part from him, wishing that the hours and days had bin longer. Yea, and he
was far from making such as frequently conversed with him to be aweary of his
company, or satiated with his discourse: for he was always pouring forth new
floods of Learning; and his expressions were so lively and ravishing that such
as heard him, were always asraid, lest he should make an end too soon. And
sometimes, he would pertinently interpose a jest, though very seldom; for his
custom being to speak seriously, he poured forth his words with such
eloquence, as needed not to be seasoned with Jests.

Moreover, though his company was most acceptable to every one; yet he himself
could not endure the company of such as loved only to hear, and speak, of
vulgar and trivial matters. And therefore he was wont to complain, that he was
forced to lose such good hours, only in hearing and assenting that it was cold
weather, or very hot; that the Sky was very clear, or cloudy; the Air healthy,
or unhealthy; and other such like things. And for this very cause he shunned
the society of Women; because he could hardly get any good thereby; and he must
be forced to talk to them only of toies and trifles.

Nor could he endure with patience clamorous, brawling, contentious, and
talkative People; yet could he best bear with the last, because amongst many
vain words, some profitable matter might be intermingled, which he was wont to
say, he picked, as Corn from amongst an heap of Chafe. Howbeit, they must be
sure to speak truth, which such talkative folk, are not much used to do; for he
hated nothing more, then a man that he found in a lie. Wherefore, he was wont
so to sift such kind of men, by asking them diverse Questions, touching the
circumstances of what they told, that they must needs have a good memory, if
they told a lie, and did not contradict themselves. The like esteem he had of
Boasters, and Braggadokies; save that he was sometimes delighted with some
witty passage, which would now and then bolt out, among their Boastings. But
nevertheless, he wonderfully hated all vainglorious boasters; for he was endued
with so great modesty, that being more delighted with brave actions, then
glorious speeches, he never was the man that thought, or spoke proudly of
himself. So that he might have raught such men better by his own example, who
never heard his own praise, but against his will, and rejected all ambitious
Titles which were put upon him, and did so extenuate his own virtues, though
very rare, that he was ever accusing himself of infirmity, or ignorance; giving
evident demonstration, that nothing could be more desirable, then so great
moderation of mind.

And therefore I shall add nothing touching that great gentleness, and singular
humanity, wherewith he was wont to entertain, all that came unto him, and all
that in any thing, desired his assistance. For it is sufficiently known, how he
was not ashamed, to give greater honor then he needed to have done, to any
men, though of mean condition, who were any way considerable, for Parentage,
Learning, or any kind of dignity; and with what affability he carried himself
toward the more obscure, clownish, and poorer sort of people; encouraging them
to come unto him, sit by him, speak to him, and to ask and answer Questions;
till every one thought himself by him fully satisfied. And this was truly his
carriage toward all, but especially to such as desired him to promote their
Causes depending in the Court. For he took very great pleasure, to hear the
parties themselves privately, and by questioning and pressing them, frequently
to attain more knowledge of the matters in controversy, then the Lawyers by
all their Pleadings and Writings, could suggest. For, although he was a lover
of eloquent, and learned pleadings: yet he was not well pleased, but greatly
offended, when he observed that Truth was disguised, Equity ensnared, the Laws
defrauded, and Ginnes framed and set to entangle Innocence. Howbeit, how
earnestly he endeavored, that every one might have justice, we have formerly
declared.

Moreover, his Dexterity and Industry was so great, and happily effectual, that
by his own Arbitration, he composed the differences of certain Gentlemen, which
otherwise could never have bin ended, procuring unexpected Reconciliation
between Families at variance. Also whereas it was a custom, that the Clients
engaged in suites before the Parliament, were wont to follow the Senators in
Crowds, as they went to the Palace, to Church, to their own Houses, or other
places, he would never suffer it but contenting himself with one Servant, or
one or two of his familiar friends, with whom he might discourse, he dismissed
the Troop of Clients, which would have followed him.

And as his Gentleness and Humanity was so great, as has bin said, toward all
men; so did he in a special manner, respect such as he knew to be eminent, in
regard of their Degree, Family, or Virtue. For, as he reverenced them all, so
did he render to every one, as far as he was able, more honor then was
precisely due unto them. Also such as were promoted to Dignities, returned into
their Country from Travailes, recovered of sickness, newly married, had
Children newly born, or attained any other of those good things of Fortune, so
called; he was wont to congratulate with them, either in their presence, or by
Letters, full of good Wishes Reverence and Affection. Nor did he omit any
friendly Office or Observance; sending Gifts withal, or at least communicating
what ever rarities he had obtained from sundry places, according as he knew, or
could guess, with what kind of things every one was most affected. And he
very often (truly) complained, how much time was lost, in giving and receiving
Honors and Complements; but, whereas he himself would most constantly refuse
such as were given to him, yet would he never omit any honor which he believed
due to another. Which he was sometimes blamed for; especially, seeing the great
weakness of his Body, might have very well excused him; But (his answer was)
Would you have me by being the first that leaves fooling, to be reputed the
greatest fool of all?

I shall not here recount his great Piety, and filial Respect, toward his
Parents; for it has bin formerly sufficiently hinted, in place convenient. Only
I shall add one thing, viz. how he overcame and mitigated the cursed and
shrewish humors of his Mother in Law. Not long before he took his Degree of
Doctorship, he was sitting at the Table with her, where she vented that choler
against him, which she had conceived against his Father. Having given him many
Tants and Reproaches, and upbraiding him of many things, whereto hoping that he
would reply, she intended further to disburthen her stomach; he denying nothing
of all that she had said, replied only, All which you say Mother is true; yea,
and there are many more things, for which you may justly complain. And then,
fearing lest she misinterpreting this assent, should blame him for dissembling,
and grow more angry; or through shame, should seek some other occasion of
scolding: he presently rose from the Table, and went his way. She not expecting
any such thing, and wondering at so strange a carriage, was so cooled in her
courage, that she contained her self, and spoke not a word more. Afterward, she
enquired of him in private, why he, knowing that what had bin laid to his
charge, was false, did nevertheless, assent thereunto, and take the same upon
himself: to which he answered, As I have already (Mother) so will I for the
future, take all upon my self; and I do advise you, that as often as you feel
your Breast swell with anger, you will empty the same, and ease your self
against me, rather then any other. For I shall take all patiently, but others
will be incensed so, as to increase your Anger, and make it, that you can
hardly give over, before you have brought your self thereby into some grievous
sickness. Nor was this carriage of his, unserviceable; for afterward, she
behaved her self much more gently, and began so far to love him, that she had
frequent thoughts to make him Heite of all she had; and had done it, but that
he was far off, in the Low Countries, when she died.

As for his Brother, his Affection to him was so great, and his Brothers love
likewise, so great to him again, that it deserves to be recorded for an example
to Posterity. For from their tender years, there was so great an Agreement
betwixt them, joined with the greatest mutual good will possible; that they
always conspired in the same studies, never fell out, nor ever so much as
thought of dividing the Estate between them. Touching his Kindred and Allies, I
can truly bear him witness, that he most dearly respected them all, and would
have them use his House, as their common In, so ost as they came to Town,
making no difference, how near or far off, they were of kin to him. And as he
would cheerfully undertake the Patronage of them all; so was he wont, when any
differences arose amongst them, to be Author, and Arbitrator of their
Composure. Of his Tutors and Teachers, we spoke formerly, in place fitting; I
shall only add what I have heard him say, more then once, that never any thing
befell him more delightful, then when he obtained, I know not what, of his
great friend Varius, for Fonvivius, who was his Tutor, during his Travails, as
has bin formerly related.

What need I speak any thing in this place, of the love he bore to his Native
Country, when as it is clear enough from what has bin already recounted, that
he was wholly taken up in adorning the same? for, to let pass how he would
slip no occasion of maintaining the Majesty of our Kings, and the Honors and
Rights of the French, against all outlandish Writers whatsoever; I shall only
speak a word of Provence, how it was his chiefest care, in a special manner, to
illustrate the same. For to that end, he took so much care and pains, that he
might pick an History out of the Ashes and Dust as it were, of the Earls
thereof; and give light to its most noble Families; using to this end, not bare
Tradition, slight Arguments, uncertain Authorities; but Authentic Records, as
Wills, Mariage-Contracts, Transactions of business, Law-deeds, Privileges;
also Statues, Tombs, Inscriptions, Pictures, Scutcheons, Coins, Seals, and
other such like things: which that he might discover, and get into his hands,
he spared no Cost, Pains, or Industry; perusing himself, or causing to be
perused, all Acts and Monuments, which could be found in the Treasuries and
Records of the Princes, Bishops, Abbots, Chapters Monasteries, Nunneries,
Nobles, Gentry, and private persons whomsoever: Also in the Statutes of
Churches, their Registers of Burials, and Kalenders; causing to be drawn out,
whatever thing of great Antiquity, was shadowed, pourtraied, engraven, or
expressed in Books, Vestments, Glasse-windows, and Buildings, sacred or
profane. So that it is less to be wondered at, if no Gentleman in Provence was
better acquainted with his own Noble Ancestors, then Peireskius was; seeing he
examined all their Genealogies, and tried them by the Records and Coats of
Arms, whose variations he declared, according to the several Houses, to which
they did belong. So, particularly, he framed with great labor, a Catalogue of
the Viscounts of Marseilles, drawing them down in order from so high as
William, the Brother of Saint Honoratus, Bishop of Marseilles, that is to say,
from the year nine hundred sixty and two. And after the same manner, he made
Tables of the Bishops and Abbots, and all renowned men; taking very great pains
likewise, about the Trobadores, or Poets aforesaid.

Hitherto also tended his care to get the Map of Provence, corrected and
printed, and to get knowledge of the several bounds in several ages, with the
several Peoples, Regions, and Princes, which we read to have bin therein; to
say nothing, of their Laws, Magistrates, Forms of Judicature, which he also
enquired into. But his greatest care, was punctually to search into, and get a
delineation of the Via Aurelia, or way of Orleance so called, as far as it ran
through Provence: also of the Amphitheatres that of Freius, and the other at
Arles; of the Triumphant Arches of Orange, and of St. Remigius; of the three
Towers yet remaining in the Palace of Aix; and in a word, of all things
savouring of Antiquity, For that he was besides careful of Inscriptions,
Marbles, Images, and other such things, is manifest from what has bin formerly
declared; as also what we have hinted tonching Live-wights, Minerals, Plants,
and other things, either proper to Provence, or brought thither from strange
Countries.

Finally, it was to this end, that he constantly excited such wits, as either
he knew, or foresaw, were born to honor their Country; continually
admonishing and animating them, and affording them, if need were, Books, and
all other requisites. And as he was wont to commend them, who, by their
Writings and Inventions, and especially, by describing the Country, and such
things as had bin therein acted, did render the same famous; so did he most of
all esteem the studies of Polycarpus Riviera, the glory of the Carthusian
Order: who besides his immense Learning, had rare knowledge of all the Affairs
of Provence, which he intended to relate in a particular volume of that
Herculean work which he had in hand. Also he was very much contented, that by
his exhortations, he had persuaded Jacobus Morguesius, a Senator of the
Parliament of Aix, and a great honor to that Court, who had obtained a Writ of
Ease, that he would set himself to illustrate the Statutes of Aix: by which
means great light would be afforded to all the Tribunals of Provence. And how
often did he wish, that Petrus Decormius, the Advocate General, a man of most
rare learning, would surrender his Office, to his worthy and learned Son,
that he might wholly give himself to the Collection, Disposition, and
Justification of the Decrees of Parliament, especially such as himself had
propounded! How often did he defire, that Scipio Pererius, whose wit, judgment
and eloquence, he could never enough admire, would publish those
Court-pleadings of his, so learned and elegant! And these few Instances, among
many others, may suffice to show his affection to his Country; for it is to
small purpose to say, how much he grieved in troublesome times, when there was
no remedy but prayers.

It should now follow, that I speak of his Religion toward Almighty God: but
it is in the first place confessed by all, that he so defended the faith of his
Ancestors, that is to say, the Roman Catholic Profession, that he also took
pains to draw as many of the Heterodoxe thereunto, especially, such as were
learned, as he was able.

Moreover, his religious worship of the Deity, was apparent by his rigid
observance of all public Ceremonies, as far as his Health would permit. For he
was present at Masses, Sermons, and Processions; and there was no remarkable
Holyday, in which he did not Confess himself to the Priest, and receive the
Encharist.

Moreover, he had constantly a sincere faith, and love toward God, having high
thoughts of so sublime a Majesty, and exceedingly confiding in his goodness. I
say nothing of the Reverence he bare to the Pope, Cardinals, Legates, Nuncio's:
for he omitted no occasion to testify to them his Reverence, Affection, and
Obedience; so that it is no wonder, that they had no business in Provence, but
they desired that he might have the mannagement thereof. In which respect also,
he obliged the rest of the Praelates, Generals, and Provincials of Religious
orders, whom it would be redious particularly to recount, being acknowledged
fora Patron of all religious orders, especially, the Reformates; who when they
had any business in the Court of Rome, the Kings Court in Provence, or the
Parliament there; they presently implored his help.

And now that I may come to speak more partieularly of his studies, I must
premise in the first place, that Peireskius was of a ready wit; or if he were
any way deficient, he made it up with Art, and Labor. For, things of most
difficulty to understand, he comprehended for the most part, at the first
hearing; and by continual enquiry, and exercise of his mind, he fitted the same
to understand any thing.

Moreover, his wit was so naturally disposed, to all studies, that there was no
kind of Learning with which he was not in love, and whereof he delighted not to
discourse with learned men. Being moderate in all other things, he seemed only
immoderate in his desire of knowledge; and never man was more desirous then he,
to run through the famous Encyclopedia, or whole Circle of Arts. Yea, and not
only so, but he was studious of Mechanics, or Handi-Crafts; for which cause,
there was never any famous Workman that went that way, but he entertained him
at his House, and learnt of him many works or mysteries of his Craft; for he
would keep him with Diet, wages, and gifts, and make much of him for months
and years together.

Moreover, his sagacity was wonderful, by reason of his constancy, which
rendered him indefatigable in his inquiries. In which regard, he was frequently
happy in his conjectures, because from such circumstances as were obvious, he
would smell out and happily divine such things as were hereupon dependent.
There never came any thing to his hands, but he would attain all the knowledge
thereof, which was possible to be acquired; so that he was justly reputed all
the world over, a kind of Judge of abstruse and mysterious things. For if any
thing was any where found out, whose Original, Nature, and Use was unknown,
presently he was appealed to; as if the true knowledge thereof, could not be
attained without his help. Yea, and he dived into the condition of such things
as were not, but were only imagined to be; and considered whether it were
possible, that such things could be in Nature?

Of his Industry and quickness of wit, we have all ready frequently, spoken,
by reason of which, he never deipaired to attain any thing, which the wit of
man could attain, or bring about; provided he had a mind thereto; and would do
his uttermost endeavor to accomplish the same. And verily he accomplished and
obtained many things, which see ned above his condition and beyond his
strength; because he could easily foresee whatever might help or hinder, and
was indefatigable in improving the one, and declining the other, and would try
a thousand ways, till he had accomplished his designs. Moreover, he made
friends in all places, and freely obliged them with courtesies, that whether he
had at present any design in his Head, or might hereafter have, they might be
ready to serve him. Wherefore, having propounded unto himself his End what it
was he would have effected; he first considered whether he was to attain it by
money, or entreaties, through love or fear, by command or free consent; also who
was able to contribute any thing thereto; also what, where, when, and which
way; and then without delay he set his hand dexterously to the work. In like
manner, he was very acute and quick in his invention of the causes of any
admirable works of Art or Nature: for he conjectured with great facility; and
when he had a little digested his thoughts, he would confirm his conjectures
with reasons of all sorts. Moreover, he had a happy memory, and which seldom
failed him. For though he complained that his memory was slippery, and weak;
yet it cannot be expressed, what a variety of things he remembered, even from
his young years, and that not in general only, but also with the particular
circumstances of places, actions, words, and persons. Whence it was, that he
allwaies wonderfully delighted such as heard him discourse, for be the occasion
of the discourse what it would, he could always produce out of his Storehouse
pertinent matter, which he uttered in choice words, with the greatest grace
imaginable. For whether it were some invention of his wit, or somewhat
treasured up in his memory, or some Passion or affection of his mind, which he
would declare; he had words so at will, that he could utter all he had to say,
distincely, gravely, copiously, and eloquently, so that a man could not see
things more clearly with his eyes, then he would set them out with words.

He was of a mature and solid Judgment; especially being assisted by so much
experience, reading and meditation. And although some men may have accounted
him rash, because he never stood considering, when occasion was offered to
advance Learning, and assist learned men: yet that was a business which he had
consulted of in his whole life time, from his very youngest years, so that
nothing could be more deliberate. Yea, and he was wont to say, there was no
room for deliberation. when such men were to be assisted, who one way or
another, by their learning or inventions, would profit all mankind. He seemed
in some cases over credulous; but though the very sinews and limbs of wisdom,
are to believe nothing rashly, yet reason does not require that a man should
believe nothing, but what he has seen, or heard, or felt with his hands. For
a difference is to be made, and every man not to be believed: yet are there
good and learned men who can neither deceive nor be deceived, whom not to
credit were a barbarous and brutish thing. Especially, seeing it is the
disposition of a Wittoo shallow, to persuade it self, that there is nothing in
the secret Closets of Nature, beside; these familiar things, which we
commonly meet with in the world; and to make those things which are seen in
one Conntrey or Age, the measure and model of all that which may be in all
other Ages and places. Which because Peireskius knew very well, he readily
gave ear to all, whose learning or honesty he did not question; and though he
did not presently determine, that such things as were related were impossible
to be or to be done: yet he was wont to weigh all things, and at least so to
enquire into every circumstance, that, if at least he gave credit to any thing,
it could not be otherwise than probable. And if sometimes he stuck close to his
own reasonings, and seemed a little too stiff in his received opinions, the
cause was, that he conceived that a man ought not to be always vvavering, nor
to depart from that opinion, which some reason or conjecture had ratified;
unless some stronger evidence appeared, to evince more friendly the contrary.
And doubtless the safest way is, for a man to have his mind disposed to put
off all prejudice, so as to give place to reason and verity without
refractoriness; but because the Reasons of things, are hardly ever of equal
weight; it always comes to pass, that a man's mind enclines to one part; so
that every man is so much more worthy excuse, inasmuch as whether he will or
no, he assents unto that which is most likely.

He was also rarely industrious, and of a diligence invincible; Which was
truly greater than could comport with his health and strength, seeing he hardly
ever so much relaxed that same earnest contention and bent of his mind, as to
let an hour, much less a day, to pass without a Line; so exceeding great was
his delight in study. It is needless for me to tell of his indefatigable care,
when he was to make any observation, or to commit any thing to writing. For
how much he effected in observing things Celestial or Terrestial, Natural or
Artificial, old or new, or what evet else might seem worthy of care and
consideration, I have already all along hinted; and he was so unwearied in
vvriting, that he presently noted down, what ever he met with. To say nothing
of his Letters, which were very many in number, most full of Learning and
commonly very large.

There never happened any thing memorable, which he did not presently set down in
writing with his own hand; such as National pompes, public calamities,
prosperous and adverse accidents pertaining to great men, famous contentions,
discourses had with Princes and learned men, and many other things of like
Nature. He would presently set them down, lest by delaying some businesses
might intervene, and disturb him, and his memory in the mean while
languishing, might let slip many. particularities. His diligence was the same
when any notable thing came into his mind, or was suggested by some other, or
observed in reading, for he would presently take pen in hand and note the same
down, not enduring that any thing should perish, which he conceived might be
useful to himself or others. Now he wrote things down in his Memorials, because
he then judged they were out of danger of being forgotten, seeing he could not
trust his memory as Socrates or Pythagoras were wont to do; and had found by
experience, that the very labor of writing did six things more deeply in his
mind.

Moreover, whatsoever he noted down, he did it upon a new or fresh leaf of
paper that if anything were afterward to be added, it might be done without
confusion. And he always wrote on the top of the lease, or the upper part of
the margent, the Subject or Title of what he was to note down, in a large
character (with which commonly he inserted proper names, and other words, which
in the ordinary letter could not so well be read, or so soon found out) and he
added the year and the day, and if he received it from some other, he premised
the Authors name. Nor did he only leave a margent, sometimes on one, more
frequently on both sides of the sheet, that if through haste any thing had bin
omitted, it might be there added, rather than interlined: but he lest also a
very large front, that the Title might be better distinguished and discerned,
and chiefly, if through haste he had not time to set it down. Howbeit that
seldom happened; for he never willingly left any thing unperfected; because he
had found too often, that things only begun, or done to halves, out of hope to
enlarge them afterward, by reason of intervenient occasions, remained as they
were left, without any further addition. And therefore he wrote every thing as
accuratly as he could; and he was vexed, if when any one was bid by him to
write any thing which he dictated, or somewhat which was collected from some
Author, or of his own invention; he left not room enough to prefix the Title:
or not margent enough, or sufficient distance between line and line, and one
word and another, expecting to write the same over again, in a more elegant and
ample manner, For he truly judged, that such delays were deceitful; and that
they were an occasion, if of no other inconvenience, at least of loss of Time.

In like manner he took it ill, if any, being far distant, did stay till his
return, or for some other occasion, fully to relate or transmit any thing; for
he would that what ever was requisite for him to know or have, should be
written to him at large, and sent forthwith; because through such kind of
delays, he had bin frequently deprived of many goodly and very profitable
things. Now he that loved him, could not be too large in his Letters, because
he desired to have all the circumstances of the subject matter, punctually set
down. Yea, and he often complained, that those that wrote did not sufficiently
consider, that such things as were clearly visible to them, and which
therefore, as too well known, either they little esteemed, or neglected to
write; were to persons absent, altogether unknown, and would to them seem new
and consequently delightful. And therefore, as when he himself enquired into
any thing, or questioned another about it, he would not omit to enquire into
every thing which concerned the same; even so, when he desired any thing to be
sought into and observed, by others, either near at hand or far off, he always
gave order, that it should be viewed all manner of ways, so that no
circumstances, if possible, might lie hid, which he therefore was commonly
accustorned exactly to set down in vvriting, being wonderfully delighted, when
any one of his own accord and by his own industry, did attend either all, or
most, or at least some circumstances.

Moreover, his care was exceeding great, to procure plenty and variety of
Books. For to say nothing of Manuscripts, which if ancient, in case he could
not procure them, he would cause Copies to be written out (and sometimes vvrote
them out himself) having by him Catalogues, of the most renowned and chief
Libraries in the world. To pass over, I say, Manuscripts, he bonght up printed
Books at Rome, Venice, Paris, Amsterdam, Antwerp, London, Lions, and other
places; and that not only after the Mart was over at Francfort, but all the
year long, his friends acquainting him with, and sending him such, as were for
his turn; for which he caused money to be paid, either by the Bankers and
Money Changers, or by friends. Also where ever any Libraries were to be sold
by outcry, he took order, to have the rarer Books bought up, especially such
as were of some neat Edition, which he had not. And truly it is incredible to
tell, how great a number of Books he gathered together; also, it is incredible
how it should therefore come to pass, that he lest not a most complete Library
behind him: but neither of these will seem strange, if a man shall consider,
that he sought Books, not for himself alone, but for any that stood in need of
them. He lent an innumerable company, which were never restored; also he gave
a world away, as I hinted before, of which he, could hardly hope ever to get
the like again; Which he did when learned men had occasion to use them. For as
for such Books as were commonly to be had at the Booksellers, of them he was
wonderfully profuse and lavish. For which cause, as often as he was informed
of Books newly come forth, he would have many of them, vxhich he would partly
keep by him, and partly distribute them immediately among his friends,
according as he knew they would like the subject matter thereof.

And whether he gave them away, or kept them, he would be sure to have them
neatly bound and covered; to which end, he kept an industrious Book-binder in
his House, who did exquisitely bind and adorn them. Yea, and sometimes he kept
many Book-binders at once; for one man was hardly ever able to bind up such
store of Books, as came trowling in from all parts. Also, it happened
frequently, that such Books as he borrowed, being neglected by their owners and
ill bound, he delivered to his binder to be rectified and beautified, viz. when
their subject matter or rarity deserved that cost; so that having received
them, ill-bound, and ill-favored, he returned them trim and handsome. And so
he did by all the very old Books which he could get, whether printed or
Manuscripts. Nor did his care only extend to such as were entire and perfect;
but even to the fragments of Books, and Leaves half eaten. And being demanded
why he would be at that charge in the Bookbinding, he would say, the Cause was,
inasmuch as the best Books, when they fell into unlearned men's hands
ill-accoutred, were pitifully used; he therefore endeavored, that they might
be prized at least for the beauty of their binding, and so escape the danger of
the Tobacconist and Crocer. And those which he bound for his own use, he would
have his Mark stamped upon them. Which Mark was made up of these three Capital
Greek Letters, N K PH, which were so neatly interwoven, that being doubted,
they might be read to the right hand, and to the left, by which initial capital
Letters, these three words were designed, Nicolas, Klaudius, Phabricius.

As for the Room wherein his Library was kept, it was indeed too small, though
the whole walls were filled, and nests were placed likewise on the floor,
filled with Books. Also he had Books in the Porch of his Study, and likewise
piled on heaps, in several Chambers. And truly, he had frequent thoughts to
build a large Gallery: but so many things were then to be removed, especially,
the Library of his Father and Ancestors, in which he had laid up the greatest
part of his rarities; also he was always so full of business, that he could
not accomplish what he intended, but left the House just as he at first found
it. I omit to say, that the Porch to his Study aforesaid; also the Porch to the
House, and his Carden and other places, were loaded with Marbles, both such as
were engraven upon, and such as were formed into statues; and that whereas in
the old stndy, he had treasured up an huge Mass of old Coins and weights,
especially the lighter fort; and in other places, weights, measnres, Arms,
Statues, and innumerable other things: it must needs be, that all things lay as
it were confused to others, but to him that knew perfectly where every thing
was, they were orderly placed. He was far from the Practice of those mentioned
by Seneca, who adorned with cutious gold-worh, such Corinthian Vessels, as the
madness of a few men had rendered estimable; for he neglected even those
precious Boxes which he pro^ided at first for his Coins; especially after his
loss by Thieves, had made him more cautious; so that he made cases of Ebony,
and such like stuff, only for things less subject to be stole, as the Tripod
aforesaid, the drinking Cups, and such like things.

Nor was it without cause that I told you, how that what might seem to others
consused, was not so to him. For though he would frequently excuse himself,
that all in his House was nothing but a confused and indigested Mass, or heap;
yet was he never long in seeking any thing, in so great an heap, provided that
none meddled with ms Rarities, Books, or Papers, but himself; and that rome body
else being commanded to ferch this or that, had not put them out of order. For
to say nothing of his Books, which were all titled, and distributed into
certain Classes, and proper places as much as might be, and which he could
describe to Simeon Corberanus, an ingenious Joyner, by any the least
circumstance, even where they were not methodically digested; he was wont so to
digest and bind up into bundles with paper, or some other covering, all other
things, that with his own hand he would write litles upon every bundle
intimating whatsoever was therein contained.

And whereas he was accustomed in a peculiar manner, to bind up into bundles,
such Letters as he received according to the variety of Perfons, Places, or
Times: he first writ upon each, who wrote the same, from whence, what year,
month, and day; and subjoyned a brief Index of the chief matters, which in
reading, he had marked with a line drawn under them: for by this means he was
helped, both to answer the same more distinctly and speedily; as also to find
the same, if at any time he went to seek any thing in his Letters. And if any
new matters were contained in his Letters, which others desired to be
acquainted with, he did not promiscuously show them; but caused them so to be
written out, that he first enclosed within certain bars or lines, what he would
have omitted in the transcription; cutting off such names of men, things and
business, as he desired to conceal; also changing and sweerening the phrase,
that no offense might be taken.

And as he was wont to keep carefully such Letters as were sent him by others;
so did he cause his Scribes to write Copies of such as he himself wrote, which
he kept by themselves, according to the variety or condition of the Countries
or Persons, to whom fie sent them. And being sometime demanded, why he did so,
he answered, Not because he thought his Letters worth keeping, but because it
concerned him many times, to see what long since, or lately, he had written, or
not written; least he might inculcate the same thing after the same manner, and
so become tedious; or might omit that which he was uncertain, whether he had
written, or no; or least such things which he had sought out, and digested with
great care, might slip out of his memory: or he might want wherewith to
convince such as should deny, that he had informed them of this or that; or
finally, least in case his Letters should come to misearry, he must be forced
to take pains, to compose new ones.

As for the reading of Books, he had truly in his latter years, little time to
bestow therein. For he was wholly in a manner taken up with writing of Letters;
and when he did run over any Books, he did it chiefly, that he might collect
somewhat from them, to put into his Letters. And whenever he gave himself to
reading, he was not wont cursorily to slip, or run over the difficult places;
but he kept a slow pace, and was wont to stop, when he met with any difficulty.
To which end he always had his pen at hand, with which he drew a line under
obscure places, and whatever he thought worthy of observation. For he said,
that he was thereby put in mind, when he toook the Book in hand again, to
consider afresh the difficult passages; to inculcate and imprint upon his mind
such things as were most observable; and readily to find what was most for
his turn. He was not therefore of their mind, who having gotten fair Books,
are afraid to blot them with such lines, or marginal notes: for he esteemed
those Books most highly, into which he could insert most notes; and therefore
he commonly caused all his Books, when they were in Quires, to be washed over
with Alum-water, and when he foresaw their Margents would not be large enough,
he caused white paper to be bound between the printed leaves. Also he was wont,
when he received any observations from his friends, either to write them into
his Books with his own hands, or to cause his said friends, or some others to
write them in.

In like manner, if he had received by gift: or had bought Books which had
belonged to learned men, he esteemed them ^ so much the more highly, by how
much the fuller they were of such things, as they had inserted with their own
handwriting. And he was exceeding desirous to get into his Hands, Books of the
Authors own handwriting, especially such as had not bin printed, when ever he
could procure them of the Authors or their Heirs, which he would cause to be
printed, or if the Authors were unwilling, he would at least have them written
out for his own use. And for this very cause, he had always Scribes in
readiness (amongst which, I must not forger to name his most faithful and
laborious Scribe, Franciscus Parrotus) that whether in the vulgar Languages, or
in Larine, Greek, Arabic or Turkish, or any other Language, he would have any
thing transcribed, he might not fail to have it done to his mind. For he could
never endure, that the least invention, or observation of any man, should be
lost; being always in hopes, that either himself, or some other would be
advantaged thereby.

And it is requisite, that I acquaint you, that as he was careful of all other
studies, so was he not unmindful of that which concerned his own Office. For,
conceiving that every man, who by the condition of his birth, or his own free
Election, was destined to some kind of public life, ought chiefly to bend his
mind to that, which his Office and Designation required; and that asterward he
might divert to other studies, at his pleasure. Therefore he himself, though he
followed, indeed, other studies; yet did he not therefore cease to exercise
himself in that Art, wherein he was most studied, and whereof he made
Profession. For he studied the Laws, after the liberal method of Cujaeins,
which tends to illustrate the said Laws from the Fountains themselves, and
fundamental Maxims of Equity and Right, rather then from the rivulets of the
Doctors or Lawyers. And this it was, that chiefly made him affect the study of
Antiquity; because it gave him great light therein; and, besides a Manuscript
of the Pandects which he had, he sought after the Manuscripts also of other
Books, because some places in the printed Books, had need to receive light from
them. And upon this occasion truly, I remember, how doubting upon a time (and
the Florentine Pandects could not perfectly satisfy him) what the
Interpretation should be of that Law, called Neratius, concerning possession
kept, or lost only by the mind; he wrote to Rome, that out of an old Manuscript
of Cardinal Barberino's, the Text of that Law, with the Marginal
Interpretations, might be faithfully exscribed by the Hand of Buccardus: For,
as often as he foresaw, that he was to give his vote in Parliament, concerning
some famous Case there depending, he would turn all stones, that he might not
do it unprovided.

So, long since, touching that Question, Who ought to have the Gain, the
Creditor or the Debtor, when after some species of Money being lent out, the
value thereof is raised by an intervenient Decree of the Prince: he wrote to
Pacius, who was then alive, to acquaint him with all that he had observed upon
that Question. So lately he dealt with Salmasins, touching the punishments
anciently decreed by the Romans and other Nations, for such Soldiers as leave
their stations, and give up strong holds, wherewith they are entrusted, rather
through faint-heartedness, then Treachery. So he dealt with the renowned
Bignonus, who may be called the Scaevola and Varro of this Age, touching the
Authority of the Roman Laws, throughout France, by reason of the Edicts of
Alaricus, Charles the great, and other Princes, who seemed to ratify the Laws
of the Theodosian Code, and the reft. In the mean while, he himself wrote all
in a manner, that could be said or imagined upon these subjects, so well
furnished was he evermore, which made them write back to him again, that he
ought to consult with none but himself; but the reason that he dealt so with
them was, that they might not take pains to stuff their answers with such
things as he already knew, but endeavor rather to produce somewhat that was
new.

And what I said occasionally touching his study of Antiquity, comprehends
principally Universal History, which he had so printed in his mind and memory,
that a man would have thought he had lived in all places and times. For he held
it evermore as a Maxim, that History did serve exceedingly, not only to give
light to the study of the Law, but to the ordering of a man's life, and the
possessing of his mind, with a rare and ingenuous delectation. For he counted
it in some sort, more effectual then Philosophy, because she instructs men
indeed, with words, but History inflames them with examples; and makes in some
fort, that we ought not to think much of our short life, making the same
partaker of things and times which are past. And therefore, he always sought
the Histories of all Nations, and as he highly prized those which were very
ancient, so did he most of all esteem those of our own Nation, or which any way
pertained thereunto. For, as he could hardly well endure to see an ingenuous
man, who was a stranger in his own world; so did he a cquaint himself with all
that was written, not only of the Affairs of Provence, and France in
particular; but also of Italy, Spain, Germany, England, Hungary, and in a word
of all that had any Comerce or quarrels with our Nation.

And with what ardency think you, did he seek to get a Translation and Edition
of those Arabic Books, which the most excellent Golius brought lately with him
out of the East containing an History of the Expeditions and Wars of our Kings
in Syria? For he conceived that possibly the Writers of that Nation, might
relate many things otherwise then our Writers, which it were worth the while to
know; that at least by comparing both together, a more probable narration might
be framed. For he was likewise of opinion, that many things omitted by our
Historians, might be from thence supplied, seeing himself also had many things
to be added. out of several Councils or Diets of those Countries and Times, the
Charters, Letters, Seals, Coats of Arms, Inscriptions, Coins and other such
like things. Now he was extremely curious of such things as these above others,
because he said they were incorrupted witnesses of antiquity, and that such
things might be learned from them, which a man should seek in vain, among all
Historians extant.

And truly, I remember, how when upon a time he was looking through certain
spectacles of Augmenting glass upon Papers and Coins, whose letters were
exceeding small, and half eaten away, that of Seneca was objected against him,
You call him an idle person, who spends the greatest part of the day poreing
upon rusty plates of brass. Also that of the Poet, To buy old Statues Damasip
is mad: and other such like. To which his answer was, I am not ignorant that
many Iaugh heartily at these Studies, as neither honorable to my self, nor
useful to others: howbeit, those men alone are justly to be blamed, who refer
these things to no Learning, or to such as is vain; seeing most men get them
only to adorn their Armories and the walls of their Houses, and have them to no
other purpose, but that it may be said, they have such things. But those men
are worthy praise, and do not vainly spend their time, who seek out such
things, weighing and illustrating the same, to the end they may give light to
the understanding of good Authors; that the circumstances of Histories may be
more perfectly understood; and that the Persons, things and actions, may be
more deeply fixed in the mind. For by Statues and Coins, we may know what was
the Countenance and habit of renowned men and illustrious women, whose actions
we delight to hear related; how those ancient gods, goddesses, and heroes were
formed, with their Ensigns and Badges; what things were for the Ornaments or
Instrements of Religions, Wars, Magistracies, Crowns, Chatiots, Triumphs,
Thrones, Seals, and other such shings innumerable. Which when he had said and
more to the same purpose, then producing diverse Monuments of antiquity, he
demonstrated the same; so as by this means to clear up most of the obscure
passages in Authors, and such places, as were by no other means intelligible.

Yea, and frequently he brought fuch as heard him into admiration, when he
showed, that without the view and consideration of such things as these, the
meaning of Authors could not be understood, seeing they make so frequent
mention of Comes and Weights, as Talents, Sieles, Drachms, Denaries,
Victoriates, Selterces, also of the As or pound weight and its parts, and many
other things; of which while he reasoned, producing a vast quantity and variety
thereof, I have known many men astonished. And more especially when upon a time
a multitude of Ounces being produced, differing one from another in weight and
fashion, he was asked what meant those so different marks or tokens, which were
upon them. For he said that a single Globe or little Boule was put, not only to
signify the number one; but that by the swelling and bunching thereof, which
the Greeks term Oncos, an allusion might be made to the word Ounce. For the
same cause, the most were marked with an Hook, which being called Uncus or
Uncinum, it was intimated, that that was pondus unciale, or an ounce weight.
But in some and especially those of Tuscanie, there was a Spear, which the
Greeks term Lonche, that by leaving out ^ the same word once might be
intimated: So, for the most part, the Moon marked on, did signify an unity;
not only because she alone does enlighten the night, with rare splendour; but,
because from the word Luna, L being taken, there remains una, which signifies
one, So upon some was marked that side of the Astragalus or Cock-all which
being cast uppermost makes one; and upon others that side was only understood,
the opposite being expressed, called Senio, Sice or Six. The like things he
declared in the other parts of the As or pound weight, as when in the Semissis
or half pound, was marked an ear of Corn, because the ancients alluded to the
words Semiuis and Semissis; but thus much may suffice to have hinted, to show
how he by his study and industrious, and sagacious examination of these things,
could interpret matters which no Books could show; which therefore did so much
the more aflonish the hearers.

For it was otherwise a less wonder (though many were justly delighted
therewith) that he could as well eloquently discourse of vessels and measures,
as he could by producing the vessels and measures of the Ancients, make clear
demonstration of what he said. And verily as often as any Vessel, Coin, or
Statue, or any other extraordinary thing was presented to him; he was always
wont as soon as he could, so to weigh and consider the same, that before he
laid it up or restored it to the owner, he would perfectly know, all that might
be known or conjectured, touching the same. For he consulted with his Books,
compared it with like things, and called to mind what ever he had observed,
that might give light thereunto; and by all posble Art, he enquired into the
capacity, weight. or shape thereof; and asked the opinion of all learned men in
all parts of the world; and collected all his own conjectures, which he could
by any reason make good; and in brief, he would not let it pass, till he knew
as much thereof, as it was possible for any mortal man to know. And when he had
arrived so far, then either he inserted all he knew, into a Book of the same or
like matter; or he wrote it in a sheet of paper, to be put into his
commentaries; or he took occasion to write a Letter one or more, wherein he
explained the fruit of his labors in that subject. It is therefore no wonder,
seeing all his life long he used this diligence, that nothing could be
propounded, which like another Oedipus, he did not presently explain and unfold.

The same course he took, touching the wonderful things of Nature; of which
seeing all along we have made frequent mention, it is needless to make any
further specification in this place. It may suffice to say, that no man made
more observations, or procured more to be made, to the end that at last some
Notions of natural things more sound and pure, than the vulgarly received,
might be collected: for which cause he admired the Genius, and approved the
design of the great Chancellor of England Sir Francis Bacon, often grieving
that he never had the happiness to speak with him, being then alive when he
was at, and came last from Paris. He was verily, displeased with that Doctrine
of Nature, which is commonly taught in the Schools, as being too obscure and
imaginary, built more upon tricks of Wit, than experiments of Nature. He was
therefore wont to frown, and look with a very discontented countenance, when he
met with such Writers of natural Philosophy, which did contend more with
subtilty than solidity; and though he commended the acuteness of their wits,
yet he grieved that it was worn out rather about words and trivial
distinctions, than employed in penetrating into the nature of the things
themselves, whose very surface was still unknown. And if they were very stiffly
opinionated, and addicted either to the Aristotelean or any other Sect, he
would leave them to their own wisdom, and never conrest with them, about any
thing; but if they were such, which for Love of Truth would lay aside
prejudice, and had rather gently to hear, then stubbornly contradict; then
would he pour forth such discourses, as they could not but receive with
pleasure and applause. For, although they did not altogether allow some of his
opinions, yet were they wonderfully affected, while he did evermore confirm his
opinions, either by the observations of such things, as though vulgar, were not
sufficiently marked; or by the relation of his own, or other men's experiments,
of which he had always plenty to produce (so continually curious was he to
note down and collect the same) or by producing the things themselves, about
which the question was; for he was furnished with an infinite quantity of rare
Minerals, Stones, Plants, Animals, such as for any price or by any Art he could
obtain, and keep.

By the Premises may be gathered, that he was not pleased with those Logical
and Metaphysical niceties, which are no ways prositable, and serve to maintain
bawling, and contentious disputes. For though he was delighted to hear a thing
acutely concluded; yet he grieved that the Subject matter was but a trifle. So
was he also many times troubled, when he heard men discourse of sublime things,
which fall not under sense. For that the mind of man could ascend so high, as
to Ideas and separate substances, that he accounted a thing to be admired and
commended; but to dream so many things concerning them, and to go about to
prove the same, by such weak Reasons and Analogies, that was a thing which he
did not approve, but pity. For he was grieved that excellent wits should
pass over, unknown and unhandled, such things as we see with our eyes, and
feel with our fingers, and busy themselves about such matters, as they cannot
reach, no not so much as by a probable conjecture. Yea, and he was wont to say,
that he was not without fear, that the Doctors did presume too far, when with
such confidence they disputed so many things touching God and matters Divine,
besides what the Christian Faith teaches us to believe. For all the Decrees of
Faith he said must be accounted indubitable; but what they discourse over and
above, cannot be but doubtful; and seeing what is maintained by one is
contradicted by many, the Majesty of sacred divinity is thereby violated. For
which cause, he could indeed bear with those unprofitable public disputes in
matters Logical, Physical, Medicinal, and such like: but he could not with
patience endure the boldness of such as would take upon them to prove that
there is no God, that God is unjust, impotent, improvident, miserable, and the
like; for though they said they did it to illustrate the truth, yet he thought
it was a thing undecent, and that no Prince or discreet man, could take it
well, that such things should be controverted concerning himself, especially
when there was no need of such disputes.

He could better bear that manners should be called in Question and
controverted, provided the Statutes of Religion, and Laws of the Country were
not meddled with. For he conceived that the Laws were most highly to be
esteemed, which might be wished indeed, as good as possible, deserving
nevertheless ^eneration whatever they be. Forasmuch as in the obsetvation
thereof, consisted the safety of the Commonwealth; so that such as are not very
just, may be more useful for public good, than juster, provided they be
religiously observed. And therefore he did not dislike those men, who being
thus affected, did contemplate the Laws and Customs of sundry Nations and
compare them with our own. For by this means he conceived an ingenuous man
might lay aside that prejudice, which makes the vulgar sort of men account the
Customs of their own Country to be the Law of Nature, and that nothing is well
done, which is not suitable to their ways and manners. For when all things
considered, he shall see, that other Nations have their Reasons to justify
their Manners and Customs, and that every Nation dislikes the Customs of
another; then is he in a capacity to elevate his mind above the vnlgar
condition, and though he defend his own Country manners, yet to be
indifferently inclined toward all men, and to become like Socrates, a Citizen,
not of one Country only, but of the whole World; to admire nothing in humane
affairs, and in a word, to have his mind so tempered, as to enjoy the greatest
tranquillity possible, and consequently, the greatest good.

And for this very cause, he did not only out of Books and printed narrations,
inquire into the variety of men's manners, which by himself alone, or with some
friends, he examined; but with all diligence possible, he enquired of such as
came from far Countries, what notable thing they had observed, concerning the
manners of the people of those parts; exhorting all his friends that took
journies into foreign parts, to observe the same. And by this means he was so
well acquainted with the ancient and late manners of all Nations, that it was
almost impossible to relate any new thing unto him; so that he seemed to have
bin born, or at least to have conversed in all Countries; so that consequently,
to that goodness wherewith he was naturally inclined to all men, he added such
a kind of humanity, as made him embrace men of all conditions, as if they were
his Brothers; being ready to do good to all, and hurt no body. For he indeed,
hated those abominable vices of Impiety, Cruelty, Malice, Perfidiousness, and
the rest: but distinguishing humane nature from the pravity thereof, and taking
the same into serious consideration, he was moved with pity, that through
weakness and blindness, men could not continue in the way of virtue. Seeing men
were not sufficiently aware of the nature of their lusts, and the true ends
which good men should aim at. For if men understood how little would content
Nature, they would abandon all deceit and fraud, by which superfluous things
are sought: And, if they knew but the use of Riches; Humanity, Honesty,
Moderation (for want of which, not only Societies, but private men's lives are
disturbed) would not be banished the World.

Moreover, he studied the Mathematics with all his might; because they were no
ways subject to the foresaid Disputes; and they so accustomed the mind, that
being used to such truths as were made clear by demonstration, it could not
easily be deceived with the bare appearance of truth; and in a word, did by
their evidence and certainty, cause such a kind of pleasure, as none could be
greater, more honest, or more constant. And the truth is, he had not leisure,
scrupulously to study all the parts of Mathematics; yet he would know and
understand, the principal and more facile points of every one. But he
principally loved Astronomy, because a Man (as he was) born for contemplation,
could not behold a greater, more sublime and excellent sight then those
illustrious Regions of the Heavenly Bodies. And next to that, he loved
Geography, because it and Chronology, did most of all illustrate History, and
cause, that ingenuous men, and otherwise learned, should not be like Children;
but rather possess themselves with the knowledge of the whole World, and all
the times and Ages thereof. And next to that, he loved Optics, because thereby
were explained the Causes of so many things, which appear to the eyes, which
are accounted miracles, or at least, would be so, were it not for their
familiarity, and our want of consideration.

And therefore he was wonderfully delighted with painting, which made him keep
Painters; and procure Pictures, whose excellency, he knew as well as any man.
And he frequently averred, that it repented him that he had not learnt to
paint, when he was young; and wished, that with the loss of two fingers of his
left hand, he could purchase that skill which his right hand wanted. For though
both in his own Country and abroad, he had used the Industrious help of diverse
Painters; yet he could not always find store of such as were skilful, nor
could he make so frequent use of other men's hands, as his occasions required.
In like manner, and for the same cause, he loved the Arts of Carving,
Engraving, and making Statues, by which he caused ancient works, to be imitated
or amended. So did he Architecture, and the Art of making Engines for
Waterworks, and such like. Also Husbandry: and in a word all kinds of Art and
Industries: for he kept not his mind intent upon the North pole alone, or
Charles his Wain, but took a diligent view of the whole Heaven of Arts.

It remains, that I speak a word or two touching that opinion commonly spread
abroad, that he had composed diverse Books and Treatises. And the truth is, it
cannot be denied, but that he gave great hopes that he would publish in print,
the Antiquities of Provence, with Observations upon Coins, and other choice
Monuments of Antiquity; and that he had a great desire long since to publish
Commentaries concerning the Medicaean Stars, and the Calendar of Constantine;
that he would publish a complete work touching weights and measures; and that
he had a mind to handle diverse other Arguments: for, as there was no kind of
Laudable Erudition, which the vastness and curiosity of his mind did not
embrace; so was there nothing in a manner, concerning which he had not
Intentions to write. Nevertheless, he did nothing, excepting what I told you,
just now, he inserted into his Letters: for as concerning that Book, called
Squitinius, I have formerly said in place convenient, what we are to think
thereof. For this excellent Man, who never thought he had gotten Monuments
enough touching any subject; did gather all his life long great variety upon
every Argument; and the more he got, the more he thought he wanted, so that in
conclusion, he did not digest, no nor so much as begin any thing.

And I remember, when I was wearied by our Countrymen, who would ask me, if his
History of Provence, would shortly come forth, I asked him, How long he would
have me give them no other answer, then that some of the work remained yet to
finish? And he answered smiling, that it was requisite to spread a rumor
abroad, that the History of Provence was near finished; for by that means,
many desirous to have themselves or Ancestors mentioned therein, would hasten
of their own accord, to contribute some ancient Monuments; which otherwise they
would not communicate, though they were entreated to do it.

Moreover, he was in hopes, that he might at last withdraw to Beaugensier; and
peruse that mighty Mass of Ratities, which he had there piled up, and having
rightly digested all, might exiract somewhat which might be so molded, as to
become worthy to see the Light: howbeit, he doubted both his own Health, and
the obtaining of that happy leisure, by reason of many businesses coming in,
one upon the neck of another; especially, calling to mind how it fared with
him, at his late retirement, where he did not so much as open his Desk, where
the foresaid History was locked up; though his Brother Valavesius, who caused it
to be conveyed thither, did sollicire him thereunto, offering himself to be
his Assistant and Scribe.

Wherefore, fearing that it would fall out, as it did; and desiring that all
should not be lost, he took the course above specified, namely, to take, or
seek occasions of writing Letters, into which he inserted the principal
matters. And therefore I may well say, there are many of his Letters, which
being replenished with Learning, may be accounted so many Books, and do every
way deserve to be published in Print. Many of these there are, in which he so
discourses of Antiquities, and the wonders of Nature, that who ever shall read
them, will be instructed. For he was always very willing to communicate, what
rarities he had in that kind to good men and friends; because he always loved
learned men, who would be edified thereby, and assisted in the Composure of
diverse works. For he judged, that it was all one, whether he or others
published the same; provided, they were such things, as the reading whereof
might be judged profitable.

He hoped moreover, and professed, that when they were inserted into other men's
works, they would become so much the more profitable, by how much they should
prove more illustrious, by passing through such learned hands.

For he did not for any other end, search our, and suggest them, then that they
might provoke excellent wits to invent somewhat better: forasmuch as he himself
was unable to produce a ripe and elegant birth, or to form and fashion, and
lick the same as it were over; but was happy enough, if he might by any means
play the Midwives part, in helping into the World the Labors of other Men. It
was therefore his custom, even unasked, so to assist any man that was writing a
Book, that there was nothing which he would not afford him, either out of his
own observations, or his Treasury of Rarities, or the Rarities of other men,
which he would procure of purpose, or out of Manuscripts, which if he had not
himself, he would take pains to procure them out of any Libraries, where ever
they were to be had. Nor was there any man fit to write upon any subject, whom
he would not solicit thereunto, and remove all Impediments if any were, and
contribute Money, Books, or what ever else he stood in need of.

But to speak yet further concerning his Letters, there are very many moral
ones, which are exceeding well worth the Printing, in which he comforts,
exhorts, disswades, and the like, with wonderful elegancy, and efficacy; but he
is no where in my opinion, more eloquent, then where he advises learned men to
abstain from reviling, and bitter girds; to honor Antiquity, and not to
dissent therefrom, without some testification of Reverence; not to receive, or
give out uncertain things for certain; rather to produce somewhat of their own,
then to confute other men; not to imitate such men, as being to take a Journey,
stand to throw out of the way, all the stones they meet with; or who intending
to gather a Nose-gay of Roses, do first of all cut all the prickles from the
Rose-bush; to excuse, connive at, and mitigate the faults of others, when they
meet therewith; and think with themselves, what man will be thought to deserve
praise, if none may be praised but he, that is without fault; to take it
gratefully rather, that they have broken the Ice, and have at least endeavored
to make a very rough way smooth; to acknowledge, that nothing is at the first
perfect, and that no man would produce his endeavors into the eye of the
World, unless he hoped for some favor, rather then reprehension; to remember
that they also themselves are men, and apt to be mistaken, and should by that
means merit pardon, if they showed themselves gentle to others; with other
such like things, all which were here too long to relate. There are also other
Epistles, in which he commends, begs, excuses, congratulates, expostulates, and
the like, with so much decency and grace, as can be desired; he was so
naturally apt to observe Decorum, invent Reasons, and stir affection. I forbear
to tell you how he very seldom wrote in Latin; but used principally the French
Tongue, or the Italian, the sweetness whereof, and all its charming Elegancies
he expressed, not only in his Letters, but also when he discoursed with
Italians by word of mouth. And such a Man, as you have seen declared, was
Peireskius.

I return now to the time, in which, as I said before, he fell into a mortal
sickness. But I must first tell you, that a few months before, there was a
common report at Rome, that he was dead, which was brought from thence to
Paris: whereupon Valavesius, who was then in that City, sent unto his Brother a
Congratulatory Letter, full of good wishes, for the continuance of his life and
health. Nor must I pass over in silence, how Peireskius himself, four days
before he was taken sick, did relate unto us this following Dream.

I thought (quoth he) that I was at Mass, in the Chapel of the Palace, and
that the Roof of the Chapel fell down, and overwhelmed my self, with other
Eenators, and the Priest. And when at the first crack the Priest being
affrighted, would have left his Sacrifice. Why art thou afraid Friend (quoth
I) seeing thou have God so near at hand? Howbeit, I do not relate this, as one
that would seem desirous to rake up wonders (as many fables are wont to be
related upon such occasions) but that I may not be thought to make so much
haste to the end of my story, as to omit any thing which may seem
extraordinary. Now I call such like stories as this, which are commonly
related, Fables; because, if they be not altogether false, yet are they drawn
in by the head and shoulders, upon some slight occasion, and happen rather by
mere chance, then any intention of Nature; who cares no more for a wise man,
then a fool; nor for a famous person, than one that is obscure, and of no note.
As for those accidents last related, this was not the first time, that a report
was spread touching the death of Peireskius, as has bin noted in its proper
place, and it might now more easily be occasioned, because men had often heard
of his sickliness. And not many days before his Dream, the Roof of the Palace,
a great part thereof fell down: and therefore it is no wonder, that the fall
thereof, having made a deep Impression upon his fancy, might, as is usual,
occasion such a Dream; other circumstances being mixed therewith by reason of
the Conjunction of other intervenient Species, or Representations of things
seen or done.

But be it how it will, Malignant Fevers were at that time very frequent all
the City over, and therefore because he would not let slip any duty, that might
concern him, he went not only to the chief President and his Wife, who were
sick as I told you, and now upon recovery; but he frequently visited others
also, whose life he was tender of. Amongst the which, there was Franciscus a
Sancto Marco, a Senator of good fame, whose ingenuous and constant love, he
highly respected; and Gregorius Francus his house-Physitian, whom he loved for
the skill he had in his Art, and the gentleness of his manners; and Natalis
Galliardus, a youth of rare towardness, whom as he hoped, he would in process
of time, carry a great stroke in matters judicatory; so he loved him for his
great affection which he knew he had to learning. And seeing there were many
others also, and the Disease was popular, and the heat increased, nor did he
ever the more abstain from coming to the Senate, or taking care of his
friends, and household occasions, or from assisting learned men, or writing of
Letters, or searching and observing diverse things; it was no hard matter to
foretell what would follow.

Moreover, having visited a friend of his that came from Marscilles, who lay
sick at an Inn, he caused him to be brought home to his own house, that he
might be more handsomely and carefully acco^modated, and visited him often, and
felt his pulse, when he was troubled with raving, and other symptoms, gave him
good words, suitable to his condition, and continually provided for him, both
diet and all other things necessary. So that he indeed recovered; but, as he
began to grow well, Peireskius fell sick.

It was the tenth day of June, when he awaking toward morning, and perceiving
that by reason of the frequency of his sweats, he had not changed his shift all
night (as he ought to have done twice or thrice) and felt withal a shivering
cold, with a light sweat, he opened his eyes; and seeing the casement not well
closed, he foretold his own sickness. Then he began to seel his Head ache; yet
he arose, went to the Court, and visited and saluted some friends, and certain
sick people, according to his Custom. When he was come home, and felt his pain
as bad as before, he refused his dinner, hoping, that (as he had often found)
if he should fast all day from eating and drinking, he should prevent the
sickness which threatened him. All the Afternoon, he did either sit in his
Chair, or lie upon the Bed; till about Sunset, he got on his Cloak, and
entertained the excellent Campinius, who was come to visit him, and after much
discourse, brought him to the door, to take his leave of him. When he was gone,
there came to see him Raimondus Maranus, the Son of William, Professor of Law,
in the same University of Tolouse, with an ingenuous youth, the Son of his
Brother the Counselor, with whom he was forced to abide a while in the Porch,
with his hat off: and being withal careful to entertain them in his House, he
was much troubled, because that part of the House which was most convenient for
them, was taken up. Afterward, with much ado, he went up stairs; and being in
his Chamber, and his Headache and Fever increasing, he supt only a little
broth. He was wont to observe, that when he abstained wholly from meat and
drink, he was never thirsty; finding therefore, after his broth, that he was a
dry, he took it for an ill sign.

The day following, being Corpus Christi day, he sent to desire Hannibal
Fabrotus, a famous Lawyer, of whom we have formerly made frequent mention, that
he would come and keep his Cuests Company. He kept his Bed all the day, and
besides the Fever, was pained in his Kidneys, and Haemorrhoids. The same day,
he was let blood, and the Fever continuing, he was enjoined to forbear his
drinking of the mineral water. About the evening of the thirteenth day, his
Headache and Fever increased. The day following, he was somewhat better, and
the Post, who had brought Letters from his Brother Valavesius, from Paris,
being to return, he would needs write an answer with his own hand; but after he
had made three Essays, and had thrice changed his pen, supposing that to be in
fault, after he had wrote three lines, his hand grew so stiff, that he never
wrote more after that time. Having in the mean time, with much ado consented,
that Johannes Salvator, who was then his Physician, should prescribe him a
Potion, he took it the next morning: and finding himself pretry well after it,
he busied himself about many things.

On the sixteenth day, he did endite a Letter to his Brother, in which he
extenuated his sickness; and yet toward night, there came forth upon his
back, great red spots. After which, the Fever increased, and he slept not at
all that night. Whereupon the day following, toward evening, he was let blood
in his right foot, to prevent raving which was frequent and vehement, in those
Diseases. And the day after, indeed, in which he began to fetch his breath
short, he raved not; yet on the ninereenth day he did, which I took notice of,
and observed therein certain marks of his Learning. On the twentieth day, in
which his strangury was not so great as formerly, he was a little better; save
that in the afternoon, his raving was somewhat more apparent; though it was
always in a learned strain, and observed only by my self. For he would
commonly speak to no body but me, and he spoke little, and low; bringing forth
his words slowly and with difficulty.

The day following, his raving was yet more vehement; because the Fever was
grown stronger, and caused very many spots to come forth; which seeming
somewhat abated, Cupping-glasses were applied. And because both Salvator and
Prisius Insulanus another Physician, did judge that he was dangerously sick, I
began to take care that he might not depart before he had received the
Sacrament. Which being propounded to him, he consented, and desired withal, to
hear Mass celebrated in his Chamber, on the two and twentieth day. Wherefore
the foresaid Minutius, a Friar Minim, having got a License from the
Archbishop, both said Mass and gave him the Eucharist. That very good man
Jacobus Resius, Rector of the Oratorian Society, had first heard his
Confession, to whom he was wont to confess himself, in time of his health.
These things were done about nine a clock, he sitting all the while in a chair,
upon which he had caused himself to be set, that his Urine might come from him,
with greater ease.

We supposed that he was weary with sitting, but he would not suffer himself to
be removed, commanding the company to withdraw, that he might dictate some
parts of his Will. The chief were, that he would be buried in the Sepulcher of
his Ancestors, viz. within the Chapel of the Dominicans Church, which is
situate at the left end of the High-Altar; that he gave to the Dominicans three
hundred pounds Tours, to the Brotherhood of the Oratory, a thousand. To me all
his Mathematical Books, and all his Instruments, and of his other Books an
hundred, such as I should make choice of, with the Picture of Wendelinus. To
Scipio Pererius, as a token of his love, the Florentine Pandects; to Hannibal
Fabrotus, six Volums of Law books, such as he should choose; to Baltasar
Viasius, six pieces of ancient Coin, such as he had most mind to; to Arthur
Olivarius, one of his ancient Rings; to Bonifacius Borrillius, the Picture of
Reubeus. To his Nephew, God-sonns, officious persons, and servants (amongst
which he mentioned Antonius Agarratus, who assisted me in observing the Motions
of the heavenly Bodies) he gave diverse Sums of Money. To him whose name he had
told in his Brothers ear, (which the event showed to be Cardinal Barberino) his
Samaritan Pentateuch. He made his brother Heir: and the O^erseers of his will
Honoratus Agutius one of the Senate, and the foresaid Balthazar Viassius. All
which being engrossed and read about evening, he could not subscribe his name
by reason of his weakness. Mean while his Urine stopped, and a great and
stiff-stretched swelling, arose upon the Region of his Bladder.

On the three and twentieth day in the morning, he was in pretty good ease, and
was displeased at the application of certain fomentations, to the tumor
aforesaid. About noon he defired me not to omit to observe the Suns Altitude,
and remembered to ask me, if the Solstice were past or not; A while after, he
uttered some raving speeches, but savouring of curiosity and Learning. About
four a clock the Surgeon came to let out his Urine, who after he had tried a
wax Candle to no purpose, he used his Catheter. And, at that time, a good deal
was voided; but not without immeasurable pain to him, who not being able to
stand of himself, was held upright. After he had rested a while, he indicted a
short Letter to his Brother: and after nine a clock, the Surgeon let out his
Urine again; but he was very like to faint away, so great was his pain, and so
great his weariness.

Finally on the 24 day about Sunrise; Minutius asked him, if he would receive
the extreme Unction. He said, it was that he desired; and when a little after,
we told him the Parish Priest was come, I am (quoth he) very much obliged to
him. Then beckening to me, to turn my ear toward him, he charged me to see
that twelve pounds should be given to the Parish Priest, when he went away. In
like manner he was always careful that his Physician and Surgeon should
have their sees given them, every fourth day. Moreover, when the Parish Priest
pronounced the Absolution, he of his own accord and with his own hand, signed
himself with the sign of the Cross. Also he made show that he was delighted at
the performance of the extreme unction. Then, I stood by him, and bad him be of
good courage; for if God had appointed this to be the end of his Life and
Labors, he ought to take it patiently, and follow his Commander according to
his wonted courage. To which words he gently assented. Afterward Minutius
pronounced the General Absolution; and telling him, that as he would have God
to forgive him, so must he forgive others, what ever offenses they had
committed against him; he presently made answer, So be it.

Mean while the lower part of his Belly, which, we told you before, was much
swelled and stiff, having been somewhat assuaged, was now again so distended,
that he complained he was choked. The day before, he refused the Cataplasms;
but now Resius and Minutius came both to him, and desired him for the Love of
God, to permit the Application. He answered, I am content; seeing you will
needs have it so. But he endured the Cataplasm not long; commanding to take it
presently off again, and complaining afresh that he was choked. The Surgeon
was therefore sought for, to let forth his Urine; but he was gone to some
Village, about I know not what business. Others being sent for, either durst
not meddle, or wanted Instruments. Mean while, he caused himself to be placed
in the Chair, but putting down his feet he could not in the least bear himself
up any longer; yea, and he sunk so down upon the Chair, that his Neck falling
on one side, and his eyes being distorted, we thought he had bin giving up the
Ghost.

Being carried into his Bed again, he came so far to himself, that he could
still complain of choking. Then came the President and his Wife, who sent
another Footboy for the Surgeon. Mean while, another Surgeon being
called, he was placed upon the side of the Bed; but the Surgeon endeavoring
in vain to thrust in his Catheter, he fell again into a swoon. Being come a
little to himself, the other Surgeon returning about noon, thrust in the
Catheter with much ado, but could bring out no water: and then he fainted away
the third time, and though he were put into his Bed, yet he recovered very
little strength. To be sure, he never speak word more, although his frequent
and difficult breathing, did sometimes appear as if it had bin speech.
Whereupon being advised by Resius, to pronounce the sacred name of Jesus his
Savior, he could not do it; and being by by him entreated to testify his
Piety by some sign or other, he did it diverse times, by lifting up his eyes.
Finally, having wrastled with so many Pains and Dolours, he rendered his Soul to
God, a little before three a clock in the afternoon: having lived just fifty
six years, six months, twelve days and twenty hours.

After his decease, his Nephew provided for him a very honorable funeral. And
because there was then in the house Petrus Pavillonus a rare Statuary and
Carver, whom Peireskius, had kept above two months as he returned from Rome,
that he might repair a maimed Statue of Diana, a broken Tripode, and other
marble works; he made use of him to figure out in plaster, all the dimensions
of his Countenance, to the intent, that afterward a Marble Statue might be
formed, as like him as was possible. Also the Physicians thought good to view
his internal parts, that they might be perfectly satisfied touching the cause
of his death, though it were not very obscure. Therefore the night following
they dissected his Body, and found that his Heart, Liver, Lungs and other
parts, were in good plight: only his Bladder in the forepart thereof, was so
corrupted, that like wet Paper, it would rend apieces, being never so little
touched. It was therefore conceived, that a day or two before his death, it was
so torn, that his Urine was shed into his Belly, and caused the foresaid
swelling. The hinder part thereof, was more sound and whole: but there was in
the bottom, store of phlegm, and a little gravel. At the Sphincter there grew
a fleshy or callous substance, which being in the neither part, shaped like an
half Moon, and the third part of a finger in thickness, did stop the Orifice of
his Urine. In his left Kidney there was nothing extraordinary; but in the
right, there was much gravel and diverse stones, three of which were bigger than
the rest: the one being as big as an Almond, the other two, as two Lupines. And
these caused the pains in his right Kidney; as his Strangury was caused by the
Caruncle which stopped the Orifice of his Bladder. The day following, which was
the seventh of the Kalends of July, his Corse was carried to Church with great
Pomp, and exceeding sorrow of all good men; and was buried, during the
celebration of the accustomed Ceremonies, in the Vault or burying place of his
Ancestors, in the Church of Saint Dominick, at eleven a clock in the forenoon.

His Brother Valavesius was absent at Paris, to his great grief, when the
tidings of his death were brought him. For besides the bitter sense and want of
his most dearly beloved Brother, it increased his sorrow, that it was not his
hap to be by him in his sickness, to refresh him in his languishings, to
satisfy himself by seeing and embracing him, to receive his commands, and to
hear his last words, that they might remain fixed in his mind. They that
acquainted him with this sad accident, and gave him my Letters, were the two
Puteans, whom the two Brothers always made use of, as their prime friends. The
elder of the Puteans being highly respected by Petrus Siguierius the
Chancellor, undertook to acquaint him with the business. And finding him with a
great company of people about him, and being demanded what he would have with
him, he related the matter to him; whereupon let us go aside (quoth he) for
your relation is more grievous, and that man was greater and to me a dearer
kinsm^n, than that I should seem to, grieve perfunctorily for him. But
Valavesius, though he was cast down, yet he generously, took heart, and went to
the Cardinal of Lions, who also, out of the great love he bore to his Brother,
gave great Testimonies of sorrow. Also he went to that mighty Cardinal renowned
through the whole world, and never to be forgotten Johannes Armandus Plesseus,
Cardinal of Richelieu, who abundantly testified how dear to him the memory of
Peireskius was, and of his own accord, bestowed the Abbey of Guistres upon his
Sisters son, and the son of Henry Seguiranus, who was chief President of the
Chamber of Accounts. And coming a month or two after, into Provence, the first
thing he did, was to perform Funeral Rites to his Brother, and to be present at
the Obsequies, which those of Riantium, having made an Hearse, did celebrate
for him. Also he wrote forthwith to Genua, for to have from thence a Marble
stone, to make such a Monument as was suitable to his Brothers Renown, and their
mutual love.

Moreover, the rumor of Peireskius his death, was quickly spread abroad,
through the whole learned world; all Scholars, being so smitten with grief, as
if the common Father and Prince of Learning, had bin dead. For seeing he
cherished all their hopes, encouraged their minds, was a Patron and Assistant
to them all; they could not choose but all of them be dejected and out of
heart, having lost that spirit, which did animate them all. I say, presently:
for lo, even from Leiden, Letters were dated the third of the Ides of July,
from Salmasius to the Puteans, wherein he writes, that the tidings of his
death, had rendered him wholly unfit for study, or any thing else. And not to
pass over what he says afterward, I am not able (quoth he) to comfort my
self, being quite out of heart, and I make no account of my studies, since he
is gone, who was their cherisher, and promoter. And my grief for his loss
would not be so much, if during his life I had testified that affection which I
had justly conceived toward him, for the benefits he conferred upon me: but now
I must die ungrateful, he being dead before I could make testification of my
thankful heart. All that I can now do, is to hold his memory in veneration, and
in my writings to transmit to posterity such Testimonials of him, as his
incomparable Virtue, and inestimable merits do require from the hand of that
man, who honored him living, and received more benefits from him, than from
any mortal man besides. But I can say no more, for weeping, and must of
necessity here break off. Behold also Letters from Rome written by Naudaeus,
the day after the Ides of the same month, in which among other things there
are these Passages. O the instability of all mortal things! O the unspeakable
cruelty of the Fates! O the bitter Death and mischievous to all good men, which
is befallen in the midst of our jollity! that incomparable man, being taken
away, when his death was the thing we least feared. What Blazing-Star appeared?
What notice had we thereof from Heaven? Where were the Earthquakes, unwonted
thunderclaps, the Apparitions and Prodigies, which should have appeared at the
death of that man, the greatest, the best, the wisest of all other? verily we
are deluded, etc. I pass over other Letters, in which such passages as these
were frequently inserted, No future Ages will ever produce such a man. Also,
when shall we meet with his like again? And, Our hopes are laid in the dust,
Our Sun is set, the Graces have forsaken us; the delight of mankind is dead;
that man is dead, who was the only cherisher of the disconsolate Muses, in this
Age wherein we live.

I pass over likewise other Letters, wherein his friends and learned men, in
whose Breasts Candor and Gratitude did reside, did both testify their grief,
and mutually comfort one another. Many came to my hands, the chief of which
were those of the renowned Balzac (to whom all Writers both in French and
Latin, do easily grant the Palm of Elegance) wherein he rarely bewailed his
Funerals. I omit likewise the Elegies, Epitaphs, Lamentations, Encomiums, which
were published both in Prose and Verse in diverse Languages; but especially in
Latin by Grotius, Rigaltius, Dumayus, Gothofredus, Gaffarellus, Billonus, and
others; none of which (I hope) will be offended, that I speak of Viassius, by
himself, for honors sake: who as he exceedingly honored Piereskius, and was by
him highly eueemed; so did he take extraordinary pains in composing a Poem,
wherein he prosecutes the rare praises of his deceased friend, most decently
and copiously. Nor will it be unworth my labor, if I shall likewise select and
insert the Epitaph which Rigaltius composed, and Valavesius made choice of, to
be engraven upon his Tomb. Which was as follows.

Here lies,
Expecting a Christian Resurrection,
Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius
Lord of Pieresk.
Whose Sagacity, Counsel, Liberality,
Opened the most secret Treasures of Antiquity,
To all the learned world of men.
A Man so rarely Happy,
That living in an Age of Quarrels,
All Men knew, but no Man blamed him.
The VIII of the Kalends of July, in the year
Of Christ, 1637.
of his own age
LVII.
Let every good man pray for the best of Men.
And verily, I must not omit the Funeral Honors which were performed for him
at Rome: were it only because that crafty estimation of Virtue, ought not to be
forgotten, with which those most politic men, thought fit to adorn, even a man
born on this side the Alps. For when the Pope, Cardinal Barberino, and other
great and learned men, came not without extreme sorrow, to understand this sad
Accident; they thought fit to decree such Honors, as might adorn a man so well
deserving of the Roman and learned World. He was chosen in his lifetime,
though absent, into the Academy which is called Academia Humoristarum: which is
a renowned Society of learned men, who meet twice every month, where, in a
full Assembly, one of the Academicks makes an Oration, and others recire their
Poems and other works, worthy of a learned Auditory. It was therefore thought
fit, that Peireskius should be honored in that Assembly, though contrary to
the Laws of the said Academy, which allow that Honor only to Princes of the
same Society; so that in whole forty years time, only six, and they Princes,
are recorded to have received that Honor. But the fame, and splendour of his
rare Virtues, overcame that obstacle; as also the extreme affection the
Cardinal bore him, with the generous humanity of Camillu, Columna, Prince of
the Academy; and the great admiration and respect of the Academicks, by whose
Votes it was carried.

The twelfth day therefore of the Kalends of January, was appointed for the
solemnity; against which, Seats were provided, hung with mourning, as also the
Pulpit, and an Image of Peireskius deceased, set in a conspicuous place. There
came besides Cardinal Barberinus, and his Brother Antonius, the Cardinals
Bentivolus, Cueva, Biscia, Pamphilius, Pallotta, Brancatius, Aldobrandinus,
Burghesius; and such a multitude of other very renowned and learned men, that
the Hall was searce able to contain them. Where the most choyle wits in all the
City, recited Verses in praise of the deceased, in Italian, Latin, and Greek;
and his Funeral Oration neat and eloquent, was pronounced by Joannes, Jacobus
Buccardus, who was chosen to perform that Office, both for the excellency of
his wit, the great love he bore to his Country, and his special Affection to
the memory of the party deceased. I would let down here the chief heads of the
Oration; but that it has bin already diverse times printed, with a dedication to
that greatest of Cardinals, and an Epistle subjoyned to the foresaid
Luillerius. And there was added to the Edition printed at Rome, not only the
foresaid Verses recited by the Academicks; but also the Letter of Naudaeus
forementioned; and withal, a rare fardle of Funeral Elegies, which because
they were expressed, in almost all the Languages of the World (for they were
near upon forty); Therefore they were entitled Panglossia, or the Lamentations
of Mankind, in all Languages expressed, for the Death of their Darling. And
because the Book was to be licensed, and approved by the Master of the sacred
Palace; Lo how Lucas Holstenius made way, and declared by this following
ceninre, that the Laudatory Oration of Buccardus, was written eloquently and
elegantly, and with the same purity and Candor, with which that most excellent
and incomparable man always lived; and the Elegoes written by most renowned
and most excellent man, that is to say, the very Tears of the Muses, runn^^g
down in the clear and learned Humor of the ^^man Academy, at the Funerals of
Peireskius, ^^ght by any means to be published, that the memory of so great a
Personage may be transmitted to all posterity; seeing they set before Men's
Eyes, the illustrious Example of a Man born to advance all good Literature and
Liberal Arts.

And I have bin more large in recounting these things, thus transacted at Rome,
because, this was as it were his Apothe^sis, or Canonization, which was
entertained with the whole Worlds applause. For though there was no learned man
who did not wish with all his heart, that Peireskius might have bin longer the
Recreation of Mankind (which was in old times said of a Prince) rather then so
soon a Companion of Saints and Angels: yet all were pleased, that he was
honored in that Theater, of which he was, while living, judged most worthy.
And peradventure, if it had bin his hap to live longer, the greatest Honors
might have bin conferred upon him, without his seeking after; but they could
add nothing to his Honor, who by the common vote of all men, was ever
counted worthy of the greatest, which could be conferred.

Moreover, as he was always richer then the wealth which he contemned: so
was he more glorious then those Honors, he scorned to seek for. And therefore,
though he was taken away in the middle of his whole Age, yet in respect of
glory, he lived very long, having by his virtue attained an eternal Renown. For
as long as there shall remain any Lovers of good Literature they will dearly
esteem his Memory, whose love to learning, and munificence toward learned men,
they shall see sprinkled in all Books. We have mentioned many of them all
along; and have omitted more, yea, such as have been dedicated to him. One
thing I must not omit, being proper f^r this place, viz. that many Authors
were resolved to dedicate their Books to him, just when he died. Amongst them
were Campanella, Licetus, Hortensius, Buccardus, Arcosius, and who not? And
what would have been done, think you, if he had attained a riper Age, and
longer lise? Those things which he accomplished, may justly be counted very
many, and very great: but he was just then taken away, when by rare actions
he began to exceed himself. For he had now contrived to himself many vvayes of
intercourse, into all the Provinces of Europe: into Asia, and all the Eastern
parts of the World; into all Africa, and the farthest bounds of Aethiopia; into
the two Continents of America, and the unknown World it self; so that he was
now in a capacity more abundantly to unite all Mankind, through the whole
World, by the Commerce and Correspondence of Letters; and to supply all learned
men, with such Books, and other things, as they stood in need of.

But, as for such things as would have happened, if he had lived longer, I
leave them to Gods disposal. Who verily, has cansed the grearest sorrow
imaginable, by taking away the Pilot, who stood at the Helm of the Ship of
Learning; or rather, the Pole-starre, upon which all learned men kept their
Eyes fixed; setting none in his place, toward whom they may look up. For there
are men indeed, who by their Wealth, Authority, Favor, do assist and cherish
some kind of Learning and learned men: but there is no Man, that ardently
affects all the learned, through the whole World, as he did; who bends all his
care that way, neglecting every thing besides; exhausts his Estate to that end,
and liberally spends his Treasure; who is in such Credit with all Men, and
catches at all opportunities of doing good, with the greatest willingness,
Industry, Felicity, imaginable. Tistruly scarce credible, that there will ever
arise such a man, of such a disposition and inclination as he was. For although
the former Age by a wonderful felicity brought forth those three rare men,
Pinellus, Velserus, and Molinus, who were rarely affected to all learned men:
yet Peireskius coming after them, did so in his own person, combine the
virtues of each of them, as to weigh down the praises of them all, seeming to
him inferior. Yea, and whereas before those three mentioned, we hardly read of
a few Kings and Emperors like affected, Peireskius seems in nothing to them
inferior, save in the largeness, and ostentation of their Riches. This was the
opinion of learned men, when commending his truly royal, and magnificent mind,
and acknowledging him to be the pattern of never to be forgotten beneficence,
they declared, that he had seized the glory due to Kings; and that he was so
much more worthy of commendation then Mecaenas, inasmuch as he had no Augustus,
by whose favor and liberality he might be enabled to do good. In a word, this
was the true fruit which he attained, viz. to leave a grateful Memory of
himself consecrated and inshrined in the Breasts of those men, who have
extolled him to the Heavens, and will transmit his memory to all succeeding
Ages. Others seek Renown; by enlarging their Dominions, leading of Armies,
presenting rare shows, building Tombs, Pyramides, and such like things; yet
oblivion at last overwhelms these men, as inglorious, and ignoble; or if any
memory of them remains, it is either despicable, or at least void of love and
affection. Those men alone, who get a name and Honor, by their Beneficence,
become so immortalized, as no man can ever make mention of them, but with
ardent affection, and a secret sense of Gratitude.

This is the way which was trod by those gallant Personages, to the love of
whom, after so many Ages, we are by Histories allured; in this caelestial path
you have chosen to walk, o Ludowick Valese, the best of Princes; whose immense
goodness may be felt by us, but not expressed. Good cause have I to praesage,
that your memory will remain as dear to Posterity, as ever Timoleus was; for
you patiently heard, I well remember, my Discourse touching his exact and rare
way of Life, among the Syracusians, over whom he ruled. For, neglecting your
own affairs, you make it all your business to sustain cherish, and erect
afflicted Provence, and (if the times will give way) to restore it unto its
ancient splendour. Do but proceed, to merit the affections of those People, who
are so loving, and so devoted to you; for they are those, who honor and
advance the reflourishing Glory of that most excellent and Beneficent King
Renatus, who was of your Family. But to conclude, Here you have, what at your
Command, and the importunate Requests of others, I have bin able to say of
Peireskius. I ask no pardon for delaying to finish the same, so soon as you
desired: for you are acquainted with my long sickness, and the longer Relics
thereof, which have lasted full half a year. And truly, I am hardly now
perfectly well; so that knowing this small work to have bin by me labored in
my sickly condition, you need not wonder that it bears the Marks and tokens of
a mind languishing, in a sick Body. But be it as it will, it may at least
testify, the exceeding willingness I have to serve you. Mean while, I provide
my self (since your singular Gentleness will have it so) to return to you, as
soon as may be. And so fare well, o Honor of Princes. Finished at Digne, the
XII. of the Kalends of March, 1639.

THE PRAISE OF PEIRESKIUS, In a Funeral Oration pronounced in the Roman
Academy, December the 21. 1637.
By Jacobus Buccardus of Paris.
IT is excellently done of you ( O Roman Academicks) and suitable to the
Dignity of your Order and Renown; in that, you have decreed public Obsequies,
and a Funeral Oration commendatory, to be performed in honor of that most
gentle and learned FrenchMan, Nicolaus Claudius Frabricius, Lord of Peireskis.
For, if this pious Custom has bin set on soot by your Ancestors, chiefly to
adorn such as have well deserved of the Commonwealth, and to transmit their
memory with honor to all Posterity: such truly, and so great are the merits of
Peireskius, and the Ornaments by him bestowed upon that part of the
Commonwealth, which is devoted to the studies of Learning and Humanity; that
he seems, not only to have removed from the Nations on the other side the Alps,
that hateful Imputation of the suppression and decay of Learning; but even to
have equalized, or rather transcended, that Glory which the Romans themselves
ch^^^nge, for the Advancement of Arts and Science^. For all the learned men of
all Ages, in this City, who either by their own Industry have illustrated, or
by their Authority, and Liberality adorned, the liberal Arts and Sciences, if
they were brought all together, seem in no wise comparable to Peireskius. Who
was in a word so excellent in all kinds of virtues, that in him alone this Age
of ours, may compare with Antiquity, in all that is prayse-worthy. In which
respect, I find the task imposed upon me more great and difficult; viz. that
I, being a stranger, of a mean wit, unexercised, and unable, should in this
honorable Assembly of Romans, eloquent and polite men, discourse of the
innumerable, and almost incredible virtues of that man. Which task has bin by
me undertaken (most learned Academicks) not out of any self-confidence, or
fool-hardyness: but out of my Respect to you, who by your most honorable
decree, have assigned me to this work; and my duty to those, who as they have
the greatest Command over me, so I could not but prefer their Authority, before
the estimation I made of my self; but especially out of that good will, and
pious respect, which commands me to give such great thanks to Peireskius, now
dead, by this last office of Humanity, as I did owe him living, for the
greatness of his deserts toward me. For, seeing in my own Country, my Parents
would not suffer me to lead that studious life, to which from my Childhood I
was addicted; but drew me by force to the Court, and Pleading places: I
resolved at last, freely to forsake Paris, a most large, and powerful City, and
by a voluntary banishment, to betake me to this City of yours: seeing from
thence I understood by Books, that all Religion, Laws, Learning, all knowledge
of things, and elegancy of living, did anciently flow into our parts; and our
learned men informed me, that they did all now flourish more and more, under
the countenance of a most gentle and wise Pope. By the Advice of which learned
men chiefly, visiting Peireskius by the way, as one best acquainted with the
Affairs of Rome: he both liberally entertained me in his House, received me
into the condition of an intimate friend; and at my departure from Provence
toward Rome, gave me such a serious Commendation by Letters, to the learned
and principal men of the City, and such excellent precepts touching the Customs
thereof; that presently upon my entrance thereinto, I was not only soon
acquainted with the public fashions, to which I easily did accommodate my
self; but I also insinuated my self into the acquaintance of all of you, most
learned Academicks; and which is the greatest matter of all, I gained such a
place in the Familiarity of the chiefest Persons both in the civil and literate
Commonwealth, as is wont to be allowed, only to famous and learned men. I
might justly therefore be accused of Impiety, not to say ingratitude toward
you, and all others; if, having long since made it my business, to write the
Encomiums of all learned men deceased especially Italians; I should now refuse
the duty imposed this day upon me, how ever hard and difficult, of praising the
learned man in the world, and one so nearly related to me, as a Countreyman,
Friend, and Benefactor. I shall therefore set my self upon this renowned and
exemplary work; most full of novelty and admiration: and look how much
eloquence there is wanting in me, to accomplish the same, so much I shall
endeavor to borrow and supply, both from my own singular affection to that
most rare man, and the greatness of the grief, by me conceived for his death,
which sometimes makes men eloquent and copious; as also from your Benevolence,
right reverend Fathers, and you most renowned men, and that benignity wherewith
you affcord your audience with so much attention.

When I compare the Life of Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius Lord of Peiresk, which
transcends the Capacity and Custom of this Age wherein we live, with the Lives
of the most excellent and happy persons of Antiquity; the Life of Titus
Pomponius Atticus, above all others, seems so like and nearly to resemble the
same, that I think fit before I pass unto other things, which may satisfy the
expectation which I have already raised touching the Learning of Peiresk us,
and his affection to all good Literature, to propound the same, as a most
perfect picture thereof; in which you may behold an express image of the
Disposition and Virtues of Peireskius. For being both of them of Noble Parents,
lovers of Learning, they passed their boys-age in liberal studies, and their
youth in learned Peregrinations, living in great Honor with Princes and
learned men, in foreign parts. Both of them in their own Country were linked
in friendship, with persons of the greatest and most excellent rank and
quality: and were a safeguard to good and leared men, both from the injuries of
others, their own mutual detractions, and the pressures of Poverty. In their
houses, into which both of them liberally invited men of all ranks, there was
more ingenious Elegancy then superfluity of Diet; as in their clothing, they
affected cleanly neatness, rather than luxurious extravagance. Using
nevertheless, the best in all things, especially in their household servants,
where there was not a Page, which could not perform the office of a
Bible-Clerk, and Library Keeper. In the Commonwealth, which in both their
times was very various and subject to change, they so carried themselves, as
always to side with the most honest party. As for the Honors of which they
were therein capable, they sought them not: but being content with the dignity
wherein they were born, they lived well and happily unto old age, in their old
way of the studies of Philosophy and antiquity, being of most sweet and
excellent manners.

These few things, out of many which might have bin said, I have instanced in,
for example sake, to make it appear, that Peireskius shared in all the Praises
which ancient Authors give to Atticus for his Virtues in general, and
especially his Temperance, Honesty and Prudence: I come now therefore to those
Virtues to which my mind has long hastened, which were so peculiar to
Peireskius, and so much his own; that no man in all antiquiry can pretend to
outgo, or once compare with him in the glory thereof, viz. a continual and
almost incredible labor and rare industry, to attain the knowledge of all
great and excellent things, all Arts and Sciences: an ardent study and eager
care to preserve and advance the same: finally, a perpetual and constant desire
to adorn and ser forth learned men; and a princely and magnificent liberality,
in effecting all the premises. In the handling of all which, I shall be so
careful both of verity and brevity; that setting aside all rare ornaments of
speech, I shall in a plain Historical narration, briefly set forth the studies
of Peireskius, his diligence in reading and writing, with his liberality to
learning and learned men.

The Fabrician family, after that from the order of Knighthood, in which for
the space of three hundred years and upwards, it had flourished in the glory of
Chivalry, it became adopted into the Parliament of Aix; did so excel in wit and
Learning, that an Inheritance not only of highest dignity, but of most
excellent Learning also, did from the fourth generation, together with a large
Library, and other literary utensils descend unto Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius
Lord of Peiresk. Who resolving with himself, not only to keep, but also much to
augment those possessions, chiefly of Study and Learning, descended from his
Ancestors; he made it all his care, and spared no cost, to adorn and augment
those literary Instruments, which are altogether needful for the attaining of
good Arts and Sciences. Wheresore, after he had taken care, to get from all
places the most excellent Books, and to adorn them with gold, purple, and all
manner of neat and curious workmanship, by such excellent Workmen, as lived in
his house; and had diligently perused them all: his greatest care in the next
place was, to travel all Europe over: not only to acquaint himself with the
manners and Cities of the Nations then living; but that coming to the very
things themselves, and comparing what he had heard and read, he might
diligently view the ancient Monuments of Antiquity: and from thence carry home
as much as he could, to treasure up in his Library. The first place that
invited his presence was Italy: in which as there are flourishing at this day
most excellent and elegant wits, most civil and polite manners, and
transcendent Laws; so are there yet remaining very many relics of the ancient
fortune, and those most flourishing times for Arts and Literature. Having
therefore viewed the Cities of Liguria and Tuscanie, he came by long journeys
into this City of yours, as the Seat of all Divine and Humane Empire, the
Mansion place of Antiquity and Humanity: where with his eyes and feet he
diligently went over and visited the Courts, Theaters, Temples, Bathes, Arches,
and Caves; as also the Spires Columns, Statues, Monuments of Brass and Marble,
Coins, Jewels, and Books; in a word, all the Monuments of the ancient
Magnificence and Arts; more of which and more illustrious are comprehended
within your walls, than in all the world besides; these he viewed and handled,
and carried what he could home with him: which he partly bought at a great
rate, partly received by way of free gift, from learned men; which as they are
always in great abundance at Rome, so were they then especially, in the days
of those most studious and most munificent Princes, of the Family of the
Aldobrandini, in very great number and exceeding courteous. All which, but
especially Fulvius Ursinus and Laelius Pasqualinus, most diligent and
industrious collectors and admirers of the Relics of Antiquity, were drawn
into admiration and friendship, by the Virtues and rare Learning of young
Peireskius. The same expectation and favor he brought with him from Rome to
Naples, where he conversed with Matthaeus Capuanus Prince of the Conchani, more
renowned for his love of Learning and his knowledge, than for the great Dignity
of his Family and Fortune, and with Mars Gurgustiola, one of the Supreme
Council, and a very learned man: both which had in their houses, most rich
Treasuries of all kind of Antiquities. There also he frequented the renowned
houses of Johannes Baptista Portae, and Ferrans Imperatus, of which the former
was an eager searcher out and explainer, the latter a most diligent keeper and
preserver of the most abstruse works of nature. And seeing Peireskius spent his
study and pains no less in these kind of things, than the contemplation of
Antiquity; he searched every most secret corner, not only of this most large and
beautiful City, but also of the whole Territory of the most happy Country or
Campania; where he might behold the pleasant spectacle of Nature, (which there
chiefly delights to work wonders) contending with the ancient Magnificence and
Luxury of the Greeks and Romans. He diligently viewed the rest of Italy, and
all that part of France, which is on this side the Alps: turning aside to
Ravenna, that he might behold those dismal Trophies of Gothish Barbarism,
erected upon the ruins of the Roman Empire; as also and chiefly to visit
Hieronymus Rubeus, an eloquent Writer, as well of those Antiquities as of the
Art of Physic. From thence he journeyed to Padua, chiefly invited by the fame
of the rare learning of Vincentius Pincllus, and of his Library, full fraught
with Books in all Tongues and Sciences: which fame was so spread all Europe
over, that learned men, who intended to collect ancient Books to furnish
Libraries, or to set forth their own works; did come from remote parts, to
consult with him thereof. There Peireskius abode for a season. not only to
insinuate himself into the House and Library but the acquaintance also of
Pinellus; into which he perfectly rooted himself, that he might know and
understand his great care to adorn Learning and learned men, and all other
Virtues of that most excellent man; to the intent he might imitate the same,
and in process of time exercise them all with most ample additions, for the
advancement of Learning. Of which thing be then and there gave so great and
undoubted hopes, that Paulus Gualaus, a man famous both for his own wit and
learning and the intimate familiarity he had with Pinellus; in those elegant
Commentaries, which he wrote touching the Life of the said Pinellus, did affirm
of Peireskius: that if our Age did ever produce a man equal to Pinellus, it
could be no other than he who at Padua being hardly past a youth, did with such
ardency embrace Pinellus and his studies, that he was a miracle to Gualdus
himself and to other learned men. Which learned men, truly, as many as then
happily spent their days in study at Padua; especially Pinellus himself, and
Hieronymus Aleander, and Laurentius Pignorius, men excelling in accuratenesse
of judgment, as well as polite Literature, did so approve this grave testimony
given by Gualdus, touching the rare towardliness of Peireskius, and did so
admire and love the same in him; that every one invited him to his house, with
the greatest hospitality imaginable; and communicated to him their greatest
ratities, both such as were in their own studies, and in the public Libraries
and Records both at Padua and at Venice, a City abounding with those and all
other excellent things, which they did as well when he was absent from them, as
when he was present, which was also done by the greatest part of the other
Cities of Italy and of Europe; discoursing with him by Letters touching their
studies, fending their Books either to be printed by him, or, for honors sake,
to pass into the world under his name and patronage. Thus flourishing in the
favor and entertainments of most renowned and learned men, when he had
enriched himself with Statues, Tables, Coins, Books, and other most ancient
Ornaments of Italy; he proceeded in his Travails to Germany, and as far as to
great Britain; where he gathered many Relics of Antiquity, and gained the
repute and goodwill, not only of men skilled in the studies of wisdom and good
Arts, but also of such as excelled in Painting, Architecture, and other curious
Actifices: whom Peireskius being an elegant spectator of their works; did
highly account of in those Countries, as formerly he had done in Italy, making
himself acquainted with them, as with all other learned men: especially with
Petrus Paulus Rubeus, both for his knowledge of Antiquity, and his skill in
Painting, Graving, and Architecture; which Arts he seems to have first of all
brought out of Italy, into the Low Countries, with their ancient splendour and
dignity: Marcus Velserus a Magistrate of Augsburge, studious of the
Commonwealth there, and a careful advancer of Learning through all Germany:
John Barclay, at that time famous in England for the elegance of his wit and
Learning: Daniel Heinsius chiefly in Holland, and his most learned Master
Joseph Scaliger, who as soon as he heard Peireskius, whom he knew only by name
and hearsay, reason about matters of Learning, being of a piercing and sound
judgment, he presently knew him, and declared who he was. His last
peregrination was to Paris, whither, by reason of the great abundance of
excellent Books, and most learned men which he there found, he made a second
journey. In his first journey thither he visited Jacobus Augustus Thuanus, and
his most renowned Li^^^y, and saw Isaac Casanbon, Franciscus Pithaeus, and
abundance of other learned men then living who came frequently to Thuanus his
Library, daily magnifying Thuanus; as the most excelient Prince and Patron of
History, and all other Arts and learned men, and earnest defender of the French
Empire and Majesty. And having spent ten years at his own house in perusing
those Monuments of Antiquity and Learning, which he had collected all Europe
over, and in reducing and digesting the same into his study and memory,
wherewith he was endowed after a divine manner: he went to Paris the second
time, to turn over and devour those other Libraries, viz. the Kings, that of
St. Denis Victoria, St. German, and of the Memii, and to visit those learned
men which frequented the same; of which there was at that time a new
generation, as it were, sprung up. Amongst whom those two most courteous
brethren the Puteans, do at this day excel; who abiding with the sons of
Thuanus their kinsmen, excellently adorned with the gifts of wit and virtue,
derived from their Father, do by all the ways and means they can, assist and
wonderfully adorn, not only his Library, but Learning also and learned men,
which were commended to their faithful care and protection, by the last will
and testament of Jacobus Augustus, Nicolaus Rigaltius, who excels all men
whatever in the polite elegancie of Learning and judgment, and incorrupt
purity of the Latin tongue; to whom I glory to say, that I am beholden, for
whatever progress I have made in that kind of Learning: Claudius Salmasius and
Hugo Grotius, who challenge the principality of Literature and all good Arts:
Petrus Seguierius, Henricus Memmius, and Hieronymus Bignonius, men more
renowned for their Learning and rare love of Arts, than the purple Robes they
wear as ensigns of the supreme honors they enjoy in France, whom for
brevities sake I pass over. I shall also pass by Sirmondus Pelavius, Morinus,
Mersennus, Burdelotius, and Valesius, and an almost innumerable company of
others; who are exceeding famous, for their transcendent Learning, and most
excellent writings; all whose hearts and goodwills, Peireskius did win unto
himself, and oblige them to the service of his ends, viz. the advancement of
the Commonwealth of Learning. Yet there is one man whom I cannot pass over,
namely Gulielmus Varius or Du Vair, who may be compared to Marcus Tullus, as
well for his study of Eloquence and Philosophy, and other high Virtues; as for
the sacred and inviolable friendship he always held with this our Atticus. He,
after that he had initiated Peireskius into the Parliament of Aix, of which he
was chief President he presently so addicted himself to his acquaintance and
society, that they continually lived together at Aix; nor could he ever after
endure him to be absent from him, Wherefore, when the King called him to Court
to be Keeper of the Seal, which is the highest dignity which a Gowned man is
capable of in France; he carried him to Court with him. esteeming him to be the
only man in France, whom he could find in his heart to make, his Camerade, his
bosom friend, the assistant and companion of his State-Counsels and Honors.
Whose favors Peireskius made use of only in deprecating and shielding of, the
dangers and discommodities of his friends, that is to say, of learned men; and
procuring the advancement of Learning; to which end besides many other rare
Ornaments and accommodations, he contributed one of the greatest moment; for by
his means there was procured in the Kings name, great store of most ancient
Books, to supply and enlarge the Library at Paris: which at all times stands so
open for the use of all men that from thence most rare Monuments of ancient
Learning, are daily brought to light. There was ^^ a manner but one good turn
which ^e procured of Varius for himself, viz. that by his authority he was
admitted, to search the most ancient Records of Courts and Churches, in all the
Towns of France. As for wealth and honors, he was so far from seeking them,
that he often refused such as Varius freely offered him, who when he would have
adopted Peireskius into the most ancient and worthy order of Prelates of
France, he had much ado at last to make him accept of an indifferent
Church-living. Varius being dead, who gave all his rarities of antiquity, in a
manner to his most loving and officious friend, committing his last Will and
Testament to his faithful care and oversight; Peireskius began to look after
his own home and study, from which he had been long absent: when lo, just at
his departure from the Court of Paris, he was in his journey invited again to
the Court of Rome: receiving the most joyful tidings of Cardinal Barberino his
being made Pope. For he knew the said Cardinal before his Election to the
Popedom, being the Prince of Wit, Learning, and Sanctity in the Roman
Commonwealth; having some whiles before procured a first and second Edition of
his Divine Poems, and obliged him with other services: so that when the
Messenger, who intended first to acquaint the King with the news, meeting
Peireskius did only tell him, that the learned of all the Roman Princes, and
his most loving friend was made Pope; he presently knew, that Barberino was
placed at the Helm of the Commonwealth, to his incredible joy. For he did
foresee, that under a most learned Pope, the Study of good Literature, would be
reduced into its ancient Light and Splendour; and that Students in hope of
Honors and Rewards, would flock from the utmost ends of the Earth, to adorn
the Court of Barberino. Which happiness of the times and learning, that he
might at least view with his Eyes, and adore the new Pope, who so highly
favored him, he was by his friends, persuaded to come to Rome, not much
against his will. But he was loath that Ambition, from the very suspicion
whereof, he was always free, rather then duty, should be thought the occasion
of his journey thither: and after that, with much ado, he had gotten out of
the Island of Circe, he feared, if he gave ear to the Sirens Songs, he should
be by them detained: therefore after a long peregrination, he betook himself at
length to his own Ithaca, to the most desired Haven of his Study. And then
truly, the Study of Peireskius, and his whole House, through the well-nigh
Kingly Liberality of its present Master, which from that time forward, he used
not only for the Ornament of Learning, and the Instruments thereof; but
chiefly, in assisting and honoring learned men; was more magnificent, and
fuller of Hospitality, then the Court of Alcinous.

A little after the return of Peireskius, Cardinal Franciscus Barberinus,
brought thither with him, the flower and Cream of the Court of Rome; being sent
as Legate from the Pope, to the most just and valiant King of France. And
Peireskius entertained him, and his Noble Retinue, so plentifully, and with so
much splendour, that he seemed to contend, even with Kings, in point of
magnificence; admiring and adoring in that young Prince, as well the mature
prudence and sanctity of the Pope his Uncle, as his singular love to Learning,
and good will to learned men. And in regard of his so rare virtues, he bore him
such Reverence, and was so officious to him all his life long; that hardly any
one went out of France into Italy, by whom he did not send him Letters full of
dutiful respect and Learning; as also Books, Plants, and rare outlandish
Creatures, to adorn the study and Gardens of Cardinal Barberino. To whom that
most courteous Prince, always returned the greatest thanks possible, with like
frequency of Letters and tokens. With no less observance, did Peireskius
honor and respect, those most learned, and rarely-qualified persons, which
were in the Legates most renowned Retinue; but most especially, Cassianus
Putealis, a Man for the famousness of his Family, Virtues, and Learning, worthy
of the greatest praises, and Honors imaginable; with whom being most closely
united in Affection, by reason of the likeness of their natures, in excellency
of manners, and love to learning and learned men; he held afterward constant
correspondency, familiarly acquainting him with the whole course of his
Studies. Also with Johannes Baptista Donius, who by reason of his Ingenuity,
and a wit fit for the knowledge of all great things, was most dearly respected
by him. These friends he then and there procured, as others afterward at Rome,
by the mediation of Hieronymus Aleander, a Man endued with most excellent Arts
and Ornaments, and a Lover of Peireskius from his youth up; who then so admired
his Noble House, full of Dignity and Wisdom; that he afterward openly
pronounced, that Peireskius was the greatest and most happy man in the World:
and was often thinking to remove from the Court and City of Rome to Aix, that
he might enjoy his sweet Company, and that precious Treasury of Literature,
which he had there hoarded up. Thither came afterward all those brave men, who
about affairs of State, went out of Italy into France, or from thence to
Provence; to his House they came, to see that Man who had the Commentaries,
Acts, and secret Records of Kingdoms; who perfectly knew the Scituations of
Countries, Counts of Times, Originals of Peoples, their Laws, Confederacies
and Wars; and the Families, Kindreds, and Successions of Kings and Princes: so
that no man knew the condition of his own House and Land, better then he was
acquainted with the state of this World of ours. Also all men, of what ever
Rank or Nation, that were studious of great and rare things, came thither to
see him, and his most renowned Study, where they might at one view, behold a
Collection of what ever was rare and excellent, to get a sight of which, men
were formerly wont to travel all the World over. All which Peireskius and his
Brother Valavesius, a most courteous Gentleman, brought home with them from
their Travess, which two Brothers lived together, even to old Age, in such a
Community of Studies, Cohabitation, and Revenues, without any falling out; that
there was never any need that one of them should be reconciled to the other.
Also new things were continually brought him, not only from all parts of
Europe, but from Asia, Africa, India, and the new World; since this old World
of ours, would not content his greedy desire of knowledge: so that no man came
from the remote parts of the World to these Coasts of ours, that did not bring
with him whole Cart-loads of Rarities of Art and Nature, to the House of
Peireskius. For these kind of things were daily sent him, from choice men
dwelling in the principal Cities and Haven-Towns of those Provinces; who were
by him employed with all their diligence, to procure such things, to his
infinite charge and expense. And because those Men, with all their Art and
Industry, could not fully satisfy Peireskius, he oftentimes sent others from
his own House, into all the Islands of the Aegean Sea, to the Mountain Atho, to
Constantinople, Alexandria, and those miserable Relics of Memphis, and
Carthage: who for him, and with his money, should seek to procure. besides
other Rarities, chiefly, the ancientest Books in the Greek, Hebrew, Arabic,
Persian, Coptick, and Ethiopian Languages; finally, besides other Monuments of
Asiatick and African Antiquity, the Bodies of the ancient Kings, and Princes of
Egypt, embalmed with most precious Spices, Gums and odours. In which practice
of his, verily, he seems with a mind truly royal, to have imitated the care of
those ancient Kings of Pergamus, and Alexandria; as also of our France, in the
magnificent setting forth of their Libraries. And to this his Shop and
Storehouse, of wisdom and virtue, Peireskius did not only courteously admit
all Travelers, studious of Art and Learning, opening to them all the Treasures
of his Library; but he would keep them there a long time, with free and liberal
entertainment; and at their departure, would give them Books, Coins, and other
things, which seemed most suitable to their studies; also he freely gave them
at his own expense, what ever things they wanted, most liberally: even as to
all other learned men, well near, which were absent, and whose names he had
only heard of; what ever he had among his Books or Relics of Antiquity, which
he thought might assist them in their writings, he would send it to them of his
own accord, not only without their desiring the same, but many times when they
were ignorant of such things. If there were any thing which he had not himself,
but lay somewhere concealed, he would spare neither pains nor cost to procure
that also for them, that the works which they were writing, might come into the
World perfect and polite. And such as he heard, were about to travail to search
after Antiquities and Rarities of nature; he would procure them letters
commendatory, horses and money to bear their charges, out of his own purse: and
he invited many to take upon them such journies, by offering them the like
conditions, of his own accord. And all men, whom he knew to be in a calamitous
condition, only by means of their love of learning and virtue, and the injury
of Fortune, he assisted with such things, as they stood in need of, and helped
to pay their debts for them; or he carefully commended them to some great
personages, and obtained many things from them in their behalf: having gained
great favor and Authority, with all the more courteous Princes of Europe;
especially, with the most eminent Grandees, who at this day, steer the
State-affaires of France, as who out of their singular knowledge, and love to
learning, have learned men continually in their Eyes, Ears, and Embraces; and,
which is their royal magnificence and magnanimity, do in the conferring of
Benefits and Honors, prefer them before all men, of what Order soever.

Out of which Order, I can cite plenty of Eyewitnesses, of the beneficent, and
most liberal nature of Piereskius; not only out of this City, and present
Assembly; but even out of the farthest parts of Syria, and the immense Altitude
of Mount Libanus, I can bring the most learned Amira, Bishop of the Maronites;
out of Magna Graecia, that great Philosopher Campanella; out of France the
learned Petitus, and an infinite multitude more, out of other Provinces. Also I
could relate unto you, an innumerable Examples of Liberality and Magnificence;
scarce credible of a King, much less of a man only of a Senatorian Dignity,
Rank and Estate. Whereas nevertheless, which sounds more like a miracle, than a
thing credible, he laid out in this City alone, every year, three thousand
pounds-Tours, that is to say, a twelfth part of his whole Revenue; which we may
well think he did in other renowned Cities of Europe; partly, in sending Books,
and other such like tokens to his friends; partly, upon Books, Statue, Brazen
Monuments, and Marbles, which were daily here discovered; or at least upon
Patterns of them, and Images painted, carved or molded; in Wax, Plaster, or
moystened Paper.

But, consideration of the time (most learned Academicks) advises me now to
take-in my Sails, and look toward the Haven. Yet verily, that same ardency of
your Countenances, and Intention of your minds, does call upon me to perform
the rest of my Promise; which was, that I would prove Peireskius to have far
exceeded all other men; not only in a rare love and Liberality toward
Learning; but, which is the greatest matter of all, in unwearied labor, and
incredible Industry, in commenting and writing, touching almost excellent Arts,
no part of which verily, he left untouched.

He wrote the History of Provence, which was his own Country, in many large
Volumes; with so much diligence, that whether you regard Antiquity, or the
Laws, Peace or War, and the Changes happening in the Commonwealth; you
shall therein find nothing wanting. In other Volumes he set down the Originals
of the Noble Families of the same Country, and of his own by it self: and
seeing the Family of the Fabricii, had its Original from Pisa, from whence
after the space of four hundred years, flourishing in Chivalry, it was
propagated into France; he did in the same Book, excellently illustrate the
Antiquity of Pisa; and consequently, of Italy, of which he was always an
exceeding great Lover: setting down many unknown passages, touching the Gothic
Kings, who bore sway in Italy, which he collected from ancient Coins; as also
touching the French Kings, whose Originals and Pedigrees, being obscured
through length of time, he much illustrated. Finally, he wrote most elegant,
and full Commentaries, of all great and memorable things, which were transacted
in his time. Also he adorned Philosophy by his writings, and amplified the
same; especially, the natural part thereof, to which he was wonderfully
addicted. For he had made an elegant Book, touching those sporting works of
Nature, which in some Countries, are dug out of the ground: viz. concerning
wood and other things, degenerating into the Nature of stone, or some other
different substance: also touching huge and vast bones of Giants, as is
commonly conceived; a great quantity whereof, he caused to be brought to him,
from far Countries: touching which being of a discerning spirit, he discovered
many Impostures. And as for Plants, especially such as were of Indian growth,
he wrote a peculiar History of every one well near, which he illustrated with
experiments never before practiced; for he engrafted Trees with happy success,
not only upon Trees quite of another kind, but upon the Horns, Heads, and other
parts of living Creatures. Of which live Creatures, yea, even of Elephants, he
diligently sought out, the Nature, manner and weight; and dissected all their
members; as also of the Body of Man, with his own hand: especially, the Eyes of
huge Beasts, and of Whales; for the finding out of which, he sent men as far as
Herenles Pillars. By which means, he wrote new things, never before heard of,
as of other parts of the Body; so especially, concerning the admirable frame of
the Eye. Nor was he less industrious, in illustrating the Mathematical Arts:
giving himself up in his latter years, to the study of Astronomy, so as to
build a most high Tower, furnished with plenty of Instruments belonging to that
Art, where he watched all night long, when the Sky was clear, in Contemplation
of the Stars: not only diligently observing their Altitudes, Magnitudes, and
Motions; but penetrating by the quickness of his wit, into their very matter
and Nature; assisted by that new and admirable Invention of the Telescope,
which makes the most remote and obscure Species and Representations of things,
clearly to be seen, whose name and use was invented by Galilaeus, the Prince
doubtless of Mathematicians, and a very loving friend of our Peireskius. By the
help of which Instrument Peireskius caused the several faces and appearances,
both of the other Planets, and also of the Moon, with the smallest marks and
spots as it were, which appeared therein, to be diligently viewed and engraven
in Copper Plates: committing to writing, his own perpetual observations
thereof; so that no man was better acquainted with this World of ours, then
Peireskius was with the Heavenly Orbs, especially the Moon, which the ancient
Sages of Italy were wont to call Antichthon, the other Earth. Whose Eclipses he
did both observe himself, and caused them, by all Mathematicians, to be more
diligently observed then formerly; not that he might assist the laboring
Goddess, whose shape like another Endymion, he beheld and admired; but that
thereby he might find out, and set down the sure and certain distances of
Cities, Havens, and Islands, both from the four Coasts of Heaven, and one from
another: and so take away the received Errors of Travelers, and Seafaring-men.
A thing before, not so much as endeavored by any, except one or two, and they
great Kings: which it was hoped, that Peireskius would at last happily
accomplish. For he caused most accurate observations of the Eclipses to be
made, in the most renowned Cities of the old and new World; of which
observations, the most excellent he said, was that which he received from
Naples, from his good friend, Johannes Camillus Gloriosus, an excellent
Mathematician. And herein he used the continual Assistance of Petrus Gassendus,
the most excellent Astronomer, and Philosopher in France, intimately acquainted
with Peireskius; so that he lived with him many years together in his own
House, as a bosom friend, where he was assistant at his death: and now out of
the dear memory he bears to his Name and Virtues, he is intended to write an
History of his Life; which makes me rejoice, that the work which I had long
since designed, is now taken out of my hands, by a most learned man, and my
very loving friend; yea, and I congratulate the Memory of Peireskius in that
behalf.

The excellent pains he took in describing your Antiquities (O Roman
Academicks) I cannot pass over in silence: seeing there came no Vtensils, nor
Ornaments of the ancient Romans to his hands (of which he had very many in his
house) of which he left not something or other in writing, but most copiously
and diligently touching the Weights, Measures, and Tripodes of the Ancients. I
omit the rest of his works, in other parts of Learning. I shall only add his
Letters and Epistles, to increase the admiration. Which were so many and so
learned, as, if he had writ nothing besides, he might nevertheless have been
said to have gone through the whole Encyclopaedia or perfect Orb of all
Learning and liberal Arts. For you cannot think of any rare and excellent
Argument in all the Arts and Sciences, of which Peireskius did not write to all
learned men, either asking their judgment, or returning his own being asked,
learnedly, frequently, and very largely; so that he seems to have filled all
Cities in all Countries, with his Letters, shall I say, or volums rather. And
that you may know I speak no more than the truth in this point, consider I pray
you with me how many, and what for Epistles he sent to this very City, for
examples sake. There are extant an almost innumerable company, written to Pope
Urbanus the 8th; and to Cardinal Franciscus Barberinus, comprehending that
knowledge of good Arts, which we all admire in those two most excellent and
learned Princes. There are extant Letters to Caesar Baronius and to Johannes
Franciscus, Vidius Balneus, Cardinals: to Josephus Maria Suaresius a Prelate:
to Christophorus Puteanus and Constantinus Cajetanus, all of them persons
renowned for the Science of great Arts; touching Religion and matters Divine,
as also of humane affairs and history, to Cardinal Vidus Bentivolus and
Augustinus Mascardus, persons best seen in that Art of any, not only in this
City, but in all Italy: and touching the abstruse and hidden things of Nature,
to Cassianus Putealis and Petrus Vallensis, both of them renowned, as well for
their knowledge in natural Philosophy, as other great endowments. There are
extant Letters of his touching Humanity, (as they call it) and the ancient
Tongues of Europe, Asia, and Africa; as also concerning the latter Languages,
as the Gothic, Cantabrick, Provincian, Italian, to Lucas Holstenius, Gabriel
Naudaeus, Leo Allatius, Vincentius Noguera, and Fredericus Ubaldinus, men
excellently and perfectly skilled in the said Languages; also to Cardinal
Franciscus Boncompagnus, Vincentius Justinianus, Maria Felix Zachus, and
Alexander Rondaninus her husband, Stephanus Gnaldus and Claudius Menetrius, men
most diligent in searching out and preserving the Relics of Antiquity,
touching Statues, Coins, ancient Jewels: also touching Books anciently written
and Manuscripts, to those rare men Cardinal Scipio Cobellutius and Nicolaus
Alemannus; whom Peireskius entirely loved, and whose benignity in opening to
him the treasures of the Vatican Library, he exceedingly wanted when he was
dead. These men (o Academicks) (...) know to have been most excellent in all
Arts; which I have therefore the more willingly reckoned up and as it were
mustered out, because all of them in a manner, as well Peireskius himself,
having bin long since chosen into this Academy, have illustrated the splendour
and glory of your order, and daily illustrate the same. Moreover, he sent the
like or a greater quantity of Letters, not only to other Cities in Italy;
especially to Padua to Licetus, Rolius, Argolius, and Thomasmus, samous men in
the Arts by them professed: but also to Mantua, Paris, Oxford, Leyden, Lovane,
Augsburge, Vindobona, and other renowned Cities of the new and old world,
flourishing with famous and learned men. With which Letters truly of his, he
linked and united in a way of learned Commerce and correspondency, not only the
Nations on this and the the other side of the Alps, but all other Nations also
of Europe and the barbarous people to boot; so that in conclusion he made
common to all those Nations, those good Arts and all their Instruments, which
for the good of all he had treasured up in his own study and mind. So that we
must not judge of the excellency of Peireskius his learning, nor of the worth
and greatness of his study, by his writings and other Monuments of the Ancients
which are extant in his house; but we must rather conclude, that there are no
famous Libraries in the whole world, in which some part of the Library of
Peireskius is not to be found; and that no Books have been set forth in this
Age of ours, exceeding fruitful of Writers, which do not carry with them, as
well the Learning as Name of Peireskius.

Imagine with your selves (O Academicks) that all studious persons do make as
it were one Body, in the midst whereof Peireskius performs the office of that
quiet part, for the nutriment whereof, all the other Members in their several
places, do all they do; and whose ministry is no less industrious, nourishing
as much as it is nourished: so that with an insatiable desire of reading and
learning, devouring all the food of study and erudition, which all men every
where gathered and heaped up for him, he turned the same by his heat of
meditation and writing, into juice and blood; which in like manner he dispersed
into all parts as a common nourishment of all Wits, unless we should rather
say, that Peireskius was the Soul of that same illustrious and immortal Body,
which governed the whole, and by his force and Divinity, did preserve and
augment all and every the parts thereof. I said Divinity, O Academicks: for he
who spent a great part of the short age of fifty seven years in peregrinations
and the Kings Gourt, another part in the Parliament of Aix where he twice a day
attended his Senatorian office; and could nevertheless leave so many, and so
illustrious Monuments of his love of Learning, and his liberality in the
advancement thereof, to the eternal memory of posterity; more Books and Letters
written with his own hand, than other long-lived men, abounding with leisure
are wont to read, both in Latin, Italian, and French: he, I say, seems to me
worthy to be accounted more than a man. Moreover, that this Divine soul of
Peireskius, being now free from the fetters of his earthly body, is mounted
aloft, and entered into possession, of that eternal and celestial Mansion, to
lead there most happily among the holy Saints, that life he happily lived
amongst us, you have (o Roman Academicks) all the reason in the world to think;
and to honor the same with all Honors, which are wont to be conferred on the
greatest Heroes. For, besides that he lived with the greatest integrity and
innocence possible; he was also a great houourer of the Roman Religion and the
Ceremonies thereof, wherein he persisted most constant, to his very last
breath. He valiantly contended for the Catholic Faith, so that he reduced many
thereto, even of those that had left that most ancient and holy Religion, and
obliged themselves to new and strange ones; having not without hope of victory,
assailed three of the most learned of that way. Show therefore your
thankfulness (O Academicks) in adorning the funerals of that man, who has so
many ways, so excellently deserved of the Roman Commonwealth; and as you have
thought fit, that he should be honored by a public Declaration of his
Praises; so, what I, through the scantiness of my wit and the time, have not
been able in my Oration to set forth (suitable to the Grandeur and Dignity of
the Argument: do you at present supply, with your most delicate and curious
Verses: and, for the time to come, give this noble Gentleman deceased, instead
of a short life, a lasting memory; and which will be of all things to him most
acceptable, enter as it were into the inheritance of his Studies, and
constantly hold the same. And you, most venerable Fathers, as you have brought
to the mannagement of that Commonwealth whereunto you are called, all the most
excellent Virtues of Peireskius, worthy to be imitated by the greatest and in
all things praiseworthy most eminent Princes, such as you are; go on, I
beseech you, and proceed in this good course, imitating his divine care and
royally magnificent liberality, in the advancement of those Arts, wherein all
civility and elegancy of life, and even humanity it self, do consist and are
contained; as also by loving those men that study the same, and adorning them
with Honors, and such Benefices and Prefermeuts, as those holy and Religious
Ancestors of yours, have thought fit to bestow upon them. For an unworthy and
shameful thing it were, that those men should lie in the dirt, by whose labor
and watchings, Learning, the best thing God ever gave to mankind, does now
chiefly flourish: being altogether worthy of all favor and authority, amongst
you. For they, by the eternal Monuments of their writings, do consecrate to
immortality, such Princes and worthy Personages, as have deserved well of them
and their Virtues; as on the contrary, being wronged, or neglected, they brand
them with such marks of infamy and reproach, as the longest tract of Time, nor
the armed hands of Tyrants, cannot wipe off or deface. You ought not therefore
by any means, to give ear to certain worthless persons, who though they serve
to no other end than to fill up the number of your Court, and to enhance the
price of Corn and other Victuals, yet like empty hogsheads, turning this way
and that way, whose vacuity makes them nimble, and full of empty found; do make
great stirrs, laughing and hooting, as well at the dispositions and manners of
learned men as at the use and dignity of Learning it self. Learned men (right
reverend Fathers) are the most harmless and temperate sort of men in the world;
because, they spend all their time and study, which the foresaid cocks-combs
are wont to employ in ambition, avarice, or things ridiculous and filthy, in
the contemplation of the greatest and most excellent things in the world: nor
are they, as those men call them, wayward and crabbed,; but such as make an
accurate estimate of things: nor stubborn and proud; but such as can neither
act, nor endure things unworthy an ingenuous man: not slouching, and sneaking;
but modest: finally, not clownish and rude; but following the ancient manners,
and so full humanity, that the Arts which they profess have from thence their
name. As for Learning it self, how great maintenance as well as ornament it,
affords to well constituted Cities, may from this City of yours alone appear:
which as it was in times past afflicted, through neglect thereof; even so now,
a most learned and most wise Pope, bestowed as a celestial gift and Divine
present from God himself, is the cause, that your Commonwealth does at this
day gather strength and flourish; that it is happy; and that, in a word, while
other parts of the world are shaken, and tossed with the tempests of Wars and
other calamities, This alone enjoyes it self in Peace and Rest: which I beseech
the most good and great God, long and long for to continue.

A LETTER OF Gabriel Naudaeus TO Petrus Gassendus, Concerning the Death of
Peireskius.
BEing urged more then once, to communicate those Astronomical observations,
which I made at your request, to those renowned men Fortunius Licetus, and
Scipio Claromontius; and being solicited likewise by your Letters, to continue
that mutual intercourse of friendship, whereby we have heen long since nearly
united one to another; I take it for an Argument of your very great love; that
though I have been so long silent, yet out of your singular humanity and good
will, you have not been offended with me therefore: judging that I have not
been wanting to our mutual love and the singular respect I bear you, though
being busy about my Treatise, De Studio Militari, I have in the mean time
neglected to answer your Letters; save that I frequently signified to our
common friend, the renowned Peireskius, that as soon as ever I got any leisure
I would return such an answer to all your Letters, that you should have no
reason to complain, that your most delightful Urbanity and pleasant jesting,
has not bin by me answered, and recompensed with like festivity. But, O the
uncertainty of mortal things! O cruel Fates! O that bitter death milchievous to
all good men, which is fallen out in the midst of our jollity! that
incomparable Person being then taken away, when we thought of nothing less
than his death. For where was the Blazing-Star? Where the Thrnder and
Lightning? Where was the earthquake and unwonted noises? Where the Apparitions
and Prodigies, which might be expected at the death of that man, the greatest,
the best, the wisert, in the whole world? Historians verily do mock and sweetly
delude us, when they tell us that no Princes depart this world, without such
signs and tokens, foreshewing their death. For, I beseech you (my dear
Gassendus) how can it be, if the world is not governed by chance (as indeed it
is not, but ruled at the pleasure of Divine providence) that Heaven takes care
of such men, as rather by the blind disposal of Fortune than their own merits,
are advanced to Thrones and Scepters, being commendable for nothing but riches
and power which they most wisely abuse to the ruin of mankind, through the
extreme filthiness of their flagitious lives: and in the mean time the Heaven
is silent, the Moon heedlesse, nothing new or unusual is seen in the Elements
or such live-Creatures (if any such there be) as foretell things to come, at
the death of those, who by their virtue have obtained a most ample and
honorable Kingdom, among the sons of men; who being born for the good of all
men, are by their labor, study, industry, helpful unto all; and draw the whole
world into admiration, by the Fame and commendation of their Merits? And if I
shall say, that Peireskius deserved this praise the best of any man, either in
these or former times, no man will contradict me that is not an enemy to
Virtue, envious at his glory, or ignorant of those things, wherein all good and
learned men are agreed. For, was there ever a man, I pray you, better skilled
in Antiquity, Nature, Chronology, History, and Languages? or more ready to
assist the labors of studious men, by Speech, Letters, Books, Models, Plants,
Animals, Pictures, Coins, and the like Monuments of ancient and latter times?
Or in a word, better fitted to do all this, with Will, Wealth, Authority,
Knowledge, Providence, and other Virtues; with a mutual consent of all which,
that man must be adorned, that will undertake like the renowned Peireskius, to
govern the learned world by his beck and at his pleasure. Which truly, how hard
a thing it is to do, you may hereby (friend Gassendus) conjecture, in that if
you have recourse to all the Heroes of ancient times, you shall not find any
one that has done the like. And though the times immediately foregoing, have
afforded Vincentius Pinellus and Dominicus Molinus, men peradventure not much
inferior to Peireskius, for their endeavors and desire to assist learned men,
yet I know not how, they wanted diverse helps, which Peireskius had, by which he
was enabled to hold on his course with full sail, from his early youth to his
very last age. And verily with what facility he did all this, no man can be
ignorant, save he that cannot see the Sun at Noonday. For, who knows not, that
his mouth was not the mouth of a man, but of Delphick Apollo, out of which
Oracles daily issued, touching the most abstruse and hidden things? and that
his house was like a renowned Mart or Fair, full of most precious Wares brought
from both the Indies, Aethiopia, Graece, Germany, Italy, Spain, England, and
the nearer Provinces; and that no Ship entered the Havens of France, which did
not bring some strange Beast, rare outlandish Plants, ancient Marbles,
engraven or inscribed; Books in the Samaritan, Coptick, Arabic, Hebrew, China,
and Creek Tongues, or Relics of highest Antiquity from Peloponesus, into the
only Treasury of Peireskius? Finally, who can be ignorant, that he did not
gather all this Treasure for his own delight, or to adorn his study, that they
might ly there, as in the Cellars of the Capitol, or Sepulchers, where it was
unlawful to remove or take any thing out, for the benefit of others: but that
Peireskius made this Law to himself, that if he knew any learned men that might
be assisted by his Counsels, Wealth, Books, Statues, or Marbles, he would not
stay till with importunate entreaties they should defire the same; but he would
offer the same of his own accord, and cause it to be brought unto their houses;
so that, I could almost say, he did overwhelm all learned men with the
greatness and frequency of his benefits. But, what need is there that I should
write these things to you, most excellent Gassendus, who have with your own eyes
seen more of the brave actions of that rare man, worthy to be remembered to the
days of Eternity than any other man is able to set down in writing; that being
a work fit for none but your self, who in your love to him and the Elegancy of
your style and expression, give place to no man? Verily, seeing no part of his
life was without a Miracle; seeing there was never man in this world, to whom
learned men were so much and so greatly endebted; since the greatest part of
what for some decads of years last past, has been beautifully, elegantly, and
learnedly observed, came from him for the most part; nor should he be reckoned
among mortal men, were it not for his immature and bitter death, o grief to
tell, who ought always to have lived: I am very well convinced, that every man
is not fit to transmit his memory to posterity; for that a vulgar mouth should
do it, were great wickedness; yet, to find out words suitable to so great and
incomparable merits, seems to me a very hard thing. To gather therefore
together a Breviary of the Life of this great Patron of the Muses, out of the
whole world, whereinto it was diffused into a small Volume; this is such a
work, which unless you shall perform most learned Gassendus, who have the
command of a pure elegant and proper style, used to write of matters Divine and
Caelestial, of which kind all good men account Peireskius to have bin; and who
art wont to reduce the supreme Orbs and their Miracles, which are not verily
more large than the Fame and merits of Peireskius, most artificially into a
small Globe: I can hardly find any man man else, who can so fitly and happily
perform this work. For though all that were friends to Peireskius, are
furnished with Wit and Eloquence, and they are all as well as you concerned to
celebrate that man, whose memory ought to be to them most sacred; and although
many things which may be set down and alleged touching his most excellent
disposition, his industry, and wonderful readiness to assist the endeavors of
good men, may be known to any man as well as your self, by his most excellent
actions and works; yet can it not be denied, that the greatest of his Praises,
are better known to you than any other, by reason of the intimate acquaintance
you had with him, and your continual living in the house and dealing with him
for many years together. Come on therefore (my Gassendus) take that pen in
hand, which has bin accustomed to defend or praise gallant men, as well as to
explain the Miracles of Nature, and the Heavens: and think with your self, that
in so doing, you shall profit all the learned; honot his and your Country;
advance the glory and splendour of great Person ages and Princes, whiles out of
that great love you have always borne to him living and dead, you shall set
forth the true Picture of Peireskius, who did incite and assist all men to be
virtuous, nor only to be seen, but imitated also by them. As for me who have
always so accounted of Peireskius, as one in whom Nature was chiefly intended
to try her strength, in producing such a man, as might want nothing excellent
and comely, as far as mortal nature was capable; so that I cannot set him forth
with words as I ought, because the riches of his Merits have impoverished my
Rhetoric: therefore I most earnestly beseech you, to take this one task in
hand; and I shall then conceive the piety of my self, and others satisfied, who
are bound to prosecute the memory of Peireskius, with eternal honor and
grateful veneration; if by you, both the present Age and future Generation,
shall be made to understand, that Peireskius was not only most learned and most
munificent, which the whole world can witness; but a man most great and good
beyond comparison, a prime Patron of learned men; one for prudence and
learning, and all kind of virtues so excellent, that he ought in that respect
to be reckoned amongst the miracles of our Age, and honored accordingly.
Farewell, and read, if sorrow will give you leave, what I have mournfully
written, as one suddenly smitten with exceeding grief.

Rome, the 17. of the Kalends of August 1637.
Out of the Praeface of the Renowned Salmasius, before Cebes his Table in
Arabic.
AMong those kind of men, whose loss their friends ought to lament, both for
their own sake, and the public, there died three years since, Nicolaus
Fabricius, Lord of Peiresk, a man honored, as soon as named. Whom did not Fame
report to have bin such an one, as I knew him to be, I would here endeavor to
paint him out with my Pensil, though with rude lines, and obscure colors, as
the most perfect Picture and Pattern of all Virtue, and all kind of Learning. I
would endeavor, I say, to do that, the least part of which I could not promise
my self to be able to accomplish, as it ought to be. I would perform verily,
what I owe to that man's merits toward me, which will never slip out of my
mind, so long as I have a day to live. But seeing I cannot so do it, but that
I must omit more then I shall be able to set down; it being impossible to do it
completely, and suitable to his life and fame; I am forced to gather in my
Sails, and creep under the shore, least venturing into such a vast Sea of
praises with my small Cockboat, I should be in danger of drowning. Let it
therefore suffice to say, that the Sun never shone upon a man for many Ages
past, who was more desirous to advance the Commonwealth of Learning, nor who,
while he lived, did more advance the same. As his Curiosity was not drawn forth
by one kind of Science alone, so neither was his Benevolence, joined with a
beneficent mind, felt only by one kind of men. There are innumerable others,
whom I know, who, if they be not unthankful, will do their utmost endeavor, to
publish to the World, what, and how much they owe unto him. As for mine own
particular, his kindnesses to me were so many, endeavoring by all the ways he
could to assist my Studies, that I can hardly comprehend them in my thoughts,
much less can I by words express them. All which helps and furtherances,
though I must now want, he being taken away, to the great stop and hinderance
of my Studies, especially in the Egyptian and Arabic Tongues: yet I more
lament the loss of the Commonwealth of Learning, by his Death, then my own
Detriment; however, I am sufficiently sensible thereof, to this very day. Next
to this loss, which I confess, concerns the whole Commonwealth, as much as
mine own parricular, and is much to be lamented, there is none more grievous,
etc.

An ADDITION. To the Life of the Renowned PEIRESKIUS. To the famous Franciscus
Henricus, that great Favourer of Learning, and my singular good Friend, Petrus
Borellus Castrensis, Doctor of Physic, sends Greeting.
YOu have at length (Renowned Sir) procured the most Learned Petrus Gassendus,
though much taken up with diverse Studies, to fit the life of the most famous
Peireskius, the third time for the Press, and to illustrate the same with new
additions, and to distinguish the Text, which was formerly continued, into
certain Verses or Paragraphs, for the more commodious use of the Readers. The
work being at length by your care committed to the Press, and almost finished;
I gave intimation, that I had collected here and there, certain Testimonies of
great Men, concerning Peireskius, after his Death: which to omit upon this
occasion, as, it were a kind of sacrilege, and in jurious to the glory of the
Gentleman deceased; so, I have ^^^^^ht fit here to subjoyn such Testimonies, as
(...) co lected out of diverse Authors, printed (...) his Death, according to
your Request, and (...) the Consent of Gassendus: and in the first place,

Out of a Book of Athanasius Kircherus, called Lingua Aegyptiaca restituta,
Printed at Rome in Quarto, Anno 1644.
AFter he had related, that a Copto-Arabick Dictionary was found in Egypt, by
the most illustrous Knight Petrus a Valle, a Patrician of Rome, he adds that
which follows: Mean while, the most Renowned Nicolaus Fabricins, Lord of
Peiresk, a Senator in the Parliament of Aix, and the glory of learned men,
being informed of this Treasure, newly brought out of Egypt, he left no stone
unturned to procure the same to be turned into Latin, and printed for the
common good. Whiles therefore in other places, and chiefly in France, where the
Studies of all Languages and Arts do exceedingly flourish, a fit man was sought
to undertake this work; I at last, being banished out of Germany, by reason of
the Swedish I umults, and coming into my own Country of France, was, by the
earnest solicitation of my friends from all parts, and chiefly, by the
entreaties of my most familiar friend, Peireskius, compelled to put my
shoulders under the burden, though scarce strong enough to bear the same.

By which may be seen, the great Affection of Peireskius, to learned Men,
wherewith he was wont to cherish them, by his most courteous writings to assist
them, and most magnificently to seek to confer upon them, all the Benefits
which came in his way; thereby also may be seen his great Study to reveal
secrets, to the end, he might assist as much as he could the Learned
Commonwealth, in such things, wherein they were most deficient. Which he rarely
performed, by promoting this Copto-Arabick work: in which, making a way into
the most secret Closets of the Ancient Egyptians, our new Interpreter, by the
assistance of his good Angel, has revealed the hidden Mysteries of natural
Magic, and their sacred Arts and Cabals.

And in the 528. page, in a Supplement to the Chapter of the names of God, he
explains an Hieroglyphic figure in which the Sun and Moon, and many other
things were contained within a Snake coiled round, and holding his tail in his
month. And thus he goes on.

And now let us see, whether there are yet to be found any foot steps of these
Coptick names, in the Egyptian Ruins; the Copticks before cited assirm the
same, and that fragment of Egyptian Antiquity, which that rare man of immertal
Memory, Nicolaus Fabricius Lord of Peiresk, ^ut of his incredible love to me
and my Studies, such as they are, among many other things which wanted an
O^dipus to explain them, sent unto me to be interpreted, does more then
sufficiently demonstrate the same. In which the names of four Gods, which rule
the four Quarters of the world, are to be seen fairly represented in the most
ancient Coptick Letters; as also in words, between the Characters of the Sun
and Moon, compassed by a Serpent: the Picture thereof, he there sets down.

Out of the Obelissus Pamphilius of the said Kircherus, printed at Rome in
Folio, Anno, 1650.
Having praemised an exhortatory Epistle to the Readers, skilled in abstruse
Learning; and having rendered a Reason of the Title of the work, and the
occasion of Writing the same, he adds these following passages.

Sixteen years are now past (friendly Reader) since in the time of Pope Urban
the eighth, I was sent for out of France, to Rome, to try if I could interpret
the Inscriptions of the Roman Obeliskes; it being reported, that I had taken
upon me the Restitution of this kind of Learning, out of a very ancient Arabian
Manuscript the business being eagerly urged and prosecuted by that great
Maecenas of learned Men, Nicolaus Peireskius a Senator in the Parliament of Aix
in Provence.

And after that Kircherus had showed (from the very words of Gassendus) how he
was invited by Peireskius, and desired to bring with him, the Arabian
Manuscript, writ by Rabbi Barachia Nephi, teaching the way to interpret
Hieroglyphics; together, with some example of an Interpretarion and his own
notes; he observes, that the Authors right name is Abenephius, and then
reckoning up such as had bin assidant to the work, he has these words.

This Treasury, and Shop of Antiquities, did first belong to that Gentleman,
worthy of immortal praise and memory, Nicolaus Peireskius, a most renowned
Senator of Aix in Provence; who out of his zeal to promote these Studies,
caused all his Egyptian Rarities, which he had in his Treasuries of
Antiquities, to be drawn out, and sent to me at Rome, to assist me in my
Restitution of the Art of interpreting Hieroglyphics.

And again in Page 451.

Just against the Chain, there is the figure of a sacred Cup or Chalice, which
the Priests used in their Sacrifices; which may be known, by that
Hieroglyphical Representation upon a certain Egyptian Amphora ( a model
whereof was sent me from the Storehouse of Peireskius) in which the Priests
being to sacrifice to their God Mophtasen, or Niligenius, did hold this figure
in their hands, as it were a certain Cup, with its appropriate Liquor; by which
means, I first came to know the signification of this Figure.

And again, in Page 473, he propounds the same figure, and makes again
honorable mention of Peireskius.

Peireskius and Kircherus, were an Example to all men, by so much Expense, Care
and Labor, advancing the common good. And I could wish, that such Jewels,
Coins, Vessels, Statues, and other such like things, as lie hid in the Closets
of Antiquaries, might be brought to light, for the explanation of ancient
Histories, and the augmentation of Learning; which I have small hopes to see
effected in these days of ours, in whith there are few Kirchers, and never a
Peineskius.

After Kircherus, Mersennus comes to be considered, whom when Peireskius knew
to be writing of Universal Harmony, and all kind of Music; he presently sent
him the names of two Musicians, which contained the six Musical notes, UT RE MI
FA SOL LA in them, letter for letter, not one over, or under. Of which
Mersennus makes mention, in his first Volume of Universal Harmony, printed at
Paris, in the year 1636. Now their names were these.

F. SALVATOR MILE, and F. LOVIS ALMERAT.

That wonderful things have bin sometimes sound out in Anagrams, who can deny?
Witness the Sybilla Gallica, in which Thomas Billonius, an Advocate in the
Parliament of Aix, has curiously abbreviated the Life of King Jews the
thirteenth, by diverse Anagrams comprehended in Heroical Verses; which I do not
mention in this place, as intending to assert the Art of Divination by names;
much less, the foolish and chymerical Conceits of Robert Flud, touching the
same: but to bring upon the Stage an Art (to me well known) but through the
carelessness of Students, not sufficiently searched into by which through the
Doctrine of Combinations, all the Anagrams which can possibly be made of any
name, may, without any labor, be seen at one view; nor can there more be found
out by any Created Being, Man or Angel; so that if the name consist of four
Letters, it will afford 24. Anagrams; if of five, an hundred and twenty; and so
of the rest ad infinitum; so that of a word or speech of sixty four Letters,
there does arise by these Combinations, the wonderful product of ninety
Ciphers, out of which, a skilful Composer may frame as many Anagrams. And so
much may suffice to have said occasionally, in praise of this Art.

But that the six musical Notes, VT RE MI FA SOL LA, should be contained in the
names aforesaid, is but a matter of chance, may appear, in that the said Notes
(setting aside the Anagrammatism) are contained in the Hymn, which is wont to
be sung, on the Nativity of St. John Baptist, as you may here behold.

UT queant laxis REsonare fibris,
MIra gestorum, F Amuli, tuorum,
SO Lve polluti LAbii reatum,
Sancte Johannes, etc.
To reckon up in this place the Rarities contained in the Study of Peireskius,
would be a work too long for an Epistle. Howbeit, I shall briefly touch upon
such things, as it was my hap to meet with here and there. And the first shall
be that same Greek Manuscript of Constantinus Porphyrogeneta, mentioned by
Gassendus, peri Aretes cai Cacias, of Virtue and Vice, out of which Valesius
gathered an whole Book, and printed the same, which is now kept, in the ample
Library of Msr. Ranchinus, a Senator in Languedock; also the Epistle of a
certain Sultan, to an ancient King of France written in Arabic Characters upon
a silken Paper, sprinkled with small streaks of pure gold, which shine up and
down, which (being in some sort useful for our Histories) I shall cause to be
printed, with an Interpretation in the Mother Tongue. I must not forget to tell
you, how I saw a Cymbal of Brass, exceeding neat, which came out of the same
study: it was of a round shape, like an Orange, hollow within, and divided into
two parts, like two Acorn Cups, out of the bottom of which arose another Cup,
which was fastened to the other, not by the surface, but only in one point
where it touched, which (the two first being drawn down parallel from the top,
and boared as it were with so many holes) being never so little stirred with
the hand, would make a musical sound, which lasted a quarter and half quarter
of an hour, sending forth, by repercussion of the Air, a manifold Echo.

Out of the same Study, came that Volume of the Travels of Vincentius,
mentioned by Gassendus, being deposited with Peireskius in his lifetime; which
intending to print, he was hindered by the foolish Discourses of Blancus,
touching the plain Surface of the Earth, and other such like things; till at
last, after both their Deaths, it was in the year 1649 again taken in hand, and
printed at Paris. Touching which, I desire such as are curious to take notice,
that the true Original Copy of the said Journey of Blancianus, is kept by Mr.
Hardii, a Senator of Paris, which being compared with the printed Edition, does
in some things vary therefrom, being likewise enlarged with Topographical Maps
of the places, and the lively Pictures of the several Cloathings of diverse
Nations. And if the Book come to be printed again, I dare say, the Original
Copy may be procured of that most courteous Gentleman, to make the Edition
thereby more complete.

These things I had to say (Renowned Sir) touching Peireskius, which supposing
they would not be to you unpleasing, I have therefore more willingly published
under your name, because I knew you to be a very great Referencer of Persons
rarely learned; in whose foot steps gloriously treading, you daily search into
the deepest mysteries, furthered by your Genius, so desirous to learn; and what
you search into, you examine with a piercing Judgment; what you find out, you
commit to writing; from whence, the rich Treasures of Nature, will one day
advance into the World, completely written by your eloquent Pen. Which God
grant for the common good, and your own immortal praise.

In the mean while (most loving friend) as I now present this pledge of my
Devotion to you, so shall I daily (God willing) prepare some better, and more
worthy presents, viz. the third and fourth Centuries of wonderful observations;
one Century of such as belong to our Microcosme; a second part of Bibliotheca
Chymica; the Life and Philosophy of Democritus; a Treatise of an Universal
Language, and touching the way to expound the foure-square Venetian Cipher,
with a Key: all which will, I hope, be acceptable to the curious. Dated at
Paris, the Kalends of July, 1654.

To Petrus Borellus, Dr. of Physic, his loving friend F. H. P. L.
YOu are an happy man, friend Borellus, whom good Fortune has made after so
many years, an Amplifier of the Dignity of Peireskius. Happy man am I, to whom
you have directed your commendations of a man so heroically virtuous. And we
are both happy, whom Gassendus has thought fit to propagate the memory of that
renowned Man, himself being the most worthy praiser of the Virtues of
Peireskius, and the perfect writer of his life. By whose means Posterity will
abundantly honor the most glorious name of that great Hero, which all learned
men ought to admire, and commend the same to eternity. What was the habit of
his Body, what the manners of his mind, and what his Studies, have bin so
punctually set down by Gassendus, and in a style so sublime, that no man well
advised, can pretend to add a tittle thereunto. For he has given us a most
perfect Picture of that brave Man, expressed his rare works, and in a pure
style graphically painted forth, his manners, and inclination to all excellent
Learning. He has set forth to Posterity a genuine example of polite Literature,
and plentiful grounds of emulation to the learned World. For by his most happy
undertakings, the Muses have recovered their spirit, life and Country, whom
the Barbarism of the former Age had banished out of the World. To whom
therefore must the Muses acknowledge their liberty, when they shall reflourish?
to whom shall Studies and Arts acknowledge their recovery? to whom shall
learned men attribute the increase of Sciences, and those helps tending to
unlock the most abstruse points of knowledge? To whom, but to Peireskius, and
in the next place to Gassendus; who was the first that did what no body else
could do, in painting out to the Life, that worthy Hero in a Picture which
shall last to eternity. I shall not go about ambitiously to praise the one or
the other; for they need no praises, who are above all Commendation, and
greater then any Titles can be given them; whose renown will be immortal. I
shall only resume his Studies (which Gassendus has most accurately prosecuted
in his sixth Book) and contract them into a small handful, propounding his
Manuscripts at large, for the common good of those, who desire the same. But I
need not explain these things to the learned; I conceive it may suffice to say,
that this most unwearied Gentleman labored all his life, in gathering the
same, to this only end, that he might be as a Midwife to Posterity. Give me
leave here to set down the very words of Gassendus, and therein to admire the
lowly modesty of that most eminent Man, whose words touching himself, are these
in Gassendus, viz. that he was unable to produce a mature and elegant birth, or
to lick the same into any shape: as if he could be thought insufficient for
such a burden, who left at his death, fourscore and two Books, of his own
handwriting, of all most exquisite Arguments; considerable for their Bulk; but
more for the variety and excellency of the subject matter, in which he sets
open to all men, a Treasury of most choice Learning, by assistance whereof,
they who like him are wont to search into the depths of Erudition, may be
enabled to support the decaying Arts, and save them from perishing. Now what
chance this great treasure of his has undergone, which has bin hitherto hid
from the learned, I shall here briefly hint, yea and ingenuously intimate, who
it is which hides the same; that such as are disposed particularly to examine
these great Riches by him heaped up, or (if possible) to publish the same, so
as to satisfy the great thirst of those, that earnestly enquire after them;
they may have the opportunity, to search into the very bowels of these Books,
and bring forth the Treasure they meet with for the common good; that the
victorious labors of that rare man may be admired, and that others being
enriched with his spoils, may prosecute and perfect what has bin by him begun,
and deliver the same as an Inheritance to Posterity, through the munificence of
that great Maecenas. Ten years after his Death, his Heirs caused his Library
to be brought to Paris; which, in the year 1647, I saw there, consisting of a
great Company of Books, most curiously bound. But alas! what a miserable fate
it underwent when it came to sale they know, who grieve for such a loss
never to be repaired. For this most rich Library might, yea and ought to have
bin reserved for the Muses; or at least those precious Books, which by
infinite Labor, were procured from all the choicest Libraries in the World,
should have bin sold all together; but the renowned Genius of this Library
being extinct, so fate ordered the matter, that being torn into piece-meales,
it miserably perished; which is so ordered, I conceive, by the eternal
providence of God, that all men may remember, in the midst of their most eager
Collections of Books (who are apt with too much confidence to brood over their
learned Treasures) that such things as are collected in time, will likewise
after certain revolutions, pass away with time. His Manuscripts doubtless, had
better fortune. For that excellent and learned Man Petrus Puteanus, when he was
living caused very providently his said Manuscripts to be separated from the
rest of the Books, both to preserve the Labors of his friend from perishing,
and to satisfy the learned Commonwealth, which is extreme thirsty, after
abstruse knowledge. Having therefore put all the sheets, being in certain
bundles, according to the accurateness of his judgment, into several Classes,
suitable to the variety of the Arguments; he caused them, being so placed in
order, to be bound up into fourscore and two Volumes, making a Catalogue of the
names of every one of them, to the very least: which Catalogue I do now
publish, having never before seen the light. With which (that I might not seem
to do any thing negligently) I have diligently compared the several Volumes or
Books aforesaid; that by this means, learned men may have a Breviary of the
said Manuscripts, begun by Putean, and finished by my self. To the making of
which Catalogue, that most illustrious Gentleman, Claudius Fabricius, Baron of
Rians, the Son of Palavesius, Brother to our Peireskius, did much contribute
(very readily lending all the Books to that end) who being renowned by the
Noble Titles of his Ancestors (with which the Fabrician Family is famous to
this very day) has added thereunto most proper and peculiar gifts of his own
mind, viz. sweetness of manners, Candor and Ingenuity, with an industrious
wit, thereby to augment, not only the glory of his Uncle, but the growing
Wealth of the Literary Republic. I am so far from unthankfully passing over in
silence, how I owe all I have done in this business, to the Gentleman
aforesaid; that I am ready with the most officious words I am able to return
him, as by these presents I do, all possible thanks for his favor to me in
this particular. Go to therefore, who ever thou art, that longest after
mysterious and hidden secrets of Learning; go to the Peireskian Fountains,
which do by their streams plentifully water the field of Learning; you shall
find plenty wherewith to quench your thirst; whether you desire caelestial
things, or things terrestial; natural or artificial, old or new. And behold in
these a most intent observer, the Judge of most abstruse matters; and celebrate
the Phaenix and miracle of his Age; in one word, recommend to Posterity, this
most worthy Gentleman deceased, whose Virtues while living, did merit a public
Triumph. Dated at Paris, the last of December, 1654.

A CATALOGUE OF Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius, Lord of Peiresk, and Senator of
Aix, his own proper Manuscripts.
Printed from the Original Copy of Petrus Puteanus his own handwriting, being
diligently compared with the Books themselves, which are at this day in the
Custody of the Baron of Rians.
Volume I. DUkes and Peers of France, Vol. 1. Dukes and Piers of France, Vol.
2.
II. Diverse Catalogues of Manuscripts. Diverse Catalogues of printed Books.
III. Books of diverse Heralds touching Coats of Arms. A Miscellanie of diverse
Coats of Arms, some blasoned some not. Certain fragments touching kingly
Robes. Diverse Instructions concerning Heraldry. The Coats of Arms of the
greatest Families in Europe blazoned. Figures of diverse ancient Tapestries.
IV. England Volume 1. England, Volume 2. Scotland.
V. Ancient Authors, Greek and Latin, touching weights and measures. Diverse
Calendars. Of Looking-Glasses, and Spectacles for diverse purposes. Observations
touching the Eyes of Men, and diverse other Beasts. Effects of the Sight.
VI. Touching Maritim affairs. Of Commerce. Matters appertaining to the Law.
VII. Inscriptions and Subscriptions of Letters written by the King, Queen, and
others, as well within as without the Realm. Other Memorials touching the same
subject. Enlogies and Epitaphs.
VIII. Turks. Voyages. A mixture of diverse Papers of the same Subject.
IX. A verbal process touching the negotiation between Pope Sixtus Quartus,
and the Princes of Italy. Memorials of Queen Margaret.
X. For the Life of St. Lewis. For the Maid of Orleance. Of the City of Rhemes.
Enchanters, Sorcerers.
XI. Memorials of the Council of Trent. Assemblies of the Clergy.
XII. Chancellours and Keepers of the Seal of France, General Rules for the
Houses of the King, the Queens, and the Parliaments.
XIII. Genealogies of the House of Austria. Letters and Passages touching the
Martiage of England 1624, 1625.
XIIII. Acts and Memorials touching Bearn, Metz, Toul, Verdun, Commercy.
XV. A Discourse touching the power of the Pope. Touching the power of Kings.
Tampin. Whether or no it is lawful to bear Arms for a Prince of a different
Religion. The English Naaman, whether the Catholics sin that live among
Heretics. Vacancies, and Exactions of the Pope. Bishops, and a Catalogue of
Bishops. A Treatise of the Inquisition, by Father Paul.
XVI. Ancient Statues and other Antiquities. Precious Stones. Of the Tripod.
Seals of diverse sorts. Pourtraits of the Princes of the House of Anjou, and
other Figures.
XVII. Regencies. Portions. Seats of Justice held by Kings in their
Parliaments. Verifications of Edicts, in the Chamber of Accounts, and the Court
of Aides or subsidies. The Chamber of Justice against those of the Exchequer.
Receipts of the Exchequer.
XVIII. The History of the Marshal of Fleurange. The History of James de
Lalain. Lives of the Earls de Carcez. A discourse touching the Life of
Monsieur Charles de Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne, by Cornac. The Negotiations of
Monsieur de Bassompiere in Spain, touching the Valtelline.
XIX. Assizes or Assemblies at Jerusalem.

XX. The Liberty of the French Church.
XXI. A Catalogue of the Books in the Kings Library.
XXII. Orations and Discourses. Diverse Discourses and Memorials. Genealogies,
and other historical Treatises.
XXIII. Ancient Genalogies of the Kings of France. Extracts from Chronicles and
Histories. French Antiquities, or Extracts from diverse Histories. Touching the
ancient History of France. Titles and Acts, for the History of the second Race.
Privileges granted by the Popes to the Kings of France.
XXIIII. Ancient Inscriptions. Vol. 1. Ancient Inscriptions. Vol. 2. New and
Christian Inscriptions.
XXV. Diverse Orders of Knighthood. Vol. 1. Diverse Orders of Knighthood. Vol. 2.
XXVI. Ceremonies, Consecrations, and Coronations. Entries. Receptions. Te
Deum. Baptisms. Marriages. Butials. Reception of the Duke de Pustrane into
France. The Reception of Monsieur du Main into Spain. Memorials of diverse
Ceremonies. A Discourse touching Seats and Places. A memorial touching Places.
Of the Debate 'twi xt France and Spain touching Priority of Place.
XXVII. Criminal Process or Trials of Robert Earl of Artois, of Gilles de Rail.
Of the Constable of St. Paul. Of the Duke of Montmorancy. Diverse criminal
Arrests, and criminal Processes,
XXVIII. A Chronicle of the Metensian Bishops. Chronicon Besnense. Chronicon
Novaticense. Chronicle of Berne. Diverse Letters and Acts passed between the
Emperors and Princes of Germany and the Kings of France. Chronicles and Statues
of Monpellier. Diverse Chronicles.
XXIX. Legati a latere. Indulgences of Cardinals. The Legation of Cardinal
Barberin in France and Spain.
XXX. Italy, vol. 1. Rome. Urbin. Parma. Este. Gennes. Mantua. Montferat, and
Venice. Neutrality of the free County. Italy, vol. 2. Milaine. Savoy and
Piedmont. Naples and Sicilie. The Empire of Constantinople.
XXXI. Of the Huguenots or Protestants from the year 1550 to the year 1619.
Vol. 1. Of the Huguenots from the year 1620. to 1629. Vol. 2.
XXXII. Of Genealogies, vol. 1. Of Genealogies, vol. 2.
XXXIII. The General Assembly of Estates holden at Paris, under King John.
Other Assemblies in the years 1418. and 1461. Assemblies of the Notables at
Roan. 1596. 1617 and at Paris 1627. An Ordinance made in pursuit of the said
Assembly. A Register containing the Acts of the Estates general assembled at
Paris, during the Ligue or Confederacy in the year 1593.
XXXIIII. Italian Relations Vol. 1. Italian Relations, Vol. 2. Italian
Relations, Vol. 3. A Diarie of the Popedom of Leo the 10th.
XXXV. A Remonstrance of the third Estate, to the Estates General assembled at
Paris in the year, 1615. A verbal process of the Lieutenant General d'Evreux
touching what passed in the said Assembly. A process verbal of the House of
Lords to the said Estates General, 1615. A Remonstrance of the said Lords.
XXXVI. Diverse Mathematical Treatises. Astronomical Discourses.
XXXVII. Sundry Latin Poems. French Poems. Pasquils. Devices.
XXXVIII. Contracts of Marriage. Contracts of Marriage. Testaments.
XXXIX. Spain. Arragon. Flanders Spanish. Holland.
XL. Diverse Conclaves. Relations of Cardinal Bentivoglio.
XLI. Letters of Monsieur Salmasius and Monsieur Peireskius. Italian Letters of
diverse great Persons. Letters of Monsieur Peireskius. French Letters of diverse
great Persons. A Miscellaniee of French Letters.
XLII. Parliaments of Paris, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Bretagne, Dyon, Metz.
Parliament of Provence. Chamber of Accounts. Court of Aides.
XLIII. Of Weights and Measures.
XLIV. Earls of Thoulose, Languedoc, Montpellier, Dauphine, Guyenne, Bretagne.
XLV. Diverse Registers touching Moneys. Acts and memorials concerning the
business of Moneys. Touching Moneys.
XLVI. Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Lorraine and Bar.
XLVII. The Chancellor de l'Hospital. Baldwin. Monsieur du Vair. Monsieur de
Villeroy.
XLVIII. Monks. Jesuits. Knights of Malta.
XLIX Mortal Duels. Tiltings.
L. Matters Theological. Letters of Popes. Lives of Saints. Certain writings of
Hinemarus.
LI. Guistres.
LII. Gardens and fruits.
LIII. Observations of diverse wonders in Nature. Curious Inventions.
Instructions touching Curiosities.
LIVE. Memorials touching the Affairs of Switzerland. Touching the Grisons and
the Valtelline. Treaties betwixt the French and Switzers. Of the Switzers among
them. Of the Grisons with the Switzers and other. Touching the business of the
Valtelline.

LV. Medals. Arabian Medals. Explications and Discourses touching diverse
Medals. French, Saxon, British Coins, etc. Inventories of diverse Cabanets of
Medals.

Here I must acquaint the Reader, that diverse Books which belong to this 54
Volume, are missing, which he that bought the Coins has in possession, whether
justly or no, it concerns not me to enquire. Yet most sure it is that they were
cunningly, if not forcibly, got out of the Treasury of Peireskius, and lie at
this time in some secret place of the buyers house, so that for this seven
years they have not bin seen, nor may be lent to any man, being confined to
sight with moths and worms in some dark hole. That Treasure is therefore lost,
which the most renowned Peireskius had ordained as an assistance to the
curiosity of Antiquaries; but by what fate, force or fraud I do not enquire.
For that hard man would reap where he had not sowed, and gather where he had
not scattered, hiding another man's talent in the ground.

LVI. The Oriental Languages, Hebrew, Samarican, Arabic, Egyptian. Indexes of
Books in the foresaid Languages. Antonius Kircherns his Apparatus for the
explanation of Hieroglyphics. Jacobus Gaffarellus touching the Kabala, and
Mersennus upon him.
LVII. Diverse Titles and Acts from Hugh Capet to the year 1399. 1. Vol. Diverse
Titles and Acts for the History of France, from the year 1400. to 1579. 2. Vol.
Diverse Titles from 1580. to 1614. 3. Vol.
LVIII. Diverse Titles from the year 1615. to 1626. Vol. 4. Diverse Titles from
1627. to 1631. Vol. 5. Diverse Titles from the year 1632. to 1634. V. 6.
LIX. Annals of Giovennazzo. The History of Varchi. The lire of Castruccio
Castracani. The life of Saul. An History of the Siege of Malta. An History of
the Albigeois. A Chronicle of Savoy. Johannes Baptista Tassis, his Belgic
History.
LX. Learned Epistles of famous Men. Observations upon diverse Authors.
Epistles of Petrus Gassendus. Mathematical Observations of Joannes Gualterus,
and Peireskius.
LXI. An Inventory of the Register of the Ordinances of Parliament of Paris.
Diverse Inventories and Extracts of the ancient Registers of the Parliament of
Paris. A Table of an Inventory of the Registers of the Ordinances of the
Parliament of Paris.
LXII. A Table of the Ordinances of the Chamber of Accounts. Diverse Ordinances.
Memorials of the Chamber of Accounts at Paris.
LXIII. Extracts of diverse Registers of Parliament, of the Chamber of Accounts
and others. A Court-rolle. A Collection of diverse ancient Ordinances made by
Register du Tillet. Customs of red Wines, by Phlets de Beaumanoi.
LXIIII. A Table upon the seven Volumes of the Inventory of the Treasure of
Charters.
LXV. Acts and memorials for the History of Provence, from the year 1441. to
the year 1479. V. 1. Acts and Memorials for the foresaid History, from the year
1580. to the year 1590. V. 11. Acts for the foresaid History, from the year
1590, to the year 1637. Vol. 3.
LXVI. Particular Relations of what passed in Provence, during the Reign of
Henry the 3d and Henry the 4th. Diverse Memorials, subservient to the ancient
History of Provence.
LXVII. Genealogical Treatises for the History of the Earls of Provence.
Genealogies and Titles for the House of Fourbin.
LXVIII. Titles and Momorials for the Family of Pourcellets. 1. 2.
LXIX. Genealogies of Glandevez, Agoult, Sault, Pontevez, Rodulphi, Leonce,
Benau, Luynes, Brianson, Puget.
LXX. Genealogies de Grignan, Simiano, Villenube, Sabran, and Castillane.
Genealogies of the Baux. de Foresta, Oraison, Lascaris, Ventimille, Brancas, de
Callian, Grace, Vallavoire, du Blanc, Lodun, Mondragon, Candolle Sceytre,
Pontanier, Boucicault, Spinola de Alx, Clemens, etc
LXXI. Histories of the Antiquities of Arles, by L. de Romien. An History in
form of a journal, touching what has past in Provence, from the year 1562. to
the year 1617. A Procez against the Earl of Provence, by the Duke of Lorrain.
LXXII. Diverse ancient Genealogies of Princes, which have ruled in Provence. A
Miscellany of diverse Letters, touching the Families of Provence. Genealogies
and Titles for the Houses of Bulbone, Requeston, de Medallionc, de la Guard,
Simons, Signa Cornuti, Grimault, Renigliaos, Flotte, Jarante, Cossa. A Register
de Caradet. The Genealogy of the House of Fabricii, and the Families thereto
allied.
LXXIII. Cities of Provence, Aix. Arles, Toulon, Yerres, Forcalquier,
Brignolles, Erejus, Riants, Nice, and others. Acts and Memorials touching the
City of Marseilles, and the Lords which have possessed the same. The Statutes
of Marseilles. Antiquities of Marseilles, Rhemes, Solers.
LXXIIII. Archbishop of Arles. Ancient Acts. Bishops of Marseilles, Frejus,
Die, Vence, Gap, Digne, Grass, Senez, Glandevez, Riez, Systeron.
LXXV. Arch Bishop of Aix, Bishop of Toulon, Apt, St. Paul, Vaison, Cavaillan,
Aurange, Nice. Abbeys, De Lerins, de Nazareth, Caroli loci, St. Veran, Lioncel,
St. Poris, Almanarra, St. Hierosme Correns, St. Mary Magdalanie, Beaugensie,
Pignans, Barjolz, etc.
LXXVI. Abbeys. Of St. Victor de Marseilles, St. Maximin, Articella, Boscodum
and Luze. Abbey. Of Montmajour, of Arlez. Chartrenses of Montriou, Valbonne,
Val St. Marie, de Vrbonne, de Verne, Bompas.
LXXVII. Avenion. Letters of Pope Clement the 4th. The Earl De Venisse.
LXXVIII. Aurenge.
LXXIX. Very rare Memorials for the History of France, chiefly touching the
troubles of the Ligue, or Confederacy in general, and what happened in Provence
touching the same. Diverse curious Relations made by Mr. Peiresk in Conferences.
Ancient Parliaments.
LXXX. Grotius Querengus.
LXXXI. The third Discourse and Commentaries of Mr. Lewis de Perussiis Esquire,
de Coumons, Knight of the Kings Order; also the Continuation of the War and
Troubles of those times, from the 22th of February 1554. to the year 1581.
LXXXII. The Bull of the Legation of Avenion.

The End.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, at
the Princes Arms in Sr. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in humane Learning, etc.
1. Historical relations of the united Provinces of Flanders, by Cardinal
Bentivoglio: Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. Fol. 2.
The History of the Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by that learned and
famous Cardinal Bentivoglio; Englished by the Right Honorable Henry E. of
Monmouth. The whole work Illustrated with a Map of the 17. Provinces, and
above 20 Figures of the thief Personages mentioned in this History. Fol. 3.
The History of the Wars of the Emperor Justinian, with the Persians, Goths,
and Vandalls, written in Greek by Procopius of Caesaria in eight Books,
translated into English by Sir Henry Holcroft. Knight. Fol. 4. De Bello
Belgico, the History of the Low Country Wars, written in Latin by Famianus
Strada, in English by Sir Robert Stapylton, Illustrated with diverse Figures.
Fol. 5. The use of passions, written by I.F. Senalt, and but into English by
Henry, Earl of Monmouth 8o. 6. Judicious and Select Essaies and observations
by the Renowned and learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for
his Voyage to Guiana. Fol. 7. The Complete Horseman and Expert Farrier in two
books, by Thomas De Gray Esquire, newly printed with additions. in 4^ 1656. 8.
Unheard Of curiosities concerning the Talismaticall Sculpture of the Persians.
The Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the judgment of the Stars, by J. Gaf^nel,
Englished by Edmund Chilinead, Chapter Chapter Oxon. 9. The History of the Inquisition,
composed by ^. F. Servita, the compiler of the History of the Council of
Trent, in 8o, traslated out of Italian. 10. Biathanatos, a Paradox of
self-murder, by Dr. Jo. Done, Dean of St. Paul's London. 11. The Gentleman's
Exercise, or the Art of limning, painting, and blazoning of Coats and Arms,
etc. by Henry Peacham Master of Arts, 4o. 12. M. Howels History of Lewis the
thirteenth King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol. 13.
Mr. Howels Epistolae Ho elianae. Familiar letters Domestic and Foreign, in six
Sections partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the first Volume with
Additions. 8o. 14. Mr. Howels new volume of Familiar letters partly
Historical, Political, Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions.
8o. 15. Mr. Howels third Volume of Additionall letters of a fresher date, never
before published. 8o. 16. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the
first part, in 12o. with many Additions. 17. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the
Vocal Forest, the second part, in 8o, never printed before. 18. Mr. Howels,
Englands Tears for the present wars. 19. Mr. Howels, Fre-eminence and Pedigree
of Parliament, in 12o. 20. Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for Forven
Trvels, in 12o with diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant
parts. 21. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his late Majesty, in
4o. 22. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o. 23. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of Monmouth, in 12o. 24
Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's David persecuted, Englished by To. Ashly. Gent. in
120. 25. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the
Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the revolt of the Catalonians from the
King of Spain. Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gent. in 12o. 26. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades, and Coriolanus, Two
famous Roman Commanders, Englished by Rob. Gentilis. 27. Policy unveiled, or
Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator of Gusman, in 4o. 28.
Gracious priveleges granted by the King of Spain to our English Merchants, in
4o. 29. Englands looking in and out by Sr. Ralph Maddison, Knight, 4o. 30.
Gratiae Ludentes, jests from the University. 31. The Antipathy between the
French and the Spanyard, an ingenious translation out of Spanish. 32. Mr. Birds
grounds of Grammar, in 8o. 33. Mr. Bulwers Phylocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb
man's friend, in 12o. 34. Mr. Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or a Dessection of the
significative Muscles of the Affections of the Mind, 12o. 35. An Itinenary
containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646, 1647. illustrated
with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by John Raymond,
Gent. in 12o.
Books in Humanity lately Printed.
36. THe History of Life and Death, or the prolongation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban in 12o. 37. The natural and
experimental History of Winds, written in Latin by Francis Lord Verulam
Viscount St. Alban, translated into English by an admirer of the learned
Author. 12o. 38. The life of the most learned Father Paul, Author of the
History of the Council of Trent, translated out of Italian by a person of
quality. 8o. 39. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters, and. by Dr. Donn Dean of St
Paul's, to which is added a book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same
Author, translated by Jasper Main. D. D. 12o. 40. Ignatius his conclave, a
Satyr written by Dr. Done Deane of St. Paul's. 12o. 41. A Discovery of
subterraneall Treasure, viz. of all manner of Mines and Minerals, from the
Gold, to the Coal, with plain directions and rules for the finding of them in
all Kingdoms, and Countries, written by Gabriel Platt. 4o. 42. Richardi
Gardener, ex Aede Christi Oxon. specimen Oratorium. ^o. 43. The Sovereignty of
the British Seas, written by that learned Knight Sir John Burroughes Keeper of
the Records in the Tower. 12o. 44. Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar
made plain and easy for Teacher and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles
Master of Arts. 45. Artificial Arithmetic containing the Quintessence of the
Golden Rule, the true valuation of all Annaities, also to find the distance at
one station; An Art never till now published, useful for Merchant, Gunners,
Seamen, and Surveyors, by Robert Iager of Sandwich in Kent Gent. 46. Natural
and Divine Contemplations of the Passions and Faculties of the Soul of Man in
three books, written by Nicholas Moseley Esquire 8o.
Se^^rall Sermons, with other excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some
most eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
47. A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. 48. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot
Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24. 49. Ten Sermons upon several
occasions, preached at St. Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the Right reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. in 40. 50. Six
Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings Majesty,
and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done, Dr. in
Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o. 51. Private Devotions in six
Letanies, with directions and Prayers for the days of the week and Sacrament,
for the hour of Death, and the day of judgment, and two daily prayers, for the
Morning and Evening, written by Dr. Henry Valentine, 24o. 52. A Key to the Key
of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the Epistle to the Romans, the
three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in Divinity and Minister of the
word of God at Pitmister in Somersetshire, in 4o. 53. Sarah and Hagar, or the
sixteenth Chapter of Genesis opened in ninteen Sermons, being the first
legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned, Orthodox, and
indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute. B. D. and above 33
years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in Follo' 54. Christ's Tears
with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in sundry Sermons upon
Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. late of Magdalen College in Oam.
in. 4o. 55, Three Sermons viz. The benefit of contentation, The Affinity of the
faithful, and The lost sheep found, by Mr. Henry Smith. 4o. 56. Ten Sermons
preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter Hausted Mr. in
Arts, and Curat at Vppingham in Rutland in 4o. 57. Eighteen Sermons preached
upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded, to the capacity of
the Weakest Christian, by John Dawson Oxon. in 4o. 58. The History of the
Defenders of the Faith, discoursing the state of Religion in England during the
Reigns of King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. by C. L. in
4o. 59. Christian Divinity, written by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in divinity, in
4o. 60. The Communion-Book Catechism expounded by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in
Divinity, in 4o. 61. The true and absoluce Bishop, wherein is showed how Christ
is our only shepherd and Bishop of our souls, by Nicolas Darton, Master in
Arts, in 4o. 62. A description of the Newborn Christian, or a lively pattern
of the Saint militant child of God, written by Nicholas Hunt, Master in Arts,
in 4o. 63. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm, and on the History of Agag
King of Amalek, with an Essay of Friendship written by an honorable person,
64. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory Oxon, in
8o. 65. Lazarus his Rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious,
learned, and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephrim Vdall, by Thomas, Reeve, B. D: 66. The
Survey of Man, in a Sermon as it was delivered by Mr. John Bishop at his
Fathers funeral. 67. Enchiridion containing institutions Divine and Moral,
written by Francis Quarles, 24o.
Books in Divinity Lately Printed.
68. THE Psalms of David from the new Translation of the Bible, turned into
Meter, to be sung after the old tunes used in the Churches; by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry King Bishop of Chichester. 12o. 69. Choice Music
for three voices, and a thorough-Base composed by Mr. Henry and Mr. William
Laws, brothers and servants to his late Majesty; with diverse Elegies set in
Music by several friends upon the death of Mr. William Laws. 4o. 70. Letters
between the Lord George Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby Knight, concerning Religion.
8o. 71. Essaies in Divinity by Dr. Donn. D. of Saint Paul's, before he entered
into holy orders. 12o. 72. Public devotions, or a Collection of Prayers used
at sundry times by diverse Reverend and godly Divines, together with divine
implorations, and an introduction to prayer. 24o. 73. The Sinners Tears in
Meditations and Prayers by Thomas Fettiplace of Peterhouse Camb. 12o. 74.
Quaestio Quodlibetica, or a discourse whether it be lawful to take use for
money by R. F. Knight. 75. Sions Prospect in its first view presented in a
summary of Divine Truths consenting with the faith professed by the Church of
England, confirmed from Scripture and reason, composed by Mr. Robert Mossom
Minister: 4o. 76. Flores Solitudinis, certain rare and elegant pieces, viz.
Two excellent discourses. 1 Of Temperance and Patience. 2 Of life and death by
I. E. Nierembergius. The World contemned; by Eucherius, Bishop of Lions. And
the life of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, collected in his sickness and retirement,
by Henry Vaughan. 77. 14. Sermons on several Texts of Scri^^^^ with a
Catechism written by Willam Gay Rector of Buckland.
Choice Poems with excellent Translations, by the most eminent wits of this age.
78. EPigrammata Thomae Mori Ingli, in 16o 79. Fragmenta Aurea, a collection of
all the incom-Parable Pieces written by Sr. John Sucklin Knight, 8o. 80. Poems,
Songs, Sonnets, Elegies, and Letters by John Done, with Elegies on the Authors
death, to which is added diverse Copies under his own hand, never before in
print. 8o. 81. Juvenalls 16. Satyrs translated by Sir Robert Stapylton, wherein
is contained a Survey of the manners and actions of Mankind, with Annotations,
8o. 82. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with Leander's letter to
Hero, and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations by Sir Robert
Staplyton, in 12o. 83. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of Beconsfield,
Esquire 8o. 84. Pastor Fido, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly translated
out of the Original, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire 4o. 85. Poems, with a
discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o. 86.
Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas Stanley, Esquire
8o. 87. Coopers Hill, a Poem written by Mr, John Denham Esquire the 2d Edition with
Additions, 4o. 88. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca,
Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn Esquire with Annotations, 8o. 89. Seneca's answer
to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes, seeing there is a
Divine providence, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn, Esquire 8o. 90. Madagascar
with other Poems, by Sr. W. Davenant. 91. Poems with a Masque by Thomas Carew
Esquire Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to his late Majesty, revived and enlarged
with Aditions, 8o. 92. Poems of Mr. John Milton, with a Masque presented at
Lud^^w Castle before the Earl of Bridgewater, then President of Wales, 8o. 93.
Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of Beauty, by James Shirley, Gent.
8o. 94. The Mistress, or several Copies of love-verses, written by Mr. Abraham
Cowley. 80. 95. Stepps to the Temple, sacred Poems with the delights of the
Moses upon several occasions by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge. 12o. 96. Divine
Poems written by Francis Quarles 8o. 97. Clarastella, with other occasional
Poems, Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs, written by R. Heath. Esquire 98. Poems written by
Mr. William Shakspeare. 99. Arnalte and Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight, a
Poem translated by L. Laurence. 4o. 100. The Odes of Casimire, translated, by
Mr. George Hills of Newark. 12o. 101. Alarm to Poets by I. L. 4o. 102.
Fragmenta Poetica or Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by Nich. Murford Gent.
12o. 103. Hymnus Tabaci, Authore Raphaele Thorio. 8o. 104. Hymnus Tabaci, a
Poem in Honor of Tobacco Heroically composed by Raphael Thorius, made English
by Peter Hausted Mr. of Arts, Camb. 8o. 105. Olor Iscanus, a Collection of some
select Poems, and Translations, written by Mr. Henry Vaughan 106. Argalus and
Parthenia by Francis Quarles. 107. The Academy of Complements wherein La^ies,
Gentlewomen, Scholars and strangers may accommodate their Courtly practice
with gentile Ceremonies, complementall, amorous, high expressions and forms of
speaking, or writing of Letters, most in fashion, with Additions of many witty
Poems and pleasant New songs. 12o.
Poems lately Printed.
107. Poems and Translations, the complete works of Thomas Stanley Esquire 8o. 105.
Choice Poems with Comedies and Tragedies, by Mr. William Cartwright late
student of Chapter Chapter in Oxford, and Proctor of the University. The Aires and
songs set by Mr. Henry Laws, servant to his late Majesty in his public and
private Music. 108. Herodian of Alexandria, his Imperial History of twenty
Roman Caesar's, and Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, and now
converted into an Heroic Poem by C. Stapleton. 4o. 109. The Card of Courtship
or the Language of love fitted to the humors of all degrees, sexes and
Conditions.
Incomparable Comedies and Tragedies written by several Ingenious Authors.
110. COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authots Originals Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, Fol. 111. The Elder Brother by Francis
Beaumont and John Fletcher. 112. The Scornful Lady by Francis Beaumont and
John Fletcher. 113. The Woman Hater by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. 114.
Thierry and Theodoret by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. 115. Cupids
Revenge by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. 116. Monsieur Thomas by Francis
Beaumont and John Fletcher. 117. The two Noble kinsmen by Francis Beaumont and
John Fletcher. 118. The Country Captain and the Variety, two Comedies written
by a person of Honor. 12o. 119. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr. John Denham
Esquire Fol. 120. Brennoralt, or the discontented Colonel, a Tragedy written by
Sir John Suckling Knight. 4o. 121. The deserving Favorite by Mr. Lod. Carlel.
122. Albovine King of Lombardy by Sir William Davenant. 123. The Just Italian
by Sir William Davenant. 124. The Cruel Brother by Sir William Davenant. 125.
The Unfortunate Lovers by Sir William Davenant. 126. Love and Honor by Sir
William Davenant. 127. The Sophister by Dr. Z. 128. Revenge of Bussy D Ambois
George Chapman 129. Byrons Conspiracy George Chapman 130. Byrons Tragedy.
George Chapman 131. Contention for Honor and riches J. Shirley 132. Triumph of
Peace in 4o J. Shirley 133. The Duchess of Malfy by John Webster. 134. The
Northern lass by Richard Broom. 135. The Cid, a Tragicomedy translated out of
rench by Joseph Rutter Gent. 12o. 136. The Wild Goose Chase a Comedy written
Fr. Beaumont and John Fletcher. Fol. 137. The Widow, a Comedy by Ben: Johnson,
John ^letcher, and T: Middleton. 138. The Changling by T Middleton and Rowley.
4o. 239. Six new plays. 1. The Brothers. 2. The Si^ters. 3. The Doubtful
Heir. 4. The Imposture. 5. The Cardinal. 6. The Court-Secret, by I. Shirley.
140. Five new plays. 1. A mad couple well matched. The Novella. 3. The Court
Beggar. 4. The City Wit. 5. The Damoiselle, by Richard Broom 141. The Tragedy
of Alphonsus Emperor of Germary, by George Chapman 4o. 142. Two Tragedies. viz.
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Agrippina Empress of Rome, by Thomas May Esquire
Plays lately Printed.
143. THe Gentleman of Venice, A Tragi-Comedy by James Shirley. 144. The
Politician, a Tragedy by James Shirley. 145. The Passionate Lovers in two
parts, by Mr. Lodowick Carlel. 146. Mirza, A Tragedy, really acted in Persia
with Annotations by Robert Barron Esquire 147. Three new plays, viz. 1 The
Bashful Lover. 2 The Guardian. 3 The very woman, by Phillip Mas^enger, Gent.
New and Excellent Romances.
148. CAssandra the Famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written in
French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a person of quality, Fol.
149. Ibrahim or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole
work in four parts, written in French by Monsieur de Scudery, and now
Englished by Henry Cogan Gent. Fol. 150. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an
excellent new Romance, written by that famous wit of France, Monsieur de
Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F.G. Esquire Fol. 151. The
continuation of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the third and fourth parts, written by that Famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire
Fol. 152. The third Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the fist and sixth parts, written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire
Fol. 153. The fourth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that Excellent
new Romance, being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.
G. Esquire Fol. 154. The History of Polexander, a Romance, Englished by William
Brown Gent. Fol. 155. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated
by I. H. Esquire Fol. 156. Casandra the famed Romance, the three first books,
Elegantly rendered into English by the Right Ho^^^ble the Lord George Digby. 8o.
157. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite, a Romance, made English by an
honorable person. 8o. 158. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance, written in
Spanish by Francisco de las Coveras, Englished by a Person of Honor. 8o. 159.
Aurora Ismenia, and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian Virgin, translated by
Thomas Stanley Esquire 160. Cleopatra, a new Romance, Englished by a Gent. of the
Inner Temple, in 8o. 161. La Stratonica or the unfortunate Qeene, a new
Romance, translated into English. 162. Choice Novels, and Amorous Tales written
by ^he most refined wits of Italy, newly translated into English by a person of
quality. in 8o. 163. Nissena, a new Romance, Englished by an Honorable person,
in 8o. 164 Dianea, a new Romance, written in Italian by ^io Francisco Loredano,
a Noble Venetian, Englished ^y Sir Aston Cockaine, in 80.
Books lately printed for Humphrey Moseley.
165. A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the power and
weakness, glory, and ^^eproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Adantages
and Defects, Antiquity and Modernes of all ^^^ Kingdoms and states of
Christendom are Imartially poised by James Howel Esquire Fol. 166. Renatus des
Cartes', excellent compendium of Music with necessary and juditious
Animadversions ^er^upon, by a person of Honor, Illustrated with livers figures
in 4o. 167. The Scarlet Gown, or the History of the ^^ves of all the present
Cardinals of Rome, written in ^alian and Englished by Henry Cogan, Gent. 80.
168. A discourse of constancy, Ly Justus Lipsius, faithfully Englished by R. G.
sometimes of Chapter Chapter Exon. containing many sweet consolations for all that are
afflicted in body, or in mind. 12o. 169. Le Chemin abrege, or a compendious
Method for the attaining of Sciences in a short time, with the Statutes of the
Academy of Cardinal Richelieu, Englished by R. G. Gent. 170. The Academy of
Eloquence, containing complete English Rhethorick, with common place and forms
to speak and write fluently according ^^ the present mode, together with
letters amorous an^ moral, by Thomas Blunt. Gent. 12o. 171. The Secretary in
fashion, or a compendion and refined way of expression in all manner of letter
with instructions how to write letters of all sorts, composed in French by P.
St de la Serre, in 8o. 172. Curia Politiae, or the Apologies of several Princes
justifying to the World their most eminent ^^ctions by the strength of Reason,
and the most exact rules of Policy, by the acurate pen of Monsieur Scudery,
Governer of Nostre-dame, and now English with the figures of many Emperors and
Kings. 173. (...), or observations on the present manners of the English,
briefly anatomizing the living by the dead, with an useful detection of the
Mount banks of both sexes by Richard Whitlock M.D. late fellow of all Souls
College in Oxon 8o. 174. Scholae Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae The Latin^^
Phrases of Winchester School, corrected and much augmented with Poeticalls
added, and four Tracts. 1. ^^ words not to be used by elegant Latinists. 2. The
disference of words like one another in sound or signification. 3. Some words
governing a subjunctive mod^^ not mentioned in Lillies Grammar. 4. Concerning
(...) and (...) for entering children upon making Themes, by H. Robinson D. D.
sometimes schoolmaster of Winchester College, published for the commo^nse and
benefit of Grammar schools. 175. Atheismus Vapulans, or a Treatise against
Atheism rationally confuting the Atheists of these times by William Towers,
late student of Chapter Chapter Oxon. 176. De Juramenti Obligatione promissorij
Praelectiones Septem. Of the Obligation of Promissory Oaths, seven Lectures
read in the Divinity Schools at Oxford by Robert Sanderson D. D. and englished
by his late Majesty's appointment. 8o. 177. Politic Maxims and observations
written by the most learned Hugo Grotius, translated for the ease and benefit
of the English statesmen by H. C. S. T. B. 178. The perfect Horseman or the
experienced secrets of Mr. Markhams fifty years practice, showing how a man
may come to be a General Horse -- man by the knowledge of these seven Offices,
viz. The Breeder Ambler Keeper Farrier. viz. The Feeder Rider Buyer Farrier.
Published with some Additions by Lancelot Thetford Practitioner in the same
Art. 40. years. 179. Divine Poems written by Tho. Washborn. B. D. 180.
Buxtorf's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar, Englished by John Davis Mr. of Arts.
181. Fasciculus Poematum and Epigrammatum Miscela^eorum Authore Iohanne Done.
D. D. 182. Poemata Graeca and Latina, a Gulielmo Cartwright, C. C. Oxon. 183.
The Marrow of Complements, containing Amorous Epistles, complementall
entertainments, Dialogues, songs, and Sonnets, presentations of gifts,
instructions for Woers, with other pleasant passages.
Books newly Printed for Humphrey Moseley.
184 THe fifth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance; being the ninth and tenth Parts: Written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame, and now englished by F. G. Esquire
185 Elise, or, Innocence guilty; a new Romance, translated into English by John
Jennings Gent. 186 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, written in French, by the
exquisite pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame de la Guard. 187
Coralbo, a new Romance in three Books; written in Italian by Cavalier Gio
Francesco Biondi, and now fait^fully rendered into English. 188 The Lusiad, or,
Portugalls Historical Poem translated into English by Richard Fanshaw, Esquire 189
The History of Philosophy, the first Part; by Tho Stanley, Esquire 190 The History
of the Kingdom of Naples, with the lives of all their Kings; written by that
famous Antiquary, Scipio Mazzella, with an Addition of what happened during the
Rebellion of Massaniello, and continued to this present year, by I. H. Esquire 191
Mr. Howel's fourth Volume of familiar Letters, never published before. 192
Manziny, his most exquisite Academicall Discourses upon several choice
Subjects; turned into French by that famous Wit, Monsieur de Scudery, and into
English by an Honorable Lady. 193 The English Treasury of Wit and Language,
digested into common places, by John Cotgrave, Gent. 194 Lusus Serius, a
Philosophical Discourse, of the superiority of the Creatures, by Michael
Mayerus. 195 The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, with a short Comment on them; taken
out of Galen, Heurnius, Fuchsius, etc. 196 Euphrates, or, the waters of the
East, by Eugenius Philalethes. 197. Hermeticall Physic, or the way to preserve
and restore health, by Henry Nollius Chemist, and Englished by Henry Vaughan,
Gent. 198 Dr Valentine's private Devotions in Welsh. 199 Mantuan's Eclegues,
Englished by Tho. Harvey. 200 Medici Catholicon; or, a Catholic Medicine for
the Diseases of Charity; by John Collop, Dr. of Physic. 201 Poesis Rediviva,
or, Poetry revived, by John Collop, M. D. 202 The Saints Expectation and
Reward; A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas Wiborow, by Michael Thomas
Minister of Stockden in Shropshire. 203 A Sermon against Murder, occasioned by
the Massacre of the Protestants in the Dukedom of Savoy; by William Towers B.
D.
Books Printed this Term.
204. RAgguagli di Parnasso; or, Advertisements from Parnassus: Written in
Italian by that Fa^ous Roman Trajano Bocalini, and put into English by the
right Honorable, Henry Earl of Monmouth. 205 A complete History of the Lives
and Reigns of Mary Queen of Scotland, and of her Son and Successor, James the
Sixth, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, by William Sanderson. 206
The Destruction of Troy, an Essay upon the second Book of Virgil's Aeneis, by
John Denham, Esquire 207 Poems, viz. 1 Miscellanies. 2. The Mistress, or
Love-Verses. 3. Pindarique Odes: 4. Davideis, or, a sacred Poem of the Troubles
of David; by A. Cowley. 208 God Incarnate, showing that Jesus Christ is the
Only, and the most high God. In four Books, containing Animadversions on Dr.
Lushingtous Comentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, by Edmund Porter, ate
of St. John's Coll. Camb. Prebend of Norwich. 209 Ducis Buckinghami in Ream
Insulam Expeditio: Authore Edovardo Domino Herbert, Barone de Cherbury. Quam
publici Juris fecit Timotheus Balduinus, L. L. Doctor e Coll. Omn. Anim. apud
Oxonienses Socius. 210. The Siege of Antwerp, written in Latin by Famianus
Strada, Englished by Tho. Lancaster, Gent. 211 The History of Philosophy, the
second Part, by Tho. Stanley Esquire 212 Clella, an excellent new Romance, the
second Volume: Written in French by the exquisite Pen of Monsieur de Scudery,
Governor of Nostredame. 213 Argalus and Parthenia, written by Francis Quarles,
and ^^ustrated with 30 Figures, cut in Copper relating to the S^ory. 214
Practical Arithmetic, in whole Numbers, Fractions, and Decimals; fitted to
the several uses of Gentlemen, Merchants, or Tradesmen; by Richard Rawlins,
Professor thereof, in Greet Yarmouth.
These Books are now in the Press.
215. GLossographia, or a Dictionary interpreting all such hard words, whether
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, etc. as are now used in our
Refined English tongue: Also the Teat^mes of Divinity, Law, Physic,
Mathematics, Heraldry, Anatomy, War, Music, Architecture, explained by Thomas
Blount of the Inner Temple, Bar. rester. 216. Astrea, A Romance written in
French by Messire Honor D'Vrfe, and now Translated into English. 217. An
Introduction into the Greek Tongue most plainly delivering the principal
matters of the Grammar thereof, composed for their sakes which understand not
Latin; and yet are desirous to have competent Knowledge in that language, by
Edmund Reeve. B. D. Instructor of all the (...) Tongues. 218 The Rules of the
Latin Gr^^^ construed, which were omitted in the Book carred I illies Rules,
and the Syntaxis constrned by Edmund Recoe. B. D. Instructor in all the
Original Tongues. 219. Politic Discourses written in Italian by Paul Peruta,
Gent. of Venice, Englished by the Right Hono^able Henry Earl of Monmouth. 221.
Of the Passion of the Soul, and contentment of mind, by Peter du Moulin, the
Son. D. D.
These Books I do purpose to Print very speedily.
222 HEsperides, or The Muses Garden, stored with variery of the choicest
flowers of Language and earning, wherein grave and serious minds may be
re^eshed with the sollid fruits of Philosophy, History, and osmography,
intermixed with the sweets of Poetry; and the ceremonious Courtier, The
Passionate Amongst, with his admired Lady, may gather Ranties Sul^^able to
their Fancies, by John Evans, Gent. 223. Mosaicall Philosophy, written in Latin
by ^obert Fludd, Esquire and Dr in Physic, and by himself afterward translated
into English. 224. Disquisitions upon the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ,
by the Honorable Sir Isaac Wake. 225 The Expedition of the Duke of Backingham
into ^he Isle of Ree, written in Latin by the Right Honorable Edward Lord
Herbert of Cherbury, etc. and now endred into English. 226. The Life of A
Satyricall Puppy, Called Nim, tho worrieth all those Satyrists he knows, and
barks ^^ the rest by W. D. 227. The Anatomy of Profane Love, written in
^ulian, and Englished by I. S. 228. Nicholas Flammell his Exposition of his
H^ero^phicall Figures, with the secret Book of Artephius ^^d the Epistle of
John Pontanus concerning the Phi^^sophers Stone. With an Addition upon the me
Subject written by Synetius that most Learned and Famous Greeian Abbot, never
Printed before. 229. Brittain's Ida written by that Renowned Poet Edmund
Spencer. 230. A Discovery of the Hollanders trade of Fishing, and their
Circumventing us therein, with the means how to make profit of the fishing, by
which the have made and yet do reap so great a benifit, by Sir W. Munson Knight
sometimes Vice Admiral of England. 231. Sir, Charles Cornwallis his Negotiation
as Leiger Ambassador for Spain. 232. A Discovery of the State of Christendom,
containing many secret passages and hidden Mysteries the times both past and
present with Historical and Political Observations thereon by a person of
Honor. 233. A Grammar Lecture with Elegies, written b^ Francis Beaumont Gent.
234. A Discourse touching peace with Spain and retaining the Netherlands in
Protection written b^ Sir Walter Raleigh Knight; presetned to his Majesty. 235.
A Discourse of the War of Germany with the Lo^^ Chancellor Bacon's Petition
and Submission toth House of Peers. 236. Andrea Palladio his four Books of
Architectu^ treating of private Buildings, Highwayes, Piazz exercis^^g places
and Temples, Translated out of I^sion, by, H. L. Esquire 237. The Distresses. By
Sir W. Davenant 238. The fair Favorite. By Sir W. Davenant 239. News from
Plymouth. By Sir W. Davenant 240. The Seige. By Sir W. Davenant 241. The
Spartan Ladies. By Lodowick Ca^lell Gent. 242. The Discrect Lover or the Fool
would be a Favorite By Lodowick Ca^lell Gent. 243. Osman the Great Turk or the
Noble Servant. By Lodowick Ca^lell Gent. 244. More Dissemblers then Women. By
Tho. Midleto Gent. 245. Woman beware Women. By Tho. Midleto Gent. 246. No Wit
like a Woman's. By Tho. Midleto Gent. 246. No Help like a Woman's. By Tho.
Midleto Gent.

