PLEASANT NOTES UPON Don Quixot.

By EDMUND GAYTON, Esquire

JUVENAL. -- laetam fecit cum Statius Vrbem,
Esurit, intactam Paridi nisi vendat Agauen.
LONDON, Printed by William Hunt. MDCLIV.

To the Candid Reader.
Reader,
BOoks of Knight Errantry, like the Knights themselves, look for entertainment
gratis; Don Quixot did oblige the places which received him, and left his
Landlords in debt to him for his acceptance of their Courtesies: His stay was
not long in a place, and his Pay was the sport he made; The Castle had security
for a Reckoning, and protection for the Bill of Fare; His Hosts were created
Constables; His Hoastesses Countesses, and his Daughters Ladies, for the
benevolence of Slippers, and Night-Caps: Oastlers were dubbed Grooms, the
Servants Squires, Tapsters Yeomen of the Bottles, and Skinkers, and so defrayed
all with Acts of Grace, and conferring of Honor. He adventures now, as
always, with the same confidence of welcome, a Known Guest needs no
Invitation; Reception is all he looks for, little or no Provisions. Give him
now but a good Look (for indeed his Ill-favored Face wants it) and it is a
Feast. Smile upon him, laugh at him, and he will grow fat, with what should
make you so. Rosinante looks for your Tih-hee, and you shall have his VVhi-hee;
he is as freekish as if the Iack-an-Apes rode him. Sancho Pancha courts your
Blanckets, and desires to be tossed from hand to hand; His Ass is for every
one to ride, the more the merrier: If you give him Stable-room, it is well, he
can feed on Thistles.

They come all like Gypsies or a Morris, and Dulcinea is pleased to be Maid
Myriam; Strike up the Tabor and the Pipe, lend us but the Barn, or the
Church-house, And great Dul^inea, and her Knight accord,
To be Wake Lady, and a Whitsun Lord.


To his most facetious Friend, on his Festivous Notes upon Don Quixot.
WHere others Lamps have ^urnt long Attick nights,
With rank Romancie cyle, to grease their Knights:
Thy nimble Phant'sie has with ease displayed
All the Chimera's of the Errant Trade.
Which (though with a crispe Nostrill penned) was done
With a Spagericall discretion:
For, while the Ore ran melting from thy Mind,
It left thy chief, and richer Thoughts re^in'd.
Men's doughty Gimcracks, thou do (glancing) hit,
With such a sure Mercuriall aim of Wit,
It into shivers splits my quivering Milt,
To see thy Lanceere Notes so run a-Tilt.
Had thy full lines run out their Parallel,
And not been charmed in by a wary Spell;
Thou Would turned the Pyrrhick Galliard of the Times
Into enchanted Spanish-Pavin Rimes.
If solid heads may judge the Text is good,
It will improve much now, being under stood;
The Comment sets a lusty gloss upon
The high Achievements of the metall'd Don:
The inventory of his Martial goods;
His fits of Courage, and hot fighting Moods;
His passive valor, with his daring mind,
In dismal Rubriques on his body signed;
Whereof he had, if you the Adage scan,
A long eared burden would o'r-laid a man:
His mad mistakes, whereby we clearly know
The Iberian Ajax, from Jeronymo:
His strong affection to Dulcinea's Name,
Which kindled in his Breast that restless Flame.
Here, Sancho Pancha proves a proper Squire,
And a true spark of the same wandering fire.
Brave Rosinante trapp'd, and pampered thus,
May play at Cribedge with Bucephalus;
And Sancho's Ass, (one of the golden Brood)
May feed on Roses, a restoring food.
O that some pleasant Beams would shine like these
Upon her Cozen, the * Cap. Jones,
Welsh Hercules!
But thou have done enough for to engage
All the Sir Valiant Woudbees of the Age.
And while you hint, that who does over-streine
At wild attempts, makes good Don Quixots vein:
Your Clavis makes his History to be
Theunveil'd Cabala of Chivalrie.
Chirosophus
To the very Witty, Merry Author.
THE greatest part of scribbling shavers
Are but Rehearsals by their favors;
And they that read them find this true thing,
Not one in ten writes any new thing.
But above all the dabling Train,
The Commentator's Knave in grain;
Who farther never sooks to store him,
Then what five hundred said before him;
So be it History, or Fable.
He still serves cold meat up toth' Table.
But see, our friend defies the man
From Bodley, or the Vatican,
That shall produce one writer on
His dapper Sancho, or the Don.
Why so then. Out with it man of price,
(Fall in that will) thou breakst the Ice,
Fear no cut feet, nor broken shankes,
So the renown may be La Manches:
But prov'st the Annals of that high Town,
A Comm^nt are on Laugh and Lie down.
Lo here the Knight, by Cupid halled
Through thick and thin, Posteriors galled;
Posting from place to place full soar,
On two long Ears, ( Squire on two more;)
Who setting out, a Helmet snatches,
Which often in sud^ had dr^n^b^ Mustashes:
Sword girt on thigh, dirt-dragg'd and slabber'd,
Cold Iron sheathed in rust, not scabb^r'd.
And' stead of Spear, his hand he flatters
With ravished Pole from Barbers Platters.
With these, and dire resolves, he enters
Armed, or to find, or force Adventures:
With courage keen as panch of Glutton,
He spies out foe, a Flock of Mutton,
Spurrs Rosinante, up he ambles,
Where strait he makes the field the Shambles.
For Dulcineas sake to win her,
He eats, and fights this duel dinner;
For Dulcinea, who the while,
Sleeps upon bulk, or sits on style;
For why, she cares not much to go,
'Cause she wants sh^on to cover toe.
And (Country hot) she wears not stock in
Of silk or yarne, to put her Hock in;
That the whole world may judge and see,
She canendure as well as be.
For though alone he roam about,
Yet it is well known, she often goes out --
-- At Elbowes, and does suffer hardship,
In coats rent up toth' very large-hip.
Now it is their fashion in Tobolo,
For damsels mendicant to go so.
The Itinerant Minister to the Squire Errant, on his Festivous Notes upon DON
QUIXOT.
Banished from Pigs and Poultry by harsh votes;
And all that sounds Festivous, but your Notes,
(For, in their Calendar my name's not found;
Who, least the spit should not, themselves turned round)
I scarce have laughed, but with a sullen smile,
To see your Quixot acted in our I Will;
The Zelot mounted, when a cross he spied,
Encountering it, as he the Windmill did:
Mistaking old Saints, and the yellow glass,
In which they stood, for Giants armed in brass;
And then in quarters on a bed of straw,
Making the rest up with his Dulcinea.
All so toth' life, they were not much amiss,
That could believe a Metempsychosis.
But this your book can wasted spirits retrive^
At the first news on it I did so revive,
As the intruding Levite does, to hear
His Pilfer'd Tithes will stand another year:
But when I saw the work, its stuff and make,
I could have been a Poet for your sake.
Did but your Author live, he would by voxt,
Your Comment was not his, as was the Text.
He that will praise it as he should, must go
A way unbeaten yet; that is, like you,
Leave common-Play-book-Poetry that spends
The same Encomium upon any friends,
As we do Funeral Sermons; and alone
Move in an Epicycle of his own.
Your observations such a path have trod,
They turn old Pegasus, quite out on's rode;
And we are dry, till Rosinantes foot
Strike ^s another Helicon to do it.
(...).
On DON QUIXOT with Annotations.
THE famous Errant Knight of Spain
Once more here sallies forth again,
Remounted upon Rosinante;
Though lean his ribs, and belly gant be,
Gentle and without jadish tricks,
Whose Provender him never pricks:
Sancho likewise, that witty Squire,
On dapple follows through the mire;
The monstrous Giant not to tame,
That lately into England came,
And lies sick, since he was brought over,
Some say at Plymouth, some at Dover:
Nor, like his neighbor Portugal,
Damsels to fright and kill us all.
His well known sword he needs not try on
Our Morefield Windmils, since the Lion
Made a retreat into his Cage
By good hap, and would not engage.
No new Adventure or Supply
Swells so complete a History;
Nor is our Author a Translator,
But a Critical Commentator:
His Notes he to the Text does fit,
With English matching Spanish wit;
Like Coin with Philip stamped and Mary,
Or, till divorced, like Kate and Harry;
Or those Pavillions powdered,
With H. and K. in Hollinshead. *
Great thanks the Mancha may him con, Page 807. H. 8.

Great honor has he done the Don;
And Dulcinea del Toboso
Has disinchanted: Reader, know so.
Aesop to the Knight of the Ill favored Face.
AS Aesop who made Birds and Beasts to speak,
Putting plain Nature into learned Greek,
Her dimmer instinct did so well unveile,
That he taught Morals from an old wives tale;
And where as men were turned to beasts by Art,
Did them again by Beasts to men convert:
So thou, considering what befits this age,
Have brought thy Don unridled on the stage;
And with thy rays illustrating his shade,
Have a clear mirror of a night-piece made:
Whose cunning placing does much skill detect,
To make it so far off these times reflect.
For we the common size of men out-grow
As far above, as the other were below.
In Arts and Arms, in our disputes and fights,
Nay in all trades almost, w' are Errant Knights.
We start up Heroes: Here a Cobbler enters.
And in the next page does a Knights adventures.
Now you shall hardly see (because he is gaunt
And poor) a draught Horse yield to Rosinant:
Who did the Knight carry as we have read,
So many miles, still better taught, then fed.
Pattent though Sancho did his belly pinch,
So disciplined, though gass'd, he would not winch:
Proportionably eat so many Oats.
As in his purse his Master carried Groates.
Who might not so against his Order sin,
As to wear money, or pay it in his Inn:
For who could money ask of him, who did
Oblige the world by deeds, where ere he rid?
Could any Hostess for the reckoning scold,
Who did this doughty man of Arms behold?
That Lady that would not wipe out his score,
Be sure, he will never see her Castle more
In just revenge; for then should any Giant
Abuse her after; he would never say fie on it,
Or question him, who otherwise should feel
His anger printed by his Bilbo steel:
But Hosts and Hostesses, and Ostlers too
Were civiller, or he would make them so.
But Friend, take heed, thy Notes may do him wrong,
Who never needed help of any tongue:
I only fear that you may kindly err,
By ventring to be his Interpreter,
Since it is known, and by himself made good,
Where ever they came. Errants were understood.
But this I think will that objection choke,
He is not when he' ^read, as when he spoke;
And read he will be, unless by Err^^ Knights
Like him, they are not for reading, but for fights.
Go forth then, and lit Rosinant outrun
In his good speed, the Coursers of the Sun.
A Trumpet before the Puissant DON.
BY your leaves friends, give way to usher on
With trunch'on pen toth' gate, this mighty Don:
I would be brief, as truth, if any shall
Demand what is here, an Amadis de Gaul?
A Knight of the Sun? or Warwicks dreadful Guy,
(Whose famous Acts are writ in Stars on high)
The old King Arthur? or that feeble Fable
Of his Round Knights, sat round his rounder Table?
I answer, none of these; but one no jot
Less then the best of those; who? Don Quixot:
A bold Knight Errant, that toth' very day
Atchieves as strange Adventures as all they.
Bring me a Saracen with head, and A-neck
So bigg, you would take him for a son of Anak,
Or any of that monstrous brood of Gath;
(If any such the world at this time has
Old, and decrepit grown) The Don with Lance
Against the Gyant-race does strait advance.
Which way the victory will sure incline,
Look up and judge; the Saracen's a Sign.
Is there a Lady (who the Lord knows how
She came to be so) that is imprisoned now
In some enchanted Castle, built in the air,
Immured with Devils, moated with despair:
That whines, and whimpers, pines for some relief
From her lost Knight, almost undubb'd with grief?
Madam take courage, melt no more, but pray,
Let those salt drops descend another way.
See Quixot at the Castle Gate, in Arms,
And anger fell, vows to uncharme your Charms;
And spite of Hell, and what the Devils can do,
Tilt you from all their Spells, or them from you.
Show me a Giant Caniball, that duels
Retired now to uncouth Caves and Cells;
Batning with humane flesh, and blood, that knows
(Save what he eats) no other friends or foes:
Whoe's guts being all the brains he has, does dread
That only pain, the belly ache in his head.
Let the puissant Quixot but appear,
Armed at all points, and in the first Career
This monster Giant falls; when the bold Knight
With his keen steel, to consummate the fight,
Opens his Butt'ry-Belly, sweeps all away,
And there commands an endless fasting day.
Whilst to the wonder of the world, and just
Trophee to Don, and his renowned dust;
His monstrous Block head shall converted be
Into a sign for some great Ordinary.
From these adventures does he sternely wagge on,
And meets the fiercer Lion, or the Dragon;
The cruel Tiger, the spear'd Unicorne,
Or any humane beast of stranger Horn;
The ravenous Bear, or the mad raging Bull,
He Will tame all these, give all their Belly full;
And as old Orpheus did by stones and trees,
So shall this Don make up a Dance with these.
More might be said, which if it expected be,
Enter good Don, and do it thy self for me.
E: D.
On the Festivous Notes upon Don Quixot.
HAve you not seen a Hench boy laced all over
So thick, you could not tell what cloth he wore?
Have you not heard the oaths of Country people,
They could not for the Scaffolds see Paul's Steeple?
Or have you heard of (happy had you been,
If I might ask you) have you also seen
Dulcinea's eyes lost in her cheeks, so that
They seemed like Rabbets Kidneyes coucht in fat?
Reader, the same may in this book be found,
The rich Embroydery does excel the ground.
The Text in parcels' midst the Comment seems
Like single Strawb'ries in whole pales of Cream;
And Don's cooked up according to the Laws
Of his own Country Feasts, less meat then sauce.
Sancho is now rewarded, and need look
No farther for an Island then this Book:
In which the Text like Land incircled, floates
'Midst the vast Ocean of this Authors Notes;
Who in his Book, like cunning Cloathiers, does
Of Spanish Wool make the best English Cloth.
Who may not be a Poet, when the fire
Raked from Dulcinea's ashes can inspire?
And Rosinante, though grown old, can thus
Prove sire unto so quick a Pegasus?
Quixot, of all the brave Adventures thou have past,
No sally was so glorious as this last:
Where though no four armed Giant thou do meet,
Who 'stead of puddings, eats whole sacks of Wheat;
And makes the Country Neighborhood about
Swallow, Sir reverence, what he voideth out:
Yet thou must combat with a foe, thou wilt find
More subject to each blast, the Censurers mind.
When first into the world thou did advance,
Bound up in Past board, like thy own Romance;
That magic Armor and Artillery,
Those strange Habiliments of Errantry
Could not protect thee like these Notes, although
Thou salliest now in paper Armor too.
But go on boldly, Frestons charms must end,
See here, a Disinchanter is thy friend;
Who innocent black Art, has round thee writ
A magic circle of Festivous Wit;
Which will secure thy Fame against that Prime,
And lasting monster, all devouring Time.
John Speed
On DON QUIXOT, published with Annotations, by my worthy friend, Mr Edmund
Gayton.
FRanck Rablais with his learned Tracts of Physic,
Had made his Printers purse sick of the Tisick;
For those few Copies, which at last were sold,
Served but to wipe what other Doctors foul'd.
He that by writing well hopes for repute,
Makes but himself the Worlds base prostitute:
Which he disdaining, vowed to recompense
The Printer, and his Clients with Nonsense:
And that did do it; for Customers did duel,
Who first should buy the gests of Pantagruell:
Nay you would admire, in less than half a day,
All History veiled to Garagantua.
Therefore my Friend, whether in Prose or Rhyme,
What thou have writ is satyr to the Time;
Thou feed'st the Ass with Thistles, and with Chafe,
To make thy self, and other wise men laugh.
Let not the Critiques then, thy work disdain,
And say, thy Authors Windmill's in thy brain:
Nor yet conclude thy Pegains is Hip-shot,
Because thou'st written Notes upon Don Quixot.
Were Don alive again, he would be vexed,
To see a Comment better then his Text;
For some of the wits who have perused it. say,
Thine is not Glossa Ordinaria.
Anthony Hodges.
Upon the second coming forth of the most redoubted Knight DON QUIXOT, and his
renowned Lady the Famed Dulcinea del Toboso.
LAdies, prepare to entertaint
The Madam Mendieant of Spain:
Let not her Rags offend, for you
Your selves, alas, wear patches too:
Though out at heel, and out at Toe,
Along Dulcinea too must go.
Don from Dulcinea will not stray,
(He runs at Sheep, but not that way)
She and her Knight again do enter,
Not armed for any new adventer;
But that she may receive from you,
The honor of a second view.
At first this great and famous Dame,
In English vamps translated came;
And being you know a Cobblers Daughter
'Twas proper work for a Translater:
But then 'twas fit, there should be next,
A Comment to so dark a Text:
For who without it could discover,
How she should ever deserve a Lover?
But it is to great Dulcinea's glory,
She passes every one in story.
From Spain and from Toboso too,
With half a Smock, and never a Shot,
She Is come again to visit you,
As Lady Errants use to do;
For it is their custom, those that make
Them welcome, they will never forsake.
And Sanoho too, that doughty Squire,
Attends Dulcinea thorough the mire;
Through thick and thin, o'r hedge and ditoh,
The trusty Squire goes thorough stitch:
It Is a hard task to wait upon her,
But the more hard, the greater honor.
Easy Achievements are not named,
It Is hardship makes adventures famed.
The Island, he expects, no doubt
Is very hard to be found out:
But Sancho, if it be any where,
Thou Wilt find the promised Island here.
The Comment ('cause thou'st little wit)
Believes the Isle of Silly's it.
But Don, I doubt, will scarce be found
To keep within the Comments bound.
If hunger pinches, out he goes,
And makes a break fast on his Foes.
For having first his Armor put on,
He streit goes forth, and routs the Mutton;
Then to Dulcinea comes he post,
Laden with spoils; she rules the roast.
If any Giants him oppose,
(As oftentimes he meets with those)
He then his passive Valor shows,
And gallantly receives their blows;
And it is an argument of great
And daring courage to be beat.
Yet let Dulcinea name but bread,
And straight you hear a Windmil's dead:
And were that Giant ten times stronger,
There Is no resisting against hunger.
That breaks stone walls you know; how can
A wooden Giant hold out than?
And if nor wood, nor stone, how shall
We keep him in a Paper wall?
That cannot confine him without doubt,
For l^^, already he is come out.
William Tailor.
FESTIVOVS NOTES UPON DON QUIXOT.
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I.
The first contains whence our Knight Errant came,
From an old house; that is his first known Fame.
Then it discovers, if you farther look,
That he did nothing rashly, but by Book
Of Errantry; and upon that he wanders,
Hoping to get a Name as great as Scander's.
TEXT.
THere lived not long since in a Village of the Mancha, the Name whereof I
purposely omit.] Why our Author does purposely omit the name of the Village,
where this Knight of famous memory did live, is easily smelt out, even this,
that he might make the greater search after it. The place of Homers birth is
yet a challenge upon Record, and the head of Nile being undiscoverable, breaks
many a man's brain to find it out. Tennariffe and Pen-Men-Maure, are Mountains
whose tops are obscured by their heights, and herein he has politiquely
out-gone our Countryman Tom Coriat, who indeed was borne in Zomersetishire (as
the ingenious Hoskins hinteth in his merry Poem.) Puer erat expers artis,
Et cum fabis, and cum fartis
Sommersetti satus.
But certainly he had been far more eminent, and a grander search made after
him no doubt, if he had been pleased to have concealed his Natalitiall Town of
Odcomb, and left the world upon enquiry.

To pile up in their Halls old Lances, etc.] This description of his house is
in short the very same with an ancient Justice of Peace his Hall, a very
dangerous Armory to be touched, like Paul's Scaffolds, Monumentally standing,
because none dare take them down: he proceeds not unlike the Welsh Inventary,
but it is not so large, nor so good, Sow's Babys in Spain being a meat for the
house of Austria, and not garsionable by the Manchegans, though ennobled by the
residence of Don Quixot. His Wardrobe not much exceeding the Major of
Quinboroughs, though for the thrift less notorious. The Frugality of the
Canvasse back to the Velvet fore-body, being not then known at Madrid, and so
could not possibly arrive at the Mancha.

He had in his house a Woman about forty years old, etc.] His Family (himself
included) like that of the Arc, two and two, Male and Female, but not of so
many persons by half, yet here was as great Beasts. I do not read that the Don
did ever augment his Number, though his Niece was under twenty, and himself
(as is supposed) by the swelling of his Lip of the Austrian Family (somewhat
removed,) or at least of the race of the Jews, as appears by his Errantry,
which is but a neater word for wandering: unto whom it was, and yet is lawful
to match within their Tribes.

He was an early riser, and a great friend of Hunting] Now you perceive the
reason of his continence, he was an early riser; That indeed made not much for
it, but withal a friend to hunting, that did it. Our Don was a dedicated
Vassal to Diana. Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. Hunting Spears and
Javelins are not of Cupids Quiver, nor will I attribute this Costivenesse (as
to the flesh) to his years, being on the worse side of forty, as they say, or
to his withered face, or dried flesh, which may render him suspected for an
Eunuch, but purely to his industry and love of manlike sports; Sentonce.
Unto which, without doubt, whosoever totally devotes himself, cannot be
guilty of effeminacy

He made away many Acres of Land to buy him Books of that kind.] We have a
Proverb (but the Spaniard have two for one) That a fool and his money are
soon parted; It seems our Knight (pardon the application) made his Lands
Errant before himself, and dubbed his Acres first, so that what he did
afterward was but in pursuance of his Lands that went before, and so made
himself a Wise-Acres. Laugh not too soon at our Spaniard, unless you can
acquit your selves countrymen of as great a folly. Are not Books of this kind
as well bought as those of the Philosophers stone? And pray what difference in
the price? How much good gold has been fired, out of whose ashes yet the young
Phaenix never rose? What did Banckes spend in Coals do you think? How much
Terra was Damnata? How many Lordships sold? besides the inestimable loss of
Time and Brains, to purchase this empty name, and sound the Philosophers
stone? There is not of all that expencefull madness so much left for profit or
recreation, as the History of that Quixo-Philosophy, or Philosophers, unless
what is most admirably Satyriz'd by our Father Ben (of eternal memory) in his
Play of the Alchymist: Spectatum admissi Risum teneat is Amici? Which would
move laughter most, our Dons encountering his Windmill, or his Lordship at the
Furnace? Being Subtle, Face, Lungs, and all: Bestow a brace of tassled Caps
upon them both, and so exeant.

He did not like so much the unproportionable blows which Don Belianis gave and
took.] Our Don is not so much transported with Belian is his Blows as a
passionate Butcher of our Nation was, who being at the Play, called the Greeks
and Trojans, and seeing Hector over-powred by Mirmydons, got upon the Stage,
and with his good Battoone took the true Trojans part so stoutly, that he
routed the Greeks, and rayled upon them loudly for a company of cowardly slaves
to assault one man with so much odds. He struck moreover such an especial
acquaintance with Hector, that for a long time Hector could not obtain leave
of him to be killed, that the Play might go on; and the cudgelled Mirmydons
durst not enter again, till Hector, having prevailed upon his unexpected
second, returned him over the Stage again into the yard from whence he came.

Many times he did fall at variance with the Curate, etc.] As great an occasion
of quarrel was this of a brace of Students, who kept short of the Dividents of
their College Fines (for that was meat for their betters) while their Seniors
were sharing that money, walked in their Grove, (taking the fresh air without
any contradiction of Superiors;) At last one makes a supposition, If thou or I
now should happily find a purse of Gold, how should we divide it? They were,
you must conceive, of different degrees, one Master, the other Batchelour of
Arts. The Master of Arts, like the Lion, asked the greatest part. The other
said, no, Simul occupantes aeque Dividentes: Equal purchase equal share. The
Master would not forgo his privilege of seniority, the Junior insisted upon
his Title of half; at last it grew so hot that they fell to Cuffs, and banged
one another devoutly, until, weary of their blows, they began to examine each
other of the ground of their falling out, which was no other than about the
divident of a purse of gold, which was never yet found.

That the Cid Ruydiaz was not to be compared, etc.] To the Knight of the
burning Sword? What would thou have said, if ever it had been thy fortune to
have adventured into England, and seen the Knight of the burning Pestle, who
carried all the Ladies before him: Or if that other Knight of the same Nation
had ever come to thy ears, whom I may call the Knight of the high Scurrado, or
the Spouting-Pestle, by name plain Captain Jones? Certainly Bernardo Del
Carpio (though of greatest esteem with thee) should not have been in the same
leaf of the Book in the Diary and Register of valiant men: Besides, this
Nation (for I cannot give all Heroic actions to the Spaniard) have produced
names as high as Hercules. What I pray was Chinon of England, or the Fool
transformed? Bevis of Southampton, and Guy of Warwick, or that Cripple-errant
of famous memory, who stole the golden weather cock from Paul's steeple, before
it was a Tower, which was the highest piece of desperate valor that ever was
performed, but that his piety is as notorious as his sacrilege, for with the
same weather cock, he built Cripple gate; which until this day retains his
name.

Rosinante a horse of labor and carriage.] I wonder, the Don being so near
neighbor to the sun, did not borrow some of his horses names, but indeed
they did most properly belong to the knight of the same name. He chose rather
by a figure, the nomination of his Bucephalus, and by a Husteron Proteron (as
we say in English) of putting the cart before the horse, he succeeds very happy
in the title, which in English makes not so high a sound as in Spanish, but
will do indifferent, Latpackasad, being in senso the very same, though not in
sound with Rozinante, though our horses do not take their names for
adventures, like the Dons, yet they have their names from their presenters; if
a friend bestow his horse, he passes his name with him, and by that means, the
names of many worthy persons (who have not left succession behind them) are
continued in the race of their gifts. It would be a pretty employment (for
there is little work now for Heralds) to blazon those gentile horses coats.
There is an able fat farrier herald, somewhat Northward, whom it would (being
the trades are already met in him) very excellently become, unto whom I leave
it.

DON Quixot of the Mancha] It was as small a labell, and as modest, as any
Knight could first have vent red on into the world with; for lower matters the
Empire of Trapesonda, having shaken hands with their names, and not retained so
much as Don Quixot of Quixada, or Quesada, which was rather a syncope or
diminution to his name, being more at length naturally, or rather literally,
though in account less: some of our Nation have accounted it more honorable
to own a bastardy, by assuming the name of the Lord that gat them to an
Annuity, then to hide their mothers shame, under the plausible covert of their
supposed Fathers.

I am the Giant Caro Culiambro] A very good name for a Giant, but I will tell
you what will fill ones mouth as well, even one of our English Giants, as
Sheildabrawne, Colarobrawne, Legomutton, Rasherobacon, and many more of this
last sword bearing race, who by prowess of the Captain Ioneses of our times,
the Marriots, the Woods, the Stubbinses, and other knights of the round Table,
have been hackt, hewed, wriggled and utterly confounded.

He called her Dulcinea del Toboso] Aldonsa Lorenso, strangely Anagrammatiz'd
into Dulcinea del Toboso, but Schoolemasters talk Latin by the rule, and
Princes by instinct. Therefore in contemptum Anagrammaticorum, Aldonsa Lorenso
shall make Dulcinea del Toboso. For as the French care not for the quantity of
syllables, so we Spaniards care not for the transposition of letters; I shall
conclude this Chapter with a reply of Don Gondamore, Countryman to our DON.
Condamore was talking in the Latin tongue with King James, and the King
speaking exactly, Gondamore took liberty to express as he pleased whereupon
the King not enduring the Peace should be so often broke before his face, desired
Gondamore to spare Priscians head for the future; but the DON was quick with
his salve, and told his Majesty, that he spoke Latin like a King, free and
without rule, but the King spoke it like a Schoolmaster.

CHAP. II.
THE second Chapter he attempts, but oh!
Unto his grief, he finds no wished for Foe:
Wherefore deceived and wearied, he is forced
Without an enemy, to be unhorl'd,
Yet not disarmed wholly Cap-ape;
For in his Helmet he sleeps valiantly,
Though with a Castle he would needs begin,
Poor Rosinante was glad it was an Inn.
TEXT.
AND therefore acquainting no living creature with his intentions] No living
creature; it cannot be so, for certainly Rosinante was of the counsel, and
enjoined much secrecy. For the Don might tell his tale to his horse without
danger of discovery, though he might hear of his tale again for it: (as the
English proverb has it in another expression.)

He was not yet dubbed Knight.] This was a horrible scarre, and enough to have
crushed our cock of the game in the egg. It was strange he did not instantly
unsheath his own sword, and cross it over his own pate, and having impressed
a Knighthood on his forgetful noddle, spoke the words himself, rise up DON
Quixot, etc. or what if he had submitted, and fallen on his knees to Rosinante
(a horse formerly of very good carriage,) the Brute could have done no less,
then bounded immediately, and laid his hoofes upon his Helmet (which was as
near his head, as they could come) and it might have passed, and the DON ever
after accounted himself of the Equestrian Order, which is the order of
Knighthood.

As touching white Armor.] It is strange; once out and ever out: what a
mischance was this. o for a chalk hill! it would have whitened him and
Rosinante, as if they had been Knight and horse of the vail of white horse. The
first Knights that ever were heard of in white Armor, and on white horses,
were (as I take it) Castor and Pollux, who though they never shine together in
the Heavens, yet at one great battle, wherein the Romans got the victory,
they were discovered to come into the field, and do wonderful execution, and
then vanish straight to their Orbs in the Heavens: and ever since, those mares
that saw those white horses, have had colts with stars in their heads.

He did parle with himself on this manner.] Of these kind of Soliloquies, or
selfe-discourses, you shall every where rather see then hear: what man almost
is it that you meet alone, if he be thoughtive or cogitabund, but his lips, his
eyes, his hands, go as well as his legs. If one should, or could but spare his
time, to observe the several postures of passengers in the street; he might
after a little curiosity of intention, know most men's businesses by the motion
of their lips, and discover their intentions by the signs in their faces:
whether the business were matter of law, love, debt, anger or jovialty. Such
agreeable indications every face does betray, that in spite of the verse we
may say, fronti summa Fides, every man's passions are written in his forehead,
and if women might be commanded to go unveiled, much more would be known,
then they would have willingly discovered. It were very good policy in times of
war, suites, or jealousy, to learn to undecipher mouths, looks, and gates;
there is more to be got out of them, then out of this extaticall speech of the
Dons, to which Rosinante pricked up his ears more from the sense of his sides,
then the sense in the oration.

Written in the Annals of the Mancha.) The Annals of the Mancha, are in as
large a fair Foolio, as those of Goteham, and are kept in very safe custody,
few Travelers have had the favor to see them; Tom Coriat had a view, and to a
wise man it is enough. It is very difficult now, unless recommended from some
great personage, to have admittance to the sight of them: there must be two
certificates at least, of the family of the We be three, who are of the Quorum
always.

There stood at the Inn by the door, two young women adventurers likewise.]
These I believe had been dubbed and dubbed again, and had devises in their
Targets, for hotter adventures then ever the Don assaied; it was strange that
the Don, (but that strong imagination is irresistible) being gaunt, (not John a
Gaunt I mean) but fasting, and therefore of more exquisite sense, had not
smelt out their profession from the evaporations of their saltpits: or that
Rosinante had not by a merry neighing, discovered the approaches of two
over-ridden jades. Their standing at the Inn door, was a sign of themselves
and the house, and (though they were bound for Sevil) that their behavior was
not so.

Checking Rosinante with his bridle] Rosinantes head-strongnesse, is here
remarkable, and shows that a beast knows when he is weary or hungry, better
then his rider. These natural offerings at an Inn door, gazings, and head
writhings, are most proper symptoms in the creature, of an appetite or longing
for Limb-ease, and tooth motion. A way bit then, and not a bit of way more. The
Knight (for all Knight errants, understand all languages, whether vocal or
natural) apprehended Rosinante, and taking pity of the croakings of his empty
guts, to which his own sometime sympathetically answered. He spurred up to the
Inn door, full upon the Donsellas; which Item, Rosinante took the more
patiently, because he was within the comfortable smell of provender: but O the
hogheards horn! 'twas an ill wind, and blew no body good; for by this means
it came to pass, that Rosinante must hear the other speech, which came from a
head as empty as his belly, in which was nothing but wind, just both alike.

Discovering his withered and dusty countenance] This souldier-like visage of
the Dons, brought the Donzellas to a stand. Ven^s did not so much despise
Vulcan for his lame leg, as she was enamored of Mars for his manlike face. I
have heard it reported of an understanding Lady of our Nation (whose opinion
being asked concerning a very beautiful and straight limbed gentleman Usher,
how she liked the owner of that face) that she replied thus presently,
(Ladies wits being best upon the sudden,) Pish, what do you tell me of a
face; I say, a Venus face, and Mars his truncheon, never met together in the
same person.

They could not contain their laughter] Continence was rare in any thing, as
well as laughter with them, yet their rude carriage, showed that they were
tender hearted; for they had been of very hard hearts, if they could not have
laughed at him, and I believe, had the Don made experience, he would have found
them through good natured, and as ready to lie down as to laugh.

Mine Host, a man of exceeding fatness.] I did not think that mine Hosts of
the Mancha, or indeed of any place of Spain, had been of such vast dimensions,
certainly he was transported out of Holland, or great Britany; this is the
first Rhodomont ado in Re that I have met with; but yet considering him to be
of the Commark of St Lucars, and no less theevish then Cacus, if he stole and
eat as much provision as that beast-robber did, his magnitude is no wonder.
Allow us but in Spain the beasts, and I will grant the Host a thief, and as
fat: until then I suspend my belief.

Rozinante, one of the best pieces that ever eat bread.] Mine Host viewed the
Brute very narrowly (as if he meant to buy him) he need not have gone round
him, to his great pains; for the horse was transparent, and rather a beast
that had never eat a piece of bread, then as the Don expressed it.

The strangest and most pleasing figure to behold.] It was well that the Don
was pleased to tell his name, for by his face they should never have known him;
his Helmet being on, he was a hard head, and when that was off, he was a
Cods-head.

And then the valor of mine arm shall discover.] The valor of that part, was
not the thing his courteous undressers expected, who rather wished him steel to
the back, then as it fell out to be to his head. It was impossible to salute
him without loss of teeth; this sad apprehension of their particular
defraudings, made them melancholy at present, but they are resolved, since
they can make him no sport, to make sport of him.

One of the Ladies served his turn in that.] She was enforced to Caw him, as
they do young Jack dowes, and every bit she administered, he gaped full wide,
as the Helmet would let him; which if it had not streigthned (and that very
much) the wideness and capacities of his jaws, the poor John's would have past
whole without slicing, and with more ease down his throat then a cormorant
dispatches Minnows.

CHAP. III.
He must be dubbed, or nothing will avail,
Mine Host the Order gives, Carriers the Hail;
Stones in such number, that our Knight might be
Not of the Mancha, but a Lapide;
And that poor Rosinant might stoutly stir,
The Hay and Oat-booke was the Register:
Where on Record stands scor'd our dreadful Knight
For want of pay, for fourteen pence a night.
TEXT.
ANd being thus tossed in mind, he made a short beggarly Supper.] Aurae sacra
fames: What will not thirst of honor make one drink, or not drink, eat, or
not eat? Here it almost made our Don lose his share of the poor John, as many
a Noble Duke Humphryan, (for honour-sake merely) because he would not beg,
has walked manfully from twelve till three in contempt of three-penny
Ordinaries, wondering at the gluttony of the Age he lived in, thinking all the
time of that melancholy motion of the rare course of Lescius his diet, or else
why it were not possible to so habituate Nature, that by degrees she might need
no other sustenance then the Camaelion; the ingeniousest Wits in the world have
been such who feed exilest, or most slenderly: The woman, who was sustained
only by Flowers, (the scent I mean) beside the sweetness of her Fare, no doubt
had a nutriment most Hyblaean, and had her Thighs been well surveyed, they were
as well laden as the Bees, as you have it in the Poet, Crura Thymo, etc.

The Inne-keeper seeing his Guest at his Feet.] You see Pride will have a Fall.
These high thoughts brought the Don to his Knees, happily on a Cushion of
Rosinantes own or during (for It was in the stable.) It was well the Knight was
the Votary, and mine Host the Idol, otherwise had mine Host been on his knees,
neither Rosinante (though formerly used to burdens, nor Asinego his Master
would have been able to have raised the Elephant.

Mine Host as was noted before was a great Gyber.] It is ordinary for Hosts to
be khavishly witty, the latter being a set-off to the former. Much of a
reckoning goes current sor the Drolery of the maker of the Bill. There is a
kind of Leachery in neat and ingenious cozenage. It does find mercy before a
Judge, and applause amongst most, but this was a great Giber, but not so great
as to lose a friend for a jest, that was the way to undo himself, no, no, the
Authors Counsel runs upon his Corpulency, just as one said of an Over-Obese
Priest, that he was a great Arminian, grant (quoth a second) that he be an
Arminian, I Will swear he is the greatest that ever I saw. Just as mine Host is
here, so is every Host almost upon all rodes of the Temper with his Guest; he
is a Knight errant with a Knight errant; Are you a Cavaliere, he is a
Cavaliere; are you a Statist, he Statist too; but that they are too fat
commonly; they are the veriest Apes in the World, and to be short, generally
Bonii Socii, and very Sosia's: Like guest, like Landlord.

The Ceremonies requisite should be done.] It is concluded to dub him Knight.
This order of Knight errantry is very ancient, when there were but three
persons in the World, one was of this Order, even Cain, who for the murder of
his Brother was a Fugitive and a Vagabond over the whole earth, a larger extent
than our Dons peregrinations; he had beside this mark another alike to our
Knight-errants, that none should slay him, for you never read of a
Knight Errant that was slain in the whole world.

Have you any money? he answered not a blanck.] We have had many orders of
Knighthood, plain Knights, Knights of the Bath, Knights and Baronets, Knights
Bannerets, Knights Templars, Knights of Jerusalem, Knights of Windsor, and
Knights of the Post, which two last were very much like the Knight errants, for
they could reply to the Question as quick as the Don, and as point blanke.

Mine Host rejourned, he was deceived.] Mine Host, I believe, was of that wise
and provident house of the Iagas, where this Maxim is intailed upon the
Family, not to be cut off under an Anathema of the prime Parent. My son, put
money in thy purse. It is good counsel for most men, but especially for
Travelers, and of Travelers, especially horsemen, who (for want of heeding
this Frugall principal) are often times reduced to Footmen, and leave their
Rosinantes in the stable, where their heads swell bigger a great deal than the
Loggerhead their hosts that would not confide.

They car^ied with them a little Casket of Ointments.] I believe the
weaponsalve, or Unguentum armarium was first devised by these Knight-errants,
who having neither money, wit, nor friends, but Imaginary (and reaping
sometimes the fruits of their folly, knocks, and cuts) wisely contrived this
subtle cure of dressing the Sword or Battoone, (for they miscarried both at
dull and sharp) which was only a clothing of it warm, and by a miracle
called Sympathy, now crumbled into a Powder, the wound was healed, as it would
have been without it; for cut any Knight Errant, and let it be a flesh wound,
and the Balsame of the part (without the help of John Pontaeus,) kept from the
air and cleans'd, shall cure it self. I do not herein study to gratify the
Surgeons grand enemies to the Sympathetick powder, or any other cheap
remedy, but betwixt jest and earnest I partly believe, and not believe my self
Aruspex aruspicem, they can construe without the help of the Book.

In some slight and subtle Wallets.] This quaint device of the Wallet has been
put in practice in more plentiful Countries than that of the Dons. Some
thrifty Sirs have thus conveyed their Brutes, and their own Provender, and
for dispatch sake, having far to ride, to avoid the turmoile of Innes, Hosts,
Chamberlaines, and Ostlers, have made choice of a green grasse-plat, and
joined Commons, the same parcht pease sufficing for two Creatures at once, the
rational, and irrational. But this device (as subtle as it was) has met with
misfortunes, for one more frugall than otherwise, having at his Inn at night
(for the device is but for a day-shift) left some inconsiderable snip of a
craggy rack of mutton, gave order to his man by a winck (which was his usual
way to have his miserable commands executed) to cloak-bag the slender residue,
whither also his over-provident servant (to please his Master) poured in the
remains of the pottage, and so made up a full adage of Parsimony.

To watch his arms in a great yard.] The Don is become Dragon to his own
arms, more Dragon in them far, then out; but more watchful out, then in
them, for he often slept on horseback. Now like a poor snake, but yet cristed
still (though stripped) he does attend the Cisterne, mounting himself, and
hissing furiously at any thing that comes near; that hissing he had not learnt
of the snakes, but of some other creature (as watchful) who saved sometime the
Capitol. He is now in this posture, both St George, and Dragon too.

What cannot Poets and skelle painters do? or rather as we have it in the
English author; -- If Homer would,
Hellen had been a hagge, and Troy had stood.


An Host (a small wit) had bargained with a humorous painter (there are many of
them) for the new drawing of his sign, which was to be that of St George and
the Dragon, and most earnestly and often, even to the Interruption of his
work, importuned and entreated him to have an especial care, that he drew St
George with a most killing countenance (to the life) and ever and anon,
renewing his desire, the easily provoked painter, looked very uncouth upon mine
host, and taking off his pencill from the frame, said, mine Host, be quiet and
leave your counsel, or the Devil take my wife) if I do not make the Dragon
kill St George. Which stroke such a terror into his landlord, that he left the
place; and the painter not well composed, until a cup of sack, and a pipe of
Spanish, had reconciled him to mine Host and his business.

He walked up and down the Cisterne very demurely.] No such eyes, or better,
did Ajax cast upon Achilles Armor, and such a speech, or better, did Ulysses
make before the assembled Greeks, upon such, or a better subject. I wonder the
Author here, did not make the Don speaking somewhat, either verses or prose,
unless he was afraid of running into Ovids fancy; but what he would not,
others will: And therefore you may imagine, the Don after many perambulations,
and applications to his Arms, opening his own, and his mouth, a great
question, which were most enlarged for the delivery, these ensuing verses,
which being above Hexameter, full sometimes, and sometimes over-makes, that
rather sounding verse, we call Elbowick.

The Dons speech to his Arms.
Lie here my Arms by day, I am thy Arms by night;
Though thou my glittering Arms, then I thy Arms more bright:
It Is not the Moon that shines, but thy well scowr'd reflection
By which I walk, more then mine own complexion.
Thou on that Altar lie, and I thy Priest walk by,
What ever comes near thee, because near me, must dye.
When on this body thou art girt, safe is thy Don,
And safe, my trusty Arms, shall thou be off, or on:
None dare approach this Altar, whereon sleeping lies
His fate: Fore-warned, who comes in Armes-way dies.
He overthrew the Carrier to the ground in such a taking.] He conquers as quick
as Caesaer, Comes and O'recomes. Though the place of this first defeat was
ignoble, (it being the horse-trough) yet the manner of the sally was gallant,
it was upon a full carreere, who if he had drank (as his Mules should have
done) no doubt he had not fallen so suddenly, with this one brush. But here he
lies, the Monument of desperate unwariness, who could not speak to a Knight,
and a soldier of the same nature, for a little fresh water, and for his mules
too, who were somewhat allied (but upon the worst side) to the guardian of the
Cifterne. But as soon as he had laid the carrier on the ground, where lay his
noli me tangere (his armor,) treading on his presumptuous breast, for abusing
his Corslet, he takes up the Arms, not much unlike Anaeasse frighted, Arma
amens cepit, nec sat ration is in A^mis.

Soon after, another Carrier without knowing,] Felix quem faciunt aliena
pericula caeu^um. It is good for all professions to have a little smatch in the
Accedens. But the Carriers are like their Mules, not to be turned out of the
way, and so ruined by the same hand, of the same Muleasses: you find them (like
their Brutes, nose in arse), not revocable to be men again of this World (as
they say) but by the noise of their pack- Mules bells. Great honor in this
encounter was done to Dulcinea, who twice provoked, twice was propitious to her
Votary and Lord.

Their fellows rain slones upon QUIXOT.] Ne Hercules contra duos; the hardy
Knight breaks, nay, out-does the Proverb, and is an Hyper-Hercules; for I dee
not remember, of all the labors of Hercules, that he ever encountered a shower
of haile-stones. Here he showed undaunted courage, and extraordinary activity.
How snakelike he gathers, and incircles himself, under the covert of his
Target, which was so peal'd with stones, and rung so loud, that the Don was not
much unlike a rattle snake, that Politic Sir under the Tortoise shell, nor he
that was shown for the Fish, ever lay in so straight, a round he takes a tile
volant in the very hole, where the pegg of wood uses to be, and bearing it on
the end of his Javeling, encounters stones as thick Atoms, which flew about
his ears; at that time (if ever) miraculously preserved, for those nobler
pendents, which Dulcinea meant to hang there.

As he had read in the Ceremonial book of the Order.] The creation, or
installation rather of this Knight Errant, or rather instabulation (for there
was no Chapel in the house) yet it might very well be, that the Chapel, as
in other places, might be converted into a horse quarter) This Ceremony, I say,
is far short of those of the Garter, or of the golden Fleece, (though of the
same continent with this latter) or those of the Knights of Malta. If the
Formalities were well compared, they would more resemble these new Orders of
the Tityrie-Tues, the Fellow Cues, the confederates, the Dead Boys, the
Tories, the John Dorians, or the late Ranters, or the Hectors, whose rites and
customs, were never fully executed (like these of the Don) without a ^ol^sa,
or a Molinera, in plain English, a whore or so, for creature-comfort, as they
call it; or as the Hectors, for Carnelevation. These Knights, (like the most
generous of creatures) sight stoutly in view of their females, and it is well
known how a dray-horse (though well laden) will forget his burden, and pluck
vigorously and villanously too, if a Flanders Mare were in the wind.

Always murmuring something betwixt the teeth as if he prayed.] I wonder the
words of Consecration were not expressed: it may be because mine Host could
read no otherwise, then was in the provender book; unto which, if he had
literally kept, it would have made more for the dubbing of Rosinante, then the
Don. But whosoever has heard of the Canonization of Raviliacks Dagger, or the
Benediction of Faulks his dark and Lantern, will say, that the ultra-marine
Ceremonies, are singular and high, and therefore, once again (as the Dutch men
drank at Abingdon) I will presume upon the Hesperian fancy, and recruit the
defect, which mine Host if he had received, no doubt would have recited.

DON Quixot's Ceremony.
O bend those knees, that only now must kneel,
And only now surrender up that steel,
Which on thy neck and shoulder thou shall feel. You must note, that the sign
was in Taurus and Gemini.

This bang upon thy neck, this shoulder-thwack,
Take from thy Prelate, who does charm thy back,
With these cross wasters, from all blows, and black.
Thy old Toled' from hilt to point upreare,
Horror 'ith hilt, death on the point appear,
And from the blade, fly lightning every where.
Thou Target, none of these from Heaven thrown,
(Yet broke as those) repel the shot, the stone,
Arrows and spears, and shield all blows from one.
Thou spurre-royall, which art of truest steel,
Let Rosinants sides by thy advisos feel,
When he must charge, retreat, bound up, or wheel.
Thou Murrion bound in mystic ribbins close
Unto his neck, let no Inchanters loose,
Be by day Helmet, by day night cap, and noose.
The Ladies Votes or Auspicies.
Let virgin hand, Tolosa.
not used to handle blade,
Nor any naked Thing, be not afraid
To gird thy whinion to thy trusty Thigh,
Whence stoutly draw; be happy, and be high.
Molinera puts on the spur.
Thus on my knees, (on which Sir Knight you ought
To be to Ladies) I the spurr have brought,
(Which you ought also give) if a geud Knight
In Scotch land 'ere you fortune have to fight.
The Knight entreated to call themselves Lady Tolosa, Lady Molinera.] This
done, as at all Creations, there ought to be some Recreations, the Ladies looked
to have been more than nominally dubbed, they curtesied him, but he Curtizaned
not them, but what he failed of was supplied by the Carriers, who had not cast
all their stones at the Knight, but had some left for the Ladies.

CHAP. IV.
Got from the Inn he lost his way almost,
Yet won the title of the Knight of the Post:
The Whipping-post I mean, where John Haldudo
Did slash his boy (as many Masters do-do)
Poor Andrew it had better been for thee
Thou Would never been rescued from the killing tree.
Thou were reprieved but to be surer hanged
Up by the heels: But Don himself was banged;
A shrewd misfortune to our Errant Sir,
But who can helped? 'twas fortune de la guerr.
TEXT.
YET Counsel, that he should ever carry about him money and clean shirts.]
Verbum sapiento satum. Application is the life of Doctrine; wherefore our Don
(not such a Fool as some make him) nor yet a pin the worse for this action,
Faces about, and would home, and carry Tom Fools Token with him; and though he
had not heard of the decision, no doubt but his apprehensive soul had found
out that there was something warmer than two shirts, and resolved it within
himself to be Three. Wherefore he now determines, after long deliberation
(which is best before great resolves) that he will neither be lousy, nor
starve all the time of his Travel; which prudent course Rosinant liked well,
and merrily tript it homeward, or else he must have picked sallets upon the
rode-Common, and grazed gratis like the geese.

He saw a Mare tied unto an Oak,] I believe Rosinante was a Gelding, or else a
stallion super-annuate, otherwise this distressed Creature, at the Oak, might
have moved him to some horse-errantry. But that service cannot be expected upon
Hay as Provender; He that eats well does his work well; had Rosinante mounted
the Mare, and raised his Knight a by-mounted Chevalier, no doubt but it had
caused a new Frontispiece to the Book, and the Don had been cut a story higher.
Had that Lady seen him which saw the Brewers horse at the same exercise with
the Cart and Barrels at his back (whence, by the way, Beer first learned to
run a tilt) she would, no doubt, have said as much for Rosinante as the
Dray-horse in his full careere, that he would have made a brave bedfellow had
he but two legs.

The other beholding such an antic to hover over him.] Here is an Epitome in
the Don, and the Master correcting his boy of Bridewell and Bedlam, only the
Don has grass for Litter, and is allowed the use of a horse, which few
Furiosos (except Orlando) though of the best quality, ever had before.

How much (quoth Don) did his Master owe him?] The Don was an unfit Umpire or
Judge in this case, in my opinion, and too strict upon the Master, if he had
remembered how he quit scores with mine Host; but I had imagined, by this nimble
question, that he would have shared with the boy, had the Reals been numbered,
and saved the journey of returning to his own house.

All is well, quoth Don Quixot, let the price of the shoes, etc.] Pithy and
pat, it would have become the Bench: servants that have hard Masters, let them
read this Decision of the Dons, it will teach them an excellent way of
discount; Tail Flebotomy, or Leaching may very well be set against breathing a
vein, and excoriation or fleaing the Podes, for given leather to the Pudds. If
it were pleaded in the Chamber of London, I do believe it would have been
excepted, and the boy (for his wit) set upon Record.

Replied the boys Master, I have no money.] This reply overthrows all Justice,
Business, and Contrivance; no money, it non pl^sses all Suits, Actions, and
Passions, or what you will. A Lady, once requesting a Gentleman to play at
Gleeke, was refused, but civilly, and upon three reasons; The first whereof,
Madam, said the Gentleman, is, I have no money. Her Ladyship knew that was so
material and sufficient, that she desired him to keep the other two reasons to
himself.

The righter of Wrongs, and undoer of Injuries.] Never did Knight take a title
so inauspitiously both to himself and poor Andrew, for Andrew was forced to
the Oak again, though his Indentures were once cancelled. And the Don proved
just contrary in the next exploit, being the abider of Wrongs, and undergoer, I
cannot say, but underlayer of Injuries.

I do also swear the same quoth the Farmer.] There is as great Equivocation in
the high shoone as the Cowle, or the men of Trade. One would have presumed the
Oath both Andrew and his Master swear could not have been broke (for they
mutually invoked the Rock, which is a very hard book to kiss) but herein lay
the evasion or mental reservation, when Andrew looked for Real payment, the
Sophister his Master gave him Corporal.

Who glad above all measure for his success.] Had Andrews picture and the Dons
been taken about the same business (for both were high exalted) they would
have made exact pieces of Heracltus, and Democritus, but Dicitur infect^ re
rediisse Domum. And the Don in this transportation was like the sleeper in the
empty Theater; who coming before the Play, or Auditors, dreamed of the
passages, and laughed, clapped, hissed, and stamped, as if the Players had been
entered, Vacuo sessor plausorque theatro. Even so, and so, To Dulcinea, the
Empress of his labors, all devoires are tendered for her inspirations of
speech and valor, as a man should say, briefly thus: Blessed be Dulcinea, whose
Favor I beseeching,
Rescued poor Andrew, and his Nock-Andro from breeching.


The way which often held Knight Errants in suspense.] This stand of the Dons
makes me suspect he was a Fool; for he is neither weather-wise, nor way-wise,
nor penny-wise, but in this Quadry-way he might (though never so valiant) be
worsted, for here was four to one.

And came with their Quitasotes.] These are over-head boon Graces, or
Vardingales, a portable pent-house against the sun; we had an old Lord (or
Lady shall I say! for King James, when he saw him at his first coming into
England, swear, old Besse was alive again.) who used in the summer time a
Fan, and if he had transplaced his huge pok't ruff four handful higher, he
had been in the Toledo mode, and brought the Quitasotes into fashion in his own
Country.

Such an adventure as he imagined.] The Don was extremely mistaken, for these
were (though not Knights,) ^is brother Merchant adventurers.

More beautiful then the Empress of the Mancha.] This is the first challenge,
and Proclamation of his Ladies beauty: you shall find him begin and end a
crier. The miserable, but not so sad a representative of many a calamity
undergone, for no weightier a cause, then the beauty of a Lady. How many
Ladies, have seen their servants, for the maintenance of that (perchance,
whereof they are as great guardians, as Dulcinea del Toboso) perished and lie
like Philaster, or Cupid himself a bleeding. But this was a most high piece of
madness in our Don, to proclaim his Ladies excellencies (if she had them) to
the World, which commonly comes not to Idolize such pieces, but if they have
purses (as these Merchants) to traffic for them. Go no farther then Gyges for
the naked truth of this.

That without beholding her, you do believe, confess, affirm, swear, and
defend.] Most legally prosecuted I profess, to have, hold, occupy, and enjoy.
But your Toledo Merchants are no fools, they will see and know their
commodities before they buy: what, a pigge in a poke? two words to a bargain:
Ignoti nulla cupido. Give me the Merchants judgments, not their leavings. But
the Knight is at his sic volo, sic jubeo; Dulcinea must be adored, and truly
she deserved the knees of all that ever saw her, to be bowed in undissembled
prayer, for deliverance from such a sight for ever after.

I request you in all these Princes names.] This need not go for a jest of the
ingenious Merchant; for Sans controversy, none live more like Princes then
they do.

The Picture of the Lady, though no bigger then a grain of Wheat.] Such rare
Models, and pieces of Art, are wonderful in these Countries, though of late;
our Southern men, have learned to cut the ten Commandments; Creed, and Pater
noster in a cherries stone, and we have seen, not a Ladies face indeed, but
Father Garnets in a straw, and his neck in a string.

Don Quixot all inflamed with Choler.] The Merchants sting in the tail of his
speech, so netled the Don, that had Rosinante been so in place where, no ground
had held him. But the beast grew dull with his ridiculous weight, and spurred
up unduely (in a furrow) did not stumble (as the author injuriously says) for
Rosinante was not used to trippe, but fell down directly, he never offered,
but fell, and oftener to the ground then his oats. And here is Quixot flowndred
(man and horse, as they say) groping like Polyphem^ without his eye. Happy Don
if (like Ulysses also) he could have hid himself amongst the Muttons, he might
then have slept in a whole skin, which the Merchants lackey, like a Ferret,
clawed off: most ignoble enterprise. I shall conclude, for I cannot behold it
any longer, with two Sympathetick lines.

O see our Lion worried! In such denns
Suck Lions roar, as we call Smithfield Penns.
CHAP. V.
Think not for all this boasting, yet to flout him,
Though h' have no lance, you will find his wits about him.
Crip'led, it is true, and in a hideous plight,
(And so had lain, but for a friend all night)
Yet he resolves to stand to his Romancees,
Though on the ground he lie, and plies those Fancies.
Nothing does grieve him, of what came to pass,
But that he rode to the Mancha on an Ass.
TEXT.
HE was resolved to have recourse to his ordinary remedy.] Account not this
Poetical retirement of our Dons ridiculous, when he had no other help. It is
the wisest turn and shift of passion, to evaporate grief, through the shaking
of the Diaphragme. Storm one passion with another, or as the Don excellently
well elevates his misfortunes from the gross apprehension of a dry basting, to
an honorable defeat achieved in the pursuance of some Heroic design. It was
enough to have deaded his high spirits, and extinguished this Infant History,
if he too sensibly, or literally had commented upon the Bastinado: besides, the
loss of his Lance, though it stuck emblematically on his sides, yet the
fractures went to his heart. He that has read Seneca or Boethius, is very well
provided against an ordinary mishap, but to have by heart Argalus or Parthenia,
or the dolorous Madrigals of old Plangus in the Arcadia, or the unfortunate
Lover, or Pyramus and Thisbe, shall be sure never to die of the Mubblefubles.
For to be acquainted with sadness, besets familiarity, and familiars never
kill one another, unless the Devil be in them.

Sedatur Lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. Urine and tears, are the great
exudatories of sorrow. If the Knight did both, you cannot blame him, and
wanting the due partaker of his grief, Dulcinea del Toboso, he could not choose
but lie in a strange pickle, which Dulcinea was never, giv^ her her due (as we
give her likeness) never I say, since she could beat a buck without a clean
taile-clout for her self or her friend.

Mr Quixada said his neighbor.] It had been affliction unutterable, to have
owned that name, and returned to himself again. The trance of the Cobbler
(drunk into the belief) that he was a Lord, was not to be shaken off without
the loss of life, once recoblar'd, he was never his own man again. To
return to the Letherne Apron, wax Fingers, and whistling to a blackbird, from
such a Lordly dream, it put him (when Coblars speak Latin, they have some
ends) to his^ Pol me occidistis Amici.

Non servastis (ai^) cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vi^ mentis gratissimus error.
Which thus is translated, (Friends) of the Cobbler you have made an end,
Dreaming, a Lord; I waking am a Fiend;
Oh make me drunk again, and on my word,
I will continue drunk -- as any Lord.


Mounted him on the Ass as the beast of easiest carriage.] One Creature is
ready to help another, though Homo homini L^pus. This beast (though by nature
Aurite) was never so prick-ear'd, as now to hear the brave speech of
Abin-Carry ass, and the Duke of Mantua, which Rosinante took for a Por^mantua;
the Don lay upon his belly, for the Lackey had laid upon his back so, that he
was spoiled for a star-gazer, and only was fit to be recovered as his great
Brother Antaeus, by smelling to the fresh earth, which gets a stomach in an
instant, and so the Don had, for his guts spoke very naturally to the capacity
of Rosinante, and his fellow Brute, who make all haste they can to satisfy all
sides.

To whom the woman of the house said in a lamentable manner.] Of this old
goodwise Pyrrha you have heard before, and of her age; now you shall know her
for her adage, she was full of Saws, and one that had seen the day; she read
without spectacles, and could thread a needle likewise, and see lost pins
without the help of a pair of Nose-compasses; she knew what was what, I, she
knew the Don's Father, and remembered the first time that he smiled in his
mothers Face, and has a piece of the groaning Cake, (as they call it) which
she kept religiously, with her Good Friday Bun, full forty good years
unmouldy, and unmouse-eaten. Now that ever wise woman should see her Master
come to this, to run a wooll-gathering, I would it were so well, but the Wool
we shall have is as much as the Devil (God bless us) got when he shore a hog.

His Niece affirmed the same.] This roguing Queen had watched her Uncle, and
seen him act Ieronimo in his short shirt, and now thinking him quite lost,
discovers his mad prankes to the Curate and the Barber, one of which
undoubtedly she thought to inveigle.

And burnt all those excommunicated Books.] Some books more than others incline
men to madness; these of Errantry have a strange Influence upon the minds of
the Readers, (especially if they be amorous, choleric, or melancholy persons
who do study them) wherefore Cooks, Butchers, and all sedentary men, (who also
are subject to the Piles) as Committeemen, Tailors, Gentile Crafts-men,
Scholars over the degree of Doctors* and super-^nnuate, besides Ladies, and
their Gentile-women, and Gentile-men Ushers, all such should be prohibited the
reading of them. For often they commit strange matters after the reception of a
patheticall story, and the Ladies going to bed full of Imagination transgress
in Fancy with Gondibert, and forget who they are under, or who is over them;
There are as dangerous books as these, Broughton, Brightman, and he of Banbury,
which if they were doomed to the same fire with our Don's Library, would have
saved many ones wit, besides their money.

He only requested them to give him some meat.] Venture Caret Auribus; The Don
is now for the entertainment of great Dido, so straight they got some thickened
milk, pan-pudding, and souce, such viands as they knew he loved, and let him
eat till his bones were at rest, or (as they say) till his skin cracked, which
was an easy matter, being so battered as he was, and bruised: But these
recruits, and sleep, will restore him.

Extend thy empty paunch unto the full,
Laden with meat and blows, thou may be dull.
CHAP. VI.
No place without a visitation,
(The Inquisition's worse, yet two to one.)
And while Don Quixot (dreaming no such matter)
Sleeps, and refreshes his o're-tired nature;
Four severe visitors the Study force,
(Of which the old woman was by far the worse;)
The Barber and the Curate (learned men)
Knew what to save, but silly women, when
They have the chair, as if they were a baking,
All to the oven must; in this sad taking
Were these rare Volumes, which they censure first,
And straight condemn, you know ill names are cursed
To filthy fate; the Curate could reprieve
But few, the Barber with his Niece did strive,
And did the yielding Damsel so beseech,
That she did lay some Books under her breech
For his own use, and for that mighty blessing,
He gave the Book second Impression:
But the old woman was most implacable,
(For she heard him jeere at old wives Fables,)
And therefore all alike must to it. And thus
Without Index expurgatorius,
Or Melius Inquirendum, O sad story!
The Books, the Books, do suffer Purgatory.
TEXT.
HIs Library the only Author of his harm.] This is a hard Chapter, like that
of a Pedigree full of hard names, which to pass over with a stout silence,
were unworthy a Commentator, as if it were all Parenthesis, and as well out, as
in; or to give no more light then the construing book, which (of every thing,
not understood by the translator) says, it is the name of a Tree, a bird, a
fish, a place, or a plant so called. No, no, being it is a critical piece, and
a censure of the most masculine and smartest Authors of Errantry, and a final
condemnation of some of them to Vulcan, we must not exfulgore dare fumum, (make
a black book of what they made a light fire) give a snuff for a flaming Taper:
wherefore we lament this Incendium Trojae, the fireing of this famous Library,
and in as high a fury (though not so worthy) as he for Maro's, cry out; -- Ergo
ibit in ignes
Stultaque vaniloqui Flagrabit Musa Quesadae.


Which in English is thus elegantly (though not ad literam) translated.

Pox^on thee Vulcan, and if that will not do,
Thy Wives Pox on thee, and Besse Broughtons too.
Which verses were made upon the like mishap, when the Annals of the famous
City of Madrid, that is the acts Chivalry of the twenty four single Signiora's
Combats of the two Consuls. The Tournaments of the common Consiliarii, the
quarterly prizes of the Deputies of the Wards, and their seconds, the
Quest-men. Besides the Annual Amphipoliticall and tumultuary certamina, or
Feasts of twice twelve societyes, every Praetorian day, with the strange Feasts
of the Greenmen, Whiflers, Marshals, and his Ministers: Besides, the Navall
expedition of the Gallyfoist, and many other renowned works, were all burnt to
ashes, not so much as a line surviving or escaping, in that neverto be
forgotten conflagration of Father Benjaminos study; Wherein, besides these
books of Infamous loss, were the several duels, onslaughts, storms, and
military performances, of the two never to be reconciled families, (like the
Capulets and the Mountchensies, Eteocleans, and Polyniceans, Dowglasses and
Percies, Guelfs and Guibblins) of enraged Sr John Daw, and incensed Sr Amorous
La-^ool.

-- Quis talia Fando,
Temperet a Lachrymis?
Which runs thus, but not verbatim; for I do not tie my self up close to the
words.

Who can these tales relate, and burning Histories,
And not contribute the Church buckets of his eyes,
Or new found spouts of tears?
This digression pardoned, I return to the note; whence I collect, that it is
not love, that always makes men mad, nor grief and pease pottage, that only
swells the belly; by woeful experience we see, that by turning over such books,
the vertigo has taken the brains, (which being themselves voluminous, as you
see in a Calves-head cleav'd in twain) they are much hurt with volumes of a
contrary make, especially those that are simple and foolish, whereas sage with
brains is very good, and rosemary is a good Cephalic, and time, savory, and
sweet marjoram, in good pottage, make excellent settle-braine. But these kind
of simples, and leaves of Errantry (though the Knights themselves have had
opportunity to be as great Herbalists, as Gerrard, Johnson, or the I^
Ambarvalion) yet experience, (which is the Mistress, and must rule this roast)
teaches us, that they are noxious to the brain, and if to the brain,
necessarily to the head, and you know Caput malum, est Caput malorum. And so is
this Chapter, a Chapter of the saddest contents that e're was made.

The old Woman returned with a holy waterpot to besprinckle, etc.] The old
woman should have turned the bottle upon her own self, who being the very
Hecuba, and unquenchable Boutif^u of the company, proved the very firebrand to
this study, and had she been but sows'd out of her balneo mariae, many books no
doubt had escaped, which her dry malice, or rheumatick ignorance condemned to
the Ovens whole, or else by parts under apple-pyes or Fools (on which the Don
insatiably always fed, and nourished a simili, admirably well) or else to more
uncomely and unprofitable ends. For Mr Cutbert and Sr Roger, were mercifully
inclined, and through their great understanding, gave many of the Books their
Book, and would have but lightly singed some, or with a cold Iron, which this
old Beldam burnt out of hand.

Commanded the Barber to fetch down the books.] Now the Library ladder is
mounted, like the the execution scaling stairs, and Mr Nicholas, like old
Mounsieur, toles down the books with as little remorse, as a Carman does
billets; whether in Folio, Quarto, Decimo sexto, stitch't or bound, of what
Sex, what age soever, whether printed at Anti^yrae, or by the approbation of
the College of Goteham, Cum Privelegio, or sine, down they go, whilst the
licentiat, like Mr Godcoale, at the foot of the Cart, gives ghostly counsel to
some, and to others the dreadful words of Ite malam in crucem, farewell and be
burnt. For the Dons Books were not fast'ned as the Books in public Libraries:
then perchance these witty censurers would have permitted them to have hung in
their own chains, in terrorem, to all Knight Errantry-scriblers for ever.

The first book was touched, was Amadis De Gaul.] Of the Original of
Knight-Errantry, there is much controversy. I am not of the opinion, that
Amadis de Gaul was the first book of that Nation, they being supposed to be
descended of the Jews, which were Errant over the face of the whole earth, and
no doubt, many books of this nature, are to be read in Hebrew without pricks:
and that all others had their beginning from this, is as improbable: What
think you of the Iliads, the Aeneads, the Frog and Rat-fights, the Pigmies and
the Giants, and the Giganto-machi, which were all pure Errantry, and of more
famous and reverend antiquity; so you Amadis may Long sequere and vestigia
semper adora;
Since that you stand for eminence in letters,
Learn manners first, and yield unto your betters.


This said the Barber is Amadis of Greece.] Amadis of Greece? why may not this
be of the ancienter house, of the D' Amadisses: we have very good Authority for
the Country in general.

-- E^ quic quid Graecia mendax
Audet in Historia.
Graeculus esuriens in caelum jusseris ibit.
Which was further then ever any Knight Errant went, though they have been even
starved as my Don. And for particular places, Aratus will testify for the
Cretians, that they were liars without intermission, as he writes it to their
teeth in their own language; we will therefore end this perplexed piece of
controversy (as our father Ben has given example,) who dedicating his Fox to
the two Universities of this Island, Fox-like (knowing they always quarrelled
for Antiquity) in a most handsome and unenviable compellation, styled them most
equal Sisters: So of these two Brothers in Errantry, that we may not set the
books together, against one another; let them be Fratres Fraterrimi: but the
licentiate is not so merciful here, as he might have been; for Amadis of
Greece being the younger, was more fit to have been saved, and D' Gaul to have
been sacrificed, being of the older house, which was fittest for the fire.

For he had deprived it of much natural worth, in the translation.] Aurea haec
verba. Translations are commonly the stains and shadows to their Parents, and
gain only a reputation to the original Author. Father Ben (when one unhappily
mulcted for peeping into holes, he had no right to, swore he had got a clap,
which he called the French Pox) was worthily wroth at the expression, and in a
fume, said, why not (Sr) the English Pox? we have as good and as large, as they
have any. If a disease may not be translated, why a book? Let English men write
of their own wits, fancies, subjects, disputes, sermons, Histories; Romancees
are as good, vigorous, lasting, and as well worthy the reading, as any in the
world. Our Fairy Queen, the Arcadia, Drayton, Beaumont and Fletcher,
Shakespeare, Johnson, Rondolph; and lastly, Gondibert, are of eternal fame;
But Captain Jones, the only unparallell Romancy, and fit to be the Legend of
all Countries, and fit to be translated by foreign Nations, for the reason in
the Text. But other effects we have of this wise; for would we translated
nothing but books from other Nations, our very vanities, nay, vices, and
amongst them our oaths, must be of an exotic extraction, and we have arrived
unto that damnable excellency (shame to our proficiency and ability, in as
various and big dialects, as the Ionick, Attick, Dorick, Hellenick, or any
other) nay, as all Nations under Heaven: Countrymen, Pudet haec opprobria
vobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


If we must be translating, let us translate these vices to their proper
quarters, be just, and give every Country that which is their own; sufficient
will be our vices, for our punishments: wherefore to Germany, her ebriety, to
Spain her ambition; to France her levity, to Turkey her Polygamy, to Greece her
lies, to Rome her superstition, to Venice her jelousie and revenge, to Scotland
her treachery; and so to every part what is theirs, and fear not, the remains
perchance will be more then the full meal.

Let Palmerin of England be preserved.] Gratias Hispane! I could kiss thy
large Moor-lip, for this favor: But had you heard of Bevis of Southampton, the
Counter-scuffle, Sir Eglamore, John Dory, the Pindar of Wakefield, Robin Hood,
or Clem of the Cluff, these no doubt had been recommended to the Vatican,
without any Index expurgatorius, or censure at all.

These, to wit, books of Poetry, ought not to be burned.] Po^ts indeed, were
excommun'd Plato's Commonwealth; but yet Augustus, in the Zenith of his
Empire, cherished them, and sat with them. If such abilities depresse not
themselves by mean subjects, but keep up the gravity of their styles in their
due decorum, not making Corinna's of Levia's, adulterating, and estimating
their fancies with unbecomming mixtures, they and their writings too, may be
fit company, for the best Potentates in the World.

(Quoth the Niece) you shall do well, to have them burned also.] This wench,
was neither wise nor beautiful, nor ever had ingenious servant, who bestowed a
copy of verses upon her Mopsa's face, else she would have been more pitiful
to men of this employment, who get little (god wot) by their wits, if they
cannot purchase a maids good will. If all the female World were so hard
hearted, what a ruin would fall on a number of distressed wights, who have no
estates left, but Physic, Poetry, or teaching a school? The gentler breasts of
the virginities of London, are compassionately moved, if a Ballad of Jane Shore
be revived, or any figment new raised: where Phillis and Corydon, sadly
complain of their own unfortunate loves; or indeed, if any Shepherd be so
long, (through the unjustifiable stubbornness of his Amaryll) kept from his,
and her desires too, for all her seeming coyness, that poor man, he is put to
that necessity, that he will have her by hook or by crook.

The treasure of diverse Poems.] It is a book with our school-boyes, in great
request, called in the Latin Tongue, Thesaurus Poeticus. As others we have for
helps of young boys, such as delitiae delitiaru^, Flores Poetarum, which being
collections (choice, as the Authors promised, if their judgments were always
in the right) out of the numerous list of the sons of the Quill; there may be
very good use of them (as Mr Licentiat knew of the use of Postils) if the lazy
or ignorant scholar, did not take the whole copy, instead of a little, to piece
out his fancy; But is in Poetry, as in other thefts, give an inch, and they will
take an ell.

It should be purged of some base things.] Our age first reformed in Poetry,
and afterward in Religion: Marhassis, I remember, was gelt, if that be English
for Castratus, who is one of the quickest wits, (and a Spaniard by birth) as
ever wrote an Epigram: yet he had some salt in his tail, which was not
refined, which calls to mind, that about the time that Author came out purged,
and made an Eunuch, a reverend Doctor had the book, and singularly commended
it, as it stood now corrected and amended, for it had passed the stool of
repentance, and I believe, the emasculations were some Scotch man's. Now the
Doctor (for he was much taken with the pure B^^ke) told his scholars all the
filthy Epigrams which were left out, and had excellently translated them all
from the copy to his head, and I believe to his heart, for by heart he had them
all.

CHAP. VII.
Our Knight awakes, perplexed and very moody,
At all his losses, Iavelin, wits and study;
That Muniaton, Freston, or the Devil,
The one should be so cruel, this uncivil.
Full fifteen days he rested at the Mancha,
Until by chance he met with Sancho Pancha,
Who was a credulous old fool, a man,
Who thought each Goose of Quixots was a Swan:
And sweld with hopes of Kingdoms and of Castles,
He leaves his house, and will with fortune wrestle.
Just as you see them in the Frontispiece,
Not eggs to eggs are liker, Geese to geese.
TEXT.
WHile they were thus busied, DON Quixot cried, here, here, valourous Knights.]
As in other fires of wood or coal, you imagine you see the shapes of Men,
Lions, Horses, and other strange creatures; so by the light of this
Book-bonefire (as plain as Eteocles and Polynices in their flames were seen
fighting) did visibly apprehend, he saw the most desperate Tourney that ever
was performed by Knights, which raised his valourous soul from his bed to
action: deprived he is, stout heart, of arms all, but his natural; his lance
miserably shivered, past the cure of a cunning Joyner, the Helmet in so many
despicable pieces, not fit to make nails of, yet thus bereft, only in soul,
cap-a-pe a soldier, his high conceit In praelio trudit inermem.
Soon as he waked, he fell a fighting naked.


He continued cutting and slashing on every side.] He is in the very same
postures, as I knew one, who being soundly doz'd, had the charity of his
conquerours to buttresse him up from the Inn to his chamber, where like my
Don, he took quiet repose for two or three hours, after he awakes intollerably
dry, and inflamed in the throat, roared out and stamped (supposing he had been at
the Inn, not in his chamber) for the Tapster, whom loudly and often he called
for, crying, I burn, I burn, Canns you rogue, and impatient of delay,
threatens to fetch him with another Alarm, which suddenly he puts in
execution, and storms his own glass windows so furiously with bedstaves,
old shoes, and the like weapons, that he made a breach big enough, out of
which he might have thrown the room after: And had not one of his fellow
Collegioners passed by, and reconciled him to his windows, the actions of
battery would have been so chargeable, that his whole years pension would
scarce have paid for the reparations.

His lines, pronounced by himself, do ravish the hearers.] Just as much I
believe, as when a Greek Oration (spoke excellently well by a boy, who stood
for Election, but made by his Master) wrought upon one of the chief of the
company, who commended the boy that spoke the Greek so exceedingly, that the
Electioners (which were Scholars) induced by his excessive liking of that
tongue, desired to know, how long he had been skilled therein, and he answered
bona Fide, 'twas well he had so much Latin, that he understood not a tittle of
it, but he liked it, because it sounded bravely. It is indeed a brave language,
for a man of a full mouth, a large tongue, and wide jaws, which are good marks
for a horse too, (for there is room enough for their breath to play, and it is
a sign also of a noble heat in any creature, where the parts are not too
unproportionably extended.)

Graiis dedit ore rotundo
Musa loqui.
Greek is pronounced wrong,
Unless you trole it o'r the tongue.
I have heard, that the Poets of the Fortune and red Bull, had always a
mouth-measure for their Actors (who were terrible teare-throats) and made their
lines proportionable to their compass, which were sesquipedales, a foot and a
half.

The Curate would have all the rest burned at all adventures.] Crepat ingens
Sejanus. Down goes Retont and Pelican, Sericon and Bufo. If these books had
been old shirts, much might have been saved in tinder, enough I believe, to
have served the Mancha, till the Resurrection: But paper, though it be made of
rags, is the most unprofitable of all things set on fire. Nay, I think, that
out of the ashes of these monumentall Histories, it were impossible, ever by
the labor of Alchymie, to recover the resemblances of the principles, whence
they came, nay, not so much as the figure of the pot, which in most Quires is
very visible. Otherwise, the Don no doubt, for the love he bare these Authors,
would have made that his first adventure, and might have been as famous upon
Record, for Chymicall experiments, as he is at this day, for Heroic
undertakings.

The Barber opened a book, called the tears of Angelica.] One act of grace
yet, Angelicas tears would have extinguished the fire, and therefore were kept
out, but without doubt, the true reason, why the Curate and Barber were induced
to save it, was this; they both were good fellows, and looking down upon their
bestript doublets and skirts, spared the tears of Angelica, for the tears of
the tankard, wherein both were drencht.

In good sooth, Lord Archbishop Turpin.] Such strange impressions makes strong
fancies, and works not only upon women wonderful effects, but even the most
masculine spirits have been (as well as our Don) shrewdly tainted with it. A
Gentleman importuned, at a fire-night in the public Hall, to accept the high
and mighty place of a mock-Emperour, which was duly conferred upon him, by
seven mock-Electors at the same time, with much wit and Ceremony; The Emperor
ascended his chair of state, which was placed upon the highest table in the
Hall, and at his instalment, all Pomp, Reverence, and signs of homage, were
used by the whole company: Insomuch that our Emperor (having a spice of
self-conceit before, was soundly peppered now) for he was instantly
Metamorphoz'd into the stateliest, gravest and commanding soul, that ever eye
beheld. Tailor acting Arbaces, or Swanston D'Amboys, were shadow^s to him; his
pace, his look, his voice, and all his garb was altered. Alexander upon his
Elephant, nay, upon the Castle upon that Elephant, was not so high, and so
close did this imaginary honor stick to his fancy, that for many years he
could not shake off this One nights assumed deportments, until the times came,
that drove all Monarchical imaginations out, not only of his head, but every
ones.

He called for his breakfast, which was presently brought.] This Barber, I
perceive was no Barber Surgeon; nor the Curate himself any great observer
of Lent, Ember weeks, or other fasting days, else they would have kept him
fasting, according to the diet of Bedlam, which was the only way to allay his
fighting spirit, which being ever and anon supplied by the fumes of baked
pudding, and his body blown up with flatulent meat, such as pease-pottage,
radishes, and on yons made, such dangerous recruits in him, that without
prayers and spare diet, it was impossible to exorcize his Frenzy.

The plot was to change his Chamber, and damm up his study.] This delusion of
his Chamber, was good, pro tempore. I knew a humorous Cook in Oxon, so given to
shift and alter doors in his house, that one morning early, he changed the door
belonging to a pair of stairs, which went to one of his Lodgers chambers; who
not knowing of this alteration, run down hastily (as at other times) and found
his head stuck in a new mud wall, which did so confound him (going about some
other necessary business) that by reason of the forcible detainer, it was a
great question, whether he was in more mortar, above or below. Of the like
loss of a study, it is certain, that a scholar called somewhat hastily from
the place to a friend, who had brought some token to him, left his door wide
open, and making merry somewhat late, returned at night, and resolved to have
candle, (though his head was light enough, he passed by his study-door, and
came to the window in the study, where finding himself, he cried ou^ (frighted
at the apprehension of his loss) Thieves, Thieves, my Study is stolen, but
indeed he had lost nothing but that afternoon and his wits, which his
chamber-fellowes (awakened with the noise he made) recovered him to, and having
put the door into his hand with much ado, was persuaded to lock it up, and
secure the Study better against morning.

Muniaton Freston.] This Inchanter is of no note, nor do I find his name in
any famous Authors of Daemonology, he is not so much as mentioned in Cornelius
Agrippa, nor yet in the Shepherds Calender, unless he was some one of those
three Bungi, Bacon, or Vandermast: and so has changed his name, (as is usual
with Jesuits and Inchanters) I know not whom it should be.

The poor fellow determined to serve him for a Squire.] Sancho has bit at the
ambitious bait, and is caught poor fellow, he knew not what a dance the Don
would lead him, before he returned to the shaking of the sheets, with his Joan
Gutierez.

Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit, and alsit;
Much did the poor old Squire endure, before
He got to be the Islands Governor.
But above all things he charged him to provide himself of a wallet.] Two
things very unsuitable and Inaugurable for such grand designs, an Ass and a
Wallet. But whosoever has read the History of Masinello, a poor contemptible
fisherman, will think nothing impossible. An Ass or two, ( Sancho and his
Beast, give them but the fortune) may overrunne Muleasses and his Barbaries,
and a wallet may sack Constantinople.

Si fortuna volet, fies de Rhetore Consul.
In English thus,
If it seem good to powerful fate,
A Dray-horse may be a horse of state.
In that of the Ass the Don stood pensive.] Parvis principiis res magnae
crescunt. If he had bestrid Bucephalus, the World could have but gazed at him,
and so they would now: excesses and defects have always the same admiration,
as much wondering at Ieffery, as the great Porter. Be not troubled and
disquieted (O Don of vast desires!) Take the Ass along with thee, and be not
ashamed, though his ears are unsightly, his back is serviceable. No Beast,
except a Dromedary, (and Sancho upon the Ass makes one) will be able to go
under the spoils, that thy valor will atchieve.

Mount cheval, and through all Nations pass,
That word mounts thee, and Sancho mount thy Ass.
Sancho Pancha rode on his beast like a Patriarch.] whether the Primitive
Patriarchs rode so, (I mean those before the flood) is very difficult to
prove. Asses indeed, were then much in use, but for the Wallers, unless it
were in the great famine, when they went down to Egypt to buy food, I find not
example for it; I am sure our Modern Patriarchs do not so, the Patriarch of
Constantinople not so, nor of Alexandria so, nor his Holiness Papatriarch so,
nor the Archbishop of Toledo so. The Mule, and glorious Foot-cloath-pages, and
Harbingers, are all too little for these Patriarchs; yet these are governors
of more then Islands, what Sancho will do when he is in honor, noman knows.

Joan Gutierez my wife become a Queen.] Joan was a great damp to the high
thoughts of Sancho. For a man of his expectations to be depressed with a slut,
a whore, or a fool (or it may be all at once in one) was an intolerable
weight. A dung boat sunck in a shallow, where a wherry is to pass, lies so
pest^lence unhappy, that neither it self can get forward, or any thing by it.
It calls to mind, a story of a poor, but simple woman, who for want of a grain
or two of discretion, lost her husband the highest advantages of the World that
ever was. For the good man had so spent his time in true and honest pains,
contented and not murmuring, that Fortune seemed to smile upon him, as often as
he came to worship at her Temple, whither he often resorted; the gracious looks
of the Goddess encouraged him to ask something more then before he used, and
yet considering with himself, that too bold a votary might be repulsed, he
modestly bounded his request with sure, that her goodness would confer three
wishes upon 'um, which from the Oracle was answered; Ratified; Wish, and be
happy. The joyful man acquainted his wife strait, who having been the constant
companion of his labors, was meet to share in his good fortunes; but she was
just such another Niddecook as Joan Gutierez, and the first thing she desired
her husband, was, that one of these wishes, might be left to her disposal. The
good old man, willing to gratify her, said, yea Love, one I will spare thee:
So to the Fair they came, whither they were bound, and the woman casting her
eyes round about, to see what she should make the choice of her wish, at last,
(remembering what she wanted at home) spied a handsome wooden ladle, which she
forthwith wished for, and as soon the thing was in her hand, which her husband
seeing and impatient at the miscarriage of the first wish, wroth with his wife
for her simplicity, wished the Ladle in her breech, which out of hand was
instantly there. But the poor woman (like a fly with a straw in the same place)
was so tormented, besides the shame, that she desired her husband, that as he
ever hoped to partake of the delights of the opposite place, he would remove
this impediment, to which the uxorious man condiscended, and in charity to his
wife, wished it out again. So all the three wishes went in and out with a
Ladle.

CHAP. VIII.
Having a witness and his Squire to boot,
He dares high things; now let the Mils look to it,
Which though enchanted in those forms by Freston,
He does encounter, but has not the best on it;
For up he is hoysted in their sails, and flying
In The air aloft, on the earth he never feared dying.
Roz'nant was changed into a Pegasus,
Bellerephon they made, and Perseus.
Poor Sancho on the ground, does gape and stare,
And sees his Don dub^'d woeful, Prince 'oth' air;
Where if the Force had giv'^ him to other whisking,
He Would near come down to Combat the proud Biscaine;
But he descends, though never so high a flyer,
And Sancho mones him on the ground a Liar.
TEXT.
QUoth Sancho, pray understand that those Giants are Windmils.] This gross
mistake of the Don* to the not drinking or clearing his eyes in a morning,
which Sancho never omitted, and if the Squire were not the sharper witted, he
was the quicker sighted, does appear plain by the story. For he saw at a
convenient distance forty windmils to be the very same, that the ipecies
represented them; unless such a spiritual mischance befell the Dons eyes, as
did ones ears, who standing very attentive to a sermon, yet by no means of
straining his neck, or shifting his port-holes could receive any articular
sound or sentence, which troubled him much, but so much the more, when he
espied him, and farther off than he stood, one taking notes very swift in short
hand: Whereupon he removed his station, and thought philosophically, that some
angles of the Church might carry the voice to that place by his circular
concaves, whither when he came, he was as unable to hear as before. He beheld
himself, and Sermon-Writer, and did not know which most to wonder at, his own
deafness, or the fellows acuteness. At last he asked the Brachygrapher,
whether he wrote the notes of that Sermon, or something of his own conception?
Yea (good Sir) said Stenography, the words of the Teacher in truth; The other
replied, it was impossible, for I have stood by thee some while, and but even
now a yard or two nearer to the Minister, and cannot hear a syllable; That may
be, said the Scribler, unless you have sanctified ears. So it may be the Don
had his eyes sanctified, and happily then (though unhappily here) he might
discern Windmills for Giants. But yet Sancho's eyes for me, which in time (for
they were upon improvement) would easily (or at least as far as another man's)
look through a Millstone.

If thou art afraid, go aside and pray.] Sancho though he was none of the best
at his prayers, yet at this time made election rather of his devotions than the
assault: His prayers were short and home; God bless me, and my children all
three, and Ione from above the knee, and no more. But it became not the Knight
to give this liberty to his Squire, nor the Squire to take it, who was not to
be upon his knees when the Don was upon the salley. But 'twas his first
entrance; and though Sancho did not what was souldierlike, yet he obeyed
orders, and therein he is excusable.

With this the wind increased, and the sails turned about.] Notwithstanding
the danger of their turning, the Don scorned the motion, and assailes them, and
no doubt had Rosinante been a Mill-horse, as his Master by one attribute was a
Miller, they had carried the business round; but here the Mill had the better,
for their want of experience only in such fights, for the Don should not have
grappled here, but charged at distance, and letting alone his trusty Lance
should have ventred on with lighted linkes, and then he had made clear way to
his victory, and having fired the sails had also fired the Castle, and Cacus
in it, where if there had been as much dough as meal, the same fire would have
made him and Sancho Cakes enough for their Wallet, and the Mill should have
been the Oven; but those that ever saw the Picture of falling Icarus, may
guess the condition of our Don, who fell not into any sea, that afterward
bare his name, but with a sound Thump he fell to the Earth, who bare his body;
his mother had hoped he would have returned to her as she gave him to the
World, but he falls a Centaure, who came forth a man, and a heavy burden he
was, as ever lay upon a Grand-mothers back.

Sancho comes to his succor as fast as the Ass would drive.] Poor Sancho
laments the windfall his Master, and was gathering him up like a bruised
Codling Apple a little corrupted on the Leiger side. I know not whether from
this eminent misfortune that befell the Dons Windmils, since have been made to
go to the Left, in memory of this dishonorable usage. The Observation has
escaped the learned Author of the Vulgar errors, and I will not undertake the
decision.

Diego Peers of Vargas.] This Knight from his success against the Moors
gotten with an Arm of an Oak, was surnamed Machusa, which signifies with us
John an Oaks; and our Don (or if Sancho had the brains, for the Squires were
whim'd in the whiske) might very well from that encounter have styled himself a
Knight of Millan. So Scipio from his victory against Carthage, was called
Africanus, and the Caesar's surnamed from their Successes, Almanicus, Gothicus,
Britannicus, Germanicus, Dacicus, and Claudius, for other exploits, was called
C^^^icus, and was the very Dackins a fellow used to defile himself.
Dackins of all the Emperors. And no doubt but Sancho, if he had skill in the
Latin, would have called him Querceticus of the Mancha.

Don Quixot could not forbear laughing, hearing the simplicity of his Squire]
This is the first symptom, whereby it is guessed the Don to be rational, that
he could laugh. The Query of Sancho's was very provident. For Sancho having now
two capacities, the one personal, and the other Squire erranticall, 'twas very
well worth the enquiry to know in which of those two he should suffer. For if
the Squires Arm, Leg, or Neck were broke, it made no matter, so that Sancho
Pancha were a whole man (as they say.) But the Knight did state the Question in
the Affirmative, that the Bodies of Squire-Errants, and Knight-Errants,
likewise, do suffer personally (as Witches in their Bodies suffer for the
harms of the shapes of Cats, Dogs, Hares, or any Creatures else they assume)
For Errantry is but a nobler kind of Incantation and Witchcraft sans question,
and therefore a simili it is subject to the same Inconveniences. Our Knight
(who was none of the wisest) experimentally knew (which is the surest knowledge
of all, but not the safest,) that when the Knight Errant was in the air, that
Don Quixot was there also, and when he and Rosinante come with a squash to the
ground, that the Squire-Errant was then Couchant in a field Green, Nose Gules,
and Sides and Back azure: and so you may state the Question for Personal or
Politic capacities, if you hurt one you hurt both.

Then Sancho said unto him, it was dinner time.] Sancho could not look on the
one side him, but the Wallet did Item him, such memento's he liked very well; a
fall too, rather than a fall from the Windmill; but the Don had not maw to
victuals, having not yet disgested his Feast of fresh air, which almost turned
him into a Camaelion. But he that travels with a Cane that will hold Sack (for
such there are as well as Sugar Canes) may go further than one with a firm
Staff, this is better to jumpe with, or lean on, but for a great journey I
would rely on the other. The Bottle and the Wallet are two good Companions;
and as he rode, it was in Persian state, for the ends of the Wallet being of
each side, Sancho possessed the middle place (which in those Eastern
Countries) is of highest honor. The Bottle Sancho often advances to his nose,
which raised his eyes to heaven, which he seldom so devoutly looked on, as in
that posture, and by that means he often called to remembrance that there was
something above him.

So Cyrus on a Dromedary rod,
Adoring, like to Sancho, his Warmed God.
He tore an Oak and set on the Iron of his own.] It was strange that Sancho
did not alight and set on the Iron, but permit his Master to do it. But hence
you may gather, that Knight-Errants as they are of all Countries, and all
Languages, so they are of all Trades; They take it from the Ottoman Race, who
are always bred up to handicrafts.

Thou must not assist me, unless those that assault me be base and Vulgar
people] Very easy Indentures these of a Squire-errant; and yet had they been
given sooner, Sancho was, by his Conditions, to have run the same danger with
his Master at the encounter of the Windmils: For what more base Castle than a
Mill? And what more vile Rogue than the pilfering Giant in it? But Sancho was
not dubbed, and therefore was excusable, and never meant to be, and therefore
would for ever be excused. Nor did ^uixot (as ever I read of) make trial of
his Squires personal valor before they mounted, as a Knight in our Country
(but not of that Order) did, who having dealt with a Master of the noble
science of defense for his Usher of the School, whom he obtained from him for
a sum of money, before he came to his own seat rode to a City, where he was
acquainted with a huge Bravo in that Art, unto whom he repaired, and told him,
that he had got a young pretender to the tacticks, and desired that he would be
pleased to try what metal he was made of; the Tryer, looking very
disdainefully upon the young man, (as Goliath upon little David) went forthwith
to the School, where having chose the weapons, to it they fell, the Tryer
bidding him Guartha, and be careful, for he should give him cause to know,
that he met a man of skill; the Usher lay purposely open, and unguarded, and
the other spying the advantage gave him a brush, whereat he vapoured
extremely, shaking his head at the fellows unexperiencednesse; whereupon the
Usher gathered up his skill and mettle at once, and gives his Trier such a wipe
o'r the shins, that he made him make a Leg for it, though not in Courtship; and
presently retires to the Knight, and swore, It Is a pretty fellow, there is hopes
of him: Anon the Usher gives him a shrewd swap on the very end of the elbow,
which he rubbed likewise in his commendations, and said, It Is a very pretty
fellow in faith. By and by the Probationer with quick returns laid his Trier
o'r the sides, legs, and pate, all in an instant, whereupon he threw away his
Weapon, and swear to the Knight, He is for your turn Sir, It Is a question
whether his Tongue or head ran faster in his commendation.

Do you not see Sir (said Sancho) that these are Friars of Saint Bennets
Order.] The Don (contrary to the advice of Sancho) attempts this more dangerous
adventure; for the Windmils could only grind the body, but these Friars the
Purse. That Coat is higher prized in Spain than in England, where it was five
pound a blow, and the Don being a nimble striker, how soon might the revenew
of the Mancha have been thrash'd out upon one of their Canonical Coats?
Besides the danger of the Inquisition, which Sancho dreaded as hell, where no
Wallet would be admitted, and the bottle of good Sack for ever to be banished,
Bread and Water unto Sancho! the Furies were not worse Torment to him than the
latter of them, for which cause he was very glad the World should never be
drowned again; for of all deaths he hated it, and like Ovid, not with him, was
used to cry out, Demite naufragium, Mors mihi munus erit. Which John Tailor
thus Englisheth: To drink indeed is all my wish,
But how, not to drink as a Fish.


Sancho run in to the Monk, and would have ra^sack't his habits.] Non videt id
Manticae quod in tergo est? Yes, Sancho had seen Cappuchines, and knew where
their Wallets were, where the stock lay, no paddee to a Trooper, so expert; and
now you see the chief of Sancho's service, he was for the plunder, the Squire
for the bag, the Knight for the baggage, for he is with the Biscaine Lady,
while his Squire made an adventure indeed, of robbery, but was taken in the
fact, and having two unmercifull Jurymen, and Judges (for they were all) two
heavy fisted Lackeys, never was horse so curryed, betwixt two Northern Jockies,
as Sancho was. Sancho pleaded well, that they were lawful prize by law of
Arms, but the unskilful knaves (not known to Civil Courts) used him very
barbarously, nay, no Barber would have served him so, (though he had often gone
away trimmed for nothing) they grubb'd up his reverend hairs by the roots, and
left his chin as bare, as a pulled hens rump. In ten years travels they came
not again; so that Joan at his return, thought him made young again, and had
they grubb'd downward, and a like growth come there also, it might have passed
for a very good Metamorphosis. The Monk all this while (though he had his, Thou
shall not steal for Sancho) not remembering his Lackeyes of the other precept
(which was very near violating, for Sancho was breathless, and that is as good
as dead,) got to his horse, and with a greater speed (then he rode to be
admitted into the Monastery) made away, and left poor Sancho in pate and beard
a Monk, but of the order of the Maledictines.

Get thee away Knight in an ill hour, or I will kill thee,] This Biscainer was
a Castrill, a very Foighter, and no doubt, but the Pusses in the Coach, were
his sisters. But the Don recounting with himself (notwithstanding that he
swore damnably, he would kill him) the infallibility of his security in being
Knight Errant, that it was impossible to be ever outright killed, he made bold
to throw the Caytiffe in his face, which was the greatest affront to a
Biscainer (who is terra marique, a gentleman) that could be offered. Had the
Biscaine been tossed as our Don was by the Windmill, and a little higher in
concavum Lunae, no doubt but he had been a gentleman by all the four Elements.
Two such high spirits are now met, and more implacable then Clinias and
Dametas. The Author leaves us uncertain of the issue of this single combat,
(which however it went with the Master) was notorious on the Brutes side, for
Rosinante run down the hired, tired jade of the Biscainer: And if the horse
such praises had,
The Knight got more, or he was mad.


The End of the first Book.
FESTIVOVS NOTES UPON DONQUIXOT. BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
Ioult here! we are at a loss, now what shall we do,
We must toth' Exchange for news, e'n at Toledo.
Where if a Hawker with old scrowles Arabic
Do not support us, down goes all this Fabric
Of Quixotsy Errantry; but let me tell ye,
We happ'ly meet Hamete Benen-geli,
An old Arabian book, which very few
Do understand, but we have hired a Jew*
(Of which there are good store in Spain,) who kenn'd
A better tongue, then wherein this is penned.
He does translate this brave ensuing story,
Which book by book shall now be laid before you.
Give ear therefore, it is time, for we have found
One of our Dons fallen off from's head toth' ground,
Cut by proud Biscaine hand, but see he lies,
To answer for one ear, with both his eyes,
He dearly pays the making Don, Scriva-no
Dead on the place, but that the Ladies-pray-no:
What could not Ladies do upon a Peer,
The most humane, that ever wore an ear.
No man but he, would e're used a foe-so,
Upon his homage done to Dull Toboso.
TEXT.
WE left the Don and Biscaine in so doubtful taking.] This pause, is like an
Istmos or Peninsula, which dividing two enraged seas by her natural
interposition, keeps them from emboguing or praecipitating one into the other.
Otherwise, Ionium Aegeo frangit mare, as says his lofty Countryman Lucan. But
you may guess the Combatants by their metal, like Stags and stonehorses. For
as on each side of an Istmos, by the iterated beatings and rebeatings of the
waters, the froth and Venus, the salt and spirituous bubbles (churn'd into a
cream) are seen at top about the shore: So every where did appear upon this
Pharsalian Camp, the drivelings of these embossed Rivals, who foamed like two
chafed Boars, or blown Mastiffs, whose rage had curded one another chops,
that had they been milk-sops, they might have dined from one another face, nor
were their Horses in less Agony, and by excessive heats, continual
evaporations, and sweats, they were laundred and ladder'd; had there been water
by, as there was land enough, they might have very well served for the sport of
the soaped Bull. It is great pity to leave two Knights tugging thus, like
slaves at an oar, I will (with my Authors leave) make what haste I can for
their redemption.

The Author leaving no notice, where we might find the rest of the narration.]
This a Spanish quirk, a maze of the Authors own making, as intricate as his
brains, to puzzle and withold the inflamed Reader, whom he would make
believe, for the dignity and antiquity of his History, that it came from
Arabian head and language, and was translated by an Hebraean; But I am clear
of another opinion, though I like his invention well, and Facile est addere.

And I shall put my conceit upon the judgment of the World, which of the two
they think most probable. Therefore I conjecture that this story of Quixot,
with many more eminent Opuscula of that nature, were all preserved in that
famous and wonderful hollow tooth of Garagantua, from the irruptions of the
Goths and Vandals, and the Barbarismes of the Ottoman cruelty: which said
tooth, John Pontaeus, his Ter-quaterque retro-Tritavus descended into, by the
assistance of a College of Physicians (for there was room enough) and
Chirurgions also, with all those huge engines, tooth-pick-axes, tooth-mattocks,
and all manner of mouth-Pionery, provided for the scouring, cleansing, and
purging of that stupendous concavity. In the rubbish of that vast Hiatus, were
these two Volumes of the Don preserved safe and unperisht; which how they came
thither, will be the hardest thing to make good: But it is of no such
difficulty to salve the scruple. For that exceeding Giant being troubled with
no small pain in his tooth, called the Hodontalgia, it caused such a vacuum in
the place, that so much wind had gathered thither, as it was enough (as out of
Aelus cavernes) from thence at any time to have caused a tempest; wherefore
from all places there were helps and councels called, and when stopping of it
was concluded upon, they thought not at the instant, with what to do it, (men's
brains being not always ready for every punctilio) but then finding what an
intolerable charge it would amount to in Cotton-wooll, Linen or Canvas, they
thought it best, (and best cheap) to do it with wast paper, which was
approved on, and the Giant willing to save his purse, condescended to it: So
all the Pamphlets then extant, all Romancees, English, Spanish, French, and
throughout the world were bought up, and amongst the rest, this of our Don,
which being chiefly to be preserved, was laid next the root of his tooth, many
piles of less worthy labors lying betwixt it and the casualties of the
continual defluxions that fell upon the place. So have you him incorrupt, and
by the help of Rablais sweet as a nut.

Rescuing damsels with all their virginities at their backs.] This is virginity
transplaced; but it is plain he means mothers, who had their little ones, as
our Irish women use to go laden (who without all question were virgins) at
their backs: Which calls to mind, a story of a Foot Knight Errant of our Land,
who was much given to take the pleasure of the Woods in the Summer time, and
especially that time of it, when nuts are in season; into the thicket, where he
was used to adventure, came a very fair Lady of goodly stature, rare and
flowing hair, and of good carriage (for she had two barnes bound fast to her:)
the melancholy Knight viewing her, was amazed at her rich beauty and poor
clothes, at her light ordering her pasternes, and heavy burden at her back,
and calling the Lady to him, ask't her, whence, and who she was, she told him,
one whom misfortunes had sent into England sor relief; yea said the gentleman,
that thou shall not want, and presently gave her a piece of money, the Lady
bowed her self and her family to him, and as she was praying God to bless
him, he desired her to spare that, and stay a little with him, and presently
requested her to take the pleasure of the place, and she should have better
chaffer then nuts; which the Lady apprehensive enough, was willing to
entertain, but told him the disconvenience of obtaining his purpose, whilst
those weights and impediments were tied to her, we will unloose them, said ( Sr
Solitary) nay said the Lady, but if they be unfastened, they will cry for meat,
and laid aside without it, keep such a noise, that may call in spectators more
then we desire. Come said ( Sr Solitary) that all may be secure, fasten the
barnes to my back, and I shall be (as you shall order it) as good as a cradle
to them. The Lady liked his pregnant fancy, and presently unwhitled, and
swathed them to her Paramor, who was no sooner fast, but he was desirous to be
loose, and when he prepared himself to beat the Tree, the Lady vanished with
such speed, that he running (with weight) was not able to overtake his flying
Daphne; and too far he durst not follow, for fear of discovery: now he tried
to ease himself of his charge, but the cunning Lady had fastened the whittles
so equally behind, that his hands could not reach the knots, and while they
were in the amorous embraces, she withdrew with his money, all injurious
weapons from him, so that his knife, which would have decided this Gordian
knot, was stolen. The Gentleman reflected upon himself, and both sorry, and
ashamed of the action, that he might take heed for the future, and satisfy for
what was past, made have toward night to his Town, accoutred as he was, and at
a Tenants house dismantles himself, telling her the story, and giving her
charge to see the brats well brought up, which was a piece of gallant
Foot-Errantry; and so what was intended Lechery, proved an act of excellent
charity.

This Dulcinea of Toboso, had the best hand for powdering of Pork in all the
Mancha.] This is the first Character we have of the excellencies, which were in
this Lady Dulcinea of Toboso. But why this should move a Jew to laughter, I
know not? rather it might have provoked him to have thrown away the book, for
the Jews abominate all swines flesh, fresh or salted: which hatred against
that foul beast, (besides the prohibition) was augmented from the Devils
choice, after his dispossessing, and changing his lodging into a heard of
Swine. But that the Commendations of her hand, in that piece of huswifry, is
not so ridiculous; I shall make it appear by two short stories in our own
Country: where a Gentleman having invited (about the Lent-time) some friends to
his house, his Lady provided such cheer as was seasonable, the Collops and
Eggs, and as it fell out, (a Hogg being slain) she had a service of the
puddings, which being deservedly commended by the guests; Nay, said the
Gentleman, friends be it known to you, my wife is abomination good
pudding-wife. Take unto this another of like brevity, of one, who being merry
with some friends late at a Tavern in London, and (as after all mirth some
qualmes of repentance surprise us) he reflected upon his family in the Country,
and pathetically laying his hand upon his breast, said, wicked wretch as I am,
to be at such a late hour deboysing my self, when now at this sad time of
night is my poor wife making Puddings and Candles.

Quixot written by Cyde Hamere Benegeli.] I never read or heard of the man's
name before, unless he were Nephew to Allo-hazen Hali-Ben-Hali-Ben-Ragan, who
indeed was a grand Translator, and an Astronomer, and from that high study
understood, what Country would produce the most eminent men for Chivalry, as
well as other matters.

There was painted in the first quire very naturally, the Battle betwixt the
Don and the Biscaine, and the Mule and Rosinante.] The lively pourtraictures of
the Biscaines Mules and Rosinante, makes me condole the want of those Artists
in my Nation; especially since the loss of that famous Hyliard, made more
famous by the Incomparable expression of the dead Author, -- A hand, or eye,
By Hyliard drawn, is worth a history,
By a worse painter made --


Such stuff is now (though we have those can do well yet) drawn, that it were
a good piece of charity in the Painter (if he were skilled in pen as well as
in pencill) to write over the piece, what it is, that the puz'led spectators
might know, which was the Hare, which the Greyhound, which the Lion, which the
Lamb, which the Eagle, which the Child. Rosinante was drawn so thin, that he
was transparent, and the Mule, that one might swear he was hired. O for an
Oxford tired hackney with a Freshman upon his back, to be thus drawn to the
life.

Yet in respect the Moor does hate us so mortally.] Fratrum concordia rara. The
Moors and Spaniards, (especially those of the Austrian family) are as like as
an apple to an apple, an egg to an egg, an eye to an eye, a tooth to a tooth,
or to come nearer, a lip to a lip; and for that reason, there may be some
emulations, both striving, who should outlip the other. But the pretender to
universal Monarchy, has now the better on it, though the Moor may justly
esteem himself of the more ancient house, being more sooty and smoaky.

Historiographers ought to be very true and unpassionate, etc.] Lipsius could
have said no more to Tacitus, who both were better Politicians then Hi^^rians;
for by interposing their own censures into the affairs they (...) on, they
showed indeed their Art, but not their faith: That brings into suspicion the
truth of all the rest: better did Stow and Holingshead, wherein though there be
many lies, (which they took upon relation to the times) yet they added never a
wise word of their own. Here is a very good description of History, and
whereas I presume to turn his prose into verse, so here I shall turn his
English into Latin. Matter and nutrix veritatis est Historia, temporis
Coaetanea, Repositorium and Bibliotheca actionum; Index and testis rerum
praeteritarum, Futurarum Aruspex and Sybilla.

The Trenchant swords of the two valorous, etc.] The Giants and the Gods for
the time, were not so hot at it, as the Don and the Biscaine. Have ye ever
seen two driving a Buck? that is something to it: two beating of Hemp, very like;
but a brace of threshers excellent, who falling out about the overlarge soope
of the Colley or Harvest-bottle, bestow upon themselves what was due to the
sheaves.

Who is he that can well describe the fury that entered into, etc.] Quae dixit
and quae fecit? nay, what said he not? what did he not? He did not regard his
own lost ear, but said, he would have two for one, he was always covetous,
and given to extortion, for he vowed to have the head too, to which they were
supporters. And being resolved for improvement, he enclosed his valor, which
before lay in common field, and with united, hands, eyes, and all but ears, he
let fly at the Biscaine, and with one blow, confounded and downe-dagger'd him,
and as we say in our poor English Proverb, put him clean beside the Cushion.
and there he lay Semi-mortuus, Sepulchrorum and manium Penincola. We had seen
his head on a Spear (like the Boats before Guy of Warwick) had not the Ladies
in the Hell Carts, screem'd out for their Hector, and humbly begged (once on
their knees) to save his life, who had served them on his, all his days, and
nights too.

CHAP. II.
Our Dons in blood, and will not heed Sancho's rules,
But rides about the field which is all gules
From his ear stillant, swears they shall repent'um
That drew that blood;and slights Album unguentum,
Which Sancho stole from his ill favored Mopse,
Thinking it good for cuts, as 'twas for chops
In here over parched face. But the Squire was
Unwilling that the Balm Fierebras
Lay in his Masters head, which being so near,
He hoped, in time would issue to his ear.
But now he rages worse than any Caesar,
When he beheld his broken Hemets vizar;
The Biscaine he will recall upon the place,
(For troth he was ashamed to show his face)
And had he kept his oath of Fasts, and Wakes,
H' had Waked his last; but Sancho (wise) uptakes
That matter, and finding his stomach high,
Desires with bread and Cheese to pacify
His great distemper, and by persuasion,
Upon the Crust and Cause, he makes invasion.
TEXT.
SANCHO prayed with all his heart.] Somewhat of kin was Sancho to the
Seamen, who seldom pray but in a Tempest, and the prayers much alike; Vt
optata potiantur are^a: As saylors pray at Sea, to see the dry lands,
So Sancho prays, that he may have his Island.


These are not adventures of Islands, but of thwartings.] The pitcher does not
go so often to the well, but sometimes it comes home broken. This Proverb,
(if the Spaniard had understood it) would have suited very well with the Don,
who very much at present ressembled the Hieroglyphick, having ears, Ana. It is
the right discipline of Knight-Errantry, to be rudimented in losses at first,
and to have the Tyrocinium somewhat tart. Those prove your surest veterani, and
hardest Knights, who have smarted for their experience. The castigation of the
lackeys, the unfavourable but auspicious hoyst of the Windmils (for in the
elevation he saw all the Castles he was to conquer, and Sancho's Island too) the
eare-ring of the Biscaine, (for it was more than admonition,) were the
praeludiums and trials of his doughtinesse: Ardua virtutis via.

And whosoever is to make his way through quicksets, thorns, and briars, may
very well lose an ear in the thicket.

Don Quixot checked Rosinant, until Sancho did arrive.] Mark the great love
betwixt Sancho and the Knight, and the two Brutes respectively. Much like that
of pothooks and dripping pan, who once were at variance; the one was off the
hooks, the other upon it was a drooping-pan; but at last by meditation of
Andirons, parties of each side, they were reconciled, and in sign of
everlasting amity, when pothooks looked down upon dripping-pan, then did
dripping-pan look up upon pot-hooks. Even so and so the simile is quadrate,
when Sancho's Ass brayed, then Rosinante neighed, when Sancho out-cri'd, then
Don did not out-ride.

It were not amiss to retire to some Church.] Ignavi semper specie pruden ^u ^
admonent. Cowards are always great Politicians, and huge creators of dangers
and safeties. Sancho is afraid of hues and cries, for the insultum fecit upon
the Monks, and a clausum fregit it had liked to have been, if that the Pages
had not come in before the Burglary, committed upon his treble locked purse.
Two reasons yet Sancho had for this caution; security of person, and
convenience of revictualling, for the provisions were far spent, the wallet was
empty, which made Ass and Man go sorrowfully: Sancho was short and thick,
and being empty and lanck, there were two wallets upon one beast: He (though
others hate it) loved to make a cloak-bag of his belly, wherein he desired an
days provision at least before hand; for he did not use his wallets,
emblematically one, and that the foremost, should hold others vices, and the
hindmost his own. That diet was for envious folks (of which number he hated
to be) because they were lean. He loved all religious houses, but especially
the Monasteries, for that the Monks were very well spread men, not dwindlers,
but of an ample size, having bodies capable for large undertakings, and wherein
the soul was not straightened, as in pinched and spiny carcasses, where the
received air being stifled and choakt up into a narrow compass, causes
stinking breath, and many other aneusanses in the body natural, which he
intended in his future Island (when he came to it) to prevent.

I will deliver thee out of the hand of the Caldaeans, how much more from the
holy Brotherhood.] This holy Brotherhood, were the Officers of the Dorps, as
Constables, Tithing-men, Bailiffs, bumme or shoulder-Marshals, and the like
dreadful appearances, which make stop of suspicious persons, vagrants, under
which Squire-Errants, if not Knights, might very well be comprehended; But that
Knight-Errants are for the holy sisterhood, and fear no such bugbeares. He
that fears not the Caldaeans, scorns to come before the Constable, or his
vigilant Capitolian Watchmen.

O what a valde vult, or rather a vult valde
Is here, that fears nor Constable nor Caldee.
Pray use this lint, and a little unguentum album he has in his wall^^.]
Sancho had stolen his wives unguentum, wherewith she soder'd up the chinks in
her ruinous face; that poor woman, for want of it and the thief, will gape
till his return, like the parched earth in a drought.

A vial full of the Balsamum Fierebas.] Opobalsamum, I pray you, for a rarity
of so transcendent operation! This was an imaginary Balsame, which was good for
imaginary wounds. Phantastes being asked (in that learned play of Lingua) what
a man thought of, when he thought of nothing, answered by present strength of
imagination; he is thinking how to answer him, that asks nothing; so for no
wound, no Balsamum is best. This Op^balsamum, (as he would have it valued and
esteemed) was near of affinity to the sympathetick powder, which has done
wonderful things. A strange but true story I shall tell you of the effects of
some of it. A Lady fell asleep (as many do) with needles and pins in her mouth,
which she unhappily swallowed: great care there was to preserve her; Physicians
from the four corners are called, and a Regiment of Apothecaries and
Chirurgions; For her Knight terribly afriad of intestine turn-pikes, could not
rest, till some remedy was found out. A council was had, and no conclusive
result; at last a little Paracelsian Apothecary Clyster-high, advised to make a
Clyster with three hundred ingredients, which you may read in the Pharmacopoea
(translated or not translated) but the chief praedominator in the business,
was to be two grains of pulvis magneticus, powder of Loadstone, which having
the Misceatur and Condiatur by direction, was administered unto the Lady by the
Pigmy Minos (dressed up like a Gentilewoman) for more modestyes sake, which
wrought so appositely and sympathetically, that the occult qualities of the
Loadstone, presently exerted and shot out their virtues through the body of the
patient so vigorously, that at last they fastened upon the needle, which was
attracted with a powder, the other impulsives helping to the qua data porta,
and in such an instant of time, that little Minos could recover himself from
the storm of her Ladyships Posternegate, which streamed and issued so
furiously, that my Apothecaries face was stuck like a pinne-cushion, and the
needle stuck, was in his nose clear and untainted, with the many Meanders that
it had passed through. The Apothecary was carried forth to the Doctors and his
fellow Artists, who wrote probatum to the Clyster, and for the mishap, no other
of the function was to d^^e it but himself, the Chirurgions as their office is
at Anatomies (cleanly dressed) made his face clean, and the Knight gave him
Pulvus auratus for his sympatheticus: And so all parties were very well pleased.

Give me but a draught of the Opobalsamum, and I shall, though cleft in twain,
be sounder then an apple.] All the Art is in the cleanly conjunction of the
disunited parts again; for if there should be solutio continui, but for a
minutes time, and 'twere a head of Gold 'twere lost; for experience, you have
seen a Calves head cleft by a Butcher at a stroke, and immediately ( ictu oculi
as they say) clap together again by the benefit of a fine white thread, which
must be ever near (for it is the thread of life) futures like Portcullises, or
a pair of shuts, strike one into another; but as I said, if an ear from that
head be separated, as it befell the Don, not Fierebras, nor Paracelsus
himself, nor Bacons head of brass can cure it.

With less then three Rials you may make three gallons of it.] With as little
cost as he that found out the Philosophers Stone at first, and best (because
best cheap, but these Lapides are not for Ladies) even with what think you?
with the white of an egg whereunto the cock tread is joined, which without
doubt has a villainous contagium upon the grand magisterium of the Stone. Since
Coals have been so dear, few do adventure at this great work. But that this
opinion may find its a betters is very probable, for all things are now
discovered to proceed askue (the round world and al) Ladies are with egg, not
with child, happily so by their cackling, I wonder they don't lay before they
sit, and make up their la'ter as they say in the Country; To hear a woman cluck
were pretty. But to our Balsame, the poor is more becoming a Mountebanck, then
a Knight Errant. John Pontaeus talks of Dolars, and takes sixpence.

He swore to lead a life lke to the Marquess of Mantua.] Proh Jupiter inquit!

What, is my trusty Helmets vizar broke in pieces?
Lend me his oath, of Mantua who Marquess is;
I will not eat on cloth, I mean on Ta^le clothes,
(For as Dulcinea, so her Don clean Napery loathes:)
I will no Turnament of flesh, though my Dull-
Longed as they say, and I of lofty thoughts were full;
I will not see the Mancha honored by my birth,
Nor will I tread (though a Knight Errant) much more earth,
Until there unpar'd ailes, there sharp and tearing tweesers
I fasten on his face, that broke my Helmets vizar.
Thou has spoken right and well, and therefore I disanull the oath, but I
confirm it again as to the Helmet.] Sancho keeps his Master very just, a Turk
if he lay his hand upon his head, will never deceive you, nor a Jew, if he pat
it on your thigh; the Knight Errant, if he lift upon his eyes and hands to
Heaven, cannot be realsed of the engagement, unless the matter it self be
null, as if he should have sworn to maintain Dulcinea's virgin-honour against
all Knights, and she should, unknown to him, though not to others (as they use
in Scotland) have vent'red only a trial of her potentiality to procreation,
and had the scruple of her mind satisfied with a brace of barnes at once. In
such a case (as the Casuists says well,) Iuramentum est irritum, or (as Doctor
Cutbert has it in his notes upon Balus,) Irritum est Iuramentum. But the
Knight was here Errant in his rage, and forgot that the Biscaine was a military
Trophie, and Marshall Donative sent upon Par^le to Dulcinea of Toboso;
Whereupon, the oath fell of it self, as to the vindicative part, 'mary for the
self-denying part, which was a voluntary and Sacramental Renunciation of clean
linen at Bed or Board, it was to be kept, unless he purchased a dispensation
from Rome. But I never heard that he wandered so far out of the way, but
inviolably kept of much of it as concerned his sheets and shirts, as the
Arch-Dutchesse of Austria, at the siege of Ostend for her smock.

Knight-Errants, if they perchance eat, they eat only what is next to hand.]
Venture caret auribus, is that true? then our Don wanted three. The onion though
it be naught for the eyes, it could not hurt his left ear, strong smells being
no annoyances to the sense of hearing; yet why may not the sense make bold with
one another objects? you have heard it commonly spoken, I have smelt out his
meaning, I smell what you would have, or what you are doing, (that is more
properly indeed at some time) let m^ see what you can say; so for hearing, as
an ill air is smelt, so it may be heard, or understood, or felt. But the sense
of tasting is most made use of at present, (which being very nearly related to
that of touching:) the Don a natural Philosopher (if ever any) would not
suffer the objects (though they were very hard, and which is desructive to the
Organs) to be at any competent distance or medium from his teeth, which
encountered a Giant called Crustbread, (a hardy whoreson) the Cheese also was
another Giant, an Argus (but an old one) with an hundred eyes, as many as you
shall see in a vault, and the matters as rocky, which this Cutis never left, as
long as he saw one.

The chief sustenance were some Herbs they found about the fields.] Sancho was
a very Ingrum as they call him, he could neither write nor read, a very beast,
and fit for nothing but to pick sallets, which being the chief food (as the
only parabile) wherewith the nature of our Knight Errant was contented; What
could you expect but faint performances from grass diet, or such as his last
was, gross fare? Had such a Knight lived in our Horison, and led so valiant
and so frugall a life, he had been dubbed brother with John a Green; or had the
times of old been worthy of him, he had been the only companion for
Nebuchadonozor, when he was changed into a Beast. But we must leave him sub
dio, whether a sleep or at supper all is one, the earth is bed and board to him.

Sleep pair of souls, than whom none worthier lie
Under the blew, and the dew-dropping Canopy.
CHAP. III.
Their Fare is mended, and now Sancho's Ass
And Rosinante pick, sallets on the grass.
Our Errants are invited, and this night
Is merrily past away without a fight;
Yet to the pot poor Sancho went; never fear,
'Twas toth' pot only (where the Goats boyld were.)
The Don does drench his over-dry'd Mustachios
Once in good Wine, out of the herds Borachios;
Good wine, as it with several spirit meets,
So do it spirits work; it rayses feats
And golden fancies in DON QUIXOT'S head,
Whilst heavy Sancho's fit for naught bu^bed.
The snorting Carle does sleep out all along
The Dons Oration, and the Goatheards song.
TEXT.
SANCHO presently repaired to the smell of certain pieces of wild Goats
flesh.] Here is Aesops Fable of the two Hounds, moraliz'd in the Squire and the
Don. Hound Sancho was for the Kettle, Hound Quixot for the Field, Orations, or
Music; but Sancho as he had a tun belly by nature given him, so he was very
much given to the belly, which being of that measure, was not easily filled.
Such a servant was never advised to his Master by Marriot. But although the Don
could have been contented with the fresh services of Madam Aura, for which he
opened as constantly, as an Oyster against tide; Yet the Knights of the
Mountains obtained this favor of their younger brother of the Hills and Dales,
that he would vouchsafe his company to such cheer as they had; which
Goat-provision were most agreeable with their Errant bodies, which were always
saltitant, passant or current, sometime volant, sometimes after a Windmill, or
so, couchant. Omne simile nutritur a simili, which is the reason that swines
flesh, (which most inwardly of all creatures resembles his master) is so
nutritive and apposite, unless to old Jewry men, or Scots. I belive Sancho and
his Master, fed most upon Goats countenance, the head boiled in hair, being
as rare and choice meat, as Lambs head in the wool; very good diet, and the
most successful for any that are troubled with a desperatio Barbae, beyond
your unguents, or whatsoever else is given to dilate the pores of the place:
It Is true, it is somewhat rough at going down and untoothsome, but I told you
before, it is not for the teeth or palate, but the chinne, though a pallat of
Mo-haire is very good lodging (I take it;) now you know the attractive faculty
is implanted in every part, ad every part draws, and every part, (as the
learned say) agglutinates, and assimilates, and then the work of nature is
done, so that the chinne, the cheeks, the boscos, and suboscos (I mean,) the
dulapes and the jawy part of the face, know what they have to do, and what
thatch is best for that place: And it is very well known, that ever after this
entertainment, and the next day, Sancho's face moss'd, and his chinne had a
down sprung out, substantial enough to grate a nutmeg. The Don had a
Philosophers Aspect, wih an^oblong handle, Mustachios circular, which were a
great grace to his countenance Martial. Sancho was a most gross feeder, and
you might smell much of his dyer, evaporated from under his Arm pits, which
reak'd upon motion like a limekill, and by this diet, gave a stronger Hogo.

And spreading certain sheepskins.] Those sheep-skin coverings without
infringement of his oath, the Don might endure at his table; it was agreeable
with the chief head at board, and the bottom of the trough was suitable to a
knight in penance, and in pilgrimage for a new Helmet; the horn cup, if it
had been large enough, would very well have supplied the defect, and became the
Don better then the cushion did the Biscaine.

The same is said of Chivalry that is said of Love, that it makes all equal.
Love and danger are very glutinous, and of a sodering and associating nature;
if two love one another, it is very probable they will lie together; and so for
quarrelling, if two fall out, they will presently fall in, and together by the
ears; Contrariorum eadem est Ratio. So here, extreme love of Sancho's person
made his sides-man with his Master, love is a leveller, for laugh (which is a
but a variation for love) and ly down, and Chivalry does so too, lay all before
it.

I do here renounce from this time to the worlds end.] It was not modesty in
this duck-legs, that made him refuse the Table-fellowship with his Master, but
only fear of starving. For the Knight was but a small feeder, and Sancho durst
not gormandize, and guttle and guzzle too (for he would do both) under his
Master's nose, as he used to do at the side Table or the Cupboard. It is a
good house-policy, and piece of great frugality, that a whole family should set
all in common together (according to the Proverb, it is merry when beards wag
all;) the Master and men, Dame and damsels all together, (these cannot be so
merry) whereby much, that by licentious feeding, would be wasted is saved,
beside, orderly eating makes no mammocks, nor scraps for the Almes-basket. It
is impossible to cure servants of the woolf or dog in the stomach, without they
be sed under the Mistesses eye; and on the other side, I do admire how Ladies
gentilewomen and themselves too, make a shift to look so plumpe and fai^e, with
those slender pittances, which they eat at their Tables, where I am sure they
abstain not out of an intention to save their meat, but from constancy in the
sobriety. I will not censure the reason of the temperance, nor impute it to the
Cullises eaten before diner, or the sweat-meats after, but leave them to their
own ways and customs, knowing full well, that they were old enough to fill
their own bellies; with what? let it be left to their Ladyships good liking
for me.

Tossed in with their fists whole slices.] If any man has a desire to learn
how to choke himself, let him look upon Sancho and these commoners, or
cormorants shall I call them? with whom a piece of Goats leg goes as nimbly
down, as it ever alive went up the crag; they do as an exact trencher-Squire
did with a Capons leg, draw him at one pass through the teeth, as empty as
you would do a boiled peasecod. For handsomeness of feeding, use of Napkins,
and complement, they had been very well all trained up in Grobians school,
where they learned every punctilio of abominably nasty and gross feeding,
which would make a man loath any meat that should be eaten by such swine; His
non invideas porcorum a^^^nge palatum.
Their palats all alike, it had been rare,
If with the hogs, alike had been the fare.


He took a handful of Acornes, and beholding them earnestly, he began this
discourse.] This Oration of the Dons, is much aloke to the description of Ovids
golden age, which being excellent well rendered by the golden Sands, I shall not
render it in such meeter, but in a suit agreeable to this subject.

The Oration of DON QVIXOT.
Happy that Age, which called was the golden,
Not because gold (which does so much embolden
Men in this Iron age) was plenty store,
Alas (good men) they had nor coin, nor ^ar;
But because all things were in common to 'um,
And those two filthy words, meum and tuum,
Were not in the World, but each man's heart and ^ouse
Were open, they kept general randevouze.
A man might dine, (like Sancho) fill his guts
For nough with Acornes, or with unsavory Nuts;
And for his drink (for Nuts are somewhat dry,)
The silver liquor did run bubling by,
Which out of hand they drank; for cups and dishes
Were not in use, by word of mouth, like fishes,
They drank and drank, and never could drink (...) up;
Nor was it vile to slabber in the cup.
In clefts of rocks, and ancient hollow trees,
The Commonwealth or Monarchy of Bees
Did hive, and left to men the fragrant vales,
Carrying no sting, but honey in their tails:
Vulcan was then no God, for then no steel,
But only cork, was fast'ned to horse heels,
Which made Light-horses all, but not for fights,
But Hide-park-races, and such free delights.
Children they might at pleasure get enough,
(But not as in the song) by going to plough
No hobb'nall whistled to the Teem, the ground
Gave freely all her grains, without a wound;
And all those fragrancies she kind disposes,
Which now we buy of gardners for our noses.
Then went from hills to dales the Shepheard-esses;
(Save of their hair) without all curious dresses,
Their hair in ringlets, which they sometime twine,
(Their beauteous skins as through a lattice shine)
And sometimes flowing from the top toth' toe,
You could discern nothing but hair to go,
Only some slender, but sufficient cover
Lay over the Entry, which they call the Lover.
The silk-worme was not then put hard to work,
Nor fed to cloth the Minions of the Turk:
Ivy was all their clothing, and good souls,
Though they were simple, yet they were no Owls,
But deemed themselves as gallant in green Bur-docks,
As they which clad in silk their stale Sea-vernocks.
No art of words, no lisping, fraud, nor doubling
Of minds, or chins, not gaggling like Geese stubble-in;
But if they loved they loved, pure down right they,
Not having learned the Hypocrisy of Nay.
Justice was blind indeed (as true as steel)
As she saw not the person, she would not feel
Whom to befriend, and as the weight oth' fee
Poised her, do either right or injury;
It was before the days oth' dreadful budge,
There was none guilty, and there was no Judge:
Young men and maidensmet, and so returned,
Lust was not kindled then, which since has burned;
No damzell can escape, though she be shut,
As Rosamond the fair was in a hut;
Nay, were there now a Labyrinth this day,
If money cannot, Love will find out the way.
Corruptions thus increasing, bribes and rapes
(To such a height, that scarce a Lady escapes,)
An order was invented, as you see,
Valiant and chaste, of bold Knight-Errantry;
Whose offic^ it is to vindicate all Ladies,
(Which by constraint have teemed with pretly babyes)
And all such widows, whom miscarriag^
Has poisoned, before their second marriage:
They must all Orphans help, whose cunning mothers,
Knew the right father, not the b^rn to smother.
These when their mother dye, being fatherless,
From their reputed ones they must redress,
And of this noble order is your guest; that is I
Whom you have feasted, with Goats flesh full high,
For which, and for you Acornes as it due is,
I give you thanks, as had been Beef an bruesse;
And though the meat was due, as I Am a Knight,
I tak^'t more kind then if I paid for it.
Here the Goat-heard ended his dity.] This entertainment was Prince-like; meat,
wine, and songs, it wanted only wenches, and as they in France, it had been
cheer entire. I wonder the Don offered not a madrigall of his own, but indeed,
his Oration did supererogate, and no doubt but that Dulman Sancho was so
heavy, it might have been obtained.

Faecundi calices, quem non fecere disertum? It Is easily answered, not such a
clod as Sancho, or the Goat-heards, whose dull and unactive clay, no Fragrantia
frigida frisca can elevate of firk up into any spark of fancy. Wine is drowned
in their bottomes, and only happy when they spring aleak. But clods as they
are, to their mothers lap, with them the earth, where they need not fear
falling, but may ly secure without bedstaves.

Qui jacet in terra, non habet unde codat.
Whose pallet is the very ground,
Sleeps sure from falls, if he sleep sound.
CHAP. IV.
But here we are diverted, and your eyes
Awhile are heated with sad Tragedies;
The death of Chrysostom, who lost his life
For coy Marcela, who would not bee's wife.
O that a Scholar and Astronomer,
Should for a placket knack so fowly err!
Run melancholy, mad, mopish, and cry
Old fool like a young child again! and die;
And for an apple, in Marcela's eyes,
And for the Cherries, and the Straw-Berries
In her fair Cheeks and Lips; and for the snow,
The warm snow-bals, that lay her neck below;
And for a thousand knackeries, yet lower,
For which he many day, full hard did we her.
But nothing would prevail, so the old D^tard
Kicks up his heels, as Peter told the Goat-heard.
TEXT.
THat Chrysostom died for love of the develish less Marcela.] Hey ho! for a
wife say some, and hey ho, with a wife say others. Birds in the cage would
feign get out, and those that are out would willingly be in. How is it, that no
man likes his present condition? Old Father Chrysostom, would make young
Marcela Mother Chrysostom, and young Marcela she loves no fits of the mother;
a cross grained slut, and loved courting, but not lying; servants, but no
subjection. Well would she have liked a homage of a whole day done her with a
bare head, and thredbare flatteries, besides favors and sillibubs, and for all
this, think much to let her hand be kissed by the Idolatrous lips of her
languishing Paramour. Nothing will surfeit one sooner than such fits, and
pan-pudding, there may be some raising in these, but no reason for the other.

Leave off fond Lover, never dye at her feet,
Love and Pease-pottage, are a dangerous surfeit.
Chrysostom was skillful in Astronomy.] He should have taught her some of his
Astrological postures, and it had been a done business: But where were his
brains that he never cast her, nor her nativity? Could not he read in those
bright Characters, what would be the event of his own suit? What happy
conjunctions were at her nativity? whether Venus were cross legged, or Saturn
costive, or Mars melancholy, (as he is always after a conjunction with Venus,)
or Mercury honest, and then you shall never steal a maid, especially if Luna be
in the Wane, or picked, and then it blows no body good? Or whether Jupiter was
not joviall, or Sol in his Mubblefubbles? that is, long clouded, or in a total
Eclipse, then little work for Mother midnight, for Sol and homo generant
hominem, though men go to work after Sun sets. This old fellow had not the
Hocas Pocas of Astrology, he could not shufle the Ephemerides nimbly, and make
the stars move with a Palabras or a Falathra, according to the wishes of the
ingorant enquirers. Our figure-flingers went beyond him far; they deal with
the Chamber-maides to Ladies first, and (more like suitors then wizards) learn
of them what the stars shall prognostic: Abigal discovers whom her Mistress
dreams of, and then this Albumazar will tell her it waking at what rate he
pleases: Or if this take not, peremptorily conclude the Lady doomed, destined,
and star-assign'd to one, who at such a time, in such a place, with such a
shape, in such a suit of clothes shall be walking, (and all that laid before by
the gentile-man, who bribed his mercenary tongue to the description) and this
shall pass for irresistible Fate, and the wedding instantly dispatched, for it
was signed in Heaven, and they will seal it on earth.

He saw her first at the foot of a rock, where the Fountain stands of the
Cork-tree.] Many take great Omens from the place where they first saw their
Mistresses; this fellow's first view was from a Cork-Tree Fountain, ever since
she made water in his mouth, but it was unfortunate; first, because there was a
Rock, which was the emblem of her hard heart; then a Cork Tree, which is the
emblem of levity, inconstancy, volubility, and hupernatability; then at a
Fountain, which will never stand still, but is always running, and so nothing
can be done. It had been far better, (if fortune had owed him so much good
luck) to have seen her rising from gathering of a Rose, or in the very cropping
a flowers, or collection of a whole posy. Besides that the proverb (especially
that which plainly, and not parabolically lays down the beginning of Love)
made for him, it must needs have proved auspicious, for in progress of a small
time, it must have come to a wedding. Others have had their first views in a
Church, others at a puppet play, at dancing of the ropes, some at Green goose
Fair, many upon May day in the morning, which being heretofore sacred to Flor^^
(who was a sweet minion I can tell you) in pursuance of her ceremonies, have
had a green gown, which has brought things in it is due time, out of the
parsley bed; of him that had the view of the Temple, (for I cannot ensample you
in all) take this small account. The Amoretto was wont to take his stand at one
place about the pew, where sat his Mistress, who was a very attentive hearer
of the man above her, and the suitor was as diligent an eyer of her, for having
a book, and black-lead pen always in his hand, (as if he took notes of the
sermon) at last he got her exact picture. The Lady observing his constant
zeal, and quotidian pains (for she imagined that he wrote shorthand) could
not withstand the pious Rhetoric of his eye, by which fascination he first
transmitted the venomous qualities of his warm affections; then finding some
gracious returns of her bright luminaries, and favorable aspects, he gazed so
long sometimes, that he forgot his Table, till eye checked to his duty, he
scribled not a word of what was spoken. In process of time, he came to nearer
Colloquies, and they spoke as others do by their lips, whereby the Impulses of
his desires were so strong, that she submitted her self to this religious
servant, who, (after taking possession of her ensuring office) told her the
notes he took, and showed her the fairest lines, that ever were drawn in short
hand; the Lady seeing her face so well done, chid him for his hypocrisy, and
bid him abuse that place no more, but charged him to work on where he was,
until he copied out one like them both.

Sow Barley this year, and no Wheat.] Country people are abomination
superstitiously given to credit such kind of Artists. A seasonable Almanac
gains more reputation then the King of Spaines Bible with all his languages,
or the King of France, with more then his, or our late English translation,
with more then both. If the Calender say fair, wet, windy, indifferent, or mixed
of both, they will quarrel with the stars, if they make ^or good what Lilly
said, though in the point of the Eclipse, they think him a little contoxicated
(as they say.) He that made the day, is not once thought on, unless he agree
with the book, which is adored, if it prognostic a good seeds-time, and
Harvest-time, and those years most joyful, where our Ladies day (being
Rent-day) falls out late, when the Lady lies in the Lords lap; 2d for such an
Almanac. It is ordinary in the Meridian of London, for the wenches at an
Easter to refuse the Communion, unless the Apprentices assure them a fair day
to air their Festival cloths at Is^ington, Hogs-Town, or Totnam high cross.

He appeared one day apparelled like a Shepherd.] Our student has changed his
coat, he is of a black, become a gray Friar. O Love, what a pudde^ have thou
made in this world below? yea, and in that above too? if we will believe the
stories of Jupiters shapes and escapes, his cleanly conveyance of himself,
into the shape of Amphitruo, and thereby into Alcumena, was very neat, and of
all his Metamorphoses, the most probable, that of the Bull, Swan, and Ram,
are beastly lies; But for a Lady to be surpised (with I pray Jove, it be John)
makes her in the very fact a Lucreece, a Goddess of chastity, while Amphitruo
is made a Jupiter and takes one of his principal attributes, even Capitolinus,
which when he is so worshipped he wears horns, which signify not (as we
vulgarly imagine knavishly) but according to the Hebrew signification, light,
shining, glorious or transparent. This whining passion of Shepherds was very
ancient among the Arcadians, who were the first pipers that we read of, but
they made their nymphs dance after their music, two or three to a flute; for
the first age was Polygamou^, they were stout lads, and more than Cock-a-twos.
I wonder how the Don mist this praise of the golden Age in his Oration; I fear
I shall find him a Castrill or a Pigill, like old Chrysoftome, or else thus
transformed, he would have had her by hook or by crook.

He made the Carols for Christmasse day at night.] As good songs, no doubt, as
our Wassallers, or the Whitney singers tone upon those ancient Festivals. His
fancy sure could not be very high, where the subject and reward was but a spice
boul; but it took excellently, and that is enough, Don could do no more, and he
that wrote in contempt of minor Poets thus, in that Elegy, -- You might safely
swear,
This verse they wrote in wine, and this in here.


Very critically observed; and yet to see the fate of the times, some like him,
and some do not, some cry hey for Garzinton, and some cry, hey for H^rs^path.
Even as they like, 'quoth the good fellow when he kis'd his Cow.

The Villagers could not guess the cause of the two Students wonderful
change.] I can tell you of a stranger Metamorphosis, and of a Knight and an old
one, (who by his years was fitter for the grave than a Lady) Who
notwithstanding the silver Items on each side his face, and argont pendents of
his chin, was resolved to stumble in at the Lover hole, before he fell into the
pit, and so passionately pursued his affection, ( Hercules was not more
effeminate, when he turned Spinster to Cozen Omphale) that he shifted his
Velv^t Truncks, which was his customary wearing, and habited All-a-mode in the
long slopps, became a Monsieur of St Thomas Gresham, O strange Exchange^ Then
he cut off his reverend beard (which on Cato's face would have countenanced a
rattle) and smoothed his cheeks, (which ^he wind in fifty years had never
kissed) and with a bla^^-lead comb, changed the color of those hairs which
were then Senatorian, and like a silver snow had covered the reverend house ten
years beyond the Clymaterical; his close shoes altered into pumps, and he
that could scarce go without a staff, will now dance out of measure. He is
turned Masker, Actor, and Author of a play, composed of Love, and at once
personates himself, and is in act, Representative, Type and Antitype
altogether: And all this like our Chr^sostome, to win the affection of a most
delicate Lady, who to he^ beauty had wit also, and knew that a gentileman of
four and twenty, was better company than old Aeson.

He had a face looked like a blessing.] The context or words before will be
comment to these; for a word or two backward, you shall find him enobled for a
good fellow, thence you guess, in what degree of beatitude his face was, an
illustrious face, a glorious face, a bony face; or if you will have names more
known and to the life, a Robin Good-fellowes face, a Bardolphs, a Furnifals
Inn face, or a Bradwels face, which was the blesseddest that ever I saw,
wherein there was not room for another blesssing, if you would have studied it.
Our Hosts faces (if they have not the through blessing) yet their Noses commonly
are in the Zenith, and as torrid as if they lay parcht under the Sun, when he
enters into Cancer. Dangerous faces, to come near a Magazine, and as
comfortable and refreshing in a frosty morning, they smell well, (as the
English proverb has it) such a Nose is worth a double tossed in a pot of Ale,
and will make it whisse as well as a hot steel. It has other uses too, and
very serviceable ones. It was ones fortune to prescribe a direction to a
friend, (who was too impatient to follow it, being choleric of constitution,
and blessed in that part,) and it was concerning the fetching out a spot of
grease from a suit, which the party imagined, should have been effected by
brown paper and a coal, but the adviser said, with no coal (friend) only a
brown paper indeed, which being applied to the middle part of his arm, on whom
the mischance of Tallow fell, the patient, so I call him, though he proved
otherwise, asked, and what now? e'n lay your Nose close to it, (said the
Emperick) and it shall take it forth sooner then the best coal that comes from
New Castle. But the blade was Sr John Oldcastle, Duke Humphrey never raged so,
and made after the Emperick, whom if he had reached, he would have given him a
fee for his Counsel, as good as he could have told with his ten ends of his
toes. Thus you see that all blessed Faces are not charitable, for who, (but one
that will carry no coals) would have rewarded a friend thus for his opinion,
only in Face-hot presses.

Her Face had on the one side the Sun, and the other side the Moon.] I see
Peter is no kin to him that keeps the Keys where these Stars shine; what a
heavenly wide face was this? wherein the Sun and Moon must necessarily be
ever in Eclipse one to the other, the interposition of the Nose being but
small, and not casting shadow enough for a dyall, the Stars no doubt were like
beauty specks all her body over, and from her breasts downward, those infinite
company of little Luminaries made a milky way, whither we must referr the man,
(usually in the concave of the Moon) but now somewhat eccentrick; for it would
have spoiled the Moony side of her face, to have had the pourtraicture of a man
there. Beside the spoiling or crossing of the proverb, for the woman dyed in
childbed; but what of that? Sol and homo (as is aforesaid) generant hominem,
as was here done; homo being Latin for Man or Woman, which at this time was
born. But if the Man should have been in the Moon, it might have been Luna and
homo generant, and it had been enough to have set the Sun and the Moon, and
the Man in the Moon together by the ears, with old William the Man of the
house, about the Legitimacy of Marcela, which was the right Father; but they
both dyed, and she first, (as being the weaker) went to the old hole, and old
William stayed not long after, and indeed, according to Peter's relation, I
wonder the World did not end with her; for no doubt, but the Sun and Moon
were both extinguished at her death, and that is an absolute sign of the
dissolution of the whole World.

Her Uncle was willing to marry her, as soon as she was of age, but not against
her good will.] Marcelas parents dead, (old William and his Astronomia,) the
Priest her Uncle was made Guardian of this falling Star, which at her Mothers
departure to her fellow bodies in the firmament, dropped by the way. The chief
care for such a charge, the Priest presently pitched upon, advisedly,
providently, and pater-familiarly. It is a great improvidence in Parents to let
their daughters stay upon their hands like over-blown roses, till they become
contemptible. A seasonable application, and timely looking forth is best (says
he of Banbury) in his Bride-bush, which to tha^ purpose is very good, if a
thorn or two were plucked our of it: For as it is very good to provide, that
the childrens, (I mean the young wenches) t^eth should not be set on edge, so
it is too severe, if for a small fault, as the plucking of a crab, (for the
sauce of such folly is always verjuice) you make them taste of the Body of the
Tree. A short, but apposite tale I shall tell you, and conducing much to the
note; There was a Gentileman, who was very discreet, and searching into the
natures and dispositions of his family, and finding amongst his Philocleas and
Pamelas (his daughters, for their beauty some, and some from gravity might not
be denied these names) that one, and one of the least and youngest was ripest,
and more requiring then the rest; Husbandically provided first, that wanted
first, forthwith got a Principiis obsta, as they call it in Physic, or an
Intus existens prohibet alienum. The Virgin overjoyed, that her good hour was
come, could not contain, and be content, that the servants should invite the
guests, but her self would needs speak to some of especial familiarity with
her, unwilling any should forestall the news to those, whom she wished in the
same happy condition with her self; which when she had done to her play
fellows, (for she was not well weaned from that society) they wondered and
said, (good Lady!) Mrs Abigail, I pray how is it, that you are so forward, and
leap over your sisters heads: We should never have believed it, but from your
own sweet lips. Truly (said she) simpering, and with her hankerchiefe at her
mouth, it were presumptuously done, but that my Father, who knows me of an
egg, gave very good reason for it, for he said, (I know not what he meant by
it) that some eggs would hatch in an Oven, and that in hot weather, things
will not keep without salt.

Parents are not to bestow their children^ where they bear no liking.] To whom
it concerns this. The worldly Parents of these days, are rather hucksters
then Parents, and make markets of their children, Aquantum dabis, upon their
heads, putting them off to him that will give most, without respect of years,
or compliance in affection. So the Lands be coupled, the estates joined, the
parchments sealed, it is no matter whether the two parties come in any other
sheets. Like Sampsons Foxes, they meet, if ever, with sirebrands in their
tails, and burn up all that Patrimony (or Matrimony, say you which) that was
so unhappily laid together: Matches made in the minority of both parties, are
like those in a tinder box, for a short flame, not durable love, and go out as
soon. The Male commonly, is sent to travel half a dozen years, to know what
to do against he returns, and in the mean time (scholars in that school, take
too much, and turn over too many lessons;) he learnes more then does him good:
Sometimes (like an unfortunate Merchant) he brings home less then he carried
out, and if he dare examine his Cocquets, he finds himself a shrewd loser.
Miserable must needs be the condition of two so joined, especially, if the
Female have made experience, or was told by her Aunt or Grandmother, what
incombe he might have made in his travels. As unfortunate it is, when fifteen
joines to seventy, there is old doings (as they say) the Man and Wife sitting
together like January and May day, his Nose with Isicles dangling, and her
breasts as fire-bals, beating with a vigorous spirit, and never leaves the
trepidations, till she has got a Pericardiall Iulip, which she loves at her
heart.

She cast her suitors from her, as with a sling.] Marcela was not like her in
the Eclogues, Quae fugit ad salices, sed se cup it ante videri,
Who runs into a bush her head to hide,
But glad with all her heart she was espied.


She was a sullen Shepherdess, and meant to keep her virginity, till it was
impregnable for ought she knew; for if it be fortified, or rather fiftyfied,
it is as hard work, as the siege at Ostend; let it alone for me.

There is not one of the Beech Trees, in which Marcela's name is not engraven.]
Of these kind of Love-knots, the Arcadia is full, as Hide-Parke which will not
be so full, as heretofore; therefore happy those Ladies, whose names are to be
seen. As they would wish themselves in the bark-green, before that it was
enclosed, for it was impall'd before, and a price set of six pence a man,
twelve pence a coach; I believe it is the best penny worth this day in the
world, if there were but one season all the year, and that the Spring, But if
you ever come to these Beech Trees, you shall find excellently well cut by his
own hand, as the Monument of his true Love, and her cruelty: This insculpture
of our unfortunate Lover in Capital Letters.

CHRYSO -- MAR and STOME -- CELA. Sancho did lay himself betwixt Rosinante and
his Ass.] Sancho slept most of his story, only waked when the Goat-ticks stung
him, for flea-bitings would not move him. But for the sight of a lodging, no
man ever came near him, he provided against all winds, for he lay reversed with
his head to the beasts tails, so that when he turned North, he had the warm
blasts of Rosinante, and on the South, the Fuzzings of his own Asinego,
betwixt which two natural stoves (besides the unctious Lard wherein he
batten'd) he slept as profoundly, roundly, and soundly, as if he had lain by
the gentle, and sleep-moving murmurs, and ratlings of the silver currents, and
the sweet and refreshing gales of Zephire, fanning his fools face.

CHAP. V.
Fie, what a pudder's here! A man, no place
Will serve, but that where he saw his Loves face,
There he will lay his bones; e'n at the rock,
Where first he saw Marcela's hemme 'oth' smock;
Actaeon like, the fool was peeping then,
When Women cannot endure the sight of men.
I^st as if one a Lady bright should seize,
In that strange moment, when she^'s killing fleas;
Yet like Actaeon he would sain have borne,
Rathor then lost her, the fair sprouting horn.
The Nymph comes to the Funeral, and makes
A set Oration, which Don Quixot takes
Not by the ears, and yet it wrought so much,
That he the Lady saire does stout avouch,
And justifies her Nay to all fond wooers;
What will they have her, soon as they come to her?
So^^ Fire will make good Malt; she will do so,
Let 'um expect: what? a word and a blow?
Don Quixot, though Knight Errant, thought not sit,
Though she did want a man, to enter it.
TEXT.
THey saw six Shepherds more coming toward them in black skins.] It Is
strange the Don did not think of accoutring himself according to the equipag^,
a sackcloth, or black Goat skin, would have made him a complete mourner. But
it seems it was repugnant to the order of Knight-Errantry, which does appear
Az^^e and Sa^les, black and blew, or else in no colors; yet he might be no
unbecomming person there, for the Knight was a very dolorous object upon one
side, (you know how pitifully a lugg'd sow looks) and therefore being a very
lamentable spectacle himself, and a most pitiful spectator, you cannot
without manifest injury to his passion, deny him to be a man of as much sorrow,
(and a close mourner too) as any in the company.

This discourse thus ended, another began.] In vivaldo, you have pourtraicted
unto you, the ^orme of a wife Traveller, who studies men more then places, and
rides his company more then the way. He is like the winged Peregrine, the Be,
who sucks from every flower something, till she has filled her sweet bagg,
and laden her slender thighs with gummy balm, that her oars and sails can
hardly bear her up; when with her he comes to hive, at night he stores up his
days gatherings, and what is worth his observation, goes into his cereous
Tables, and what is not, pasles away at supper for Table-talke.

Since which time, never any Englishman killed a Cro^.] The Metamorphosis,
translation, or rather tranation of Arthur into a Crow, is not a Since in our
Ephemerides or Almanac; how it escaped (...) I know not, unless because he is
wait, and the other black. But (...) well (...) Spaniard, we will grant that
we kill n^ Crows to ea^, but to ^right themselves and Kit^s from our fields,
and such ravenous bir ^s from our gardens, we do; Barbarus has segetes and
culta Novalia (...);
Do^'^ you Remember (Mcors ^ace) Tilbu^y?
I do believe we plucked a crow with ye.


Or if you deny it, I am sure we slew abundance of Rooks, (which were birds of
a feather:) In 88. a year you may remember well, as also about the time of the
Powder^plot; for the infinite love and reverence we owe to Artlurs bird, we
gave the Crow a pudding ^r^wo, which were first very good links, and then they
were broiled for the birds better digestion.

(...) Eglamore with diverse others of that age.] Your Catalogue is not perfect,
(...) as if an expurgatorius were upon it. I could help you, if I w^r^ so
minded, but because stultorum omnia plena, let Don Quixot and this Comment
p^^ne the Basket; what matter is it?

Nos (...) and though we be not three, we are two; and vel Duo v^l Nemo, both
or none.

The Traveliers perceived he was none of the w^sest.] It is strange to see the
sagacity of some men, and their insight; though the Don though big, looked big,
and talked big (which is the only way to set off the simples) yet these A^ingdon
(...) (as they call them) th^se Caprit^os, the Merchants, had him in the wind,
and (...) him out to be a fool very handsomely, coucht under this notion, of
no^e of the wisest; in all ^aculti^s, in all pro^^ssions, you (if you be
curious and inquisitive) shall find some of these sor^ of people, that they
call none of the wis^st; and if you are given to strict observation, you shall
find others, who do not move out of door, but they lay their business, the
time, the place, the stay, the return, all so exactly and me^^^o^ically, as if
it were by a s^h^me: And these, when all this pains and forecasting is
bestowed, (though they will not be thought so) are none of the wisest; nay,
these critics and (...) s^rcrs of men's ma^ners, garbs, discourses, clothes, (I
knew one so punctual, that he could tell how many buttons his friends had to
their suits, and how many clocks; were in their bands,) are even as their
object, nay, some super-superlative, none of the wisest: I leave off this note,
with a worthy piece of indignation, of a scholar I cannot say, but of one who
wore a gow^, who hated a gentileman of such a house, only for this Reason, that
he was the first (for the other had lain long hid and obscure) who discovered
him to be a fool.

I do believe, the Monks of Char^er-house lived not such s^^ict lives as the
Knight-Err^^.] The Don is at his oration again, and by the length of them they
are ^ceron^an. I shall once more take the pains to run it into verse, and
(...) it is a question, as it were stated by the Don, that Errantry is a (...)
life then Monkery; we will suppose Vival^o for the Monk, and the Don in his
own person, shall by way of a short and pi^hie dialogue, canvasse the matter
over again, 'till convinced by the pregnancy of both reasons, you yield to
which your judgment shall incline.

VIVALDO.
Piety forbids to rail; I will be civil,
Though I encounter with incarnate Devil!
Knight-Errants to compare with Monks? what hopes
From our shaved Crowns, course coats, and girded ropes?
If one, whose hands are purple with manslaughter,
Shall think to be in Limbo Monks hereafter;
QUIXOT.
Father I say not so, i will never desire
To come to yours, or good St 'Tonies fire.
Enjoy your Limbus to your selves, I know
You do deserve enough for living so,
So barely, poorly, basely; yet for all that,
(Sure it is Gods blessing,) you're all very fat;
If that your Limbus be a fa^'ning fire,
Make have unto't, you will make a jolly Friar.
VIVALDO.
Not so much speed ( Knight Errant) you ran post,
But 'lasse you never read of Wandering Ghost,
Of a Knight yet uninterr'd, who sudden died,
And never men nor God have mercy cried,
And there may wander on the Stygian verge,
For want of money, to procure a derge.
We are content to live within our Cel,
Praying for such as you, who sight for Hell,
And in a desperate frenzy do such Deeds
Which puts us Monks unto our nightly Beads.
QUIXOT.
Father, we are for fighting, not for pray',
I have not said that thing this many a day;
Only Dulcinea help me, smile upon
Thy Don, and bless him in the action;
When Giant does lay on with stump of Tree,
Then deer Dulcinea, down upon thy knee,
And that is enough, that without word spoken,
Confounds all weapons, whether steel or oaken.
VIVALDO.
Is this devotion? 'twere a sin to smile;
Dulcinea help! how you your soul beguile?
You must invoke some other kind of Saints
As are departed, who did know our wants,
And feel them too, who livd cum-vobis,
And to those cry, orat' orat' pro nobis.
Pray Sancta Clara, Bridget, Frances Win,
And pray Loretto, against all my sin,
And pray good Katherine, that did wind thy wheel,
That I by fumes of drink may never reel:
O pray all Saints of ages and of Sexes,
Against all evil, that our soul perplexes.
QUIXOT.
What though I say no hymns, nor Ave-Maries,
I fast, and keep a diet like the Faries;
Sancho shall witness it to good St Peter,
That when I have to eat, I Am no great eater.
I Have read of Peter's sheet, and large provision,
But I was never in any such condition;
Sheets I renounce, and victuals I have none,
Sancho produce the Wallet; See, all is gone:
Who does endure so much? besides I Am battered,
Thirsty and lousy, galled, tattered and shattered:
Show me throughout the World so wo' a fight,
As I at present, and yet I Am a Knight.
VIVALDO.
I grant, you Errants are a ruefull Tribe,
Like wandering Jews indeed, (without a gibe)
Yet though you want from lasting, to e're-lasting,
You cannot call this a religious f^sting.
This is plain hunger, want of vict'-als,
Poor rogues, you would need be sent to some Hos-pitals.
But we a thousand Ave-Maries say,
And night by night, and day by day we pray:
We fast indeed, for though we have good Wine
And oil, and all that pampers up the groyne;
Yet in the sight and smell of a Full Kitching,
We to our Crosses go, Penance, and Breeching;
And what we do, that does the pretty Nun,
Up goes her trinkets too, sure as a gunne;
And when w^ have ^orti^i'd and tamed the flesh,
We feed with stomachs good, as they that thresh.
Which in my opinion, is a kind of Gentilisme.] I must fall to my notes again,
for neither in verse nor prose, sea or by land, high way or field, must a
Knight Errant be worsted; therefore the issue of the Poem lies doubtful, and
conclude them both with Et vitulo tu dignus and hic;
No quarrel upon any ones behalf,
They do deserve alike; Divide the Calfe.


Don Quixots Religion, though not his fare, is very like that of Ch^ur^rs
Physician, Whose meat was good and digestible,
But not a word he uttered from the Bible.


Knight-Errants have neither grace nor meat, unless it should fortune his
Ladies name should be so, then perchance when he fell on, not when ^e fell to,
Grace might be said. They fall upon food, and adventure (...), Car^iers and
Goates-flesh as ungodly, as we do upon Oysters, Mellons or raw Hartichokes.
There are few Christians of the order, they being generally Apostates, or
voluntary Mahume^ans, and subscribers to the (...): For according to the
principles of that fabulous book, they Knight Errant i^ from this world into
the next, with a (...) here, to (...) there, Toboso being changed pro Paradis^;
and his Dulcinea's twinclers enlarged to the full breadth of Queen Proserpines
sawcers, Turkish Paradise.
which the Lady Margery Owletia, at the largest extention, can no way compare
to.

If the Lady be in place, he turns amorously to her his face, etc.] In these
words, if you will, but they are too good for a neates tongue, or a Calves
head, being borrowed from that excellent play Lingu^, in Tactus his speech when
he was mad, and supposed himself Hercules: Omphale dear, Commandresse of my
life,
My hearts repose, sweet Center of my cares,
See where the mighty son of Jupiter
Casts himself prostrate at thy conquering feet;
Scorn not my voluntary humbleness,
But bless me with Commands.


Or if you will have our Knight-Mummers own words, which like Abel Druggers
ginger-bread, must melt out of his mouth before you can hear it, hear 'um e'n
as good as mine Host muttered over him at the consecrating of him
Knight Errant, out of his provender book of Ceremonies.

Toboso's honor, and Toboso's shame
Known unto none but me by thy new name,
Not to thy self; for thou poor simple wretch,
Can not conceive a name of that high fetch,
As great Dulcinea, and in Tobo-so,
Thou art so poor, it grieves me see thee goe-so.
The Sails of Giant VVindmils shall be smocks
For thee my heart, or it shall cost me knocks:
No linings can be cooler, nor no Fan
Used by the Persian or Mahumetan.
What prowess cannot obtain, Sancho shall steal,
Thou shall receive, and I will stout conceal.
Only thy countenance grant, grinne on thy Knight,
O show thy teeth upon thy Favorite;
Give a good gloss from thy strained goggle eye,
And as a ball from Canon shoot I fly.
There is no History wherein is found a Knight Errant without a Love,] A Knight
without a Lady, is like a Face without a Nose, a fiddle without a bridge, a
body without a head, a soldier without a sword, a Monkey without a tail, a
Lady without a looking-glass, a glass without a face, a Face without a Nose,
and so about it goes.

All Foyters, men of the sword, Hectors, Herculeans, Samsonians, are all of them
Pamphilians, that is, universal servants to all Ladies who have fair faces,
fairer fortunes, lusty Butteresses, and requiring gascoynes. Indeed, there are
a sort of men called Solifidians, such who have vowed to one single piece of
surpassing excellency their faith and services, and so are engrossed and
enclosed, and made several, who before were common. Of this order and rank was
our Don, who would be believed constant to Toboso, yet I suspect him, for you
shall find him running at sheep anon; I do no^ mean for hunger, but lust; he
loved mutton literally and metaphorically, as will appear by his pursuit of
Marcela, whom had he overtaken (after the Goat was digested) I know what kind
of pulse he would have had, that which they call Caprizans, and you may guess
the rest.

She is not of the Roman Curtios, Caios, or Scipios.] Her lineage is very
large and spreading, and infinitely branched (exceeding Justinians ^ ree, on
the negative line or side) but very thin, empty and lanck upon the positive;
I do believe she could scarce run two ascents without the help of a Town or
Parish, where her Grandfather was found, and for want of friends and
acquaintance, accepted of the name of the place, and it is very likely to be
the true genealogy, for by her bulk she must necessarily be imagined to
descend from some body corporate, left by some body politic, and kept by some
body Civil, or else- spem greg is ah nu^^ she was (for the Don has not yet
discovered her as she is naturally, or rather domestically endowed, but sets
her out in her crranticall titles, and the fantastical and imaginary
apprehensions of her future Queen-ship) she was I say, Aulica Coquinae, and of
that litter which is but a degree neater or finer then the turne-spits, if the
dog at any time was weary, cry a wheel, and she knew not whether it was her
turn or no, only she did it without side, the dog within, she by hand, that
by foot. Many of her kindred are knew not by the names of Cicely Bumtrinket,
Gillian of Winchester, Long Meg, Ione Easy, besides the Fustyloeggs, the
Dowdees, the Trollops, the Maukins, the Fussocks, the Trugmouldies, the Funcos;
all which were Fausen sluts, like Bartholmew Fair pig-dressers, who look at
the same time like the damms, as well as the Cooks of what they roasted.

Sancho Pancha did verily believe all his Masters words were true.] Sancho,
though he was not trained up to second his Masters lies, yet he had as good a
quality, which was to hold his peace and let them pass. Davus had no better
commendations then fides and Taci^urnitas, as says the Comaedian in Andri^. A
Spanish sh^ugg will shift off a lie sometimes as well as a louse.

This is the Body of Chrysostom, who was peerlesse, etc.] Now we must leave
fooling, we are at a funeral, and Chrysostomes body a spectacle of mortality
is before us, Signior Ambrosio likewise has a pastoral oration for his brother
Shepherd deceased, stain by the negative voice of Marcela, who this night is
to be railed upon by the black skins, in as lamentable noise, as the wild Irish
make their O hones. As for example;

O hone O hone! why would thou dye good Chryfostome? had thou not Sheep and
Oxen, I and Cowes, yea and red Cowes (whose milk is good against the
Consumption?) had thou no^ Orchard and Gardens, and sage in those Gardens?
which whosoever has and eats, how can thou dye? Was not thy Father and
Mother dead and left thee all, why will thou die? O bone! had thou not wit
more then all thy friends, neighbors and kindred? and why then would thou
dye, and leave us fools behind thee, but O hone! We will follow thee even to
that place where thou receivedst thy deaths wound, O hone! for a woman's
denial, O hone! did thou not know? yes, too well, that caeteri volunt, O
hone! or a whetstone, for my wits are very dull upon this melancholy subject.

He commanded me to sacrifice them to the fire.] What volumes of this hard
subject had this Loves-Martyr wrote? which after this fire, were never to see
light. It was well done of Vivaldo to endeavor the reprieve; for the vapors
of so much discontented, sad, melancholy stuff, might in an ill time affected
all the standers by, and wrought such sad impressions in their brains, that
the party that were single might have disavow'd womenkind, and then it might
have (had the example been followed) brought the World to a conclusion that
Age, and the parties married would have no doubt gone home, and for fear of
such unkindnesse, so labored to please their wives (for men do strange feats
when they are melancholy) that the numerous fruits of one nights benevolence,
would have so peopled the world, that Spain could not have kept them, though
it might contain them, and so put the succeision to seek new habitations in
the West Indies, who are as glad of their company, as of the Feinds.

Which had this title, A ditty of despair.] I shall change the name of it, and
call it the Ditty of Comfort; because I presume, though I do not desire the
same subject (that is, an unflexible Mistress) that I can make as good a one
my self. So when a Lady sees a face not of extraordinary symmetry, let her
call it a comfortable face, hers is as good. When a Sermon is preached not of
too singular composure, but plain and easy of apprehension, that also is a
comfortable Sermon, another man may do as well; and so for other things, as
your own application shall best serve.

CHAP. VI.
The Canzone of Chrysostom in Despair.
Give ear unto my Elegy,
Or shall I call it Legacy;
Let it be both: For in it I deplore
My own sad love, and charge you give it over.
My years, when first I saw that face;
(Had I never seen her nor the place,
Where bathing she set me on fire:
Strange! water should incense desire,
I had been happy) but my years
Bad me be bold, though my heart fears.
No such Orient Pearl Dian 'shed
From her pure skin, and drenched head,
When that the silver stream grew rich,
And found her water pearly, which
Dropped from the Goddess, and now Graces
Her Nymphs, and serve them for neck-laces.
Marcela as she bathed her limbs,
The enamored fountain standing seems;
And the Flee^ waters could not move,
Turned to a lake by powerful love.
The bows together twist, and show
That you and I ought to do so:
And all the birds in a joint quire,
Did sing her into soft desire.
In gentle murmures the kind wind,
Conveig'd into her ear my mind;
Which when she heard, she straightway dight
Her robes, and did her self benight;
As from the howling of a Woolfe,
And from the fountain as a gulf,
From all the birds as birds of prey,
From winds, as bands she flew away:
And as she unrevoked ran,
She thought each tree to be a man.
But I had engraved in thousand rinde^
My loves, which where she written f^ndes,
She barks (hard heart) the guiltless tree,
And so by proxy murders me.
Enjoy thy cruelty, i will fall
The Martyr of thy spleen and gall;
Triumph in scorn, 't shall be in vain
Relenting, wish me live again.
For by that rock i will buried be,
The emblem of thy cruelty;
Marpesia, lose thy craggie name,
Marcela is the rock of Fame,
Famed for the death of Chrysostom,
His life sometimes, but now his doom;
Thou lend'st indeed a thread, ab but
It was no sooner lent, but cut;
A face thou shewdst, aspring of life,
But in thy tongue there was a knife:
Soft as the Down of Swans thy skin,
But thy heart was adamantine.
Learn all of me, Shepherds be wise,
And come not near those charming eyes;
For if she catch you in the flame,
She Will hold, and burn you in the same;
Let her range on among the Beast^,
You Will find ^'th' Heard more gentler Breasts,
And make your suites to stocks and trees,
They will be moved, they 've Sympathies.
But this Marcela's only skin
Without, and patri^^ed within.
Remember what a dying man
Says, and the Can^^ns of the Swan;
When ever this cruel fair one dies,
I charge you her anatomi^e,
And when she is found, as I relate,
Such stone you cannot penetrate;
Lay her upon my open grave,
No other Tombe-stone I will have.
TEXT.
ON the top of the rock whereon they made the grave, the Shepherdess Marcela
did appear.]

See where our Cynthia shines, but hark,
Though the Moon shine, the dogs will bark.
Our Don and Rosinante both neigh,
Forgot is foul Dulcinea;
He would adventure a sound knock,
to change his Dul' for her 'oth' rock.
Ambrosio impatient at that sight, was able to compose the quarrels of
brethren, rather barkt then spoke, and in most bitter Billinsgate Rhetoric,
bespatters a Lady of most immaculate same, and firm constancy, as the Pedestall
she trod on, the rock: Bona verba, better words good Ambrosio, what, down
right Basilisk^, stern^ Nature, Merciless Nero, Tullia, who would have looked
for such N^ctar with Ambrosio?

I come not here (good Ambrosio) quoth Marcela, to any of those ends thou
say.] Marcelas speech is a pure defense of resolved virginity, vowed
Nu^nery, a rigid constancy, and obstinate resolution to gather nuts all the
vacation long, which are very stipticall, and the bodies that feed much upon
'um, costive, and seldom loose.

Our fair Hippolyta dedicates her self to the Forests and Woods, where
exercise and continual labou^ and variety, give check to all those paisions,
which a sedentary and lazy life are subject to. Spinning will not qualify nor
suppress those fancies so much, they are not allayed with a wet finger:
Carding can do no less, which (as it would affect somewhat,) our Ladies do
most intollerably ply. But Tib and Tom are not of the Wool-pack, nor those
stocks of the primitive good house-wifry. Though this life of Shepheardizing be
out of fashion, yet far better do they, who in remembrance of these rare
pieces of abstinence, busy themselves in rockwork, in Civet-baskets, in waxen
Fruit Trees, in making Adams and Eves even in wax, representing their state of
innocence, in framing Paradise, Babell, Jerusalem, Nin^^^, Troy, or any thing,
rather then setting up the other dozen, or wasting the week amongst young
gallants, who, to show their breeding, must los^ their money fashionably, pay
the box generously, and so they win, shall I say, or rather lose (for unless
they lose they shall be accounted hard-h^ads) the reputation of complete
Courtiers. To all of this Marcela is an example, and a plea, a pres^dent and
leading Case to all such Ladies (if any such there be) whose servants have
departed out of this world upon the same occasion taken, that Chrysostom did:
She in this eloquent speech, does (...) all refractory damsels, from the
least accessarinesse or lyablenesse of guilt from the ends (violent or
melancholy) of their puling, s^iv^ling, or Hen-hearted Servants. No woman is to
be indicted, as cruel Spinster, for the shortened thread of Tom Fools life; if
he dye or run mad, or beyond ^ea, or vow not to shave his Beard or powder his
Cock scombe, or ride in a Coach or Seda^, or go to Sermon (that is to wait
upon a Lady to Church) upon the Repulse, the Maidens, nay, the harsh Letter,
the Frown^, the Gloat, the Hung-lip, the Neglect, the Go-by, the Bannimus from
the Table, returned Presents Letters, Fancies, (all but kisses and Banquets) of
the most exquisite Marcela in the world. Oh Chrysostom, Chrysostom, thou were
Felo (...) Te; Thou did cast away thine own life, and dese^vedst to he
staked as well as buried in the open fields, for being such a Goose, Widgeon,
and Niddecock to dye for love: Of which sort before you shall find one in the
Bill of Mortality, you shall find ten thousand dye of Grief, and the Rickets,
which is a disease, when the head sucks all the nu^riment from the rest of the
Members.

I never gave any hopes to Chrysostom^ or any others.] Our brother departed is
to be blam^d more and more, that will take no Answer: she told him (in plain
English as they say)^ she could not love him or any one: What cannot be cannot
be: It Is bett^^ to go out of the house, than to be thrust out, and be laughed
at. But this Pagan Scholar would not believe a Woman in the Negative to her
own good, he had read no doubt of some one, who said, she would embrace Fire
or the Faggot, rather than such a One, and in a fortnight the Imprecation
forgot, she has been tied and bound up to that more abhorred stake. His (...)
ne cred^^ here failed, Marcela was resolute and stout to her Quanquam: not like
tha^ tergiversating and backsliding Lady, who desperately vowed and threatened
the Poniard, present death upon a libidinous assaulter, who notwithstanding the
apparent and instant hazard of his life, (graceless wre^ch) fell on and
stormed his peremptory desire, so furiously and inconsiderately, that had not
very much mercy been eminent at that nick of time in the Lady, the Assailant,
if he had a thousand lives, they must have been lo^t all. Such an
unvanquishable spirit no Age has met with, as was found in Marcela, who
without doubt was of Amazonian Constancy, and could have rather endured one
breast cut off, than a Child sucking at 'um: rather the Bows and Arrows with
the Man-like Quiver at her back, then that any effeminate shaft should come
night her Quiver: rather the Busk in upon he^ half way covered Legs, then
endured the lac't Pantofle, the silk Stocking, the buttoned Smock, or the sweet
bag at her Pillow, or a Pillow to her Downe-bed, or any bed but the Downs
themselves; where she lay and composed this ensuing Poem, to answer the
untrue, and unjust accusations of Chrysostom and his fellow Shepherd, netled
Ambrosi^.

MARCELA^ Plea.
I do appeal to all my Sex,
Whom tedious suitors hour^ly (...),
And chief to those (if any (...))
Under my vow of Chastity.
If none be found, then I (...)
Such as the Matrimonial
Nooze has caught fast, but gladly would
Be such as I am, if they could.
Is it my sin for to be fair?
TO have pleasing Fetters in my hair?
TO have an eye made for to kill,
Or to revive at mine own will?
And such a voice as Birds stand mute
To hear? and dye as on his Lute
Once fell the Nightingale,
And fainted when her voice did fail?
To have two ri^ing lips, yet such
A^ only know each others Touch?
A hand so small and snowy white,
'Twould serve to light you in the night.
A Breast where Azure veins are drawn,
(Soft as the Water, or the Lawne;)
Yet plimming by a generous heat,
That always by one Pulse did ^eat:
Pasternes upright, so small a (...),
It puts the Does, and Hindes unto't
To tread so nimbly o'r the Plains,
And tires the heavy clo^ted Swains.
Nature if these be crimes, I lay
On thee the charges of this day.
But if what thou did freely give,
I mean to keep, long as I live,
Pure and unsullied, as the Rose,
(Not tainted by approach of nose.)
Why am I blamed? Cause I Will not part
With these, by giving up my heart
Into another mast'ring power,
To crop at's pleasure every Flower?
If I decoyed a simple Swain,
Or gave him hopes to come again:
If I received a Gyrland, or
(When that I knew what he played for)
Would hear his baited Lays,
Or gave him either smile, or praise,
Let him appeal unto that smile,
And Ise no more his hopes beguile.
But when I Have told so often my mind,
Which you may read, if you're not blind,
Through my transparent skin, that I
Intend to live a maid, and dye;
If like this Chrysostom you pine
To death, it is no fault of mine.
I am and will be on my vow,
Answer my Riddle, if you can tell (...).
Had I submitted to thy Foolerie,
I must be false unto my self and thee,
If I that had vowed Chastity before,
Should marry, married I should play the whore;
For marrying to be chaste to thee I vow,
How art thou sur^, when I broke one but now.
It Is only she alone that lives therein with honest intention.] How now Don, I
begin to smell a Rat, if Marcela alone, if these honest intentions, what is she
of Toboso? This cannot be forgetfulness or incaution, for it was morning, and
he was fresh and fasting. On my life Dulcinea was no better than she should be,
pray heaven she were so good: yet it may be he spoke this somewhat hyperb^icall
(...) that is ^gnorantly, as the good chaste wife, who s^^pri^ed with a Quaeri^
from her jealous husband, who had heard abroad amongst his Neighbors, that
there were but two men in his parish that were not Cuckolds, could not stay any
longer, but forthwith repaired to his wife, and told her the st^rie, and was
very inquisitive and urgent with her to resolve him, whether she knew or could
guess who those two happy men were: The good soul not reflecting upon her
husband, or her own vindication, being secure at home, puzzled her self to
satisfy him of those abroad; but knowing how unhappily she was situate, and
confident of the truth of the rumors, she protested she could not possibly
guess who those two should be; which raised such a dissension betwixt them,
and her husband was so touchy for no cause at all given, that the good woman
was forced to the course her neighbors used, only to live a quiet life with
her Husband, who after he was come into the honest list, was more contented
than ever before; and his wife, by such Arts as her Gossips taught her, quite
rid him of all his jealousy, which in the time of her constancy to his Bed, he
was ever plagued withal.

Which Ambrosio said was to be after this manner.] But I believe Marcelas was
more proper which she engraved in the Bark of a tree, just against the place of
the Rock where the unfortunate Suitor lay.

Suffer kind tree this Epit^ph to grow
With thee, and as thy G^mmes do flow,
Into^be the Words, that none may dare
To take them thence, but see they are there.
EPITAPH.
Against this Tree does lie a Swain,
Who died indeed, but loved in vain,
Who hoped to have been Marcela's Lord,
But died upon a cruel word:
To whom I wished a longer life,
But not as be, to be his wife.
Yet if his Dust conten^ can have,
I Will ^ingle Ashes in the grave:
And when it is my welcome Turn,
What Bed denied, enjoy in the (...)
The end of the Second Book*
FESTIVOVS NOTES UPON DON QUIXOT. BOOK III.
CHAPTER I.
Swift as the Roe, Virgin Marcela flies,
The Don can only follow her with Cries;
But our Atlanta does not mind his Calls,
Nor has the Don or gold, or gilded Balls
To bait her flight: but both resolve together
To bait themselves, and let the Devil go with her.
The grass is Table to the Don, and meat
To Rosinant, who full was for a feat,
And lust full, scents the Mares Gallician,
And presently is for coition:
The laboring ^ades were not for wanton tricks,
But answer his Levalto's with shrewd kicks.
But Rosinant persists, and maugre packs,
He mounts (girt-burst) upon their skittish backs;
But the Yanguesian Carriers with Battoon
Did cudgel out of's side the salt Baboon,
And tamed him straight; where at the enraged Don
Enters the Lists, but had blows three for one.
And Sancho too was here a Combatant,
But you will know the issue by the plaint:
Plainiffs were both, both Sancho and his Master,
Defendants none, the Umpire is a plaster.
TEXT.
Traveling the space of two hours without finding her, they arived to a
pleasant Me^^w.] Marcela was too quick of foot for the Don; she that used to
chase the vvilde Boar, and ore-take the wounded Stagge, how was it possible
that an over-ridden Stallion, or a tame Ass should overreach her. Horse and
Asses tired, and soultred with the heat of the day more than affection they
flung their caps at her, (they had tassell ones in their pockets) and cried as
we do of a Hare escaped, let her go it is but dry meat. But the Meadow is got,
the pleasant smiling Meadow, but no Marcela to bestow a green gown on; here
is the pure and refreshing stream, but not Marcela, who used to dress her
sweet face in it, made more sleek, lovely, and glassy, by receiving and
returning those lines and imagery to those eyes which were only fit to behold
them.

They did fall to with good accord and fellowship.] Hopeless of satisfying
their eyes, they consult how to pleasure the rest of their senses; and (the Don
being maimed in the Organ of one of the chiefest) it was high time to provide
for the maintenance of the rest; -- Strato discumbiter Ostro:

The green Carpet was laid before them and they ( more graecorum, in their
lying down, not at this time in taking up, for they had no Caecubum) I may say
too more Brutoni, for Bos pro cumbit humi, they I say laid themselves down,
falling to it, hail fellow well met; Sancho proved the nimbler feeder, having
his nose seldom out of the Manger, which, the Don did not so much mind,
because he often gazed about for adventures, and did not follow his blow, or
rather his stroke, (for this encounter is of the Teeth) insomuch, that Sancho
was the Knight of the Meadow, though the Squire of the Highway.

Rosinante had a desire to solace himself with the Lady Mares.] Rosinante it
seems was not run off all his metal, he was backed to enterprises, and would
have had a Barriers with a Gallician Philly, which was a great error in the
Cephael-Errant, for he was by ordure of his horse-hood, to have relieved the
Lady Mares, (not as Spanish Iennets are begot, nor in that corner) who were
oppressed and overladen with heavi^ packs, and ought not to have laid more
sacks to the Mill (as they say) being the only horse of the only Lady-relieving
Knight now remaining in the whole world. But the Yanguesian Carriers (finding
the Beast troubled with melancholy) presently flew in to the assistance of
their Mares, who had hitherto (more then many rational creatures will do)
defended themselves from this foul ravisher with their heels. But now
Rosinante is at the stool of repentance, never was paure Brute so hampered for
wicked intentions, never such sharp blows for the gentle strokes that he
meant to his Galician sweetharts; besides that, he did carry the favors of
one of the goodliest amongst them upon his flank (as plain a Mare-shooe, as
ever was made by Smith;) these Battoone marks were too intolerable, (which
their Masters did accumulate upon his hide) till he lay down upon the grass,
worse tired with this wooden entertainment, then if he had all-abroud (as the
Scotch Kerle says) aw the Phillyes one after another upon the place.

Sancho at the second Peale is struck down, and the Don fell at his Coursers
feet.] Love me, and love my dog. It was a sign Sancho did not heartily affect
the Don, that he was so unwilling to relieve Rosinante from the Yanguesian
Giants; but he had reason for it, he saw their number, and the noise of the
weapons, from Rosinante's sides, made him provide for his own: Fear has a
quick ear, and though it was tickled with the government of the Island, (which
always buzzed in the hollow of it) yet he perceived it was a desperate causway
that conducted thither, and that he should undergo very strict discipline,
before he came to exercise any. And so it proved; for though he was spurred up
with hopes by the courageous inspirations of the Don, yet (alas,
notwithstanding he collected his full spirit) what were Hercules and Lycas
against more then twelve labors at once, or rather laborers? whom Sancho very
properly advised not to charge on foot, or indeed at all, or to engage upon a
horse quarrel, which would gain no credit in History, and especially if they
should be foiled; what a blemish would it be in the book that was to be wrote
of them? to see in a great Cut or Brass leaf, there Rosinante laid
breathless, and by him the Don, not able to heave a side or stir a limb, or
stretch forth a hand, and Sancho in woeful manner pictured aloof off with his
face to the ground, ashamed to look up to Heaven, or upon man or beast, after
this ignoble victory; Only the Ass, reserved to carry away the blushing
spoils of the field, will be seen in the piece free, grazing and leaping, and
as having more wit then three, contented himself with his pasture, not like
Rosinante given to lust, nor like both the fools (I mean as to this enterprise)
his masters given to revenge.

The Carriers with all possible speed, trussing up their loading, followed on
their way.] Fuga est pro culpa: A guilty Conscience is a thousand Judges,
Juries and witnesses. But who shall make hue and cry after them? who shall
raise the Country? It being done betwixt Sun and Sun, the hundred was to
pay for the Injury done by the Carriers, which were wont to pay for injuries
done to them: But it was secure as to that matter, for cantabit vacuus. The Don
feared no robbing, and as for their Brutes, they were not worth stealing;
Nothing was taken from them, the fault was in what was given them, and not the
hundreds nor ten thousands could take it off. Sancho more wise (for in
a^flictions he got experience) then his Master, (who, like his Cousen in the
mortar, never profited) remembered his Lord of the liquor at Feoblas, which was
much, that his head (so disordered) could contain so hard a word in it. But as
for the Balsamum Fierebras, it was at that distance, (as a Doctor of Physics
remedy was in time of present application) some forty or fifty miles off, but
this farther, not in Facto, (though as by the name appears) but in Fieri.

I cannot set a time for our recovery, but I am in the fault of all.] Statutum
est semel mori, the Don kn^w that; but as for the stati dies of a sickness,
the beginnings, declinings, perfections of any disease, herein the Don was to
seek as much as for his Balsame; but pares in culpa, pares in poena, like
Master like man, Sancho was cheek by jowle at dinner, and now he is jowl'd with
him after dinner. But confession is the first step to repentance, though a foot
could not be moved by either of them, yet notwithstanding it was real, for
here was contrition, (or rather attrition) also adjoin'd, and an absolute
resolution upon Sanchos part, never to play such a prank again, with endeavor
of satisfaction, and an Act of Oblivion to these Banguesian Carriers. There
wanted now the Monks of his former adventure to pronounce the absolution, and
the Don was fit for Heaven; and so he was without it (as to the matter, though
the form were wanting) yet he looked to get that Paradise purely by suffering,
which Sancho (unless at this time the purchase was paid for it) desired some
other way might be achieved.

Draw thou, and chastise them at thy pleasure.] DON QVIXOT very cunningly, but
nobly, would have entailed these inferior Encounters upon Sancho and his
heirs Male. Indeed dry-bastings, cudgelings, surcinglings were too mean for a
Knight, and more compatible with his Squire, who by often malleations,
hammerings, poundings, and threshings, might in good time be beaten out into
the form of a gentileman: For he was like a wedge now, or like gold in the
Oar, thick and rough, and no doubt, but these Yanguesians did but act the part
of Goldsmiths, who with much labor, polish, and surbish up the splendour of
rough-cast metals. After some few experiences of this G^ldsmiths-Hall Furnace,
the man no doubt would be far fitter for the government of the intended Island,
who in the shape he now was, cannot be esteemed proportionable for any
plantation, unless it were in the Antipodes.

What would become of thee, who do disable thy self in respect thou art not
a Knight, nor desire to be.] Here Sancho had almost lost a Hog for want of a
halfe-penny-worth of Tar. The hopes of an Island (and that no small one) rather
then complete his Errantry through blunts to sharpes, through surcingles, to
the garters and Zones of Amazones. The Don excellently well upbraides and
excites his coward-spirits, setting before his eyes (which were much benefited
by looking upon the green grass) how venerable, of what ^igh esteem among the
Romans the Veterani were, who were naught else but old beaten Soldiers. What
respect a Captain gains, who at his return views his Country, and she him,
with a face and skin as scarrified as that body before an Almanac, a sign
of what danger he has run through, as those are of the Sun passing through
the Zodiac: Then after his departure, to have this skin hung up in the
school of Anatomy, where every year, thousands of Ladies view the Monumentall
foreskin, with as much joy as did the Hebrew damzels, those of the slain
Philistines; what and how many legs has a Colonel (whom an honorable shot
has left but one to) in place of that? All eyes will look upon him, who has
lost one: Polypheme was more star'd at then ' Ulysses, and Argus, if ever he
had the fortune to see him, more wondered at his sawcer, then all his own
hundred of small eye-let-holes. Every man lends an hand to the Officer with one
arm; nay, our very enemies (after the hot disputes are passed) are in honor
with us very much, especially, if by some great piece of valorous hazard, (the
signs whereof are eminent and visible) they bear the Characters of their own
gallantry, and of success. Such Sancho was my ear, and ever will be
throughout Bisca^a, and all ears will glow, in memory of the blood I lost from
that. Do but recount (for I must speech out this timorousness from thy head
and heart) recollect with thy self I say, what honor a Ship has (senseless
of the thing done to her) which is famous for some singular Sea-service, the
watermen speak nobly of her, tell their passengers how bravely she behaved her
self at Lepanto, at the Golph D'i Venice, in the Mediterraneum, in the
Straights, at Gibberall Terk, amongst the Cypriots, the Candiots, the
Smyrniots, the Scyots, the Scanderouns, and many more Islands, where she has
taken in fresh, and whether the joyful natives run, as much wondering to see
her honorable Bark, as if a Sturgeon, a Sea- Calfe, a Porcipize, a shark, a
sword-fish, or Leviathan himself had been cast ashore, and could not retumble
his vast hulk into the maine Sea again.

The pains of the disgrace does not so much trouble me as the grief of the
blows, etc.] These Orations raised not Sancho's spirits a jot, nor his body
from the ground: Inso much, that he gave over the thought of the government of
the Island, and imagined he had taken possession of the Continent, where he lay
a Living Lease sealed upon the ground, yet not in case to molest any
Trespassers. For unless Rosinante could be caught again and his Ass, what
likelihood of any other Purchase, then this of the Turff? Rosinante was the
concluded Author of these last mischiefs.

-- Equo ne credit Teucri. Never trust a modest-lookt Stallion, your soberest
Jades are firkers in Corners, and your horse that says least is (like the
silent Sow) for Draft-Mares. But Sancho was resolved to humble him, if grass
and hay can do it; he is to be interdicted Oats and all Flatulent and erecting
diet for a Month; but had rem been proved in re, his mouth had been excommun'd
Provender for ever; for a lascivious futring jade could never prosperously
carry the chaste body of a Knight Errant through his Virgin-rescuing
Adventures. It is dolorous to relate in what variety of Agony he lay shifting
from side to side, and sometimes upon his knees, but nothing would give him
ease; and the sight of his Master lying in worse malady was double grief unto
him.

Tormentum miseris socios habuisse doloris. I know all these Incommodities are
annexed unto the exercise of Arms.] Play the Crab with me, and run a Note
backward: and for observation upon the place, I conceive that these
Incommodities were so heavy, that they conduced not to the exercise of his
Arms, Sides, Back, nor Thighs: all the parts of his body being in a parity of
suffering, not by compassion or sympathy, but by the proper anguish of each
particular joint and member. Otherwise some unexercised Limb (like the undipp'd
heel of his brother Myrmidon-killer Achylles) had been enough to lose the
whole man. For I can compare the thorough and Integral, and almost quotidian
poundings and bastings of the Squire and his Don, unto nothing apter and more
convenient, then the daily sowsing of that valiant Greeks body in the enchanted
Bath for Invulneration. Certainly if Glass may be so indurated by fire, that
it may scorn the force of the hammer, so verily I believe, that our Knights
parts would be stock-fisht, and solidated by continual contusions, threshing
and quassations, that in time they would be inferrible, that is, Sword-proofe,
Battoone-proofe, Cudgell-proofe, and Surcingle-proofe. Milo, it is known by
using to carry Calves, improved his strength to the burden of a Bull: So the
Don by bearing well and stoutly these Yangue^ian trials of skill ( Tyrocinia
merely militaria) in time would contemn all the injuries, nay the very packs
(if he were put to it) of all the Carriers of all Rodes. Atlas by such
stupendous burthen-bearing came to be Porter of Heaven it self, and Hercules
his supporter, that is, under-porter, and the Don (when his earthly labors are
to cease) in reversion to Hercules, Nemine contradicente.

The Wounds, friend Sancho, that are given to one by those Instruments which
are in ones hand by chance, do not disgrace a man.]

-- Mean Iliacis occumbere campis
Non potuisse, tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra.
Had I but fallen in Trojan fields,
Covered with Myrmidons rich Shields,
Where Hector lies in his blood graveling,
Slain by Achilles lusty Javeli^.
There was the honor of it, Sancho, to fall by Achilles his Spear, that was
Field-Honour. But to have a Pack-staffe salutation, it is not dishonor in the
Heralds Court of Knight Errantry. 'Twas no legal Combat (judge all Masters of
Defense) where the weapons are not named in the Bill, and produced upon the
stage. This was mere Chance-medley, and mis-application of tools. There is no
flaw, no shoulder-spraine, hip-shot, nor rib-rost in thy credit; there is the
comfort Brother, we are reputation-sound. A hundred of these (which however
Heaven avert) make but misdemeanors in Knight-Errantry, and can never amount to
an Attaindor.

There is no pain nor grief which Death will not consume.] Death (Brother
Sancho, now we go forward again) said the Don, puts a period to all
Travailes, all Adventures, and therefore necessarily to Knight-Errantry, it
self, and dissolves the Order, then which it were better that the Machine
Catholic should fall: For thereby so many plundered Ladies, abused Virgins,
oppressed Matrons would be left unrevenged. No, no, friend, let us to our
Brutes again: And for a concluding story about Death take this; An old lazy
fellow having over-burthened himself with stolen Furz-bushes, groaned more
under the weight than stealth, and even spent and tired, cried out, Come death,
come death and welcome: which spoke* comes in a gashfull, horrid, meagre,
terrible, ugly shape, Phoberoon Phoberotaton: That is Death, Sancho, a very
ill-lookt Fellow, worse than the Yangu^sians: and this Raw-bones demands of the
poor old fellow, what he called him for. The man looking up amazed, Nothing
Sir (said he) but only that you would be pleased to help me up with my
burden. So I say, Sancho, and do thou as I say: Let Death alone yet, and
saddle me for the Ass; that is, take me, and lay me upon thy Ass, better be a
burden then lie here for old Phoberon.

I do not hold this kind of riding dishonorable.] Sancho you may perchance
think it improper to behold me upon thy Ass hanging Wallet-wayes; but if thou
did consider, that I intend after the next glorious defeat, to be for Madrid,
and there to accumulate the Order of the Golden Fleece; thou would not much
strange that I do beforehand conform my self to the Ceremony, which is the
ancient'st Order in the world, and indeed was first belonging to the
Ship-Knight-Errants, the Argonauts. And as for the dishonor of riding, or
rather (as present necessity commands) bethwarting, or over-laying the Ass,
know -- Nay look, O look throughout the world so wide,
And each one rides the Ass, or the Ass does ride.


But Sancho you may reply, that is uncomely: It is so, if there were no more in
i^; but I have been taxed for want of Devotions by Vivaldo, therefore now I
will to them, and though it be Kim Kam; yet it is more then has been related
of any Knight Errant, and I will for future luck-sake cross all my Adventures
in this posture, as I lie even cross the Ass, that no Inchanters, Giants,
Carriers, or Windmils, may any more prevail upon us, and be assured, that
though I do not ad Sydera tollere vultus, yet my pains and moanes reach
thither, and I look downwards in defiance of all hellish Confederacies, from
whence they come: Go on therefore with alacrity, (good^Brother Sancho) for (if
thou could Prognosticate so well as I, who through all accidents look to the
end of my Intentions, and shape them good or bad for that design) thou can
not but perceive thy self already in the very way to promotion, being changed
from a rider of a poor Ass, to be the honorable Conductor of Ass, Horse, and
Man, to the greatest Castle now in sight.

So let them go, all in an happy hour,
Well met Fools, Jade, and Ass, One, Two, Three, Four.
CHAP. II.
Our Don is Inn'd again, O cry ye mercy,
It is a castle with him (as I hear say)
Three Ladies at a time (all well appointed,)
Wait on our Knight, who is with Grease anointed.
To bed he is carried, and without his supper,
Suppled with Kitching-stuffe from head to crupper.
'Twas ease and sleep he wanted, take enough,
Belly and back must not have Kitchin-stuffe
Both at a time; if that his bones were quiet,
His Belly was nor did cry out for Diet.
But O the Body that mine Hostess greased,
Three Women viewed the corpse, and not one pleased.
Great Bumps and Hillocks in his Flesh arise,
Like Hills thrown up by Wants, which want their eyes.
Such fruit the Fine-tree bears, but no tall Pine
Appeared, or a Top-gallant Masculine,
Which made my Hostess, and her pretty daughter
Take little pleasure in him, but of laughter.
The Asturian wh^re, much like an Africa Monster,
Came to his bed by chance, but he cannot once-stirre
Ought but his tongue, which brought our Warrior
Again into the clutch of Carrier.
Base and unmanly fellow so to do it,
To tread a right bred Horseman under foot,
Against all law of Arms, whilst Sancho Panck'
Does play the Batt'le on Moll-Tornes Flanck.
TEXT.
SAncho said it was nothing but a fall from a rock.] Our fleeced Knight, or
Knight fleece, not of the Fleece, (unless when he was laid in the Flocks) by
Sanchos nimble wit passes for Rupecadente, the Knight of the Rock, not that he
fell upon, but from; the Knight of the precipice more properly, or the Knight
of the Downfall, or the Knight of Ruin; any of those Attributes or Titles were
suitable to the Don and his Squire, the Squire of the Quarrie, or the Squire of
shrubs, or Squire of brushes, as you shall see every where about stony, rocky,
and craggy grounds.

Made a very bad led for the Don in an old wide chamber.] The uneasines of his
bed was nothing to a Heroes, that had made the ground his Pavillion. The
Emperors of Asia ly on quilts upon the ground, our Don lies upon the ground
abed, Feathers effeminate, and soft Flocks suffocate; bedcoards and boards are
the best flesh-firmers, Consolidating and Contabulating his Body of Errantry
into a gum and moving Mummia, which was first made of the Mauritanian
Knight-Errants, and thence derived to the Spaniards.

The Hostess and her daughter anointed him all over, etc.] The Asturian held
the Candle. --

A fit servant to hold it to the Devil. By the benefit of this light they saw
Monstrum, horrendum, ingens, cuique est Vn'auris Adempta.

These Maukins were not so modest as the good Lady Prioresse, when the search
was made amongst her Nunns for one, who had under that disguise made the
handsomest amongst them, horribly forswear her self. And at the last, coming
to the person indeed, who was the wicked cause of the breach of her vow, when I
say they came to close, and hot-hunt, even to Astianax to the privy search,
notwithstanding that his ti'd up Astianax was so fierce (like a muzz'led dog)
at the sight of the beauties, and fellow searchers, that he struck Madam
Prioresses spectacles off her nose; yet I say, the grave Matron and her fair
assistants did not, like these impudent heildings, stare upon the violation of
the Conventicle, but with great care, laid their hands to their eyes, and
through the crevises only of their fingers, saw (to their great grief, how
rash and inconsiderate such vows are upon better meditation and second
thoughts. But here was no such encouragements, yet they did Hog-grease his
body, and smiled and twitter'd at the bumps in his flesh, which was like a
bruised Pig, (but not so white) splotch'd all over, or like a moldy Cheese,
where three parts are blew and vinnow'd, or like a musty pie. The Hills and
Dales in his body wasted her spike-nard extremely: Indeed, he was more fit to
have been delivered over to a pla^terer, who with a shovell or two of mortar
and a trowell, would have daubed up the gaps and Cosmas of his dilapidated
Carcass; that done, to a Carpenter to have new planckt him, his muscles were
so extended and contunded, that he was not Corpus mobile; after that, to the
joyner with him, to shave and smooth the knobs made by the Yanguesian Rockers;
and after that, a Mason and other Tradesmen, for he reparation of the Oeconomie
of his whole body, which was all out of order, both Timber and Stone-work.

It may very well be said my Hostess daughter, for I have dreamed that I sell
from a Tower, and could never come to the ground.] A Tower with Pinacles I
believe, and there she held, for she fell upward. This slut recites the
dream false, and in her own person, when it was her Amorosos, the Curate of
the Parish, who being often in hopes (and sometimes gratified) with a nights
lodging, dreamed that he fell into a Well, where he went down, and he went
down, and down, and still down, but he could never come to the bottom; which
afright awakened him, and upon the next motion, he moraliz'd his Fable of the
Well, and found himself in puteo Sans Fund. Her Dream as it is in the Arabian
Copy, was of catching at the Pinnacle, Pinnacle after Pinnacle, as people that
are drowning, do any thing they can lay hold of.

Know then sister, that a Knight Errant is etc.] M^ntornes is the Monster of
this Castle, which I marvel the Don did not (though naked) assault, as
Hercules did any living thing, when he run mad in his shirt dipped in the blood
of Nessus. She was a more rare sight, then we exhibit at Bartholmew Fair (take
in to help it the reaking, sweaty Rouncifolds of Py-Corner too) yet this Beast
Sancho calls sister, (perchance both of a litter) she was a sow of the largest
breed, if you look upon her paps, and if Circe had lived in her time, she would
have used no other Incantation for the Metamorphosis of men into swine, then
the stroakings of her dugs, which would yield (after she had taken the rennet
of a brimming) as much as a Dutch Cow. Upward she was Elephant in head and
ears, but not so docile, not so wise as that Creature, nor so serviceable; for
then Don Quixot would have absolutely renouncd Dulcinea, and took no other
Lady then this, who could carry Castles upon her back, as fast as he could take
them. Her face was flat, and very much like an Owls, if not more Oulebie, and
her Nose adunck like an overgrown Eagles beak, her voice, and that melodious
birds, much alike. Her Belly of a capacity for a Cellar, two Stands of Ale
might find room therein, and a century of spickets; yet this younger sister to
her at Heidelberg, is enamored with the name of Knight Errant, and desires to
know more of his nature, which Sancho describes so villanously, (as if he
suspected the Dons inclinations) and intended (if their bellies did not deny
the Banes) to join issues with her himself: yet take the Description, 'twill
serve for Future times as well as these.

A Knight Errant, is (as you see) a Creature bruised, basted, swadled, greased,
bedridden and fit to be sent to Madrid, to the house of Bethelem.

Yet whom, thou see thus vile to night,
To morrow is a Prince, or some such wight.
Sitting up in his bed as well as he could, he took his Hostess by the band,
and said.] The Hostess having suppled his joints, that he is able to sit up,
Grateful and Graceful man (as she made him) the Lard of Mancha, or the
Liquor'd Knight greases his fat sow, that is, gives her the oil of Mancha;
Courtly stuff for hers of the dripping pan. And Inde toro loquitur gravis ursus
ab alto.

Most gracious Lady, so y' have the Lord
Of Mancha, for no cost of oils you have spared;
Before I was illustrious, but your kind
And gentle hands have made me so behind.
Lend me your daughters hand, 'Ide handle her.
Ah girl, art thou a match fit for a Chandler!
If my hard hearted Queen should vamp to Charon,
A Boat for her, a Chariot for thee, Faire-one.
Now by m'e anointed Flesh and Bodies glue,
(Such Aromatic aires there are but few;)
I Will stick my Dear to thee, and cling withal,
As fast as ever Tantoblin to a wall.
This said with emphasis, as much as his collected Spirits would give leave,
with patheticall looks now upon the mother, then the daughter, then
Maritornes. Our buttered Westphalia gave Sancho order to inform them further
of his Worth, Country and undertakings, and looking for no applause to his
Oration, he slid into his bed like a hogshead down a soap'd ladder. His bed
was full of holes, so that the Flocks broke through the breaches, and stuck all
about his fulsome and unguentous Body in such numbers, that he suspected
himself to be infected with the swine Pox. That thought, and the fear of a
Rat-encounter kept him waking; For he was baited with stronger allurements then
tosted Cheese, or rusty Bacon.

The Carrier and Mary Tornes had agreed to pass the night together; a good
wench, if she promised, she kept her word.] This Asturian golph was better at
keeping her word then her honesty, and of all words, she never made good her
nay, if she could remember that ever she gave a denial. She was true Touch, a
word and a blow, say and hold, touch and take, happ, be lucky, strike me
handsell, kissing and clipping, laugh and lie down, and hey then up go we. A
Lady that very well deserved to be brought to, and attended on daily by two
able and lusty Furcifers or Squires of the Body, at that famous Castle called
Bridawelia, where amongst Justice Quamdiu's Seraglio, she should work at the
merry hemp post, and twice a day the foresaid Squires of the Body should
Flebotomize her salt Corium, till all the wanton blood flowed out at the
lacings of her flesh colored Wast-coat.

Don Quixot lay with both his eyes open like a Hare.] A thousand fears,
fancies, Chimaeras keep our Don not only like a Hare in his eyes, but his
brains also; which being as vertiginous as a whirle-poole, presented ten
thousand whirlygigs, Windmils, and Turne-pikes to his errantick soul; so that
by the very strength of Imagination and exalted fancy, he would make sallies in
the bed, and sometimes out, and routed all the Flocks out of the dilacerated
Tick, which hung about his glu'd Body, like Bees at a swarming, or flies got to
their winter quarter, thousands in a place; he was all over like a hillocke of
black-berries, or small Toadstools, here and there they were thinner about his
legs and arms, like Sheep-dung in a With, if a man may be compared to a tree
reversed or unrevers'd. Quixot is a Mulberry Tree; look upon him now, and you
will take him for no Knight Errant, but an arrant Shepherd with all his Flocks
about him.

While he was thus troubled, the Asturian wench entered the Chamber in her
smock, and the Don caught and grob'd her smock, etc.]

Fumidoque supervenit Uglee,
Ugly Torneadum fuscissima.
Whilst the Don with his Flocx-crump-shoulder was acting Richard the third, in
comes this, not Ghost of Jane Shore, but of the very Common shore, the
Quintessence of Tantoblins Field, and is the nasty prey of his high employed
thoughts, raised for the embraces of the Lady Quintanonia, and supplied by the
Lady Pentassle, or the fulsome Lady Boggardina: whom, as soon as he had
incircled in his Arme-twigs, he might have roared out upon, as loud as the
gentileman of the Ins of Court, who coming out of the country on a night, when
the boggards were to be cleansed, and having no notice that the place was
unplankt and laid open, being called thither by an expellas, extrudas,
exenteres, ne admittas, a writ in that case very necessary, fell into Cocytus
amongst the pickle, he came to augment, where floundred extremely and uncouthly
accoutred, yet he resolved to call for no help till the like mischance
ensnared some body into that enchanted Castle, which was the first that ever
was made under ground. At last a stranger (who with good Ale, had mellowed and
lenified his intestines) came wadling with a load of Sacrifice to Stercutius,
and ready to present to Cloacina, fell into the Arms of his Senior Yeoman
Feuterer, who overjoi'd more in his companion then the place of meeting, swore,
and art thou come? Welcome to the Wedding Dios Diablos! the place, the fall,
the squash, the hug, the Salutation, and intolerable Incense, did so
confound our Votary, that he could not contain, but uttered Grobian returns
for the kind entertainments of his friend Marius, in the Lake of Minturdum:
Who, after his belly full of laughter, cried out for help, which suddenly came,
and in an instant they were dighted, and came cleanly off, though they went
fowly on. These were adventures of A-jax, which none but these two
Knight-Errants (for they missed their way) ever attempted, except our Father
Ben and his Argonauts, when they vent'red in an open an untilted whirrey,
through the Common shores of a springtide; but how they escaped the dangerous
gulf of Mala Speranza del Arse-holo, you may read at full, in that most
celebrated Poem which is styled A-jakes. But our Don could not distinguish a
Tantoblin from a Pancake; but extracts and sublimates out of his Balneo Mariae
de Tornes, (whose exhalations were no better then those of a dunghill) the
fumes and evaporations of a Civet Cat: For exsensed (as he used to be) and only
a man of Fantasy, he conceives on the one side of the Asturian, he touches
balm and dissolved gumms, when his fingers were in a tar pot, and the smell
more odious than that of soap-boylers; and on the other side, for the amorous
fool was resolved to survay his whole Quintanonia, he imagines he feels
Ginger, Nutmegs, and the cordial borders of Mace, and such oriental spicery,
when he was knuckle deep in the bogs and quagmeirs of Old-Lingia, and the
bristles of a wild Boar or Porcupine, were more soft and pleasurable then her
filthy Furrz bush.

I could wish to find my self in Terms, most high and beautiful Lady.]
Which speech because it is but short, I shall give you in Meeter.

Lady, whose bodies bright (for ought I know)
As far as touch can judge, I deem it so;
How shall I recompense these high shewn-favours?
How ever re-incense you for these savours?
I do small out what your good Ladyship
Would have, by the applying of your lip
To mine, that as our sugared lips do touch,
So other parts (as well) may do as much.
But our Yanguesian Varlets, Lady trust me,
The whoreson Rascals have unfram'd and burst me;
No limb is sound, no joint, the smallest rustle
Against my body, vexes every muscle.
Your pardon therefore beauty, most desiring,
That I reply not to your dock requiring;
Besides, and 'twas well thought on by the mackins,
I have a Lady too, who longs for smacking.
To you, who only can her parallel,
For softness, plumpnesse, roundnesse, and for smell,
I may impart her name (there he kissed her,)
And there he whispered, call her (Madam) sister,
Sister Dulcinea; were e't not that, no doubt,
And all my Aches, we would have a bout.
The Carrier discharged so terrible a blow upon the Knights jaws.] Jealousy
has a quick ear, and the Don (though he whispered his soul intents) was
overheard by the Carrier, and over-believ'd too, for he verily did conceive
that Maritornes had made a pack of the Don, and taken him up Incontinent:
wherefore like an errant Stone-horse, (deluded and detained from a leap) he
throws about, kicks his consort, her Knight Stallion, and leaps upon the Don,
and tramples upon his Valiant Body, and kneaded the Mill-ground Knight, as if
he meant to make dough of him. His bed (but that it fell with the weight) had
been the softer for it; the Flocks were never so well turned since it was an
Inn: the Don was blooded in the mouth as he had been pricked for the staggers,
and the Flocks clung to his chops so artificially purp'led, as they had been
Mulberries indeed.

The wench, seeing her master, ran into Sancho Pancha's bed, who stepped all thus
while soundly.] If one will not another will, Quiddere blunt qu^th the old Woman
to the young man, who complained that his wife refused benevolence; which is
the corruption of caeteri volunt. Maritornes expects retaliation from Sancho
whom she greased with her own hands, and now would be repai'd with oleum
Anthropinum Hypogastrio applicatum, or at leastwise if his lamp were dry, she
desired shelter under his Abdominous pent-house, till her Masters Inquisition
were eluded. But old drowsy pate slept very soundly, except that now and then
he groaned extremely, being hag-ridden by the Asturians incumbency, who having
gathered her self in a circle about his umbilicall hillock, she had imagined
by her agglutination and natural Incantation, to have raised the spirit of the
adjacent coppice. But her Master not finding her with his Lamp and by the fire
that sparkled from his eyes, endeavored to reach her by the ear, calling her
by her propet, as well as common name, Whore where? Where whore? where art thou?

By this Sancho awaked, and feeling that bulk, gave Maritornes many blows,
which she exchanged so trimly.] The noise awaked Sancho, now eased of his
Ephial^es, though in a swea^ an hour after. But his difficulty of breathing
was supplied by the motion of his Arms, for he entreated his unknown, unseen,
but not unfelt bedfellow, so roughly, and so rudely, that she could no longer
brook these unmanly returns for her warm and gentle Bumme, and Belly-pats,
and defrauded of her hopes, and exasperated by contrary blows with Feminine
fury, she multiplied her clod-fists so frequently about the muzard of him, and
thump'd his hulks hide so vigorously, that she made him bownd from the bed,
which proved unto her great disadvantage; for as soon as Sancho got up, down
went Maritornes, and being cast the wrong way to her desire, Sancho beat all
manner of Marches for a quarter of an hour upon her drumme-head so loudly,
significantly and perfectly, that it was rare encouraging Music to the three
Matachin Combatants, the Carrier, the Don, and mine Host, who continued that
tripartite fray somewhat the longer, excited and stirred up by the Marshall
sounds and loud claps of her tail, passive and active.

The Carrier perceiving by the light of the Candle, which the Inn keeper
brought, the lamentable estate of his Mistress.] Had not the ray of the Candle
betrayed to the Carrier, whose drum beat all this while, poor Maritornes had
been flatted in the hanches, (as if she had been beetle-beaten to be laid in a
pasty.) Sancho had almost levelled her extuberancies, when the Carrier came to
her rescue, and gave Sancho such a sound and expressive souce on the ear, that
it admonished and chastis'd at once his sauciness, for daring to come so near
his Mistresses Sowce-^ub. The Asturian was a stout brand-strops, and though
Sancho mauld her Cascoines, till her feathers were about to fly, yet she never
cried out for (though the Carrier proved her Man-Midwife) help at her delivery.
The Scene of this various Tragedy calls to mind the song of John Dory,
personated and well performed by a Company of lusty shoulder-thumpers, who
discharged the mutual thwacks so stoutly, that they make a noise, as if they
were beating of hemp. The miscarriages of this Love-Scene, turned into a sad
and lamentable Catastrophe, calls to memory the story of an Outlandish
Peregrine, or Traveller, who having seen most parts of this Nation, came at
last to that famous University of Oxford, where being infinitely satisfied with
the beauty of the place, the magnificence of the Colleges, the discipline,
habit, and order of the Students, and above all the famous structure that was
then almost finished of Sr Thomas Bodleyes Library (not inferior to the
Vatican) and since enlarged from a T which was its figure, to the from of an H.
he did confess abundance of contentment, and resided long in the place, which
though he liked very well, yet there was something wanting to him, for the
pleasing of Scaliger his sixth sense, as he calls it. And coming from, and
having been born in hotter climates, he would use to say, that those Countries
were better furnished with she- Nurseries and Seminaries of no Religion, and
virtue, then this colder Island: The Popes Seraglios were very profitable and
necessary Refrigeratories for the constitutions of the men upon the place. But
one day passing through the street, with his Interpreter, of whom he enquired
the name of every place; at his return to his lodging, entered into a
Table Book, what instructions were worthy the notice. Amongst the rest of the
lanes, he remembered, one was called Seven deadly sins-lane: Which place he
marked and diligently observed, that he might find the way thither, (when
occasion served) without his guide, which not long after was put in practice,
and one evening he repaired thither, and as well as he could in his half
English, he required in this Deadly-sinnes-Lane, whereabout was te House of
Lust, pray tell me te House of Lust; scarce understood by the Inhabitants; at
last he knocks at a door, at which a sharp nosed eager Woman came, unto whom
he said, Madame, is dis te House of Lust; of Lust, you rogue, said the Woman?
having in her hand a broom-staffe. (wherewith her Husband and she had been
deciding the controversy for the Breeches,) and laid it on with that force,
that she gave him a broken pate to his broken English; whereat the stranger
stood plaguily corrected, and crying her Mercy, that had none of him, said, I
be mistake Madame, dis be not te house of Lust, but te House of Wroth. Now
apply all; so it fell out out here, Maritornes thought to have made a
vaulting-School of this Chamber, and to her abominable grief it proved a
Fencing School, where a Prize was played, and she a great part of it, at never
a weapon that she liked.

But the Officer seeing that he, whom he held fast by the Beard stirred neither
hand nor foot.] Never had any Knight Errant such unfortunate Inaugurations at
setting forth into the Field of Honor: See, see, how he lies, as if he had
finished all his labors in the Repository of Gallantry, flat on his Back in
his Helmet; just like the Knights Templars in their Arms, until this
intruding Officer disturbed him, composed in his Coemit^rium, which was an
unpardonable affront to a Knight Errant Dormant, to have the handle of his Face
Couchant, so uncivilly treated. But Fear and former pain, keeps the Don
politiquely Insensible, and stiff, so that his counterfeit death saved him a
real killing: For the Officer imagining him so indeed, cried out Murder,
which dismissed the three other assaylants to their several Quarters,
Maritornes worst contented then any, though her haunches were never soundlier
clapped in a night before, which shall serve for the plaudit to this Chapter,
being one of the merriest in all the Book; and so exeunt.

CHAP. III.
Mischief and Love do mix, the Ladies daughter
Is one while to be dubbed, and then Manslaughter.
Murder, and tickle me; One Face which keeps
Two Cheeks, one^smiling ever, 'tother weeps.
A Tragick-Comedie of errors, where
A kiss of the lips procures a cuff of the ear.
Tantalean Torture, and Sisyphian
Apples and stones do play: the oil and pan
Now hugged and hagg'd by an Asturian Whore,
Then straight way battered by an Enchanted Moor;
(Or else her Sire the Devil.) Sancho come,
It is high time to make our Balsamum;
Go, get me these Ingredients, such as Aeson
Renewed from Winter, unto vernall season;
Such as the bearded son of the Aes^ulapius Apollinie imberb^s barbatus
fillus.
smooth-chinn'd
Father Apollo used and medicin'd:
One who had broke his neck in twain with hunting,
('It Is not so bad with us yet, though we are grunting:)
And made him new again, another man,
So like as Lamp to Lamp, or pan to pan;
Only a name he gave him (as 'twas decent,)
As I my self have, at this very present.
This Balsamum eclep'd Fierebras,
All Aesculapian tricks does much surpass;
Nor Galen, nor Hippocrates did know it,
Nor John Pontaeus, he full far would blow^^
Even into England, where brave Palmerin,
Had he (...) happy, or so skilled had bin,
To Have known this precious dose, nor be nor's horse,
For all incounters, had been ever the worse.
TEXT.
FRiend Sancho, art thou asleep sleep thou friend Sancho?] Such kind of
Tones as these the Vmbrae use, when they call upon Charon for a Boat. But
Hector (nor any of his name-sakes since) in such a pitiful case, so codled
ever came to the Stygian Shore, as the Don and Sancho, if before the
application of the Balsamum Fierebras, they should be sent to Pluto for a
token: For their bodies were bowed and so pliant, that you might turn them
upon your finger like a piece of Barbary gold. By the dolours and fractures of
their bodies, you may think them below the condition of men, but by their want
of meat and no sleep, not inferior to the state of the Gods: -- Vox homines
sonat. Such a shrill Note gave Abel Drugger, when after a nights expectation in
the Privy-house (his gagge of Ginger-bread dissolved) he was to crave a
blessing of his Mother the Queen of Fairies, and her Ti-ti-ties. But our Don
and his man were a while among the Furies, though some part of the night he was
(but not dancing) with a Pharie, but in the Rings.

A hand joined to some Arm of a Giant, gave him such a blow on the jaws.]

This Giant Carrier would have been more merciful to his hand, if he had
known, against the jaw-bones of what creature he so often ding'd his fist, and
Maritornes likewise would not have endured the adventure, if she could have
suspected that the issue of her nights dalliance might have proved a Mule, as
by the fireside it would have been very visible, however the partus sequitur
ventrem, might a little assimilize it in the Crupper, to the Flanders breed.

Be not grieved Friend Sancho, I will now compound the Balsamum Fierebras,
which will cure us in the twinkling of an eye, etc.]

Hei tibi quod nullis, Amor est Medicabilis herbis. Though in those innocent
times, Philtrums, Love potions, Nutmegs, suppled ( sub Hirco Alarm;) nor the
blood from two opened Orifices of Corydon and Phillida intermixed, nor twists
of hair, nor legs, nor any other Fascinations were known; yet something of
high concernment, and great prefit was discovered, and (as an Antienter Author
has it of that Nation, then Cyd Hameti Benengeli) by Priapus himself, who was
the greatest Herbalist in the World, and the Tutelary genius of all Gardens,
and handsome Plantations: This Phutologicall Deity (I say, or rather the old
Arabian) being enamored of a Smiths wife (that was usual amongst those powers)
who came constantly to his Quarters, to gather Sallads, who looking many times
on, and with good liking upon the portraicture of this high-mounted Genius) he
understood her meaning (as they say) by her gaping and discovered (by way of
recompense for her favors) the Secreta and Arcana Herbarum, which the fond
fool revealed to her husband, and he upon his deathbed to his brother, which
was the first Catholic Kings Farrier; And it is credibly reported by my
Arabian, that he chose him a Venus out of the sisterhood of the Mancha, from
whom this Opobalsamum as well as the Don himself was traducted, as by his
looks is most evident, that he was originally descended, not of the Fabri, (or
Fabritii) Lignarii, but Ferrarii; for he did often account himself of the
house of Ferrara, and might very well. Thus by many mean conveyances this rare
Secret was at last lodged in the Family of Quesadas, Quixadas, or Quixots, as
is aforesaid, that is all one: And this derivation I have been somewhat more
curious in, because it might be wondered how the Don should come to the
knowledge of such a Rarity, and this same search has not cost me hot water (as
they say) but what is more dangerous, it is fetched out of the Fire, and if you
please to cast your eye Anagrammatically upon the name of the Balsamum, you
will find Convenient Rebus Nomina saep ^uis. And Fier-ibras, though the latter
Termination may make it supposed otherwise, yet such ends signify nothing, but
the first is material, and shows assuredly that it came from the Fire, or
rather men of Fire, who were the Vulcans of the Times.

Sir, said Sancho, is not this the enchanted Moore?] Sancho is very much afraid
of this vision, the fellow walked like old Ieronymo, a distracted Spaniard; And
with his Lamp in his hand, as if he were speaking his words; Who calls Ieronymo
from his naked Bed?

Negromancers will not suffer themselves to be seen.] Right Don. Negromancy is
Deceptio visus: Do you think that Faustus or Vandermast were discovered when
they took the Bowl out of the Emperors hand, as he was about to lift it to his
head: A voice indeed was heard, Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra.
Nor was Bacon ( Roger Bacon I mean, when the Brazen Head thrice spoke) ever
seen, or in that study, which until this day is called by his name. But these
were great and deep Scholars, and you know the deepest waters make the least
noise; your Rattle Heads keep a noise, when your full Hogs-head will not sound.
You have heard of Gyges ring, you know Gyges was never seen all that while; and
you have heard of Gyges his Lady, nor was she seen ever at the running of the
ring, except when her over uxorious Husband showed her naked to his prime
Favorite, who ashamed of the spectacle, never left till he got opportunity to
cover her nakedness.

Is it the custom of this Country you bottle-Head, to use Knight-Errants after
this manner.] The DON had a plaguey wit, and guessed by his head, what
employment the fellow was of. Now, whether he meant of those sort of Bottles,
where Duke D' Alvas Face is so eminently fixed, is a question? but I believe
not, for it proved a head, as it had been of Bottle-Ale, for it gave a Bounce
(a cruel one, more then of a Cock to the Don) and run out.

Without doubt, this was the Enchanted Moor quoth Sancho.] He was a Black is
most certain, and the Don a blew, if not both: But this was the most
charitable wound that the Don has received in all his Adventures; For it is
true the Lamp gave a shrewd cut, but it broke, and the oil ran presently forth,
and was the cure in an instant.

Vulnus opemque tulit. Procure me some Oil, Wine, Salt, and Vinegar.] Train
Oil, dead Wine, Base-salt, and the Lees of Lombards made up this decoction. I
do wonder, that in all his sudden accidents, the wholesome cure of Piss and
brown Paper was never discovered to him, nor his Squire Sancho; which if he had
known, it had been of great consequence to him, and because it was frequent
with him to Urine (being much given to Horseradish, Garlic and Fear) which
are all Diureticall and clensing, and he himself for the most part musing;
(that is to say in a brown study) He was seldom without the main matters, and
as for the wounds, not a day scarce or an hour without them. But this is only
for Knight-Errants at hand, but the Balsamum is for the inward Contusions, as
you shall hear anon.

He put this precious liquor into a tin Oyle-pot, and said over it eighty
Paternosters, Aves and Creeds.] The Tin Oyle-pot did very well concur to
the cure, for his pate being but lately broke by a Lamp-panne, (which was of
the same metal) that being broke, spoiled, and incapable, the experiment might
be made upon a pot that was coaetaneous, and of the same make with it: So by
application of the Balsamum to the very Sofia-tinpot alike effects might
follow, as usually does Unguentum Armarium, and it might very much conduce to a
speedy cure, helped and assisted as those remote Agents must be, Per genium
mundi, and volubilitatem Atomorum and virtutem Sympatheticam. The eighty eight
Paternosters, Creeds, and Aves, were only these few Latin lines under-wrote,
which were the Charm, and virtuous operators of the grand effects in the
Balsamum. I do not believe, that he would use such holy Forms and Ceremonies,
and signum Crucis too, for a Thing made at the best, but for a Creature with a
star in the Forehead.

Neptune Pater Equorum,
Et tu Sol, qui tenes lorum;
Quadrupedum ignivomorum,
Fac ut ego, qui sum Coram,
Vis vibicum and Dolorum,
Futurus Domitor Monstrorum,
Protector hominum, horum, harum, horum,
Vi^um, Mulierum and Orphanorum,
Per hoc Balsamum, Opobalsamorum.
Invulneratus posthac transeam,
Prim-as Militum Errantium.
This is to be said or sung, and round about the Ovall, for he had these
Incantations in a cycle, (besides that of his head, which was of the greatest
Capacity, sphaericall and whirri-call) and about the border of his Annulet,
these words wrote in a great Character.

Octogintos octos per haec verba,
Benedicetur quaevis herba.
This indeed mystically pronounced, and looked 88 times, (which is the Spanish
Mode of Incantations,) the simples receive their wondrous virtues, and did
operate very much upon the Knight, who was one of the simplest in the World,
and therefore the most capable of cure by them.

And having taken the dose, he slept two or three hours.] It was very
improper, and unartist-like done in Sancho, to permit him to sleep, and showed
that though most men would be counted Physicians, he laid sure hold upon the
other part of the division. Sancho should have rode him about the grounds, or
run him a hand-trot in the hay tallet, which was the usual custody of those,
to whom it was first administered, and then tied him up (well clothed) to the
Racks, and some three or four hours after, refreshed his sweated body with a
mesh. But had not the Don been of a stronger constitution then that creature
that used thus to take this Physic, a Body of Brass indeed, this Balsamum
Fierebras had dissolved this magnanimous person at the first experience; what
did not this fetch up? something of every thing, and it was strange (but that
his heart was great and could not get through the Isophagus) that it came not
up with the rest; Much undigested Poor-Iohn and the Goat, came skipping back
faster then it went down; the Iron Cheese made a horrid noise, (as if the Mils
had been in his guts,) Sancho with the aid of his fingers, could hardly get out
the roapy stuff that stuck in his throat: After this (for the Basins were
shifted) came up all manner of colors, an odious and filthy consistence, which
were the collections of the many bruises (now matur'd into a putulent matter)
got by the Windmils, the Yanguesian pack-staves, and the late kneading of his
Chamber-fellow, the Knight of the Herculean Foot, and Briarean Hands, even
Maritornes his Gyant-Carrier; whether he had the Pulvis contusionis amongst the
ingredients, I know not, but it wrought as if it were, and the Balsame deserves
a new name, more sounding, ample, and full befitting its own virtue, and the
Dons quality, and let it in an happy hour be named, Panc^ymagagon Fustifugum.

Which for the capacities of those not skilled in the Latin Tongue, and that
Iuniores may understand, call it in plain English thus, The Medicine Catholic,
Against kick, fall, and stick.


Sancho desired leave to sip up the remainder of the Balsamum.] Sancho
perceiving his Master cleans'd and clear, (for he was as gaunt as a Hawke
after casting) desired a Dose for himself, which his Master very willingly did
condescend unto: And Sancho, like the wench that desired to be used well by the
Apothecary upon her Recipe, had so much given her for Gods sake by the knavish
boy over and above the prescribed quantity, that she wished upon the return
of it, that the Devil had taken him for his courtesy. So Sancho very
liberally drencht him self, but as Physic is not alike to all constitutions,
as the French Doctor said; if te Body be full of gross humors, and that it
operates excessively, all de better for dat; and if the Physic do not stir
the Patient, it is a good sign that de gross humors are not in te body, and
so all te better for dat too. So our friend Sancho, having a tough and
tenacious stomach, and that was not used to part with any thing it had once
received (unless (dog fashion) upon condition of Resumption,) labored to
digest it, and turn it into nutriment, which verily had been effected, had the
Dose not been over-proportioned; which put the Squire into such an Agony and
maw-Convulsions, that he thought his soul had been transmigrant and Errant
from his Body. At last gathering all his expulsive faculties together, and
setting his hands to his sides, at the first reach he threw out his troublesome
guest, and dislodged the Balsamum, which being embitter'd by his long stay,
made the Squire look very sowerly, and so distorted his face by manifold
writhings, that he looked handsomer (if his countenance could have kept the
posture) then ever he did in his life. But he had more motions then one, his
backward memento's came so fast, that he could not mind what his mouth uttered:
No Bed-panne was sufficient, nor the Tub for that purpose. He was compelled to
advance his Plukes to the Chimney, which he most violently assaulted and
battered in such furious sort, that much of the shot recoiled upon his Canon
muzzle, which the Asturian with a maukin cleans'd, (as often as the enormities
happened) very glad that she had this revenge for the Battle played upon her
Maine-Pillian; she ever and anon held his head too, which she bound about
with a list taken from her leg. The half Tub began to fill, for up came all
his Wallet-thefts, his stomach was like a Foxes kennell, or a Polecats hole,
whence innumerable parts of the creature came fluttering out, as if they had
been upon wing again. It would have puzz'led a Poulterer to have named the
several ransacks of that Oleo. Such a hotch-potch was never seen, insomuch,
that the poor Asturian even stifled with the fumes and Nauseae of his filthy
Caldron, could not hold his head nor her own stomach any longer; but kept
consort with him, and played her part so well, that she run through all the keys
from A-la-mi-re to double Gammut, nor was she only vocal, but her Base Violl
went as fast as his, with great danger of breaking her twatling-strings. They
made a foul house ^etwixt them, and Sancho was so ^tupified with her
continual Cataracts, that he could not hear his own tale, for the bellowing
of Maritornes, who reached as if she would have fetched up her Lady-tripe.

He called the Inne-keeper unto him, and said with a grave and staid voice:]

High Constable of this large Castle, know,
I cannot pay you, what I present owe
For all the favors shown, for the sweet oils,
Yet fragrant on my wounds got in late broils.
But chiefly for the Queens affections,
And for your Daughters gentle Frictions,
Never was Knight so handled: Wherefore say,
(For new Adventures call your guest away)
Is there a Miscreant who has dared to blast
Your Queen or Daughter, as they were unchaste;
Or that your self are of no noble spirit,
(Courteous above almost Knight-Errants merit)
Show me the Varlet that I may confound him,
Before I go to fight the world so round in.
All that I desire is, says the Inne-keeper, that you defray your charges.]
The Invincible ignorance of mine Host was very smartly reprehended and punished
in the Knights generous and free Goe-by: Teaching the Fool hereafter more wit,
who when he demands money of a Knight Errant, to take hold of his Bridle, or
else by the Law of Effugium, or Mittit habenas, he may make his escape good;
and there are Presidents enough for it.

The Inne-keeper came to Sancho, and asked his money of him.] Sancho overheard
his Masters Reasons for Non-payment, and from a strong Argument (drawn a
paritate rei, though not subjecto) labored to have convinced the ^ncredulous
Host, who had neither Faith for the Reckoning upon their words, nor to the
valiant Deeds they were to do. But it was Sancho's misfortune to have a more
Indocile Creature under him, and less manageable than the Dons, so that he was
left (as always the Ass is) for the reckoning: He urged often, like Master,
like man; and love me, and love my Dog: Beside other more true and significant
Proverbs; as, Sue a Beggar and get a Louse, Where there is nothing to be had,
the Commonwealth must lose her due, The Devil take the hindmost. But mine
Host on the other side had his Proverbs too, Touch Pot, touch penny, Finger in
Dish, finger in Pouch. Sancho could not deny that the Pot had touched his
Master (the Oyle-pot he meant) and he had touched the Ale-pot. But he was
impatient, and telling them, they could not without manifest danger and
violation of the Laws of Errantry stop him, he attempted to escape.

The Clothiers of Segovia pulled him from his Ass.] O happy, happy Sancho
had thou been
If thou were gone, or never had seen this Inn.
For the Cordovan Point-Makes, Scoffers, and Mockers, by their Profession, and
Segovian Clothiers, sellers of Blankets, upon one of their strongest
commodities lay dis-mounted Sancho, now like a great Bell, at which six lusty
Ringers are plucking, and after a Celeusma or two, they raise him, and find
him coming, then up they have him, and never give off till they have turned it
over and over. Sometime they made him stand an end, his head being flat, very
much helping to the posture. Thus you see our Squire Errant is made a Squire
Volant, and in stead of the Government of an Island is made a petty Prince of
the Air, to whom the Birds flock, as to his Brother Broad-face when he flies
abroad in the day time. It was well the Balsamum Fieribras had so thoroughly
purged his sink, otherwise he had left foul signs of his high Indignation in
the Blankets. In his Tranation he looked about, and saw under him (though a
far off) his Lord upon Rosinante, no bigger than a Toad upon a
Bucking-stoole; and the Don beheld in amazement the motions of his Squire, now
equal with him in all Adventures, this last paralelling his of the Windmill.
But the Don shaking his Javelin over the wall, and discovering implacable rage,
and threatening, but not attempting to leap the wall, the Inne-keeper gave the
sign to the Ringers, and they let the Bell go very Musically down, by
lessening their strokes, heaves, and tosses, till they brought Sancho very well
breathed and air'd to the ground.

Sancho requested Maritornes to give him some Wine, which she did.] Poor
Sancho was as dry, as if he had been visiting the torrid Zone, or passed the
Line; a draught of water he would have, but his Master knowing in his great
observation, that water will putrify and stink under the Line, would not
permit him to drink it, nor yet would Sancho be persuaded to a dram of the
Bottle, no Balsamum goes down his throat, which was as open as a Sepulcher. But
Maritornes (all after-claps forgot and forgiven) moved with a Fellowship of his
sufferings, risings and fallings, helps him at last to a draught of pure
Nepenthe, a lusty glass of Claret wine, wherein the dead flies looked like the
wholesome Clove, and because he should be sure to have no more risings in the
stomach, she powder-sugar'd it with a little burnt Alum, which she crumbled
into it, and stirring often, said, partner in affliction drink, drink it up,
the deeper the sweeter, parting with Sancho in the very same proverb, as she
hoped to have lain all night with him.

Now Sancho, switch and spur, and curse the hour
That brought thee to this Castle without Tower.
CHAP. IV.
Freed of the Castle, he is hurried on,
And finds the Pagan Alifamfaron,
And good Pentapolins of the naked Arm,
And both their Armies ready for Alarm;
Then making ready amongst the thickest rout,
For the fierce Pagan Prince he seeks about,
Enraged and madded; the Mahumetan
Cannot be found: The Battle he began
Amongst the Infantry, never fight was hotter,
For all the Sheep appeared to him as Trotters,
Which he hewed down apace; but the dust smothers
(No quarrels are so fierce, as those of Brothers.)
The Don, both face and eyes, he knew not whither
Rosinante ran, but trod down Yew and Weather;
The Shepherds at this Woolfe on Horseback wondering,
Caught up their slings, and with good stones they thunder him,
And plied their work so nimbly, that his Coasts
As well, as he their Muttons, they rib-roste.
And did so batter too, that a stone hot,
It was apparent, he was gone to the Pot
Of Balsamum, to raise his wasted spirit,
But with a lucky hand as sling did ever hit;
The second stone did break the pot of Balsame,
And on the ground (for there I Am sure did fall-some)
Lay that same holy Liquor, and four grinders
Of his Cheek Teeth: From which God bless the finders.
TEXT.
DON QUIXOT would have revenged, and Sancho would have avenged the injuries of
the Blanket.] Revenge is sweet, and the Don and his Squire never pardoned any,
but those they could not beat, which was enough for larger bowels, (and theirs
were of the largest too) but not of Mercy, that you should see. This known
cruelty in them, made them terrible, and feared where ever they came, and those
who stood out should be paid, (except Enchanted Inne-keepers) was known
throughout all rodes: So upon their approach, Castles were surrendered, Ladies
submitted, Giants capitulated, Armies treated, Hostages were sent, (but none
ever returned by the Don,) Kingdoms entered into Leagues and Confederacies with
Quixot and his Squire, as secure, as if all the Knight-Errants Seals in the
universal World had been to the Articles. The Catalogue of his Associates,
Friends, Auxiliaries, with the frames of all demolished places, Pillories,
Privy-houses, Whipping-posts, old Barnes, haunted and forsaken Houses, besides
Baudy-houses and Pigsties, are all to be seen at the Mancha, every Festival
that is kept to the Don; when as at a Bartholmewtide the Fights and Travels of
this great Knight Errant are to be seen, and himself represented (for these
honors came after his death) to the life, by Timotheo Reado of Tiveri-ae, who
was the most incomparable mimicke upon the face of the Earth.

The men whilst they tossed me had proper names.] Peter Martinez, a very able
man of his hands as was in all Spain, and Tenerio Heriander, not such another
in Madrid, at a living or dead lift, and John Palameque the Deaf, was the
Inne-keeper, which defect, whether it were natural or politic, is much
doubted, but it held him surest and longest at the reckoning, when any thing in
the Bill was questioned; he had been in his younger days bred in Holland,
which is the best place to train up an Host or Hostess to Austerity in the
reckoning. All To Mall is the word, and irrefragably it is stood too. These were
the Worthies, which mounted Sancho higher then into his Ass, and whose names
could he have ^wrote no doubt, but he would for the high favors they showed
him, have put them into a Book, whereas now he is forced to give them
entertainment in his head, which was a very bad lodging, but yet too good for
the guests.

Ever after the defeat of the Biscaine, we had blows and more blows, cudgels
and more cudgels.] He might have gone a degree farther; for as I take it, the
last basting will admit of three, Yanguesian positive, Gyant-Carrier
comparative, Oyle-panne superlative; he exceeds plus plurimum, and I too much
fear, that there must be a Climax made in the Grammar, for his beatings could
not be declined by the old rule, but we must necessarily allow of a
super-superlative, and a hyper to that if need require. Sancho has his
Tole-Booke too, I mean his memory, and it is the best Register: Multa Tulit
fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit.

That hits him pretty well, but that of Virgils upon Aenaeas more pat; Multum
ille and terris jactatus and alto.

Both which must be rendered into our Mother tongue, because they do (but too
succinctly) express most of Sanchos sufferings, but especially the last.

The first verse rendered.
Much did they suffer, but what did they-much,
When they were boys at Trap, or slatter-pouch;
They Would sweat until they stank, and then catch cold,
The aches are not off um now they are old.
The second verse rendered.
He may be which you please, Master or man,
Who in their suff rings, them difference can;
From place to place, like unto Rolling stones,
Gathering no moss, but bangings to their bones.
And tossed aloft by the stern Windmill Quish-ot,
Sancho from Blanket, cause he paid not His-shot.
Which belonged to Amadis de Gaul, when he named himself Knight of the
burning sword.] That Amadis de Gaul had such a sword is probable, for he might
have occasion to fetch it from the Cutlers red hot, especially if ever his
Squires Horse tired, it being as present a cure as ^ hot spit. But if ever he
had a true one, it must be made and ensampled by that of Chinons of England, or
the fool transformed, for by both those names that Knight was ever remembered.
This sword, by some privy to his Testament, was ordered to be buried in a side
of the great Hill Pen-men-maur in Cambro-Britannia, where it was to lie
nourisht in heat, by the Sulphurous supplement of that Mineral, until one of
the most redoubted and Modern Knights in Europe should be born out of those
parts, unto whom this sword in process of time was brought; the child scarce
able to speak, (like as Hercules grasped the Serpents in the Cradle) grasped as
much of it in it pretty fist, smiling, and pleased with no rattles, babies,
hobby-horses, or any such toys, but only this burning sword, which as it never
burned his fingers, so he never dreaded it; and come to age (Captain Jones was
this Valiant Infants name) he gave the sword a name which it will never lose,
Killz-adog.

The Whineard of the house of Shrewsberry is not like it, nor the two handed
Fox of John Falstaff, which hewed in sunder fourteen out of seven principal
assaylants, and left eighth and twenty equally divided bodies in the Field,
all slain while Shrewsberrie clock could stricke seven; (of the men you must
take in.) Upon this new sword of Quixots when he got it, these words were to be
seen; Sum Quixoti, pro vincere inimicos meos.
Which is thus in English;
I am Don Quixots guartha, my spatha,
With Basket hills, and blade of a Lath-a.


When Don Quixot perceiving a thick dust arise in the way.] It presently calls
into the Dons mind, that great Giant Adriasdust, who had choked many a man,
and was only vanquishable by the Knights of the Well, or the Running spring.
Wherefore it was time to look to it, for now if ever he was like to come to
those deadly words, Dust to Dust;

As appeared by the Catastrophe of this battle, wherein, though the Don did
slay seven Knights of the Curled Fleece, yet he paid for the honor very
dearly, and lay speechless, toothlesse, and witless, and the pillage of the
Field carried off by the enemy supperlesse: Otherwise Sancho Pancha, though
the loss of his Wallet very much troubled him, yet with one of these booties,
which had been prey and Wallet too, he had rested contented; but now there was
no hopes of sleeping this night with a belly full, or in a whole skin.

Sr (said Sancho) what shall we do? What said the Don, but assist the weaker
side.] It was never so, but when this Valiant Knight joined unto it; but the
Knight by the Order, was to be on the oppressed party, whereby he was sure to
have the worst on it. I believe Sancho would have been Jack of both sides, for
he loved a side of Mutton, both leg and the other, as well as he loved his
wife, which was rib of his rib. Here was a recruit for the Wallet, but where is
the Wallet to be recruited.

Sed vos non nobis, vellera Fertis Oves. He that comes to us is Ali-fam-facon,
the other at our backs is Pentapolin.] These two Emperors are the mistaken
Shepherds of the Country, who served Madrid and the Catholic Kitchen with
those droves: What a company of Knights, Giants, Captains and Officers, does
this fantastical whimzy-pate gather out of this Innocent Flock; if ever his
head (as when did it not?) had gone a Wool-gathering, certainly now he might
have had a profitable adventure, especially of entreating the Giants of the
Rodes modestly, he would have been contented with a brace of the infirmest
Soldiers, which were the tenderest meat amongst them, and ready to drop into
his lap.

This Knight here whom thou see in the yellow Armor.] All Virgils Bucolicks
will not suffice with names, (nay search his Georgicks for help to boot) for
the Officers of this Army of Foot: Had it been a Heard of Oxen, it would have
afforded greater Giants and more trusty Knights; For Beeves have been knighted,
(I mean out of their loins have come Knights,) as Sur-loin and Bevis, whether
of Southampton or any Town beside, was of that race. China-beuf^ a huge Giant,
and with the great Cham of Tartary now at War for that vast secret of the
World, the Kingdom of China; The Chinese or Chineteers are the most numerous
people in the World, where is there a man that has a stomach, but is for
China-beuf? Rumpo-beuf and Croppo-beuf are his younger brothers, who have stood
to the msot stout Giants in the most sharp encounters that ever were (tooth and
nail work as they say,) and made the Cadmeian race of their enemies weary and
give over, and with their belly fuls too; as you shall read at large in the
Chronicles of the Buphagi, which are kept part in the great Libraryes at the
Bridge Foot, Boares head in Eastcheap, and the Ram and Goat in Campo
Fabrorum, which indeed is the chief Randezvouz of the other Army, whose
Captains and Commanders the next note shall unfold unto you.

I hear no Trumpets sound said Sancho, nor nothing but the bleating of Sheep.]
Now the other Army is drawn into the Field, which was not of so great Giants
indeed, but they were more numerous, and unanimous: For as in Scotch-land they
have a word, especially upon the Rout, One and Aw; so in this vast body, if one
run, aw run, if one stamp the foot, aw stamp the foot, if one ^ab, aw nab, if
one ba, aw ba. He that Commanded in chief, was not, as the deluded Don
imagined, not Ali-fam-farom, but Ali-fe-Ramme-Anafaron, who was a surly Sir, an
old Soldier, and had kept the field more then any General that ever I knew;
His son and heir Rutter-ramme-faron, was the Leivtenant General, Marshall
of the Field, grand-Wether, a nimble Officer, who was very rich, though in
Field service he was often taken and fleeced by the Enemy, who are a sort of
devilish Giants, who infest their Quarters constantly and unavoidably about St
James tide, when by great subtilty, and assisted by Negromancers, and I know
not how many unhallowed Monsters, they customarily once a year make inrodes
upon 'um, rather pilferers then Soldiers, and what Soldiers or Officers they
catch, they plunder to the very skin, and so cashear'd, they send them back
to their Quarters, as naked and bare as a shorn Sheep, as we say in our
English Proverb. Brigadeers in this Army of Infantry, which may well be so
called, for they are the harmlessest Soldiers in the World, content with their
Quarters in Field in the Summer, and in Winter, with such voluntary
Contributions as the Country can afford: For their Brigadeers and Commanders of
the right and left wing of this Army are very well liked of every where; no
Lord, Knight, Squire, Gentileman, or Yeoman, but are joy'd to see them at their
Houses and Tables. And such is the great love the People bear to them, that
they may quarter with them all the year long; but they seldom do lie upon
the meaner sort of the People (though they would willingly entertain them) but
at the ablest men's houses, and most wealthy, which is a great ease to the whole
Nation where they live; and were it not for that ravenous Giant, who does
without mercy devour 'um, the cruel Woolfangus, they would scarce have a scout
or sentinel out in a year, unless it were at St James tide (as I told you
before,) when those other Giants, called the Tonsorini, Deglubecanii,
Excoriarii, and Lani-furciferi infest their whole body; then indeed the whole
Army sometimes is one grand Round, one Court of Guard, and a thousand lie
perdue; but such is the unresistible subtility and force of these forenam'd
miscreant Giants, (who at first by treachery of their supreme Governor, Pastor
infido, were let in amongst them) that they cannot prevent this universal
pillaging, which they endure the more patiently, because the mischief is
fore-knowne and frequent, and their Brigadeers, whose name at last I have
remembered, viz. Costo-magno-mutton, Rachaumutton, and Scapulovin, are now upon
a composition of a Tribute of Wool, which they yearly pay, and are by patience
and Gods blessing (in a month or so) as well fleeced (as we say) again as
ever. Rumpaney Kid, a very stout Soldier, is always in the Rear, and was
never seen from his station, unless removed by death, and then always one of
the same Family, for their known services, succeeds, and by common consent the
place is entailed upon them. Unto his care all the impediment of this vast Army
is committed, and their Wives and offsprings, who are as innocent as their
Husbands, and it is counted a kind of blessing and wealth to the places where
they march. Thus was this Sheep-Field Marshalled, which the Don and Sancho saw
through the Prospectives of their fingers; but Sancho, a very Woolfangian, was
bloody minded, and wished the utter ruin and confusion of these two Warlike
bodies. -- Animal propter Convivia natum, was all the Latin he had, or cared
for, and to express his Sanguinarious Nature, he whispered the Don in the ear
so subtly and close, (that Cyd Hameti did not hear it) and protested by the
Gods of Mancha, that he wished from his heart, and the bottom of his belly,
that every Soldier in both those Armies were dead upon the Turfe.

And so it was indeed.] If ever Knights wits went a wool-gathering, ours did at
this instant, where a Flock of Sheep are supposed an Host of men, Ramms taken
for Giants, Ewes for Ladies, Wethers for Eunuchs, black Sheep for Negromancers,
Lamkins for Knights Pages, Shepherds with their Crooks in their hands for
Inchanters, and Pioners with their pipes for Martial Flutes, the Wethers bells
for Drumms, and their tail clouts, their colors, their tupping and rutting
for the maine Battalia, and the Buttons for the slaught' red bodies, which were
innumerable.

One of the effects of fear, is to trouble the senses.]

Videri facit quae non sunt Timor. If this axiom be true, the Don by his own
mouth shall be judged, that he is the greatest coward of the two, and that he
reprehends Sancho unjustly, who was not distempered by that womanish passion;
for he saw really that the Sheep were Sheep and no Giants; but the Don taking
Geese for Swans (as we say) Sheep for Soldiers, it is a hundred to one upon
Sanchos side, that his Master was more timorous pro praesente.

For all this, Don would not return, but cri' don, on Knights, all that March
under the valorous Emperor Pentapolin.] The Knight is as mad as his Enemy,
when it is vexed with the ticks, he charges through and through, and routed the
whole Body, and made such gaps and gashes in the sides of the assaylants, that
one Sheep might have leapt through another, till the main part of the Army had
escaped through the first Sheep-breach. Never was such a slaughter; here lay
legs and arms, there breast and sides, there necks, there heads without
horns, there horns without heads, there feet, there rumps; Sire, Dam and
Barn, Ram, Ewe and Lamb, lay all in one ruin; the Knight himself like
Iohn-a-Green, discolored with the garbage of the Enemy, which he fetched out
of the very bowels of them, using the Sheep, as the Romans did the Jews, at
the sacking of Jerusalem, ransacking in their Fundaments and upwards, for
concealed Gold and Jewels; but the Don ripp'd them up, not out of
covetousness, but mere revenge, and was so bespattered and bespringled with
the Intrailes, that a-was more terrible then a Forrester, and did so stink of
offall and slaughter, that the Crows, Owls, Ravens, and Buzzards flew about
him for provisions, as if he had been Quarter-Master-Generall for those birds
of prey. His word was Pentapolin of the Naked Arm, and looked himself like a
Lion of East-cheap.

The Shepherds unloose their slings and bepelt him, he crying Ali-fam-fa-ron
where art thou.] The Shepherds at last, take heart and stones, and defy this
Goliath of the Mancha, who (not afraid of an encounter of that nature) run in
upon the great Ali-feramme-Anae-faron, and advancing his sanguine Javelin in
the very curled front of him, said, dye Tyrant, dye libidinous Ravisher, dye of
the yellowes, as thou livedst (jealous and lecherous) so dye. Never any more
hope to tup the daughters of Pentapolin, or see the naked and goodly leg of the
fair Lady Ovesia, or the tender quarters of the pretty, young, and chaste
Agnetis, or Agnesia. So fell this buffle-headed Giant by the hand of Don
Quixot, who skilled in Astronomy, (as far as an Almanac could instruct
him,) struck the Ram in the neck and shoulders, and with one blow (the sign
being at that time Aries) severed his head from his body.

He thought himself slain, and remembering his liquor, he took out the
oyle-pot, which a Shepherd with a stone broke.]

Saepe premente Deo fert Deus alter opem.
The Giant of the Tarre-box makes the wound,
The Knight of the good oyle-pot makes the sound.
But O the fate! Cephalus his dart,
Conse^uitur quodcunque petit.
This Shepherd was some Parthians Bastard, he had so unlucky an aim, he would
hit you a bird flying, (and unless an Owl be no bird) he was his marks-man
now. He stops two gaps with one bush (as they say) with one stone does Triplex
malum, makes three gaps, a shrewd one in the oyle-pot, whence the remainder of
the Dons mornings draught, and drench for his rib-sparre, or split (choose you
which) run all out, and a cut on the fingers; but the fowlest gap of all, was
the breach in his mouth, which the stone did forcibly enter, in despite of his
violent detainer, of an high and mighty Guard of Teeth, and a Jaw-bo^^e, as
strong as that, with which Sampson did wonderful things; the four principal
Giants of his mouth fell to the Earth with that blow, his Cheek-teeth, which so
confounded our DON, (as if his strength had lain most in his mandibles) that
he fell after them upon the Earth himself, lamenting the loss of his
Face-frontiers, and conceiting with himself that if he meet not in some good
time with the French or Madrid Operators, who can supply him with a new set,
his mouth was upon the West side like to be unpalisado'd for ever.

At the season which Sancho looked in his mouth, the Balsamum wrought, and the
Knight disgorg'd all in Sancho's face.] This was the first meal that Sancho had
this day, and the good Knight spared it (as we say) out of his own belly, but
Sancho could not keep it, it smel^ so strong of the Pantry whence it came, and
the odious stench set Sancho's pot boiling, till it run over in such violence,
that he returned his Masters full meal into his mouth again, and a second
course into the service; they never knew one another minds better then now,
for they uttered them fully and wholly, not a secret to their very heart but
was opened, the Knight had all that was in Sancho, and Sancho had all out of
the Knight. If their souls were ever so faithful at confession, upon easy
Penance, they might very well be cleared.

Which Wallet when he found wanting, he was re^dy to run out of his wits.] This
violent and thorough discharge, puts Sancho in mind of his Wallet, Animus in
Patinis: Which when he saw lost, he wished his head also lost, which he thought
was the less damage, for the Wallet held somewhat, but the other nothing, his
stomach cried out upon him too, for making such clean work, there was not an
egg in the nest, nothing for that boiling Caldron to work upon. His body in
lieu of his Wallet, was like an empty sack; gaping for a replenish.

But what great Cat^rer durst take the task,
To fill with grossest Fare that empty Caske?
If we could find the herbs you used to talk of.] These exenterations,
embowellings, and disgorgings* made Sancho's appetite like a swine, he desired
to be turned a grazing. But what Commons would suffice? a grand Sallad of
Paradise Garden would hardly fill up the concavities and chinks of the Squire.
Greenland in a Tansey, would have been like a Pancake, which he would have
rolled and swallowed faster then a Duck does worms.

In the nether part you have two Cheek-Teeth, and in the (...) Sancho to his
own great joy, recounts the loss of this (...) Teeth. His chief adversaries
(which so often put him to the jaw-halt) were dislodged, and never returnable. So
that now he rides cheek by jole, and though the Don was the better
Carpet-Knight, yet he thought himself the ^est Table-Squire, and for such an
encounter now his mouth waters, which overflowing nothing can stop, but an
Inius existens of three days arreare in provisions at once.

CHAP. V.
Room for our Hercules! hark how he knocks
At Pluto's gate, and has his dog by the locks;
He Will dragge the three chopped curre from his black night,
And make him shake his tail in broad day light:
Death shall not bold her prey, and the poor Manes,
Fe^r he will force 'um to the Peri-cranes
From whence they came, or into Birds or Asses,
Or Fish, which doctrine was Pythagoras^his.
A Coarse, and Mourners, nothing him aware on,
(Before the Ghost can get a boat of Charon)
Is stopped in the way to Ceres son in Law,
Whom Madame Proserpine does keep in Awe,
And Jove Feretrius must wait upon,
Before he have the Corpse, the will of the Don.
This was a deadly woeful enterprise,
And showed him full of inhumanities,
Denying burial to the dead; to these
Had paid Church duties, e'n to the Clerks Fees.
Now while the holy Quire in white sur-plices,
His Requiem sing, in twain their sarks he slices,
And beats the mourning from the heads of those,
(Who watered not their hoods) they call the close:
This only Field be won, and bravely vapors,
Whilst Sancho robbed the Sumpter by the Tapers.
Choler in stomach raises canine Fury,
They Are for the living, let the Dead dead Bury.
TEXT.
MEthinks (Sr) the mischiefs that have befallen us, are punishment for the
breach of your oaths, of not eating bread on a Table-cloth, or sporting with a
Queen.]

Securi de salute, pro gloria pugnant. Now that they are free, scot-free I
mean, for that was al^ the liberty they had, as to reckonings, only they
begin to be wanton, and to wit it one upon another.

Sancho imputes all his shrubbings to his Masters perjuries, Aliu^ peccat,
alius plectitur,
Delirant reges, plectant^r Achivi.
Knight Errant Feasts, and wantons in desire,
And he is beat by Proxy, by his Squire:
That Is I, Poor Sancho Panch^ called, or P^nsa,
Poor I confess, but honest no man can-say;
For how can Man live just that wants relief?
A beggar Master, makes a servant thief.


Sancho charges (for at these word^charges he was very tongue-valiant) the Don,
that he did more then embrace that nasty Queen Maritornes, and Knight-Errants
are like Al^bymists; if they be not chaste, godly men, the work will fly in
Fu^a. It Is true that he did eat no meat on Table cloths, which was the other
part of the oath, yet that was not kept in sincerity and simplicity as it ought
to be, but out of mere necessity, because they had nor meat nor napery. And
whereas he was to have abandoned linen as well at Bed as Board, he had
violated that too; for he lay in a pair of sheets, (though they were course
and nasty) that a dog would have made choice of the chimny corner, rather then
rolled in; And so multiplied perjuries, multiplied punishments. Your sporting
with Maritornes was returned to you in the shrewd earnest of her deluded
Carrier, and the yearning of your bowels, with the kneading of your guts: Your
forgetfulness in lying (though in foul sheets,) was recomp^nsed with a foul
blow with the oyle-pot, where you lay for dead a long time, what with the
grease my Hostess bestowed on you, and the overflowings of the Lamp, prepared
for the Grave, without any further Ceremony of Supreme Unction.

The Don replied, thou may likewise think certainly, that for thy
non-remembrancing of me, that of the Coverlet was inflicted on thee.]

Facillimum est accusare. But the Don Grammet-confuted Sancho presently, with
his Te ipsum intueri oportet qui alterum incusas probri; And emblematically
brushed him, (though at this time without his Wallet) canvasse thine own Wallet
friend Sancho, and bring that part of the budget before, where thine own crimes
should lie, and throw not thy proper Errata behind thy back, (as they are used
to be put at the latter end of a Book.) I am criminal for embracing the
Illustrious Dulcinea, for so my fancy represented that Fustilugs unto me; I
was only a trespasser in wish (a small Peccadillo that, Sancho) but had she
been there in person (with all the witchery of Love and Beauty) I tell thee
Sancho to my grief, I tell thee, I could not have said boh to the Goose, that
is, I could not have played the part of a Gander, the multitude of my sick
Feathers making me unserviceable, which the Civilians term frigidity quoad
hanc. But Sancho, thou had the Asturian Donzell^ betwixt the sheets, which
sight the most favorable Judges of actions, even Whores and Bawds if they had
seen, they would have said you had been naught: To come to a corporal contact,
(say the same Civilians) is the next gradus or step to a Falathras; and the
Falathra is the Falathra Sancho, that is all in all, and what ever thou and the
foul pusse did do ( sub Rosa as they say) while you were plucking of her
Rose; I am sure by the plaudit and claps at your ^ngresse or egr^sse, it was a
sign that you did your work well. For which levaltos and Incontinencies of
the blankets, (for indeed thou had no shee^^ I remember well) the exaltations
of the Coverle^, and thy manifold risings and fallings in that Horizon, befell
thee as a just recompense; and what thou did privately and unheard, (except
in the loud salutations of her Pone, or Canopus,) which was able to have set
any flesh as well as hairs an end; it was openly revenged, thy Body being
visibly purged in the open air, for thy fulsome wickedness in a close room;
and because crying whore first* rather bespatters another, then cleares ones
self, they concluded this bitter dialogue of accusations, and each man took
upon him as concerned him: The Don (as his due) the precedence in the perjury;
Sancho as in the Frontispiece, kept not such a distance, but that he might very
well be an Accessory, if not hayle fellow well met, especially in all the
pilferings, Hedge-robberies, Debenturs, at Inns, and Farriers scores, for
drenches for themselves and Horses, besides nails and shoes, which in the
many years* Travels of the Don, came to vast sums of money, and do lie a^ this
day, a charge upon the Manchegans, (for the Don died insolvent and intestate,
unless it were such a Will as Dego made,) but a composition being made with
his Creditors, upon the Auditing of the several Bills, the Villagers took upon
them the payment of the debts (a small time allowed them, and agreed upon by
Article of some two or three thousand years for the performing of it.) The
Corporation having nothing for their Security and Indemnity, but the Reversion
of Dulci^nea's Jointure, who they say is not yet dead, (for such a one no man
can say was ever living.) And so the Account stands copia vera, with a
concordat cum Originali, sworn by two of the most reverend of the Senate of
the Mancha, and subscribed in great letters, Gualtero Tyleros,
Iohannos Stramineros.


Sancho beholding the Torches, and the Visions in white and block habits, was
struck into a wonderful amazement, and his Lord was not much better.] A burnt
child dreads the Fire, (says the proverb,) but the truth of it is, that the
Don and his Squire were never parabolically basted, but literally in the very
common notion and acceptance of the word. And this encounter at the first
view, did presage more danger then any yet, here being the greatest number of
enemies, except in the adventure of the Flock, that ever they met with;
besides, it was like to be night-work, and Sancho had bad eyes, and could no^
tilt well by Candlelight. His Ass also as well as Rosinante, star'd and grew
wilder at the approach of the lights, then the Windmill, for they had been
acquainted with that adventure, and had gone the rounds, often employed by
Molendinario, The Giant of the place: Wherefore Reader blame not this Tertian
that is upon them at present, for indeed they were seldom out of a Quotidian
shaking. But now it intermitted, vomiting in principio morbi being the best
Physic for it, of which they had their belly full, (if that may be said
without a bull;) but considering they did bucket and discharge on into another,
(like two cunning gunners, who shoot so direct and level against one another
muzzles, that they send each ones ball back to the mouths of the Canon from
whence they came, and make bullets Sea-Crabs, and teach them to be retrogade;)
In that signification, I say, they may be said to have disembogued their belly
full. But to the note; the horrid fright they are in, calls to mind a pair of
Spirits of equal match, who like Sancho and the Don, or rather like two cakes
of Size, or trembling Custards, are put into an Ague with apprehension of their
sudden devouring: But this story which I shall now tell you, is somewhat
apposite to this, and near upon a subject. In a Tragedy (that was prepared for
the public view of the University,) the Actors were privately to be trled upon
the Stage, that upon the insufficiency of the persons, or unfittednesse, the
men might be changed, But two Scholars there were in this Spanish Tragedy
(which was the story of Petrus Crudelis) whose parts were two Ghosts or
Apparitions of some Noble Personages, which that Bloody Prince had Murdered.
These two at the Repetitions spoke their lines very confidently, insomuch, that
the Judges thought they would be very good Ghosts; but when the trial night
came, that the Play was to be presented to some few friends before the public
exhibit, and then these two Scholars were put out of their blacks into white
long robes, their Faces meal'd, and Torches in their hands, and some flashes of
Sulphur made at their entrance, just as they put their heads through the
hangings of the Scene, coming out at two several sides of the Stage, they
shook so, and were so horribly affrighted at one another gashly looks, that
no force of those behind them, could get them to advance a foot forward toward
the stage, or speak a word of their Parts; but there as they first stood, they
stood for half an hour shaking, quaking, and staring one upon another,
Insomuch, that they put the Auditory into such a shaking with laughing, that
they had almost died with the excessive motions of the Diaph^agme. In fine, the
Ghosts retreated, and other two Persons of better hearts were pitched upon, who
were such fellows, that if the Devil had appeared (as it is said he did
amongst Doctor Faustus his supernumerary feinds) they would not have been
afraid at the sight.

Sancho with leave, departed a little out of the way, and discovering many
white things, so that his courage abated, and he did chatter with his teeth.]
The Don cries out, willing to save his Squire, Heu fuge (nate Die) teque his
(ait) eripe Flammis.

And imagining himself to be Hectors Ghost (as he was not unlike at present)
he proceeds in his own person, -- Si Pergama dextr^
Defendi possint etiam hac defensa fuissent.


As to the first being, it was for Sancho's honor and preservation, we shall
give you this account in English: O fly my highborn Squire, borne at high Noon
Under a hedge, in sight of open Sun;
I see of flames thou may be well afeard,
Keep off therefore, for thou art a hedge-bird.


And as for the other, because there is more in that, we must enlarge out
Translation, for Pergamus ( infelix Urbs Troum) Pergama gignit. Where you see
Pergamus, you may see a City which is more then an ordinary Verse, and
therefore must be said, What makes thee shake, what makes thy teeth to chatter?
Art thou afraight or frighted? what is the matter?
Thou make me tremble at they flesh-quake, Pancha,
Look on thy Don, the Shake-speare of the Mancha,
Whose chief defense I am: The undertaker
Of all Heroic Actions, though a shaker.


Indeed the Don could not chatter so well as Sancho, because of the loss of
his Cheek-Teeth, but what he wanted in that Music, was supplied in motion; for
his Carnimotus was so violent, that he had like to have thrown Rosinante down,
being all in a sweat, as if the Hagge rode him. The singular knackings of
Sancho's teeth, puts me in mind of a strong fancied man, a Scholar, and a good
Trencher-man, who was invited to a great Feast, (which was the next day
prepared) and some of the principal dishes being related to him, (for he was
always inquisitive upon such occasions, into the bill of Fare,) he liked them
very well, for they were very agreeable to his palate; and for better inabling
himself for the tooth-encounter, the day before he walked methodically, eat
slenderly, drank cauteously, and went to bed seasonably (being excellent
preparatives for the next days action.) But O the mischance! he was no sooner
in bed but asleep, no sooner in sleep but dreaming, for his hightned fancy
presented all the Catalogue of the dishes to his soul, as lively as if they
had been at Table; so that it wrought real impressions and impulses upon his
body, to the motion of his hands, which he managed, as if his knife had been in
it; but above all, his Teeth out-travell'd Sancho's, and went such a swift
trot, that it waked his Chamber-fellowes, who thought by the noise that he was
dreaming he had been in Hell; wherefore about to rise and wake him, they were
suspended awhile by his words, for ever and anon he said, Sir, Sir, Sir* pray
hand the Spring of Porke to me, pray advance the Rump of Beef this way, the
Chine of Bacon, O the Chine, with your leave the Chine, Sir, and then the first
dish again Sir, and in his Complements, his Teeth kept Minnum and Semibriefe
time so excellently, that the persons resolved to wake him, did lie down and
laugh, wonderfully pleased to see their friend so singularly contented in the
same instant at bed and board. The Scholar waked after a sound sleep, but could
remember no sport that he made, nor would he believe the Auditors relations,
until by woeful experience, he found his Face swelled, and his Gumms so
battered and bruised with the repercussions of his grinders, that he was not
able to stir his jaws, nor could be partaker of any of the good cheer,
except it were the liquid part of it, which they call Dutch gleek, where he
played his cards so well, and vied and revied so often, that he had scarce an
eye to see withal, his guzzle rec^npencing abundantly the want of his Teeth.

It figured unto him that the Litter was a Bier, wherein was carried some
slaughtered Knight, whose revenge was reserved for him.] I wonder that Cyd
Hameti Benengeli, did not venture to tell us whose body the Don fancied to be
there. It must needs be, that his high imagination ran upon some eminent
Person, or else he would not doubtless have undertook a design of so much
hazard and odds, and without the second Ship of Sancho, who came not in at all,
but only to the pillage; certainly he could not but conceive and strongly
apprehend, that the Body of that Famous Knight Errant and Traveller, Tom^
Coriato, was carrying home to great Br^tany, being slain by that grand Giant
of Hildeberg in a single Duel, and being dead, was (that the Murder might not
be discovered) said to be the Valiant Knight of the Stand or Stoop; or it may
be he did, and very patly, conceit, that the Body of Gulilmo Stivos, whom we
called Summers, was conveying away, who was the Knight of the Sun, or rather
Colo-Paltono, the huge Giant, Brother to Capitanio Ionesio, who both were
Knights of the Burning Pestle. If none of these, without doubt, he must needs
intend the rescue of that gallant Man of Tooth-action, Don Mariotto, Knight of
the Inasswagable Panch, whom those Inchanters, Moors, and Witches, the Mourners
and P^aeficae, and the singing-men, whom he absolutely took for white Devils,
had coss^^'d up unvindicated until this present hour, when a high revenge was
to be inflicted by DON, Repairer of injuries.

He said, stand (Sr Knight) who ever you be.] The Don buckles to the Van of all
the Army, and assaults the first pitiful Scou^of this lamentable Body, whom
he should have quaeriedin this manner, and in sober sadness demanded of him,
First, why his Nose run so fast? Secondly, what a whining he kept? Thirdly,
whether he meant to lose his eyes because he should never see his friend
again? Fourthly, why his friend, who was out of sight, might not as well be
out of mind? Fifthly, whether he grieved so, because his friend had left the
World, or rather had left him nothing but the wide World? Sixthly, whether his
mourning were a legacy, or upon his own charges that he wept so? Seventhly,
whether the man died mad, (if he made him Executor,) and he feared that a
caveat would be entered against the Will, and in fine be overthrown? Eighthly,
whether he dyed and gave no Sugar-Plums, Naples-Bisket, burnt wine, Ribbons,
Gloves, nor Scutchions? To the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 interrogatories, nihil
dicit, nor to a hundred more such examinations. For, Curaeleves loquntur,
ingentes stupent;
He was a hireling, and commanded tears,
Not for his grief, but pay, in's eyes appears.


The Mourners were so muffled in their weeds that they could not stir; so
that Don Quixot without any danger to his person gave them all the Bastinado.]

He had the better of the whites in this checkered board, now have-at the
blacks; the singing men were at Dirges, and howled out for a Requiem for
themselves, being departed souls, and scattered up and down the Face of the
whole Field, who afrighted now (but in their wits they were Fatui) are only
Ignes Fatui, and it is wonder that Sancho did not follow 'um up and down the
Chase, instead of Will with the Wispe, or Gyl burnt tail. But the Don out of
all rule was measuring Spanish cloth by the spear, and meant to make prize and
booty of it all, for it was sub hasta It was a dismal piece of night-work, and
worthy the pencill of a Zeuxis. Here and there lay the pitiful spoils of the
Knights of the black-robes; Ribbons (good twelve-penny broad) hackt as small as
beauty-specks, Gloves cut into thumbstals, Cypress harbands shrivilled into
black chitterlins or -- Scutcheons flew in the air like paper-Ravens, (for
Kites are not black enough,) so that the Field was all a black Heath, and
Rosinante embossed in the pursuit, never went prouder in all his life, treading
all the way upon Spanish cloth of twenty shillings a yard. The Passengers of
the several ways, imagined they had been Fairies a horseback, and that the
Knight, the Queen's own eldest son was running the Rounds after his Lady
Mother for a blessing.

All this Sancho beheld marvelling at his Masters boldness.]

Aut meus Erasmus est, aut Demon. Either this is DON QVIXOT, or the Devil
himself quoth Sancho, who is come to carry the body to the fellowship of his
soul.

I do believe the Divel's in my Master,
who ever basted was till now; Now Is baster.
Or thus; For Erasmus will bear it:
O see the man that was the Mouse,
Become a vermin Montanous.
Do not kill me, for you will commit a great Sacrilege, I being a licentiat,
and receiving the first orders.] This Licentiat was of the lower Form of the
Levites, he had newly come from his Quo vos? ad Glosteros.
Quid ibi vos? ad sumendos orderos.
I bimus nos cum vos? etiam si placet vos.


He had no more Latin then the Missale, and that not in Capite, but by book.
This fellow was to sing in Tone, and no matter for Accents, Quantities and
Terminations: The Latin Tongue never suffers Purgatory, but in the singing
men's mouths, which I wonder the Pope has no dispensation for, at least a Dirge
for the Tortures of the Catholic Language. His Person however is sacred, and
his calling religious, though it were a high shame that such a piece of gross
ignorance, should have protection under so holy a shelter. Take him out of his
habits and set him in a Market, and no man but would prefer a Tinker before
him, or give more for a Calfe, flesh for flesh, brains for brains. Alive he
was in his cloths five pound a blow, but out of his clericall vestures, not
worth so much as five sparrowes, which is half a farthing.

Who killed him, quoth Don Quixot? God quoth the Bachelor.] The Don neither
feared God, Giants, nor Pestilentiall Fevers, yet at present his Valor seemed
to have some symptoms of discretion in it, he lets the matter alone, nor would
not turn Typhaeus and fight with Heaven; just like a brother of the Sword, or a
Giant of the Way, hearing (while he was in Travel for a certain season, till
the quieting some two or three foolish Hues and Cries and searches were over)
that his brother (as he called him) was dead, for the natural brother of him
departed, meeting of him in Paris told him the sad story; with great signs of
grief, and anger too, our Hector entertained the relation, vowing by all that
was holy (things that he never mentioned but at such a Ceremony) that if he
would impart unto him, who was the Person that had robbed him and the World of
his delights, he would be the apparent and single Vindex and Ultor of his
Brothers blood, the Brother requested his patience and dispensation to that
point, shrugging and saying, it was too late to look after it, better pass it
over in a wise and politic silence, and dissemble the malice for a more
proper opportunity of revenge; the other violent upon the Inquisition for
blood, and to show his Indeerednesse, pressed often to know the Murderer of his
friend: The Brother could by no means be brought about to discover. At which
the Bravo seeming extremely perplexed, good Sr says he, deny me not this
honor, let me know the place only, and from thence I will make a hunt, until
my curious Arts and Quaeries have tract out the guilty person, as sure as a
blood-hound does a Thief by the foot, wherefore pray satisfy my affections,
as to the place then; the Brother said, Sr I cannot well deny you it, but it
had been better buried too, for it calls fresh grief into my eyes, for truly St
said he, my Brother was slain, speaking in a very small voice, mincing the
words, as the French do Tibi; he was slain I say, at a place by a Parks side,
not far from the Metropolis of England; to be brief, he was slain at
Teburne. He of the Sword, stood as mute as the Don, for 'twas as good and all
one, as if God had done it. with the Country, or else the Presse-yard had ended
the quarrel; such an answer as this quieted men of greater power, then this
Man of Arms. The Constable and all his Watch, who, good conservers of the
Peace, one night took a fellow late out, but not out of his wits, for he had
been transgre^sing in the sober sin, with those that rob the brains, but
another way then by drinking: The Watch apprehend him, and bring him before the
Magistrate of the Night, who with gilded staff, welted and guarded Gown, with
wrought Nightcap, looked very dreadful, and asked this noctivigator, where he
had been so late, and with whom, and whither he was going, and to whom, whether
he was a servant or Master, and many such questions; to which the fellow (for
he was a Scotch Man) answered but little; at last, the Constable asked whither
he had not got a cup too much, the sinner said, ney in gewd faith Sr, I he not
had one swoop, nor sloop drink this night, dele of my sall if I have; who do
thou belong to man, say? marry (Sirs) and Ice tell you friends, well ha you
asked, For I serve a good Lord, A Lord said the Constable, what Lord? e'n the
gewd Lord of Hosts said the Scotch Man; the Constable and Watchmen stared upon
one another, totally ignorant of the Noble Man, and let him go, saying, it is
some Scotch Lord or other, I Will warrant you.

Sancho was otherwise employed, ransacking of a Sumpter Mule.] Pancha had done
nothing worthy of notice in this Encounter of the Coarse; now he comes upon the
Stage, the Catastrophe of the Tragedy: he took his cue right, and finding a
Mule without a Master, summoned the Beast in, and made himself Master of the
Mule, and all the provisions culinarie, which were for the upper and lower
Regions; he longed for such a prey, very properly longed, for he had a very
great Belly, by the Notion of which, he used to send to Tavernes, or any place
where good cheer was provided, to get a cut of the best, which he never failed
of. He had the whole pillage of the Panniers, which were the first fruits of
the Churchmen, those he thrust, because they belonged to their Coat, into a
Cassock for want of his VVallet, and stuffed the Divinity Habit so full of the
Creature, that ^^ looked as if the right owner had been in it. It was
serviceable after this greasy use for nothing but to preach at a Carnivale or
Shrove-tuesday, and to toss Pancakes in after the Exercise; or else (if it
could have been conveyed thither) nothing more proper for the man that
preaches the Cooks Sermon at Oxford, when that plump Society rides upon their
Governors Horses to fetch in the Enemy, the File.

Don Quixot, otherwise called the Knight of the Ill-favored Face.] It is
usual for Knights and Dons Errant to take appellative names from their
successes, places of Birth, Conquest or Favor, as the Popes and great
Emperors do sometimes Praenomina, sometimes Agnomina, sometimes both. He
remembered on his Holiness, that was called Bonifacius, another Vrbanus,
another Clemens, in reverence to those, and Sir-to his own, (for it was a
Knights Face) he styles himself of the Ill-favored Face, not improperly, nor
far fetched. In Latin it is Male-facius, in Latino-Britan, Scurvy-Facius, or
Filthy-faciu^, or to make a word proportionable to the subject, (for there was
not much difference betwixt Rosinantes and his own) Male-scurvy^ filthy-Facius.

I will upon the first occasion have the Face painted in my shield.] Minervas
Aegis not so terrible, an excellent bugbeare to keep little children out of the
water with, or to set in one of Cloacina's reservatory, or privy Chambers,
where the person in the hardest labor cannot make a worse, or else most pat A
Face, to those, only pictured in Nunneries, and that at sight of it, they might
superfete their vow, and not only forswear the use, but the very looks of
Men-kinde for ever, unless it be after confession, when they do not show
their own faces, nor see their Confessors. Bless the man, for he had very bad
looks, a hanging look, as ever was seen.

Sancho, I believe I am excommunicated for laying hands on a consecrated thing.]

Iuxta illud siquis suadente Diabolo. Still harping upon five pound a blow! had
the Don himself been in Orders, (as 'twas impossible to keep him) undoubtedly
he had proved the richest man in Europe, upon the penalty of half the money; he
had a body would have brought him in of old rents, at least a thousand li. per
mensem, which is a very great incom, if it should improve to a rack. I knew a
quarrelsome scholar, that used to make his cracked Crown, his debt-booke; he
was always fighting, always beaten, the blows he took pro tempore, and his
batterers pro termino. As his purse failed, or pockets emptied, he would have
recourse to his hammered Noddle, and straight fetch in a 5 li. which had been
posted off a year or two; on one side Debenturs for juggepots, on the other,
Arrears for Pewter Candlesticks, (which were for change presently after an
encounter) all his skull over, were either open wounds or cicatris'd,
Chirurgian unpaid, and his witnesses, the Tapster, a brace of Drawers, or the
wench at Bar, with whom he was always in Fee for a little Sugar at hand; and
thus he made a shift to put bread in his head, and furnish the inside, from the
injuries of the outside, living not by his wits, but by his pate.

This juxta siquis suadente Diabolo, is of very near affinity to one of our
Sessions-charges, or indictements, our Common Law is as dangerous as Canon shot
in that case. Whereas, Quixot of the Mancha, contrary to the Laws of his
Catholic Majesty, and the peace of his Realm, having not the fear of God
before his eyes, did murtherously, bloodily, and feloniously, (in, with, and by
the Advice, help and assistance of one Sancho Pancha of the Village aforesaid,
and servant to the Quixot aforesaid) dismantle, rob, and rifle a Sumpter-Horse,
and per minas, insultus and Durez, that is to say, with three hard words,
un-mule, un-leg, and un-able, Alanso Lopez, ordinary to the fraternity of Nova
Prisona, and at the same time took away, besides his wits (which are not
valued) a Missale, six Crucifixes, a suit of Beads, a dozen of Indulgencies, as
many Agnus Dei's, two Anathemas, and other considerable things, goods and
Chattels, out of the pocket of Alanzo Lopez aforesaid, a Tobacco box with a
Burning Glass, a Case of Pipes, two ro^ten Nutmegs, and a pick-Tooth;
amounting in all, to the value of thirteen pence halfe-penny; therefore the
said Quixot of the Mancha aforesaid, and the said Sancho Pancha aforesaid, of
the Mancha aforesaid, are hereby indicted, arraigned and charged to be guilty
in the first place of wit-Murder, in the second place, of several Sacriledges,
in the third place, of pilfering; and so we leave him to the Consciences of
twelve honest men, and true to do as the Laws in that case require, Alanso
Lopez.

Therefore let us retire to our repast; and to the grave with the dead, let
them that live, eat bread.] Grass and Hay, quoth Rosinante and the Ass, we
are all Mortal. Eat Mancheat tot Senioli, say Sancho and the Don. While the
Jury are kept close to agree about the verdict, the indicted c^y a merry life
and a short, he that eats most may have the luck to break the halter:
Therefore they fed devoutly, yet without Grace or looking up to heaven, and so
sweet every thing tasted, as (a relish being added to it from the manner of the
purchase,) that they dreamed not of any sour sauce. The dryer and more crusty
meats fell to Sancho's share, who was tooth-proofe, the softer, more putrified
and moist, the Don invaded, sighing often betwixt the goblets, for the
inability of his Mandibles, and sometimes he would lay hold on Sancho's hands,
and say, O Sancho, time was, and not long since too, that thou could not have
cast me thus behind thee; but if I live by the help of a Coral, it may be, and
Heaven grant it, I may rub up a new set of Cadmeian pegs again, or some
artificial supply, I will re-indent my mouth, and not see my self Tantaliz'd
thus to my face, for want of the most necessary Instruments of life. Sancho was
secure of Ember weeks for his life, for beside the miss of his Teeth, much of
the Gum and Jaw were dilacerated, that ther^ was no possibility of laying a
foundation in that ruinous rubbish.

CHAP. VI.
O for a subtle Painter! were he found,
To draw toth' life, the Encounter of the Sound!
A Pencill worthy, where d' you think to find?
Yes from the Wing, if you can caught, of the Wind.
A Canvasse of the purest part of the air,
Such as you cannot see, it 's so thin, were rare!
Then would I have an Echo at rebound,
As she makes Capers from the hollow ground,
Caught, and by cunning Art I would her fix
In that aire-Table, by some silver quix:
Deaded by spettle, which being borne in the place
Where Echo lives, does know her doubling face.
I would have Sancho's ears ta'n at full length,
As he did stretch 'um in his passions strength;
And the Don's whole one pricked, and the small pittance
The Biscaine left, but he paid for the acquittance.
Unto these parcels, and ears integrall,
I would have the two Brutes, just four in all,
Which with the other three* and quarter make
Seven and a dodkin, O how the piece would take
Especially if in the proper places,
Were pourtraicted to' the life the Iron Maces;
And Sancho too, with pode disrobed discharg-ing
Such stuff, as, for, you often see a Barge in:
The vapors in the ascent, the stuff ^'th' fall,
I would delineate, and what is all in all,
His filthy Buttocks mounted, down his hose,
And the Don stoutly tweaking his own nose.
This in a Table rarely done and well,
Faith, throw it in the fire, if 'twould not sell.
TEXT.
AND we shall meet that which may mitigate the terrible Thirst that afflicts
us, which sets us questionless in more pain then did our hunger.] It is a
great quaerie in the scruple-house of Nature, which a man may best endure, and
longest, Hunger, or Thirst, want of Meat, or want of Drink: The Brethren of the
Spicket, state the question in the Negative, and lay down for a fundamental,
that there is no living without Liquids, no not a day; Ale is their eating and
their drinking surely, the Bilbos, the Trouts, the Aristippians, the Beereans,
the Aleans, the Canareians, and Claretteers, Ancient Philosophers, were all of
Consul Bitulus his opinion and practice, and of that able and comprehensive
Tholus, and the fair match of Fuscus his custom, according to the measure of
that draught, which was -- Dignum sitiente Tholo, vel conjuge Fusci. Which was
a Goddard, or Rummer, or lusty Bowl taken exactly by Silenus his Can, which
was the standard for mornings and evenings draughts, and the whole school (I
mean Schola Bibendi) and their asseclae Bibaculorum, Madidorum, and
Temulentorum, who are the greatest, and most spreading Sect in the World,
follow that way to a drop, whichis called in the most authentic and
emphaticall word they have, super naculum; amongst these it is an undeniable
principle, that vita consist it in Humido, and a drive soul, quatenus talis,
cannot last. The intrinsecall radical moisture must be supplied, recruited,
and replenished with the extrinsecall liquids, that is, exempli gratid, in the
morning with a sphericall Tossed in a pot of Ale of good capacity, that it may
not be resisted, but force passage, and break through all obstructions. Before
dinner again, refresh your Lamp, (for it is always wasting) with the generous
oil of Sack, nitty, roapy, and razy; at dinner with the same, unless for
varieties sake you have an auxiliary and lusty glass or two of Vine de France;
after dinner, for you must not have too long intermissions, to your Sack
again, Typice, Topice, and Tropice. By the constant and quotidian succors,
you provide against the conflagration of the Microcosme, which like that of the
greater magnitude, must and will (unless these provident rules prevent it) dye
of a burning Fevour: Wherefore like prudent smiths, have by your Forge, the
troffe of water continually, and learn your quantities, for pidling draughts
will not do it.

-- parvaeque Aspergine lymphae
Grandior exurgit, laesus que irascitur Ignis.
According to the capacity of your vessel, the dilatation of the veins, which
if they be large and full, plainly indicates that a brave flame (which is
always extending it self, and enlarging his narrow quarters) plays in the
Azure Channel; no small services nor misers glasses will do the business
here, nor Pimplico's discharged to the round inthe middle; but a thorough and
total exhausting, draining, and swooping the whole vessel, were it as we say*
to the bottom a mile: According to the example of our friend Bytias in Virgil,
-- Ille impiger hausit,
Spumantem pateram, and pleno se proluit auro.


And because I am indebted to you a Translation, I shall clap both the pieces
of verses of two several Authors (agreeing so well in the matter) into one
Epigram.

A little water does incense the fire,
Drink deeper, boy, and see you fi^'t up higher.
Somewhat at top is best, when the brisk wine
Swims l^ke a Coronet round the brims, it is fine.
Bitias begin thy plentiful Carouse,
And we as thee, our selves in Sack will sowce.
E^contra, the adverse party, which are sober fellows, the Brethren of the
Fange, that would have all conveyances dispatched the old way, by Indent of the
Tooth, the Marriotae, Idiotae, Lytherani, Stubbingenses, VVoodenses, Cannibals,
and Lycaones, such as have the Woolf or Dog in their stomachs, Crosse-byters,
Crosse-sitters, Tailors, Gentle Crafts-man, Smiths, and all manner of Antelucan
Laborers, who make provision for the flesh, make the flesh their provision.
These lay down for their Axiom^ and Dogmata, Tempus edax rerum; eat at all
times, Totos ponit apros. Be not ashamed to have a stomach like a Swine, ede,
lude, live to eat, and play for meat.

Cum morte summa voluptas; There is no happiness to the Grave, who is always
devouring never satisfied, eating even these great eaters too.

Besides, they strengthen themselves with varieties of learned precepts, such
as Animal propter convivia natum,
Homines fruges consumere na^i.
For naught but to be eat is borne the Creature,
Oves and Boves must be slain, Man's the Eater.


Then consider rationally, and naturall-Philosopher-like, consider and compute
the many parts, joints, sinews, atteries, veins, bones, skins, parts, similar,
dissimilar, Homogeneous, Heterogeneous, spermatick, sanguinary, muscular,
gutturall, dentall, mandibular, etc. which are all to be maintained out of this
kitchin-natural, the stomach, by the providore, the mouth, who would think that
any Shambles, Poultreys, Newgate-Markets, Cheapesides, Eastcheapes, Faires,
Festivals, Saturnals, Jubilees, are able to satisfy the several Interests, of
so many Ravenous expectants, much more, when this Macroc^sme is full of
Microcosmes, and every one, the least Infant in the universality of men, has
as much to maintain, as the greatest Giant in the World: Wherefore Saturn (the
very Lun^ford of the Deities) showed you what to do rather then starve, marry
eat thine own Children, it is the next way to make a wise child, to teach him
to know his Father, as well as if he were in him. Lycaon followed that course
of diet, and ever since it has been practiced, Homo homini Lupus, we may eat
one another, till there is but one man left, and so the World may end, as it
began.

When Sancho heard these words, he began to weep with the greatest Compassion
of the World, and said unto him, Sr, etc.]

Nos patriam sugimus and Dulcia linquimus arva.
Have not I left for thee the Onyon Beds,
Scallions and Garlike, which has stronger heads
Then any yet we met? and more then these,
What is more strong, my Mary Gutierez,
Wife of my Bosom; Sancho Pancha's wealth?
Who covetous fool, have ta'n a course of stealth,
May bring me to the Rope, not Onyon Ropes,
But such as at one swing drown Care and Hopes.
O had you heard our Curate, you would not snatch
At dangers thus; he taught, harm watch, harm catch,
And you ever since the adventure of the Windmill,
Run headlong on, and will, or make, or find-ill;
The Smith-Field Giants laid you in a zound,
And now a Giant of the ear y' have found;
For we see nothing but a rustling noise,
Good Sr forbear to search into the cause;
For if you should do otherwise then well,
(As gold ^ Argent you do) pray who shall tell?
Think you that I am worthy to relate
The manner of the Combat, and your Fate?
Who will believe, A Knight that lived by applause,
Unfortunate, should perish by a noise?
Who will believe, when wrote in books we find
A head of Windmils, ruined by a Wind?
Who will believe, when on the earth you are found,
That such an Eare-lesse Knight should dye of the sound?
No Sr, let Sancho Counsel, do you kep^,
We have been soundly beat, let us now sound sleep't.
And if our dreams are full of such mad whimsies,
Let Us fight in sleep, but waking let our Limbs-ly.
Sancho tied his Asses Halter, to both Rosinantes legs.]
Dolus an virtus quis in Host requirat!
Sancho found a politic and strong Remora for the Knights speed, and what
Prayers, Preachments and tears could not obtain from the Master-Fool, he got
by the Ass his servant, unto whom he had girt Rosinante so straight, that he
was not sui Iuris, for he was Asse-Tedder'd, and in potestate Halterius. The
Don presently smells out the business, an Incantation upon the Horse for want
of nailing his old shoes at the door of his house when he came forth, or
because, nor the old Woman, nor the Barber, nor his Niece, nor the Curate
designed him the security of an old shoe after him. Little thought the Don,
that Muniat^n Freston rode upon the Ass by him, and that Rosinante was
becalmed, not for want of wind, but by too much Cable Rope. Here they must
cast Anchor perforce, and though the Brutes are at rest, the Don will not
permit his senses to foregoe their Offices, but keeps his Eyes, Ears and Nose,
very busily employed all night, as thereby hangs a tale.

Be you attentive, for now I begin, it was that it was.] Once a top of a time,
so, and so so, and says he, says he, says he, and quoth he, quoth he, quoth
he, are the natural cement of most tales.

If thou tellest thy tale after this manner, repeating every word twice that
thou say, thou will not make an end this two days.] Custom of ridiculous
speeches prevail much upon most men, who having used themselves to some
impertinent word or phrase, cannot, even in matters of greatest consequence,
forgo it. For example, a Reverend Judge, was to give a charge at the Assize,
which was with great gravity and sincerity performed, had it not been every
where interlarded with, in that kind, that was his customary word; so that to
every material thing, this was sure to come in. As Gentlemen of the Jury, you
ought to enquire after recusants in that kind, and such as do not frequent the
Church in that kind, but above all, such as haunt Alehouses in that kind,
notorious Whoremasters in that kind, Drunkards and Blasphemers in that kind,
and all notorious offenders in that kind, are to be presented in that kind,
and, as the Laws in that kind direct, must be proceeded against in that kind;
which set all but the Bench (who were to keep the Peace by their places) into a
laughter of that kind, that being charged by the Crier to silence, they could
not, till they had ended laughing and crying together. A Gentleman being asked
(after the Court rose) how he liked the Judges charge to day, answered it was
the best, in that kind, that ever he heard. Like to this, something was that of
an Innkeeper in the same City, who being troubled extremely with the D' you
see, to all discoveries, upon an occasion being put to say Grace; began, the
eyes of all things, D' you see, do look unto thee, d' you see, and thou
providest their meat, do you see, in due season, d' you see, God save the Church
d' you see, the Queen, the Realm, d' you see, and peace and truth, d' you see.
Amen. This old Queen Elizabeth's Host, could not out of the rode in his
alter-Grace, but before he had done, no man could see for laughing, which vexed
my choleric Host so much, that he swore he would not say grace, d' you see, as
long as he lived for this, d' you see, and do you hear, d' you see, if I do
not make it good that I have sworn, let me never look man in the Face, d' you
see, or let me drink water, d' you see, till my dying day, d' you see, that a
man must be laughed at for his good will, d' you see, I cry God merry d' you
see, I did not say grace but in this pinch, d' you see, this forty years d'
you see.

See now what I said quoth Sancho, that you should have ^^pt account. By Jove
the tale is ended.] This tale is lost, just as the fellow lost the Eole because
he could not hold it, or as Tantalus his Apples, because he could not catch
'um, or the fellow his Geese, or he that was to tell twenty, whereof himself
was one, and never reckoned that; or it ends just as his tale began, who being
to relate some story to Vespasian (an Emperor of the Ill-favo^r^d Face)
standing long still, was commanded by a Gentleman to begin, But he excused it
and said, he would stay till his excellency came off from the stool, which he
guessed by his face, his business at present, the Emp^ror could not change his
face, and the Historian was forced to change the room. So our story ends very
wittily abruptly, and Torralva is on one side of the stream, and the Goate-herd
on the other; as the Scotch-man and his wife, who were more unhappily severed
by a like accident; for Iany and her good Lowne had went, and they went until
they came to a Bury, which was at that time overflown with water, there Iany
and Iocky stood gaping eane at ather until a Traveller passing that way,
profer'd the courtesy of a waft successively to them both; the Scotch-man
blessed him with bath his hands, and in gewd Faith (Sr) let Iany gang first,
and I will stay your return; so up went Iany, who was very thankful, more then
became her, for upon easy solicitation, she yielded mutual carriage to the
Gentleman on the other side. Iocky beholding these strange sights, roared out,
why Iany? what an Alaboure an you at? wha werks this Ianny: Ways me, O for a
dry Burg. For want whereof, as of the Don's not accounting, the Tale is ended.

What noise is that Sancho?]

Haec oracula naribus exploranda. This is a very pretty praevious adventure, to
the encounter of the sound, in which, two of the Don's best senses were
shrewdly put to it, but this of Sancho's was the hotter service, and came with
load and load, fresh and fresh, but never sweet. It was strange, that Sancho
(but he had only Wallet-invention) did not tell him, that it was a Trumpet sent
from Tantablins Castle, where the Reverentiall Lady Merdina, and many more of
her train, which they call the Voluntary Tenants, were imprisoned, during the
Giants pleasure. Which Ladies of the most excellent delight and ease, he
always suffered to take Air only at his Port Esquilin, which was as loathsome
as a Common-shore. Some of these gallant Spirits have been confined all their
life times, until their dissolution; others, weary of detention, have broken
Prison, and flew in the very Noses of them they next met, and changing their
names, but not their conditions, pass for the Rowsers, the Tearers, the
Ratlers, the Quaverers, the VVhizzers, the Fuzzers, the Squeekers; according to
the several eruptions of the Winds, out of Aeolus his den, which is the grand
Colon or hole of those imprisoned Spirits. Hark, they are coming, Vna Eurus
que Notus que ruunt, Creberque procellis,
Affricus, and vastos volvunt ad littora Fluctus,
Qua data porta ruunt, and terras turbine perftant.
Which in plain English read you thus,
Supposing Sancho Aeolus:
And with both hands his belly pressing,
Blow winds says he, upon my blessing;
When that the Port-hole opes, or his back door,
Out go the Winds, East East, Nore and by Nore.
These fly about, and like the Bowdy wind,
(Sweet breathed or no) kiss all they meet or find;
There is no guard against 'um, though you compass
Your Nose, they have privilege (as the Trump has)
To go about: but when the Tempest's laid,
Then gentle showers fall, where those bustlers played.
So Sancho wind-eas'd of his rumbling guts,
Discharges softest Lees, from his bare buts.


I prithee friend Sancho, retire two or three steps back, and henceforth have
more care of my person.] It was strange the Don would make a business of it,
when as Lords and Ladies do the same, and he having admitted his Squire into
such familiarity, there could be no greater expression of Sancho's acceptance,
and haile-fellowship, then that Coram te pedere Sancho solet.
This Favor Don do not deny,
Let him (that he fly not) let fly.


But the thing is justifiable by nature, and there is a book wrote by Grobiaus
and Grobiana, (who are the Patron and Patroness of these deportments) wherein
the Scholars are authorized to the venting, disburthening at any place or time
(be it Dinner, Sermon, Prayers, or any other while whatsoever) of that
flatulent spirit, which is troublesome, or desirous to be disposessed. Besides
that, the Emperor Claudius Enacted a Law for the common use of liberty at
Meals, and amongst other Histories you might hear one another ta'les go: M^re
incitements to this sport you may read in Fartarethis de art Ca-candi, which
is very well worth that for which it was made: it cannot be then wast paper,
being most properly imploi'd; but if for a more legal justification you
suspend these (which so suspended, smothered, or stifled) prove lactium
Tormina, subligaculorum discrimina, take the Text for it, Lege de egestis,
Podice grave onerato, Tit: Nose Autem vel siquis intervenerit.

Turning back again to Sancho, to bid him farewell, he commanded him to stay
for him three days at the longest, etc.] Aurora displaied her self, after
this Wedding, ( Sancho's I mean) was ended, which sort of solemnities are most
commonly in the night, and the Don is very unfortunately among a company of
Chestnut Trees, (for Sanch'os fruits were not so sweet) through which the
adventure of the Sound came so fresh again to the Ear which was next, that
without heed given to what Sancho had said, or considering aright, the omens
and presagings of his Augurhole; a few words being spoken to Sancho, snobbing
at his Insensiblenesse and undauntednesse, the Don resolved to take the Sound,
leaving behind him if he had miscarried, only this copy of his countenance for
Dulcinea, and these few L^gacies for Sancho Panca.

After my three days absence, (so long stay,
So long may last this sound and bouncing fray)
Return, and tell Dulcinea, that her Don
Had blows enough, before he now went on;
Blows to that number, and of such high grace,
As dubbed him Knight of the Illfavour'd face.
Tell her beside, what did befall my jaws,
My chops are fallen, and my wide mouths god saws,
(My teeth I mean are beaten out) that if
I lived, spoon-meat bad been my chief relief:
What on my sides is seen, tell; how my ears,
(Not fully two, more lugg'd then any Swine or Bears,)
Continual Catadupes do stound: But I
Will either still this sound, or by sound dye.
Then taking Sancho by the Fist;
My Testament begins thus, Amen: Ego,
In as good senses, and as rich as Dego,
Bequeath my body to a plat of ground,
To be interred without or words or sound,
(Music or prayers,) killed by a sound; my tomb^,
In scorn of sounds, shall only hold out mumm.
Then look behind an ancient painted cloth,
Covered and hid from sight, by fly and moth;
There read, what lands I meant to conquer, there
Are all the Castles in a Register;
And at the end of that victorious List,
Thy Islands named; it is so, I mary is it:
My goods 'twixt Dull: and thee divide, pray prise 'um,
Let none the Inventary boldly gaze on,
Or buy, before that you have made election,
It is my love to thee, to her affection.
Dulcinea is my sole Executrix,
The seal is my nails Thumb, the Indorsement Quix.
When DON QUIXOT saw what was done, he waxed all ashamed and mute, and Sancho's
Cheeks were swollen with laughter, and the Don also laughed a little himself.]
Quanta despe decidi! Is our adventure proved a Fulling-Mill? are our Silver
staves turned to Iron Maces? and our Giants (earth-bred indeed) but of Fullers
earth? Certainly by the sound, something of the employment wrought upon Sancho,
which scowr'd him so; and yet if either of the two, Sancho should have been
first in this Encounter, for it was necessary for him after he had foul'd his
Breeches. Our Tragedy is changed into pure Comedy, and instead of a Prize, we
are like to have a jiggo of two principal Clownes, each gibing the other, they
are now at the Ti-hee, and without tickling, laugh till their sides ache, as if
they were under correction of the Maces, Sancho has the better in this
grinning Prize, and so long they interchangeably kept it up, that in the
Spanish Tone and Accent you may sing, Per multos risos poteros cognoscere
stultos.

The Don was enraged, but chiefly, hearing him say in gibing manner, I was
borne by the disposition of Angels.] The slave Sancho does supra- parasite it,
turns mime Satyr, Sarcast, Hyperaspist, Quixo-mastix, and from the Don's own
mouth, has a Mockabere for him; I am the man by Providence designed,
To change the Iron age to Gold refined,
Which without Alchymie, or loads of Coals,
Or whites of Eggs, or Spirits, (alias souls)
This Arm shall Cohobate, all matters mighty
Reserved are for me, come all, i will fight ye,
All upon one at once; Monsters where be ye?
I Am Hercules, club too, Ti-hee, wi-hee.


The Don lifted the end of his Lance, and gave him two such blows on the
back.] Laesa patientia fit furor. This contempt was so high, that in all the
books of Errantry, I meet not any Relation to match it withal. No Squire ever
took that liberty which Sancho did, to deride his Knight to the face, and by a
looser carriage to affront him to the nose; but nothing was so distastefull at
present, as the unmannerly, and reproachful wide opening of his mouth, whereby
the Squire did manifest to the world, that he had a better set of Teeth then
his Lord: so that the abuse being triple to his face in general, and his nose
and teeth in particular, the punishment should have been answerable, and he
should have basted him from head to tail. Now it is a great Dispute amongst
Martial men, whether this Lance. Bastinado (for it cannot be called an
Encounter) did dis-Squire Sancho, that is, Cashiere him. In the truth of the
state, I do believe it did; but by the consequence of the story, finding his
Repentance so sudden, and his submission so exemplary, he may pass in
Errantry for a Squire Reformado.

But you may be sure that I will not once more unfold my lips to jest at your
doings.] The Spaniel! the Spaniel! What a deal of love and service a good whip
and a Bell procure? The Orders and Rules of Errant-Squires are not here
related, though in the secrets of the Manchega^ Registrie at this day they are
to be found. What Distances, Equipage, what Approaches, Smiles, Shrugs, Habits,
are suitable with them, and requirable from them! How qualified he ought to be
that enters himself Squire to a Knight Errant; and what Services (I mean of
Chivalry) he must perform for his Trial; what years he must accomplish before
he can be capable of the Government of any Island; or have the privilege to
ride all Rodes pennilesse, without pay for Mans-meat, or Horse-meat; at what
time of his Age he may take leave of the Knight he does serve, and set up for
himself: And after such Resolution, within what time he is to assign himself
a Lady, under whose protection he does undertake his Adventures, and unto whom
all his successes (as the Tutelary power over him) are to be attributed. To
these were many more very considerable Instructions, besides Negative Precepts
showing what he should not do: As not eat, or drink, unless occasion were
offered; not lie in bed, unless in place proper; not be familiar with their
Dons, unless upon penalty of discharging, or unavoidable necessity; not
speak, report, or betray the ill success of any Adventure on his Lords side,
but stand to justify the contrary, though his Legs would hardly give him
leave; not grumble at want, not look for Wages, cast-Apparrell, or a fresh
Horse: And upon these conditions Affirmative, and Negative, any man may enter
himself into this Honorable Employment; from which Heaven preserve all men
th^^ are in their right wits.

CHAP. VII.
For want of drink, and clearing of the Eyes,
The Don is thrown into an enterprise;
Wherein he gets the prize, it would amaze one
To see him now Top-gallant in a Basin.
O for an Ewre too, to complete the grace!
And wash him Knight of the Well-favour'd Face!
But 'twas impossible, for in that fall,
The Barber perished with his washing-ball.
What will wash off this stain! when it is read,
That which should be at's Chin, is over his Head:
Ill-favored now for ever! for those shops
That mend the Face, will never admit thy chops:
No hopes that e're thy jaws shall be recruited,
Sancho will be the Trencher-Squire reputed.
How can thou think for ever to be better,
When thou have wronged Tooth-drawer, and Tooth-setter?
See what strong fancy can! it flies so high-now,
That Cut-beard is supposed the great Mum-bry-no;
And the Brass Basin which he washed foul Beards-in,
The Helmet is that Giant grand appeard-in.
Thus rides our Don, to all the world a laughter,
And fools it on, unto the end oth' Chapter.
TEXT.
ANswered Sancho, I see nothing but a man on a gray Ass like mine own, and
brings on his head somewhat that shines.] Sancho had no Heroical and
Erranticall eyes: His Diamond was of no spirituours and sparkling Water; but
dull, composed of thick pudly stuff, which did obscure and debase the objects
he looked upon: The Opacous part was too large, whereas the Don's was
Ictericall, as if he had descended of the house of the Flavii, or that his
Nurse had mixed all his milk with Saffron, all was Gold or Lions that he saw;
an eye for an Alchimist, a Sublimating, Transmuting, and Cohobating eye, a
Cuckolds eye, (which is a Cornu-copious eye) and renders all flesh, and
especially his own, like the fat of Rams, yellow, because he is Aries on the
Head.

This Barber served two Villages, etc.] This transient Face-mender would in
time have made a good Knight Errant; he was for the Tournament, and could hit a
hair, a man inured to Martial Instruments, which if he had but spirit enough
to have drawn, the very sight of his Tweezers would have put the Don to the
Roares; or if he had hanged his Collar of Teeth about his neck, (as they use to
be at his Sho^-window) the Don had took him sans question, for the Giant of the
Cheek, and made what haste from him he could to have preserved the remainder of
his life-sustainers. But sure the dull Rogue, shaved with a Pumice-stone, and
clipped with a pair of hedgesheers, and washed with Pigge-dung, and though by
the custom of Spain he might ride on Asse-backe to his Customers, yet it
seems by his flight, that his agility lay rather in his Toes then his Fingers.
Our youths of that Profession, do not look as they were under the Influencies
of Aquarius, but the nimble Mercury, who has so spiritiz'd their whole
Oeconomie, that they are Quicksilver to the fingers ends; you would swear,
that upon the swiftness of their Motions, their hands were the primum Movens,
and ultimum Moriens of their whole body: Nor are the rest of their parts less
active, their Tongues are as fluent as their Fingers, and (except in some sense
of the word) seldom lie still. Their shops are the forges of Invention, the
Magazines of all News, more frequented then a Bake-house, or a Booke-sellers
stall; All the Mongers of tha^ kind come thither for matter and Inspiration,
(both the Scrubbado affording it, when Barlerino himself is dry) after such an
effectual excitation of the ingenious Atoms of the Pericranium, the spirits
of the Brain by a kind Contagion stir, and then the nimble Factories of the
Fancy move all their subtle Engines of device, and presently (like Minerva
out of loves) issues all those Diurnall-births, which in several Mercuries
fill the Piatza, and are the Gazzets for the whole world. Besides these
necessary Administrations, rare are the Quedrums of many of the houses of the
Ba^rberino's; like A-bell Drugger, you shall have one of them without a Rebus
to his sign, which is as attractive as his Wife, or the adjacent pot of Ale,
or his Plaister-box (if he be a Chyron too) or if not, as his Tweezer. These
Rebuses are Gingles, or English Hieroglyphics; for anciently the Egyptians
(of Nations that used no Barbers as well as the Moors) were the first that
conveyed knowledge or wit under such Representations, viz. He has a long Pole
elevated, and at the end of it a Labell, wherein is in a fair Text-hand
written this word, Money. Now the Pole signifies it self, which joined to the
written word, make Pole Money: there is the Rebus, that Cutbert is no body
without Pole Money: The Motions in his Paper-Lanthorne are not to be passed by
as the smallest part of the Rarities of his house; then the Magnetic virtue of
his Citterne, Gytterne, and Kit, which are the constant preservers of the
agility of his hand, which he loves because they have heads to 'um; Next to
these, tagging of Points and Ribbands, which in a vacation of Customers, if his
Boys be quick at it, and the Fashion as it is, will serve their Master in Ale,
and their Mistress in cold Caudle, and themselves in Black-Puddings, per
^eptimanam very well, (Sunday excluded as to the Work) not to the profits
aforesaid.

The Barber rising up again as light as a Dear, run away so swiftly through
the plain, as the wind could scarce over-take him.] Whether throughout, as a
Dear Cap-a-pe, is a question: for the Barbarino's of Spain are great Liars
out, their Custom calling them abroad; and that occasion given, their
she-Gitternes also, who are much played upon in their absence: which is the
occasion commonly of the increase of a Monster more in the Paper-Lanthorne at
their return. I do believe amongst the many Fables at his Shop, this story
was never told without such additions as made for his own Credit, the loss of
the Basin and the Ass being repaireable from the Country. Against the next
journey he is resolved to ride better provided, and with a more appointed
Helmet, upon a Brute of better Service, and with his own Pole for a Lance,
Basin for a Target, he would take the Field again, where, Tam Morte quam
Mercurio, the Don should dearly find, and to his cost too, (for Barberino
intended also to assault him with the subtlle Engine of a W^it) that if the
Pole failed, the Catch-pole should not; if his Target failed, wherein he used
to catch by the beard, that by which he caught by the Back should not: But if
all these miscarrled, this Machavillian at a stratagem, never went without a
small Box of Powder, or dried Meal, and his Puffings, which if he could but
advance to the Dons eyes, he doubted not to spoil him for all Adventures, and
to punish him in^s kind for that of the Winde-mill, and regaine his Basin,
leaving the Vnmambryne-helmeted Don in as confounded a case, as the Mayor of
Quinboro^ugh after the Encounter with PICKPOCKETO of Nov. Hispaniola, or Nov.
Anglia, which you please: But if Fortune denied Martial Revenge, then Chance
might bring this Knight of the Ill-favored Face after his Victories to Toboso,
'to which Town he must needs pass through the Village where Cutbert lived;
and for his Face let him alone to remember it; and for a Base-one, what the
Pole and the Powder could not effect, the Suds of his Landred Face should do;
which beside the intolerable smart of his eyes, which would call his hands to
their present help, his skillful Boys should ransack his Fobs, and make him
thence better satisfaction then the Masters of the Holy Brotherhood: until
some such time Barberino leaves him, his Ass, his Basin, and his Patient, who
by this time is dead of a Pleurisy, for want of the Barber, who touch^ with
his own proper grief, is got to his Wife for a Remedy against the
Palpitation of the Hurt, got by the violent motion of his Heels.

That Pagan which lost it was discreet, and did imitate the Castor.] The story
of the Castor un-polluxing himself is very well applied: In the like danger of
persons not much unlike, the like policy was used before. A counterfeit
Cripple, and a real Bear, which having broke loose from the Keepers, took
directly upon a Pass, where this dissembling Beggar plied; who seeing the
Bear make up toward the place, whence he could not upon his Crutches, without
apparent attachment escape by the help of sudden wit; therefore he cut the
ligaments of his wooden supporters, and having recovered the use of his
natural legs, though he came thither Cripled, he ran away straight. The
Metaphor here was only transversed from Tail to Head: Why might not the
Barber throw away his Basin, which was his Cap-case, to save his Head-peece, as
well as the Castor his Ball-case, to save the rest of the Taile-piece? Hercule
me Castor might he, especially when Don Quix-hercules was so near his Civit-Box.

O quantum in subitis Casibus ingenium! In the mean time I will wear this
Helmet which thou call a Basin, as I may:] What an invincible Coxcombe was
this Sancho, to look for a Beaver with the Basin, when in the very example
before excellently hinted by the Don, the Castor, which is the Bever, bites
away the Basin to save the Bever. So here the Barber having a Cast-Bever, or a
Castor of Don John's of Mendozas, to save it from the Rain, put on the Basin;
but the putting on so hard for the Basin, he put off his Basin to keep on his
old Bever: Upon the Inhasonation of the Don, it was to be wondered which was the
greater Sarazen, he on whose head it was, or from whose head it was supposed to
fall, Man-barbe-ryno: It could not worse become our Don surely then, when, for
want of other accountrements at a Play, Mars (the god of War forsooth) was
feign to act in a close-stoole pan, which had it been properly applied, would
have served for his Stool of Repentance, after the violation of his Brother
D^ities sheets.

And as in case of doubt, until I am better informed, I say that thou exchange
if thy need be extreme.] A Council of War is called, to know whether they
shall admit the Trojan Ass into their wooden Society; Cry you mercy, it is a
Grecian Ass, for it was a Gray. The Don being President of the Council, which
consisted only of the Advocate- Sancho, and himself, (not Judge-Advocate I
mean) but one who was always a Pleader for some illegal prize or other: the
Don herein, (though to his friend and Brother Sancho) denied to do an act of
injustice, or derogation from the Honor of Knight-Errantry; He Knight Errant,
if he steal in propria persona, is Uncalendred for ever, and his name expunged
the Ephemerides of King Arthurs Knights. But change is no robbery, so that be
done likewise by the Squire, not the Knight: The Capucines boy takes money, not
his Holy Master; but in case of irresistible necessity, as when Iugurth's
Horse, A^^xanders Elephant, Cyrus his Dromedary were shot under 'um; or (for I
think their time was before Monks, and so consequently before the Invention of
Guns and Gunpowder) when these great Heroes Brutes were slain, it was lawful
to take the next they could get. Not did Alexander take it for a disparagement
to ride upon a Camel, when Elephantus was gone; or if he, or any of the rest
had, Lege Nationum, they must have gone on foot, which is incompetent with a
Knight Errant, unless with his Horse in hand, or rather in his Squires. And as
for the qualification in the Question, ( but of extreme need) the extreme
hardness that Sancho was put to, might be very well judged by the obduration
of his Posteriors, which were almost petrified by continual hardnings upon his
Asses bare back; for he rode podice nudo, ever since the loss of his Wallet,
until the purchase of the Cassock, where the Divinity Buttons did often disease
those of the Flesh. Wherefore it was decreed and ratified in a full Court, of
one Judge, one Asse-sessor, two Asses, and a Stallion, that Sancho should have
all the Bona Mobilia (praeter ipsum Corpus) of the Prize-Asse taken in lawful
fight: and those he should instantly translate upon the back of his own Ass,
which made proud by these new Trappings, pricked up his ears above Rosinantes,
or he that was above Rosinante.

Sancho thou say not ill, quoth Don Quixot.] These were Sancho's nuts after a
full Meal, to bring his Knight into a fresh Frenzy, which he could do with as
much ease as an Ape-carrier with his eye makes the vaulting Creature come
aloft, or at the sign of Terrid in Aldo. Name but an Emperor, a King, a
Queen, a Lady, a Giant, a Castle, a Monster, and he was presently on fire,
Orlando Furioso, Hercules Furens, Ieronymo: upon the very mention, his brains
are got beyond the Sophy of Persia, unto a far remote Kingdom, where the
King of that Kingdom was rescued by that Knight, that was in love with that
Daughter, that was heir to that King, that was oppressed by that Giant, that
loved that Daughter, that hated that Giant, that was slain by that Knight,
that had forgot that Lady, that lived at Toboso, that was called Dulcinea, that
had a Squire that was unknown to that Lady; but by that name of Sancho Pancha,
that served that Knight, that was of the Ill-favored Face, that promised that
Squire, that Government of that Island, that is not in this Book, but in that
which is the next.

The Princess shall admit me for her Lord and Spouse, although she knew me to
be the Son of a Water-Bearer.] I did always imagine that from such a
Fountaine-head this stream of Knight-Errantry did derive it self; Prince
Tancred was a great Prince, and like those Roman Emperors carried upon men's
shoulders, which was the first piece of state in the world, and at this day is
kept up by the French Madams in their Sedans. From Prince Tanacred, or Tankard,
his Phlegmatic race was drawn by wooden or leaden Pipes to the Mancha, where is
yet to be seen the Scheme of his Lunatic Genealogy, who as the Knight, were
by Nativity, as well as Acquisition, very Bedlamish; the King his Father-in-law
so much spoken of, calls to mind a Gentleman, who was the By-blow of a Lord, by
whose name the Base son used to honor himself in all companies, at Meals,
Cards, Bowls, Races, where ever and anon he was at his -- The Lord his Father
allowed him so much for this, for that Recreation, and the Lord his Father kept
the best Hawks, Horses, Dogs, House, etc. in all that County; and thus he
continued his shameless repetition, until another Gentleman vexed at his
ambitious, but worthily to have been concealed, Recitals, said, Sir, here is
much talk of the Lord your Father, but the Devil a word of the Whore your
Mother; which struck the Lordling into so deep a Melancholy (for he had not
the spirit of Barnes of that Extraction) and such a long silence, as if
Sweet-lips his best hound had miscarried, or Pepper-corne his Race-horse had
got a splint.

Then there is no other to be done, but steal her away, and carry her to some
other place.] This Daughter-catching is only pardonable in Knight-Errants; for
in all other places, Plagiaries (that is, Stealers of Children, whether of the
back or brain) were accounted the greatest Robbers, and therefore ought to
have the greatest punishments. A sort of these Thieves are now redivivous, (the
Reliquiae I believe of Knight-Errantry) who go by the name of Spirits: These,
by Wiles, Bribes, and Tricks, decoy silly Children on Shipboard, where when
they once have them, they are clap^ (as the simple Rat-catcher in the same case
was upon Lenoyrs account) under Decks, and thus entrapped, part with Country,
Friends, and Fortunes, which they never re-salute, no nor their spiritual
Fathers, who deserve the Gallows more than any Rogues that suffer. But for a
Lady to be stolen away, and such a Lady, that was thought a fit match for a
Giant, is such a Device, that none but a Knight Errant could dream of. It is
all odds, the Story is not right here, Cyd Hametes hic non tenetur. The Lady of
such proportion stole away the Knight rather; for it cannot be imagined
otherwise, that her Discretion or Love should be so little, as to bring her
Knight in danger of a Rape or Felony, when a gallant spirit would confess the
truth, and say the business was her own plotting, her own doing, and undoing,
and that howsoever she dissembles the business of riding now behind, that was
not the thing she aimed at.

I would not authorize my Litado? Dictado said the Don, or Dignity.

Nobilitas sola est atque uni^ a ^irtus. The Fountain of Honor cannot give
deserts, though he give Titles, though commonly where the Deserts are not, the
Honors are not given, but bought and sold, which is the rise of so much
gallant Nobility and Gentry in the Spanish Kingdoms, where is Purchase-money
enough: An Accipiamus Pecuniam, and Dimittamus Asinum, being a current Maxim
in all Countries, where an importunate rich Coxcombe is gratified for his Token
which never fails. But Sancho after his Cobblers Dream of the Earl, (like
those whose manners are not mended with their Titles, being Splendidiora
sterquilinia, or Apes in a new sure) sinks himself into the conceit of his
first original, which was Beadle unto some Fraternity of Porters, wherein
(notwithstanding his airie promises of the Island) the Provostship of the
Company would gladly content him and his Moll, if for one year she might take
place of the Sister-hood of her fellow-Porters wives. Then after the days of
his Mastership expired, he would return to his Ale and Tossed, the Frock and
Badge, and off goes Gown, and on goes shouldersavers, welcome half a hundred,
and God rest his soul that built the Pillars for the Rest of Porters Bodies.

Nam genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
What if my Ancienters were John of Cumber,
If I no worth have, I Am but of the number.
What more is to be done then to take a Barber, etc.] I think I must recant;
and conclude Sancho will make a right spark: What Noble Knight Errant, or
Lord of a Purchased Title can do more then keep his outlandish Barber, his
Monsieur, his Tailor, his Cook, his rider of his great Horse, and the great
jade himself rides, all exotic; snuffing at any services of his own
Country; their Meats, Drinks, Fashions are course, fulsome, nasty, without a
foreign Hogow. Their Suits, rather then they should be without a Fangle, must
be done with a Why-hoo, which is a Chimericall Mode lately found out; A Fashion
to be whistled into a Tailors head without Butts or Patterns.

Ride on, ride on, great pair, unto Fools Harbor,
Both high in thought, with Basin, and with Barber.
CHAP. VIII.
Room, room for fresh Adventures, and new Sallies,
Thus far in Land-work, now Ware for the Galleys;
For Gally-slaves, who chained in loving Links,
(Their hands were never honester methinks)
The Knight of the Ill-Face his Brother-Faces,
(For they were ill-lookt all) from their doomed places,
The Oar and Mines, will rescue; for he allows
No force on freeborn souls, no Chains, no Gallows;
An act of desperate Valor, and Sub paena
Of death, but that he fled unto Morena,
(Once taking Sancho's counsel) a high Mountain,
Where they remain, their Histories recounting:
Recounting more the dangerous reward,
(Then the Act it self) of forcing of the Guard,
The Convoy of the Slaves, which bold arresting,
Was treason against the King, with whom's no jesting.
But that which sticks in the stomach of our Don,
Like a good Meal (if ever he get one)
Was the redeemed Slaves ingratitude,
Whom he enlarged and gave full latitude
Of Leg and Arm, which they uncivil Devils
Employ against the Rescuer from their evils.
Whom think you in this Fact was Paramount,
But that unlucky Rogue Gines Passamont?
Whom though the Galleys miss, yet for this trick
I Will warrant him a Passe-port to old Nick.
TEXT.
THen if that be so, then herein justly falls the Execution of my Function.]
Well applied Don, Ergo Pot-lid. No, no, a better Inference by far; it was
Argumentum ad hominem, viz. to himself, whose Pate itched, it was upon the
mending hand, by that sign, and consequently upon the marring; Exempli gratia.

Every thing under force is rescuable by my Function.

All these are under a force,

Ergo, They are rescuable by my Function.

The Syllogism is a very strong one. A Demonstration, a priore, as to the Don;
as a Posteriore, to the Slaves: The Major no man durst deny, 'twas Probatio
Leonina! quis ausus est quartam partem? The Minor was visible as the Nose in
his Face, nay more, then the Teeth in his Mouth, and ten times more, then meat
for those Teeth. The Conclusion is undeniable, per (...) seculorum: Thus by one
Syllogism in two Figures the Don has proved himself into an Adventure very
Logically, his Mood being in Barbara, as to the matter of the Rescue, and in
Bocardo, as to the issue; a quo, as to the Slaves, ad quem, as to himself and
Sancho; who could never persuade him to any prudentiall forbearing of Criminal
Encounters; but the Don had a head (like his bad stomach) which converted all
into the gross and filthy Humors of Errantick Valor; which does rub up a
story (we have not had one a great while, for want of the Barbers Currycombe)
of a Priest who was sure, (let the Text be whence and what it would) to make
all the Sermon against Non-Residency; which was taken notice of by all sorts of
Auditors that heard him; the Priest being himself unbenefic'd, and an
Ubiquetary, made bold ( sede vacant) as he found room enough to pay the
Non-Residentiaries, (though they were in the Mother-Churches in the
affirmative) for not stopping his mouth with a Living, or with their living
upon the place. Now some friends conspired to give this Itinerant a Text,
whereby he should not possibly rest in his common Notes against Non-Residents;
The Text was this, Abram begat Isaac; they thought they were far enough from
Priest then; and yet they were out, (for Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck)
but our Sir Roger took the Warning, and having Saturday nights (time enough for
the Collection of his Authors, which were (as his Land was not) in Capite) for
premeditation the next day he mounted, and short Prayers premised, the Text he
named; his Auditory smiling at their own conceits, of what an irreconcilable
piece of Scripture they had proposed, and unconcatenable to his usual subject.
But beyond all expectation, and to the extreme satisfaction of those that knew
the Design: No sooner had he read, -- Abram begat Isaac, but he adjoined. A
plain Text (beloved) against Non-Residents; for, if Abram had not kept the
Company of his good Woman Sara, that is, not been Resident, then Isaac had not
been borne. Such kind of wedded Fancies have many men to one sort or way, that
all manner of Discourse is turned into the Chyle of their Customary
apprehensions and applications, be it Drollery, or Seriousness; Like a
Metaphysicall pated Disputant, who, let the Question be, An Zabarella fuit
Scriptorum opt. maximus? would bring the confounded Replicant to Materia prima,
by due form of Argument; where if he caught him, Tenet occiditq* -- he would
so Contund him, and extra-mund him, more then Materia Prima it self was at the
Chaos: happy noise of the University Bells, who were only able to put an end
to the Matter; or give an Haec sufficient pro forma.

They are men that take delight in acting and relating (...).]

Olim baec meminisse juvabit. The soureness of the present Sauce did not take
away the sense of their sometime sweet meat, even to the very last swing, and
periodicall moment of life. Mischiefs will delight themselves with the memory
of those prancks they can no longer act, Et retinet mores quos perdidit aetas,
is excellently said of Claudian, concerning a superannuate Creature, who
(notwithstanding that her years did supertede her vocation) prudently shifted
her Trade into that of a Matron, which we call Prioress of a Vaulting-schoole,
having a great desire to see that work go on in others, which was ended in her
self. It is observable, that these Gusmanillo's the night before they ascend
the Execution Cart, send for their friends of both seres, and very
Pater-familiarly, advice them with great Caution, how they come to the like
unfortunate ends; that is, by being too lavish of their Tongues, too much given
to Drink, which betrays secrets; too much loving a Whore, which is a revealer
of their stealthes, but not their own; too much addiction to Gaming, which does
waste the small stock their industrious pilfering has got together, and
enforces them upon fresh Designs, and sudden, but dangerous Recruits; also
hankering after Repentance, and hopes of Pardon, which is always of dangerous
consequence, and either alters the whole course of ones own life, or else the
latter, (being base Peachery) brings another life to a Halter. Wherefore very
solemnly they conjure their friends to do nothing simply, rashly, or
unadvisedly, that should conduce to such Casualties as these; but at all times
to steal with great care and prudence; to wench soberly, and undiscovered; to
swear their Hosts once a Month to secrecy, and once a year at least to
bring 'um into personal Action; and for their Landladies, to Night-worke them
into silence, that by the mutual breach of the 7th Commandment they may be
true to the Infringers of the 8th; and for the pleasing wrong done to their
Husbands, connive at the robbery done to their Neighbors. These Counsels given
with some Deprecations to their Children, (if they have any) wishing them the
blessing of their labor, their fingers ends upon them; and encouraging them in
the way wherein their forefathers were bred, they entaile their Professions
upon their issue, which is never cut off but with their lives. In that
penultimate night is the right farewell to the World, the sense of Domus, or
Spelunca Latronum, truly spoken, the next days Pageantry, old Goodcoale, the
Cart, the Sheriffs, the Halberts, the Psalm, the Confession, signify nothing,
and are only pro forma, doing pro more, as the Custom is, but in truth they
are all of the fellows mind, who is of the Turks, that there is a Fate and
Destiny, which is as impossible to escape, as the means that brings to it. So
that if Hind must be hanged, he had good reason to see it should not be for
nothing.

He answered that his offense was only being in love.]

Injectus est in vincula, ne metue nuptiarum, says Lipsius, of one caught in a
Love knot, or wedding couples.

But this Neophyte was enamored with a basket of linen, it may be a youth in a
basket, so left ab incunabilis, which was all he had to the charity of the
Parish, he did as he was inclined by the basket stars, that shone at his
nativity, which was the Talismon of his whole life. Just as a Tailor for want
of work, turned into his Trade, but out of his name, a Fur, but not manifestus,
came to an Inn, where all usage was neat and handsome, and about bedtime, the
Shee-Chamberlaine left him, he desiring the use of the Candle longer, by which
very succinctly, he made him a good shirt of one of the holland sheets in the
bed, having dispatched the threads into the fire, they not being worth a Limbus
in his Hell. But in the Morning he is very much displeased with his lodging,
(though he lay better then he had done in a month before, with a good shirt on)
for that he had but one sheet, the wench swore she thought she brought two, and
none ever imagining the conversion of the linen, he came cleanly off, though
he came lowsily on, being better able to shift ever after; such a piece of Love
a blade of Hiemont in Cambro Britannia showed to a piece of wandering
horseflesh, wherewith he was as much enamour'^, (as Europa of her Bull) for in
want of a bridle (and a halter he could not endure) he was enforced to embrace
the Brute about the neck, and with all speed make to the rode, but the owner
being in some grounds not far off, and espying the cheat, made after him,
undiscovered, and being very well horsed overtooke this rank rider, though the
spurs of his affections carried him very furiously and swift away, and
requiring of him the reason of his speed, his Countryman swear, Sr, are you in
a good hour, the Master of this wild jade? in a good hour, I am replied the
other, (for half an hour later, I believe had altered the case. (In troth
Countryman (said the thief,) it is the joy of my heart, that you have thus
happily overtaken me, for this headstrong jade else might very well have run
away with me; the Gentleman was very well pleased with his horse and his jest,
and unwilling to horse him again, dismissed him under the penalty of petty
larceny, when, for want of ready money, they sco^'d upon his back, the postage.

Here it is quite contrary, he that sings once, and weeps all his life after,
he is called a Canary Bird.] This fellow is of the despised order of the
Confessors, those I mean of our Tyburn Confessors, to whom, confess and be
hanged are convertible; for if you 'fesse you're hanged, and your hanged is
confess. But the Parot is laughed and abused by them all, Facillimum est
tacere, he is fit to be throtled that cannot shut's mouth. Could he not say,
Not guilty my Lord, but upon the first question undo himself, and comrades,
and occasionally deprives the World of a succession of Knight-Errants, who were
destined relievers of Ladies, (Market-women returning home laden) rescuers of
inthralled Creatures, (poor sensible Animals locked and fettered) surprizers of
Castles, (such as every man's house is) setters free of the imprisoned Queen (
Regina Pecunia, let her confinement be to Iron Chest, or Castle under ground;)
chasers and subduers of Monsters, (all honest men traveling upon their
occasions;) Disinchanters of Negromancers, (disrobers of Gypsies, Canberry
Besses, and the like Bona Robas of the times:) One confessor, one puling,
snif'ling, Hen-hearted Rogue, is sometime the ruin of a set, a pack, a covie
of these valiant Heroes, whom the Annals had swelled with; but for the
Interception of a few years, concluded in a Triangle, which was intended for
the Circle.

I go to the Lady Garrupes, for five years, because I wanted ten Ducats.]
This was a pleasant Rogue, that rattled his Chains, made Music of his
Fetters, and sang with his breast against the Thorns. It was pity, that for
want of a little money, a Bribe, or so, so brave a spirit should tugge at an
Oar! But hang it, it was for five years, and what is that to the age of man,
which is threescore and ten in the train of the world. He sweetens all the
misery by making Proserpina his Lady, the Turn-keyes wife a Madona: such
comforts they raise to themselves, who shaking hands, heads, and heels at
Madam Tyburija's, Cousin german to the Lady Garrupes, tell their friends that
they are invited for a year and a day to the Lord Mayors Banqueting House,
(which is all one with Apud infernos coenabimus:) others, in other places,
veil and couch it, under riding the wooden Horse, covering Bagwells Mare,
dining under the Hawthorne tree, turning Mahomets, and without a Lodestone
residing betwixt Heaven and Earth: And while they live in the like Metaphors
(for the other are Allegories and continue for ever) they name their Fetters
Love-knots, their Ropes Fancies, (which for the honor of their Ladies they
will wear to the death) their Goales their Castles, their Carts their
Chariots, in which they ride in Triumph from Metropolis to Tripletris: And a
Father these all have, Derich, or his successor, and the Mother of the grand
Family, Maria Sciss-Marsupia, who is seldom troubled at the loss of any of
them, having many, and to spare, and fearing no want of succession, because
there are so many lineally descended one from another.

Don Quixot went to the fourth, who was a man of venerable person, with a long
white Beard which reached to his bosom.]

Non Barba facit Philosophum. A man may have a very goodly Beard, and yet be a
Pimpe: and a man may have never a hair on his head, and be a Whoremaster; and
a man may have never a hair in his face, and be an Eunuch. Fronti nulla fides;
Beards of all fashions are naught; and you need not so precisely keep your wife
from Black-beard, Brown is as dangerous, Yellow worst, and Red worst of all.

Et de virtute locuti --
-- Clunem agitant.
Cato would be drunk, and Morose together; and the old Sages, the Gray-beards,
had their Lycases, Ganymeds, and pretty Cleopatras, as well as Jupiter, Caesar,
or Mark Antonie. These Brokers of the Ear, Inventers of the venereall
Hotacusticon, or Priapuses Whispering place, are the same sort of Engineers, as
our Procurers, Match-makers, Limb-comforters, Informers unto the Vice, not
against it; who are walking Tickets, and moveable Papers of inclining Ladies
Lodgings, where the Beauties, (like the Room next vacation) is to be let ready
furnished. This Affair is much managed by Matrons in our Clime, unless it be
when both Parents consent in the Construpation of a Daughter; then (as my
Father Ben says) they cannot be matched. -- I have a short story ( Credent ne
posteri!) of the truth of this last practice: Where the Mother was bribed to
the violation of her only, and that a very handsome child; the gravity of the
Mothers person would have deterred an ill inclined Roman from the vice; but our
Northern Lads are unappeasable: A round sum is proposed, the place appointed
even at her own house, in a room just over the Chamber, where this piece of
Antiquity taught school; In^^ which the shreeks of her devirginitated Daughter
came, which put her unto the most horrid shift of all, to ^smother the noise of
Lust with the Tones of a Psalm, which she and her Scholars sung aloud, and the
second part too, whiles the other above sung damnable Notes to a godly Ditty.
The highest practice of Impiety that ever I heard of, and performed many years
before the late Reformation, but betwixt the time of the first; otherwise
Hopkins and Sternhold could not have been isntrumental to a piece of
Incontinency; unto the performance whereof, (like Music in the Act) perchance
David's Penitential, unregarded, might be the Hymn. This story is not Fathered
upon this bad Mother, but it is set down to show you, that Italy and Venice,
Spain and France, have more open toleration of sport; but great Purses can do
amongst us as much as ever it did at Rome; and Animae Parentum, as well as
Corpora Filiarum, are venalia. This Child without doubt had this Original
sin from her Parent, and from whence she learned this pious fraud is too long
to enquire.

If that smack of Witchcraft were not in it, he merited not.] It is ordinary to
impute our own Lapses (which lay in our wills sometimes to have resolved) to
the power of the Devil, tempting and overruling us. A wench willingly
seduced, and poisoned, (as they say) was thus expostulating with her self post
rem factam, and se infectam. What a graceless Queen was I? what a forgetful
hot-tail'd Carrion? Right! very right! Sure I was bewitched, there she was
excentrick! Nay, without peradventure the Devil was in me! And with a high
sigh, considering her early Hillock, said, Shame on me, it was the Devil
Incarnate. This Confession not extorted, nor subtly wrought out by any
Examiner, but a shifting, shriving Conscience, may very well be praeambulatory
to her own Absolution, and to this scandal from our Broker of the Ear, who
following the steps of his first subtle Master plyes that part which he began
with, and so at last got from one Round to another. Look to your Eare-rings
Ladies, strange bobs hang thereby. Although I know very well, that no Sorcery
in the world can move or force the Will.] Medicated Garters, Gloves,
Handkerchieffs, Heart-breakers, Ribbands, Fillits, Fancies, Pictures, nor
Platonic speculation, (which, if there be any thing near Witchcraft, or
Knight-Errantry, is without Question of the surest side) find any faith in our
Don, who for this Tenet (for in other things quantum distat) may be accounted a
wise man by the authority of the first Verse that ever moved foot in his
behalf: Sapiens dominabitur Astris.

And if it be in the power of a Knight Errant to resist and counter-worke the
Influences of the Starre^, who are his higher Brother Planetae, and so (with
the Suns leave) as many Monsters as ever Quixot did; which Stars more
subtly and naturally incline our tempers; and if their virtues may be rebated
by a moderate Fasting, and sufficiently mortified Body, or rather as our Don's
was mortar-fied. Do You think a few Herbs shall do it? I dare presume, that
let Medaea have gathered what Plants she pleased, at what time of the night she
thought most effective, and with what words she pleased too; let them have been
made into a grand Sallet, with Oil, Sugar, Almonds, Vinegar, and the rest of
the French Coques Ingredients, Quixot and Sancho should have made no more
danger of it, but eat it as heartily, and with as good success, as if Mary
Gutierez had prepared against their coming home a Tansey of Clare, for the
reparation of her Sancho's back; and another of Coxcombo, for the
discerebratings of his Knights head.

I go here, because I have jested too much with two Cousin Germans of mine
own.] The Rogue lies to the Don and his Cousins too; for he was in earnest
with them, and they took it: Insomuch, that if there were but few Trees or none
in Spain, he ought to have been sent to Rome, and hanged upon the Arbor
Civilis for an example; which by these disorderly intermixtures he has made so
knotty, that it has changed many a Bartolus (with rubbing his Pate to find
the right names for his Offspring) into Baldus. It is the latter end of the
Character of this slave, that he was a Stadent, a great Talker, and a very good
Latinist. All these he might be; for Scientia and Mores do not always meet in
the same person, though it were a very handsome Conjunction: But you find his
studeo ( Mu^ e contra) stans; and he is not so great a Talker, but as great a
Doer too; and for his Latin Tongue, that could be no sin, unless in that
Catholic Tongue he did corrupt the Whore of Babylon.

Don Quixot asked who was this so laden with Irons, and why? Because he had
done more Villainies than they all.] This Rogue was at full years, in the
strength of his age, a handsome fellow, (as we say of those we never do
commend but once) the rest of his Company were singular knaves, but this was
Nomen multitudinis; A Book must comprehend his life, and no better penman then
himself; if he could be true to any, certainly he would not cheat us in his
own Story. In the Parchments of his body (for he was for the Antique Records)
much of his History was to be read, in a very high Rubric, which upon solemn
days was seen, and the part re-stigmatiz'd according to order: In his hand was
another Impression, in his forehead another, another in his shoulder, which
were several Editions of some small Pamphleticall labors of his, which are
now to be collected into one entire Volume, bound up together like the Author;
and to be tied in memory of Gines Passamont, in the Vatican, in Chains, when
the first Edition shall come forth, Correctior and non Emendatior.

Gines Passamont, or, Ginesilio of Parapilla.] This latter name of Parapilla,
Gines does abominate, the Creatures of the Rode changing names as often as
Highways, which they never ply above two Terms. As for example, Now he is
taken and apprehended by the name of Pass^a-mont; at other times, and upon
emergencies of occasions, Passe-a-broak, Passe-a-ditch, Passe-a-way,
Passe-o-ver, Passe-a-repass; but this the best name, if with a Convenit res
nomini. One Pass-a-galley were worth a Kingdom: beside what a great adornment
to the Grande Opus of his life would it be, if it might not be concluded among
the Brethren of the Oar, but be spunne out to the utmost thread in the noble
Enterprises that Fate and his own Genius had necessitated and inclined him to.

This Book was pawned in Prison for 200 Royalls, and is redeemable for so many
Ducats.] You may read in this Book the abuse of Prisoners, which at first was
bound for Pence, and cannot get out under payment of Pounds; the expense of the
Prison, and the Keepers Fees, and Rent-money for the liberty of the Rules,
(without Rule) extending beyond the Liberty of the People even to
Constantinople, where those that live under the Turk are more kindly used then
those that live under Jews at home, merciless Jaylers, and hungry Wardens,
who fleece the sheep brought to their Pounds, worse then a Wolf a Lamb. But
Gines after his Captivity ended, for he did Pass a Jew in slavery, never out a
whole seven years together: so that he reckons his life by the Iustra of his
Imprisonments, the first five of his Innocence and Infancy going for nothing;
so that he has played at fives excellently well, and his Quinquatria of once
every fifth year, (in the Galleys, or some place of like eminence) except
before excepted, render him according to the Spanish and his own account,
trigesimo aetatis, which (if he had been guilty of so many crimes in England)
would have been Gregorian, which is a just Account indeed, but very killing.

The Commissarie held up his rod to strike.] Molops our insulting Officer is
incensed; the Tyranny of such Superiors is intolerable; and when the State has
taken the Will-liberty of his hands and feet from him, these will deprive him
of his natural freedom, if it were possible they would muzle his mouth; but
Gines is mumm'd presently, he saw it was but a Word and a Blow, and it was
better and more selfe-preservingly done to leave him to the Sarcasmes of his
Book, then by a shoulder-experience to have learn^d how to write a literal
invective against him. But see the Valor of these Brutes, not much unlike the
victory of Aeneas, and a fellow-Deity to boot, upon a simple woman, (as Dido is
pleased to call her self, though she doubled I believe with one of those
Deities.)

Egregiam vero l^udem and spolia ampla tulist is,
Tuque puerque tuus, magnum and memorabile nomen:
Una dolo Di^um si faemina victa duorum!
Which for the honor of ^ines, and the perpetual stigma of such Barbarous
Custodes, let it speak English thus: What glory may be in the Victory found,
If a loose Devil beat a Prisoner bound?


It seems to me a rigorous manner of proceeding to make slaves of them whom
God and Nature has made free.] How far this freedom or exemption from
punishment is disputable, tenable, or otherwise, has not by any Defenders of
the Liberty been yet shown. For Don Quixot, who seems at the instant very
much to Patronize the cause of these ( contra Legem Naturae) enthralled, does
at other times very highly tyrannize, and gave Sancho (his friend Sancho,
Townes-borne Children, and of the better Face, of equal sufferings) but for
doing the work of Nature (I mean not that of Disenteration,) but of laughing,
such a blow upon his freeborn shoulders, that if he had not been a
laughing stock indeed, the blows had confounded him: but here he is for
freedom, and anon for Distance, Observance, Reverence. However the Theme was
sweet, and the Rhetoric pleasing, and finds more Believers then experienced
soldiers; and therefore Don Quixot's Oration was received as Caesar's at the
pass of Rubicon; when his speech against the insulting, covetous
Faith-breaking Senate was applauded by the whole Army, and the Countries where
he came, crying out, Down with the Senate, down with them: Long live the
people of Rome, and the Liberties of the Commons: all this while crying down
that Authority, and not knowing what would succeed, or whether uni Caesari
multos Marios, whether Q. Elizabeth's, or Mary's days were better; which is
worst to endure, Fire, or Sequestration?

Go on the way, good Sir, and settle the Basin right on your head.] What,
touch our Helmet, touch it with so high indignity as to call it a Basin! It Is a
Defiance which presently amounted to a Tournament; a Tournament, to an
Over-turne, that to a Dismount, which happened upon the first Barriers, where
low lies the Commi^^arie, and Don Quixot rides like Jupiter liberator, guilty
of a Rescue, and Sancho Pa^ca, (who all this time through fear of the Guard,
Lawless and Witless) suspecting Victory, that she would play the Jade, and
not keep the same side still, was auxiliary to the slaves, and the fettery
Hand-Cuffs of Gines Passamont, and all his Iron-work lopped off, and the Cord
of Amity and Friendship of his Fellows broken, they all (as now in Duty they
stood loose) took part with their Rescuer, or Restitutor Qnixot, and so pelted
the guard, that they had very hard pay for their Convoy, and glad to retreat,
they left the Prisoners to Don Quixot, Master of the Field, and Lord of Six,
which he counted a Sexcenturio: And imagining himself Generalissimo, he thus
makes his Oration to his new-form'd Army.

Don Quixot's Oration to the Slaves Redeemed.
Quirites (Gentilemen Soldiers all)
And fellow Soldiers too, (such I you call,
Such is your Generals meekness,) Freeborn Blades,
And made Free-Blades by Me, from hungry Trades,
Tugging at Oars, or digging in the Mines
For wealth and Oar, (he never enjoyes that finds)
Made capable to feed your selves, not eat
The pittances of Madam Garrupes meat,
Dried Eeles, and the Eeles skins for digestion,
Poor John, and what that is 's a question;
Stock Fish, and Haberdine, and splitted Hakes,
Dried Sprats, Cockles, Dog-fish, and Sun-dry'd Cakes.
What is that thing your Emperor shall ask?
What is it that you will think too great a task?
Methinks I hear Gines Passamont require,
Where my commands will be? through Water, Fire,
Or over Mountains, or down steepy Rocks?
Or if again we shall bind on these Locks,
From whence your power has newly loosed us; wa
Shall be more proud of such Captivity,
Then any freedom of our own: It Is so;
Once more then on your Necks these Laces throw,
Once more in Chains, but never after this;
You must be Pilgrims to my Queen of bliss,
Dulcinea of Toboso, Lady bright,
Bright as the Stars, black-mantled all in night:
Her, and Toboso's Palace having found,
Humble your selves, and click your Chains to the ground.
Tell her you are Don Quixots Freed-men, tell
That he has ransomed you from death and Holl,
From Furies, and things worse tormentative,
Devils incarnate; that you are alive,
It is the Guerdon of his Arms and Lance
Which Masters all, when it does once advance.
Say you besides, with a most signal grace,
Thus spoke the Knight of the Ill-favored Face,
And kissing thrice the ground, rise from the place.
Gines Passamont answered for all the rest, saying^]
Gines Passamont's Reply to his Emperor.
Then Passamont in the name of all the rest,
Bowing his body, as became him best,
(Honored Releaser said,) Command what is
Fecible, and not impossibilities.
How canwe all in such procession go,
The Holy Brothers ranging to and fro;
And all ways laid to take us for the escape,
And Hues and Cries in every Village gape?
Not that I Lightning, or fell Thunder fear,
(Unless that Lightning before death appear.)
Why should your Excellency thus value us,
As to design us, new re^^ev'd, to the Gallows?
'Twere better never to have been freed, then I
Should now surrender to a Hue and Cry;
And on the next tall tree, in these escaped Chains,
Gines Passamont should give the Grows his braims.
Those brains that formed and framed that glorious work,
(Greater then Tamerlains, that slew the Turk,)
Whom he did keep in Iron Cage; till, wroth,
He beat his brains out, which to go were loath.
O Sir, some nobler thing command:
Cannot you change? it is not under hand,
Nor Persian Edict: Knights of the Round-Table
Were never said to be unalterable.
If that your Queen were her they call of Faries,
(As if she is like to you, you must be Pares)
Would it not be as well to have some Aves,
Such pious so^^es as we shall get God save-yeets,
With equal Creeds, and equal Pater ^osters,
We will roar out in most amazing postures:
Both night and day we will frequent the place,
Praying you both have a like Favored race.
That whosoe'r behold the valiant youth,
May swear 'twas spet out of Don Quixots mouth.
But for this Boon, dread Sir, do not pursue it,
For to be short and plain, we will not do it.
I swear, said Don Quixot, (...) whore, Don Ginesio Paropillio.] This
perempto^y Denial made the D^n all flame within, and soot and smoke without,
insomuch, that he (...) and foamed, (like a Boares head on a Chasing-(...)) and
(...) upon Rosinant, he rode up to the Head of the Foot, and (...), and with
his Face full of Wroth, and filthy Fury, ^etting his (...) to ^his Lance, and
his Lance to his side, and an Oath in his mouth, which was none of the
smallest. By the faire^ (...) of my Mother, (^wore the Knight) whose very
picture I am, when she teemed me under the Line, thou son of Lupa, Don Gives
of Pass'on-offa, or Don Ginger-bread of Parapompeon, or by what Title soever
called, or mis-call'd; Thou Would better eaten Tar, then from thy chops
Had fell such rude, and undigested drops:
I destined thee unto a Linck of Chain,
Now load it all upon his neck profane,
Until with weight (as due) it crack again.
And for these bold presumptuous words alone,
(All these remitted) without Hose, or Shoon,
Unto Dulcinea (Pilgrims poor) be gone.


He winked on his Companions, and going aside, they sent such a shower of
stones.] See, see the wheel of Fortune! O Vicissitude! O Moon! O Madness, to
think it can be otherwise to men under the Moon! Trust not to Honor, she is an
Eele; nor to Victory, she is a Wheel; nor to Riches, they are Witches; nor to
Popularity, that short-lived Charity; nor to Friends, for Love is for Ends; nor
to Allies, for none can tell who cries when he is dead, and cold is his head.
Our Grand-Signior Don of the Mancha and Sexcenturiat is un- Ottom, and by his
own Janissaries, and Sancho-Mahomet hangs betwixt two Opinions, and knows not
which side to take: Passamont not moved with the Reverence of his looks, nor
the Majesty of his Helmet, beats the Brazen Diadem about his Tinne-pot face,
and with shoals of stones so pelts him, that the Knight looked for his end, and
to lie buried under small Pebbles, and other Rubbish, as if he had died in a
Pitcht-field: Rosinante is over-turned, and lies all four upward, as if the
Earth had backed him, and he was riding into the Air. Sancho is uncanonically
used, and stripped of his Casso^k, under whose pious Covert many a Hen and
Chicken hung, as small Birds in a cleft stick. The Ass is (as always) Animal
cogitabundum and obtusum, and so stands, and they all not much unlike. But the
Don is most dejected at the apprehension that these his Captives should return
him stones for bread, pain for ease, and confinement, to a wild Mountain,
for their enlargement to the wide world, where we must look him now, if we will
find him, for the Don does not go now to seek, but to hide.

CHAP. IX.
An Honorable Retreat, with Horses flying,
With bodies furled, and Colors 'like men dying:
Lance trail'd, and Rosinantes pendent ears not pricked,
Unless sometimes, when Don his dull sides kicked.
Still like himself our Don, for as in fight,
He ran into the thickest, so in's flight:
No Hare so intricate a Maze could make,
And by their Doubles they like courage take:
But Sancho does run Counter-posting back,
That he may find the Path in the same Track.
But now they are got into the uncouth'st place
Of all the Mountain, Where a little space
Spent in Refection, little there was dressed,
Their Belly's full, their bones were soon at rest,
Here with eyes closed full close, and open nose,
Knight and Squire-Errant, take their loud repose.
Not Errant now, no not in dreams, nor thought;
For want of Fancies Scouts, a Mischiefe's wrought;
(Such as our aftertimes will sadly Rue)
Sanch's Ass is stolen, (such Asses were but few.)
And never brayed, nor gave the shrill Onch, Onch;
For Passamont the slave had slily slunck
Into Morena for a skulk, and gazing,
Espies two Asses sleeping, and one grazing.
These undisturbed he leaves; but takes great care
For Sancho's Brute, to show him better fare.
Pancha in the Morn' had even departed too,
Not out, but in the Mountain, when the view
of an old Wallet, lined with yellow Boys,
Turned his Asse-Funeralls to gallant joys:
He thinks not now of Tiltings, nor to fight,
But he will purchase Governments downright,
He Will buy the Island of the needy Lownes,
And for the future save their Pates, not Crowns.
But O the Mischief! here is a Devilish block,
The Owner of the Gold, the Knight of the Roch
Appears, and in strict hugs, and close embrace,
The Knight of the Rock, and the Ill-favored Face
Encounter one the other; Tales are told,
Which Sancho likes, but not a word of the gold.
TEXT.
TO do good to men unthankful, is to cast water into the Sea, etc.]

-- Perditur Oceano gutta. Our English Proverb, though not against Ingratitude,
is as smart; for it is all one to be unthankful as insensible, so that, To
grease a fat Sow in the Tail, comes much to one end. But these two Proverbs in
their executions and applications are not alike; for few throw water into the
Sea; or if once it have been done, it is never seconded upon the same person.
For we so naturally love Flattery and Applause for all our gratuities, that if
we miss our vainglorious Harvest, we never sow seed in that barren and
lethaean ground again. But on the other side, when we are in the vein of
Presents, and that to great ones; Courtesies not acknowledged are suspected,
that they were either guilty of Intempestivity and unseasonablenesse, or else
of want of Worth and Glory. This puts the Client, the Suitor, the Flatterer, the
Prodigo, the Expectant, to fresh charge and new counsel of gifts, till they
have either wearied their Purses, or their eminent (but taking friend) into a
small resentment, by importunity, and multiplied Repetition.

The Holy Brotherhood care not two Farthings for all the Knight-Errants in the
world.] A Brother of the Sword could do no more: but this Holy Brotherhood,
were Brothers of the Whippe, or Bulls-pizzle. I believe, (such as the Fratres
of Bride-well) whom to offend is a double punishment, starving and stripping:
they are revenged upon back and belly, giving this too little, and that too
much. But Sancho does very much dignifie the Title of Knight-Errants, who it
seems in Spain were esteemed no better then Vagrants, and passable from
Tithing-man to Tithing-man.

Upon condition thou shall never tell any mortal Creature, that I withdrew
for fear, but only to satisfy thy requests.] This Adventure of Sancho's
promoting, was the safest they yet encountered, the Adventure of Retirement,
which was well ominously, and politickly engaged on with an Oath of Secrefie.
It will well become all spirits of equal undertakings with our Don, and equal
success, to swear their Seconds, and Company, never to reveal the unfortunate
issue of any fight, nor the necessities of a Retreat, whether orderly, or
otherwise, as great Fear or Apprehension of Danger shall direct. But that you
may see in what a stout Accent, with that Princely Gate, what undaunted
Countenance a Don can make an escape, take Sanctuary, or else, like Robin Hood,
before the green Hills, presuming a shrug or two preparatively made: Thus highly
speaks -- The Knight that sneaks.
Retreat! Retire! O base! But Sancho swear,
Advance thy mouth unto our grisly hair,
And knab a Lock of that contorted curle,
That breaks the heart of fair Toboso's Gurle.
Swear to a Hair, swear by these sable Locks;
'Twas thy desire to live amongst Trees and Stocks;
Swear that I went for Company, swear (Sirrah)
That I never led the way into Sierra.
For though in all the Tables they shall find
Me on the Forlorn, Sancho Panch' behind;
Yet in this business, (is it be cut in Brass,
Or Wood, all is one) I followed here the Ass:
For what could Rosinant do with his proud Bristles?
The Ass was best for guide through Thorns and Thistles.


CHAP. X.
The Knight of the rock, and Knight of the harder face,
Salute each other in most Courtly grace:
Look on these postures, who will judge him of the Rocks,
Mad for a Mistress, or the Don for knocks
Such civilized deportment, shows of Love,
As Rock and Bad-face had been hand and Glove;
With strenvous Complements, (above the School,
Of Sr John Daw, or Amorous La Fool.)
The Don obtaines Cardenio's woeful Tale.
Where does not Arms and Rhetoric prevail?
Great was the attention of the Ill-favored Knight,
Who for Dulcinea was in woeful plight.
As often as Ferdinand Luscinda praised,
A panting fear in his fond breast it raised.
Toboso too was flesh and blood; and how
If some great Prince should vacuate her vow?
'Twould prove of dangerous consequence for us,
To have our Ladies so adventurous;
But yet Cardenio gave no ground to raise
Such scruples, but Luscinda still does praise,
And prosecutes his Story with such grace,
That it astonished all upon the place,
And the Don too; for so it fortuned,
He best the Tale into his Cockscombs head.
TEXT.
TRuly good Sr, whosoever you are, for I know you not, I do with all my heart
gratify, etc.] Behold and view the very Picture of the Salutation-Taverne
reformed; an Andaluzian, and a Manchegan in the Spanish mode, passing
Punctilios upon one another. I wonder it escaped our Pencill men, especially
when they had so many Signs to alter. A Knight Errant and a Bedlam exactly
drawn, in the liveliest postures of the Madrid Salutados, would have been as
magnetic and beneficial to the house, as the Renouned pieces of John a Green,
or Mul-sack.

The Knight of the Rock did nothing but behold him, and re-beheld him from top
to toe.] Certainly these two enlarged their Organs beyond the Sphaere of their
ordinary capacities. It is thought by the unusual dilatation of their optic
Nerves, they had so far extended their eyes, that all that instant, they might
have been taken for a brace of Saracens; and as their postures before made 'um
unfit for Tavernes, so these for Innes.

After viewing him well he said, if you have any meat, give it me for Gods
sake.] Cardenio, being to make a full relation of his misfortunes, desires to
eat first, and being quick at meat, was quick at work, for having filled
himself from the Wallets, he forthwith filled their Ears with a most
passionate Story, which he did more sagely and deliberately deliver, then could
be expected from such wild looks, and strange postures. The Story you shall
have in Verse, because it is long, and the bestowing Feet upon it, will make it
pass away the quicker.

Cardenio's story.
My name is Cardenio, the place of my Birth, one of the best Cities in
Andaluzia.

1.
Cardenio is my name, my Birth
In one of Andaluzias
Best Cities, which has got the praise,
For one of the choicest Seats on Earth.
2.
My Parents did in wealth abound,
As I in sad Misfortunes do,
(Wealth is no Antidote for Woe)
Such as elsewhere cannot be found.
3
In the same Cities round there shined,
A beauty of transcendent grace,
Who made a Heaven of the place,
Yet to my ruin was assigned.
4.
Luscinda was this Angels name,
And she had earthly glories too,
(If Wealth and Honor ought can do,
To magnify a Ladies Fame.)
5.
Loves fuel in our Childhood glowed,
And when we knew not what w' would have,
To amorous play our selves we gave,
And innocent fire along flowed.
6.
Until with years the flame grew high,
And our wise Parents 'gan to see,
These fires could not extinguished be,
But by our mutual tie.
7.
Luscinda's Father feared our Loves
Might unresisted run, whereby
A non-admittance unto me,
My faith and loyal temper proves.
8.
Like Pyramus and Thisbe then,
Through crannies we did Court,
And chinks and holes, conveyed our sport,
(Made stronger by her Fathers Pen.)
9.
Restraint in Flames and Currents stopped
Run wilder, and most furious break
Poor Damms, (in Combat too too weak.)
And winds opposed will never be topp'd.
10
(Denied access, and tongues up tied)
To Paper Stratagems we turned,
Our passions then in Letters burned,
And the conveyance was our pride.
11.
And by the Emblem of true Love,
(A feathered Messenger well taught)
Were constant Letters to us brought,
And we well paid the Carrier Dove.
12.
On it, as on Luscindas Lips,
Were kisses plentifully laid,
The Dove (as if account it made)
The loving tally justly keeps:
13.
And with the letter would approach,
Which 'oout her colored Neck was hung,
And soon as that was once unstrung,
To Bill Luscinda 'twould incroach.
14.
So that Luscinda knowing well,
The Bird did nothing, but 'twas taught,
Her Lips unto like kindness brought,
And paid my Favors with a fragrant smell.
15.
For that the kisses came from her,
Might be assured to me, she sum'd
Her Lips in Civet (I presumed)
Which I upon her did confer.
16.
Thus did we blow our warm desires,
And words (like wind) increased the flame;
The papers did afford us game,
We lived upon fantastic fires.
17.
At last, impatient of delaices,
I undertook a deadly task,
It was Luscinda stout to ask,
Of her Loved Sire, and brook no naies.
18.
A thousand stops, a thousand onwards made.
As damm'd to Sisyphus his stone,
I forward went, yet back was thrown;
Courageous now, and now afraid.
19.
Courage at last prevailed, and I
Accosted him, whom most I feared,
And told him how I was indeer'd
Unto Luscinda, she to me.
20.
My Love was Noble, and scorned stealth,
A Jewel of that value should
Be purchased by a servitude:
A Thief is Master of no wealth.
21.
Wherefore his liking was the band,
Which us yet severed binds,
(Tied fast enough in heart and minds)
And for the second tie I stand.
22.
An answer gracious he bestowed,
That I vouchsafed to honor his,
And made his only pledge my bliss,
And sugared language plenty flowed.
23.
Then with a gravity he said,
Cardenio, still thy Father lives,
Both Parents legal consent gives,
Let him but say it, and thine's the Maid.
24.
Such wings the Answer gave my soul,
That I was straightway flying home,
But thither when I joyful come,
Strange news my wavering Fates control.
25.
As I my due approaches made,
Resolved to ask Luscinda Wife,
Duke Ricards Letter, as my life
He bid me read, my Rise was laid.
26.
Cardenio, look you there, the Duke,
I know not whence the occasion is,
Courts you unto his Court in this,
As in a glass your fortunes look.
27.
None of the least Grandees of Spain,
(But yet in Andaluzia chief)
Duke Ricard was; that my belief
In his great Offers were not vain.
28.
The Invitation it was high,
No less then be companion,
Unto Duke Ricards eldest son;
Few were so fortunate as I!
29.
And as I read, my heart did swell,
Dilated with the joyful news;
Fond Fool! I too ambitious,
Thought happiness at Court did dwell.
30.
But then my Father struck me dumb,
Saying Cardenio, yet two days,
Thy welcome person with us stays,
And then for Court, thy time is come.
31.
These were too big for one poor Breast,
Nor could I keep them, but my fair
Luscinda was to keep her share,
That Cabinet became them best.
32.
With these a thousand kisses past,
And promises of constancy,
And tears did issue from her eye,
And cried, pray heaven thy Love do last.
33.
Cardenio! and with that a sigh,
Take heed Cardenio of the Court,
It has (my love) no good report,
And thou art young, and absent I.
34.
Absent? Luscinda did thou see?
Where thou full deep engraven art,
Thou Would find thy picture in my h'art;
Cardenio said, I live by thee.
35.
Then grasping her fair hand he vowed
A constancy so firm and sure,
Angelick Forms should not allure,
(If they more fair could be allowed)
36.
Nay, nay, Cardenio you're at Court,
Luscinda blushing said,
(And by those colors Truth it made,)
Which he devised in Loves sport.
37.
But envious Time cut off the rest,
Of pretty talk; their lips do now
Transact, all closely seal and vow,
And unto secrecy are pressed.
38.
Parted at length with much a do,
By the quaint'st language of the eye,
A thousand farewels you might spy,
If you do know the Art to woe.
39.
Her Father now was come, and put
An end to all, but thoughts;
Salutes did pass, and both besought,
That time true-Loves knot might not cut.
40.
The good old Man could naught deny,
(For on Luscinda he did dote)
And as she would, he passed his vote,
Lest crossing her should make her dye.
41.
With these good Auspices rejoiced,
To the Dukes Court Cardenio flies,
Where all regard well justifies;
The Duke did Love him as 'twas voic'd.
42.
Honored by^h' Duke, and 's eldest son,
But envied of the followers,
I found that flatteries and fears,
Possessed wholly every one.
43.
It 'twas too much, they thought, that I
Should in the Father and the son
Hold such a strong affection,
That they me nothing would deny.
44.
But when they saw Lord Ferdinand,
(The second son of Duke Ricard)
Show me such Love, such high Regard,
They fawned on that they cannot withstand.
45.
And then, as the known Favorite,
I often was applied unto,
And praises heard, which were not due,
In which more danger is then spite.
46.
Don Ferdinand did so exceed
In his exalted Love, that naught
He feared or loved, his very thought
He did impart, I was his Creed.
47.
Not his own Brother would he trust,
(Though they did love most dear)
With what he whispered in my ear,
And once admit; retain I must.
48.
So dangerous the secrets are
Of Princes, that they fire the breast,
Where they lie lodged as a dark nest,
And if divulged they make a War.
49.
But that which touched Lord Ferdinand,
Was an unequal love he bare,
Unto a Virgin rich and Fair,
A Farmers daughter of the Land.
50.
He told me all the passages,
Of his long Suit, and how the maid
Could by no Arts be once betrayed,
Nor would give ear to wanton pleas.
51.
Which forced him to a solemn oath,
Made only to entrap her soul,
For he intended actions foul,
Yet swore they would be married both.
52.
Then what my power was I tried,
And with persuasion strong dissuade
His further hanckring on the maid,
Which all his honor vilified.
53.
What, would a Lord of so high blood,
Such expectations from abroad,
Take up a daughter of the road,
And in a barn Nurse up his brood?
54.
What talk would this be in his own?
And what in other Princes Courts?
Where your two names should be their sports,
And the whole Table of the Town.
55.
What a defeat might it chance prove.
Unto the Dukes contrived designs;
If to some foreign Prince, he minds,
To send you for a Noble Love.
56.
O (Sr) that gallant master are
Of Valor, not to be envied,
Nor equaled, let a worthy pride
Make you disdain this humble Ware.
57.
Don Ferdinand feared this loyal friend
Might (as he meant) disclose his mind
Unto the Duke; He then did wind,
As if toth' Sure he would put an end.
58.
Cardenio, see, thou have o'rcome,
So Potent are thy words, so true,
That I the mischiefs will ensue
Foresee, thy reasons strike me dumb.
59.
Come, let us fly temptations strong,
They cannot follow where we will go:
For none but thee and I will know,
Where we will retire, from Love, and wrong.
60.
Thy City Famous is for breed
Of the great Horse; under pretense
Of buying these we will get hence,
And with new work our Fancy feed.
61.
When he once named my Native place,
You would not think with what content
His plot did please me, for I went
Joy'd, I might see Luscindas face.
62.
My Lord (said I) y' have Counseled right,
Absence and business will estrange,
And often minds with places change,
Out of our thought, once out of sight.
63.
Having obtained the Fathers leave,
We forthwith will away,
What danger may be in the stay,
Your honor cannot but conceive.
64.
But Ferdinand had further reach,
For he would enjoyed his Country Maid,
And of the effects was now afraid,
Such works in time, themselves will peach.
65.
And though through oaths and vows he got
A Jewel of a worthy price,
Having a Dunghill for its rise,
He did not value it a jot.
66.
Therefore with winged speed he posts
From Court; (the Duke our leaves assigned)
Our Gennets vied it with the wind,
And brought us straight into our Coasts.
67.
According to his dignity,
Lord Ferdinand was entertained;
But I thought all my time profaned,
Until Luscinda I did see.
68.
We were not long e're we renewed
Our joys and hopes; and now we strive,
Our speedy Marriage to contrive,
Which a small time should sure conclude.
69.
Nor could I hold, nor thought it fit,
A parity of Love commands,
But did disclose to Ferdinand,
(O had I never discovered it!)
70.
Luscindas glories and her youth,
Her beauties in so high a strain,
That Ferdinand desired to gain
The sight of such excelling truth.
71.
And his desire (O simple I,)
Was from a window gratified,
Whence he both mine and Natures pride,
With ravished Senses did epsy.
72.
Vanish, says he, all Faces yet
That ever my Fancy moved,
They Are now not worthy to be loved,
She Is Ivory, and they are Jet.
73.
Happy Cardenio in thy choice!
That in thy Arms art sure to enclose,
The Lilly's envy and the Rose,
But that you are her choice, more rejoice.
74.
For Ferdinand unhappily,
A Letter from her hand had found,
Which I had laid as under ground,
But not secure from Jealousy.
75.
Therein my Innocent fond fair,
In silken words upbraids my stay,
And wittily chalkes out the way,
Lest I should pulingly despair.
76.
This Letter to the skies h'extoll'd,
Ulysses to Penelope,
And Ovids Rarities did he
Account as poorly pen^'d and bald.
77.
Others (said he) Cardenio
Some single grace may have, but here
Virtues are mounted in their Sphaere,
And no declining know.
78.
Luscindas just and merited praise
I loved to hear, but yet my thought,
I did not liked and it had wrought
In my sad heart, a jealous maze.
79.
For my Luscinda, as an Oak
I confidently deemed, yet his
Frequent and forced hyperboles,
When no man thought of her, or spoke,
80.
Did raise some small suspicion,
(Increased by's peeping in her Letters)
Which (he swear) all were pleasing fetters,
And proud should be of my condition.
81.
Nothing could escape his Eye, that went
To her, or from her, he would see all,
A book she liked, 'twas Amadis D' Gaul.
Scarce had the Don heard him make mention of books of Knighthood, etc.] Here
is the Dons Cue, and he will enter, and speak in spite of a broken pate, which
was sure to ensue, yet with more manners then ordinary, he excuses his
interruption of the story, opening his foolish infirmity to Cardenio, and
telling him plainly, that he was no wiser then he should be, and though his
head was full of Books, it was like a Library, which was not a jot the
learneder for them: But if so, it had been well, the Don would have bestowed
Chains upon them, they would have stood the quieter in his own head, and would
have been less troublesome to others.

He is a bottle-head that would think otherwise, theu that Elisabat the Barber
kept Queen Madasina as his Lemmon.

Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.
One Fool makes many.
Humors are suddenly imitated, especially if there be any life and fancy in
'um. Many have by representation of strong paisions been so transported, that
they have gone weeping, some from Tragedies, some from Comedies; so merry,
lightsome and free, that they have not been sober in a week after, and have so
courted the Players to re-act the same matters in the Tavernes, that they came
home, as able Actors as themselves; so that their Friends and Wives have took
them for Tonies or Madmen. It fell out here so, for Cardenio is raised a Cue
above the Don, who was in the behalf of Ladies; but Cardenio is for the more
dishonorable part, which is the occasion of a great quarrel.

That is not so I vow, by such and such, quoth Don Quixot, in great choler.] If
the Don had permitted Cardenio to have completed his story, he would not have
been so fiery in the defense of Ladies; but ( altera part inaudia, the Don
hearing but of one Ear;) this matter proved a dispute, for who knew Elisabat
the Barber, or Queen Madasina better, the Don or Cardenio, is a hard question
to resolve? (the Persons being no where in the world;) wherefore the Queen and
the Barber being no where to be found, I do rather adhere to Cardenio's
opinion, that they were together.

Queen Madasina was a Noble Lady, and 'twas not to be presumed that she would
fall in Love, etc.] The Don goes upon presumption for his Argument, and Oaths,
the lie given, and Villainy for the Victory: These were indeed both
presumptions, as it fell out; for great Ladies have miscarried in their
affections, (though the Don was not yet beloved by any) and stories (his own
stories) are full of their Levities, Inconstancies and Falsehoods, to their
Knights; insomuch, as some have submitted to their Coach-men, Footmen, and
Lords Pages, in a vacation of service. But the Lady Madasina, being a mere
Chimera, a name and nothing else, the Don therein, might justify the chastity
of a Queen and no Queen; a Lady and no Lady; a name and no body. To the other
presumption it was harder replied, for that part of it raised an adventure,
wherein the Don had his usual fortune and success; for with a well ordered
and right guided stone thrown by Cardenio, (now in his fits,) Quixot was
confuted flat, and lay on his back, indifferent for the present, whether
Madasina were vitiated by Elisabat or no.

Sancho seeing his Master so roughly handled, etc.] Compassionate Sancho! That
good Nature should betray a man into mischief! Yet aliquod Malum, propter
vicinum, and like Master like Man, is a Proverb, at this time very true; for
Cardenio (feeling the rude assault of his clownes fist) runs upon him with more
then Humane violence, and turns the tunnebelly, and rides him in worse
fashion, then our Countryman Coriat did the Barrel at Hiddleberg; But Cardenio
did so trample him, that he made him run worse liquor by half, and after he
had pressed him, and flatted him like a Pancake, he imitated his companions,
the Goats, and left Sancho to the Goatheard.

The dispute ended in catching one another by the Beards.] It Is not always
true, that it is merry when Beards wagge all, for these men's Beards wagg'd as
fast as they could tug 'um, but moved no mirth at all; they were verifying that
Song Of heigh brave Arthur OF Bradly,
A Beard without hair looks madly.


Two Ancient Reverend Men, had almost disthatch'd their Faces, and coud neither
of them sue for distraminations. If Quixot had not recovered out of his sound,
and reconciled this difference, his Squire Sancho might have passed for his
Page, he had been made so smooth chinn'd, and the Goats would never have owned
such a beardlesse boy as the unstead Goatheard for their leader. But the Knight
of the Ill-favored Face, seeing the misusage of their's, thought he might lose
his own title, or have a compartner; which is very dishonorable, that any
should give the same Field, world, or devise, as himself. Wherefore he parts
them; now very fit for Mr Elisabat the Barber, if he had done with Queen
Madasina.

CHAP. XI.
Our Don is now a Mountanier, a Sect
Sometimes, who in the Worlds neglect
Abandoned the Community of others,
And lived in Deserts, (discontented Brothers.)
But not in imitation of Montanus,
Shunning the world, (as if it would profane us.)
Does Quixot take the Mountain to abide in?
But he had read, Orlando ran beside Himself,
Self,'Cause Angelica the fair played foul,
And 'twas as fit for him to play the Owl:
But chiefly he was headlong driven to it,
Because that Amadis d' Gaul did do it
Upon disdain of Oriana, who
Did, as Angelica before did do:
Wherefore a Penance, the good Amadis,
(Never such tenderhearted Knights a^ these)
Imposes on himself; So does our Don,
(For if there Mad men be, he will sure make one)
And does out-Act Du Gaul, and wild Orlando,
And does much more yet, then ever yet did man-do.
TEXT.
IF Fortune had so disposed of our affairs, as that Beasts could speak, (as
they did in the Guisipetes time) the harm had been less, for then would I
have discoursed with Rosinante.] Sancho does very bitterly, but very simply
complain against the safe and incomparable use of silence, admirable if
voluntary, indeed less commendable if imposed; and because he does instance of
that happy time of the ( Guisipetes) wherein Beasts had the freedom of speech;
it shall be made appear to Sancho, that there was no such time, when the
Creature spoke, or if at any time it did, it was but once, and that an Ass
too. The Guisipetes were a people of Sancho's onwe making, for no History, nor
Chronology, ever heard of 'um, and it may be, were those where he was to be
Governor of, unless he mean the Antipodes, where notwithstanding, the common
error men go upon their feet, and the Beasts speak as they do now, and ever
did. It is silence in Beasts, that has kept them at such Amity, as they are,
peace and quietness; there is no challenges amongst them, no Duels, no Wars,
(except what are fictions of the Frogs and Mice) and the Frogs indeed, (a
croaking generation) that is somewhat near speaking, have incurred by their
mutinous noise Jupiters great rage. But the rest of the sensible Creatures,
having some two or three natural sounds for the significations of their
several wants or satisfactions, live contented, that is, speechless, saying
nothing, and grow fat upon it; for talking spends the Spirits, and Livia's
would never be fat.

Eheu quam pingui macer est mihi Taurus in Arvo? That was a bellowing Bull,
that in the best Pasture, Sancho, will never thrive; an Ass that brayes in
that manner, will eat but few Thistles: Nay, reasonable Creatures, to whom
Language is permitted, the wisest are counted the less talkative, the wisest
of Nations (which our Don counts his own, and it might have passed, had he not
spoiled the Universality of it) are no pratlers, and very weary in answering
frivolous questions, passing off replies in a politic silence; the Country
shrugge, and a considerative gloat of the Eye, which are maine good preventives
in a place troubled with the Inquisition. What a miserable things is it, to
hear Men and Women every where almost, saying, would my Tongue had been out
when I spoke it: That Tongue of yours will undo you. Aesops two dinners of the
same sort of meat, may very well show the vanity of Sancho's wish; where, of
bad Tongues he provideda most plentiful Feast, but of good ones, he could
scarce make a mess. I would Pythagoras were alive again, that men might be
taught silence for seven years, and a seven years custom would not easily be
broken. The Don sure was a Pythagorean, for he had enjoined silence, and for a
time he practiced it: But Sancho now being wild and passionate for the loss of
his Ass, he will no longer live in that safe condition of Mutes, (whom as no
man will hurt, so the grand Signior does highly Honor and trust) but most
foolishly obteines the liberty of speech again, which did engage him into many
adventures, and that his Tongue might go a little, has been the occasion that
his head has too often run.

IN faith Sancho, if thou did know how Honorable the Queen Madasina is, thou
would say I had great Patience, that I did not strike thee on the Mouth.]

See the fruits of his freedom of speech; his Mouth is no sooner opened, but
it is like to be sealed up again. Sancho's tongue was like a Bells clapper,
beating others, and ever beat it self, and never better then when it was an
end. Who would have such an instrument, that should be always jarring? Sancho,
return to silence, and to security, Can not thou (Fool) content thy self
with thinking; your Thinkers do more knavish, mischievous things unpunished,
and unblameable, then any of the subtilest railers in the World. Sancho, be
tongue-tide again, or lose thy teeth, never speak much, but confine they
self to some few and necessary quaeries, ask for Money, ask for meat, ask for
the way, and ask for plasters. These things are but short, and yet it will be
long before you get them.

The truth of the History is, Mr Elisabat was very prudent, and a man of great
Judgment, and served the Queen as Tutor and Physician.] The Don has given a
degree to day, and made a madd Dr in the Forest of Stenna Morena: To justify
the quarrel, he has created Elisabat Dr and Tutor to Madasina; the degree of
Physic was the most proper he could think of in that place, for it was
naturally made for simpling, where the Don gave a great augmentation in his own
person.

Those that suspect and affirm that she was his Friend, I say again they lie;
and those that either thinker or say it, lie a thousand times:] This kind of
Confutation, is not only Spanish, but has got into other Countries, where if
it be emphatically spoken, that is, stoutly and in full accent, it confounds
for the time. But suppose one think so but once, who shall know it? and if he
say it no more, how shall he lie a thousand times? Our Don is transported
mainly with Mr Elisabat, and I do believe he has some plot upon him, to
change Basins with him, for Mambrimo's Helmet was most rufully battered: that
he is so favorable to Physicians, may in time procure a Counsel to mend his
Balsamum Fierebras, and the promotion of a Barber Surgeon to a Doctor, (Things
done by wiser men then Don Quixot) they will confer their Plaster-boxes, and
poor Sancho and thy self shall no longer be tied to that poor refuge of Piss
and Oaken leaves.

Thou must wit that desire of finding the Madman alone, brings me not into
these parts so much.] As for that, he meant to turn Mad man himself. Now,
whether a man may abdicate his reason, renounce his understanding for a time,
and discover (if not discovered) no reasonable Acts, whereby a man should not
undifference him from a Beast, and live and enjoy himself in the sensitive
part alone, is a hard matter to determine, and harder to do. To counterseit
Madness is ordinary, and to be really so, more. Bedlam affords you these; the
streets (if not better places) the other. After Death, the Pythagoreans averred
a transmigration of Souls into new Bodies, and oftentimes entered the Soul of
a Philosopher into a Goose; shifted Alexanders gallant Spirit into a Dottrell,
and such like changes, as Lucian, or such abusive Forges, had a fancy to
fashion 'um in. But these are fantastical conceits; our Don is real, he will
put off the Man, and put on the Beast, only reserve to himself the benefit of
Speech, which whether man have, or not have, he cannot be said to be out of his
Senses for the matter: Strong passions left too long unsuppress'd, may
overthrow the temper of the brain, and totally subvert the rational parts,
and some paisions counterfeited long, whether of grief or joy, have so altered
the personaters, that players themselves (who are most usually in such
employments,) have been forced to fly to Physic, for cure of the disaffection,
which such high penned humors, and too passionately and sensibly represented
have occasioned. I have known my self, a Tyrant coming from the Scene, not
able to reduce himself, into the knowledge of himself, till Sack made him
(which was his present Physic) forget he was an Emperor, and renewed all his
old acquaintance to him; and it is not out of most men's observation, that one
most admirable Mimicke in our late Stage, so lively and corporally personated a
Changeling, that he could never compose his Face to the figure it had, before
he undertook that part. The Knight of the Ill-favored Face, had much done to
his hand, in his intended Emigration; for counterfeiting there was not much
need, (if hunger did not make a revocation of his little wits at any time.) For
Crabs, Hawes, Acornes, Berries, agreeing naturally with his complexion, and
embetter'd his Face to all purposes: I do believe it 'twas possible for the
Don, for a certain time to lose his Wits, and to revoke so much as he parted
withal, and be not a grain the wiser at their return.

Have I not told thee already says Don Quixot, that I mean to follow Amadis,
by playing the despaired Wood and Mad man.] The example of Amadis, is very
autorative with our Don, but why he should rather labor to imitate him in this
fit of Madness, then-in any other of his magnanimous Acts, is very strange;
no, it is not so strange, but a common thing: When did you see a wise example
followed by many, or any? Let it alone, it is grave, stanch, and singular. Thin
are the appearances at Gresham College, when the Bearegarden, the Cock pit is
thrung'd with Company: If Bartholmew Fair should last a whole year, not Pigs
not Puppet plays would ever be surfeited of. The wenches could live and dye
with Jack-pudding, what flocking of good wives and Pickpockets to a Ballad? or
if at any time a Mad man have broke his custody, he shall have more followers
then pittiers. Our Don is of this number, who cannot read of a mad prank, bu^
he must augment the sport, and rather then he will have no part in the Stage,
he will play the mad man.

I believe (quoth Sancho) the Knights which performed the like penance, had
some reason for their austerities, etc.]

Insanio cum ratione; To play is allowable (quoth Sancho,) I have lost my Ass;
for me to be beside my self, were a pardonable thing: But for you, who have
lost nothing, but the way home and your wits, why should you be madder yet? who
have a Mistress, Lady, Queen, (what do you call 'um) that is secure of her
honor, whom no Prince, Knight, Inchanter, Moor, nor the Devil himself would
come near: Why should you run mad? unless that it is your good hap, to have
such a singular piece, that you need never be jealous, never keep a spy, never
use Italian gimcrack, or any restraint upon; and do you therefore surfeit of
happiness, and are mad, because you have no cause to be so? Amadis had a
powting slut, a sullen huzzy, he should have curried her Coat, and never run mad
for it. Our Mary Gutierez, when she was in the Mubble^ubles, do you think I
was mad for it? no, no; I took my Ass (O that I could do so now) and went to
the next good Town, and let it Jubble out as it Mubbled in. Orlando indeed had
some reason to be mad, Angelica made him horn mad; now here is some cause. But
you are an obstinate Mad man, and will be Mad, because you will be so; Dulcinea
del Tobos^ having not given you the least occasion.

The wit is in waxing mad without a cause.] Herein the Don is paradoxicall, and
singular, and will make himself the first Inventer, de Art Amentandi, though
he gain but few followers, now by frequent private practices upon himself, as
by being quarter Mad, half Mad, and three quarters Mad upon several
experiments, is the full Midsommer Moon madness to be attained unto. No doubt
he had passed the three first trials, and was very near his perfection: The
first quarter it is totty and freekish; the second, fantastical, melancholy
and suspicious; the third, quarrelsome and injurious, and then pure
phreneticall. Our Knight is now in the increase, he has but a wild dispatch or
two to Toboso, and you shall have him in the full; and then he is for the King
of Spain, and Dulcinea del Toboso!

For he that shall hear you name a Barbers Basin, Mambrino's Helmet.] Sancho
in this censure, discovers his Masters aptness and preparedness, for the
encounter of Penance, and that he was a Knight of so great curiosity, that he
went the most appointed, and disappointed, unto any adventure, of any Knight in
the World, being at that time the only Knight-mark of the East and West, and
alone acted in the empty Theater of the World. Captain Jones was many years
since down in the Annals; and now to see, when his head should be busy
composing Love Letters to Dulcinea, his Heroic brains are working, where he
may find some wandering Tinker, to mend that scarre of the broken Helmet; But
dull-pate his man, upon the strength of sensitive observations, cannot be
persuaded out of his error, that it was a Basin. O curvae in Terras animae,
his Soul was as disordered as the Helmet, which the Don beholding in the
notion and rapture of his new vertiginous brains, left it with Sancho till it
was uninchanted by some man of Metal, or else some Negromancer: For it was as
sure to return to the shape of Mambrinos helmet, as his own face after all
his labors was to be changed, if any would change with him.

The Knight of the ill-favored Face made choice of this Place.] The Scene is
laid, the Play will follow, he has much to do, and little business troubles
him: But now he is worthily taken with the site of his Stage, whereon he means
to outdoe Ieronymo, and this rapture of his is the best valediction to sense as
could be thought on; for here is some to be found, which because it is of
Poetical fancy, though spun in prose, I shall endeavor to give you't
according to the natural air of it.

The Don's welcome to the Woods.
O ye the Gods and Powers of the Place,
Wood-ticks and Goat-ticks, spoil my Ill-favored Face;
If any thing should charm mine eyes asleep,
Or the Inchanter Morpheus on me creep:
I do not choose this place for sleep, though here,
Temptation is enough, the murmurer,
(The silver ratler on the gravelly path)
And gentle wind, which his soft lulling has,
And moving boughs, which many a Nymph has brought
To her repose, and more then that, it is thought.
I come Loud Music to the place, you are soft,
Yet when I Am hoarse, I then will hear you often.
O you that in the Woods do 'bide, green Dryades,
Behold my prancks, and you above wet Pleiades.
Come forth you Fawnes and frisking Satyrs,
And in mad fits, be my fellow Wa'ters.
O had I horns, (I Will send) and hoofs like you!
The one perchance I have: what would I do?
I Would take a leap into the horned Moon;
And view at once a Corporation,
The largest in the World, and being there,
I Would wind my Horns, and cry, Brethren up here.
But since we cannot, we will fool it bear below,
I do intend to be a lasting show;
Surrounded with my Satyrs, Fawnes, my Kids and Goats,
What brave loud Music will it be to hear our Throats.
3
Sancho, thou partner of my ways and woes,
Whom I must send, my secrets to disclose.
Remember how I sigh; and thump this Bre'st
(A Pox upon the Corslet;) void of rest
Till thou return me news from her, who is
The Loadstone of this man of steel: The bliss
Of this abandoned wight, the star that rears
My desperate Valor, e'^ o'r head o'r ears.
Sancho, if she should drop a tear, when thou
Tell this sad story, of my Mad man's vow;
Catch it be sure, and in some Crystal Vyall,
Preserv't with care, for I will make a trial;
And to the World will justify the Pearl ^' the Glass,
More Sovereign then was Balsamum Fierebras.
4.
This having said, he lighted from his Brute,
('It Was strange that Sancho suffered him to do it)
Unsaddles and unbridles Rosinant,
(Long did poor Rosinante those favors want)
And on his buttock striking him: O horse,
(That with me have seen better days and worse.)
Take now thy Liberty he said, take Mare;
(More then thy Master ever did I Will swear)
And know that in thy Forehead, though no star
Ever was, yet Perseus Horse thou 'xceedest far,
Or Pacolets, or Bradamants, or Hippo-gryphon,
Which the renowned Astolpho vent'red still his life on.
Isay content your self with breaking your head on the water, or with Cotton
or Wool.] If Sancho had been a Confessor, he would have enjoined very easy
Penance. But the Don is resolved to smart for no water, but Rock water, and in
that he will chill his head and whole body, until it be petrified, and able to
endure knock for knock with a Rock. Cotton? to Cotton (as they say) ones Coat,
that is, to baste it. Wool to Sancho, but then when my flead Corpse (by the
touch of the most softest Down) would be in pain and anguish: No, no ( Sancho)
I am not in jest. By my order of Knighthood, Sancho, I must not lie; and
therefore be expeditious in thy return, lest thou find thy macerated
Master, more like a Skeleton then a Body, and so go a farther search, not
imagining that that can be the Don: Lint I have none, unless thou leave some,
and the Balsamum Fierebras is all consumed. Selfe-preservation, (though I mean
Tortures and Whips unto my body,) must be thought on, for I have much to do,
and much to suffer. The suffering part comes first, which being over, Sancho,
thy government, and our greatness does draw nigh.

Quia ab inferno nulla retentio; as I have heard say.] No? Sancho, that is
neither right nor right Latin; For Orpheus ^laid out his Euridyce; Theseus
returned victorious; Herculos led away the three chopped Porter, and broke down
the black Gates; and ever since ( nulla retentio indeed) Hell is broke loose;
you may now have free ingresse, and egresse, and regresse.

Now since we have no Paper, we may do well imitating the Ancient Men in times
past, to write our minds in leaves of Trees.] The Don was to be wood himself,
and favored that Antiquity therefore: Bark there was plenty, but where were
the ingraving Tools? The Don though a great cutter and ^lasher for distressed
Ladies, could not make incision into a Tree for his Dulcinea. Had she been a
Tanners daughter, it had been the most proper missive, possible to be imagined;
but (as she is) most agreeable with her Hide. So as they say, if one would
present a thing to like one, he should have sent that. But Paper is the great
want. It is a great quaerie, whether it had not been better the invention had
never been, and it had been wanting still, or that the Don had amongst his
adventures, destroyed and confounded all Paper Mils? as he did, or would have
done (at the encounter of the sound) the Fulling ones, not that Paper is of
it is self pernicious, dangerous, or of evil consequence; it being the fairest
child of foul Parents, that ever was, converting the Axiom, corruption pessimi
est generatio Optimi. For from rags, Snattocks, Snips, irreconcilable and
super-annuated Smocks and Shirts, come very fair sheets; so that had not
Writing and Printing corrupted so fair an invention, by the pestilent matter
that they cast upon it, the project was of great use, as to put under Apple
pies, make Lant-hornes in dark nights, Burn-graces in Summer to save childrens
Faces, and Stomachers against the wind, (as they call 'um) when they are indeed
very cleanly coverts for foul Shirts, (since the fashion of unbutton'd
Doublets) besides the great service it stands Barbers in, for pictured
Lanthorns, and Card-makers; and then ends not so unserviceably, but departs
(somewhat blewly indeed) in being matches for your tinderbox. But for this
quaerie, it is alike with those of Gunpowder, Tobacco, Printing, Writing,
(whether it had been better they had never been) most men thinking their
inconveniences to exceed their conveniences. Let it alone for me; the Don is to
write Letters, and we must have Paper, or somewhat like Paper, or all the
encounter of Madness is spoiled. But happily, and in a good hour, Cardenio's
Tablets supply the defect. You will have the Letter in time, bless the Don, he
do not make a long one.

Ta da (quoth Sancho) that the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso is Lorenco Corcuelo's
daughter, called by another Name, Aldonca Lorenco. I know her very well, quoth
Sancho, and I dare say, etc.

Sancho's description of DON QUIXOTS Lady.
Mopsa on stilts, was not so high, nor big,
Fair as the farrowing Sow, pert as her Pig;
May Pole of flesh, dancing and danced about,
Her mothers Wonder, and her Fathers Doubt:
For never was such a shrivelled star veling fellow*
As her supposed Father, Corcuelo.
Some high German thrassers, who indeed,
Hoped to have peopled Countries of that breed;
Her Sexes Champion, now, She^ Hercules,
(Whom had he seen) before all Omphale's
He must have matched, (unless at sight afraid)
His thirteenth Labor, the great Bosse (...) had made.
A new rigged Ship, with all her Sails fair spread,
Looks like Aldonca stretching her from bed;
But hardly I believe have any Ships
So strong a gale, as blows from her large Hips:
She if in place where the Colossus was,
Might 'twixt her strides unstruck-saile Vessels pass.
Had there been Beauty to those parts, she would been
The very statue of Original sin.
Borne to great Titles, (though from low descent)
The Don could not her honors much augment;
She as she grew, got natural Heraldry,
Her Highness and her Greatness, none deny.
None will say but you did very well, if the Devil carried you away.] Sancho,
rather then have Aldonca Loreneo to be his Dons Empress, and so by consequence
his fu^tie Mistress, commends his Master, and furthers the design of Madness:
Any thing, the Devil and all take him, rather then he take Aldonca. An
excellent remedy, certainly against Love! such another, as one having lost,
said of his wife (the party deceased) that he had lost as good a wife as any
man would desire to part withal; It may be of such a wife it was, that the
poor fellow carrying to Bedlam, (said) being pitied as he went along the
streets, the people crying, what will his poor wife do; nay (friends) I am not
so mad yet.

Though thou have but a gross wit, yet thy jests ^ip.]

Ridentem dicere verum -- quis vetat -- This ridiculous fool spoke smartly,
and under the merry description of Aldonca Lorenc^, makes bold to disparage his
Masters Election, and puts the slut upon her, and the fool upon him. This made
the Don take pepper in the nose, and unwilling to remand him silence, answers
him with a Story of a widow, which is this in a short Epigram.

A widow of a plump estate;
Lived near unto a Coll^dge;
And matched the Porter of the Gate,
But passed the men of Knowledge*
Whereat the Rector of the place,
(A grave and reverend sir)
Sent for his neighbor, and the case
He thus put unto her.
Had I so many Graduates,
And able Scholars too,
And have the most ungentle Fates
The Porter given to you?
The widow answered modestly,
As for that able stuff,
I like; he has Philosophy
Enough (Sr) and enough.
For all the Poets which celebrate certain Ladies at pleasure, think thou
that they had all Mistresses? Do thou believe the Amaryllies, the Phyllies,
etc.] Now, now he is in his fit: O thou more then Ill-favored faced Don! what
harm did the poor Poets do thee that thou must insinuate to the world, that
they had only chymericall, and imaginary Ladies, and never knew the duties of a
nuptial night, or came to a Zonam solvit diu ligatam, or reap the sweet
pledges of those pleasant encounters, when Homer lay with his own Wife, Ovid
with his own; and more, Virgil kept at home with his own wife, till the
Soldiers disturbed him, and sent him to Augustus for relief. Catullus,
Tibullus, Propertius, had three wives, or else did worse; Lucan was the Country
man, and you know the temper of the Country, you cannot live without wives or
whores. Petrarch (the Great and Laureat) had his chaste, and until this day
unblemisht Laura; and all the Poets (until wives were interdicted Priests) had
real Mistresses or wives. Our Modern Poets, had one or two wives apiece.
Poets, they are composed of such a Spirit, and salt volatile, (that unless you
fix 'um at home with an amiable object of their own) not Caesar's Livia could be
free from their inveiglings. But a wife is better then Patmos, better be in the
bands of Matrimony, then such Fetters. Our Nation also has had its Poets, and
they their wives: To pass the Bards; Sr Ieffery Chaucer lived very honestly at
Woodstock, with his Lady, (the house yet remaining) and wrote against the vice
most wittily, which Wedlock restraines. My Father Ben begat sons and
daughters; so did Spencer, Drayton, Shakespeare, and more might be reckoned,
who do not only word it, and end in ^iery Sylvia's, Galataea's, Aglaura's; --
sed de virtute locuti,
Clunem agitant --
It Is possible to speak of holy life,
And anon after Solace ones own wife.


But that the Don is slept with the Giants, Knights Templars, etc; and there
would be foul raking in the dust. At this time we might justly quarrel with
him, for we have our Poets, who are Knights, and they have Ladies, and those
Ladies are their wives: Wherefore this is the greatest scandalum Poetarum, that
ever could be. But what shall one say to a mad man? nothing: He Will make sport
anon for it, and there will be satisfaction.

Neither can Helen approach, nor Lucreece come near her.] True, ( Don) they are
far enough, and fast enough; yet surely, Helen and Lucreece put together with
Paris and Sextus in conjunction, might something match her in the wast, if
happily they were now flourishing, as she is. Tatius and Cloacina might come
near certainly, and it is strange she is not called to be of the privy
attendance to Cloacina, for no soul ever uttered more constantly, or in a
larger proportion then Aldonca, at their houses of ease, insomuch, that she
called in Votaries, with the high strains, and Jearing expressions she
always made. But might not one with a Clove and Orange come near her? is she
more sweet then an Anatomy, or the Bearegarden, or a nest of Pole-Cats, or a
Tanne-pit, or a Soape Kiln?

Mysterious Fragrancies, Perfumes so close,
It does escape the most sagacious Nose.
In the same sense I believe it is to be understood, as the like expression to
a Barber, who having lost all his custom, bewailed his misfortunes to his
friend; saying, (Sr) why should it be thus, my shop is the best in Town, my
person tractable; I dare compare for an Eye, Leg, Hand, or Foot, with any man
upon the place; and his Friend added (unmercifully,) and for thy Trade there is
no man comes near thee.

Hear it then quoth Don Quixot, for thus it says, Sover aigne Lady, etc.
Thine until Death, the Knight of the Ill-favored Face.] This is pure, his own
invention, the marrow of the Do^s brains, the ^rightest sparkle of his fancy,
not miserably patcht up out of Books of Love Letters, or his own Books of
Errantry, (the ordinary helps for the Amoroso's of the Time) for a
compellation to a Lady, and abasement (for so are subscriptitions) of his own
self; I do not think Rablais can equal it. (Sovereign Lady,) what could be
said more, to signify her height and greatness? (Thine until Death, the
Knight of the Ill-favored Face) What greater affront could he put upon
himself, then to dedignifie his countenance, as not worthy to be looked on by
a Lady, nay, making it a scarecrow and Bugbear. This is Ars procandi, Woers
policy, but yet he in the body of the letter follows his Complements. (Sweetest
Dulcinea of Toboso) There was not one in that Country of such a scent: And anon
after, (O beautiful ingrate!) You may make three words if you will of it, as
Fair have been seen, in or at a Grate. But she as equally entitled one as the
other; for till this Letter (which was never sent) she could not be guilty of
ingratitude, and ignoti nulla Cupido; how could her Beauty entangle that was
impossible to be seen?

Sancho swear by his Fathers life, it was the highest thing he ever saw in his
life.] The hope of his Asses makes him turn parasite. Had he read his Letter on
the top of Sienna Morena, it had been higher far. But Sancho is so much in
his Masters flattery, that he makes the Devil himself of him. (who is Prince
Errant o'r the whole world) So highly is he transported with the thought of
Mary Gutierez, and the riding Rosinante, that he leave^ the Don possessed of
the Principality of the air, and as freely bestows it upon him, as he
hereafter would dispose to Sancho the Government of an Island. Sancho will have
warrant signed in his Masters now Title, for the Asses perchance, and then he
might be gone in the Devils name.

It is very necessary that I see you do one trick.] Sancho is got into the
saddle, and rides Rosinante and Master too; now his worship is pleased to see a
trick. The Don, as if under ( Tonies) correction, presently disrobes his lower
Wardrobe, and like an Ape (deorsum nudus) shows himself to be desc^nded from
Hercules by the melan-pygitie, (that is, the grizlinesse) of his posteriours,
which were (no disparagement to his looks) as Ill-favored as his face; Besides
others fights there were, wherein he seemed a Mungrell, and not of the right
Herculean Line. Yet like him too, when he was Furens, for they both are in
their shirts, though the Dons was the fowler; Hercules his the worse, and more
pernicious: Mad both too, but upon several grounds, one for a Smock, the other
with a Shirt.

One dies empoyson'd by the blood of Nessus,
And Don runns mad for a worse Beast; God bless us.
CHAP. XII.
Soon are his frisco's over, ( Sancho gone,)
It was too violent an exercise for one
Of Limbs so mortified; 'its very much,
If these few Tortures send him not toth' crut^h.
Wherefore resolved against Orlando's way,
He Will save his flesh, and only weep and pray,
(As once did Amadis,) a sober madman,
A Poenitentiary, or sad-man:
A bitter Penance doubtless ( Don) befalls,
When that the Beads upon his wrists were Gauls.
Then most like Amadis-next he confesses
All his whole life, which why he here suppresseth
(Who wrote the Book)'s unknown; but I shall get ye
A taste of it, out of old Cyd Hamette;
He also treats of Sancho, how he ^anted,
When he his Letters and the warrant wanted,
Deeming h' had lost what he did never receiv^,
Till that the Curate and his Friend retrive
The Letter to his memory, but so confused,
That not a word the Faithful Sancho true said:
The Asses are secured him, and the Letters
Should be revived, or else made something better.
Thus Sancho's pacified, and all are plotting,
To fetch the Don from this mad course he is got in;
Agreed upon it, away they all go trotting.
TEXT.
LET the remembrance of Amadis live, and be imitated as much as may be by Don
Quixot of the Mancha.] Second thoughts are best: Retra^^ations of what we have
untowardly designed, wrote or spoke, show not a man only wise, but Master of
his own passions and humors, which some men are so in Love withal, that if
once they have engaged in a business, they will through, though they meet with
an hundred inconveniences, and selfe-reproofes in the way. Wiser did the
fellow, who having lost a great sum of money at Dice, got loose from the
company, and then grew desperate upon the apprehension of the estate he was in*
murmuring and muttering to himself, that on the next convenient post he would
hang himself; the garters were taken off, the place was chosen, where by the
help of a stall, it was fecible to fasten his garter to the Sign-post, and a
short speech of his foolish and ill-spent life, he was preparing for execution,
when on a sudden, a merry tune came into his head, which one would have
thought his farewell hymn, and that called into mind his companions, with whom
he used to chant it; whereupon he pulls down his garter, and went away, saying,
I reprieve thee from day to day, until thou die a natural death; this was a
wise recantation. Such was our Do^^s, who (not without his Paenitentiall
Psalm, as we shall hear anon) forsook his first resolution of tormenting,
wounding, starving, and almost annihilating himself with fastings, watchings,
and other pe^rsonall afflictions, and makes choice of the more rational and
easy way of D^-Gaul, which kept him in a whole skin. A Heremite he wanted to
impart his grief and life unto, from whom an absolution would have been of
much comfort to him; but some pieces of his confession Cyd Hameti Benengeli
has preserved, taken out of decayed rinds of trees; one which (being the most
ancient and reverend stock of the place, having only two arms left, and those
as it were stretch^ out, to bless or receive a Penitent,) he fell down before.

He was much vexed in his mind, for want of an Heremite to hear his confession.

The Confession of Don Quixot, taken out of some fragments of Cyd Hameti
Benengeli, and are in Latin in the Original.
1.
Grandaeve, and constans Pater, Fateor
Me non esse Dominum de Gateor,
Nec, (quantumvis amens hic amando)
Furiosum, qui dictus est Orlando,
Sed per Orbiculos Petri and Pauli
(Hos fellis globos,) sum Amadis Du Gauli.
2.
Erravi fateor, cum patribus meis,
Erravi pater, cum, and sine eis:
Doce, quaeso, quo me vertam, quia
Nec fui, nec Futurus sum in vid.
3.
In aurem fateor haec s^surrans
Iuvenis Consilium omne abhorrens,
Consulta sprevi matri^ atqu^ Patris*
Qui designaverunt me aratris.
4.
Sed addixi me Legendis Libris
Permendacibus and comburendis,
Vbi de militibus pugnacibus
Invulneratis Ferro, and facibus
Miranda vidi, and mulieres
Quas vivendo paene Lapis fieres*
Sed pater, quod ad res venereas,
Siquid unquam novi, male Pereas.
5.
Parentibus defunctis per dium
Et Domus erant mihi taedium.
Fabulis refertus feror pronus
Ut miles essem, valeat Colonus.
Conscendo aequum mox and capio arma,
Et cum Conto Cuspide, and Parma,
Que non tuli (pater) que non feci?
Plusquam, (quando egressus sum,) conjeci.
6.
Enumerare velim libens, etc.
Upon six several Trees, were these lines engraven, and on the sixth something
was begun; which whether by injury of weather, or time erased and confounded,
is a shrewd scarre, and loss to this History. Some supplements from Arabian
Neotericks we have, which seem to complete his confession and absolution, which
you shall have translated into the Mother Tongue, for that was his Fathers, to
wit, his Confessors.

1.
Sheep-slaughter, and Sheep-murther,
I do confess, and further
(Having no Providore)
The Poultry fell good store:
These peccadillo's Father,
You may forgive the rather,
Because sometimes by hunger put-on;
But by Nature I loved Mut-ton.
2.
Grice Mill, and Fulling Mill,
I did attempt to Kill,
But bloodshed there was none,
And Penance for the one
I did in the air, my Horse
And I, are still the worse.
But O the Coarse! who will me save,
Who fought a Corpse out of its Grave^
3.
Father I have a number
More faults, (which castith' lumb^r)
As swearing, telling lies
Of ungot Victories;
And crying up the sootie
Aldonca for a beauty.
O by thy stretcht-out Arms declare,
That all these errors pardoned are.
Now these Modern Writers say, that a Goatheard had concealed himself in a
Cork Tree nere the Oak, to hear Don Quixots Sonnets and complaints, and
desirous to make up the Scene, spoke from his hollow in a loud voice.

The Goath^ards absolution.
Son, I have heard thy words, thy sighs and groans,
Thy verses and thy lamentable tones:
I do alsolve thee, but you promise must,
By no means to take Giants upon trust,
And' cause your Windmill was the first ill fate,
Be sure to have a Windmill in your pate;
And' cause you run at Sheep, I do command
You wear a goodly Sheep tail for a Band.
For the assault of the Coarse, about your bed,
And rings (when that you have 'um) carve deaths head:
As for your lying and your fearful oaths,
When you leave one, I wish you to leave both.
Arise and thank the gods, who pitying thee,
Gave Arms to the Oak, and tongue to the Cork Tree.
The Don took the miracle of his absolution, to be far more eminent then if
an Heremite had pronounced it, and confir'md in the opinion, tha^ he was clear
in foro poli and soli; he fell into his melancholy part again, and
over-afflicted with the absence of Dulcinea, he composed the most pitiful
Poem that ever was read, whereby he does approve himself the only mad Lover in
the World. Yet of all the furies, you see by this, that he was not troubled
with Furor Poeticus.

It is congruent we turn and recount what happened to Sancho.] The Don is left
grazing, and picking of sallads, which being the only nutriment he had, did so
discolor him, that he might have added a superlative to his title, and wrote
of the most Ill-favored face. Besides, the crude herbs so frequently made
their green sallies through his body, that all the Field where he raved up and
down, was full of Knight-sharne, and had it been possible to have got a fire
and frying pan, he might have thrived better upon the Tanzies he evacuated,
then with the herbs at first gathering. Wherefore he might very well
contain, and most properly usurp that Verse to himself; Hei mihi quod null is
amor est medicabilis herbis.

But Sancho is in his progress to Toboso, and rides (not with Bellerophon^
Letters) but without Letters, and with a mischief; but yet being ignorant of
his misfortune, he arrives at the Inn, where he incounter'd the Coverlet, and
came clean off. But the indignity disturbed his Valiant soul, and he is as much
tossed in mind as then in body, and at last resolves not to enter into the
house, though his own belly, and Rosinantes were of the dissenting party. But
while he plays about the door, he and his horse are discovered by two of the
Mancha (the knowing part of the Village) the Curate and the Barber, who betwixt
threats and entreaties, work out of Sancho all the passage of his Masters new
projects, the errand that he had to his Lady of Toboso, and that in Tablets the
Letters to Dulcinea, as also his warrant, for three Asses were included.

When Sancho perceived that the Book was lost, his visage waxed as pale and
wanne as a deadman, etc.] Sancho not capable of his Book, does fearful
execution upon himself, and in an instant, unthatches his reverend chin, that
Mr Barber with his Razor or his Tweezers, could not be so expeditious: He
grub'd up all by the roots, wherever his unmercifull hands fastened, and
quartered his face into a plain betwixt two thickets, nor did the rest of his
Face escape his fury, which he did assault in such rough manner, that he was all
gules, which running along the Champion of his Chin, made a bloody field. Poor
Sancho, I pity thy mistaken vengeance, and causeless revenge upon thy self;
and above all, that thou should forget thine own counsel to thy Master, whom
thou would have (if he had a mind to castigate himself) to break his head
against the water, or a tod of a wool, or some such favorable matter. But
great grief is insensible and impatient of advice; The Curate and the Barber
stand astonished at his passion, (and forgetting for a time, both their
professions) neither spiritual reproof, exhortation, or comfort, came from Sr
John in the Cassock, nor any healing remedies from Mr Barber Surgeon, until
Sancho tells the cause of his lamentation and unkind usage of himself.

Both of them took great delight to see Sancho's good memory.] Sancho had a
brutish memory, and only served him for the remembrance of his three Asses, and
the loss of his gray Ass. But the Letter to Dulcinea, it was as much from his
head as the Tables were from his Breeches; they never were there, yet the fool
ventures on a recital, and mingling his own expressions with Don Quixots, he
rendered himself to have as much fancy as memory: He only retains that part of
it which might have been best forgotten; (the subscription) Yours until death,
the Knight of the Ill-favored Face. As to the relation of his Lords wanderings
and prancks he was very punctual, but his memory failed him, as to the tale of
his own tossing in a blanket, which being perchance a secret belonging to the
bed, he thought it not fit to be revealed.

And he would give him one of the Emperors Ladies to wife.] Some of the
decea^ed Emperors not doubt; for Sancho expected Mary Gutiereze's his head to
be cold and laid with her mothers in the Churchyard at the Mancha. Thou art in
the right way to preferment ( Sancho) no better Mart then dead wives;
especially if men have cast about in the lives-time of their dearly Beloveds
deceased. As Sancho does here, who lays the hopes of his second match to
hight, that from a Manchegan Tripe-wife, he does aspire to the Bed of a Queen.
Dives promissus quilibet esse potest. This and more then this the Don assures,
upon the return of a favorable Letter from Dulcinea, who could neither write
nor read.

I would faigne know what Cardinall-errants give unto their Squires.] This is a
strange transition, that the most wicked, unwarrantable and ungodly Order in
the world should be at any time capable of the most holy and sacred: But yet in
this also Sancho looks to be preferred; If he had peeled his crown as he had
done his beard, he was in preparation for a Friery: No further could Sancho go
or proceed to the hopes of a Fortune in the Church. Barba aliquando facit
Monachum. And Sancho if he had not disparaged his Face (with friends to shift
off examinations and subscriptions) he might have passed for one Ordinus
Minorum (as to his wit) but Superiorum and Majorum as to his Corpse: unto which
when he had another Corpse added, what a goodly monk would there be? But
Sancho, what think you of the Beneficial Office of Porter to the Lord
Cardinal Quixot, when in your gown (not a Clericall habit of any Learning)
but welted and crosse-lac'd, with gilded staff of power in your hand, and your
beard grown down to the girdle; you have the power of admitting or refusing
accesses to my Lord Archbishop Quixot, unless they pay the Turn-key: The
Dollars dropping every day into the hand, would make you look upon your self
with good regard. Besides, in that Signiory, your wife ( Mary) may be dispensed
withal, or more, if (as you only are in favor with my Lord Prelate) you do
require a License in case of extreme calidity, and supersufficiency. Sancho was
now in comfort, that go the world wik way it would, he was provided for, either
with an Island, if the Don was an Emperor, or with an Honorable Mace, if the
Don took into Church-preferment, which he had less mind unto. For though the
Porter of a Cardinal may exercise his power over people without the gates, and
sits there upon his Bench, and from his peep-holes judges of beneficial
Visitors to his Lord, and then most officiously opens the great gates (as his
opinion's of them) and returns them out at the Wicket: Yet he bethought
himself, that in the Administration of his Governour-ship he should keep
himself such an Officer, and sit upon the Bench in Judicature, advanced aloft,
and have servants, which is better then to be one.

I will pray unto our Lord to conduct him to that place where he may serve him
best, and give him rewards.] Sancho's devout zeal for his Masters promotion
(with his own) calls to mind the form of an Epistle sent by a Scholar to his
Father, which ran much after this manner: The EPISTLE.
Honored Sir,
THe Quarterly Returns enforce me to write to you, and present my humblest
duty to you; you will find that these Bills are higher then the last, occasioned
by public sport in the College, wherein I lost no credit, and by buying some
new books, which our Progress in study gives us occasion to use, so that I
hope this excess will not prove distasteful to you, since there is nothing but
just and honest expenses, no Alehouse scores, Tavern Bills, or the like, coucht
under the style of any of the particulars, which I pray read with patience, (as
you usually do.) Thus with my hearty prayers for your health ( together with
the receipt of the money) I rest,

Your most dutiful son.


The Curate told the Barber, that he had bethought to apparel himself like a
Lady adventurous.] How Mr Licentiat? don't you know that by the Canon Law, it
does make you irregular, to shift sexes by change of apparel? propter bonum
finem nisi sit; that distinction is not visible in the Canonists: But let it
pass, this was a pretty invention, and like to prove a very good Scene, and
the only probable way to reduce the melancholy Knight. Mad men (as well as mad
Girls) love mad toys: Strong conceits must be flattered, not resist'ed, and
when you have humored such distempered fancies in the full of their folly,
they will decrease (like the Moon) into quarters, till at last there is nothing
to be seen. Such a course, and with very good success, was taken by a Doctor,
with a melancholy Patient of his, who using to sleep with his mouth open, (as
he supposed) imagined a Mouse had slipped down his throat; the Doctor perceiving
his fancy to be strongly perverted, concurred with him that it was a Mouse, and
nothing else that troubled him, and that he should (upon a little Physic
taken) see the return of him to his great joy. The Patient desired his dose;
and within a day or two, the Apothecary gave him a slight vomit, which wrought
very well, but at the first and second strains, no Mouse appeard; whereat, the
Apothecary swear, he smelt him coming by the scent of the ejection, and
therefore he wished him to reach lustily the next provocation, and he doubted
not but to show him his incroacher, and to make him pay for a entry and
forcible detainer: The next bout, the Apothecary under care of holding his
head, clapped his hands about his eyes, and while he was expectorating with the
other, he conveyed a live Mouse into the Basin, which the Patient seeing, he
highly triumphed over his disposses'd inmate, and at once cleared his stomach
and his fancy of the imaginary Mouse, by the Doctors wise application of a
real one.

CHAP. XIII.
Sr John is changed into my Lady Jone,
And Cut-beard is the Squire, (a proper one)
But Mr Curate (though trickt up and dressed)
To act in Woman's cloths thought it not best,
His orders did forbid him; They change par^s,
But not the plot, and follow their first Arts:
And while they do pursue that brave design,
They sonnets hear, and harmony divine
At their repose, and at the last discover
Cardenio the discontented Lover;
Who now composed compleats his woeful tale,
And shows that wealth and honor will prevail^
Against oaths and vomes; the loss indeed is sad,
'But the worst loss^ i^, for it to be mad.
TEXT.
THey borrowed therefore of the Innkeepers wife, a Gown and a Kerchiefe, and
left in pawn a fair new Cassock, etc.] 'Twas well if Mr Curate never knew the
charge of taking up a Gown before: It is a dear commodity, and has put many a
man to doffe all: But for Mr Barber, who (and yet I cannot tell whether the
trades were conjoined so anciently) was a Perruke-man by profession, should
have no better shift then a pied Ox tail for a Beard, is very unc^uth, he
might have had enough of more pardonable Rubbish, if he had taken the pains to
reform Sancho's Beard, where was an infinite of shrubs to spare, without any
wast to his Coppice.

The Hoastesse trickt up the Curate so handsomely.] So rare a dress is this of
the Gown, with the guards of black Velvet full of gashes and cuts, that
certainly the Don, or whosoever saw her, must needs take her for a distressed
Lady, and oppressed too, if it were no more, then with that Gown upon her back
in the middle of August. But it seems the Gown was of great Antiquity, and
being made in King Bamba's days, a Prince that delighted in no fashions, was
extremely ridiculous in King Cambises time, who was the most glorious Courtly
Prince, and most observer of Modes in Arabia. Now what would move one of us
easily perchance to laughter, will work other effects upon the Don, who seeing
a Lady submitting her self to his protection, and stiling him her deliverer,
restorer and avenger of her Injuries, would instantly imagine, that some
Villains, Thiefes, Giants, or Inchanters, had robbed her Castle, killed her
Knight, stripped the Empress, murdered the young Princess, and left her naked,
until she was compassionated by a certain Midwife, who accommodated her with
her Christning Gown, wherein she got more pity, and raised a higher desire of
revenge in the Don, by how much that more eminent she had been, and especially,
that by her muffler he could perceive, she was very tender of laying open her
rare beauty to the Sunbeams, which was another inducement to provoke him,
that such a Beauty should not (and he a living Knight Errant) suffer
(unrevenged) this injury. These opinions no doubt would surprise the Don,
beside the uncouth figh^ of her Squires face-handle, (by which he might seem to
be a longo-beard) would much amaze him. But more the variegated form of it,
the like whereof he had not seen upon the face of man in all his Travels: But
presently reflecting upon the hubbub, affrights, and confusions of the stormed
Castle, he found, that the present fear and amazement the Squire was in
personally, and the deep grief that did seize him for his Lords and his young
Ladies, and the sweet Princes Ruins, and his most sweet and Innocent Ladies
horrid abuses, did change in a night one side of his Beard, as is frequent with
those, who take too deep impressions of sorrow, to have their whole hair
altered from any color (except the same) into white.

Sancho, came over to them about that time, and seeing of them in that habit,
he could not contain his laughter.] Sancho shows himself a man by his
proprieties, and though it be the sign of a fool to laugh excessively and
often, it is the part of a rational man to laugh sometimes, especially when merry
objects are presented. The contrary passionate Philosophers from the same
objects raised tears and laughter: A great Argument that most men's actions are
like Mr Curates Beard, pied: and that both Heraclitus and Democritus might
exercise at once their customs upon them. Mr Curates Beard was indeed more
ridiculous then Sancho's, yet Sancho sneers at it, having not seen his own face
in a glass since his first setting forth. Yet the intention of this foolish
Metamorphosis, was commendable in the continuance, and dolorous in respect of
the object; that wise men should permit themselves to play the fools, to
regaine a perverse and obstinate mad man to his home again; let a man judge
himself, and at night recount his days several works, and he will
ingeniously (if he be impartial betwixt himself Jury and self Judge)
confess, Inter ridenda and deflenda tempus esse perditum, and he might lay
himself to bed like the Picture with a face of several sides, the one weeping
and the other smiling.

They arrived the next day following, where Sancho had left the tokens of
boughs.] Sancho is now near Bedlam, as he supposes, and that he shall find his
Knight, out of wits, out of cloths, and out of knowledge. The Curate instructs
him what to do, and gives him a letter of word of mouth, (not to be shown, if
he would conquer the world for it) which if he delivers with that fidelity as
he did the Don's to the Curate, he may be styled Mercurio del Fido. They
injoyne further secrecy, that he reveal not the design; a thing which he was
very well contented to do, hoping it tended to his present installation to the
government, and then there was another infallible token, that of two things
committed to his memory, he could remember but one, and that was for his Asses,
his profit quickening him in that particular. But as for the Letter to Toboso,
it crumbled into such miserable Snattocks, that the Devil could not piece it
together.

Both therefore arriving quietly under the shadow, there arrived to their
hearing a sound of a voice.]

Ante Focum si frigus erit, si messis in umbr^. Umbrage and Music too, and
vocal, too, was treble delight: But such rare strains, and so exactly sung,
raised their opinion, (that it was not pastoritiall, nor any Dorus that sang)
but some body of rare fancy, and exquisi^^ voice. It will be a good
Parenthesis, according to the inversion of the Verse, (both ways to be
followed) Interpone tuis interdum seria ludis.
Sancho being gone to fool it with his Master;
Cardenio brings of the Stage his sad disaster.


The continuation of Cardenio's Story.
Luscinda's Letter to Cardenio.
1.
Love and Desert enforce me to
Hold you not only high and dear,
But to put off all foeminine fear,
And teach thee slow-man, what to do.
2.
If thou desire in civil ways,
Without a clausam fregit writ,
Upon my honor (tender it)
It is my glory yet, and praise.
3.
Unto my Father make address,
He loves me highly, you he knows,
Who will not crosly interpose,
But rather our good fortunes bless.
4.
He cannot compel my will to thee,
It Is to thee long ago designed;
This letter shows how I Am inclined,
If thou my Love be so to me.
5.
This message 'fir'd Don Ferdinand
With praise to me, and magnifies
Luscindas wit, above all that is wise,
But loves herfalse Lord underhand.
6.
I as a man designed for ruin,
And one whose sorrows should be full,
My self invited in this gull,
My self the usurper drew in.
7.
I made my secrets known, and told,
Why the kind summons of my love
I did not to her mind improve,
But for a season did withold.
8.
It lay upon my Fathers side,
To ask her of her yielding sire;
But had it Heaven bin to acquire,
I durst not mention't, nor confide.
9.
Not that Luscinda might not gain
(Without worldly additaments)
By personal virtues the descents,
And grace the noblest blood in Spain.
10.
But I knew well that no requests
Would on his will prevail, ^'r since
Those Letters from our noble Prince
Called me to wait his high beh^sts.
11.
And filthy fear, I knew not why,
(But straws were blocks) did chill my heart,
That I could not my mind impart
With Fancy, that he would deny.
12.
Now sings a Nightingale, O hear!
Don Ferdinand will undertake,
Consenting Fathers both to make;
But O she signs not half the year!
13.
O Ioab false, Italian Lord!
Whose saying it was, qui nescit dissimulare nescit vivere. Alexander
overheated with Greek wine, ^lew his best Captain, and friend Ephae^hon.
Vespasians tutored Favorite,
But Alexanders friends, sad plight
Will seize thee, and a Tyrants sword.
14.
O bloody Gyges, whom the King,
Candaules the King of Lydia discovered the naked excellencies of his wife to
his Favorite, who made conscious to such a high secrecy, never left plotting
(by his death) till he made himself more private with his admired spectacle.
( Candaules) gave a fatal view,
(Of what no wise man ere would show)
And made his own a Gyges ring.
15.
Fond Lover, whosoe'r thou art,
Let not thy tongue thy Mistress praise,
Such talk in the hearers lust does raise,
It Is pimping to a goatish heart.
16.
But show her not (not to the blind)
Cupid is said to want his Eyes,
But yet about he wanton flies,
And does the fairest pieces find.
17.
Be only mirrors to each other,
Viewing your selves in your own Eyes,
(And fear least they should chance prove spies)
Your kisses too with kisses smother.
18.
So shall no envious person pine
At that he does not see nor know,
And all the joys will 'twixt you flow,
Which your own banks will safe confine.
19.
But I transgress, and shall return
Unto Lord Ferdinand, whose care
Is now to send me from this air,
Where he in fires of love does burn.
20.
The better to effect his will,
A specious errand he contrives,
And in that missive a plot drives,
His hopes to raise, and mine to kill.
21.
Six goodly horses now are bought,
But money from the Court must come,
(That any man should Court his doom!)
I this employment freely sought.
22.
He had his wish, and straight dispatched
Letters unto his elder Brother,
But his intents from him did smother,
And in his papers mischief hatched.
23.
I gave Luscinda short account,
Who wished me make no tedious stay,
To ready minds naught is delay;
(The saying did to much amount.)
24.
But then I did perceive her eyes,
With liquid Pearl distent, and swelled;
I never tear before beheld,
Which made me bode 'um prophesies.
25.
And so they proved, for in a shoure,
(A storm it proved in fine to me)
I left my sweet Captivity,
And never shall see good day nor hour.
26.
Pensive and sad I mount my Mule,
(My fears gave wings, and jealousy.)
The way was scarce seen under me,
So rode a mad deluded fool.
27.
And Ferdinand's Brother privatelie
With Letters I salute, who reads
The business, but no money speeds,
Until eight days could finished be.
28.
Who laid commands that those eight days,
(Unseen unto the Duke with him)
I should in joy and pleasure swim,
And money he would private raise.
29.
And all this was the Artifice
Of treacherous Lord Ferdinand,
To win his Brother to command
My stay, by feigned necessities.
30.
Who could prevent, who could discover
Such ^ubtle managed treachery?
That might have I, that did not I,
A foolish, doting, senseless Lover.
31.
Short of Lusc^^da in my love,
My resolution not so high
(More like a spouse in modesty)
A coward too, in fine I prove.
32.
What could the pretty soul do more?
(A soul surpised, and forc'^ by friends,)
To bring about our longed for ends,
Then send, and rescue to implore?
33.
Luscindas Letter.
Don Ferdinand (writes she,) he does act
So by the Father, (not for you)
That both the Heifer he will plow,
For the two Fathers are compact.
34.
And O that I must say such word,
He has demanded me for wife,
But he shall ask, and get my life
As soon: Love can find out a sword.
35.
Ambition spurs my Father on
To have his daughter, Duchess styled,
That he does urge as he were wild,
And yielded has unto the Don.
36.
Two days, ( Cardenio) and but two,
(O think how nimbly time does fly!)
Are 'twixt that dire solemnity;
Do something, and that quickly too.
37.
Imagine my perplexed estate,
One while o'rcharg'd with courtships high,
Then Fathers importunity,
And thus my wretched ears they bait*
38.
If these arrive unto your hands,
They may prevent the giving mine,
Or that my lips should ever sign,
To say, I will be Ferdinand's.
39.
That word like to a daggers point
Wounded my heart, and drove from thence,
All the regard and reverence
I owed, and friendship did disjoint:
40.
Got from the Court, I back did fly,
(For rage and fear my Mule did spur)
And had a quick access to her,
Who at the grate did for me lie.
41.
That Iron grate, which often has heard
Our vows and protestations,
(Were things of course and fashion)
Was now unto me double barred.
42.
For in a sad and doleful tone
Luscinda said, ( Cardenio)
I strait in these rich Dresses go,
And must with Ferdinand be one.
43.
The Traitor Lord in the Hall attends,
My covetous Father there expects
My duty, which the work effects,
Unless some poor relief me sends.
44.
But if I must my self relieve,
I have a Poniard secret hid,
Which will the cursed Banes forbid,
And give me long and wished Reprieve.
45.
Dearest of living things be there,
And see thy Maiden sacrifice;
See how I will this Lord despise,
And name of Virgin Martyr wear.
46.
O persevere (soul of my soul)
And act according to thy word,
And see Cardenio wears a sword,
None shall my fury then control.
47.
Then will I falsehood falsehood call,
And challenge Ferdinan'd to's face,
And have revenge upon the place,
For one or both that hour shall fall.
48.
So shall we both be joined in the Urne,
And in eon Tomb we will chastely lie,
The monuments of constancy;
Luscinda (while I speak) does turn.
49.
Called to these cursed Nuptials,
So that I grop'd, (as in dark night)
Deprived of her vigorous light,
Till hate my fainting soul recals.
50.
Not as a Brideman, 'twas decreed,
To see this Pomp, but as a feind
With dismal torch, I shall attend
The issue of this cruel deed.
51.
Then to the Hall unseen I came,
The busy house was upward flown,
The Hall with various herbs was strown,
(It might have been for me the same.)
52.
Two courteous ends of Arras meet,
And gave me sight, and covert too,
That undiscerned I saw the show,
And how these lovely couple greet.
53.
False Ferdinand took first the Hall,
(A Field perchance to us't may prove
And 'tent of wrath, and not of Love)
Clothed in his common habits all.
54.
Then came Luscinda and her train,
Rage made me blind, senseless and mad,
I scarce took notice how sh'was clad,
But nothing was so fine in Spain.
55.
Amongst these people ^tood a thin
Lean man in black, and from his coat
He plucked a book of common note,
And brushed and cough'd, and did begin.
56.
He joined their hands, and lowly bowed,
Madam (said he) is it your mind,
With Lord Ferdinand to be joined
In Wedlock, speak, and it is avowed.
57.
My lengthened Ears did greedily watch,
What answer she would make, and while
I with her Negative beguile
My hopes, or that she would dispatch
58.
With Poniards point the fatal Scene;
My hand was still upon my hilt,
She ordered it, no blood was spilt,
And said I will! Was this her spleen?
59.
And Ferdinan'd replied ( I will,)
And going to salute his Bride,
A judgment just did her betide,
Whom Heaven for perjury did kill.
60.
For 'twixt her mothers knees she fell,
And on her heart her hand was fixed,
That nothing could be got betwixt,
And gone she is, where none can tell.
61.
At last with spirits she got heat,
Which loosed that false and mulcted hand,
And from her Breast Don Ferdinand
A letter caught, and did retreat.
62.
Which by the help of Torch he read,
But the Contents did not well please,
He sat him down in little ease,
The killing letter made him dead.
63.
He did forget to mind his spouse,
(To whom but now he gave his hand)
Nor could or life or speech command,
But sat dejected in the house.
64.
Judgments enough (if they be home)
If thou never op^ that treacherous mouth,
Whence never issued word of truth,
(Said I) it is a happy doom.
65.
The house in tumult, I conveyed
My self unknown into the street,
Where no man me, I no man greet,
But walk like one wholly dismayed.
66.
My Mule I got, and for the Fields,
And sight of Rocks, and Woods, and beasts
I now resolve, and count them blessed,
Who live in place that no men yields.
And just about the time, Mr Curate was bethinking.] A note of consolation
would have been very unseasonable* especially in beating out such a story with
worse matter. Then it was not certain, whether Cardenio would hold in this
temper; and so Mr* Curates word of comfort might meet with a word and a blow of
reproof. Thirdly, I believe that Mr Curate was not provided, and that is enough
at any time, for a escape Sermon; the quilted cap the next Sababths day is
Apology for the indispositions and failings of the last. Fourthly, and to
conclude indeed, another extraordinary pleasant voice, drew them all by the
ears unto it. It was so ravishing a voice, that it was able to compose the
troubled soul of Cardenio; who weary with the sad relation of his own Story,
is now at leisure to hear this, which that it may gain all its grace, the
Author places us a room off from the Music, and only in this Book, gives us
the echo and falling tunes; but in the next you shall have the fullness of the
melody, the Beauty of the person, which he sufficiently invites us to, while
he raises in us appetite, which will not be satisfied without tasting.

The end of the Third Book.
FESTIVOVS NOTES UPON DON QUIXOT. BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
Our Shepherd shepherdess, relates her hap,
What do you think it is! she has got a clap.
Lord Ferdinand as you have heard before,
Made bold to make this pretty rogue a whore;
It Is pity she is so; but being out-sworne,
Out-powr'd, out-worded, she is at last o'rborne.
Her Father has a Barn more to his Farm,
Good man, it is known my Lords, and there is no harm:
But Dorothea having lost her Fame,
Scorns to be Country talk, and peoples game;
Forsaken by her Lord, the Woods she takes,
Hoping to meet with Cleopatra's Snakes,
Or any courteous Beast, would make a prey
Of her: But Woods nor cruel Beasts obey.
Instead of welcome dangers, her own Page,
(A rascal Varlet, scarce grown up to age)
Adventures on her chastity; but he
Thrown down a Rock, received his destiny.
Then to an ancient Heard, (what age is free,
If fifteen be not, nor threescore and three?)
She was a servant, but the old Knave knew
She was not as she seemed, but lustful grew.
Flight was her refuge here, she now remains
In The craggy part of the Mountain, and complains
Of Lords, of Pages, and old doting Swains.
TEXT.
PReface. Most happy and fortunate were those times, wherein the most audacious
and bold Knight Don Quixot of the Mancha, was bestowed on the World.]

Faelix illa dies! quae magni Conscia partus,
Quixotum terris, and tibi Mancha dedit.
Translated thus.
Who knows the day of that illustr'ous Birth,
When Quixot of the Mancha saw the Earth?
I do believe, Garagantua and he were near Contemporaries, or rather the
Knight of the Sun, by his parched face, but by his wild and wandering head, he
should be more conv^rsant with the Knights of the moon, who every month, in
some Region or other, drop from the Orb, and play feats in this. In the
Register of the Mancha there is nothing to be found but these Letters, and
these with much Art preserved. Hab: Lunat: Quix: Anno ante Orb: Cond. p. 10.

A voice said very dolefully, these words ensuing.] Let it be if you please a
Drawlery upon it, for it is very sad and long, and it may be you long to be
merry.

Dorothaea's Description.
She Would got (poor soul) among the craggy Rocks,
And is discovered by her silver locks;
Her argent hair, which all beholders caught,
Entrapp'd her self, and to her sex her brought.
She would a boy been thought, but her pure feet,
(Then which nothing so strait, nothing so neat,
Nothing so clear: For to the bathing wench
And'bout her legs the fish played as a Tench.)
Confessed her woe too plain, 'twas worth ones wish,
To have a Less, that caught both flesh and fish:
Just like a Plow-boy tired in a brown Iacket,
And Breeches round, long lethern point (no Placket)
With her high shoes, her Buskin fashioned hose,
Half of her Alabaster legs disclose:
Her head a rusty cap did hide, and as
She lifts it up, her face proclaims a Less
So beautiful, that rapt Cardenio swears,
Since not Luscinda, it is not as'^ appears.
I would have sworn as much, had I been there;
But after this she combed out her hair,
What was her Ivory combe^d' you think? her hand,
Which ran so nimbly at her sole command,
That in an instant she had spread her hair,
You could not see a person to be there;
As in a thicket of rich Silk Worms work,
Or twisted Sun-beame, her nice Corpse do lurk
Unseen, unless the amorous Wind did sunder
The even lines, and show within more wonder.
All which circumstances did possess the three that stood gazing at her with
great admiration, etc. Therefore they resolved to show themselves.] Mr C^r^t
had no Crosse-worke against this sight, it drove him not to his Pater-nosters,
nor his Beads; but the most magnetic piece wrought vertually upon him, and so
strongly, that he could no longer be at so remote a distance, but was for a
contactus, which is more natural; and if matters hit right for a contractus,
which is more spiritual as to the Eclesiasticall Court; but nos inter nos very
Carnal. Mr Barber was so smitten at the looks of her, that his eyes smarted as
if he had washed 'um ( open) in his sweet bals: And O the mischance! how he
laments the want of his puffings (or head-bellows) to powder his Perruke; nor
had he at present any ^spertaminis for his upper Lip: Yet he would show
himself a man of his hands, and arm her from the River. Cardenio also, but
that his rude and tattered Ruins discouraged him, would not have been the last
at this Ceremony, but they all ran from their Covert hastily, and rusht upon
her, which put her to a short flight, and presently to a fall; for her tender
plants were of a more choice and pure earth, then that she trod on, and unable
to endure their roughness. But she was presently supported by the Curate, who
(as if he had been beginning his Sermon, a lapsu primae parentis) said, Lady
(for so your hair unwilling to your self) discovers you) it is incident from
our Mother Eve, for your sex to fall: and so regaining her feet, desired her to
be constant to them, and put them to no farther disease to themselves, but to
setle her a little discomposed spirits, when she should perceive, she was
fallen upon such, that hoped their persons were rather to be approached to,
then fled from. Here the Barber should have acted, but the Curate being the
fluenter man (except when Mr Cutbert was in his suds and snaps) had the
happiness to hand her, and have the advantage of her care to convey his
Consolatories, Suasories, Depre-colories, and the like fragments of his
profession, until he had appeased her totally, and brought her to that
calmnesse, that she was willing to take a stone, the natural stools of the
place, and Mr Parson inviting his companions with his -- vivo sedilia Saxo, To
accept those living seats of stone,
Which grow without a cushion;


They all encompassed their delicate Orator, who confirmed in her resolution,
began her Story.

Dorothaeas Tale.
There lives a Duke in Andaluzia,
Grandees they call them, (if I right do say)
Who had two sons, the eldest of great hopes,
The younger, such as those they call crack-ropes*
A wicked Lord, as ever wore Spanish leather,
Gaudy as Sunshine, light as any feather,
And divelish handsome, set out too with clothes,
With which he takes fools eyes, their ears with oaths:
His business was, his plots, designs, and carking,
To abuse poor maids, a very very Tarquin.
My Father farmed of the great Duke his Father
Much Lands, from whence you very well may gather,
How bold the Lordling made, for he played Revell-
Rout, when he came, and laid the Town all level.
All were his Fathers Tenants, who made bold
Upon a privilege in days of old,
(Which the gyrles knew not) of Purgandos Renes,
And so he came by many wicked venies,
Which the old Lords had long time left undone,
And was the drudgery of the yong'st son:
But other breeding, then the Parish maidens,
(Which to the Market went with country Tradings)
My Father gave to me, beside the ruling
Of all his house, I had no time for fooling;
For either I was busy in the Dairy,
To see clean work, that stroakings were not hairy;
Their Churnes and Presses neat, there was no clutt'ry
In Pantry, Milk-house, dairy, nor in Butt'ry.
I had accoutrements and proper dresses,
For all employments; now for the wine-presses
Anon for oyle-Mils, then among the Hives,
(And was as busy as those winged Thieves.)
Our House, nor theirs, afforded Drones; two servants
One of each sex (in the Family the fervent'st)
Always attended me, and by those pair
I sent my Embassies to every ear:
I ordered, and 'twas done; there was no Duchess
Had a more clear Command within her clutches.
If that the day afforded any leisure,
It was not spent in giggling and in pleasure:
I and my Maidens at the dista^fe sit,
Contending, who the finest thread could spit;
Or else the bones we ratled for the grace
Of the most exquisite and smallest Lace:
And for our work with needles, we could venture
To show Arachne sitting in her center
Amongst her homespun Orbs, and lines, and thence
She moves from Center to Circumference.
Or his dread piece, who mulcted was for peeping,
While Nymphs their bodies in cold bath were steeping:
And then transformed into a stately Buck,
To dye by his own dogs had the ill luck.
That self enamored Sir we also wrought,
Who in a watery looking-glass was caught,
And to the men's perpetual jeer and laughter,
Extinguished was, and set on fire by water.
Weary of work, I forthwith went to play
Upon the Harp or Lute, so spent the day;
Music revived my Spirits, and at night
I was as bonny, as at morning light.
Abroad I went not, but unto the Mass,
And ^hen so hooded, to tell who I was
My self knew not, until uncas'd; the Priest
Confessed, and did absolve me in ^ mist:
All was not care enough, this would not cover
Nor hide my beauties from a Goatish Lover,
(Lord Ferdinand)
-- Thereat Cardenio rose,
As if he had t^'^e pepper in the nose;
That very name did make him sweat, and stand,
As if his fit of frenzy were at hand.
But he did only sweat, which cooled the Barber
And Curate too, who leering were for harbor,
If the mad fit had seized him: It fell out,
Cardenio proved fair Company this 'bout.
Never was man so smitten as this Lord,
He knew no^ how to look, or speak a word
At first, but once having found out the way,
The Devil himself coud not the Lord Out-say,
Out-Court, out-promis'd, swear, out-bribe, out-ly;
He forced me double guard my chastity.
For I was now to look to my own Trenches,
I know not how he had won upon my wenches,
They were his spokes-women, and high Abetters,
And always scatter'd's praise, or scatter'd's Letters;
What should poor Virgin do? they praise, he begs,
I Am left alone, to stand on my own legs;
I must confess the flattery of his letters,
Would have inclined Ladies, by far my betters;
And what was I, that I should be so coy,
(Alas my heart to read 'um often did joy!)
But I did fear, and so my Father told me,
(And bid me when that I was well, there hold me.)
He meant no good, for all his deep protesting,
Keep out his head, for he would bring the rest in;
Then he contrived to match me out of hand,
To one of equal years, and equal Land,
Which was more suitable then those high courses:
But yet I han^kred after Coach and horses,
To be my Lady called, a Duchess daughter
I often wished, and entertained with laughter.
But Ferdinand had fisht out thy poor plot,
With silver angling all the truth he got;
And in a night, the Chamber door being shut,
Unless 'twere after opened by the slut
That waited there, or that he had a key,
(For that he had, I think for any way)
As I was half undrest, this lustful Lord
Unbrac'd before me stands, I Would not a word
To say, not did the unhappy wench cry out;
(She knew too well what he was come about)
But Ferdinand, most full of raptures high,
Caught me in his arms incontinently;
And with such strict embraces did me round,
And swear and kissed, and wished him all confound.
He meant to marry me, and never would alter,
Then kissed the Missall (that's our Ladies Psalter)
And me again, then made Imprecations,
(More then the King of Spain has Nations)
And then used whining too, all sort of cunning
(Tundo a credulous poor maids down running:
I gave him reason, how the Duke his Father,
Then marry me, would see him hanged rather,
Twould be his own, mine, and my friends undoing;
But he for all my words, never gave off sueing.
Then catching up our Ladies Image, swear,
That all his purposes were chaste and fair.
And though he did anticipate his pleasure
This night, he would appropriate the treasure
Next day unto himself, then begged and whin'd,
(Alas too much to one so well inclined)
And having swore my maid out, and the lights,
We did what Lords and Ladies do anights.
The morn too soon began a blush to me,
Which I returned to him in bed with me,
Who startled at the double purple light,
Rose up in such a huddle, as the night
(It was not so to me) had been unpleasan^;
Surely it was not, though we had no ease in it.
My maid conspired his farewell too, to hasten,
(That very maid that in my study placed him.)
Just like an Epicure, or greedy fellow,
H' has had what he came for, and so farewell ho;
But yet his farewell was not quite uncivil,
For he did wish himself unto the Devil,
If he did break his faith, or failed to tarry
A month at full, before that he did marry.
Then in exchange, a ring of noble price
He drew from off his finger in a trice,
And slipped it upon mine, and strait was going,
But I did think, there something more was ovving:
I dropped a tear, and kissed him, and then I told him,
He saw full well, I was not given to scolding;
For my false maid I scarce had chid, who hid him,
Though not unwelcome, yet a guest unbidden;
And (Sr) said I, though now you make no stay,
Forget not (good my Lord) to know the way.
All this prevailed, but for one nights stay more,
He could have done no less unto his Whore:
I pressed for's company, he gave denial;
I asked him, if he took me upon trial:
He swear, he tried and liked, and liked ^o high,
He could upon the circumstances dye.
Nay prithee live (said I) and return speedy,
Fish that on gravel use to play are greedy.
He smiled and vanished, but I know not whither,
At me he came not, nor in public neither.
A month I spent in wat'ring of my Pillow,
And then bethought me of a Garland willow;
Then the false Damsel, that conveyed this Traitor,
I ratled, but yet kept her for my wayter;
She knew too much to be discharged, a Trustee
Of such concealements, always flattered must be.
But I was troubled most, (my eyes being blubbered)
For public meals, I often fed at Cup-board.
But anger, sorrow, and all passions bulg'd
Into themselves, for a report divulged,
That my Don Formidand had found fresh litter,
(I did not wonder how he came to get her)
One named Luscinda: and that they were bedded,
That moved me not; but this, that they were wedded.
But yet Cardenio star'd and champt and wond'red,
And wished, the Devil had their bodies sund'red.
And forthwith having bribed for Page a Swain,
Unto Luscindas Town we trudge amain.
But there the Bells could not proclaime't in the steeple,
Higher then 'twas in the noise of common people.
From one of them I heard, that on the espousals
That night Luscinda frighted all the households.
She fell into a swoone, but dropped a writing,
All as he swore of her own hand inditing,
Wherein in lamentable case she shows,
She long time since was our Cardenios;
(Ours I cannot call him now, for young man, he
Is gone, alas, we know not where he be.
She did renounce those later bands, that she
Could not without disloyal perjury
Be any others, if they would go on-ward,
She Would end the business with a bloody Poniard.
Thus much the Hind related; then a person
Of better rank, on Ferdinand fell fierce on,
And said, that He deluded of his Lust,
With her own dagger would have given a thrust,
And killed his spouse, but the vile wretch was hindered,
By those then present, parents and her kindred.
'Twas time time to fly, this eminent disgrace,
Made my shamed Lord, he durst not show his face.
It was a day before Luscinda strengthened,
And then the story of her vows she lengthened
To her abused Paronts, who requested
To be forgiven, but she was then close breasted,
And spoke but little; and a few days after
The house was full of tears, they would lost their daughter.
'Twas worth my journey this, I tarried
To find my spouse was yet unmarried;
"Fool as I was that had no knife nor dagger,
"But if I had my doubtful hand would stagger
"What it should do! slay me, the innocent?
"And why slay him, if that he honest meant?
CHAP. II.
While tame Cardenio Dorothaea courteth,
And to new stratagems the Dame exhorts,
Resolving both upon returns; the Curate
Offers to wait, the Barber not obdurate,
Proffers like service. But hark Sancho Pancas
Runs Onching round the mountain like a ranck-^sse,
Braying for's Company; The Barber whistles,
At last they meet, and jeer each others Bristles,
Ox tail, and Shotto^er. Sancho related,
How that the Don was near exenterated,
Meagre and wanne, with hollow Cheeks sharp gullet,
Che^t like a dog-fed horse, legs like a Pullet.
Never (more) Knight of the Ill favored face;
But now he was the naked ^night of the place:
Fit for some Physick-schoole, where he might stand
To show his parts, he is a muscle man.
A Counsel strait is a called, and Madam Doll
Micomicona does her self install.
(An injured Ethiopian Princess)
Who beaten out of all her own Provinces,
Must crave Don Quixots aid: She strait accoutres;
Curate and Barber being adjutors
Unto her hig^nesse; Sancho is persuaded
It is a Queen, that comes for to be aided
By his great Master; so the plot is laid,
Sancho does foot it, Barber's on the jade:
The Queen in the middle, and at last they find
This wondrous Knight, not like one of Mankind:
The Queen makes known her woeful case; the Don
Calls for his Arms ('it was well his cloths were on)
His Armor clapse; they carry this lank sinner,
The nearest way they can unto a dinner.
TEXT.
THE Audients of her Story, felt both pity and admiration.] The Auditors eyes
did even run over with water at Dorothaeas Story, but that she restrained
the woman in them, with the woman before them, who was so lovely, that she
scattered nothing but cheerful influences upon her beholders. She made grief
and sorrow amiable, insomuch that Mr Licentiat was upon premeditation still
before he spoke to her, and did not play the Priest adventure, nor vent his
extemporary fancies upon her. A composed piece of his office in the point of
comfort no doubt was instantly to issue forth, when --

Cardenio taking her by the hand, said at last, you are daughter to the rich
Cleonardo.] I had thought Cardenio would never have been known; but now he
will disclose himself, which he might easily do, for he had scarce a rag to
his tail, and gives her the naked truth, that he was that ^ame piece of flesh,
who stood more like the Arras, then the Tapestry it self, while a perjured
friend, made bold with his Lady before his face. Dorothaeas managery of her
matters, was far more ingenious and commenda^le, who was not a thorough
loser, she got what was to be got, and though she lost the Principal, she had
good consideration. What has Cardenio to excuse himself from the extreme
scarre of a Coward? who having his hand on his hilt, and placed as in ambuscado
for the Stratagem of revenge, expected the word from his Ladies dying groan.
Her Poniard must whiffle to his Toledo. A living pudding is better then a dead
Lion; (quoth Dorothaea,) and let all Grandees of Spain (for they delight
therein) like the Proverb, and use it for ever.

Then I will use the liberty granted to me as a gentleman, and in just title
challenge him to the field.] Dorothaea might have smiled, or rather suspected
his fidelity, that her beauty should prove a Beutefeu greater then Luscindas,
and inspire more valor into him, then he did show for his own encroachments;
no challenge sent to Don Ferdinand, for the usurpation of his spouse, though
done under his nose; and why such a cock of the game in her vindication?
Certainly he had an aguish fortitude, and it came upon him by fits, when it
concerned him most, at his own cornuting, the cold Paroxisme held him, and the
hot and Feavourish at present. It was true indeed, the Lady whose defenses he
undertakes, was worthy of an Herculean Vindex, and one (that had these tilting
times been worthy of) must have wrote her self the Mistress of some short
Catalogue of slain, or perished Kings servants (a very great honor I can tell
ye.) And here now were hint an occasion enough for a discourse upon Duels,
whether they be a piece of justifiable fortitude? without the consideration of
Christan laws made against it, or any impresses of the divine Prohibition in
the soul, created in, and to love, and originally interdicted revenge and
violence. If you come with these arguments into the school of defense or
repu^ation, you are said presently to smell of the Coward. But if you come
fortified with Cain's Jaw bone, and will maintain a challenge good against
your own brother, not of the sword only, but nature, then you are of the right
flame, a brother of the Jaw Bone. The arguments on both sides are very strong;
the Hectors rely upon their blades, manus ad capulum: It is enough to signify
the challenge, and the cause too, and the Law is as strict, and punctual too.
Caput ad Laqueum, which is enough to intimate the crime and the punishment. But
I have but one argument against Duellers at this time. Why do the Hectors
themselves fly for the same? They will say, for fear of the Law; why then let
them find out a place, where there is no Law against it? that the brotherhood
say, is in terra Incognita they could never hear of any such place; then
certainly if all people and Nations punish it, it is not only unlawful, but
unnatural and morally evil; and what no people allow in general, no one
should dare to do in particular. The Tragedies of Dorothaea, and Cardenio, are
more lamented (the more's the pity) feined Romances are bewailed, and
Philaster bleeding in love, when a true really slain Gentleman shall not find
a tear; but a dispute, whether he fell nobly, made a right thrust, or lay too
open, or had his hat, doublet, band, and spurs off? These are the requisite
punctilios before his lying down in the bed of honor. It may be the cause of
the quarrel is by some asked after, by a thousand related, and by never a man
the same way. A sad case (my friends) when a man shall perish, and go no man
knows whither, and taken off no man knows why. Homicidia in mendacio flemus, in
vero postulamus. 'Twas said of those days, when Emperors exposed the
live-bodies of their slaves, to be Prizes with Beasts, and one another, then
the voice was at those Amphitheatrall Butcheries; A man after he had subdued
one beast.
Play him again, clapping and applauding, when the Beast was victorious. So we
can weep at fained Tragedies,
And look upon true Murders with dry eyes.
This is a little too serious; the next note brings a fool in, and then we
shall be merry again.

It was Sancho Pancas, who, because he found them not in the place where he
left them, cried out lowdly.] He might have cried bread and meat for the Lords
sake, (for his half starved Lords sake) who with hunger and cold had almost
put an end to his Errantry. He cried, and his Knights belly rung noon, and the
wood rung of them all; and now they have Sancho in a ring, and round him,
until he have made his Mr as ridiculous as himself. The whimsy of the Knight,
is to be cured with another whimsy, as they say, set a fool to catch a fool; a
Proverb not of that gravity (as the Spaniards are,) but very useful and
proper. For example sake: An English Lord kept a Fool, a very natural, who
being displeasur'd at some ill usage of the Family, absented himself so long,
that the Lord was much troubled lest he should have made himself away; others
thought he might be gone in a visit to a neighbor fool some few miles off. The
Lord sent thither to enquire, and withal, to entreat that Fool over, (in case
he was not there) to their house. Fools are soon entreated, especially the
servant telling him, that his Cousen had been missing many days; all is one for
that quoth Tonie, I Will find him out, never fear Coz. At last they came to the
Lords house, and all of them, Lord, Lady, servants of both sexes ran out to the
Fool, and woefully lamented the loss of Tonie, who was as good as meat to
their bellies. Coz Tonies cried, get ye all to prayers on your backs you long
coats (speaking to the women) my Coz is safe enough, he is too wise for you.
Then the fool was ranger of the whole house, and in every place he came, he
cried, O Coz, Coz, are you there. I see you well enough? Thus having traversed
the best Chamber; at last he came to the Cocklofts, and with a more hearty and
confident noise then in other places, he cried, ha Coz have I found you, I see
you, that I do. The other fool had unpil'd some wood, and lay behind it, then
his Coz cried out again, I see him, I see him, in very joyful acclamation:
Whereat his counterpart said from his lurking hole, O but you don'^: The noise
directed them to the place, whence out they plucked him, half starved, for he
had there but wooden entertainment; but the Cook got him some spoon meat for
his Coz and himself, and they were very well satisfied. Such a dish now hot in
the Plain, where Don Quixot acted more then the Knight of the Naked Arm,
would have put an end to the play, and all the bitter usage of Dulcinea would
have been forgot in a Lethe of settle-braine; wherein if they had sliced some
of the leafes of the two books, wrote de veritate, amongst the chippings, it
might have been enough to reduce him (without the neat design of Dorothaea) to
his natural temper, from having ever any credence in lying Romances.

Dorothaea said that she would counterfeit the distressed Lady better then the
Barber.] The Barber might have done much, if he had his wife to attire him, and
set him out in Ladies combings; but I do not think she would ever have let
him shaved off his Mustachoes for the matter, it being the only hold she had,
(for his hair of his head was but thin) when she found occasion to pull him
to her pleasures, or from the Alchouse to his pains. Let him be honest
Oxen-sterne, the Lady Nicomiconas servant with the checkered Beard, which
signified much fear in him, or from him. Pray Heaven, the Don in his rambling
fancy take him not for Cacus the Giant, that robbed those honest men the
Grasiers, and cozened Polyphem, (the Monophthalmos, and Giant of the single
Eye) drawing politiquely his Cattle backward to his own Cave; so that Polyphem
tracking their step^ to the done, could find nothing but hoofes reversed from
the Cave. A hundred to one but he hits on it, and takes this long pendent on his
chin, for some glew'd on Trophie of his beastly victories: If he should hanck
upon it, there is like to be no quietness without a Rumpe to the tail.

And through the great Fame which is spread over all Guinea, of the Lords
Prowess, this Princess is come to find them out.] Sancho replied, what that
fat and plentiful Kingdom, (whence the Guiny Pigs come) does this Lady with
her self submit to my Don? O Mary Gutierez, live and be fat! and let thy
Children all be fatlings; those pretty Guiny Pigs-nies shall live about thy
bedchamber, and thou shall lie upon thy pallat, and call to thy cook-maid, and
say, dress me that Squeeker for my breakfast, I Will eat it before I rise, and
the rest of the litter shall be small Music to me, while I feed; it shall be
so Mol, and fell a capering, as if he had one in his belly. But Mr Curate told
him, these Guinea Pigs which he meant, were Shelves of gold melted, refined,
and made into wedges, Pigs and Bars, that Mary Gutierez and her whole family,
could not lift one from the ground. One of these would buy the Manchas
Hogge-heards whole drove, Dams and all.

My master has no kind of power over Spirits.] The Don could never worst any
thing that had a Spirit. The Windemils had a Spirit that threw my Mr in
Confagum Lunae, (as they say) and he was never in his wits since. Certainly he
was tossed or carried beyond the temperate Regiment of the air, among the
blustering, thundering, and fiery boys, for ever after he despised Land
encounters; he smelt my thought, as if he had been singed at his fall, or of
somewhat of a hot air. So that (great Queen) for this business of Guinea, if
you have not a man of Spirit in it, he will make no more to conquer it, then he
would to eat an Orange, though his stomach is sharp enough at present without
any Incentives. Lady, he shall destroy all except the Pigs, with which your
Dominions abound. May you, and my Lord people it from your own Loins again;
(all but that part of the Dominion, which you bestow upon you humble, ^ut
doughty servant, Sancho Panchas of the Mancha) and my Lady Moll shall serve
your Highness, (not amongst the maids of Honor) but chief Princesses of
your Kingdom, in the office of holding up your train, or the cloose stool,
wherein she is very tendable, and handy. I have more of the litter, if you
please to grace 'um; but when I and Moll shall come to feed on Pigs, we shall
multiply beyond the rate of the creatures we eat, and have subjects of my own
begetting, of my own loins, in such a number, that it will be fit for your
Highness to transplant them for Colonies, and send them into the wide world
for a living. Thus is the fool transported, taking Mr Licentiat for the Queen,
and out of apprehension of he knows not what, he talks to he knows not whom.

At last they discovered him amongst a company of intricate Rocks, all
apparelled, but not Armed.] Sancho was to blame, (...) let his Mr be thus
surpised without his Arms on, his long penance having withdrawn his body
from the full extension of his clothes many a handful, so that he looked as if
he had been in a sack, or a scarcrow, rather then a man. So improper an
oversight was never committed by a Squire of the body: Insomuch, tha^ the Don
in the beginnings of his adventures, providently would not suffer his Arms to
be all taken off, when he reposed, but slept in the Helmet. To unmartiall the
whole man, and leave him without steel or iron upon him, is, as if you should
pare the nails of a Lion, strip a Bear of her skin, rob a Fox of his tail,
dishonor a Cock of his spurrs: That is to Caponize the gallant spirit of the
Creature, and to render him less formidable to his Antagonists. A
Knight-Erra^t without Arms on? credentne posteri?

I will not answer you a word, nor hear a jot of your affairs, Fair Lady
(quoth Don Quixot) until you arise from the ground.] It is much that he is not
on his Knees too; for he was scarce able to stand on his Legs, which (if his
Arms had been on) had not been so visibly flexible; for the Don through
weakness bowed ever and anon, and recompensed her kneeling, with continual
unavoydable cringes, which made him appear the most courtly Knight upon the
earth. The case was plain, for he was not able to raise her up with his hands,
but she expected his gracious word of mouth, which was stronger always then
his Arms or Legs, and promised a great deal more.

I do give and grant it, quoth Don Quixot, so it be not a thing that may turn
to the damage or hinderance of my King or Country, etc.] A very loyal
exception: Three obligations which he had forfeited over and over, and yet to
see the tenderness of his Conscience in a point which he so often violated.
This faithful lover of his Prince, is under privy search of the Holy
Brotherhood, for the rescue of his Majesty's slaves sent to the Galleys. The
Country was full of hues and cries for the adventure of the sheep, which his
Manchegan Farm would not satisfy. The Helmet of Mambrino, was the poor
Village-Barbers goods, which he took to arrest him for, as he past the Town;
the present subsistence, which Sancho (his Receiver and Treasurer had) were the
spoils of Cardenio's Port-Mantle, beside the several Hosts, (his unwilling
Creditors) who intended to dis- Rosinante him, and send him home Knight Errant
on foot, if he paid not, what his Squire and Himself had eaten. Lastly, for
his obligation to his Lady, there was no fear, but of himself: For who could
damnify her, who had nothing to lose, not so much as credit? and for his
personal injury to her, he had sufficiently done it in his Penance, which had
so mortified the man in him, that all the wealth he had would not repair him
into a reasonable proportion of night-service, which if he fail in, Dulcinea
was like to Orlando him, though it were by his Squire Sancho.

And therefore hands to the work, for (they say) that danger always followed
delay.] Concluded most Heroically! 'twas well to call for hands, (and more
hands then thine own) or else the work would be very ill done. Yet I think in
this point Sancho's opinion was right, ( that it was a matter of nothing) for
there being no such Queen, and no such Kingdom, the Squires word is here to b^
taken, and the Don's Proverb of delay proves dangerous, is infeebled, for the
less speed, or a festina len^e were farr^ more safe and easy; but hands to
the work however, and at length restore the Queen to her legs, for shame that
ever such a decrepit Knight should undertake so chymaericall employments, and
is not able to relieve a Lady from her Knees. It was not want of humanity in
him, but strength, says our Author. Fasting is an ill preparative for a Ball,
and the Don was (notwithstanding his sniffeling example of Amadis Du Gaull, or
any other puling Knight) in a wrong course to reconcile himself by abstinence
to any distasted Lady, especially such an hirudinous and extracting Lady, as
Dulcinea; who would have tired Hanibals Army, after he had rested a month in
Capua, being of a larger size then Messallina, and vaster desires. This next
civility will drown all that is past, for he will not permit the Queen to
kiss his hand, but keeps them in his pockets, and cannot be constrained upon
those terms to draw 'um forth.

But it grieved Sancho to think that the Kingdom was in the Country of
Blackamores.] It was not just cause of grief; ( Sancho) for if your
primogenitors be not belied, the general smutch you have, was once of a deeper
black, when they came from Mauritania into Spain, and the protuberancies of
your lips both alike: Now indeed your teeth are not so white, nor your faces so
black, though the Don by his Penance, had reduced himself almost into a
Moore, and to his most Ill-favored Face, had most clean teeth. But Sancho,
were it not a more profitable and less cruel design, (then that of selling 30
or 40 thousand in a morning into Spain for slaves) to try a piece of
experience, and since every man has two coats to his back, (that is two skins
Sancho) an upper and an under, that thicker, to keep off the injury of
aire-blows, and the like, the under, finer, and lighter like a summer coat.
Flay therefore ( Sancho) the tougher upper skinn off, and send them by
Ship-loads into all other Countries, (where solemnities for Funerals are used)
and you may drive a mighty trade for mourning gloves, mourning saddle-clothes,
and mourning buff, and Pantoffles for Ladies, after they are covered with gold
lace; (for no skin is softer then the Moors Sancho) thus Sancho you save the
subjects in a whole skin, though not two, and the second skin proving white,
you will have your Country called Albion, and your people Whites, not from the
color of their Sands, but their own strange Metamorphosis. Your self called
Blancho, that is the Fair, or Pharo, who was an Ethiopian Prince before you,
that is, King of the Whites.

Mr Curate was an ingenious and prompt plotter, and took out of his case a
pair of sheares, and cut off Cardenio's Beard therewith, all in a trice.] Sr
John is turned John of all trades, Clericus and Laicus, a brace of Elders and a
Presbyter, bound up in one Volume, the Tailor, Barber, and Licentiat; well (Sr)
exercise your gifts; Cardenio's Beard is the first point to be handled, which
being exorbitant and unfit for the Congregation, by the Scissars of authority,
was reformed into a more brotherly cut. Exit Tonsor; enter Tailor with a
Capouch and a long cloak, wherein having dressed the young Gentleman, he
resembled a little Levite so handsomely, that in the e^suing passages he might
hope to be Chaplain to the Queen of Micomicona; Mr Licentiat is left in
Querpo, as if in Zeal he had preached his upper garment off, or else parted
with them, when Duke D' Alva was beaten out of the low Countries, in the heat
of that Reformation.

But notwithstanding the Barber was so affrighted, as he fell to the ground
with so little heed to his Beard.] By a Synecdoche of partis pro toto, the Ox
tail being fallen to the ground, we may say Bos procumbit humi, for both lay
together; nay down fell Mr Licentiat also, and so the old three may lie
together, Bos, Fur, atque Sacerdos. 'Twas too much for a hackney to carry
treble, they seldom are true to one; but Mr Curate must now show his skill, or
Mr Nicholas, for all his two handed chin-cover will be found no Squire to the
Queen of Micomicona, and then all is discovered, for the Don wondering at the
Squires sheere loss of his Beard, said, no Barber could have done it with so
fine a slight of hand. He would profane an Agnus for an Ox tail, but murmured
some few words over the Squire; strange! the Beard came to the Face, or the
Face to the Beard, none knows which put the Don upon a request, that he might
have that prayer against his evils; for no doubt if it were chin-proofe, it was
tooth-proofe and limbeproofe, and easier carriage then the Bals amum Fierebras.

Let me entreat you Mr Curate, the occasion which has brought you hither to
these Quarters so alone, etc. You shall understand, etc. read on, ad finem
capitis.]

Here Mr Curate is put to a grand case of Conscience, whether in point of
urgent necessities, as the saving of a man's life from perils of robbers, or any
other accident, (legally to be permitted) or from an obstinat melancholy in a
person, sworn and devoted to ruin himself, and Family, in such a case for a
majus beneficium or bonum Reipublicae, or to ones own self, wheth^r the lips
of the preacher is always to preserve truth? If the frequency of lying might
excuse it, it has justification enough. He answers his mental objection
mentally, and says, In ^oro, coram Iudice, in Pulpito, coram Episcopo, in
rebus litem dirimentibus, he is substantially, really, and verily to speak the
truth, and nothing but the truth; but in extrajudiciall cases, (not ordinarily
so) but such always which infer a public or a private good end: The Licentiat
was satisfied that he might transgress the beaten path of truth, and take that
way which made most expedition to his honest design in hand, and reckons those
matters amongst the peccadillo's and venialia, which never come into the black
book. But Mr Curat, by your leave, your slight transgression, is one of the
lowdest lies, that ever I heard of; what, seventy thousand Ryals of eight sent
for a token? what, Ships for a Convoy? But (cry you mercy) it may be Mr
Licentiat was allied to Dego, Mr Lopez his Sexton, whose estate was incredible,
and investigable by his executor; but happily some slight moiety is discovered,
which our Indian friend very kindly sends for a token, a small remembrance of
his love to his affected, though some 106 years posthumus Kinsman Mr Licentiat
of the Mancha. The second lie is so mixed with divinity, that with a little
enlargement it might have served for a homily of charity, taken in the example
(in the same case) of the Traveller, who fell among Thieves; and questionless
with the Pathetick expressions, which he was singular at, the Manchegan could
not choose but melt into pity and relief, as is ordinary upon the Ladies side,
and that is the moving side that carries all; but the severe rebukes end all in
a general pardon, (which though the Don intended not to confess the crime) he
resolved to make use of, and said Amen to himself and the prayer.

CHAP. III.
The Queen of black Micomicon relates
A story blacker then her present Fates;
And in such tragic words her matter dresses,
The Don is more enraged then Captain Bessus;
Whose Diary for dinners, and for Duels,
The Don did like, but of Knight-Errants few-els:
The want of which, caught in a humming lie,
The Knight that fought byth' clock at Shrewsberry.
The Don had kept a Register, and did set down
What Giant must be fought that day; what Town
Relieved; what Castle battered; all was there,
But that he durst not show the Register.
They were Cardenio's Tablets, whose good Mantell,
Had furnished 'um with many a savoury Cantell:
(Another Postill for the Curate.) Don
Grants all, and strait is for Micomicon.
Conquers before he sees: successful Caesar
Did never such stupendous acts as these are.
Then like a gallant Knight at the last closing,
He leaves her person to her own disposing.
He scorned to make her prize, and give her Kingdom;
This dumpt poor Sancho, as'^ had been a thing-done,
And happy it had been, had he been mute:
For while he does Dulcinea's face confute,
Enraged Quixot at his Ladies trumps,
Tilts Sancho down, and leaves him on his stumps.
Until the Queen her grace came interceding,
Sancho for love of her lay foulely bleeding:
All laws of Errantry forgot, his fire
Was blown so high, he would have killed his Squire.
But pacisyed by her (whose conquering looks,
Wins more then swords) they now are for the Cooks.
Yet Sancho growl'd, until at last a bl^ssing
Beyond his thoughts, makes him forget his threshing.
Gines Passamont besmeared with soot and blacking,
With Sancho's Ass unto a Fare was packing;
The quick-eyed Bore had spied him, and unass'd-him,
And in his arms most kindly he compassed him,
And kissed his brother Animal; what passes
You shall hereafter read betwixt these Asses.
TEXT.
I Advised him that he should see well what he did, and that it was a 'sin to
deliver them.] To what purpose is it for a wise Lord to contrive and plot well,
and have treacherous servants, fellows that are conscience-toucht with a Sermon?
such timorous Rogues are not fit for noble engagements. The Don (you see) could
hear all this learned Homily, as an unconcerned person, such a one is right,
and if need be, he could rail against the villainy himself committed, the
less suspected still; or if big enough, own it, justify it, the more feared,
the more obeyed he is. But for this unserviceable Squire, with his confession,
(his sordid simple confession) he deserves to be requited with the Proverbs,
and the Don for his stout silence, and politic carelessenesse, in minding the
story of the Slaves, is fit to be a proverb, and adage of concealment and
secrecy for ever. Bottle-head was too good a word for him, unless it were an
Ale bottle, which had discharged his Corck centry, and run all out.

First of all I would have you know (good sirs) that I am called, and here she
stood suspended by reason she, etc.]

Oportet mendacem esse memorem. Sinon made not one rub in that long lie of the
Trojan Horse, but with a solemnity, commanding belief, lays the whole
business upon the gods, calls it the^r Artifico, Divina Palladis Art.

The memories of men and women have been very strange. Caesar's was such, as he
could call his Soldiers all by their own names; Seneca could remember all
that ever he wrote or did, others what other men do, and nothing of their own.
Some remember more then they should, and some not so much; and those whose
memories are pitched very low in the hinder part of their heads, are so long
before they can pumpe out what they have treasured up, that they remember not
at a first or second time, but at a third. I have heard of one of so strong
observance and retention, that if he saw a man but once, he was able to tell
him a long time after, how many buttons he had on his doublet, what kind of
shooe-ties, bandstrings, and hat-band he had at their first meeting: The chief
matter is constitution, use, and liking. A well tempered brain remembers
constant, habit strengthens, and perfects; and like old men, what we have a
mind to and affect, will be remembered well enough. So it is with the Queen,
whose own fancy setting her upon this design, (except the first halt) went
very cleverly on with the rest of the story.

Nicomiconas Story.
Imacrio skilled in Art, surnamed the Black,
(Which men call (Magic) that do wisdom lack*)
And Xamarillae Queen, my parents were:
Where no issue Male, and therefore I am heir.
But wise Imacrio by his skill foreknew,
That Xamarillas death would soon ensue;
And his great knowledge let him understand,
All matters would befall himself and Land:
So that his own near destinies he told,
(Though neither he nor his good Queen were old.)
And what in future would become of me,
And then he sighed out this sad Prophecy.
Thy Mothers death, nor my own sodai^e end
So trouble me, as what does thee attend,
(Poor senseless Princess:) When our heads are cold,
Thou and thy Kingdom by a Giant bold
Wilt be invaded, whom his Island write,
Pandafilando of the du^ky sight;
Not that he squint-eyed is, for his eyes stand
Well in his head, but he can them command
To move distractedly, or outward swell,
And by distortion looks more terrible;
'Twere War enough for thee, his goggle eye,
But yet he will prove a fiercer enemy.
For he shall first desire thee for his wife,
That being denied, does make immor^all strife.
Strait with an Army of excessive courage,
He shall thy rich and vast Dominions forage,
And put thee unto flight. Wherefore begone
Nicomicona from Micomicon:
Let him a while usurp thy rights, which are
To be be regained by a great Knight from far.
Then reaching out a book of Characters,
This book, says he, directs and never errs.
Thou must deer soul (believe the mystic signs,
For thy redemption coucht in these dark lines,)
With all the speed thou can for Spain: Once there,
Report will ring thy rescuer to thy ear.
And as I guest upon a leaf, he wrote
His name Aco-te, sure, or Don Hy-hot.
False memory! A Knight of stature high,
By nature wrought and formed for victory,
Of swarfy look, but yet condition mild,
(Except when just adventures make him wild.)
Moreover, my learned Father did condole
A mark the Knight had, 'twas a mighty mole;
Which had it grown above his grizly chin,
No Knight like him for Errantry had been;
But on his sturdy shoulders left right side,
There is this mark of honor to be spied:
And which his strength, and fortunes plain do show,
Hairs on the mole like bristles thick do grow.
Sancho leaped at the word (above the rise of Jack-pudding in a Morris dance,)
and said, O Queen, O King! thou art the man, thou art the man! For when you
were (great Sr) in the naked part of your Penance, I saw (to my great joy, I
saw) this mole-hil and the bristles growing on them; and being you were
hog-backt, you must needs have more of them about you, which shows, that you
shall not only fetch your enemies over the lef^ shoulder, but if need be your
self is able (if you shoot out the natural Artillery of your body) to be as
mischievous as an Italian with his venomed shaft under cloak: As you stood in
the field naked between two trees, I took you for a turnepike; I saw so many of
these Molehils and sharp Spears about you, that if you had but rusht and
flurted like a Turkey cock, I should have been afraid of dying no other death,
then by the shooting of your quils through me.

Nicomicona proceeds.
These things discovered which my Father told,
Which my abusive brain could hardly hold,
And tha^ your name (most Noble Quixot) hits
So near to those of my mistaken wits;
And reading in your looks no common matter,
(The front's a glass that will not easily flatter)
There needs no more Certificates. I Have seen,
Happy the hour! him, that will make me Queen.
The Knight ordained by stars for this design,
Methinks I do already count all mine.
And that Pandafiland of the dark sight,
Is by your valiant hand deprived of light;
His head cut off (the cause of all uproars)
And in a trophy (as was once the Bores
Born before Bevis) carried on a Pole,
Wheresoe'r Don Quixot moves. Thus take the whole
Of what my Father showed: Beside he wrote
In languages, not understood a jot
By me, (as Chaldee or Greek Character,
As those that knew the meaning did aver;)
That if the Knight of this grand Prophesy
(After the Giant slain, his Arms laid by;)
Should burn with gentle heat and soft desire,
And love shall kindle in his bones a fire,
That could not but by me extinguished be,
I should incline to's suit, and make him King,
And with my loved self give every thing.
What think thou of this friend Sancho?] Transported Don is raised a pin
or two above his judgment (and carried by strong imagination, and an ambitious
mind.) He supposes his work done before it is begun; the enemy slain, the
Queen restored, himself inaugurated and naturalliz'd on a Black, his Royal
Robes on, and the glittering Ensigns of his men, State and dignity borne
before him, and himself to be acknowledged (by conjunction with the Queen)
lawful King of Micomicona during her life: nor is Sancho behind him for a
Pigeon; both deluded commit equal errors. The Don is indeed a more thoughtive,
inward, close, and concealed Cocksome; Sancho open, and in this point
irrecoverably cosen'd, until the sad Catastrophe shows the Play to be a jig,
all mockery and mirth. In the mean time Sancho's a Player, and Acts a Lord.

"Thus Sancho makes fine Dorothy a Queen,
"Kissing her hand, that until now was clean.
"(So only fit to do him grace,) her word
"Is his Commission for a future Lord.
I will say no more, it is not possible that ever I may induce my self to
marry another, though she were a Phaenix.] A brave recoyle upon his Soul, and
the very secret of it displaid in a sentence. It is not beauty, proportion,
gamesomenesse, majesty, affability, that are the objects of every ones love.
For we see men (as wise Don Quixot to make election) choose neither fair nor
comely women, and yet find sufficient ground even in their Persons, to be taken
pleased and contented. And there are those that have the choicest pieces for
exquisite feature on earth, married even to the envy and neighing of every one
that sees them, and these singular objects of Love meet not with constant and
reciprocal heats; If the face be the first at^ractive, that like the day is
eclipsed and not seen, not admired. Many A^^^nes (after the heyday of the blood
is over) are left miserably to the (...) and woods; their spouses inveigled by
such dross and dunghill Persons that no clean thing will touch 'um. Some
undergo Penelopes long time of Melancholy and spinning, whilst their seduced
Husbands are fooled into a far Country by some Dalila's (that had tried most
of her own) and there lose life, Concubine, fortunes, and all. What should any
man see in a whore to affect her more then a wife? unless he suspects his own
to be so, nay it has been the captivity of some men's affection, to accept, and
make their own Incumbencies tried and known reversions. It Is better to shoot at
rovers, then when you have chose a standing mark, to play at random. Dons
thoughts are fixed, and what ever it was that caught his prying and
understanding heart, it could be no unworthy thing, unless his love was like
(the others) no love in the Epigram. Non amo te (Sabidi) nec possum dicere
quare;
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amote
e Converso.
I love Toboso, and I know not why,
Only I say, I love her (whimsyly.)
Text proceeds.
The refusal of the Phaenix, is an irrefragable sign of his constancy, which
made Sancho chatter like a Jay.

That which Don Quixot said disliked Sancho so much, as he lift up his voice
with great anger.] What, despise a Phaenix? O Owl! have thou only kept company
with Bats, Buzzards, Beetles, in this long retirement in the Desert? are you of
a feather? It is blindness, obstinate blindness; you shut up your eyes
against the Phaenix of the Times, (indeed made brighter by the ashes of
affliction) and hunt after Mice and vermin: On^ glote of the Queens eye, is
more pleasant, lovely, and bewitching, then if Dulcinea should cast her heart
up, which would i^ were out, rather then it should disturb us in the progress
to our honors. Sir, settle here your choice affe^tion, and despise for ever
that Scavengers load and aneusance of Toboso, but that her form and face did
privilege her, she had gone with honest dirt and dust-ho, to the Common
shore, where a Cage was a Palace sit to entertain her, near those aires she
best thrived in, and recruited.

Don Quixot hearing such blasphemies spoken against his Lady Dulcinea, could
not bear them any longer.]

-- Manet al ^ mente re^otum
Iudicium stolidi, spretaeque injuria Doudae.
Most quarrels are upon these occasions; Wars have been waged, and Nations
embroiled in blood one against another; and -- Belli teterrima Causa, -- etc.

Such a foul business (as Toboso's) has been the shameful furzbush to set
'um all on fire. But a Knight Errant of all men is Paramount, the Champion of
all Ladies, in defense of their honesty and beauty; much more for his own.
And therefore his sudden revenge upon his foul mouthed Squire was here
justifiable, and if he had ^^rook him into, or thorough the Earth, (as it was
much he had not) Sancho could not have returned any just exception to it. But
Sancho had created Dorothaea his Queen, and she was prevalent with her hoped
for spouse (the flower of Spain) in begging pardons, the Don was merciful,
and forgave any one he had hurt.

Run Sancho and kiss your Lords hands.] He went as willingly as a dog to a
whip: But remembering that those hands were hereafter to weild a Scepter, and to
be the long and powerful hands of a King, in reverenc^ to that change, (for he
thought at the reception of those sacred Functions there was some ^minent
alteration in the Person) he did come slowly to the honorable Penance,
wishing all peace for the ^uture, and that no occasion might be given or taken,
wh^reby the Don should stroke his head, or he lick his Majesty's fingers.

And as they were talking, they espied a Gallant coming to them, riding on an
Ass^] A Rogue had benighted himself in an Egyptian dress, and smooty face,
and thought he rode in the dark, but he had forgot to discolor his Ass, by
which his Theevery is brought to light. Sancho has discovered the Ass to be
his adopted Creature, naturalized into the family, and soon after the sullied
Knight upon the back of it, Gines Assamount, whom with his loud cries he
follows so close, that he makes Gines of an Asinester, Pedester, and himself
Alacer. And now Resonant Asinelida Sylvae, and Sancho having more feet then
ordinary, yet no Lyrick Poet by the recovery of his Ass, broke into these
raptures.

And do I hold thee! and behold thee, ^oo!
O le^'s be mutual mirrours at this view;
Never were glasses truer! Thy Sweet Face
I knew as well, as any of my Race:
Our dogs do lick our chops, why may not we,
(Two goodlier Creatures far) join Physnomy?
What stately ears it bears! and how upright!
Our Rosinant does envy at their height.
No sly Egyptian Thief, no Gines, no force,
Shall ever Sancho and his Ass divorce;
And wheresoe'r this History shall be,
When you do see the Ass, you do see me;
And when the Ass is of this World no more,
For Sancho and his Ass as (One) deplore.
CHAP. IV.
Sancho the meanness of Dulcinea tells,
How thres^er-like she works, and likewise smells;
Says, that the Don with Lances might prevail,
But she would do such wonders with a Flaile:
When that he boldly to her presence thrust,
She was engaged up to the ears in dust;
But by the favor of the scattering wind,
He saw her face, exceeding woman-kinde.
Her stature man's; he feared, being no higher,
She Would take him for your Dwarf, and not your Squire.
Quixot turns all (like men Ictericall)
Into the colors he abounds withal,
And highly praises, what no man (but He)
Could ever to its fowlnesse vili^y.
Hear how poor Andrew magnifies the Don,
And the same praise will serve for both as one.
TEXT.
ALL this likes me well, said Don Quixot, therefore say on, thou arrivest and
what was that Queen of beauty doing then?] This Dialogue of the Don and Sancho,
conc^rning the high and mighty Dulcinea of Toboso, may be compared to those of
Lucian; it being Laus and vituperium Rei, full of Hyperbolicall and ridiculous
fla^teries on the Dons side, and down right and blunt abuses on the Squires. I
know no reason, but it may be in rythme; for Knight-Errants as they were
inspired with Languages, so they were able upon all occasions to express
themselves in Prose or Verse, and their Squires also had a sprinkling of this
gift. -- Amant alterna Camaenae. You shall have them as at the examination
office, the Don with his Amatory interrogatories, and Sancho deposing nothing
to the purpose.

D. Quix. When at Tobosos Palace, (pleasures roof)
Thou and our Rosinant did rest your hoof;
What was Dulcinea, Queen of beauty, doing?
What wise employments keep her from fond woing?

S. Pan. She takes the safest course to turn off Courting,
Is always moiling, and her self be-durting,
(Like to a Sow in snow-broth) somewhat neater
Your letters had the happy luck to greet her.
Then too, to quench desires, in labor great
With a round sive she winnow'd chafe from wheat.

D. Quix. Wheat? thou blind cockrel, take thou wheat for pearls?
All those rich granes thou saw were gifts for Earls.

S. Pan. It may be so; when she had made it bread,
It Was fit for the best Prince to put in's head.

D. Quix. When with obeisance just, (humble and low,
With all the niceness of Punctilio)
Thou did present our letters to her hand,
Did she not kiss the seal? and wondering stand
To see the signature, (this Countenance print)
And seem to see no common matter in it?

S. Pan. Your letter by a Clerk of Sancta Fides
Was wrote from mouth, and sealed with some Mervidas;
But yet in sign of joy her high reared hand
Bore up the sive, and as I careless stand
In the winds mouth, in mine her wheat-dust flew,
And in my eyes, that I no Christian knew;
But threw your Letters on her empty sack,
To rub my eyes, like him of the Quinborough back.
What quaeries did she make, whether her Don

D. Quix. Loved any other Queen? or her alone?
She sifted much, and tried to ge^ all o^t,

S. Pan. (The Devil could not cleanse it,) 'twas all smoot,
Sooty, and blighted Corn. But then said I,
Seeing her storm and stamp in such perplexity;
Fairest of fowlest work, your Lord, good Knight,
In fowler fashion spends both day and night;
You half undressed, in modest sympathy,
The Knight all naked in the fields does lie,
Hungry and cold, deformed, cursing and raving,
Living with beasts, and humane commerce waving.

D. Quix. Do not her silver pillars raise her high,
That she does seem an Arch of Majesty?

S. Pan. She and a Miller in the Pillory,
O'r seers of a Market well might be.

D. Quix. Is not that spacious Palace (like the Suns)
Decked with bright graces, and perfections?

S. Pan. Her Frontispiece is rich, that the sweet dimples
We would see in her chinne, are hid with pimples.

D. Quix. But bona Fide speak, what a rich scent,
What fragrant flavor struck she as she went?

S. Pan. If I may trust (as to a Probe) my nose,
See smelt, as if she would newly plucked a Rose.
Such odor breathed, and such strong airs were hobling,
As use to ascend from a new laid Tantaublin.
What she evaporates from her wide Arms,
Let them relate, whom the rank breathing warms.

D. Quix. But having thread the Pearl, (that thou call'st wheat)
And got into some place of close retreat,
Prithee how often did she read? how often
Salute my letter for the language soft?

S. Pan. As children do on writings sometimes stare,
But being unskilled, the useless paperstare,
And tread 'um under feet, so simple she
A while stood gazing at the Roman (D)
And (T) on the indorsement; then she tried
Wheher they would a backside rub abide;
And after that she rent in two small pieces
The Letter, (not that she your love despises)
But lest the secrets should discovered be
To any one that should read more then she.
She much was troubled (as I heard her say)
At your night pennances, and hers of day,
And does command you from the Woods. But when
I told her that all Knights and doughty men
Gave to themselves some name appellative,
And that your Fame would longer thence survive;
How eager was she for to hear it told?
I was as glad, and could no longer hold;
Take it, he is Knight of the Ill-favored Face,
Nor could she hold, but shook the very place
Whereon she stood with laughing; she so shook,
'Twas hard to tell which way her strainings took;
Nor left she, till I asked her if some slaves
Had come to do her homage; but the Knaves,
She said, came not unto submission; but
An honest Biscaine (who was beaten to it)
Acknowledged her his ransom; but for her
The Don had slain (he said) a Biscainer.

D. Quix. Our honor is preserved: But is hers too!
Sancho, what jewel did she give to you,
The guerdon of thy pains? had no rich gist?
I know her heart, she would make a scurvy shift
To show her bounty, especially to one,
Who brought such welcomed news from her high Don.

S. Pan. She was not at her Cabinet, if so,
She Would much to give, but unto whom few know:
She Is rich and covetous, and never appears
Stately, but keeps her Robes for better years;
Unguifted yet she sent me not away,
'Twas dinner with her, and a reversed Tray
Served for her Table, she her self did sit
So pleased of the ground, as she were used to it;
Then her provision from a bag she threw
Onyons and Garlic, Bread and Cheese out flew.
She like a hungry Gos-Hawke the prey seized,
Until her wrung concavities were eased.

"Her Grace when she had victuall'd that grand Camp,
"Gave me a piece of Cheese tuff as a vamp,
"The grinding of it, gave my jaws the cramp.
Out of a pot of water then she quaff'd
To my Ill-favored Lord (said she) and laughed,
And spouts the pledge into my face, full draught.
It was enough, that she would deine to send,
I mounted Rosinant, and there is an end.
Seeing some wise man has transp^rted thee thither by stealth, and unaware of
thy self.] Mephistopholus is the spirit of expedition, and consigned to attend
Knight-Errants and their Ladies; for the Knights ride as if the Devil were
under 'um, and their Ladies as if the Devil were in 'um, or over 'um; Pacolets
horse is for their Lords, and the Nightmare or the Ephialtes for their
Virago's. It may be Dulcinea (that he might digest his entertainment) committed
Sancho to one of her familiars, which gave him the Presto and a vade celeriter
through the air, but Sancho came not flying, but lying all the way. By the
help of these Necromanticall Pneumatergies, Drake encompassed the World with a
Ship, shot the Gulf, and was three days before he rose again, the Sr Pol^'s
dispatch Whales for intelligence, and as if there were a Post Office amongst
the Fish, you have Letters every day from all parts of the world, at a great
deal cheaper rate then any from the Continent.

And likewise I pray you not to trouble your mind, thinking to see my Lady
Dulcinea at this time, but travel to the place where the Giant is and kill
him, and conclude that business first.] Very well counseled Sancho, always
kill the Bear before you divide his skin. There was an Irish soldier so
wary, that one of his enemies being dead, he thought him not secure enough till
he had cut off his head, and then he cried he had slain him. Sancho is for a
head in a platter, a Thief in chains, a Mastiffe in a muzzle, a Bird in the
hand, a Mouse in a trap, Fish in the net. Such plain and easy proverbs
learned in his rusticall life, were of great use in his military affairs; for
he was now a soldier of fortune, and it concerned him (as much as an
Earldom) to have the Giants head in his Wallet, that is, to remove all
difficulties and obstructions to his own preferment.

I have heard preached, said Sancho, that men should love, etc. I love and
serve him for what he is able to do.] Here wants a Lipsian Marginall, a nollem
dictum mi Tacit. In the like case, where the wise Historian makes too bold to
censure the Actions of the gods, as he did frequently of the Emperors; saying,
Credo diis magis nostram ultionem curae esse quam securitatem. But Sancho's is
a censure of men, or rather a censure upon himself, why and for what reasons
he served God, which being profane might have been spared, though it is too true,
and what the Satyrist long ago observed, that our prayers were made to the
gods, but the matter was all for our selves.

Prima fere vota, and cunctis notissima Templis
Divitiae ut crescant, ut opes ut maxima toto,
-- nostra sit Arca foro.
The sum of most men's Oraisions is this;
Descend O Jove, as once thou did of old
Into thy Danaes lap, (thy seat of bliss)
So to our Chests in yellow showers of gold:
Or else, it is like poor John Be,
Who prayed for himself, his Barnes and his Wife,
Ne give's short commons: ne give us shortlife.
Mr Nicholas perceiving them drowned thus in their discourses, cried out to
them to stay and drink of a little Fountain that was by the way.] Mr Nicholas
did very well to put them in mind of water, for their discourses were very dry.
Water's like Butter, it is good for any thing, and according to the play of what
is it good for, it is good for Sancho's foul mouth to wash it clean after the
telling of so many lies to his Master. It was good for his Mrs Face to cleanse
that too, if the Proverb of his Ethiopian subjects did not obstruct it. It was
good for Cardenio, who looked like a Westphalia Flitch, with long watching and
fasting. It was good for Mr Licentiat, who as a scholar was to taste of the
fountain in memory of Parnassus, as a Divine in memory of his holy water.
'Twas good for the Lady Dorothaea to be styled the only meritorious and sacred
Nymph of that Fountain, and it was good for Mr Barber, if his sweet-bals had
been present, to have washed, shaved, and made all handsome gratis, or symbolo
soluto, paying nothing at the Inn for his ordinary.

strata discumbitur herba. In the mean time the Curate (of two cures now, for
here his provision is for the body) entreats her Ladyship to take a green
Gown, and all like good people of the first age, make the grasse-plat their
table, and accept of Mr Curates parabile, and his sentences in praise of
slender diet, as modicum non nocet, Natura minimo contenta, especially to those
who had so long fasted, through the ^ares satisfy their stomachs; and though
it is a common saying, venture caret Auribus: Yet in case of a general want,
the belly must hear with others ears (as they say) and be ruled by the
oeconomicall discipline of the whole body.

O my Lord, do you not know me? I am the youth Andrew, whom you unloosed from
the Oak, whereunto I was tied.] Don Quixot (seeing his freed man Andrew) did
arrogate unto himself the greatest piece of Chivalry that ever was performed
by Knight Errant, and is so transported with the confidence of Andrew's
magnifying his redemption, and praising his most valorous and just encounter,
that he cannot forbear to make his mouth more unsavory by his own vain and
foolish commendations, which he hoped would have been seconded by Andrew. But
such was the issue, as of his dialogue betwixt Sancho and himself, concerning
Dulcinea, and tends as much to his honor, as that to hers.

Answer me, be not ashamed, nor stagger at all, but tell what passed to these
Gentlemen.]

Infandum ( quoth Andrew) jubes renovare dolorem. Sir, pluck off my doublet,
and there read the bloody History of my Mr Haldudo, and poor Andrew; I am so
scarified, that with a little salt, I should make an excellent Carbonado. Many
a line there is in memory of your Honors intercession, (pox of your
appearance) and the scoffs wherewith he ever beat me, were as dolorous as the
blows upon my back; in such and the like scurrilous words whispered, while he
was louder in his punishment.

Andrew, accept this wholesome Bastinado,
It Is sent you from your friend, (...) Don Bravado;
Reliever of oppressed servants from harsh Masters,
And then he yerkt my back with his thong-wasters:
And 'twixt his whips insults, and every stroke,
O pray for your redeemer Don an Oak!
And when soe'r the Knight shall pass this way,
Tell him your Master gave you royal pay.
Wherefore Andrew concludes all with a very plentiful curse upon Don to his
Face, and all of his Tribe, though himself was newly entering into it, and
wanted but a Master; Gines Passamont is about the wood ( Andrew) and if you
meet, you will hardly part; you will live and dye together.

CHAP. V.
Mine Host right use of these Romances got,
Reading such books merrily o'r the pot
Unto his guests; and every Giant slain,
And Lady rescued, (Tapster) brought up twain,
Not Giants, but fresh pots; then those dispatch
In healths unto the Ladies Princely match,
And to the Knight her valiant Paramour;
Why, here is no danger now but of the score:
But mine Hosts credit upon that does lie,
That truth be in his Ale, as History.
Fresh Tales, fresh Taps; and thus they frolique through
The Arts of Thracian Cirongilio,
And Tope away Hercanian Fleximart;
(A sober Knight, and used not to that Art)
So Don Diego Garcia of Par-edes,
Has Pitcher-praise, and double health his meed-is.
So when our Don at his long home is anchored,
His memory in a Manchegan Tankard:
By the old Wives will be kept up, that is all,
Counted the merriest, tosseth up the same.
( John Falstaffs Windsor Dames memorial)
A Goddard or an Anniversary spice-Bowle,
(Drank off by the Gossips, ever you can have thrice told)
And a God rest his soul. Our Don is laid,
Truce with the world; Mils be no more afraid,
And Sheep graze quietly, Coarses go free,
The Don is laid, men may have leave to dye,
And to be buried; Carriers keep the rodes,
No more do you your selves rifle your loades,
And lay it on Knight-Errants and their Squires.
Sancho's a man of no such base desires,
An Earl in losses, and has noble thoughts;
But when the Curate proved those books were naught
But lies and Fabulous delights, and Errantry
A Figment! Sancho put finger in the eye.
TEXT.
NOW by my bless'ed self! thou shall use my tail no more for a beard.] De
Lana Caprina, or Aprugna; contention is ridiculous; but this Ox tail is
esteemed as her own, I know not upon what ground, unless her own had made her
Husbands head suitable to this Ox tail, for nothing will serve to cleanse his
comb, (which was the clenser of his head, and displayer of his high frontiers)
but this pied Ox tail, which Mr Barber was so delighted with, that he
preferred it before his Landladies, and admitted it n^erer his lips, then he
would her fa^ maine-pillion. But at last the Barber (Mr Curate earnestly
persuading) like the Castor pursued, parts with his taile-piece, and walks as
one of the dirump'd Poultry, afraid he should catch an extreme cold in his
face, and be troubled with the chin-cough.

At the Table they discoursed of Don Quixots strange Frenzy, and what happened
betwixt him and the Carrier, etc. And the story of Sancho's canvassing.] The
last guests discourses, carriages, and freeness, is the certain news for the
next comers. If one were inquisitive to find out others men's use of their
liberty, let him follow a day behind upon the rode. The sagenesse, civility,
thrift, abstinence, and such like personated parts and customs at home, will
be all laid aside, like Mr Curates divinity with his Capouch, when he has a
mind to make merry with the good wives of his parish. And these merry makings,
mine Host is as sure to r^late to the succeeding Travelers, as what robberies
are committed, though he himself were of the company. The Hostess has caught
poor Sancho in the Blank ets too, and tosseth him afresh before his lovely
Queen Doro^haea; and 'twas strange the foul Beast Maritornes had so much
modesty to conceal her and his back hot cockles betwixt the sheets. In the
mean while the Don sleeps, and his Squire Sancho watches, to learn if from
his dreams any thing may be gathered of his future victories o'r the Giant.

I my self have two or three Books of that kind, which do verily keep me
alive, and not only me, but many others, etc.] Mine Hosts policy for the
drawing guests to his house, and keeping them when he had them, is far more
ingenious, pardonable, and profitable, then our duller ways of Billiards,
Kettle-pins, Noddy-boards, Tables, Truncks, Shovell-boards, Fox and Geese, or
the like: He taught his bullies to drink ( more Romano) according to the number
of the letters in the errant Ladies name.

Clodia sex Cyathis septem Justina bibatur. The pledge so followed in Dulcinea
del Toboso, would make a house quickly run round.

No such Lure as drink and sports to bring any business about. A Gentleman
distressed for want of laborers (it seems hi^'d out before) knew not how to
inn his Harvest; wherefore he sent for a couple of Bearehoods, and proclaiming
a free access to that sport, the worke-men from all places came thither, and
by that means with his brewings of Beer, and Brewin the Bear, he got his work
done, and yet every day did play. Mine Host has another benefit by his books,
or his wife rather, for it seems he was a fiery choleric man, and the book was
her security, as long as he was reading, she was at quiet; a very good recipe
for either sex that are troubled with the Alarm of the tongue. Romances may be
very well read by women in such cases, and not as Maritornes the fousty
slattern made use of them to defile her brains with the conceit of embracing a
Knight under an Or^nge Tree, what a Lemman should he have of her? Good Mrs
Ursula! how sweet these things are to her! as Honey; O for the sting in the
rail! to let her know that sweet meat must have sour sauce. The Hostesses
daughter is also smitten, but dislikes the blows that are given, she cannot
endure severing the head from the body. Those indeed were downright, but she
was for a by-blow.

Peace (quoth the Hostess) for it seems thou know too much of those
matters, and it is not decent, that maidens should know or speak so much.] The
daughters of those mothers (who have been in the oven) are forward and
understandable of women's matters, sooner then other children. The eggs that are
hatched in an oven, bring forth spirituous chickens, and they commonly prove of
the game. Mine Hostess and her daughter were as like as one egg to another,
and like Mrs, like maid too; Maritornes served the Carriers, if they pleased
the best sort: The rebuke might very well have been spared, for in that
compellation of Maiden, it concerned not her. The old dame was fearful she
should too much lay open secreta Domus, especially the Lady being present,
whose super-eminent gracious aspects, recalled a little modesty into their
impudent breasts. My young inheritrix of the Inn would not have any man call
her Tigre or Lion, she was gentle as a Lamb or a Cow, with stretched Udders,
and this pliantnesse she had partly by nature, partly by example from her
mother, whom she thought it religion to follow, though it were to the Devil.

Gaudeant be^e nati,
Defleant male nati.
Where much salt is, Pigeons will frequent, and they are Venus's birds: Cats
have hot ingendrings, and where the conceptions are fiery, the Kittens will be
elemented alike. It Is that fire, that salvolatile which makes them of so
strange agility, and in conclusion (as the English Proverb has it) what is
bred in the bones, will not easily out of the flesh. Romul^s was cruel from
the womb, the Woolfe with her milk, conveighing her nature too. Wherefore it
is not good to give female infants Goats milk, that is, not to suffer ranc'k,
frowy and hairy nurses to suckle 'um, what the mother has conferred is not
curable by Physic, the mischief being scattered through the very Principles
of Nature, and no more to be discovered then Materia prima, and as the learned
Pliny says, Morbi sicut alia legantur, Dropsies, Gowts, Palsies, Epilepsies,
and most diseases are as haereditable from our Parents, as their estates. So
their vices also, especially those ab utero derivata: For partus sequitur
ventrem, and I never read that ever a Messallina brought into the world a
Lucreece.

Would you quath the Host burn my Books?] In good time, my wife first, if
she were in a scolding fit. These books (Sir) they are the caemen^ of my
company, the glue that holds them all together, they draw more then my sign,
or any thing I have within (except the Tapster.) Our mother the Church is never
blemished by them, nor his Catholic Majesty, nor his H^linesse at Rome; and
why should any man seek to burn such Books which keep up Society and Ladies
until midnight (if the Gentileman read e^phatically and finely to them) they
inflame men and women, and put true spirits into us; besides it is a great
help to Printers and Booksellers, who dare venture upon nothing that is
serious and true, these being innocent pastimes, and other works dry, and
fitter for the fire. Consider also that they are great helps to such ho^ses as
ours, though but few in the world beside my self, of my function, I think can
read such hard names as are in these volumes. How Mr Traquitantos of the
Commarke of St Lucrees: You must suffer me a little to digress and make it
known to you, that there are men of your profession in other parts of the
world, who have read as good Romances as these, and have thence so furnished
themselves with invention upon all occasions, that they scorn to turn to a
book when they would make their guests merry, but out of their own sparkling
forges have found delight and pleasance for the whole time of their stay, were
it a week long. And I shall give you a taste of the pr^gnancies of those
Inne-keepers where I or my friends have fortuned to travel, a little to prick
the swelling of the bladder. In Bellosyte of the D^luin are rare, acuminate,
quick and fantastical blades of your employment, that have hundred witty
Remoras for their guests, which they cannot escape for the frequency of them,
nor dislike them for the invention. One of them having some guests that loved
Larks, said, I will fit you with such a service of Larks as you never heard of
the like before: how, Landlord, quoth the Gentlemen, what part of the sky
proves your net, that you have such heavenly food! The Inne-keeper soberly (as
his custom was) replied; gentlemen, The Larks come not to me by miracle, nor
do I take Quails for Larks; But these birds my servants catch, indeed, the
rarity is their taste, as you will find at supper; for (mark me Gentlemen) in
and near the Fields where these pretty warblers resort, I my self set Garlike
and Onyons, which the birds feeding on, have such a natural Hogou, that no
French Artizan is able to make a higher, but for fashion sake there needs no
sauce, and it is always disht several, that the Larks grand taste may be found
to be from its self, nor is this all the virtue that comes from my device, for
(Gentlemen be confident it is true) I have preserved of the young ones, and
trained them up to sing, and they have learned instantly; but then by reason of
this opening food, which I always used them to in their Cages, O what throats
they had! what melody they made! no Canary Bird has reached so shril a note,
the Nightingall not clearer, and that you may be confirmed in the truth of it,
you shall have a Cage brought in, and as they sing, (though that air be sweet
and desirable) you shall smell easily by what arts they come to have their
pretty pipes so clear. This is very strange replied the Genlemen. If this be
strange, said mine Host, what think you then of my brother at the next sign,
who has taught four Robin Redbreasts of several growths, as he had chosen
Musicians, to sing in parts, which they have done long, to the great delight of
all his customers. But unhappily an envious Bard of the Town, seeing the birds
have more custom then themselves, gave one of them Allom instead of Sugar, and
so spoiled the Consort, so that now I believe my Larks will carry it for
music, from all the birds in Town or Country.

A friend of mine was pleased to grace me with a few Verses upon the raw
subjects.

Sonnet.
1.
Ho Traveller! go not to night,
Before thou know our Bellosite,
A thousand rarities are here,
'Twill find thee pleasure for a year.
2.
If stately buildings thee delight,
Thebes unto these's a homely sight;
It Is Paradise upon my word,
And it has now a flaming sword.
3.
If air, the spirits subtle friend,
Here Is air will keep you without end,
And lend you an immortal breath,
Able almost to cozen death.
4.
If Music or of men, or birds
Affect you, go not to our herds:
The Muses seat is here; some sing,
And some do ravish on the string.
5.
No where the birds such Music make,
Taught by the men that do them take;
A thing not heard of, by their arts
They teach the birds to sing in parts.
6.
The feathered consort of the Town
Will sing in tune, a catch or round
And their great Teachers of the City
Swear, that in time they will sing the dity
7.
Come Nightingale, and come you Thrushes,
Leave the dull Woods, and verdant bushes,
And with this Garlike clear your throats,
Or never hope to reach these notes.
8.
Thou Traveller, go not to night,
Before thou know our Bellosite,
And may relate this only rare,
That birds in Innes ou^-chant the air.
There were no living (Gentlemen) with us, unless something new and unvulgar
be in our houses, for every man here strives to exceed another, thereby to
gain Customers; so that keeps our wits in action, and aemulation preserves our
trading. I had some guests that were very unapt to sleep any where but in their
own houses, which when I once understood, against their next coming I made a
pretty perfume of many odours, and amongst them mingled Poppy leaves, and would
you think it? the composition wrought so effectually upon their brains, that
whereas they heretofore awakened all the house in a morning, now they would not
have awaked if the house had fallen upon their heads. When they were up, the
whole discourse was of the sound sleeps and pleasant rest they took; to which I
replied nothing, but that I had given special order for the making their beds.
One of my neighbors carried all the strangers away before him: He being famous
for catching a monstrous Eele with his horse hoof; for coming through a
Marsh, a loose nail stroke into the fish, and held it: Being caught,
insensible to the rider, until his horse being often vexed with the fishes
rigling about his heels, threw the Inne-keeper off his back, whereby he came to
see what he had caught, beside his fall. The great^ esse of the fish (for he
swore it was as thick as his sign-post) and the manner of taking it, attracted
much people to his house, for he had stuffed the skin for a show, and made it
bigger then any Conger. This story swamme a long while, until it was drowned
by a brother of ours, who being a great fisher, troll'd for a Jack, which he
had observed often, and was of a wonderful growth, wherefore furnished with
tackle accordingly to the worth of his prey, he threw in and suddenly she
pouch'd his bait, and held him play for an hour before he could bring her to
land, then he presently disgorg'd the fish, and upon the opening, out flew a
Wild Duck, which it seems the Pike caught as it made a stoop to the water; the
Duck by reason of the closeness of the place it was in, and being gripped at
the catching, could not fly far, so that he came home with double prey, and
justifies this to be no flying report.

These are their domestic attractives, besides that, they are full of all
manner of public news, and let no accident slip them, that will serve to
supply talk, or retard a Traveller; and as he finds your journey lie, so he
finds out some cruel robbery done in the way you are to go, or of Inns upon
that rode, that are suspected to be haunted by Spirits, and then tells an
artificial tal^ of an Inn, in that manner frequented, whither a Gentleman
coming late, the Host told him all the Chambers were taken up, except one,
which he durst not commend to him, because of the Spirits that did disturb any
that lay there. The Gentleman said (mine Host) with your leave I will lie in
this spiritual room, and will venture my flesh amongst 'um. Mine Host
dissuaded, but could not prevail; wherefore a good fire was made, and supper
in good time brought in, the guest was instantly for bed, his Landlady and Host
bidding him goodnight, in as sad a tone, as if it had been his last farewell,
he had not lain long after the candles were burnt out, but the Familiars were
upon his bed, squeeking and running upon his pillow; for the redress whereof,
he took one of the bed-staves, and as they came in his reach, he laid a Spirit
sprawling, and thus played the Conjurer, until they were weary of Phairy
Dances. In the morning he looked upon the floor, and found himself victor over
a score of Rats, and calling for his Host, who came gladly to him, he showed
him his Devils, that had lost him the benefit of that room so long. Mine Host
wondered with himself, where the Rathaunt should be. The Gentleman looking
behind a vacant place, found a tub and three quarters full of feathers, and
being quick of apprehension, conceited they quartered in that warm corner;
wherefore he desired a Kettle of water scolding hot might be brought in, which
he suddenly poured into the tub, and immediately there was sogreat a cry of the
scalded Vermin, as made mine Host think the Devils were in the feather-tub,
until the drowned Rats, which were many, were thrown out, and the Devils
appeared in their own likeness, for which cleanly exorcizing of the room, the
Host would take nothing for the Gentleman's entertainment, Horse or man; and
which do you think now, mine Host of Andalusia* is the unprobablest of these
inventions? truly I think that of mine Hosts liberality, and the remission of
the reckoning. And now that you see how Hosts in other Countries, reap great
benefit by lies of their own making, we may return to Mr Curate, who is
laboring to prove those lies which you read and are not of your own making.
But here Sancho Pancho interrupts us with his sad apprehensions, that the
Licentiat should speak truth.

Sancho rested much confounded and pensative of that which he heard them say,
that Books of Chivalry only contained follies and lies.] But that the sight of
Dorothaea kept up his spirits, this day we had lost a Squire, one Lecture had
converted him; a place or two ab improbabili, and impossibili, being able to
work miracles in a Country Auditory. So that Sancho fell into some
pusillanimous-selfe-discourses, and was overheard to say in muttering
grumbling manner as follows.

Have I for this sold my fat Sow and Pigs,
To purchase lies, Romances, and false jigs?
If Amadis du Gaul and Palmerin
Be lies, what whimsey-^ados are we in?
No Giants to be slain, no Emperors?
No Emperor, no Sancho Governor:
But by the life of my Egyptian Queen,
(Then whom, a fairer Lady cannot be seen)
I do believe in Giants and in Islands too,
And that the Books of Chivalry are true
As any legend, and that my Don Quizzot,
Shall get the great Nicomicon for's lot,
And for a Concubine in Guinea,
He may besport it with Dulcinea:
And I contented in some fruitful Island,
Shall spend my days, and neither sell, nor buy Land.
CHAP. VI and VII.
Mine Host this budget (like Pandora's box)
Mischievous stories of all sorts unlocks.
Here he displaies a simple Florentine,
Hatching against his wife a fond design,
Having no cause of any jealousy,
But constant proofs of love and chastity.
Yet he will try the purest gold; the touch
Sullied his piece, and did his Ingotsmutch:
The Cockscomb hires his shame, and gets a Crest,
( Actaeon with a fairer was not blessed)
His reasons laid, that women never tried,
Are therefore chaste; but she that has denied,
Resisted bribes, and opportunity,
And a solicitour of graceful eye,
Apt to convince; she merits all the praise,
And thus a Trophy to his wife he will raise.
Lothario is his engine, his best friend,
(Wealthy and young, and fit for such an end)
But his high amity did overruled,
He argues and disswades, but the stiff fool
Will hear no reason; such dangerous trials
"Rather instruct to lust, then raise denyals.
"Keep Virgin ears, such as you found um, pure;
"Young Hawks in time do stoop unto the Lure:
"And let your Camilas deportment be
"A bar and check to all immodesty.
E'n as she was, (for yet he never saw)
A face of so much freeness, and such aw.
All this wrought naught; but loath Lothario
(Unwilling any else so much should know
Of his friends follies) does attempt the thing,
With like success as Gyges to his King,
Cozened Anselmo, like all Cockscombs, dotes,
And loves her better (so a Whore besots)
Deflour'd, then chaste; such arts those gamesters have,
Their The Wittall prostitutes his wife to be wittee, taken possession.
Wittals to their wittees to enslave.
I shall not make any literal observations upon this story of the curious,
Impertinent, but only labor to satisfy Mr Curate, who having read and liked
the penning of it, yet stood incredulous to the belief, supposing it a
fiction; for as he says in the eighth Chapter, being the Catastrophe and
winding up of the whole matter.

TEXT.
I cannot imagine, that any Husband would be so foolish, as to make so costly
expense, for the purchase of a stain.] Mr Curate, to corroborate, confirm, and
illustrate this History by many examples, is the best way to reconcile the
credit to it, and first in your own way. Abraham durst not let Sarah pass for
his own wife, but agreed with her (while she traveled through a strange
Country) to go by the compellation of his sister, whereby (had no divinity
interrupted the events,) he brought his wife into great danger of her honor.
But Mr Curate, I shall endeavor to give you more pregnant proofs in the next
relations. It was in the Country of the Oriental Saxons, where a man offended
much that he had no child by his wife, took a mad course to obtain his desire,
and condemning himself in the case of insufficiency* absolved his wife,
assuring his thoughts, that change of Person would remedy the business; the
chief matter was to affect his wife with his plot, and obtain her consent;
which he did by often sighing and lamenting his condition, who was blessed with
a fortune, but could not tell you how, or to whom to dispose of it; it was his
earnest desire, that from her body, that comfort might be raised unto him, and
he should esteem it as the fruits of his own loins, whosoever could give her
the right contagion. The woman wearied out with such plaints and importunacies,
yielded to one single trial. Her Husband had before hired a young lusty fellow
to do this drudgery, who was so happy in his experiments, that he made
himself a father, and got his Chapman a child. The thing done, he came for his
wages, which was ten pounds promised; but the Chapman fell from his word, and
would not give him but half, though he had not done his work so. In conclusion,
a suit was comme^c'd upon it, and 'twas brought to a Jury, where the supposed
Father was cast, and censured to pay what was behind to the true one.

This next vindication of the possibility, and facility of such fond and
unnatural actions in some men, comes from the septentrionicall part of those
Saxons. In the times of those wars it fell out, that a proper young Chevalier
was taken prisoner, and upon Parole, dismissed to find his ransom. In
Eboracum h^quarter'd sometime, where by his civil carriage, and courageous
behavior, he purchased esteem and honor, even in the Garrison of his enemies,
who were very industrious to get a change for him, though no allurements could
work a change in him to forsake the side he had once engaged for. One of the
wealthiest inhabitants did dote upon his person and parts, and grew so
enamored of him, that he did invite him to all liberty of his house: He did
not refuse the offer, but was an often guest at his table, but with that
caution, reservednesse, and circumspection, that the more he frequented the
house, the more stranger he appeared: Insomuch that his free and open Landlord
wondered at his solemn mode, fearing that his guest might not think his
curtefies real, because no greater pleasance and alacrity proceeded from him,
at the reception of them. And having watched an opportunity, Dear Renigard (so
was this Chevali^rs name) says his entertainer, I hope you have not the least
suspicion, that these my respects are feigned, dissembled, or politic, but
are such as they seem to be. I have not yet learned to make my Table a snare,
or to catch regal Birds, by laying salt upon their tails. The freedom that I
give you, is as fubstantiall as it is open. I account my self happy in the
placing them on so meriting a Person; let me not be unfortunate in this only,
that you cannot think so. Or prithee tell me, is there any thing wanting, that
other places perchance afford you, and being the stronger recreation,
with-draws your liking from our defective entertainments? I know (be not afraid
to confess) that such complexions are not only recreated with Feasts, Wine and
Music, but naturally incline to a Lais, or a Corinna, as the Complement of all
joviallity and freedom. Renigard smiled at his prophetique quaeries, and told
him, not without a blush, that he had not for a long time been acquainted with
an Utile ad purgandos Renes. Why law you now, said he, you would conceal this
that would make a horse melancholy; now I can give you thorough cheer. To
morrow night ( Deer Renigard) you must sup with me, and vouchsafe to take a
hard bed too. It shall go hard (friend) if your second course like you not
better then the first; and so I leave you this night, that I may make you
worthy entertainment for the next. Both departed very highly exalted; Renigard
wishing it a Barnabies Night, or such as Jupiter had with Alcmena, that this
and that following were come together. His Landlord (careful providore)
omitted no cure to compass all that might delight, and having effected that,
which he counted most difficult, he went the cheerfuller about the culinary
part. The next day ended to both their joys, and Renigard repaired to his
entertainments, wondering where his living banquet would be procured. A supper
was provided fit for such appertenancies, and every dish had sauce of a most
stirring Nature; Insomuch, that Renigard had great conflicts with his flesh and
the provisions. His Landlord supplied him with fresh provocatives, saying ever
and anon, sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.

Ha quoth Renigard, Bacchus and Ceres are in abundance here, but where is your
Venus? within a stones cast, said the Landlord, leave you that to me; the Lady
of the Table wondered at these loose discourses, but replied nothing, having
charge from her Husband, to give no place for fear of discontent from her.
Wherefore in a glass of wine, she gratified Renigard's mirth, and was now
assured of his acceptance of her entertainments, by his cheerfulness and merry
discourse. My Landlord and he had mutual froliques at the Table, and charged
on the other very home, until the decaying lights admonished them of the
night, and forthwith he was conducted to his Chamber, a very well furnished
room, where sorts of delicacies were on a Cupboard in dish-glasses, offering
themselves to his taste or refusal. His entertainer took solemn leave of him,
wishing him the pleasures of the night, and so departed, only saying in his
ear, I have not forgot thee Renigard, be confident I have not, and then
withdrew.

A thousand thoughts and fears surpised our Chevalier, he casts in his mind,
what the reason should be that he knew not more circumstantially and punctually
of the person or the time he should expect.

After such various and delightful food Soft sleep might come, and that would
be as good. Why might he not suborne a common Strumpet, in place of a
bedfellow? who would give the reward of such unjustifiable pleasures? yet he
recomforted himself, calling to mind that the artifice was all his friends,
unto which he had scarce concurred, but in a smile or shrug: Surely the laws
of Hospitality would prevail with him, not to mischief him he received into
his bosom with such strong signs and demonstrations of sincerity. In these
varieties of disturbances, he thought the bed would best compose him, and
either remove 'um by the promised satisfaction, or allay the^ by a succeeding
rest; laid he was, and betwixt the confines of sleep and waking, when his
Chamber door gave a gentle creak, such as confessed the opener sorry for the
noise it made, and instantly a stately Lady in her night-dresse, made ^ome
frivolous stay about the Cupboard, entertaining her self with a large glass,
and after in some other parts of the Chamber, as if she had looked for somewhat
left there. Renigard peept through the Curtains, and to his grief, spied it
was the Lady of the house, wherefore counterfeiting a great snore he gave, by
his loud Music evidenced that he was now fast, and was not in case to be
loose; she not able to endure his drone^ le^t the Chamber, and Renigard more
perplexed then ever; for now he does strongly fancy, that it was all a plo^ upon
him, a catch and ^nare. But he had not been long in these distractions, when
Noble Festus came in, and rebuked him shrewdly for his coldn^ss, dullness, and
heaviness, telling him that Cupid does not sleep though he be blind, unless
pillow'd on his mothers breast; come (says he) arise and follow me. In that
amazement he was obedient, and resolved to go, though he knew not whither,
desiring his Landlord that he might carry his weapon with him, (not without it
for the world said the other) then he ushered him into a closer Chamber, and
more private, and bid him enter the sheets, they were warmed sartagine viva,
and if he took cold, it would be his own fault.

Renigard laid, his Landlord left him to the sweets of the night, and hoped (he
told him) that the change of his lodging would not displease him, and so
removed. He found in a short space, that his Landlord was in earnest, and that
the Lady came into his chamber for the purposes presumed, and forthwith to be
put in execution. Small Courtship passed betwixt them now, the Castle being
surrendered before capitulation, only Renigard embracing her very amorously,
begged her pardon, if he made bold a while with his Landlords Quarters: And
she to excuse her frailty, answered, you could not (worthy Sr) have ingresse
or egresse here, without my Husbands permission. Renigard knowing volenti non
fit injuria, and having two to please, spent no more time in words. In the
early morning his Landlord came again, and with great sigre, of inward
contentment reattended him to his first Chamber, (as fond of him as he was of
his wife.) Thus Mr Curate, you percieve that these tame tempers are in the
world, and every place yields not such obdurate hearts, that desire to ingross
and enclose their delights. Community (even in that particular) is allowed by
many, who rancking themselves with Beasts in their sensual appetite, applaud
the liberty of Animals, and without any Veniam petimus que damus que vicissim,

Account it natural, congeniall, and proper to their constitutions to run in
common, and to lay no stricter obligations on their wives, then themselves.
Singular was the answer of that Gentleman, who being questioned what store of
Mistresses he had; the Pamphilus returned this reply, more then a Town- Bull,
a Cock, a Boar, or a Horse: An excellent two-legg'd Stallion. Short of these
are those soft dispositions, who have rested contented after the known
violation of their beds, and jealous-headed, have not found out the
praevarications of their spouses, until some four years practice in disloyalty;
this is patience perforce, and not so punctual, and ad Rem, as in the next
Story shall be evidenced unto you (Mr Curate) wherein spleen and choler have
the predominancy, yet working the same effects, as indiscretion did in others.

A Clarissimo of Venice; (a dignity not inferior to that of the Roman
Patricii) lived in a port and fashion above any of the place, being a man of
vast revenews; and had in addition to all his other blessings, a Lady of
incomparable beauty and chastity, in so high a degree, that though it be
natural to the soil, the Clarissimo was not jealous, nor used those customary
restraints on his wife, that others did, exposing her to public view, and
priviledging her with the liberty of entertaining his friends or her own, (as
often as they were called) in person, unvailed and unsuspected, so that they were
counted them iracle of Venice, she for her transcendent beauty, and the old
Noble man for his indulgencies and permissions. Her irreprovable demeanor, and
disposition to please him, gave him great cause to suspect and grieve, that the
default was on his part chiefly, why that fair Copy was not taken out, that
Lucina was never yet called upon for help, and that no lovely pledges played
about his Hall. On the other side the Lady (ever honored for ignorance; like
that innocent soul, which was joined to a Husband of a most impure and noisome
breath, never feigned any dislike at it, imagining all men had smelt alike.) The
Lady I say knew not, but she was as well served as Niobe. But the old Signior
was resolved, since he had deprived her of her Virgin honor, to recompense her
with the reverence and dignity of a mother. But how to effect it, was res
ardua; how should he with hopes of any success, communicate so foul a design to
her chaste ears, with whom, even lawful delights were not admitted without a
blush, and some modest averseness? Doubtful, and beyond measure troubled, his
rest failed him his countenance changed, his sprightfull pleasance and
galliardnesse abated, which so deeply affected his pious consort, that in
sympathy she refused all those contentments, whereof her Lord could not
partake.

The Lady innocent, and assured that no cause was given by her, deported her
self in silence, not presuming to enquire whence these alterations did arise,
but applying comfortable cordials, and what ever would cherish and restore his
strength, left the disquisition of the reason, until his own time should
discover it; such struggling pa^sions cannot long keep within the womb that bred
them, like imprisoned winds, they will endure no forcible confinement, but make
their way through those concaves and dens, though with the ruin of their
detainers, and an Earthquake to the places adjacent. Wherefore what he had long
deliberated, he is resolved now to put in action; and the chief obstacle being
his wives inflexibility to such persuasions, it was most necessary to accost
her first, without whose consent all the rest of the project would come to
nothing. Sitting together, as their custom was, after dinner, and at that time
free from strangers, he took her by the hand, and with looks full of high
desire, said thus:

Life of this little that is left me, better part of my bent part, soul of my
soul, elixer of my fainting spirits, bright Sun-beame, repairer and incitresse
of my decaying heat: How happy am I in thee? how above merit? what felicity can
be added more unto me, only one, that thou might enjoy a reciprocal return
of joy and happiness from me? But then playing with his hairs, said, how can
this be? unless these silver ha^res were turned to gold. Is there no Chemistry
can work this change? The common Baths will alter argent metal into Or:
Methinks in time a man may be made capable of such transfiguration. For thy
sake (Love) I wish it; it grieves me for thee, who lying by so dull and
unprofitable a lump, contractedst nothing but deadness and disease^, and, I
shame to speak, barrenness, the mockery of thy sex, that which women had
rather not be, then live withal. If I had met thee in parity of years, our
Gallery had been enriched with the sweet Imagery of our own loins. Thou
might have read the History of thy self multiplied, to the visiting friends;
now thou look for issue from a charnell-house, enduring the cruellest
torment, instead of satisfaction, that can be devised, a dead Corpse to be
joined to thy sprightfull and lively person. Abandon me for ever (Deer) if I
labor not that divorce, or suffer any longer so monstrous a conjunction. I
perceive thou art so innocent, thou know not what this means, nor whither
my wild fancy carries me. Obedience has been hitherto thy excellency,
obedience to a frigid plant, a sh^king Aspine leaf, a dogs nose. Yet be thou
still obedient, and what I now entreat thee, put in execution; I have decreed
thou go to Church to morrow to St Marks in all the bravery thou can adorn
thy self, though truly thou deckest it, show thy self such, as the daz'led
Auditors may lose their eyes in thee; and since Ladies come thither to be seen
as well to behold, it shall be by the addition of this sparkling Diamond, thou
shall be only looked upon. And therewithal he gave her a most radiant stone;
amongst that captive company, let thy eye single out one, whom if I like for
quality, as well as thou for personablesse and ingenuous favor, I may, if we
continue issulesse, adopt into my Family. Of this fail not, as thou would
perpetuate the life and name of him, thou never yet in the least circumstance
did offend. Euphema, so was this accomplished Lady called, made no scrupulous
demurs to her Lords desires; and since the business was to be transacted in
the Church, she was confident the sanctity of the place, beside the holy
exercises, would guard her from any undecent gestures, thoughts, or carriages.
Moreover she knew her self a Temple, into which no profane thoughts had ever
entered unresisted, and unreplied; nor did she (and rightly too) account those
thoughts her own, which she forthwith was in Arms against, and summoned all
the spiritual Posse of her soul, to expel as invaders and deadly enemies to
its happiness and pious tranquillity. Violent intrusions upon devout and
sacred minds, are Diabolical suggestions, and such as Crown the vanquishers
with honor upon earth, and immortality and glory afterward.

The day came, when decked like the Altar, she went to the Church with an
humility and reverence due to the place, with eyes fastened unto the earth, she
knew she came from, and was to return to, then advancing to her seat, private
short devotions ended, she joined into the public worship, which being begun,
raised a condemning, but selfe-absolving blush into her cheeks, that she had
lost any part of the Oraizons, staying for the other pin, or hanging on her
watch. About the middle of the Anthem, she remembered her Husbands injunction,
who all the while had riveted his eyes to hers (not till then removed from the
Psalter, unless to Heaven; when her exalted affections moved by holy impulses,
and efficacy of the matter, lifted them up to the Author from whence they
came.) Not Cephalus durst pursue the destined object with such certainty, as
his eye her motions; And perceiving her twice or thrice to fix upon one person,
it was sufficient to confirm him, that Padri Casimire, who read the Mass was
the man; nor did she upon her Lords inquiry deny, but tha^ he was the only
object of her eye, all the service while, wisely concealing the reason of her
intentivenesse on him, whom she knew a man of great devotion, Religious without
ostentation, and of an extraordinary strict life, and customary charity to the
poor, strangers and prisoners. If her Husband meant well in this eye-service,
the good Father would encourage him in it, but if he had any evil, sinister
designs, such was the gravity of his person, integrity, and known austerity
against any wicked practices, that reprehensions and admonitions, and upon an
obstinate preserverance, canonical charge would follow; so that secure of her
mark, she rejoiced greatly that no other object had diverted her eye.
Impotentio, that was the old Clarissimo's name, the next day dispatches a
loving letter to Casimire, requesting him to honor his house, and therein
intimates, that he desired to confer with him, about some scruples, which did
a little disturb the quiet of his mind.

Nothing was more affable and willing, nothing more able in all manner of
knowledge, but especially in practical Divinity, and cases of Conscience; so
that the courteous invitation wrought not so powerfully on him, as his own
propensity and readiness to give those helps and satisfactions to any, that
were desirous of them, which by his function he was engaged to, and by his
great knowledge and experience he was enabled for. Euphema had been four years
joined to Impotentio and Casimire was the Priest that knit their hands, which
caused Euphema to bestow more then ordinary reverence on him, in respect of the
mystical tie where in she was bound, and according to the Tenet of the
Church, accounting Marriage for a Sacrament, did not conceit so rudely and
uncivilly of her conjunction, as if it were no more then saying, I Ione, etc.
Looking upon the estate, wherein she was now placed, and that from whence she
came, she could find it but a remove from chastity to chastity, from Virginal
and continual abstinence, to a moderated and restrained indulgency of
permitted pleasures. And though her Husband was a sufficient bar to excessive
dallyances, (yet knowing no other, then that it was so with every man) she
labored to lessen his rare and seldom fruitions, by subduing her own flesh
rather then his. This day in honor to her spiritual Father, was an
extraordinary Feast provided, and about the season of the day Casimire came,
and was entertained by both of them, with respect, affability, and cheerful
looks, worthy of his person, parts, and function. And in dinner time he took
occasion to bless himself, and them too, who were so conspicuous for their
mutual loves, that he received no small respect among the People, because by
him they were united, who attributed much of the blessings and happiness of
their lives to the consecrated hands, and effectual and intentive prayers,
which flowed from him at that solemnity. A matter little set by in other
places, who care not whether their Priests lips preserve knowledge, or their
hands confer a blessing.

Dinner ended, and some competent time spent after in Table-discourses, Padri
Casimire and Signior Impotentio went together into a large Gallery, where the
Merchant pulling from his breast a paper desired his Fatherhood to read those
heads of his troubles and discontents. Which being twice or thrice perused by
Casimire, at last with a great sigh, taking Impotentio by the hand, (Sr said
he) and are my strongly conceived hopes dashed so suddenly? know you what these
papers contain? even a divorce to all your joys on earth. You desire to know
first, whether it be lawful for the conservation of your name (an evident
impediment being on your side) to find a supply, and Proxy of your own
election, who shall be Loco Patris to the wife by making her a mother. It is as
just a reason, as if a Thief for the preservation of his wife and family,
should provide himself of the next house he could break open, or the next man
he could rob. The conservation of your species, and endeavor of continuing
your name and nature upon earth, are very justifiable, and warrantable actions
founded in Nature, and without which Res erit unius aetatis populus virorum.

One age would be the period of mankind; wherefore they were not to be
discommended, who under pretense of Equestrian sports, made a prey of all the
Virgins that came to the sight, satisfying for the present rape with an
after-marriage. Their dearth of women at home enforcing them to provide in time
from their neighbors, lest their Nation should end in themselves for want of
posterity: Yet none of these usurped the beds of such as were married amongst
them, or thought it lawful to abuse those Husbands who were not blessed with
issue. Much less does any History afford men of so stupid and low souls, who
would prostitute their wives to any other, and that they might be supposed
Fathers, be known Wittals to themselves, and panders to their own beds.

It is not with women as trees, there you may inoculate, and set strange
grafts, not so on them without spoiling the stick, and unbarking that body,
which is vitiated and corrupted by the approach of outward air, and for want of
the genuine covering and natural security it was placed in. The more generous
of sensible creatures, permit not variableness in their mates, but punish
their delinquencies with death, and the assaulter too, or else die themselves
in the revenge, abhorring so tame and degenerate a compliance, as to look on,
or enjoin it. The men of Primitive times, or the Golden Age (as they called it)
in case of their defects, took to themselves Concubines, and obtained from
them, those comforts which they would rather have had from their legitimate
consorts. But these men multiplied themselves, they did not hire journy-men to
do their work for them, nor rejoice in a Changeling, as it were a child. But
to all this you answer, that the impotency and fault being on your own side,
your are bound in Conscience to recompense the wives patience and defraudings
with something answerable to her expectation. If you were (Signior) frigidus
ante nuptias, then you should not have adventured upon Marriage, it being
nullitas fundementalis, and a just cause why your wife should require her dowry
back. Or is it any fascination or Witchcraft, whereby you are frigidus quoad
hanc? then you must use holy means, and the assistance of devout persons and
prayers to disinchant you; the Church in such cases has not lost the power of
Exorcisme. But the remedy you seek, is worse then the disease, to give your
wife to the Devil Body and Soul, because a part of yours is impedited by his
ministers. Or if your frigidity be from the Winter of your age, you know, warm
clothes, fires, and good Cordials, make us insensible of sharp weather, and
these natural faylings of your year^, may be happily repaired by lawful
helps, strengthening juices, fomentations, baths, and the like, and what you
think impossible (as from your dry stock) being watered, opened at root and
lopped, and all seasonable care taken, may bloom and bring forth fruit without
inoculating.

But supposing, not granting the difficulty of restoring what is decayed, will
your like an overladen Tree, be propt up with a fork? know you not the barren
bed is better then a quiver full of ill-headed Arrows. Will you to please the
Europa, Metamorphoze your self into a Bull, a very Centaure, half man, half
beast? Such a Monster is he made, whosoever voluntarily, or involuntarily, has
lost the propriety in his wife. But a resignation is most unmanly and impious.
How can two indispensable vows and bonds be by consent broken, unless one may
consent to do what he has articled never to do? how can you permit your wife
to be a Whore, (unless you misplace or misunderstood the words, for better for
worse?) Again, would you give another leave to call you what you make your
self, or your wife by that title which you have imposed upon her; or (if your
spurious design prosper not) would you try the Piatza over, and make your
self Notissima Fabula mundo. You have vowed to be hers, she likewise to be
yours, and what shall be borne of her, to be both yours and hers. A stranger
intervening, breaks all these engagements; you plainly with a de jure cedere,
cutting off your own intaile as to your progeny, and dispossessing your self
of tenancy for life. The wife is made juris alieni, and the children (which of
all our goods we account most our own) Iuris publici. Bastards are the
Commonwealths children, and therefore theirs, because nor Father nor Mother
would own them, but exposed them to the public charity: And will a man of
your discretion, a Senator and public Father, privilege that at home, which
you would severely punish in such incontinent persons abroad. Impotentio was
very much disturbed with these rebukes and reasons: (but yet not dissuaded)
which change of looks Casimire taking for a remorse, and outward sign of
inward compunction, did not farther nettle him; but said, the conviction of
your forehead puts me in hopes of the conversion of your heart, which I hope is
altered by this discourse from your first intentions. A blessing on the cure;
and so giving him his benediction, the good Father departed full of hopes and
joy for his new convert.

Impotentio waited on him, fearing his wife might be inquisitive to learn some
what of him; but the good Father knew that such discoveries, though not in
confession, were of dangerous consequence if revealed, and therefore with a
look as cheerful as when he came first, having given a Benediction to his
daughter, (freed from suspicion by his plausible countenance) he repaired to
his Covent. Impotentio champt upon this bit of Casimires a day or two, but with
like success, as Mules and Horses, who are imboss'd, foame and chafe the more.
He remembered Quod val^e cupiunt senes, meminerint been.

That he had often commerc'd with a Merchant of Angli-terra, a Gentleman
youthful, handsome and ingenious, in very high credit on the Piatza, and on
whom the Clarissimo's many of them cast an eye of more then ordinary regard,
and often called him to their Tables. The gentleman was a single man, and very
rich, so that Impotentio promised to himself success, if his vigilant wife
were not impregnable, nor to be surprised. The next Exchange, his fortune was
to meet him, and having saluted each the other, the Clarissimo desired him, to
honor his house that day with his company at meal. Sanguine Vernall, such was
the Merchants name, intimating his unworthiness of so high respect, said, he
should hereafter endeavor to make himself capable, and for the present he
would be indebted for the entertainment. Our Merchant was not acquainted with
the Venetian humor, and therefore summoned up all his cautionary rules,
circumstances and counsels, which either his friends, or his own observations
had enriched him withal, and having heard very much of the fame of the old
Signiors Lady, her beauties and accomplishments, he resolved to double arm
himself, and set a watch upon his eye and tongue, for there was subject enough
for either to be luxurious on. From the Piatza they went off together to
Impotentio's house, which was one of the stateliest buildings of the City, a
Receipt for a Prince, but that it entertained a Goddess; for Euphema coming
into the dining Room, so transported our Merchant with her luster, that he knew
not presently, whether he should salute or worship.

But presently restored by the melting Coral of her lip, he sat down with
civil confidence, inwardly admiring the several confluences of graces, that
his eye beheld, and could no where, but there behold. At dinner he durst not
let his eye beguile his mouth, nor wander on the women's side, which made him
eat like a Mad man, not minding what he took, nor how it went down, and
Euphema (as she was an excellent dissecter of the Creature) carving to him
some special foul, the puzzled wight gave her his used plate instead of the
servant. The Clarissimo gave him the boon cheer in a lusty glass of Wine, which
being by one of the Gentlemen presented to him, it was his wish, the glass had
been the spire of a Steeple, and as narrow as a pin-case; for all that while he
might have viewed, unsuspected, the Face which had set his heart on fire, not
to be quenched by such a glass, though it had been filled with Alpine water.
Wherefore imputing the slowness of his draught to the goodness of the Wine,
which was to be drank with no hasty, but with deliberate pallat, he said,
Signior, other Clarissimo's drink Wine, but you Nectar, and a Philoxenus's neck
were not an ill wish to him, who would take a right Gustow of it. And craving
another glass, he presented health and happiness to the Lady of the place. The
Table's removed, Clarissimo and Vernall retired into a very fair Garden, and a
little behind that, they entered a grove of Trees, and delicate walks every
where betwixt 'um. The Trees were so placed, that their Arms shot into one
another, and were so closely interwoven, that the vernant and aestivall Sun
beams could not pierce their rare imbroydery. In this secret of the house,
Clarissimo will now disclose his intentions. Such designs as these were
Lucifugous, and would not endure the face of Heaven, wherefore opportunity and
place adding courage to his purposes, apprehending Sanguines hand, he thus
accosted him, who wondered with himself, what would be the end of so courteous
beginnings, but Caesar-like accounting his fortunes in himself, he said,
Sanguine, fear not: when Impotentio gravely and resolutely confessed; it is
not the custom of this place, (friend Vernall) much less of men of my Port to
afford strangers such liberty, as you this day have found. But your lovely
person and candid disposition had before so wrought upon me, that this freedom
(to our nice and stanch Gentry indeed, a great matter) is the meanest and least
privilege which I invest you with; having resolved to entertain you into my
very bosom: But before you hear any further of my Noble intentions, swear
unto me by all that has a tie upon your soul, and which invoked, you count it
Religion to violate, that you will not in the least scruple reveal it either
by signs, writing or talk, no not (if we are both of an opinion) to the
Priest. Sanguine called to mind the Venetian absolution after renunciation of
the faith, and with these ensuing cautions to be praemitted, he promised
secrecy and assistance. Signior, said he, if so be the secret be not against
the present State, which I have promised during the time of my abode to be true
to, nor my own Country, whose weal I have sacramentally vowed, nor any thing
against your self, whom by the Laws of hospitality, I am commanded to secure;
it is ratified, and confirmed, and upon my oath of secrecy (in attestation
whereof I kiss your hand) no screws, arts, racks nor allurements of any sex,
shall be able to disclose what you have locked up into my breast. No, Sanguine,
against none of these can you offend, nay two of them you shall abundantly
oblige, that is (said Impotentio) the Commonwealth of Venice and my self;
both which at once you shall gratify, at once make Venice happy in a Public
son, and your old friend with a brave heir. For mark me, ( Sanguine) I am
childlesse, (and ever like to be so) unless this stratagem prevent it. My
younger Brother like a Vulture, waits for my Carcass: Not a Bell tols but he
thinks or wishes it were mine: His how d' you man comes every day to know how
I slept last night, when indeed, his errand is, to enquire whether I had slept
my last: He seemingly laments my want of pledges, which if he should see; O the
Basiliske! what poisonous vapors would his eyes discharge, more dangerous then
a m^nstruous Organ to our purest mirrours? I once desired Euphema to cozen him
with some supposititious trick, the very cheat revived me, and sent him home to
bed sick of a taffety Embryo. To defraud this rav^^ous expectant of his hopes,
and to disherison his malignant issue, is my main design, and I have in a most
happy hour, chosen thee ( Sanguine) to be my instrument: Proxies are allowed in all Courts, even in our Supreme, the Senate house; Inferior powers are
regulated by them, and why not our Domestic? Adoption it is true, in these
cases of sterility, has made up the want, and Emperors have with great
contentment created successors, when they could not generate; that common way
does not affect me. I am for the child, which though it be not of my blood, it
ought to be, and since my impotency denies that happiness to me, my justice to
my bed shall be preserved in a substitute. All things conspire in thee, to
effect my wishes, youth, strength, and loveliness. This night Euphema sleeps
within thy Arms; do not suspect my promises, this night, Sanguine, I Will
reckon as my wedding night, and what has been these four years due unto
Euphema, shall with large interest be satisfied. Be confident I am serious, and
let this chain of Pearl confirm thee, until I bring thee to a Jewel of a
Price unvaluable. Sir, said our confounded Merchant, my life is in your hands,
either by my consent or refusal. If you are only tentative and supplant my
frailty, my consent is mortal; if it be true, and that you have designed this
stratagem against your brothers offspring, though with the taincture of your
own, it is death to know so much and not consent. If then on both sides my ruin
is certain, let me dye on the best choice, for gratifying you in what you
wish, and I am sure I am able to perform, then by a sullen negative, call an
unprofitable ruin on my self: Impotentio kissed him, desiring his patience,
but to while it self in those walks, and he would return with news should joy
them both. Sanguine, left alone, fell into these raptures.

Kindle you summoned Spirits, and unite
Your scattered Atoms, in this amorous fight:
More Innocent then those of hers, whose Troy
Was made a Bone-fire by her Firebrand boy.
But such an influence dart, that every eye
May swear the Boy's of the Flavian Family,
And borne for Empire; for the times to come,
Will judge the mother to have been at Rome.
Then looking (on his chain of Pearl, says,
A way fond Merchandise, I will no more
Worship the East, and the rich Coast adore,
Adventure men, and lives at costly rates;
Euphema's are more safe, and gainful Straights.
Shoot this Venetian Gulf, and say be rich,
Sanguine, above a Misers covetous itch!
He that ^y such rare copeage Mounts, is sure
To break his neck, or live for ever secure.
Not she so rich, whom trucking Jove of old
Bought by conversion of himself to Gold:
Could I descend like him in a bright Flame,
In harmless fires I Would warm this Virgin Dame.
Was ever man so fortunate as I,
To be inchain'd thus to felicity?
Mother of Pearl, and Pearl, methinks we float,
Like Venus and Adonis in her boat
Of glittering shells: Euphema is alone,
(Daughter of Pirra) still the richest stone.
By this time Impotentio is returned, who having fully acquainted his wife with
his unnatural desires, and the sodainnesse of the performance, thought she
durst not trifle with his fury, or at leastwise would be unable to frustrate
the young* Merchants importunity. Euphema gave him no answer at all, but
stupefied with the sencelessenesse of his device, rested silent, and amazed. He
left her mixing threats with entreaties, and gave her some small time to
consider in a back Chamber next to her Bedchamber, which he vowed was to be
her Deathbed, if she refused. In this great conflict was the disconsolate
Lady full of fears and tears, and amidst those passions, she thus disputed
with her self: What are my Crimes, just Heavens? or wherein
Have I given cause to my wild Husbands sin?
Have I in thought abused his bed, or ever
Admitted Lust, but kept this Conclave clear,
Unravell me ye Powers; and let him see
The Residentials Court of Chastity.
A heart as pure, as when in sacrifice,
The pleasing incense calmed the Deities:
From thence as from an Altar of pure snow,
Fervent desires for Sacred life did flow.
He tells me he is Impotent and cold,
What difference? he is, I will be old.
His youthful days are past, wished back again,
And mine are bridled, governed by a reine;
His fire is out, and mine is well suppressed,
Prayers and tears will quench a smoking nest.
He has no power to act, I have no mind;
A fitter match where could an old man find?
He grieves my wants of due benevolence,
When it is asked, then let him take offense.
These two years day, (I Will put it to my sins)
If ever I did solicit at his shins.
I never went to Church, (some do they say)
To get them servants, rather then to pray,
Nor to my confessor could ever tell,
(And I told all) this day I did not well;
Unless it were Omission, when the time
Shortened my duty, and was part of the crime.
I came absolved from him; good man he^'d weep,
And wish his soul with mine did commerce keep.
If it be from above, my soul to try,
And be assured of my constancy,
Then give supplies, Thou that have made me chaste,
Nor let foul Batteries my firmness wast;
Let no insultings force me to a fact,
Thy Sacred Laws has made it death to act.
Shall I for fear of death do that, which done,
Brings double death, twisted destruction?
Shall I, to get him glory o'r his Kin,
Lose mine own honor in a nasty sin?
Away thou whispering Fiend! what is privacy?
Shall the All-seer only this crime not see?
"Concealed and smothered sins have never end,
"Shame and deprension is a better friend,
"And wholesome chastisements cut off that vice,
"To which a hid success does more entice;
Propt by those Sacred helps, I now defy
The worst of humane rage of Policy.
Ears be you deaf to charms, keep closed chaste Womb,
Rather then be Lusts Bed, be his Swords Tomb.


Alas, alas! her time grew short, and the hour glass was almost run, which
is the utmost limit of deliberation; wherefore recollecting all her best
spirits, and calling up her Fancy to a sudden assistance, (not knowing what
her Husbands fury might provoke him to, upon a peremptory refusal) she wisely
contrives to elude him and his Stallion by quaint devices, hoping in good time
to attemper her Husbands mind to more reason and Manhood, and let his Merchant
know, that he was not bound for tha^ Port. She called unto her instantly a
stately Moor, named Fuscilla, which the Clarissimo among other gifts,
presented her with on the day of marriage; the Moore could understand no
language but her own, yet being as docile as an Elephant, and of as precious
Teeth, by often teaching and practicing, her Lady had so instructed her, that
upon the motion of her fingers, eyes and head, nothing was unperform'd, that
Euphema commanded. By these signs she took instant notice of her Ladies
intentions, and the night-Piece provided to put them with all have in execution.

By this time the two transported persons were at the chamber door, which
unwillingly opened, as sensible of the ensuing mischief, and abhorring to give
quiet entrance to such wicked visitors. Impotentio kept up his cheerful looks,
and said, Dearest, thou art still the same Euphema; but yet remember, unto what
Planet more then any you are subject; she who rules and predominates over the
sex, permits a monthly change, thou only in this one request do imitate
thy Cynthia. Suspect not any shadow of dislike, because of this friendly
interposition betwixt us for a while, thou will appear more glorious after a
small Eclipse. Two Moons shine not at once, nor two Sunns, suffer me (best of
women) to be in the waine at present, while I leave with thee solemn and hominem.

Then whispering a short word to Sanguine, said, do you look to make good the
promise, and generate another. Her Husband gone, with a majestic look and full
of modesty, Euphema fixing her eyes upon him, so awed the Suitor, that if
Impotentio had not shut the doors upon 'um, he had Faced about, and never made
stand again; But as the Devil would have it, Rats, Cats and Dogs will make
head, if they cannot fly any farther, so Sanguine locked in his Armor, charges
boldlier: Madam, said he, were not the way made by my loving friend your
Husband, many preambles, much Oratory, and a great deal of Court-ship were
requisite to a work of this nature. Besides, my stint of time abridges all
thought of Ceremony and complement, which I am not wanting in to Ladies of your
quality; but what is defective in language, shall be made up in performance,
that you shall (I hope to the honor of Angliterr) prove the least Talkers to
be the best Doers.

Wherefore, most succinct Lady, (but otherwise now wished) remember that time
is precious, and not to be played withal. Let no scruples seize you, Madam,
concerning my ability or wholesomnesse; my looks speak me sound, there is no
Compurgators like the complexion. Your Curtezan's (unless by name) are
unknown to me, nor came I from my own Country, after the chargeable experience
of the Bath, Guiacum, or the Tub. I will not make apologies, hoping I shall
clear my self (Lady) in your judgment, and to your great satisfaction, and
your Husbands joy, when by your own confession he shall know, he did not
delegate to his servico one unworthy, or unfit for the deputation. I stand upon
my credit with the Clarissimo, to keep my reputation, and with your Ladyship,
to beget it. Madam, speed to the trial, wherein, such is the confidence of
your new servant, that he shall think himself most happy, in having the
beautiful Euphema, Judge, witness, and party in the business. Sir said the
Lady, you are in place of my Husband, and your commands are his, give me the
civility of withdrawing, and you shall not long be unprovided.

CHAP. VIII.
Come see the Don with dismal dreams o'retaken,
(Yet in his sleep more valiant, then he is waking)
Giant A wine vessel made of a hogs skin.
Borachio for Pandafiland
Falls by his heavy and dead-doing hand.
This Sancho tells to's Queen Nicomicon,
But knew not whether's head be off or on.
Then with a Candle searches under's bed,
And all the bloody Room for the Hogs-head:
But when Borachio's Second's understood
(Mine Host and's Wife) their wine-bags ran this blood;
The clutch-fist villain scor'd in black and blew
On our Don's Face the Arreerages were due;
And as he gave him, what he wanted, souse,
Sleeper, said he, you're sure unto the house.
The Barber spoiled the Proverb, for soon after
He waked the sleepy Knight with paile of water:
Thrown on those parts his halfe-shirt would not cover,
Over which a Kite would scorn, in hopes to hover.
Oh what a deep confusion Sancho's in,
To find blood, wine, and Gyants-flesh hogs-skin!
But Don awaked (yet dreaming more than ever)
Blesses the sword that did the Giant sever
Body from head; then makes the Curate Queen
(Himself, and that, both sights were never seen)
Once more to bed with him, he is laid, and Fast,
Or sober rise, great Don, or sleep thy last.
In this same hush Anselmo's stories read,
In place of which we Sanguine bring to bed.
TEXT.
ARt thou in thy wits Sancho! What a Devil man! how can that be, seeing the
Giant lives two thousand leagues off.]

Nunquam quicquam verius dixit Licentiatus. This truth might be justified
without Text, or Quotations. But the most plain truths will not be
acknowledged by praepossessed minds. Sancho's head run all Giant, and the Room
Giants blood, and the Giants head was a running head, and made an escape, or
else Sancho with the story had presented it to Dorothea.

By this they heard a marvelous great noise within the Chamber, and the Don
cried out aloud, stay Thief, Robber, etc.]

Hark, Ieronymo is at it in his own person.
Who calls Ieronymo from his naked bed?
Strong fancies, Whimsies, and Imaginations; A Wall-eyed Giant appears to him,
whether with a head, or without a head is very much suspected; but this
Apparition, or Phantasme, works such real effects, that he forsakes his bed,
takes his sword, and so slashes the doors and walls, that it showed more like
a bawdy house than any thing else. So the great Iugurth, the night before the
battle with the Romans, imagined they had taken the field, himself unhors'd,
and ran out from his Couch, crying: A horse, a horse, a Kingdom for a horse;
Fetch me my brave Getulian horse,
That stands on end and fights.


Men of great achievements have great disturbations, their spirits all
ascending upward in such crowds, that the vapors* and dew of the brain is
unable to allay them.

Alexander, after the murder of Hephestion his trustiest friend, rose often in
the night, thinking that he called out for revenge, and could by no means be
brought to steep again, until he had drowned his brains in Grecian Wine.

Achilles was so troubled with the thought of his undipped heel, and the
sudden drawing on of the Trojan Battle, that he assayed many nights to fight
with both his heels together, which made him ever after splay-footed.

Hector's unquiet spirit, (whether for want of solemn interting or no is
doubtful) kept on this side the Elysian shore, and showed his wounds to many
trusty Trojans, but especially to Aen^as, who was ready to fly without his
warning of I, fuge nate Dea, etc.

Brutus, Cassius, Mark Antony, all these, and Caesar's self before his
Assasination, and all active spirits are troubled with the rising in the
nights, Mars himself not exempted; for though those Deities are said to be
Insomnes, yet after a good rouse, or good dose of Nepenthe, they are in a
trance, which is as good to them as our dull rest. For if they were always
waking, how could Vulcan so often have taken Mars at a nap with Venus, that it
was once his intention to have made a pair of Fetters, wherein he should have
stood, and done penance at his Forge. Nay, one of their Gods is Morpheus, an
heavy-headed Numen, who indeed sleeps not all night, but at Cock-crowing he
takes his bed, and there nuzzles till Hesperus cramps him by the toes.

Impute all these obambulations, and night-walkes, to the quick and fiery
Atoms which did abound in our Don, as in all his brother Heroes that went
before him; And how can it be attributed to any thing else, for it was as
visible (as the Nose in the Face) that the Element of Fire did most predominate
in him, choler licking up all the rest of the humors, and converting them into
it self; his diet below Lescius's would scarce make an excrement, that he
might compare with a Mouse for the rarity of it; his parched body, black and
withered flesh, and rusty hair, showed that the fire was great within which
made such a Chimney-piece. Lastly, His clothes consumed by the fiery
evaporations of his body, and nearer his ( alter caloris fons) Testicles, no
Linen but perished like tinder at the touch, as will be made appear in the
next note.

He was in a shirt which was not long enough before to cover his thighs, and it
was six fingers shorter behind.] A Semi-Adamite, but to be dipped in a red sea
of good Claret, with Confirmation to ensue; yet though these accoutrements
seem so ridiculous to us now, they were in those days the most proper and
appointed fashions, and as well liked of as the steeple-crown'd hat,
piccadillo, Corslet doublet, the Trunk hose, and Codpiece. Umbonically
prominent, and significant as a Digitus Mercurialis, these were dresses not
disproved by our Fore-Mothers; though if one should now appear so, what
twittering and peeping through the Fingers we should have? Well fare the Don,
who keeping to the Customs of the old Heroes, will be known by his habits, as
well as valor, to be one of them. Hercules Lions skin (which was the pattern
of most of these short robes) came not so low as his knees, and had the same
disproportion with the Dons behind. His Oripygium was open to discovery; how
was it possible else that the Grecian Dames should call him Melapyges, that is
to say in our Mother Tongue, Black-dock, unless they had been peeping under
the scantinesse of his yellow Coat of victory.

The Father of their Order, Great Alcides, receiving his death by a whole shirt
dipped in the blood of the Centaure Nessus: in detestation of the length of the
shirt, and shortning of his days, the Fraternity ever wore half shirts. All
heroic persons are pictured in Bases and Buskins, or else stark naked (as the
Don in Sierra Morena) to show the immensity of their parts, the bigness of
their Muscles, the largeness of their veins, the toughness of their nerves
and sinews, which evidently showed, that men of such proportion and natural
sufficiencies were purposely framed and intended for the destruction of
Monsters, Men, or Beasts, and for the captivating all handsome Ladies, and the
relief of all distressed.

He wreathed on his Arms the Coverlid of the bed.] An usual piece of Armor
in times of War betwixt the Giants and the Gods; for the Giants being by the
advance of hills (which they heaped together) raised to the middle Region of the
Air (which is the coldest) thought Rugs and Blankets the best Armory, lest
they should perish more by encountering the place, than their enemies, and
politiquely likewise surprised the Magazine and Artillery of the Gods. The Dons
greasy nightcap (or rather mine Hoasts) was very considerable in a fight of
swords, whose edges will yield and turn against pickled murrions, sweat and
Ale being the only Muria, that will blunt the blow of any sharp weapon.
Feather-beds break Flints, soft and downy beds weaken the strongest bodies.

Dolus, an virtus, quis in host requiret? If our Don was so politic in his
sleep-Combates, what other stratagems do you think he had waking? Or if he
could do so in a half shirt, what mad pranks would he play in a shirt and
half?

The Host, all inflamed with rage, set upon Don Quixot with dry fists, and
gave unto him so many blows.] O indignity! dry-baste a Knight Errant! and
double dubb him of the Ill-favored Face! A Knight Dormant, Ambulant,
Combatant! Would no good hand direct our Blindman Buffe to forsake the wine
bags and tap a fresh Vessel, the hogshead, the Host.

Poets will write whole Volumes of this scarre. How happily would a well driven
blow been placed betwixt his neck and shoulders, who durst lay barbarous hands,
(Fists, Gols, Beetles) and leave the slouches impressions upon the express of
valor? Thus the sleeping Lion is worried by a Curre. A Jack an Apes does ride
the generous horse! But oh the security of presumed victory! Chevaliers are
insensible in a pursuit, and the successful Don drencht in the Giants blood,
and trampling in it, (as the belly of an Ox for the Gout) heeds not cuffs nor
boxes of the ear, kicks in Ano, tweaks ad Nasum. But Vino tortus and Ira,

Embossed and chafed like a hunted Boar, esteems nothing but spears,
two-handed Swords, Polaxes, Cymitars, Javelins, and the like Engines of just
and Noble War; as for buffets at this present, they are like Flea-bitings to a
Leopard, not felt nor regarded.

Yet with all this did not the Poor Knight awake, until the Barber brought a
Kettle full of cold water from the Well, etc.]

(...). Water is good for any thing: It will part dogs, it will make Pottage,
and howsoe'r and wheresoe'r the Barber found out this recipe for a dead sleep,
it was no dry device, Veritatem e puteo hauriunt tantam, the truth of it is,
the very Probatum for a Lethargy, and drawn out of a deep well cures a deep
sleep. The Moon was always beholding to the Pleiades, for waking of Endymion.
I do believe the Barber learned it of a Mountebanck, and 'twas first taught
him to awaken drunken customers, who fell asleep in trimming-while, and with
the sprinkling of this Frigida, were restored to their senses again, and paid
for the nap, as well as the snip. But the circumforaneous Emperick raised his
Fame, in using this admirable Element upon any other disease. An honest Farmer
in some of the Towns, (where the Inhabitants at their proper costs and charges
paid for being cheated every Market day) was a long time vexed with a
Priapismus, which is tentigo sine voluptate in instrumento generationis. To
this Mountebanck he repaires, who having remedies for all diseases, could not
be ignorant in this; and having told his tale, O says he! gravis morbus,
acutus, perniciosus; but that you may see that I love your Person more then
your Purse, I will presently send home, and prepare a remedy for you, come an
hour hence to my house, at the sign of the Cat and Fiddle, and you shall not
fail of ease. About the time the patient came, and being brought into a
private room, the Mountebanck said, (Sir) here is a Bath made with the coolest
herbs that can be got in this place, and the most soverain Spring Water; for in
your case, every ordinary water will not serve; therefore be confident, that
after half an hours plounsing in this Bathing-tub, you will be eased of your
pain. The silly Farmer followed his advice, and the effects proved answerable
to his expectation, wherefore well sous'd and duckt he came forth, the
Mountebanck demanding of him, how it wrought with him, and whether the tumor
were not allayed, and his pain vanished? The fellow answered with chattering
teeth, (but not where they did) that it was pacified, and giving him a Fee,
departed. The Mountebanck could not contain, but acquaints his wife with the
simplicity of his new Patient, and his disease, and instructed her, that his
servant should prepare the same dose for him every morning; the Mountebanck
being one day abroad, the Farmer came for his Cure, which his wife then, having
opportunity, provided, and changed his cold Bath into a hot, but a very cross
Bath to the Mountebanck, and a horse-Bath to her self.

He was preparing double Fees for her, but she said, I am contented, satisfied,
and paid, and told him, if this Bath liked him better, he should with
convenience use it oftener. But the simple fellow not using to the Bath, so often
as he did before, one day the Mountebanck spying him, called him, and smiling,
said, well friend, I hope you are perfectly cured now, far better then
before, for you put me not into the best Bath which your wife has, and the
virtue of it yet remains, whereas your cold Bath cooled for a day, and the
next morning all was as it was before. The Mountebanck shak'd his ears, (as if
he drank base wine) and giving the fellow back his first Fees, and cursing him
for his second, desired him silence, and not let any man know, or of the cold
or hot Bath.

He laid himself on his knees before the Curate, and said; well may your
greatness, etc.] A just contrary error personae was committed at a play in
Bellosite, where the Epilogue was to be addressed to the Emperor, but the
ignorant Actor, who was to deliver his speech upon the knee, looked about for
the greatest Person among the Auditors, which proved to be the Hostess of the
Inn where it was Acted, she was set upon the Table in a great Chair, unto
whom with genuflexion, he spoke these lines: With bended knees (great Caesar) we
Address our Epilogue to thee,
Who hither in great State art come,
To see the Comaedy of Jack Drum.
Our knees do render thee obeisance,
For deighning us thy dreadful presence;
May thou grow greater still, and thrive,
Till thou art greatest thing alive.
O let thy loins so fruitful be,
To sociate all Monarchy;
And may your next stupendous birth
Be the Leviathan of the earth.


The Hostess extremely netled, left her chair of State, and ran after the
Epilogue-speaker, and gave him a very great and sound Plaudit about the Ears.

The Barber, the Curate, and Cardenio, got Don Quixot to bed again, not
without much ado, who presently fell asleep.] Three to one is odds, yield
stout heart, and think it no shame to be overcome by multitudes, and all of
them either Inchanters, or enchanted; the Barber transformed into an Ox
backward, (as homo est arbos reversa) so was Tonsor (Bos reversus:) Cardenio a
escape Goat, newly transformed into a man again; and the Curate the Inchanter,
as will appear very well to all the world, by these verses found in Cyd Hameti
Benengeli, and by a Modern Poet translated, whereby the Don was like Circes
Captives, charmed into a sleep, deep as his high thoughts.

Quixots Philtrum adsomnum, or Lullaby to a Mad man.
Deep sleep arrest thy troubled soul:
No Bird of night (enough's one Owl)
Disturb thy Quiet, Gnat nor Flea,
Approach this rare spread Canopy;
Under whose Cob-web Arches lies
The Knight that fights with fast shut eyes:
Nor of his valor meaner think;
Cowards they are that fight and wink.
Wave thrice thy Wand about his head,
Morpheus; and it shall be as lead.
Thy sleepy Tribes attend our Don,
And charm him like Endymion.
On this side thousand Dormice sleep,
As many Beetles that side keep;
Millions of winter Flies fast stick
Close to his night Cap, as a Tick:
And lest his Nose should wake the Growt for great, especially now under a
swarm of Flies. Ephialtes is the, Nightmare, but he was more troubled
Growt,
Fasten these Poppies to his snout;
Tie both his feet together well,
In this benumbed Torpedos shell:
And to secure the with his horse by the Night.
Ephialtes,
Turn him from's back, for there the fault is.
Anoint his Thighs and Calfelesse Legs
With oils of foolish Dottrels Eggs.
Nothing that eats i't'h Night be near,
Remove lanck Rosinant from his ear.
Cleanse not the Wine-bedaubed room,
It is a strong Narcotick Fume:
And that no dreams nor thoughts of fights
With Giants, Ladies, or their Knights
Unlock his Fancy or his Tongue,
Stop up his mouth with soft Mouse dung:
His head thus closed, (like to an Oven)
His tongue cannot walk, though it were cloven.
And in his ear (somewhat profuse.)
Infuse this dull Lethaean juice.
Which taken from that stupid Lake,
Will never let this prisoner wake,
Until this Philtrum backward read,
Do Un-Gorgonify his head.
And he desiring to delight them all herein, and recreate himself, did
prosecute the tale in this manner.] In this calm, if ever it is possible to
complete our parallel story of Anselmo, and as Mr Curate is ready to satisfy
his inclinable Auditors with the Lecture of me Curious Impertinent, so it is my
endeavor to convince Mr Curates opinion of the impossibility of his well
contrived, though suspected narrative, by a simile of an Incurious Malecontent.

Euphema left Sanguine exalted in his thoughts, above an ordinary
transportation; his imagination working beyond the delights of dull fruition:
whereby he took the very Pictures in the room for Ladies, and sorry to see them
no farther drawn, cursed the scanty Painter, who had not finished them at full
length. In an eminent part of the Chamber, was one large piece with a Curtain
spread before it, which tempted him to display it; which being rashly unveiled,
startled the bold discoverer, so that he stood extatiz'd at that Picture, whose
person and substance his soul thirsted for. It was Euphema in her hair, at
full proportion, in a blew rich embroidered Mantle, preparing for bed (as the
fond Clarissimo, the first night he met her, would have it pourtraicted) in
golden letters; on the top of the piece was set Aetatis 16. and in as rich
Characters underneath, read similem si possis. The lively appearance operates
so strongly on our Merchant, that he broke into many wild conceits, and amongst
them these are remembered.

Which is Euphema? or Euphema gone?
Or this in the frame? or are you both but one?
Speak, and thou art the Antitype; if she
Is silent, she must needs the Picture be.
Descend fair piece, or let me climb; I Will do it,
He that will not climb the tree, deserves no fruit.
Prosper me Venus, as the Mantle falls
Double away: These are sufficient calls.
L^quere, ut i^ videa^; si vox possit esse perspi^ex Oculi (...) vocales.
Look if her eyes don't speak! what does it say?
Trifle no longer ( Sanguine) come away.
O coward Heart! how basely will thou faint,
To draw near her, who tremblest at her Paint?
Go hang together, Pictures both; may I
Have not such life, as the rare Imag'ry.
The purple blood in Azure channel glides,
That you may see the Harveian ebs and tides.
I am a piece of Arras, only fit
To be discoursed on, where the Lady fits,
And to make ugly legs, as you may see,
The cringing wights in moldy Tapestry.
In these ^dumps, exaltations, falls and rises, a Sonnet did relieve him,
contrived by Impotentio, who like a Swanne before the death of his departing
honor, sung sweetly these lines, which by the sudden rushing open of
Euphema's Chamber door, was clearly heard and understood by Sanguine.

A Sonnet.
Come to thy Dan^e, come,
The treasure of this Room;
Care for no showers of pelf,
Only shower down thy self.
Come, my Alcmena waits,
Wrought by my subtle baits:
And both expect thy loves
As fortunate as Joves.
Crown me but Father then,
And who so proud of men
As I? who joyful know,
I am Amphitruo.
Sanguine was singularly well pleased with the excellency of the Tune, but more
really heightened with the matter of the ditty, which assured him of the near
approach of his desires; and forthwith a gentleman lighted him into a Chamber
of much rich furniture, and in it a stately bed, and not far from that place a
side-Table rich, and decked like an Altar, he followed his courteous conduct,
who opened one of the Curtains of the bed, where he discovered his Euphema
lay. The convoy presently departed, leaving him to his privacy, with a
Virgin-waxe-light, in a golden Candlestick, supported by a brace of Cupids.
Every thing was admirable, but the Venetian Paradise, which he was straight to
enter, would not permit him to fix upon any subject but its own self;
wherefore with Pigeon speed he flew into his Venus, whom he found laid averse,
and with her face from him. To whom he softly, said, Madam, it is improper now
to be coy, and therewithal he insinuated his warm hands into her Bosom,
which was as soft as silk, or the choice Down of Swanns, and with all
gentleness turned her about, her face being covered with double Tissues, he
coveted to behold, and laboring to unveile her, Madam (said he) these
Chrisomes removed, your sweet innocence will appear more singular and
ravishing; whereat Fuseilla in a language as hard as her favor, screem'd out;
Haw Taxpo I^^ysavoy?

Which in the Ancient Egyptian Characters signifies, what a Pox aile^ you? But
he bustling still to unscreen her fully, she then shreekt out, crying, O veldi
voy Thy wog. Which amounts to in the Primitive Welsh, the Devil go with you.
Her prayer was heard, for he no sooner saw the face, but he leaped from the
bed, as if the Devil had drove him, repeating a short piece of new Letany.
Sancti, Sancti omnes, liberate me
A Plutonis horrenda conjuge.


After him the night-piece ran, made more terrible by her gay and precious
outside* the strange gogling and moving her eyes, shaking her extuberant and
reverst lips, gnashing her Ivory Teeth, the menacing and clutching her sooty
fists, did so affright and terrify the poor naked gentleman, that he wished
himself transformed into any thing, but of a Hog, for fear of being possessed.
These Clamors brought back Impotentio, jealous that his design was interrupted
by some scurvy accident or other, and entering into a Patritian night-Gowne, and
rich wast-Coate, with his sword in one hand, and in the other a Pistol prim'd,
finding Sanguine in a distraction, and the cause of it at his heels,
apprehending the delusion, Osperma Diabli, are you an Actor with your
Westphalia Armor, I Will try if it be proof (said he) and immediately
discharged a Pistol at her, which lighting on her shoulder plate, bruised and
wounded the poor Moor, that she roared out so hideously, as if she were going
to her winter quarters, and falling to the ground, with her hand pointed up to
Heaven, and then down to the Earth, intimated that the Powers above would send
'um both to answer it below.

Euphemae hearing the Pistol go off, came into the room in her Night-dresse,
and a black Velvet Mantle over her, with a Book in her hand, but beholding the
sad mishap of her bleeding servant, she ran in to her succor. Impotentio
was directing his Rapier unto her Breast, when Sanguine (until then
melancholy) interposed himself betwixt her and the imminent danger, beseeching
the Clarissimo to abandon such a mischief, which though it happily befell that
Hell-Cat, yet this act would never be forgiven above, or find pardon amongst
men. But Impotentio raging with revenge, and with eyes and hands, menacing,
that what was now intercepted, should not long be deferred, spurning at her,
with language sharper then his Rapiers point, and more wounding; said, Whore!
have you used me thus? She turned her head about from the Negro, and only
replied; my Lord, that word is not yet my due, and I have done all this that it
may never be, and that your name may not be read in the vain Register of easy
natured men, or mine amongst that of over-kinde Ladies. Then turning on her.
knees to Sanguine, said, Sir, you that have been so Noble as to save my life by
a hazardous interposition of your person, proceed to higher virtue, and save,
protect, and vindicate that, which unto me is dearer, (and ought to be so to
every generous soul) a fame unspotted, a chaste Breast, and the honor of a yet
undefiled bed. Here are but two of you, and three Thieves and Murderers. My
Husband (and then she wept abundantly, will posterity believe it of a
Husband?) seeks to kill me for that he should wish me a thousand lives: And
both of you, (the worst of Robbers) have conspired to deprive me of a Jewel
the Heavens bestowed on me, and I have vowed to keep. Have you not read (Sir)
turning to her Husband, you may not kill? Look on this fainting Maid, whose
intentions to preserve chastity, argues her soul not of the same hue with her
course outside, and proves you foul within, and the worse Negro.

Have you not read, young Gentleman, (sure did you go further then the sixth
Commandment) a prohibition against this very sin? will you turn journey-man
to the Devil? take heed: She would have said more, but Impotentio heated with
rage, (unhand me friend I pray you but a moment) and with looks full of Italian
malice, said, are you preaching Mistress Knipper-Dolin? yet hear me, and obey
me too, or take this Gentleman, or death: Then looking toward the bed, nodded,
and said, that or the grave, and so biting his thumbes, a sign of fixed and
determined cruelty, he left her, calling for a servant to draw off the Moor,
and conveigh her to a lodging, where for want of timely dressing, she almost
expired. All but Sanguine and Euphema were removed, who took her gently from
her knees, weeping, and imploring Heaven for protection. In pure desire Lady of
saving Christian blood (for Pagan is already split) I prosecute (said he) your
Husbands will.

Be not, O be not your selfe-Murderer,
In your refusal life and honor's lost:
Think you your Husband will preserve your Fame?
Who would not spare your life? will he not say
To vindicate himself, you did that thing,
Which you abhorred life for? so kills you twice,
For not doing that, which done, you'^ sure to live.
Who shall, who can reveal your forced compliance?
Whom do you wrong? your Husband is most willing;
How many do the same without consent?
Only for itch of change, for no good end,
As this of yours; yours is another case,
To prosecute the end of Marriage,
Barred in your Husbands confessed impotence;
If I should fail, ten thousand sins are in it.
But Lady be as sure of that success,
As if you felt the glorious Embryon swell
In your increased Orb. -- Those are no Whores,
Whose Husbands hire supplies, and hold the doors.
Euphema hearing his blasphemies, and Hell-borne Rhetoric, fell again on her
knees, and desired his pardon, that she had given him leave to suspect her
Faith and chastity, by giving ear to his loose and impious discourse; then
calling Heaven to witness, and assist her constancy, she drew from that part,
where her buske was used to be placed, a Poniard, and turning the point upon
her self, she spoke these, as she thought her last lines: That in my soul I
may n't dye Negro-like,
When I command thee, trusty Poniard strike.
And tremble not pure han^s; your cure is good,
To let, before it be corrupted, blood:
How often have I you two, to Heaven up-lift,
That thither you lift mee's my only drift.
Open the way, that my imprisoned soul,
Return as it came thence, a spotless scrowle.
I gave you once into another power,
Now I resume you to my own devoyr.
As nature made me my defense and Guard,
Giving one blow, a hundred worse you ward.
Commanded men their Captain must obey;
Then strike, the word is given: Euphema slay.


At which words Sanguine was bloodlesse, and kneeling to her, said, Madam, if
you persist in this desperate resolution, I will not live a minute after you,
and will dye by the same Poniard, mixing at least, our bloods thus, which might
have been done another way to more content on both sides. Then with eyes full
of Majestic horror, and lovely desperateness, she said, I have a word or two
to speak, and then farewell.

I guess you are a single man, whose sports
Are, the base boasted vanquishing those Forts
That yield to your assaults; those that repel
Your lustful storms, belied, you take as well;
So that all Ladies Credits you abuse,
The honest by your slander, those you use
After, and in the Fact: your obscaene Tongue
Spreading abroad the home-made nasty dung,
Delighting in your shame: I shall take care
To keep our bodies clean, and your tongue fair.
But tell me (Sir) it is my last request,
Are you with Mother, or a Sister blessed?
With both, (best Lady) replied Sanguine, and both are in the holy state of
Matrimony, (but biting his lips, said privately, that word, holy, might have
been well omitted,) she proceeded thus: And do thou love and honor them? you
do.
But would thou count them worth it, if you knew
The one had wronged thy Fathers bed? or she
(Who doubtless has her graces, if of thee
She has as much as face) were at this time
Doing what I do deprecate? This Crime.
Me thinks I see a noble fire arise,
And glorious sparks in thy incensed eyes
Against them, and their deflourers. --


Sanguine was somewhat startled at her quaeries, yet as for his mother he was
secure, being on the worst side of fifty. But his Sister was very young, and
dear to him, and at that time about his breast hung her Picture, set in a rich
Ovall, which recalled her to his memory fresh as if she had been present, which
he was willing to divert, and therefore he desired her Ladyship to press these
points no farther, unless in bed, where, being matters of the sheets, they are
most properly treated of. Then Euphema, quite out of hopes to convert him, or
make him any way sensible of his error, resolved to try one weapon more (and
if he persisted) after that to end her life upon the Poniard.

Thou have a Mistress sure, (one of thy Love,
Not Lust) were that reputed spotless Dove,
(I deem her so, may she so for ever.)
Such as thou would make me, though thou can never,
A whore, a perjured wife, a bosome-thiefe,
A nest of Snakes? for such is the relief
Of bastard issue, which thou boasts to lend's,
Like the foul gelly from fallen stars descends.
Could thou with patience cherish her?
Reward the goatish, rank Adulterer?
And kiss those Babies as thine own, and bless
The spurious spawne of an Adulteress?
Madam, said Sanguine, I should kick her, her Barnes, her Stallion into the
air unto the Prince of it, (their Ghostly Father) but innocent Lady, though it
be true, every one should do as he would be done by, and harm watch harm
catch are good rules, yet at this time they are misapplied, and quite beside
the purpose. And to be true to you (Lady) I have no Mistress of that nature;
then straight Euphema rejoined: Suppose that I were she, as who can guess
How soon my husbands low-r^n glass may cease?
Could thou accept me for a wife, who have
Wronged my repute before he is laid t'th' grave?
Sure a pure Crystal would more pleasant be
Than a Speekt glass tainted by venomous eye.
O change thy mind, thy hopes may not be far,
Prefer no Falling to a Fixed star.


At these words Sanguine, brought lower than his knees, fell prostrate, and
beseeched her Ladyship that she would pardon his bold solicitation. And calling
Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men to witness, All that he feared hereafter, or
desired, if, Madam, (said he) you and the Fates decree me to that happiness,
and at once provide to bless me both in soul and body, it is not seven years
expectation can weary out my patience; nay, those years (though I wish not the
prolongation of my felicity) repeated would make me value my purchase the more
by the grateful stay before fruition. And I shall wish to perish to eternity
rather than add a thought more to this loathsome suit. I hate my self now for
it, (I cannot say more than I love you) but I hate my self perfectly,
villain, monster of my Sex, that came to spoil the miracle of hers; unless
your clemency raise me from this place (Madam) I will grow to it, and not look
to heaven (that is, not you in the face) until I find your serenity in assured
forgetfulness of what is past. Euphema, confident that these expressions were
not feigned, said, Sir, Your repentance does oblige me to remission of past
follies; and your protestations of fidelity are so high, that I will not
question the faith of the speaker, or have the least scruple of doubt about it.
Absolved, and credited, (my trusty and well accounted servant) let us in a
noble and just conspiracy join to elude my husbands fury and suspicion both
together, which cannot be but by a seeming loss of that ehastity, preservable
in being supposed lost. I have heard much of Platonic love, now I will make
experience of it, and in that height that Impotentio shall be satisfied in my
obedience (as he calls it) if the dutiful submission to so base an Act can
please any long. And as for you friend (when the just time for such a motion
shall permit) I am to be challenged upon the promise, which I shall not recede
from, you using the modesty and reverence of a Suitor. Sanguine, upon these
words, religiously kissed her, and confirmed his perseverance in all chaste and
civil deportments to her for ever. There hung by the bedside a rich and
glorious Cymitar, and they entering together the same sheets, it was laid
betwixt them emblematically, designing the danger of violated oaths, or else as
a Ceremony preceding (after the manner of espoused Queens) and ratifying the
Contract. Sanguine, (no doubt) wished the crooked weapon edgewaies upon
Impotentios last thread of life, that it might prove his Atropos, and make a
short cut to their desires. But checking his recoyling thoughts, he asked the
Ladies leave to charm her eyes asleep with this ensuing Song.

1.
Sublimed Love, Calcined desires,
Thoughts rarefied to harmless fires,
And muzled Flesh with blood refined,
Attend my new Platonic mind.
2.
Eyes that have taken the Covenant,
And lift up hands with pulses faint,
Stopped ears, tied tongue, dead taste and touch,
Will help the new Platonic much.
3.
Thus tamed, thus rein'd, thus mortified,
Approach the chastest Ladies side:
Rebated senses only prove
Me fit for the Platonic Love.
4.
But let our souls emigrate meet,
And in Abstract embraces greet,
(Till that the Fates permit) let us live
Intranc'd, by Love Intuitive.
Impotentio, greedy to know the news of his own dishonor, posted so soon to
his wives Chamber, that Sanguine had scarce time to return the Cymitar to its
place, and himself to his drawers; but finding his Merchant in that posture,
he saluted him as newly arrived from Cape Bonae Speranzae. And so it is Sir,
said Sanguine, to you Impotentio a night of hopes, but to me a Labor in vain.
You need not now fear your brothers intrusion on your Estate, here is (noble
Clarissimo) pointing to the most delicate Euphema. Meaning, a ^^dy in the bed,
that would not suffer any strange C^ction.
Intus existens alienum prohibens. Then ran the imaginary Wittall to Euphema,
and joyed her by the name of Mother; kissed her, and bid her love his friend,
who had done more far for her than her husband could. It was my grief (said
she) to find it so, though he has proved himself a man of honor, reputation,
and ability, and has laid the seeds of a long trust in me. It should be so
(said Impotentio) but let us think what Gossips we shall have; The Duke will
not deny me I am sure, and the great Monsieur Le Spraffe, Leiger from France.
Sanguine replied, nay Sir, think me not so able (though it is pretty well with
me) to get Children o'r night, to be borne men the next morning; we are sure of
our Workmanship according to the natural way in due time, but for miracles you
must not look. While they were in these discourses, in came an old maidservant
very ghastly with watching all night, wringing her hands, and crying, Oh my
Lord, Oh my good Madam, what shall betide me! the Moore is dead, and in the
piousest manner, as we could guess, as any Christian could dye; her hands
often lift up to heaven, sighing and making signs as if she cared not for her
own death if her Ladies were secure, and for want of timely salves expired in
my Armos. Woe is me that she died in my Arms! I shall never think well of my
self for it; I have lived these fifty years with my old Lord, and truly no
body ever died in my arms before but your Lordships gibb'd Cat (rest his
soul) that died of a bone cross his throat, and I kept my bed a month upon
it, and what will follow after this who can tell? The foolish story of the old
nurse-woman troubled Impotentio, who loved Fuseilla (though his Slave) for the
love of his wife to her, and it in wardly grieved him that by his rashness she
was destroyed. It was not long after that he sickned himself, reflecting
deeply upon the murder of the Moore, (which was openly bewailed) but the deep
touch of Conscience for the abuse of his most constant wife was the maine stab;
it was never well with the poor creature after that libbing fellow was in the
house. Hoc tibi Penelope! What be as bad and worse than her luxurious Suitors!
and now that his foolish brutish humor was fulfilled, the inhumanity and
barbarism of the Fact stung him worse than Cleopatra's Vipers, hearing the
fall of her Amors to Mark Antonie. Little Ascanius too must play in his Hall,
the long brand of his dishonor; and he reputed his, though no man could
believe it; wherefore disturbed in mind, and every day decaying in strength, he
intended to make a quiet end, though he lived, since the time of marriage very
pettishly: Considering also that the abuse of his wife was his own invention,
nothing was more worthy in his imagination then to hate her for obeying his
will, and submitting upon force and execrtable threats; and below his anger it
seemed to malign the fruit which he himself inoculated; wherefore he sent for
his brother, and reconciled the differences betwixt their Families, and
satisfied his expectations, confirming his eldest son in a fair estate; then,
sending for Euphema, said, we are now private, and you see how fast I decline,
there is no dallying, nor hypocrisy to be used, a small moment being betwixt
me and my account; wherefore as I desire it whither I am going, so I heartily
beg your pardon for my rash and ridiculous rape upon your Chastity. Conceal my
folly, (faithfullest of wives) though what I have done cannot long be kept
close. Let his name be (if a Male) Potentio, and do thou endowe him as his
manners shall hereafter deserve. The Child is innocent, (pointing to her rising
mount) and fruits of this nature, though they grow wildings, prove rarely off
the tree, and become Queen Apples, the delight of their Princesses, and
fervants of great trust; a more generous flavor, and vigorous contagion giving
influence at those stolen and illegitimate births than when legal duties are
performed. It Is not therefore that you should be ashamed of him, nor discourage
his active spirits, which that I may improve unto him, the executrixship of all
is thine, and thou can not hate what with such pains and dolours thou must
dearly buy; the Quarrels betwixt my Brother and my self composed, thou will
have no trouble but this stripling, and then he sighed and wept bitterly, being
almost at his last gasp; which Euphema perceiving by his short breathings,
instantly fell down on her knees. It Is pity (worthy soul) to let thee go out
of this world deceived, in that thing too which you do most repent of, and in
whom you think the grand blemish of your house will for ever survive; Depart,
Sir, as to that matter, satisfied in this discovery. Here is Ascanius and
Astyanax the hopeful issue of my impurity, and drawing from underneath a fine
wrought silken roll absolved him of the jealousy. This is your
Angliterra-man, which according to the times of growth, has been less or
bigger, pardon my imposturage, not long durable; for I was resolved to free you
of suspicion, Sanguine is as innocent as this roll for any act with me, nay
more innocent, for Heavens forbid, he should ever have come so near me.
Impotentio made a spring up in his bed, and kissed her, and forthwith dyed,
having confirmed her in a vast estate, and left her Convert to be her
comforter, those days of public sorrow over, they married without the
intervening of a Cymitar.

CHAP. IX.
Mine Host is wild: Here comes a Carava^,
Sing, Gaudeamus gaudia Magna, man!
What fangle now, thy thronged guests to win,
To get more Room, faith go to Inn and Inn.
Leave off Romances, and thy lies in Print,
Thy house has naught but Current Stories in it.
Things now in action, and the George must be
The Scene, and perfect the Catastrophe.
Ferdinando thinking to make sure Luscind,
Is outed there, where he had thought to have Inn'd.
And sad Cardenio, who feared all was naught,
Is from his Spouse Heroicke stoutnesse taught.
Fair Dorothaea, (hight Nicomicon)
Leaves all her Kingdom to her Champion,
(Drowsy Don Quixot) and prefers the embrace
Of Ferd'nand before the title of her Grace.
Thus Chaste Luscinda escaped her pursuer,
And Dorothaea met with her undoer.
Relations pass of several misfortunes,
And all offense is pardoned 'twixt the Curteines.
Tope it about mine Host; the wine bags now
Had been as good, as milk of the red Cow.
But O what Cordial for poor Sancho's got,
Sad beyond all refreshments of the pot!
Ungoverned, Uncardinall'd, Unlorded,
Outed of all his hopes, but not Unworded;
He sees and weeps, and with unfeigned tears,
Curses Knight-Errants, and the Fools their Squires,
Resolving to return unto the Mancha
As he went forth, an Ass, and Sancho Pancha.
TEXT.
THE Inne-keeper said, here comes a fair Troop of Guests, and if they will
here alight, we may sing Gaudeamus.] Such indeed are true Saints days to the
Hosts, and here two or more are met together; Sancta Dorothae^, an authentic
Saint; Luscinda, a Virgin Martyr; Cardenio, a devout Pilgrim; And Don Ferdinand
after his penance, joined with Sancta Clara of Viedma, (who will crowd in anon
for a lodging) may very well make holiday and a half. 'Twas very proper for
these Saints to alight at the sign of Saint George, who ^lew the Dragon which
was to prey upon the Virgin: The truth of which story has been abused by his
own Countrymen, who almost deny all the particulars of it, as I have read in a
scurrilous Epigram, very much impairing the credit and Legend of St George; As
follows.

They say there is no Dragon,
Nor no Saint George it is said.
Saint George and Dragon lost,
Pray Heaven there be a Maid!
But it was smartly returned to, in this manner.
Saint George indeed is dead,
And the fell Dragon slain;
The Maid lived so and dyed,
She Will never do so again.
Here Virginity is highly justified, not so much in Luscinda chaste in the
Nunnery, but chased out of it by the lustful Ferdinand. Indeed Dorothaea is a
pregnant proof of constancy, and disproves that vulgar error, that a blown
Rose is not so sweet as a closed, when it is well known, that a little air or
vent disperses their Odours. How much of her worth had been hidden, if her
gentlewoman had not been educated and instructed, at what times to stay, at
what times to retire from her Ladies Chamber, which is as necessary a skill, as
to pin, lace, comb, order a Beauty-speck, or make a Caudle, and eat half
on it.

I shall give you a short account of this successful meeting, as it was
translated out of the Arabian Writer into Latin, and found in his Copy, who
rendered it into Spanish.

Happy Receipt of wandering wights,
In which at once do meet
As in a Cave, after affrights,
Of stormy wind and sleet,
Aeneas and the Carthage Queen;
And what they did in the denn,
As these in the house (got to a screen)
Is guessed both now and then.
Don Ferdinand resignes his less
Unto Cardenio ragged,
Or else his days he means to pass
Upon the mountain cragged.
Luscinda double honor merits,
For playing of her game,
Who would not let his Lordships ferrets
Usurp on Rabbits t^me.
But Dorothaeas nimble wits
On Ferdinand prevails,
And makes him vow, as it befits,
They never would turn tails.
The blushing Rivals then salute,
But Ferdinand more shamed,
Desired the money, for the Brutes
Might never more be named.
The gentle Knight Cardenio,
Gave pardon and did crave,
For praising his beloved so,
Before she was in the grave.
Commend their beauties when they are gone,
When death has barred access,
Then you may safely trust a Don,
With any cold Countess.
Luscinda then, and Dorothy kiss,
The Nun, and the young wife;
Who, if her Lord had done amiss,
Must ever been at strife.
Luscinda said, that flight was it,
That saved her from that Lure,
But Dorothy said, she did submit,
And made the Thing Cock-sure.
Thus Lords and Knights were all appeased,
The Lady and the Nun,
Her stealing from the Cloister pleased
On this condition.
Let us now try whether we can find you with variety, and present a company at
an Inn as merry as these, where the guests and the Host are all jocund; and it
may chance those that hear it or read it may be as blithe as the persons in it.

It was in that Country, which is fair for its Lands, commodious for Havens,
and famous for Innes, and at an Inn in that Country, which has one Room, and
one Bed in that Room of more receipt then the Host of Andalusia's whole house:
Hither it was, where a Quaternion of Knights and Ladies resolved to take their
recreation; they were very richly set forth, both men and women; yet the
unusualnesse of such apparel, and their ill management, and odd carriage in
their bravery, made them suspected to the Innkeeper, that they were not what
they would be reputed, or else (if he was deceived in that conjecture) he took
them for some new-fledg'd gentry, lately hatched in that warm Oven, the grand
Metropolis, and had made this the first flight to air their fine, but tender
feathers, and try their wings. But the variety of their habits distracted him
more then all, which made them appear like persons of several Countries, yet
their tongue was all one, and their faces (not indeed so like, as Hertford
shire sheep) but such as might discover them to be of one Nation. A Caroch of a
substantial Axletree, brought six of them, and Monsieur Suteur, and Signior
Clippochop^ rode before to provide the entertainment, which Bill of fare the
Innkeeper (after perfect disquisition, which he partly conjectured, and partly
drank the Caroch-man into confession of) his ingenuity put into a short Canto,
in memory of his guests and their provisions.

A Sonnet,
1.
A goodly Rumbouze of Canary,
A lusty dish of eggs and Clar-ee;
Botergo and the stirring Collups
Make ready for my bouncing Trollups:
Mounsieur Suteur will have it be
For his Madama Da-plusee.
2.
A grand Sallad with oil D'Zant,
Mustrumps Muriat, (the Gods Provant)
Frogs ordered, All a Mode de France,
A larded Venisons ample Hanch;
Capon with Links and Oysters bigg,
Are for Madona Perivigg.
3.
An Hotch-potch, and Olla-Podridas,
Some roast, some sod, a meat for high days.
An All to Mall of all the Creature,
Great dishes, like the spreading Eater;
Bread, Brother, Bacon, Boutter sal^en,
Provided be for steepen Malten.
4.
A dish of Olives Genoise,
A Sheeps shoulder of the largest size,
Breast with Anchovaes sauce and Claret,
(They shall be sure to pay me soundly for it.)
Crabs, Lobsters, and the Trout of Trent,
Were dressed for Madam Corpulent.
As much of these dainties as could be, were provided, and the Innekeeper
Marshalled the dishes, being Sewer and gentleman of the Ceremonies himself; at
a round Table they sat, and intermixed, a Knight and a Lady were very
handsomely checkered; and Daplusee and Periwiga, were the best trained pair
there, and had seen fashions abroad, and were now trickt up in two great Ladies
new Gowns, which was a customary service the Mounsieur owed his wife, and at
this time his wives friend, before the Suits were carried home: Insomuch, that
his Daplusee was the most noted for new Dresses and shifts of Apparel of any
where she lived; but the Protean Tayloresse, nor her Husband Akillouse, could
never be found in the same shape above once, that their neighbors wondered
where she had supplies for their various Wardrobe. She undertook the carving,
and handsomely dispensed the cheer about; but not with so good grace did the
men carry it out, who, some slovens, and some penurious, very much disparaged
their apparel and their Ladies. For Mounsieur Suteur was espied by his wife,
scoring the reckoning of Jugs, and quarts of Wine, by the losing a button on
his doublet for the one, and his sleeves for the other. Insomuch, that had not
Daplusee taken him a Button lower, his whole set would not have served the
turn for Supper-account in liquor, for his neighbor Gallinego the Vintner,
and Flounderferkin the Brewer did so ply his little body, and his Brothers
Clippochopo so hard, that they were not able to endure the narrow precincts of
their new clothes; but unbutton'd all, and lost at once, wits and reckoning.
Their Ladies are very joyful to see them so cheerful, for they were never fit
for Ladies indeed, but when they were a little Monkey, then they are all Love;
the prettiest Cubs to play withal, that Paris Garden affords, then you may
command all, that is, their purses, which nothing will open, but the disclosing
juice of the grape. Dame Corpulent accosted their slender sisters, and told
them, lacing so close spoiled their breaths, and did very much infringe the
liberty of their bodies, and for example sake, showed them by what means
themselves came to the full extent and wideness of their skins; which was
expressed by dispatching a lusty Rummer of Rhenish to little Periwig, who
passed it instantly to steepen Malten, and she conveyed with much agility to
Daplusee, who made bold to stretch the Countesses Gown into a pledge, and
Cover and Come, which was the only plausible Mode of drinking, they delighted
in: This was precisely observed by the other three, that their moistened brains
gave leave for their glibb'd tongues to chat liberally, then every ones Suit,
Gorgets, and attire were censured, their fancies compared, every one
undervaluing the others, and highly praising their Husbands liberality, when
perchance they were the presents that some welcome servant had gratified them
with. From themselves they proceed to descant on their neighbors; and (good
lack) what faults they found every where. Mrs Almond the Confectioners wife is
much set behind, because she wanted a good Dresser, and never was pinned
handsomely, but her things stood awry. Mrs Figg the Grocers wife as much
condemned, that she had not yet left off her Hat, and put her self into a Bag;
and such a one had spoiled all her teeth before she was eighteen with Sweet
meats, that she never durst laugh without her handkerchieffe, otherwise the
woman was a feat one. And Mrs such a one never came abroad powdered enough to
take away the scent of her body; which was the cause she never came near the
fire. But above all they admired Mrs Spruce the Parsons wife, who though she
were crump'd-shoulder'd, and had other imperfections, yet her cloths were so
neatly contrived, that being dressed, she seemed as straight as an Arrow. A good
soul that, and never missed the good wives Club, though she were tied to
religious per^ormances very much at home. She was an example to the rest, and
carried the business so quickly, that after a good rowze or two, no more
signs appeared, then if she had been with her Good man at the Exercise:
Others of their sisternity (very weak headed women, frail vessels) carried not
matters so well for want of use and experience, which in a short time would be
perfected. Then from that to childbearing, and what easy labor Mrs Touch had,
and how pretty a boy, and how kind a man Mr Touch was, who let her have her
will in every thing, which no doubt is a great help toward the facilitating
those matters. It is so tender a soul, that if she should but look awry,
'twould make her miscarry; for she is true Touch, and never misses. And then to
the differences of Midwives, how comfortable Dame Short would speak concerning
patience and stoutnesse in those cases, before she had drank Sack and Sugar,
and after it how fluently her tongue walked until the time came to show her
skill, which she always performed with such success, and was so skillful in
Phisnomy, that those signs and resemblances (which we poor women could never
discern) were made so apparent to our Husbands, that they found the child to
be their own by the countenances, and those marks which Dame Short gave them to
take notice of: It has been fifty pieces in her way at times from the good
men; those discoveries which are great satisfactions and most sure restrainers
of jealousy: Other Dames on the contrary, are heavy and dull, without this
secret too, which is all in all, and want speech and encouragement fit for
women in those plights, they are harsh and imperious also, enough to scare them
more, then the business it self. From such Midwives good Lord deliver me, and
when the time shall come again (says Mrs Clippochopo.) Let Mrs Short be for
my labor; I love a short cut of it: It will not be long first, (says
Corpulent) Mr Clippochopo does it to a hair, and to that good hour, or
whosoe'r it shall be next; we fat women are not so good Breeders, it is true,
but we envy not your forwardness, as shall appear by this full Carowse, and
to you Steepen Malten, to the next rise amongst us, be it right or wrong.
Softly that, said Dame Suteur. All this time the Knights played it at Dutch
Gleek, and had so vied it, and revied it, that they were all Honors in their
faces, and Toms by their stradling, and now they are for their Tibs, who had
played fair, and made never a Reneg all the time. The Knights went every one
first to his own Lady, and then his friends, and did so smouch them, that the
lippe-frolicks were heard into the Kitchen, which fetched up mine Host, who
very much welcomed his Noble Guests, and joy'd to see the strong affections
they bore to one another. He asked their Ladyships, what refection they would
have before bedtime. All were for a Sack Posset, you shall have one, you may
swim in, (said mine Host) Quickly then (said the Ladies) with expedition
Madam, and with spice enough. In this space, they agree to ly in the grand bed,
and to avoid errors, they disposed of themselves, for the first pair, female
on the out side of Male, Male next to that Male, then two females, next two
Males, and a Female utmost. Thus they made all secure, by the contrivance of
their wives, whose judgments at the instant were the quicker. Fresh lights
brought up, came a Cauldron of Posset, which the Host (fully satisfied of their
quality) had besprinkled with some Pulvis Crepitorius, the Inne-keeper staid
and saw such mannerly feeding, that he blessed himself, and thankt Heaven that
posset was no meat that he liked, much good do you Gallants said he, this is
lusty stuff, warm, and wholesome. True Myn-here (quoth Steepen Malten) we
shall not hear of this again; But for your goods, quoth mine Host, and
wishing them good rest, he sent his maids to attend them to bed.

Four handsome Girls presently appeared and proffered their service, but the
Ladies desired only to know the places of conveniences, and so dismissed them.
And with good speed they did Abigail it each to others, until all being ready
for bed, they had very much ado to make the Knights (laden with posset and
Canary) to observe the order of their bed-postures as was prescribed. After a
small rest, the Posset worked with a powder, and from the north side of the bed
Steepen Malten gave such a warning piece, that alarmed all the quarters near
her, and Corpulenta (being her self a petty garrison) returned two guns for
one; Daplusee and Clippochopo laughing so violently at it, broke into consent
with them, and did peale it about, and sometimes ring the Changes so merrily,
that the continual noise waked the dull Knights, who no sooner stirred, but
Flounder Ferkin gave a broad side, which almost spoiled all the tackling of the
bed, and now the other three upon the report of the last, like Block-houses,
did so play their great Guns, that there was naught but smoke and stench, the
Wind being in every ones Face. It was a night of high service, and great
action, but the wind a little appeased, a storm came suddenly, the men running
to the Close-stooles, the women to the Looking, or Leaking-glasses, (where they
sat not so sweet as Roses and Flowers in a garden-pot) but wondering at the
mischances, each complained, and heard one another tails very dolefully,
crying, It was never so with me before; O, I have played the beast, says
another; Daplusee could not hold, but went to it without measure; and Dame
Clipp. wished for her husbands Basin, these utensils would not contain;
Insomuch that they were enforced to the Chimneys, where like Hawks on a perch
they sliced it, while their Males were for casting and muting together. It
began now to be daylight, and by the waggery of the Host the Musicians were
tuning, but alas their Cats guts were instantly out-sounded by the loud music
within, which so confounded them, that they could not hear themselves;
wherefore they sent for their Hoboyes, Cornets, Sackbuts, and other great
Instruments, and then the aires within were higher and hotter than those
without, which put the Music to a retreat from the doors. But they knocked at
length, and sent the Music a reward by a maidservant, which was of a good
smell enough, though the Bringer very nicely held her nose whiles she gave it;
The Maid called for more help, and forthwith the four girls, whose hands they
refused overnight, were scarce sufficient for their night-worke; But Daplusee
had so sweetened the maids in the Palm, that they began silencing without
missing, and mine Host, understanding the lanck state they were in, provided
very comfortable Caudles for my Dames, and a Gallon of burnt Clarret for the
Knights, which (with the reckoning) went down very current and glib. Their
stomachs at ease, they resolved to dine nearer to the Metropolis, ashamed to
stay any longer at that Foul nest; so they called for the Coachman, who put
the horses in readiness, and received them again, a great deal more
comfortable carriage than they were before. And now we must return to
Andaluzia, where by this time the Don is uninchanted from sleep, and no sooner
awakened, but his Squire Sancho brings new fears upon him, and destroys all
the Design of the Kingdom, the Government, and his hopes of the Princess of
Nicomicon, which puts the Don upon fresh actions, as you may hereafter read.

CHAP. X.
Quixot will not be undeceived, and finds
No pleasure like the error of crazed minds.
Sancho and all his visions are confuted,
And will again be Squire of Arms reputed.
The hopes of the Island buzzed into his noddle
Has filled it up with a strange scheme and model
Of Future Government; now Ferdinand
His Dorothy may kiss, or lead in hand;
Sancho unmoved, who will make good his part,
And laid his errors on the Magic Art;
Which well the Squire in ignorance might keep,
When that the Knight enchanted was so deep.
But when the Captive Turk and stately Moore
Came to the Inn (as he thought to implore
The Queen to speed away) his heart was full,
And lifted up as high as the Mogull.
No less the Don does burgeon, and once
Again comes on Mambrino's battered sconce.
Look to 't you blacks, our Knight secured of the score,
With His Basin comes to wash a Black-a-moore.
TEXT.
SAncho as we have said was only sorrowful, and thus he entered with melancholy
semblance to his Lord, etc.] Sancho gives the Don a good day after an evil
night, in as bad an hour, and as mad a tune, and as sad a tone.

I Will come, I Will come again to thy wits,
We Will make it working day.
O done thy cloths, and doff thy Dons fits,
The fool in arms no longer play;
We never shall take Castles more,
Nor Queens thy nonsense aid implore.
No live-Gyants shall fall,
Nor bored wine bags at all,
But the World shall see
What very very Cockscombs we be.
Yes indeed (Sr) so it is, we be Three may be inscribed over our heads, and no
injury to the Reader, for we are no small fools. The Queen of Micomicona is
turned to Dolla Roba Bona, wife to the Duke of Andalusia's second son, you
lost your opportunity. At these words Don Quixot very much wroth, said; Is not
the Giant slain? is not his head
Presented to the Queen, in triumph lead?
Is not this Ocean in the Room, the Sea,
The red Sea of his foul Phlebotomy?


I (Sr) said Sancho, when his head was struck off, then these Rivers of blood
flowed from him, and in the tide his head also ran from us. Mr Quesada, I
entreat you act not beyond the play. All Is done, the Knights done, the Squires
done, the Ladies done, and we are undone; good Sir, retire into your self
again, for you have been Errant too long; have you no concealed Royals,
Dolars, or old Gold quilted in your doublet or wastband? This blood calls with a
vengeance, mine Host calls, his wife bals, it is not the blankets, a toss or two
into the air will satisfy; The Ass (my Lord) will be laid by the ears for
it. Pray look about you, do you not smell the Fe Fa Fum of the Giants blood?
Here is the Giants skin, this wine-bag pierced indeed by your Killsa-hog, poor
Borachios, would they had been in your belly, (not for my part) then my Ass
had gone for somewhat, but to part with it for a dry reckoning, and with dry
basting too, for that will be the end of it; Sir, can you hear it and not
weep, not for the Ass Sir?

If thou do well remember, I told thee when we were last here, how all that
succeeded here was done by Enchantments.] Sir, said Sancho, were the hoysts in
the Blanket an Enchantment? is mine Host (the same foul beast now and then) an
appearance? a Vision with all that load of flesh upon his back? It Is true, he
has proved a Devil incarnate, Wife, Daughter, and Maid to me, and your turn
is next, for you have a very ill-favored score at the letter Q. which stands
for your whole name. Give me my clothes quoth Don, will your search your
pockets (good Sir,) or feel about the stiffnings where your hoard lies? what
do tell me of scores (quoth Quixot) think thou I Will take chalk for cheese,
were they hundred of Scores, am not I able to sweep 'um off with a wet finger?
Sancho sighed at his high frenzy, and weeping for fear of the loss of his
companion, the Ass, well Sir said he, show your self a man of your hands then
this time, and deliver us from this chalky way: I tell thee Sancho, I will not
leave thee, till thou have seen the Milky way, and I have made thee and thy
Ass a Constellation, Dyonagri I Will have you called. This Milky way is even
home again (thought Sancho) to the Dairy at the Mancha, and my poor Ass must
be a Stallion.

I am informed (beautiful Lady) that your greatness is annihilated, and your
Being destroyed, for of a Queen, you are become a particular, etc.] The Don
would have said (if he had considered the condition she was in) that her
Greatness was augmented by the proliferous Contagion of Don Ferdinand, a
brother Don, and until this instant Errant; the Magical Father Don is at hand
to justify his work, which though it were a deed of darkness, yet it will
come to light, without your man Midwifry; nor was it in his thoughts, to
diminish your abilities at the acting of it, or require them, the business
being a single Duel without partners or Chirurgions: And as for the Giant so
lately beheaded by you, the witnesses are alive that saw your valor. The Host
here made a serious interruption, and told him to his teeth, that the Giant was
two wine bags; Fool said the Don, they were the Giants two wine-pipes, for he
had every thing double, but his head, and that doubled with us two: But the
Host commanded silence, the Don proceeded, and embold'ned the Lady to slight
her Negromancing Father, and reply upon his arms for restitution; Si Pergama
dextra
defendi possent, etiam hac defensafuissent.


The Queen a^swered with a very good grace and countenance, on this manner.]

Coram quam suspicis adsum. Who has endeavored (Heroic Sir) to rob me of my
person, my State, mine Honor, and what is most tender to me, your good opinion
of me? I am all the same, (except this misconstruction) and my expectancies as
high of your performances as ever. Drive home, Sir, your great design and
mine, and I shall accompany you unto the journies end. To you I attribute these
beginnings of my joy, these Noble friends, who never had set eye on me, but
that your name, like a Landmark, guided them to this Inn. Give leave most
sufficient Knight, that these may be joy'd witnesses of your great actions,
they shall not need to lend a hand to your assistance; the fame of your motion,
and approaches to the place, will be a terror to your enemies, and half the
Victory, the rest submission; only some few excepted Persons, who will stick to
the Giant in that memorable battle, wherein you are to gain me what I long
desired, and your self eternal fame, which you deserve.

Don Quixot having heard her, turned him to Sancho, with very manifest tokens
of indignation.] O unpolisht Knight; not so much as an obeisance or the bend of
Mambrino's Helmet to the Queen, after her so eminent and clawing Oration! But
fury does transport him, and choler against his Squire has wholly envenomed
his spirits, which are as fiery now, as they were dashed before. Now he will
vanquish all Giants, Knights, Monsters and Squires, in the person of Sancho in
saeculae saeculorum. One emanative blow, shall transfuse it self vigore and
impulsu agentis, unto the right ears of all lying Squires in the world, who
being called to the proof of the sense, not reason of this chastisement, shall
find for the Don, that they had aflation on the right cheek, and justice
themselves worthy of Cuffs a piece for their pains.

Good my Lord replied Don Quixot, I do highly gratisie the honor that is done
me.] Mark now, who is more Courtier then the Don? who fairer or more
mealy-mouthed then the Knight of the Ill-favored face? words I Will promise you
very shrewdly placed, and to good advantage (for the trepidations about the
rescue of the slaves, were not off the Don nor Sancho neither) and a friend in
Court is better then money in Purse. This was a sure Proverb with the Don, and
much of his direction. Now thoughts of action are laid aside, and the Don too
for a while. Room for fresh Gamesters, here is a Chesse-board to my Hosts
Noddy-board, Moors and Xtians.

A pure white and a black,
Knight and Lady that lack
A Lodging for a night a,
E'n shuffle together,
A Ewe and a Weather,
And have the same delight-a,
Don himself he will watch,
That no harm do you catch,
What ever him betides-a-.
But O the mischance,
The sluts force him to prance,
And on his feet to ride-a-.
O behold how he hangs,
In most pitiful pangs
A sullen Ladies Martyr,
Yet grinning honor wins,
And drops down from his ginns,
Knight of the hempen Garter.
Our Great Don's in a noose,
Who will the Knight loose?
The Wenches have no mercy.
Upon Hecate call,
To Nightmare, and Hag, all,
Or make 'um Sow's O Circe.
The Stories of the Moor and Captive, (as that of the curious Impertinent) I
shall strive to equal by the like, where a Christian Lady falls in Love with a
handsome youth, and follows him, through many dangers, being enforced to try
her woman's wits to compass him: But the Don a while will deprive you of the
tale, being very highly taken up with a discourse of Learning, most unhappily
seizing his head, when he should have put bread into it, in collation Time; A
thing very few Scholars or Soldiers are guilty of. So that by the practice of
those Professors, the Don should have little correspondence or interest in
either, yet in his own person he seemed to be compacted of both. His Man-like,
dreadful and Ill-favored Face, render him a son of Bellona; his lank
Barebone sides, a son of Minerva, wherefore he undertakes both parties,
though with a resolution to vilify and undervalue Learning. Behold the wise,
politic, and Learned Ulysses, and the rash, stout and magnanimous Ajax, bound
up in one Don Quixot, and a Theater of Knights, Lords and Ladies, with a crowd
of Clownes, Cockscombs, and other Auditors all assembled to hear who shall
win Achilles Armor. It had been very well for the Don (if that such a prize
had been at stake) for his own Arms were most pitifully battered, antique,
and rusty. But here was no reward for his Oratory, go it how it would, only
empty praise, yet success in Arms, as he promised to himself, in the design
for the Kingdom of Micomicona, might raise him to a fortune few Soldiers of
Fortune arrive unto. But I fear this wit-Combate, will prove a drawn battle,
and neither Scholar nor Soldier get any thing by the contention: However the
Don's Rhetoric, Pro and Con will delight you, to whom speculations of this
nature, were meat, drink, and cloth.

Surgit ad hos Dominus male fracta Casside Quixot. CHAP. XI.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Thy Brother wanderer is turned thy foe.
O simple Knight, O Dulman Ignoramus!
Were not for Scholars, how came you so Famous.
What are your Castles, Ladies, and your fightings,
Inventions only, and the spawne of writings.
Search all the Mancha, all the World o'r look,
No Quixot will be found, but what is in the book.
Quixot Contra Arts.
Proh Jupiter inquit,
Ante rates Causam, and mecum confertur Ulysses?
O Jove! what have I lived to see,
Any wise thing compared to me?
THey seem not to understand well, (great confluence of Queens, Princes,
Peers, Knights, Squires, Ladies, Clergy and Commons, who knew not that Minerva
or the great Goddess Pallas is equal Goddess of Arts and Arms, and that the
Purple of the Field as well as the schools, the green Laurel of the Bar,
and the gilded Laurel of the Standard, are both her Donatives, Largesses, and
rewards, and though she appear as often Armed, as in her Candid, and pure
Robe, yet these men of the Quill very much ingross her to themselves, and will
allow us men of the blade, a very small or no share in her. Something indeed it
is they say, that She her self being the offspring of Jupiters brain, Sine
Matre Filia, they may lay greater claim to her, because all their labor is
opus Cerebri, the sweat of the Pericranium; a little noddle intention, or
headache perchance, which when they have hammered it out, they call it
Sapientia; and by this means would shuffle us from Jove's Head to his Thighs,
where he preferv'd a young plumpe Godling called Bacchus, after the death of
his Mother Semela; from him they say we have an interest in Jove, but removed,
and by that means, have cozened us of a yard of Jupiter at least, and having
procured a Numen for us, say from Bacchus the God of Wine, and consequently of
quarrels, our profession at first sprung. It Is true, that the Cradle of our
Deity (they will allow us) was the strength of his Father, but what, will they
make only football players of us? they shall find it contrary; or if it be
so, that the ball is the world, and we carry it upon our Toes before us.
Another argument they have from the nine Muses, who all of them seem (except
some one pitiful whiner Melpomene) to be their Patroness, and that Apollo,
when he is an Archer, is not President of the Company. O Generations of
fictitious mynters! who knows not that Apollo is a Deity Errant, and runs o'r
the World once in 24 hours, slew the great Dragon Py^hon, which was the
leading adventure to all ours, and would have relieved the Lady Daphne, but
that he was enchanted into a Bay Tree; yet though he could not win her, he
does wear her in sign of his true affection about his brows for ever. Out of
the number of the nine Muses they have excluded our Goddess Indignation and
Eris, which themselves say are Poetical, Facit Indignatio versum. Those are
verses now with stings in their tails. Lycambaean Poetry, lines will make
their subject hang themselves; And, they have thus cheated the world with the
height and antiquity of their original, they think to o'rcome us with numbers
too, laying claim to all Merchants, Pylots, Seamen, Architectours, Masons,
Carpenters, Shipwrights, as their alumni; things that live out of the
Mathematics. Then they bring Fiddlers, Barbers, Harpers, Dancing Mrs, Singing
men, Choristers, Ballad singers, Coblars, and Plowmen, the heirs of Music;
and then a Regiment of Factors, Scriveners, Usurers, Vintners, Tapsters,
Cooks, Writing-Masters, Almanack-makers, Fortune Tellers, Surveyours, Brewers
Clerks, Bakers, and all Tally-men, marching under the account of Arithmetic.
To these they join Historians, Poets, Schoolmasters, Divines, Advocates,
Attourneys, and Solicitours, Booksellers, Printers, all of them are most
dependant upon Grammar, Rhetoric and Logic, so that by their good wills, they
will not leave a man for Arms, unless he be a Porter, a Vagrant, or a decaid
Gentleman, Bankrupt, a Waterman, or journey men Tailors; who yet contend
mightily to be under some of the seven Sciences, though not as they are
liberal: Shoomakers pretend to a Gentle Craft too, but honest kill-Cow, he is
ours: The Butchers are not denied us, though they are not allowed to be de Iure
Pacis, they are de Iure Belli. This one profession is enough for our work, to
cleave such a company of Calves-heads, as they have mustered up together.
Another thing they object, that their pains exceed those of the Soldier; by
how much spiritual or mental pains transcend corporal. Indeed the
Schoolmasters pains is somewhat, and the scholars under him more, but that is
all corporal.

Huc ades, haec animo concipe dicta tuo. A very fair invitation to a poor
Commons, which ends most commonly in lachrymae; or a Parce precor, Posthac
aeternum versificabor. Is that animo concipere? Truly the Schoolmasters and
Tutors (whether at the Universities or at home) are most necessary instruments
in a Common wealth; for without the seeds of knowledge, reading and writing,
understanding the principles of learning, the rule and direction to higher
matters, (whether in Arms, Law, Physic, or Divinity) no man could serve his
Prince, or be useful to the places where he was bred. These men that thus
discipline, and train up our youth in civil behavior, decency, good manners
and knowledge, are men worthy of double honors, that is, stipend and reward,
yet you need not be at two charges for it, of a Ruling Schoolmaster, and a
Teaching Schoolmaster, it all being the excellency of one man. The Government
and discipline of the School, instills as much as the Masters presence and
instruction: And it were to be wished, that Parents, Guardians, and others whom
it concerns, would reflect upon the men of this condition, with as good an eye
of favor, as on those especial Officers of the Hawks and Hounds, which
appurrenances to great Families, commonly are gratified in a better sort, per
annum, for the training of a whelpe, or making a Hawke, then the other
professors are for educating a son, and fitting him for the World. A decrepit
Huntsman or Falconer may have a quietus, and go with a Coppy-hold, or some
small annuity, when after the polishing and preferring of a hundred Scholars
successively, a Schoolmaster shall have only his punctual Minervall, and so
leave him to his Mill, to weary out his life like a Horse with continual
exercise, forgot alike, by Parents and Scholars, unless it be a Seneca or an
Aristotle, whose scholars were very able men and Soldiers, Alexander and Nero:
Yet this latter wished a Nesciisset Literas, the knowledge of Arms being more
suitable to a Prince then books. And Alexander loved Aristotle, and admit'd him,
but followed the Camp, and left him to his Parva naturalia. Caesar also was a
great Soldier and Scholar, and I only wish my self more learned then I am,
for the commendations given of him; he wrote with the same Genius that he
fought. Now were Don Quixot so enabled, what Comments would the World have of
his adventures, and how plausible? The Arcadia would be laid by, Polenander set
aside, and only Don Quixot would be the studdy and delight, and taking Legend,
with all that love Arms, or to Arm Ladies. And for this very end only, I can
admit of some small familiarity with learning, for it did highly inflame me to
read, well worded, and in expressions answerable to their actions, the Famous
Wars of King Pippin, the Giants, and the Gods, and Hercules, besides Fleximart,
Don Gateer and D' Amadis, which I have at my fingers ends. But otherwise for
Learning, it is a mere cheat, and the grand Professors like Soothsayers,
laugh one at another. The Grand Signior and Soldier of the World, allows of no
Learning. Plato banished Poets out of his Commonwealth; and how many now
adays run up and down the World, having all things in their heads, but bread.
It had been better to know nothing, then to know want; yet they will answer him
in some stoicall sentence, it is better to know how to want, then want
knowledge. Enjoy the Paradox good Pincht-Belly, while I show the men of the
times, men of the first times in these last; men of gold, who came not into the
World to be served last, or starved at last.

Arma tenenti
Omnia dar, qui justa negat.
He that a sword has got,
Commands the Pottage pot.
Vivitur ex rapto.
He that can catch and hold,
He is the man of Gold.
And so I leave the Scholar, rather pitying, then triumphing over him.

Of Arms. Most illustrious Queen, and by your residence, glories, presence,
and derivative rays, eminent and conspicuous Confessors. I know full well,
that the Tree of Knowledge, was the most glorious pleasant stock of Paradise,
but yet forbidden, the bold attempting to know above what they should,
disposfest the aspirers of that beautiful Garden, and gave the first occasion
for Arms in the world; a Flaming sword being set for an eternal bar upon
the pass, that they should not re-enter. A long time it was before wars came
in, (though a fourth part of the world was murdered by his brother) as the
generations of men multiplied, then societies, Kingdoms and Governments were
erected in several places, and good and wholesome Laws invented for the
security of Meum and Tuum, every man's right; the Vindex of which laws, (if
they were infringed) was the public Magistrate; but sometimes the multitude
offending, the Delegated Power could not restrain 'um; wherefore he was
enforced to call in help, and friends, to set all right at home. And to prevent
future insurrections, they raised a Military Power, which stood for the defense
of the Magistrate, against contempt and violence, so that the same strength
served against civil Commotions, and foreign invasions. At home the soldiers
life was easy and grateful; But when he was commanded to draw forth, to
avenge the injuries offered to the Prince, then his life is worth taking notice
of; what long Marches? what tedious Sieges? what short allowance? what thin
accoutrements? what dangerous duties? and what gallant ends? Well said our
Poet, Multum ille, and terris jactatus and alto.

There Is tossing for you, Scholars, a little more troublesome then rattling
chains in a Library, and tumbling old musty Authors from morning till night,
not a line there hurts you, but from one of our Lines, perchance a hundred
commanded men, may have their ultima linea rerum. This is our Rubric, (the
Scholars) the letter which does immortalize, or rather Canonize us. A vengeance
take all Gunnes, Bullets, Powder, and the Authors of them. Printing and they
were about an age, and the Devil knows which is the worst. They were made for
dispatches, very right, the one makes the quarrel, and the other defends it,
and both sides rue it. And yet you Scholars say, that the Sword was more
destructive then the Ordnance, Herquebuzze, or any Powder Engine. The noise
forsooth, the terror, the sudden dispatch of a party, saves the rest of an
Army sometimes, and induces a summons to a Treaty; as King Henry with his
letherne guns obtained it before Bulloigne, whereas, when the matter was
disputed by the Sword and Javelin, a major part must be slain, before the
Generals could tell which side had the better: No, Sophister, no such matter,
the business was effected with less blood, or at least, blood of less
moment. In the ancient wars, before these Bombards, Blunderbushes, Petars, or
salt Peter, (the Devils Ale-Tubs were ever tapt.) The very name of Caesar,
Hector, or any famous Officer, routed a wing, a Legion, as soon as it was heard
they were in the Field: And therefore contend no more for your two black coats,
the Monk and the Devil, who were the contrivers of these murderous Engines,
whereby an Alexander, an Achilles, a Solomon or a Solomon either; the wise man
and the valiant fall undistinguished without knowing their enemy, or showing
any experiment of their undoubted strength, or subtle stratagems in war; so it
may befall our self ( dread Queen,) at the siege of the chief Castle, that
some misguised Bullet (which Heaven forefend) may deprive you of the man, who
slew indeed the Giant, and laid all wast before him, conquering by his high
fame, as much as his known prowess, and yet behold the Heroes, how he lies, the
Triumph, and the spoil of a piece of Lead!

I have a whole Field to expatiate in the praise of this Ancient and Honorable
profession, which throughout the world is formidable; what Land can you come
into, but you shall find the Monuments of some great Battles surviving in
Stones, Cuts, and works in the ground, Pillars, Coins, Inscriptions, Arms with
Bodies, of an incredible weight and stature buried, and commonly found? What
has set your brains on work more, then the Histories of fighting Princes,
the Greeks and Trojan war, the Field of Pharsalia, enobled by our Country man
Lucan, and the like; when all the stock of wit was vented, in flattering the
victorious side, although in your affections, you were for the beaten party.
Pro Verre, or contra Verrem; it is all alike to you, you turn as round as a
Pigg, in all disturbances for the success: We fight it, you enjoy the profits
of it. It were good policy, in my Imagination, to change and shift callings,
and sometimes the Soldier should spend a year or two in a Gown, enjoy a
Government, a fellowship, and others, while the Scholar does lead a Company,
traile a Pike, th^^ they may experimentally and judiciously discourse of the
several excellencies, pains, and labors of both these professions. How many
bloody rounds are there to be clim'd in the scale of military honor, before
you are at the top of preferment? and how many brave souls perish in the
getting up, every step being under-watch'd with Dragons, Lions, Tigers and old
Mors himself. If a Scholar obtain not his desires, it is his own fault, very
few miscarry, if they will make themselves able, and apply to the right way;
study, and be thrifty, take heed of Alla: To: and especially have a care, when
they are young students, not to intoxicate their noddles with hot loaves and
butter, pudding Pies, and penny Custards, which make dunces, and clotpates. And
thus I have discharged this undertaking of the preeminency of Arts and Arms,
which later does as much exceed the other, as a sword does a Pen knife, or a
Campania, a Brown studdy.

Dixit;
Quid vocis precium? siccus petasunculus, aut vas Pelamidum?
A dish of Plais^, or Spanish Bacon, had been meat for a better Rhetorician,
but it falls out otherwise.

Arms great Defender, and of Truncheons,
Prates himself out of's after-noons Luncheons.
The Curate applauded his discourse, affirming, that he had very good reason
for what he spoke in favor of Arms, and that he himself was of his opinion.]
An applause obtained like that of a Play, most ridiculously penned and acted,
where the Auditors (who notwithstanding, convinced in judgment to the
contrary) durst dislike nothing, but gave great Plaudies to most things that
were to be hissed off the Stage with the Speakers; but the exhibitors of that
show politiquely had placed Whiflers armed and linked through the Hall, that it
was the spoil of a Beaver hat, the firing a Gown, beside many a shrewd
Bastinado, to look with a condemning face upon any solaecisme, either in
action or language. Mr Curate was therefore well advised, who allayed his
spirit of contradiction, and submitted to the Whifling Knight Errant, with the
Ill-favored face.

Don Ferdinand entreated the Captive, to recount unto him the History of his
life.] And here indeed follows a story, will captivate the hearer, it being
full of fine changes of misfortunes, and as sweet and pleasing conclusion; for
Phillida has her Corydon, and Corydon has his Phillida. It' is ( praeter
institutum) not my intention to undertake these serious stories, but as before,
with an exchange, which will be no robbery; only the Argument I shall present
unto you, of the 12 13 and 14 Chapters, and so proceed to the Barter; like some
simple Concionator, who naming his Text in a Country Auditory, shut the book,
and took leave of it, for the whole hour, as if it had been a dangerous thing,
and not to be handled.

CHAP. XII, XIII, XIIII.
Old Perez of Viedma, out of Lion,
Sent forth three sons, which the whole world had eye on;
The Father squared his state quadri-partite,
And left himself, but a child's portion right.
Three way's his old Mercuriall fingers showed,
And each one was to honored ends a rode;
The Church, the Seas, the Court; high ways all three,
By three made good, Wit, Valor, Industry.
Each son took's several track: But Ruy Perez,
The craggy path, where Honor linck'd with fear is.
Our Captiv's for the Wars, and his first trial
Was fiery, but of engagement royal.
Have you not heard of that great Navall fight,
Sped before Lepanto? when the Turks Moon light
Was so eclipsed, The half moon is the grand Signior's Ensign and Badge.
that the proud Selim. Emperor of the Turks.
Ottoman
Resigned his title to the Ocean:
Thinking his Prophet false, and Christ's command
Was o'r the Seas, but Mahomets on the Land.
But the next year, Don John of Austria
Proved Mahomet a Liar every way;
And by the loss of Tunez the Turks found,
Their Prophet could secure, nor Seas nor ground.
In those brave services our Captiv's lot
Was to be ta'n, while others Laurel got.
Not basely ta'n, for John Andraeas Gally,
Sailed to the succor ('against the proud King of Argiers, and afterward made
admiral of the Turks whole Fleet by Selimus.
Uchally)
Of Malta's Admiral distressed; there he
Was Captain, there he showed his company
A piece of Valor; and alone did leap
Vnseconded, upon a Barbarous heap
Of Turks, who fearing our supplies, away
Sailed from the assault, proud of this single prey.
Honored Viedma (glorious in they chains,
Tugging at the Oar, a most ignoble pains!)
Does not disturle thy worthy soul, prepared
For anything, that is high and also hard.
But the Goleta, and the Fort, Don John of Austria King Philips Brother built
it.
Don John
Built for a stop toth' Turks ambition,
Lost in thy sight, and Christian blood
Flowing about the Trenches where it stood.
Thy Countrymen like dogs interred, and those
Hardy Commanders did their lives expose;
Don Pedro De Puerto General,
And learned and stout Don Pedro of Argivall:
Both taken, both the glory of thy Spain,
Thy heart broke then, to see those in a chain.
Then slavery was slavish, and their Oars
More wound thee, then the strokes of Turks and Moors.
Uchali Fertax the scall'd Runnagate,
(So was he nick-nam'd by the Turkish state)
Died after this defeat, and a third part
Of all his wealth and slaves, (an Ottoman Art
Practiced along byth' Roman Emperors)
Went to the Turk, his sure inheritour.
In that division (...) a Runnaga^^ from Venice, taken prisoner by Vealli, then
Pyrat, was after his death made King of Argiers.
Azanaga got
A thousand slaves, and he was of his lot.
The Kingdom of Argiers the Turk bestowed
Upon this runnagat; thus honors flowed
Upon a Catamite, Porus to his Prince,
A Ship-boy first, and now his Eminence.
In our new chains and caps, Him and his Peers
We ro'd with merry looks unto Argeirs;
Not for his greatness joy'd, but 'cause that Spain
Was near, and might once more be seen again.
Which Heaven procured, for unsuccessefull we,
'Said often to escape, but 'twould not be.
But this was providence indeed; a Moor
Of great account, and of excessive store,
Lived next the Baths, a place for their best slaves,
Where hopes of ransom, the poor captive saves
Amidst these Baths, as at Bethesdas Pool,
An Angel did refresh our fainting soul.
Upon the Prison Battlements, we used
To walk, and thence our sighs and Prayers transfused
Toth' Powers above, observed it seems we were
From the Moors windows, whence there did appear
A Cane with something to'^. The Cane did play
Full upon us, and pointed to our way:
One of our company did step aside,
And to our waving Meteor near applied;
At his approach the blessed Phenomenon
Drew in its self, as if it would be gone.
As he retreated, it again shot forth;
Then went a Gentleman of noble worth,
With like success; and so the third; the Cane
Waved off, and made their hopes and prosers vain.
Our Captive was the last; who knows (said he)
Whether this Omen be reserved for me?
Or whether fortune has a proud intent,
To play upon us by some instrument?
He tried his luck, and the descending Lint
Fell from the Cane, with ten Zianiys Certain pieces of base gold used among
the Moors, and are worth each of them ten Rials of Spanish money.
in it.
A cross of Canes was then put out; which sign
Made us of Christian Captive there divine;
Who pitying our estate, lent these supplies,
Wishing her self and us quick liberties;
And after it a glorious hand appears
So white, that it dismissed all jealous fears.
Then in the Turkish manner we inclined
Our heads, in token of a thankful mind.
This for a time cheered up our hearts, and we
Nothing omitted of discovery,
To know the place, from whence our Golden shower
Descended, but alas it rained no more!
A noble Moor Arguimorato cal^'d,
(And Constable of Pata late installed)
Lived there, and that was all which we could learn,
Nor hand, nor Cane, nor Cross could long discern.
At last our Phosphorus restored the day,
And chased dull thoughts from our sad hearts away;
The Cane like to a blazing Star Crinite
Greater appeared, (but yet did not affright)
We tried, as once before, whose it might be,
But it proved only falling star to me.
I gathered up the Deodate good Gold,
And a white paper did our bliss infold,
Wrote in Arabian tongue, (not understood
By any of us) so we only showed
Signs that we would read it, and the Cross was kissed
Before her eyes, and that the hand dismissed.
O now for a secure Interpreter,
Who might our mystic happiness transfer!
A Murcian Runnagate, one of sure trust,
And long experience, this unravell must:
The fellow vowed all faith and secrecy,
And rendered it in Spanish presently.
The joy'd contents declared that the white hand
A Christians was, and longed for Christian land.
Daughter unto the Moor, trained up by one
(A Christian Captive) in Religion;
And since her death (for twice she had appeared)
She charged me be by Lela-Marien steered,
And she would bring me to her fonne, the God
That came from Heaven, and there makes his abode.
She would direct me, she a Husband give,
With whom I should in shining Goshen live:
And thou brave Christian, above all the rest,
Have made a Conquest of my Virgin breast;
Thy manly gate, thy presence in thy chains,
Shunning the blushing shackles and the trains
Of Captive gallants pacing in thy tread,
Shows thee a L^ad^r, and no common head;
Besides thy high erected looks and eyes
Lift up so often to Lela Mariens skies,
Render thee sprung from thence, no humane race;
Blame me not (Sir) to covet so much grace.
If thou be free, I like thee of all men,
Take me, and bless us Lela Marien:
And for thy chains, and fellows, soon as they
Can know the ransom, ready is the Pay:
Be wise and secret (Dear) contriv^ it so,
No Creatures but our selves the plot may know.
Aguimorato, if he should descry,
(As he is made of naught but jealousy)
Wee'r ruined all; be valiant, close and bold,
I Will work thy way, though step by step in gold.
Ala defend thee, and this Holy Cross
Keep us, our friends, and our good Ship from loss.
All fortuned well, but 'till the very day,
When they prepared to steal Zoraida.
(So was this glorious Convert called) the Moor
Came to the God-speed, ere they would had shipped her o'r,
Who crying in most hideous manner Thieves,
They gagged him strait, and hindered his relieves.
Father and Daughter now on shipboard are,
And he unbound and free, did strangely stare,
Demanding of Zoraida, what this me'nt,
Whether the Ship, these men, and she were lent?
The Lady said (Sir) I am Christian turned,
'Twere better far, thou were here present burned,
(Replied the Pagan) and of the sudden leaps
Into the sea, bulg'd o'r in watery deeps.
At her request, they hail him up who would
Have rather perished in the briny flood.
Not cleaner for his washing, his black ski^n
Changed not the hue, nor his foul heart within;
But on himself, his daughter, and us all,
A thousand curses plenteously let fall:
And did attempt again the sea; then she
Desired us, (for she thought it impiety
To see his ruin) and did all implore,
To land him on the next convenient shore.
We did so, and he blessed our Ship with gales,
Like witches, hired to furle up flying sails:
A thousand Garbs he used, to Heaven to Hell,
And tore his hair, and on the earth then fell;
Then rose, and raging, threw into the air
Curses and stones, and his torn grizly hair.
It proved unlucky to our Bark; for straight,
A Pyrate of the French surpised our freight,
And robbed us all; my bright Zoraida
Lost all her Jewels, yet was then most gay:
We feared our lives, for which there is no man cared,
If that Zoraidas might be but spared.
Now more remiss, a Cockboat they will give,
And charge us straight for Spain, if we will live;
For the rich booty made them fear; but we
Had wealth enough in our gained liberty,
And the fair purchaser: Who smiling, said,
(Love) Lela Marien still protects a Maid;
And holy men, that go on honest ends,
Ala, and all the power above defends.
The Interpreter made known her mind, which struck
Such courage in the men, they stoutly pluck
Their beaten Hoy, and in an happy hour
They all enjoy the long long wished for shore.
CHAP. XV.
So many Ladies, and so many Chan^^s,
Blow up our Don, and fortify his fancies.
Giant Borachio (or the slain wine bags
Not paid for yet) augment Don Quixot's brags;
No longer is mine Host mine Host; he is paid
In titles, and with offices defraid.
The house is changed, the Inn a Castle is,
Mine Host is Constable, and takes no fees:
The Don's Controuler of the place; but here
He deignes to play the rusty Harbinger,
And entertaines a Justice of grave carriage,
(But not advanced unto the power of marriage)
Persuading the Long-Robe-Man, and his daughter,
(Whom in a Lackeys habit followed after
Enamored Lewis) how the Inn was changed,
And nothing there but Courtly persons ranged.
Had he been absent with his face uncouth,
The Justice might have well thought it a truth:
For the grand beauties which at that time met*
Might with the glories of Madrid be set,
And far outshine; But all to Donna Clara
The judges daughter yield, she is Avis rara.
But these great persons and their ladies fair,
Were not unto the Justice things so rare
As Mr Curats story; which discovers
Two Brothers to each other, greater lovers
Then those of the place: What joy? what hugs? what tears,
When that the Captive to be such appears?
A happy sight! rarely do buffe and budge
Embrace, as do our Soldier and the Judge.
TEXT.
YET must there be a place found for Mr Justice, who comes in his Coach, etc.]
The Spanish Justices were not so far as Matho, who was himself a Coachfull;
Donna Clara his daughter might sit with him and room enough beside, although
riding in his long Gown, and his wide sleeves, he might burnish and swell out
beyond the dimensions of a single man. These are the formalities and habits,
which gain credi^ to the persons that wear them, terrify the Country people,
and wring out Reverence, Legs, Caps and Capons from them: Take away these
embellishments, accoutrements, and investitures, from any order of men, and you
leave them as contemptible, poor and naked, as the Crow, or Chaugh despoiled of
his borrowed Feathers.

Ex humeris Aulaea Togae. Keep the cloth, your Liveries, and your Ceremonies,
and they will keep you from vulgar insolences; Round Caps, and obedience to
masters went out about a time. Square Caps and Logic, Wigs and Law, winged
Gowns and good Divinity, like Astraea, (Mr Justices pretended mistress) flew
away together. Worthy was the Policy of the Roman Senators, who being
vanquished by the Galli Senones, fled to the Capitol, and there sat in their
Patrician Robes, full of gravity and majesty, which struck more awe into the
Barbarous Soldiers, then their Ensigns, or their Engines: Insomuch, that they
took them for gods at first, until their officers made them plunder them like
men. What regard would be given to a Praetor without his trapping'd horse, the
Gold Chain, and the Cap of maintenance? Even the Bedel of the beggars without
his blew Jump, and silver head tipstaffe, loses reputation among the boys and
vagrants. Upon this very reason it was, that Philosophers of old, and our
Modern Divines nourished Beards, (like wandering Greeks or Jews) not that they
were a jot the wiser for the Bush, but it gained an estimate and reverence. The
Spaniards depart not from distinctions of Orders, Garbs, Habits, Punctilios,
Ceremonies, Circumstances, and have the reputation of the wisest men in the
world. If Mr Justice had come in Querpo, mine Hostess would never have left her
lodging for his sake; but now she does Idolize his broad sleeves, and resigns
her own chamber to the long robe, which had not been so well swept in a year
as it was with the trailing of his Worships train.

To all which the Judge was so attentive, as in all his life, he never listened
to any cause so attentively as then.] What, not at the Assize Sermon? from
which most commonly your Spanish Judges take most of their Charge, and are as
much beholding to Mr Curates adviso's from the Pulpit, as he was before to
Fonsecas Postils; but here Mr Licentiat showed his art* and has so curtly,
succinctly, and concisely Anacephalyz'd, Analyz'd and Epitomized the long story
of the Captive, that if his afternoon Repetitions were with half that pains
and method summed up ad populum, they would keep waking the best part of his
Auditory after a full meal. It Is a good character of a Judge to be attentive
to hear ambabus auribus, on both sides, and both sides, (as they say) without
interposing or troubling witnesses, or suffering the Council to do it, and so
in his instructions to the Jury, to lay open the Law, not his affections to
them, which is the cause many times, that those honest men and true, swai'd by
hints and girds to the part that his Lordship is offended at, often brings very
false and partial verdicts, for which they ought to incur the penalty of
fasting, after their delivery up of their opinions, rather then before.

The Curate took him fast by the other hand, and marched over with both them
unto the Justice.] Had this been in England now, it had been a wedding; but the
Spanish Curates will not easily part with so beneficial a Sacrament, as
Matrimony to Lay-Hucksters; Marriage and flesh (being Quadragesimall
prohibitions, and forbidden in the time of Lent) cum dispensatione, and
licentia, were very grateful accessaries to a slender Vicaridge. Double fees*
besides eggs and Alicant, with many a Joviall entertainment, are more
considerable then petty Tithes, and made the Curate more blithe and bonny, then
an Archdeacons visitation, where beside the danger of information, he paid for
his own dinner, and his visitors. If all hits right, and that this learned
contrivance of Mr Curates could work in Zoraidas Inchristianation, with the
solemnity and rights belonging to it; and the gaudia magna of her
after-marriage with the Captive, to be the reward of this service, (as it
deserved it) how soon might he expect a change of his small Vicaridge, for
uberius beneficium? and admire himself in his long Cassock, broad Hat, and
divinity Belt, the advanced creature of the times; nothing being a surer step
to preferment, then the joining great persons together in Matrimony, or the
Nulling*

Don Quixot offered himself to watch and guard the Castle, while they slept.]
How proper physic he finds out for a mad man? watching being the only means
to tame frenzy, had it been confined to a close room; but this new humor of
being grand round to the Castle, makes him more wild then before, and subjects
him totally to 'the cold influences of the Moon, which was the Predominant
Planet in his Pericranium. Could he not remember what befell him, when upon the
entrance of his adventures this vertigo of noctivagation, and watching his
Arms, seizd him: How dismal was that nights Guardian-ship, wherein was more
want of discretion, then sleep, when the Carriers had almost laid him stone
dead? and yet the bold and hardy Knight, alone, not as in other adventures
attended by Sancho Pancha, (witness and partner of his sufferings) he will
react this solitary encounter. Having nothing but the spangled Coverlid of
Heaven over him, and poor Rosinant under, whose pains and Tantalizations in
this nights round, were more irksome to the beast, then all his other
out-ridings, which were ever (though somewhat long first) gratified with the
welcome rest of an Inn; but now he is dizzed with the continual circuits of
the Stables, which are ever approached, and never entered, beside the
unsupportable torment of feeding horses, the noise of grinding the beloved
Corn, the smell of hay and litter, (and nothing but the smell and noise of it)
which made Rosinant think (if ever his imagination was discovered) that he was
in Limbo Equorum, and condemnn'd with Tantalus Horses to the same flying
Provender, and deluding dainties, which should never come nerer then his ears,
or eyes.

CHAP. XVI.
Dark night invades the Inn, and pleasing sleep,
With woollen feet on every head does creep;
Only our vigilant Don, and young Don Lewis,
Yield not to Morpheus wand, that brains bedewes;
Transformed into a Lackey, by loves powers,
Like a winged Cupid, (hid in various flowers.
His part colored suit) he silent flutters
About his Claras Coach; in the night he utters
His sad complaints in songs and piteous aires
And tells how love no sex, no person spares,
Whilst other music (not so soft nor sweet)
Don Quixot raises, playing on his feet,
Strung up too high; but yet the cord will not break,
Which puts the screech-Owle to a dismal skreak.
Come see the Don of more then common hope,
Not Errant now, but pendent in a rope.
TEXT.
I Am a Mariner to love.]

Don Lewis first Sonnet.
1.
Run nimble tongue by night,
And fill her with delight;
That her deceived ears,
May think the obsequious spheres,
And sweet intelligences,
Striving to court her senses.
2.
Raise thy clear notes so high,
That laboring birds may die,
And vanquished Philomel,
Warble her own last knell;
Whilst their vain Thrillos hope,
With my love-tunes to cope.
3.
If that my Clara sleep,
A pretty murmuring keep,
In low and solemn strains
So lullaby her brains,
That she may trembling dream,
Her head's in some soft stream.
4.
But when she wakes, and finds
The error of her mind,
Let such an echo strike
Her ear, that it may like
The roused Tarantula,
Take life from the high key.
5.
Having got audience,
Monopolize her sense;
And let thy ditties be
In praise of her and me.
Until (poor soul) she long,
To yield up for a song.
He is no Horse-boy (quoth Clara) but a Lord of many Towns. Here were a note
now to enlarge upon the power of love; but we have had many examples already,
and unum pro cunct is f^ma loquatur opus. In any transformation feigned or
true, more could not be seen, then in this gentleman's metamorphosis; who for
pure love, was a Spaniell by day, and a Nightingall by night. That his feet run
was no small pain to him, but the running of his tongue was no small pleasure
to those that heard it, as will appear in his second Sonnet.

Don Lewis second Sonnet.
1.
Though that thy Coach out-runne
The stages of the Sun,
And through more dreadful ^ignes,
Thy Charioter inclines:
I follow will alone,
Through cold and torrid Zone.
2.
It is no shame for me,
Thy lackey for to be;
The Sun himself did run,
A mistress to have won.
To run, and speed is praise,
He lost, yet got the Bays.
3.
But if like Daphne thou
Of changes do allow,
Let me transformed be,
Into thy Axle-tree,
Thy Charret I will run,
So thou be in it my Sun
4.
He does but lackey it too,
Who in a Coach does wo^^;
And must bare-headed ride
By his proud Ladies side;
His pains is not so great,
Only he waits in state.
5.
Those, who upon command
Of Ladies, leave the land,
And do strange services
Their scorncfull dames to please,
Do run less pleased then I,
They from the mark, I by^
6.
Some think the Stars stand still,
And that the earth does wheel:
Others, the Heavens run round,
And fixed is the ground.
If the world passant be,
It is no shame for me.
7.
Copernicus come try,
And learned Ptolomy,
Me and my Clara view,
And you will prove both true:
She like the spears and stars,
I run like Mines, and Quarres.
For I know not whence with a vengeance, or by what way this affection which I
bear him, got into me.] What the originals of love are, is a hard matter to
find, that which first makes impression in the heart or fancy, that is the
puzling quaere: Whether it be the eye, the nose, the speech, the wit, the
common voice, or report, that is the first mover? For some love by the ea^e,
and affect by story, others by the eye -- vis amque cupit, potitur que cupita.

See and like, like and lig: some complain (deceived in their augury) of the
nose, as the maiden in the song, others of the eyes; nescio quis (...) oculus,
etc. I would I had never seen the face of him! those ey^s, those amatory
muscles; there is the vengeance on it. O his hearrt-beakers cries another! O that
tongue, that beguiling, deluding, enchanting tongue! O that mask! it was there
I first fancied his high capering, his nimble footing it, his amorous motions;
there was the vengeance on it.

In short, as matter is incli^'d to receive forms, wax impression, the air,
the light, so naturally, does the faeminine appetite require the Male: But how
the -- solus hic inflexit sensus.

How with a vengeance, one particular person more then any other, amongst
choice and variety, should only wound and subdue affections, and Dido too;
there is the scruple still; there is the vengeance on it. Go to Lilly, and he
will tell you, it is in your stars, there is the vengeance on it. But he does not
prove so true in heats, as colds; and is as much out in the (...) ^enereall, as
that of the Sun; and though it be possible, he may prove a sure Directory to
a Husband, yet not the stars, but her persuasion in his stars, was the cause of
it. Another will have it in the Amatory A^omes, and there is the vengeance on it.
The little tiny fiery rarities, when they sympathize in two distinct persons,
there is the conjunction; there is the vengeance on it. But the truth is --
haeremus sicut ille ad restuxum maris.

The true cause of the ebbs and tides of our affections are not known to our
selves, and we find out false causes, and attribute to them, what is not
theirs, and that is the vengeance on it

To this point arrived Don Quixot, when the Innekepers daughter began to call
him softly unto her, and said, Sr Knight, etc.] Our Don is now at the hole in
the wall; one of the most unfortunate adventures, that ever he undertook upon
such presumptious hopes; where his miscarriage is the more infamous and
scandalous; insomuch, as that he is chiaus'd by two spicket-wenches.

Dux foemina facti. Maritornes and her young Mistress, the matts of the house,
and lain upon by all comers, are supposed Ladies of the Castle, and play upon
our transported Don; who enchanted with his own fancies, is brought into such
a nooze, that never Knight was, to be hung out against a wall, (not in effigy,
which had been disgrace enough) but in persona, corporally exposed to the view
of all people. Tom Coriat upon the barrel at Hiddleberg, with his Rummer in
his hand was a glorious sight to this, and no way tending to his dishonor; who
ever beholding this figure, will not call to mind the story of the abused
Judge, whose patient Mule was better then his book to him, and saved him from
hanging, by not stirring from the Gallows.

In the mean time it happened, that one of the Horses whereon they rode drew
near to smell Rosinante, etc. and scarce had he stirred but a thought from
thence, when Don Quixot's f^eet slipped asunder.] The Inchantment's over, and the
dream of remaining manicled to the window, vanished into a hideous swing,
(upon the motions of Rosinante) and new torment. Poor Knight unhors'd, but not
alighted, how he hangs, pain and torture, as from Phalaris Bull! Express
noise and outcries from him, more then humane; his voice is all he can trust
to now; if his Lungs fail him, the rope will not, which he hoped would sooner
break then his voice: had he been rotten, it had been but an arm lost; but
fighting hardened his flesh, and kept his parts compact together; so that this
firmness of body was the increase of his torment. How happy might he have now
been, if he had any the least skill in dancing of the ropes, or could have
thrown himself heels over head, or cast himself into a hoope, or into the
hole whence his Ladyships bracelet, and the glorious chain was bestowed upon
him? But he cannot vault nor skip, nor mount, nor do any thing but raise a
note or two higher, which waked the Dogs, which waked the Maids, who sensible
of their roguish cruelty, relent, and at last relaxe the rope, whereby the Don
is once more a Knight of this world; into which he is no sooner dropped, but
fresh adventures bury the remembrance of the old ones, and remounted upon
Rosinante, he defies all dangers; which were as sure to seize him, as he was
sure to provoke them.

Nothing can hold him, now the rope is broke,
He will subdue, who late was under yoke.
CHAP. XVII
The disguised lackey is found out a Don,
And by four servants is attended on:
Discovered, he discovers to his love,
Unto the judge, and does so strongly move
With importunacy and tears, that he
(Though his deserts plead high) could not deny
His daughter to his suit, whiles these in love
Make up the scene; the Don does tragic prove,
And Sancho until now not understood
To be so valiant, bathed the teeth in's blood
Of saucy Barber, who with head full addle,
Would unconvert his Pannell from a saddle,
And with a face most impudent and brazen
Will swear Mambrinos Helmet is his Basin;
And all before the Judge in his great sleeves,
Us if that Sancho and the Don were Thieves;
But they do prove them prize, (the matter scanned)
Taken by strength, and not by s^ight of hand.
TEXT.
WHosoever shall dare to affirm that I have not been with just title
enchanted, I say that he lies.] A bold provocation to four men; and 'twas four
to one but he had paid for his challenge, but the men were in pursuit of
another Don Errant, which made them not heed his extravagant words. It Is some
men's only security, that their tongues are counted no slander. Fools and Mad
men, and malcontents, are privileged talkers, and the worst of their
language, is either pittyed or laughed at. At this tme our Knight under one of
those notions, gives the lie (which in Spain, is the word of death) without
any check or control; which was a great adventure, and it is therefore noted,
that of all his adventures, he came safest off in this, without any reply made,
or the words beaten down his throat again.

Don Quixot was ready to burst with wrath, etc.] Io triumphs in this bloodlesse
victory, over a Quadrivirate of Mummers, (as he takes them to be) is not
concluded with any Epithalamiums, or songs of joy, but contrary, his Bonefires
are within, and his bells ring backward; the Don is inflamed, that he can show
no spoils, no luggage for Sancho, not a Wallet nor a Pannell to be seen,
whereby the monumentall Ensigns of so great a daring, (for it cannot well be
called a defeat) should be published to the world. In strange disputes with
himself our Knight was; what should be done to an enemy that would do
nothing? what said to a silent foe? language was unfit for mutes, and action
for men of no spirit: Never was Heroes so becalmed. The business (the challenge
once over) was a dumb show, where the Don swells, looks big, menaces with hand
and shaken Javelin, disdaines sides noses, claps his own hands, and bounds
with Rosinante; the other part shrug, snecze and blurt, neglect, make mouths,
and flout in Spanish postures, and so exeunt.

The man drew him by the arm and said: Truly Don Lewis, the habit that you
were in, answers very well your calling.] It had been more modest (Signior
Servitore) to have drawn off your young Don's undecent Habits, and accoutred
him with better; but you cannot see the Lord for the Lackey. Great Personages
lose their reverence with their apparel amongst those, who only esteem their
Masters by their ambitious outsides. The Yeoman of the Bottles turns privy
counselor, and is as sage as Seneca advises, beyond any Savill, and will
turn Master of the Horse, (if the young Lord do not return to himself) and
carry him home like a Cloakbag. But his insolence is suddenly checked, and the
slave submits at the sight of the brandisht whippe; one authoritative word
stopes him into the sellar, (the Alembick of his spirits) where he only
properly commands and draws.

To this Don Quixot answered very leisurely, and with great gravity. Beautiful
Damzell, your Petition cannot preva^le at this time.] What, in the negative to
a quarrel? the Adventure-seeker refuse adventures, and incited to it by a
Lady, for her Fathers rescue, the Constable of the Castle! oppressed by number
two; and in a just cause, the maintenance of his Castle! O Jupiter Hospitalis!
can this apology of the Dons, smell of less then Pusillanimity? is our
Hercules, that just now assaulted four, not able contra duos? or what is the
cause? does Valor ebb and flow in valiant breasts? and are they more daring at
the ebullition of the blood, or at the circular refluxion? or does the last
cowardice react upon the Challenger? will he be sullen, and not fight the
humorous Lieutenant? Is it a drinking day, or a Courting day, and no day of
Turnament? none of these; it cannot be. He is engaged, not in actual combat,
but potentiall. His word is his blow; no enemy (till the Giant of Micomicona be
incountred) must be admitted; and so mine Host is like to be paid, and have his
scores in Capite.

The Princess did grant him leave very willingly.] Now he is once more
licentiatus ad preliandum and vapulandum per totam Hispaniam. What Is the matter
now? he has a quarrel, but it is, that they are not Knights, for whom this
uproar is, and so intailes the adventure upon his Squire, pares cum paribus. O
Don! how might thou by this effugium have saved all thy misfortunes? The
Yanguesian Carriers, the Goat-heards were no Knights, the Windmill and the
fulling-mils were not dubbed, and yet thou did condescend to a beating with
some, or all of these: Eare-beaten by the Fulling maces, beaten out of wind by
the Windmills, beaten and re-beaten by the Carriers; and why now so stanch? To
what purpose did thou kneel for a License, if thou will not take the liberty
to fight? Certainly (though Cyd Hameti Benengeli does not discover the reason
of this Micropseachy of the Don) it is easily to be conjectured; for the cause
of quarrelling, was non payment of the reckoning; a thing which the Don stood
to maintain, and so could not without wounding his own Conscience, and breach
of practice, be of mine Hosts part; so he prudently stood a neuter, and would
have shifted off the business to Sancho Pancha, who for fear of the
blanket-encounter, perchance might have engaged as far as a douze or two in
the business.

The Barber presently set upon Sancho, saying, ah sir Thief, have I found you
there, with all the furniture, etc.] These are scurvy salutes ( Sancho,) and
inconsistent with the man, that was in more then hopes of the government of an
Island; but Sancho out of hand confutes him, and makes him wash his mouth in
blood for his foul aspersions; wishing him hereafter to keep his chops as
clean as his fingers, and save him the labor of opening a vein for the
matter. Sancho hoped by this means, to have traverss'd an indictment, with an
action of battery; but the Barber being blooded in the mouth, was freed from
the staggers, and stood stoutly to the claim of the Pannell, and makes bloody
hue and cry after him. Insomuch, that Sancho is forced to appeal to the Don;
who, finding that his Squire had played the man so notoriously, was more ready
to make a Knight of him, then an honest man, and dignifi^ him more then
justify him; Which both were equally in his power.

The very day they robbed me of a new Basin, which was never used, which cost
me a crown. Here Don Quixot could not contain.] Like master, like man; the
Barber charges both, and now the Court is sat; what will be said in the
business, (for Council there is none allowed in point of Felony) was the
expectation of every one. Here is evidentia facti, the very Pannell and the
Basin, Coram judice. The Barber ( pro rege) swears, they were his, and now the
two at the Bar will speak for themselves.

Don Quixot for the Helmet.
Thou simple animal, thou Iobbernole;
Thy Basins, when that once they hang on Pole,
Are Helmets strait; true, under chinne they are
Basins indeed, and serve to wash us fair;
But to the Pole annex your Brazen Basin,
It Is not to smug one then, but to amaze one.
The property is changed; and this brave cover
No longer is to snap your fingers over.
For though like Brass it look, it is true as Steel;
Things are not as they seem, but as they feel.
Did thou not lose it fairly in the Field?
When did Campania ever a Basin yield?
But' cause thou were ignoble, (as I spie-now,)
I did create it Helmet of Mambrino.
Sancho for the Pannell.
If ever I joy'd my wife in smock of Flannell,
Then this a Saddle is, and not a Panvell.
Have Pannels any pummels ^ When you came
To challenge 't, you were pummel'd for the same.
Twice won; by my Lord once, and once by me,
(Had it been so,) it cannot a Pannell be.
Appeal unto the Judges, let 't be tried here,
If i^ a Pannell be, 'twill shame the Rider;
Nay when a Jury shall empanell'd be,
Both Judge and Jury 'l give it unto me.
CHAP. XVIII.
It Is put to votes, and as they use to go,
Saddle and Pannell have both I and No.
The major part for Saddle did appear,
And Helmet contra Basin got it clear.
Whereat a Soldier (though it were the sense
Of The house, not his) took villainous offense,
To see men judge so strangely: But Don Quizzot
Flew on the man, and soundly curried his coat.
Then unto sides they fell, in this cursed riot,
Until the Don that made the war, made quiet.
By a pretended sight of Agramants,
Translated to the Inn, he dis-inchants
The present tumult; his feigned relation
Of higher madness, allaies true passion.
But when the Trooper served him with his Writ,
For rescuing slaves, it was not then his wit
Would serve the turn; alas in sober sadness,
His plea unto the scroll was real madness.
TEXT.
OUR Barber speaking to the other Barber; said, Sr Barber, etc. It is not only
not a Barbers Basin, but so far from being one, as white from black.] How
easily does a brother rooke a brother, I mean the crafty brother the weaker?
it is possible to persuade a credulous cockscombe (having an opinion first of
the brothers fidelity) out of his very faith, sense and reason, and create a
belief in him, that black is white, and white black; all his understanding
being resigned to his opinion and conceit of his confident, he sees with his
eyes, hears with his ears, and speaks with his tongue: what blows,
arguments, convictions cannot do, that captivated affection presently yields
to, and a strong presumption, that such and such were no cheats, has cozened
all that presumed them so. Aruspex aruspicem, dum videt ridet, is true of
subtle sirs, long practisers in the art, who make themselves sport at others
follies and their own delusions: But our Barber on the place is chiauz'd, a
very Pigeon, a younger brother, and is caughd like a young Jack Daw, which way
soever his Senior in the profession led him.

Fratrum quoque gratia rara est.
One Barber wipes another nose,
It Is true, let it be rhyme or prose.
All of them laughed very heartily, to see Don Ferdinand go up and down
gathering of suffrages.] It seems the votes were not vivd voce, but in aurem;
so that the Collector not being sworn, it was possible, the matter went as it
pleased his Lordship. And in most popular assemblies, the business is much
carried on, like this of the Pannell and the Basin; where the most potent and
affected persons, whisper their own votes into others ears, rather then take
or ask theirs. So that the proposition is not at a placet, does it seem good
so? but Place bit, it shall be so.

Get thee a gracious and a popular man,
Thy cause shall prosper, be it what it can.
Let me never enjoy a place in Heaven (quoth the Barber.] The Barbers
protestation will not be received, though he desires the forfeiture of Heaven,
(a small matter in comparison of a Pannell) upon the failer of it. But
certainly he would not have made such an imprecation, if he bel^eved there were
any other Poles, then those his Basins hung on, or that the teeth on his
strings should ever return to the heads again, from whence he pulled them.
But his protestation is plain in Foro soli, that he is cozened of his Basin,
which will never come to his Forum Poli; whereby he gives a vale to the Law, as
if the Law were in fault, when he should have been angry with the suffragants,
or at least hired them each man a dog and a bell to lead 'um home, whose eyes
were so bad, they could not distinguish a Basin from a Helmet, or a Pannell
from a Saddle.

Don Quixot spoke in this manner. Here is now no more to be done; let very one
take up his own goods, etc.] Those he means, which his friends had voted him,
and so omnia been: He is satisfied, they are his own, though he knew he stole
them. How grateful, and how pious, and above all, how careful he is, against
any review of the verdict, desiring Peter's bl^ssing, though he had but newly
robbed Paul. So cunningly, or profanely rather, he attributes all his
successes to Heaven, though he went to the Devil for the purchase. On the
other side, the malcontent Barber, goes grumbling away, with his Might
overcomes Right, cries out of bribery, partiality, and friends in Court. Both
calling upon Peter, the one for a vengeance, the other for a benediction.

In the midst of this Chaos and confusion of things Don Quixot began to imagine
that he was plunged in the discord of Knight Agramants Camp.]

Facibus extinguis faces. He holds the Sun to the Candle, cries fire, fire,
and fetches all the company from a Bonefire; sounds a Trumpet, and brings all
the people out of the Church. Some new, high, and unheard of lie, presently
sil^nceth a known truth, as a Romance a true story. The news of a great Giant,
the talk of Taxes, a report of foreign war, all differences at home. The
trick of amuzing, is none of the worst in the pack: The Don's Policy is not to
be slighted, who to avoid his own, and his friends instant confusion,
proclaims a worse coming; which while every one desires to hear, and fears
will ensue, the private constellation falls, and every one is providing against
the public; not a Cobbler nor a weaver, but upon such an alarm, shall be as
wise as Agramant and Sobrino.

But the enemy of concord, and adversary of peace, etc.] Here the Don is worse
put to it, (who may justify his supposed Enchantments to be true) if the
Devil were his enemy, as the Text hints. But as our english Proverb has it,
the Devil on'd him a shame, and though his Ill-favored face was not easily to
be intincted with a blush, whereby the Officer might have discovered his guilt,
yet the description in his paper agreeing to those of his favor, brought him
very near within the compass of another English Proverb. What evasion will
he find against this warrant, for rescuing the slaves? This is the worst
enchantment that came yet.

For the King and the holy Brotherhood, They two together-are too strong fora
Knight Errant I fear.

Don Quixot laug'd to hear them speak so idle, etc.]

servetur ad Imum Quod pede processit. It was high time to speak idler then
they, or they had done their business. He does now more then act Ieronymo;
it is the best way to be out of his wits, stark mad, be a Bedlam, rather then a
Bandetti, be above or below the Law, that he may not come under the lash. He
tells them therefore, their Writ is false, it is error personae, not directed to
attach a Knight Errant, or had it been so, 'twas error Legis or Iudicis, who
knew not that generalia non includunt privilegiatos. Warrants for Vagrants are
not extendable to Knight-Errants, who ever demand an exeat Regno; but have and
hold by de forresta Charta, of their own; do as they list, live as they list,
pay what they list, and say what they list: They are only men of the Lists. By
these and other evident demonstrations, the Officer was satisfied of his
frenzy, which was a super sedeas to the Writ, and a discharge for his fees.

CHAP. XIX.
Here Is peace indeed; what spoils and warre-ta^ne prizes
Brought to a Jury, and to stand the Assizes?
Look on the Articles, if there be found
A tittle of that crabbed word, Compound.
Had it been tried at Barber Chirurgians Hall,
(No loss of blood proved) we had had it all.
Pox of that filthy fellow Cicero,
His unjust peace is still preserved so.
Sancho for quietness does straight refund;
Exchanging Pannels, he the robbery shunned.
And Ryals eight being numbered, in good reason,
The Barber must make livery and seisin
Of his cracked Basin, to the crack brained Knight;
Who by the flaw, might challenge it his right.
Once more it is peace; and now the Don renews
His suit unto the Queen, that she would loose
No longer time, but forthwith come and mo^nt her,
And post away to her own encounter.
Sancho the peaking rogue, here and their peeping,
Had spied Don Ferdinand and the Queen clipping;
And tells Don Quixot all before their faces,
(But they nothing ashamed of those disgraces)
Baffle out Sancho's frivolous surmises,
And salve it all with a deceptio visus.
But now the plot, (whatsoever forth is given)
How to get Quixot to his, home is driven:
And driven it was, for with a Teem of Oxen,
And in a Cage with bars and double locks on,
The Knight that thought, the world to have wandered over,
Is whistled home by a Manchegan Drover.
TEXT.
FInally, they (as the Officers of Justice) did mediate the cause.] The
Soldier has it now; and his word is a statute: Or change Pannels Sancho, or
the Troopers will make great Saddles of them both. What, cannot you agree
without calling in the Lyo^ to decide the difference? Beware of the Kite,
chicken. What though the Don without wits or money escape? 'twill not be so
here, where any thing is to be had; either agree quickly and lovingly, or both
titles are lost. They do understand the necessity of compliance, and wisely
submit to the Snaphances and Swords, which are the nimblest Arbitrators that
can be, and in an instant evidence the right. There Is no demurs here, nor Writs
of error, but sudden wit is best; save somewhat if you will, or be sure to
lose all.

All was quietly ended by the Curate, and Don Ferdinand paid the whole sum.]
Here began Don Quixot's and Sancho's Jubilee, until the word All Is paid was
past, the greatest adventure was how to get away; talk what they would of
Giants and Castles, the reckoning was the chief danger of them, wherein
Rosinante and the Ass lay by it; the perpetual bail and security for their
Masters; which put Sancho no doubt to many foot-adventures, and finger-tryals,
for leaves from hedges, and Kitching Physic, brass pots and shirts, to cure
the swelling of his Asses head: But now salva res est. The Golden Age is
returned, Don Ferdinand raines Gold and silver together, and in spite of the
Poet, hospes ab Hospite Tutus.

They defy their Landlord, and his assistants, the Brotherhood; what they
drank in fear, is digested in joy.

Unde habeat quaerat nemo, sed oportet habere. The poor must eat, and pray for
Benefactors. But at this time, the best company was best cheap, and fortune
threw the Knight and his Squire into the society of Lords and Ladies, and not
among Carriers, where he had always sour sauce to his sweet meats, if they
were so.

It is a common Proverb, (beautiful Lady) that Diligence is the mother of
good hap.] Secure of the Inne-keeper, the Knight is forthwith for another
Castle and S^onces which he built, not razed. In Andalusia, he is famous
enough, and too well known; He will instantly remove his quarters to
Micomicona, which being an Egyptian Country, he and his Squire might Plunder
in infinitum. Diligence is the mother of good hap, was his Motto, and very
necessary for one of that profession. Which Proverb in all his and his
Squires actions was closely followed. Sudden, quick and nimble motions did
always prove beneficial to them. The Basin, Pannell, Portmantle, all of them
the fruits of activity, got by surprizall, and kept by retreats and retirings
into the inaccessible parts of Morena. In just fights he never lost more then
in sallies; his ear and cheek-tooth (wheresoever they are) are the monuments
of his ill success in set battles: wherefore now he wisely incites the Queen
to set upon the Giant, and fall into his quarters, before he makes an
irresistible preparation.

Dorothaea blushed at Sancho's words, for it was true indeed, etc.] What an
Infidel is this Sancho; a sworn servant to the Queen, and betrays her;
reveals the secrets of the house, tells tales out of doors; and all for a kiss
of a young Lord, and that her husband too. (Rude Rogue) and very unfit to be
admitted amongst great ones, who cannot keep his tongue in his head; had it
been worse, it should have out. But the innocent Lady blushed, that forgetting
the part of a Queen, she should be discovered playing the wife; a thing more
justifiable then used, for it is out of fashion, and Country like, to own a
wife in public, or show any glances of affections, for fear of being
accounted amorous and uxorious, which is more matter for a blush then this in
the Text.

Therefore we must believe ( Sr Knight of the sad face) all things are
represented, and succeed by way of Enchantments.]

Argumentum ad hominem. When Maritornes and his Errant-ship were embracing,
until the disappointed Carrier uncoupled them, 'twas an Enchantment. So Sancho
likewise, (however uncharitable in his censure now, or not sensible of the
witchcraft) was no doubt, under the power of a charm, when the foresaid
Maritornes laid her Posteriors to his Priors, hoping to have raised a Novum
Organum from the Conjunction. Nothing more frequent, then this sort of
Enchantments, which if the discoverers should take for real matters, it were
enough to set people together by the ears. Visions therefore and appearances,
let those things be, which seen, should not have been seen, deprendi miserum
est. Spies and Centries, as they see sometimes too little, sometimes may see
too much, and full of the fancy and hopes for which they are set, may dream
they find that which they wish to find: It Is better to say there is fallacy and
uncertainty in the object, then prove our selves deceived, by reporting what we
cannot justify, or must not. So unfortunate was this discovery of Sancho, that
he is forced to renounce his own eyes, and to acknowledge himself only compos
mentis in the adventure of the Blanket.

They made a thing like a Cage, so big, as that Don Quixot might sit, or lie at
his ease, and presently, etc.] This is the last enchantment of this Castle, and
though it be a wooden one, yet it holds and serves their design, as well as
the Trojan Horse. By this they enter the Mancha, and bring home the long-look'd
for Lord of the place to his ancient house and seat, nor need it be accounted a
dishonorable lodge, it being the legal house of entertainment for all
Knight-Errants, who having no manors of their own, and always in a moving
condition, are provided for in all Corporations, Tithings, and VVapentakes,
according to the exigent of their travels, in these moveable receptacles, for a
night or two at the public charge.

They presently mount him upon their shoulders, and as they issued out of the
chamber door, they heard a dreadful voice.]

The Barbers speech.
Let it not grieve our Knight, nor let him rage
Like Bajazet, to see himself in Cage;
Or ever attemp to dash his slender brains
Against the bars, for he will lose his pains:
Reserved in this, not mocked nor made a show,
The fates secure thee from a greater blow.
Think not (grim Sr) your close condition worse
Then those bold Greeks, ingarrison'd in a horse;
Whatsoever you think of it, your riding now
Looks like Ulysses in his state at Plough:
And when your Sinon shall unpinne the bars,
You shall return, first to love, then wars.
Let thy Dulcinea see thee in this pickle,
And she will swear, you are stable now, not fickle.
Were she the Queen of Egypt, as her shape is
Egyptian right, she would take thee for her Apis.
Let thy Manchegan friends about thee dance,
Wondering to see thee in such state advance.
Slowly proceed, and this grand luggage carry
In pomp, to his Tobosian Dromedary;
That those that love has joined, be never parted,
Let him the Cage enjoy, let her be Carted.
Don Quixot to the disguised Barber.
O thou unridler of my mystic Fates!
(Which rubb'st the sense into my mustie pate,
Of future passages) when I shall see
The great effects of this deep Prophecy:
In honor of thy high Auguriall art,
To thee I Will dedicate this Cage, this Cart.
Soothsayers we have store, but sooth to say,
None do reward them, as I mean to pay.
In this you shall of flight, of birds divine,
(The birds will fly about thee when it is thine.)
And as unto an Altar on this Cart,
We Will offer up Beasts liver, and Beasts heart.
But if Lucina my Dulcinea helps,
I have designed for thee, one of her whelps,
Who following thy advise, (though silly
At first) in time may prove a whelp of Lilly.
Nor am I troubled at my strange abode,
The Woods have deities; Woden's a god;
Forests were my delight, this but a chop is,
I have exchanged a Forest for a Coppice.
Say, that the stout Manchega^ Lion, when
H' had preyed upon the world, coucht in this den.
And thou (good Squire) admirer of my Cave,
Think not I Will lay bones here, as a grave;
Or that I go toth' fields Elysian,
The beer or bearers (man) are vision.
Be not thou wood too, nor a jot enraged,
It is enough that one of us's incaged:
Nor are we now less then ever warriers,
Embroiled as heretofore amongst Carri^rs.
CHAP. XX.
Our Don's unsatisfied, it seems in the cage,
Until he heard it was the wooden Age,
Where all things are debased; as when the Log^
By Jove were sent, to Lord it over Frogs:
Cudgels instead of swords, and basket ^ilts
Are now in use; and Castles scaled with stilts.
Enchantments are enchanted; Beelzebub
Acts not as heretofore, but in a tub.
Coopers are Nigromancers, spirits stoop;
Content to be incircled in a hoop;
Nay, Cerberus, that direful Stygian dog,
Tamely submits unto a wooden clog.
Why then drive on says Don; Let Orpheus play*
And make our Teem go merrily on the way.
It moves, it moves, the Carre with Oxen ^ix,
And in it the Cage, in the Cage, the great Don Quix*
On each side Troupers two, as if they did
Convoy the Indian Plate unto Madrid.
Behind dispannell'd Sancho rode, alas!
Sad at the sight, and only joy'd in's Ass.
And in his hand, now master of the horse,
(As if it had been attending on a Coarse)
He led, with Target trickt, and Baso^ daint^
On each side of his Saddle, Rosinante.
The Country all came forth, men, women kind;
And as he was of a most courteous mind,
The Don waved to and fro his filthy face;
'Twas all the Favor he could show t'th' place.
Had amongst us been acted this prime jest,
We should have sworn in troth, we had seen the Beast.
TEXT.
BUT I never read, saw, nor heard, that they were wont to carry Knights-Errant
enchanted after this manner.] Indeed it was something barbarous, and below the
condition of so meritorious a Knight; and but that fortune had an intent to
example him as much for his sufferings, as his acting great things, this wooden
entertainment must needs have appeared very dishonorable: But he reflected
upon the times, (when he undertook to raise up the almost-perished name of
Chivalry) which were turned topsie turvy; all gallantry (except what was
happily reserved in his noble breast) extinct, and vanished. Wise men,
Magitians, and the like very poo^, men of Honor, and such as used to cherish
great undertakers, vilip^nded, and almost brought to naught. Courts, Palaces,
and great seats, stages, (where actions of this Nature were celebrated) all
demolisht, and turned into Tenements. All things reduced unto so sad and
miserable condition, that the Laplanders let winds upon Tick, Fortune tellers
and Gypsies expound for bread and cheese; Mathematitians and Almanack-makers,
are forced to eat their own prognostics, and the Devil himself lend at six
and six months time, without interest. Witches are confined in their night
rambles, to egg shells, and Hell affords nothing but an Ignis Fat^us, an
exhalation, and Gillion a burnt tail, or Will with the wispe. No^ a Dragon,
nor a flying Horse, nor a fiery Chariot, nothing high and wonderful, comes out
in these levelling times. It is well that a wooden Enchantment may be had, so
great have the wastes of late been, that the Gallows complains for want of
reparation; and Charta de Forresta humbly shows, that her depopulations are so
vast, that they will leave her neither root nor branch.

One may feel half a league off the Amber this Devil smells of.] Sancho had
found out an incarnate Devil amongst these disguised Porters of the Don, and
as the Don in place where found out by the infallible smell, that Sancho was a
man; so here he might have by his nose discovered Lord Ferdinand to be no
Devil; the Devil is said to be the Prince of the air, but of the worst, that
is, his usual cheats being by fogs, mists, and filthy vapors, show very well
that he is no friend to the Millener, and loves no powder, but that of the Gunn.

To whom Don Quixot said, good Ladies do not weep.] It was a needless
prohibition; for they did but say they wept; tears of laughter they had shed
many upon him, and now (if any were visible) they proceeded from the same
cause. Nay two of these mourners, when the Don roared and made outcries, able
to have pierced the heart of a Savage, were at laugh and lie down, and made
sport with his miseries. Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris. Had the
Knight made an escape, and avoided the score, then they would have out-houled
an Irish Wolf; but secure of the reckoning, the joyful departure of their
suspected guest, raised this merry shower in their eyes. His happy journey from
them it is believed they heartily wished, but not a Bead dropped for his return.
Go and welcome, a Spanish Proverb, for an indigent Traveller, and we have as
good; Your room is better then your company. The Don was (though many times
insolvent) always thankful, and would know the house again; a Complement
that might have been spared, unless he came with his temporal and spiritual
stewards, the Lord Ferdinand and the Curate.

The Inne-keeper came also, and gave the Curate certain Papers.] The drawers
courtesy to the Prince was more gentile, though it were but a paper of Sugar;
but if mine Host were hide-bound, it was excusable; for since Don Quixot
frequented the house, he was never without swaths, fillers, plasters, and
armestals; so that he looked more like a brother of some Hosptall, then the
keeper of an Inn. It was no doubt no small comfort to him, to see the Author
of his manifold misfortunes thus ingloriously riding from his house, and so
hampered that it was impossible for him to play any more mad pranks: The
Blanket and the Cage being the sweet revenges for Sancho's and his masters
injuries.

Truly brother, I am better acquainted with books of Chivalry, then Villapandas
Logic.] This Canon of Toledo, was rather for Toledo blades, and the Canon of
the Field, then Church; without question preferred for writing or reading
Romances rather then Postils to the Countess his Patroness; which services
find sooner rewards, then those of the Service Book. This fellow was never
counted a mere scholar, never so bookish, as to break his rest, or his brains
about his study. Pleasant discourses pleased better then school divinity, and a
Legend, then a Homily, he has attained to the top of his desires, and scarce
saluted Jack Seton or Ramus, nor his own Villapanda; Swarez and Vasquez are
names he never heard of. He leaped over Logic, and the Metaphysics he never
came near, however it was his good chance that he proved a Preacher, though no
Scholar, yet for the books he was most conversant in, his accounts are very
good, and argues a great proficiency, having proceeded from Garagantua to
Gusman, and now as the crown of all ending in Quixot.

Mr Barber, you should take heed how you speak, for all consists not in
trimming of Beards, etc.] Sancho begins to be undeceived, and the imposturage
will no longer last, nothing is more violent then abused simplicity, when it
once discovers the cheat; True Sancho, Beards are but bushes, and good wine
needs none; cofeners go, masked and in Visards: But old time will pluck off
those disguises, and render every thing in its own likeness. He is very
pressing upon Mr Curate also, who had a main hand in these persuasions, and by
whose authority and credit, the whole design was brought about, and leaves the
matter to his Conscience, which he hopes will perplex him one day, as much as
his delusions have confounded them; and for his confederate the Barber, the
forge of this Enchantment, he wishes the next generation may be Eunuchs; that
there may not be a Beard to turn up, or a good face to wash, as long as the
world stood. So indignely did Sancho take these affronts, that in despite to
the Curate, he was resolved to splay his sows at his return, that he might
never have tithe in kind any more.

Verily Mr Curate, I do find by experience, that books of Chivalry are very
prejudicial to well governed Commonwealths.] Mr Canon in this discourse seems
to weaken the credit and use of writings of this nature, and to prefer and
commend Aesops Fables, and Alciats Emblems, wherein the Moral may be for
instruction, though the story be of a Cock and a Bull; but it is not unknown
that this age has more abounded with Romances then any other, upon what reason
is not hard to conjecture; and yet no man dare say, but here is a well governed
Commonwealth; but what prejudice I pray, when the subjects are known to be
fabulous and figments? no man's faith is beguiled, nor any persuaded to believe
them as a truth; rather on the contrary, where the minds of the vulgar are not
busied in some such pleasant arguments, they fall upon matters which less
concern them, and become troublesome Judges of the State and Church wherein
they live; wherefore it has been accounted great policy to divert those men's
fancies, by licensing Plays, sports, and diverse recreations from businesses
above their capacity, and not of common ventilation. For want of these
chimera's, (which had no more harm in them, then their impossibility) real
phantasmes, and strong delusions have succeeded and possessed not a few, who
transported with their own imaginations, do not write Romances, but act them,
and fill the world with substantial Tragaedies.

CHAP. XXI.
The Canon and the Curate find out ways,
To make Romances good, and write good plays,
Such as may edify; such I have seen
Of holy subjects, and with Psalms between
The Acts of Dives and of Lazarus;
Of Hester good, and great A^asheverus:
Which now, through Poets vanity and sloth,
Are seen in Puppet plays, or painted cloth;
The stage reformed (as they say it is thought on)
Time may be spent there well, as reading Broughton.
No fools with Harry Codpieces appear,
Nor Soldiers suffered in their parts to swear:
No Lady vitiated of the stage before us,
But let Susanna's bathing be by Chorus;
And so alike for books, let naught be written,
That may give scandal, and is unbefitting.
But as sly Sancho politiquely found
His master to be loose in the hilts, (though bound)
So let the matter of the books and stage,
Be cleanly kept, as was Don Quixot's Cage.
TEXT.
BOth the Authors that compose them, and Actors that represent them, must be
such as they be, for to please the peoples humors.] It was an old one, and
before this critical observation said, Populo ut placerent, quas fecisset
fabulas. Nay in their Amphitheatricall gladiatures, the lives of captives lay
at the mercy of the Vulgar.

and verso pollice vulgi,
Quemlibet occidunt populariter.
And although the only Laureat of our stage (having composed a Play of
excellent worth, but not of equal applause) fell down upon his knees, and
gave thanks, that he had transcended the capacity of the vulgar; yet his
protestation against their ignorance, was not sufficient to vindicate the
misapplication of the argument; for the judicious part of that Auditory
condemned it equally with those that did not understand it, and though the
Comaedy wanted not its prodesse, and delectare,

Had it been exhibited to a scholastic confluence; yet men come not to study
at a Playhouse, but love such expressions and passages, which with ease
insinuate themselves into their capacities. Lingua, that learned Comaedy of the
contention betwixt the five senses for the superiority, is not to be
prostituted to the common stage, but is only proper for an Academy; to them
bring Jack Drumm's entertainment, Greens tu quoque, the Devil of Edmunton, and
the like; or if it be on Holy days, when Sailors, Watermen, Shoomakers,
Butchers and Apprentices are at leisure, then it is good policy to amaze those
violent spirits, with some tearing Tragaedy full of fights and skirmishes: As
the Guelphs and Guiblins, Greeks and Trojans, or the three London Apprentises,
which commonly ends in six acts, the spectators frequently mounting the stage,
and making a more bloody Catastrophe amongst themselves, then the Players did.
I have known upon one of these Festivals, but especially at Shrove-tide, where
the Players have been appointed, notwithstanding their bills to the contrary, to
act what the major part of the company had a mind to; sometimes Tamerlane,
sometimes Iugurth, sometimes the Jew of Malta, and sometimes parts of all
these, and at last, none of the three taking, they were forced to undresse and
put off their Tragic habits, and conclude the day with the merry milk-maides.
And unless this were done, and the popular humor satisfied, as sometimes it
so fortuned, that the Players were refractory; the Benches, the tiles, the
laths, the stones, Oranges, Apples, Nuts, flew about most liberally, and as
there were Mechanics of all professions, who fell every one to his own trade,
and dissolved a house in an instant, and made a ruin of a stately Fabric. It
was not then the most mimicall nor fighting man, Fowler, nor Andrew Cane could
pacify; Prologues nor Epilogues would prevail; the Devil and the fool were
quite out of favor. Nothing but noise and tumult fills the house, until a cogg
take 'um, and then to the Bawdy houses, and reform them; and instantly to the
Banks side, where the poor Bears must conclude the riot, and fight twenty dogs
at a time beside the Butchers, which sometimes fell into the service; this
performed, and the Horse and Jack-an-Apes for a jigge, they had sport enough
that day for nothing.

Those that are now exhibited, are mirrors of vanity, patterns of folly, and
Images of voluptuousness.] The Spanish stage indeed, as well as the French and
English, have been much corrupted, partly through the effeminacy of the times,
but chiefly by unskilful Authors; for, the French are so obscene, that
Aretines pictures may be represented without any offense; beside their loose
and apish gestures render them very ridiculous, and the permission of women,
personally to act, does very much enervate the Auditory, and teaches lust,
while they would but feign it. The Spanish scene is much of it Legend, or some
fictions upon Heretics, and as they did render their persons and visages to be
most horrid, odious, and inhumane, to the People of their Country, so they
never bring any of these sects upon the stage, but they have a Hell, furies,
and strange torments provided for them. But it fell out once, that at the
representation of such a Tragi-Comaedy before some strangers, not Roman
Catholics, the Judicatory of Cardinals, Friars and Jesuits, (who were to
condeme the Heretic party to Tophet) being very burdensome, broke the
judgment seat, and fell all into Hell before they had arraigned the
schismatics, as they call them, which caused such a laughter amongst the
Gentlemen of the contrary opinion, that their mirth proved almost matter for
the Inquisition; nor are the incongruities and absurdities of our own stage
any less or more excusable, it being a long time used to historical
arguments, which could not be dispatched but by Chorus, or the descending of
some god, or a Magitian: As in the plays of Bungy, Bacon, and Vandarmast, the
three great Negromancers, Dr Faustus, Chinon of England, and the like. Every
act being supported by some long narrative, which was the Apology for the
soloecisticall appearances of children, become men in an instant, within the
space of two musicks, infants, and great Commanders: and sometimes without any
regard to the credit of their Histories) as in the play of Adam and Eve) the
good grandam is brought in with two or three waiting maids attending her, and
in Paradise too, when there were but two in all the world. So at Madrid in the
divine Comaedies; Saint John the Baptist is presented with a Cross triumphant
in his hand, before his Masters passion, many a year. And in the Tragaedy of
Babel, an interpreter of the several confusions of tongues, when one man could
not tell what another said. And so in their shows of the lives of Saints, St
Francis is brought in pulling the Devil by the nose, which was the miracle of
St Dunstans tongs; and the Lady Mary is robbed of many of her own actions,
which now are celebrated for the Lady of Lorettos, St Winn, St Bridget, and the
Virgin Martyr.

All which inconvenicenes might be redressed, if there were some understanding,
and discreet person ordained at Court.] An Inigo Jones for scenes, and a Ben
Johnson for Plays, would have wrought great cures upon the stage, and it was
so well reformed in England, and grown to that height of Language, and gravity
of style, dependency of parts, possibility of plot, compass of time, and
fullness of wit, that it was not any where to be equaled; nor are the
contrivers ashamed to permit their plays (as they were acted) to the public
censure, where they stand firm, and are read with as much satisfaction, as
when presented on the stage, they were with applause and honor. Indeed their
names now may very well be changed and called the works not Plays of Johnson,
Beaumont and Fletcher, Cartwright, and the rest, which are survivers of the
stage; that having fallen, not into Court-Reformers, but more severe correctors,
who knowing not how to amend or repair, have plucked all down, and left
themselves the only spectacle of their times.

Have you not had a desire to do that which cannot be done?] Sancho is turned
Pisse-Prophet, and will prove his Master not Enchanted by his Urine, not from
the color, but emission; and no doubt he was as skilful in the other
excrement, but his argument does not hold as to madness and incantations, in
which the natural operations do not cease, but the rational and voluntary;
as may appear by the scents of Bedlam, and the receptacles of distracted
people; whither I refer the unsatisfied in this point. Ingestions and
egestions, more or less, are common to all people, and as for the Don, it was
impossible but he must have had many motions, (before the starting of this
question) by reason of the continual joggings of the Cart, which is very
provoking, both to Urine and siege, and happily Sancho following close to the
Cage, must smell out the condition his master was in, and therefore cunningly
puts the question in the Dieureticall instance, which was not so evident, and
so bewraies all the whole business. And though hence he cannot enfeeble the
Don's reason for his Enchantment, yet he does absolutely conclude, that he is
in a woeful pickle, and it necessarily followed, that the Cage must be undone,
or the Don.

CHAP. XXII.
Just as imprisoned winds, when once broke forth,
One against the other raises, East, West, North,
And dripping South: So does the Don let loose
His prisoners, which too long had been kept close.
The whistling, rattling thundering and bombizing,
All at intestine wars, in one Horizon;
(Which vexed the Knight unto the guts) till set
At liberty, they poison all they met.
Another purge the Canon administers,
Hoping by reason, and his learned clysters
To bring those vapors from his head; but reason
Against Romances still was out of season.
"To burn his Library it was in vain,
"Or carry him to the Mancha back again,
"Unless you first took out, and washed his brain,
"In this pat time, now the moon and he is in the Waine.
TEXT.
BUT those that have a desire to eat meat when they can get it, and drink when
it is given them, etc.] Besides the present necessities the Don lay under,
(which by the often drawing in of his breath, twisting his legs, and more ill
favored faces then ordinary, gave Sancho, to perceive his condition very
^icturient, and cacaturient.) He glances at the common wants of the erratick
function, which was extreme want of necessaries, unto which the Knights were
so accustomed and habituated, that one famine would hardly famish them; (they
being most dangerous fellows at a siege, and able to hold out without the
ordinary means of sustentation) yet as appears in the Text, not men so
obstinate and refractory, that they despised or refused the helps of Nature,
and supplies of their preservation, but they were hardy, patient of hunger and
thirst, not troubled with canine appetites, or the woolfe in their stomachs,
having no set-meales, nor belly-clock, but eating, and drinking as often as
provisions presented themselves, so that diet was a casual thing, and an
accessory to their lives, who were bred in Parthian education, and had nothing
until they could catch it: So that Incantation could not properly be applied
unto them, but a discommuning, and frequent interdiction of the creature.

For if they did not free him, or got further off, he protested that he could
not forbear to offend their noses.] Fair warning, Guarda voauz. He summons
their olfactive forces before he will storm, and desires them to an honorable
surrender, rather then to stand the hazard of so desperate a charge. His
ammunition and artillery was ready, Colon mounted, and infinite of small shot
provided for execution; which through any of the breaches in the Cage, would
fall foul amonst them. Hostages taken, conditions agreed, the Don is
disincaged.

The first thing he did, he went toward Rosinante, and twice or thrice striking
him on the Buttocks, he said,]

Although my inward pangs, and deadly gut^croaks,
Solicit the disrobing of my buttocks;
I cannot pass by these (O beast reputed
Above Bucephalus) flanks unsaluted.
Idaea of all horses, Model of coursers.
(Pray Heaven I never am forced to stride a worser!)
Nor Cyllarus his star, nor in the Wain
Of Charles, or Sun, is such a horse again.
Nor Pers^^s horse, which people say is flying,
Flies like to this, (if any dangers nigh him.)
Nor any horse under so sure command,
As Rosinante, for a constant stand.
Squire let him loose, or leave him to the Carter,
And help to untrusse, I Am sure (...) is no starter.
Whom if I once bestride again, I Will on,
Though I come off like sunne-burnt Phaeton.
He said gentleman, is it possible, that the idle and unsavory Lecture of books
of Knighthood has so much distracted your wit, as thus to believe.] It is not
Don Quixot's luck alone, to pin a belief on the credit and authority of other
men; for should he have presently replied, upon what grounds or proof, do you
Mr Canon justify the numerous fardle of your Legends, and the strange miracles
done in them; when you are not certain, that ever such persons were in the
world? nor are there any witnesses of the wonders said to be performed by them?
you fly to an Implicit faith in the Church, or authors of them, nor would you
willingly have their auditors or converts question the truth of those
(otherwise suspected stories) which you have made your selves first believe,
and then your disciples; the Catalogue of the saints, far exceeding the
Ephemerides of Knight-Errants, and their actions are as far incredible, as any
of Amideses of Gaul, or Greece, beside the infinite number of relics,
Baptists-heads, pieces of the Cross, and nails, to sustain which, not Joseph
of Airmathaea, nor A^las shoulders are sufficient: As for the Cross, it is
believed to be but one piece of timber, (nor would the Jews, who did all in
disgrace of the blessed Patient) make it of the best wood; and yet you shall
find many crucibles, (which we confide were snattocks of that very Cross) to
be of Cedar some, some of Juniper, some of Cypress, some of Lignum vitae, the
type being Lignum mortis. And whereas the nails were but four or five, which
were first canonized, Hanibal had not more rings at the battle of Cannae, then
we can show nails of all sorts and sizes, and so many Napkins, that it will
require a society of Linnen-drapers to furnish us with the Napery: I desire but
fair play, that the Authors of my books, may be believed to be the Authors of
what they wrote, as well as yours; which granted, can you imagine that men of
their name and antiquity, would spend so much time and study, in composing lies
and putting cheats upon the readers. You, when all is done, can palliat your
obtrusions upon the people, with a Piae frauds, or Apocryphae fabulae, which
though they are not fundamental truths, yet they are inservient, moral, and
significative helps to the end you aim at, and all is salv'd.

See what wit is there in the world, that can induce another to believe, that
the History of Guy of Burgundy, and the Princess of Florence was not true.] No
doubt as true every tittle, as that of Guy of Warwick and the Boar, and the
great defeats of the Giant Colybrand, whose statues are in brass, cast in
Swethland, and the cuts of them this day to be seen in the books; so likewise
men may, if they be disposed to be merry, seem to discredit the stories of
Bevis of Southampton, John a-Green, and Robin Hood; but that the Cities wherein
these men sometimes were famous in their Hals, and public meeting places, in
painted cloth or frames, present the lively Histories still unto posterity, and
the signs of St George, in every Town, almost of England, convinces all men
of the certainty of such a person, and his famous acts, and since the defeat of
that strange Dragon, which was then pregnant, and so was slain, her and her
issue, there has not a Dragon been heard of in the Country; as there are no
spiders in Ireland, ever since St Patrick caught a Spider upon his face, and
anathematized them all into England, which furnished the whole Land with
Cobweb-Lawn, until this day. Nor are the works of Jacques of Spain less
credited, who by his holy life and prayer effected, that the universal
Monarchy should be in times to come, settled in the Austrian family, about the
days, when the Indians should be converted to their Religion, and a
protuberancy of the lip should be the certain sign of the true heir to the
Crown; that Oranges, Lemmons, and Malaga Reisins, should breed as good blood,
as Beef, Veale or Mutton, and that the Knight-Errants of Iberia, should be
fortified to live without meat or sauce for many days. It may as well be
denied, that Duke D' Alvas face is not to be seen on Jugge-pots in Holland, or
Father Garnets in straw in England, or Monsieur D' Ancres privities in all
Tavernes in France; whosoever shall go about to overthrow the verity of these
books of Errantry, will find himself an endless piece of labor, they having
so many champions to defend them; the world swarms with men of this profession,
who under the notion of relieving the oppressed, advance themselves highly in
their times. Pity it is, that Chronologers have taken no more notice of them,
which is the chief cause, that we can but guess, and that uncerteinly too, in
what age these heroical spirits ever flourished. Plutarch's lives, Luciant
Fables, Valerius, Commines, Fox, Stow, Hollingshead, would be of no account,
and scarce bought, if some good Antiquary would but yet make it his business,
(and i^ would be work enough) to derive the History of these gallant men, from
the Knights of the Golden Fleece, unto the Knight of the Ill-favored Face.

CHAP. XXIII.
As we prove Ballads true, Don takes the hint,
And justifies Romances, cause in print.
If it be licensed it is true, although
A book may lie cum Privilegio.
It Is a lie licensed, and made fit for sale,
And Caveat Emptor fastened to the t^le.
Were It not for this, the Knights of errant worth,
(As Don in the Cage) could never have got forth.
The Knight of the Sun, had found eternal night,
But that an Imprimatur gave him light;
And Captain Jones in all his dreadful dress,
Had never been known in the crowd, but for the Press.
Wherefore no Knights (unless against their wills)
Ever adventured on the Paper Mils:
Of other Mils indeed our Don makes brags,
But counts that Sacred which does grind the rags.
TEXT.
THat were a jest indeed, that books which are printed with the King's
License, and approbation of those, etc.] This is the very life of all books,
privilege, and their License, it is their guard and security from the mouths
of scandalous invectors, who would conclude most things for untruths, but that
this warrant does defend them: What other buckler have the many controversies,
difference of opinions, then the Broad Seals to shelter themselves, or rather
lie under? what authority or reason, for the multitude of authors now abroad,
but that they are printed? and like children exposed, are sent forth to seek
their fortune with a good frontispiece, (like the Grecians Table) to get
favor, belief or money, which is better then both.

Sir John of famous memory; not he of the Boares-Head in East cheap, desired
but a broad Seal, or Letters Patent, for to raise a shilling of every one,
that could give no reason why he should refuse; but in case there were any that
should deny him, (as there are some costive, and obstinate natures, that will
not part with their money without very good cause why) he desired leave to
summon those up to London, to dispute the case, which rather then they would be
at trouble of, 'twas twenty to one, but the money would be paid. Such efficacy
have those instruments, that I have heard of a Reversioner, that killed the
present incumbent, with the opening of his Box, as if it had been Pandoras, out
of which diseases issued.

What greater pleasure can there be, then to behold as one would say, even here
before our eyes, etc.] A Topic, a jucunditate, or rather jocunditate objecti.
Whereas all things are desirable for some great profit, or delight conceived,
or absolutely in them; none has more then this dream of Knight-Errantry: Which
though it introduces you into lakes with Serpents, yet it never leaves you
without the Lady of the Lake. If it brings you into Forests, deserts, and
almost inaccessible places, there will an Ariadne, some disconsolate Fairy or
other appear, (as if you had come by her own clue thither) to be your
solacer, and she-comforter; as you see by experience in the Don, who though
enchanted in his Cage, out of which, there was no possibility of getting, but
by the power of a higher excantation, yet at the request of Madam Cloacina, who
never failed him in his necessities, he is let loose.

I dare affirm of myself, that since I became a Knight Errant, I am valiant,
courteous, liberal, etc.] This proof a Test seipso, is not so current as the
other, for it was bottomed upon his own daring to say it, and it is known he
durst do much: But the attributes with some qualifications might be very well
usurped by him; as that he was valiant, ferendo, which passive fortitude is
most erratick; liberal, promittendo; courteous, recipiendo, denying nothing
that was given him; generous, but not generosus, and that in genere, not in
specie; gentle, and most of all, since his keeping in the Cage; bold, for there
he adventured to tempt his Bases; mild, or rather mellow, and soft, or pappy;
patient ( per-force as they say) an indurer of labors, Imprisonments, and
Enchantment, revera and plerunque: And as of old Julius Caesar got Gallia,
dando, accipiendo, ignoscendo: So Don Quixot, by giving nothing, forgiving any
thing, and taking every thing, would in good time, (if he were capable of it)
make Sancho Pancha Earl of Terra incognita.

I understand not those Philosophers, quoth Sancho; but this I know well, that
I would I had as speedily the Earldom, as I could tell how to govern it.]
About a season both; though no doubt if he would have applied his mind to those
abandoned Philosophers, he might sooner have learned how to govern, then his
Lord got the government for him. The frame of his body much agreeing with
sitting and sleeping in Judicature, and that mind, that was able to inform
that body would take informations at leisure. The power and the reward was the
thing Sancho look^ for. The abilities and execution you might go look. The
place should qualify the man; it was hard to judge by outsides: Aesop was an
ugly fellow, but very witty, and seldom any natural defects, but there were
great supplies of inward faculties. Galba was very bald on the head, but it was
well lined within. Cicero had a wenne on his nose, but yet smelt out Catilin's
conspiracy; Caesar had none and could not discover that against himself;
Vitellius had a great Paunch, yet was an Emperor, and became the chair of
State, better then spruce Otho. Who then looking upon Sancho, but would say,
there was enough in him?

Then did the Goat-herd arrive, and laying hold of her, said unto her; O you
wanton Ape, you spotted elre.] It was very strange, that the Don upon these
words, was not incited to a rescue, and supposing the speckled Goat to be a
beauty-speckt Lady enchanted, instantly had not started to his Arms: Upon less
provocation, he assaulted the flock of sheep. How easily might the odor and
grain of the creature have been mistook for hers of Toboso, surely the Knight
was dull after dinner, or else this could not have produced less then an
adventure, but especially, when in his passionate rebuke, the Goat-herd
proceeds to taunt her, with how can it be other, then that you are a female;
and therefore can never be quiet, turn back love, turn back. Could the
defender of the sex hear this, and not be unmoved? Of all the quarrels he
undertook, there was not so much ground for one, as here; besides, had there
been no other reason, but that it was a Goat-Errant, by his order he was to
succor her, and have said to her bold pursuer; Enchanted Lady, (for by this
miscreants words, I guess you to be such) unsold the cause of this your
flight, and change. I am not ignorant of the like mutation in your sex, some
being turned into Trees, some into Spiders, some into Birds, some into Beasts,
some into Streams. I my self but lately was enchanted, and I know not how
soon returnable unto that condition. Speak quickly, while my Knightly capacity
lasts, that I may restore your hairs into the silken robes you use to wear;
your goodly beard into your fan; your spots into curious specks; your stately
horns into the Persian Tiara; or the knots wherein you twist your delicate
hair; all which shall be effected, if I may have but one word from you, to
show your desire to be relieved by my hand. How this fancy escaped him, is
almost a miracle, and but that his wooden studdy infused no glorious freaks
into him, it had been impossible.

I accept mine, quoth Sancho, for I will go with this Pastie.] It is no time
of adventuring, but preparing for adventures I perceive: Knight-Errants and
their Squires, like Ships, must be victuall'd, and Sancho was providing for a
long voyage. The Cloak-bag in his belly, was of more capacity then that on his
Ass; a corner of which, the whole Pie would not well fill. While the Don is
held by the ear, the Squire will be held by the teeth; Mutton is preferred
with him before Goat, and one single sheep entrenched and fortified in good
crust-work, was a more considerable adventure to him, then sharing the whole
flock.

Sancho for government it will suffice,
Eat Py-crust stoutly, and thou must be wise.
CHAP. XXIV.
The Goat-herd, having laid his Goat from skipping,
Under that Emblem tells of maidens tripping:
And would insinuate into our breasts,
That there are far more women-straies, then Beasts.
If the toy take them, like the speckled Goat,
They care not for the spoil of petticoat:
O'r hills, o'r dales, will fond Leandra run,
Vincent of the Rose her heart from all has won.
But the false Soldier loved not her, but gold,
And plander'd all, but what was fast toth' hold.
" Vincenti Dabitur, his Motto be,
"The Soldiers leavings be assigned to me.
But a vae victis be Leandras fee;
List then, while I invoke a muse to cheer us,
With Story of Leandra and her Heroes.
TEXT.
THere is a village.]
There was (say I) a Country Village,
Where lived a damzell that did pillage
Beauty and hearts; but she was dainty,
And did affect not one in twenty.
Who could forbear to like and love her?
She was as plumpe as any Plover;
But if that expression's homely,
Take another, she was comely.
And which gave the whole Town the Itch,
(Of love I mean) both fair and rich.
Anselmo and Eugenio (two
Such curious youths no Village knew)
Were smitten both, and they were neighbors
Children to boot, but lost their labors.
Yea though they made their meek addresses
Unto her father (which God blesses)
(Though many suitors have no care on it,
But take a buttock for a warrant)
They did not speed, the work was green,
(In years I mean) but just sixteen;
And why she liked not, you may gather,
They wooed not her first, but her father:
So by their simple pious fooling,
Both Rivals love-sutes lay a cooling.
At last from Italy there comes,
A youth bred up, amongst Fifes and Drums;
The son of one, did daily labor,
But he as proud as Bethlem Gabor,
In Buffe and Scarfs, full richly clad;
(Good cloths indeed, where ever the were had.)
But richer far in horrid stories
Of his own actions, and vain glories.
And yet for all his prate and shows,
He was poor Vincent's son of the Rose.
A thousand stories he did tell,
Surpassing Sir John Mandevill.
Vincent his name was, (and you know, men
From such a name may take an Omen)
But he was Vincent of the Rose,
And under that lies to purpose.
To Market when he came, the people
Rung out the greatest bell in the Steeple:
So that they flockt unto this Hector,
To hear his tales, as to a Lecture.
Amongst the rest of lowly rank,
Leandra spied this Mountebanck;
Who to his quacking brought a Gitterne,
(As musical as any Bitterne.)
Of every thing he had a Poem,
And amongst his Auditors would throw 'em.
Leandra, not so wise as fair,
Was taken with this pedlars ware:
His fabulous stories she adores,
As Desdemona did the Moors;
And all his dangers counterfeit
(Poor fool,) as true, she did conceit.
His broken pate with pots and glasses
She takes for honored wounds and sla^hes;
And for a bullet (strangely shot)
The ugly Squinzy in his throat.
His pit-hole face with the small pox,
The dents of Mars his powder box.
He need not feign; her love found out,
Enough to cozen her no doubt.
And now (as if the Devil would have it,)
He asked her will, she forthwith gave it.
Fathers consent she stayed not for,
Surrender is for man of war.
Now all the plot and chief contrivance,
Was how to get his spoused wife-hence.
What ever she could wrap or wring
Into her night-bag she did fling;
A horse she stole too from the stables,
To carry her to famous Npal^s;
Long time before that, Mas Anello
From fisher man was a brave fellow.
But now her Vincent of the Rose
Proved not so fragrant in the close;
For to a Cave he brought the damzell,
Pretending there to rest her hams well:
But the entertainment far and wide is,
Of Dido, and her Anchisides.
For here the storm was in the Cave,
Tempests of oaths the Villain gave;
And charged Leandra to unstrip her,
(The Virgin feared that he would whip her)
But he whipped nothing but her clothes;
She charged him by his vows and oaths;
Nothing would move Vincent of the Rock,
But leaves Leandra in her smock,
Without a light or any fuel,
Despoyl'd of all but her best Jewel.
But chastity we know of old
(And without cloths is wondrous cold.
At last she heard a noise of hoopers,
And peeping out she finds them Troopers:
Then did she cry, thumping her breast,
Now Vincent's served, they will have the rest;
A thousand fears did then surprise her,
She wishes now she had been wiser:
But strait her fears and troubles vanish,
She knew the Troopers to be Spanish;
And one amongst them was old Iaquez,
Who used to carry her to the Cake-house;
Iaquez she cried, come help thy mistress,
And rid me out of this same distress.
Iaquez at first was main affrighted,
But suddenly the Swain alighted.
And kneeling said, my pretty Donna,
How is it you have no garments on-a?
It is the mode of Spanish Ladies
To go in smocks of nights, not a-dayes;
Now since I see you shrewdly lack it,
I pray invest you in my Jacket;
Which would be warmer I believe,
If there were to it ever a sleeve.
But since we cannot help that disaster.
Get up behind, I Will ride the faster:
Without a Pillion or a Crupper,
To jolt it thus behind a Trooper,
Did very much Leandra trouble,
Nor had she ought for to lay double.
So that she wept as she did ride,
And wished she could have sat a-stride:
But Jacques spurred and spurred, and switch'd,
Ride softlier Jacques she beseech'd;
But Iaquet stints not, till he brought her
Unto his Master, who then sought her.
And having got good wives about her,
In better fashion they did clout her;
And lest the rumor far should run,
She presently became a Nun;
And since she could not married be,
Vowed until death, virginity.
Which, whether Vincent of the Rose
Had, or had not, yet no man knows:
Anselmo and Eugenio,
Having lost her, lost themselves too.
And being Venus famous dotards,
One turned Shepherd, the other Goat-heard.
Comparing women in their notes,
To wandering Sheep, and capering Goats;
VVhilest they are even with the fools,
And laugh at them that love by rules.
CHAP. XXV.
A simple Goat-heard will Leandra bury
By's unbelief in a cold Monastery.
Here was her Heroes; here the Hercules,
Confide in Don, down go the Nunneries:
But he distrusting in our ill faced Ops,
Is mulcted for his doubting in the chops
With a good loaf; to gather up the arms
Came Sancho up tro, or revenge Don's harms?
But come he did, and did most highly ruffle,
Which made the business but a Table-scuffle;
From which the Don retreated, when a Trumpet
Called him to true encounter, and to some feat
Of desperate valor; what could bound his fancy,
Who will adventure, though he cannot a man see?
At last appears the blessed virgins statue:
A ravished Lady swears the Don, have at you.
O how he flies about, and hacks and slices
The poor white Friars, and their clean sur-plices!
They sang aloud, good Lord de-liver us,
And suffer not this Don to sliver us.
Let down the Captive, (quoth the Don) don't dare us,
Nor think I Will spare ye, for your good Lord spare us:
But the great Lady would not see this wrong,
And she revenged the affronter with a prong;
Which on his heaving shoulder fell full sore,
And from his horse, threw Quixot o'r and o'r.
Lo where the man of Knights profession
Lies stoun'd by the adventured of Procession;
Who if he rise again, to beat any,
Will never charge for this the Let any.
TEXT.
CErtes (friend Goatherd) if I were at this time able to undertake any
adventure.] Being under Enchantment, otherwise there is no time, when a
Knight Errant is not offensive, and defensive; that is, either beating or
beaten. It is too much a conscience to be at once, at war with men and Devils:
Necromancers, Sorcerers, Witches, VVizards, and the like, being of the train
band of Hell and black guards of Pluto, were no small enemies of the Don's. No
man I think, of that valiant, honorable, but desperate profession was ever
oftener or longer, under captivity of the Diabolical forces: and although some
wiser then others, would laugh the opinion out of the world, and maintain that
there are no Witches nor withcrafts, Inchanters, nor enchantments, spirits or
familiars, against the received sentences of Tribunals, the confessions of
diverse condemned persons, the visible teats and nipples, whereat the young
Incubi and Succubae, were constantly fed: The strange creatures that like
Squirrels, Rats, VVeezles, VVhippe^s, Hares, Mice, Polecats, and innumerable
other vermin, haunt and frequent such people, also their own several
transmutations into the shapes of Horses, Deer, Hares, (in which shapes they
have been rid, many hundred, of more then errantick miles) hunted, and
sometimes suffered; yet they find Patrons to defend the impossibility of such
operations, contracts, or Diabolical disguises, when they cannot deny, but the
first practice upon humane nature was by the Devil in Serpente, using the
instruments of tha^ subtle creature, to form a language and discourse, whereby
he deluded the most perfect of her generation, and has so entailed that
victory upon both sexes, but especially on that, that in the mishaps and claps
of women, nothing is more frequent, then to entitle the Devil to his own
work, and to devolve the business (if not totally, yet principally) from
themselves, when by way of evasion, they say, surely I was bewitched, or the
Devil was in me, or I was not my self, in my right mind, that is, enchanted,
as the Don was in the Text, from whom action was as inseparable as the nose
from his face, (for I cannot say the care from his head (but during this deadly
charms efficacy.

Thou art a great villain, said Don Quixot, and thou, etc. The Enchantment does
a little abate, and his knightly spirits return in such abundance, that he
makes a weapon of a loaf, which was used to refresh them, and not to be cast
(as here) in any teeth but his own.

If Sancho Pancha had not arrived at the instant.] Sancho had been Fluellin in
this scuffle, (the pillage of such battles, always belonging to him) if the
eminent danger of his masters throat, had not proved an utter enemy to his own.
If the Goatherd had not almost throtled his master, Sancho had in a short time
choked himself with the ingurgitated relics and orts of the Canons
provision. But it is a Lapithaean feast, where there was more meat then
manners, more stomach then feeding; not like Tantalus his fare, was this at the
Table, flying from their lips, but flying at them, and in such flocks, that
there was more meat for their mouths, then mouths for their meat, non
offendimur ambulante coena, Is understood, when one dish dances round the
table, but this was all a running banquet, as if they had been served in plates
of quicksilver. No dish nor cup stood still, but only while 'twas kissed, and
the salutations so pestilent and close, that they drew blood at billing:
Insomuch, that though the meat was well dressed, the guests were all raw, and
blood run about their mouths, as if they had been Cannibals, and fed upon one
another.

In conclusion they heard the sound of a Trumpet.] What at other times animates
to fight, did here dissolve the fray: The noble sound of that Warlike
instrument, recalled shame into the combatants, who full of flesh-wounds,
crossed the cudgels the right way, and fell to picking quarrels with their
teeth, their bellies being the only sufferers, and not easily after so great a
spoil, to be satisfied; But as the Fool thinks, so the bell tinketh. The Don
conceits this Trumpet sounds for his assistance; the Lady Micomiconas Trumpet
upon his life, who having joined battle with Pandafiland her mortal foe, sent
this summons for the restorer of her Kingdom; or else Dulcineas Trumpet at her
dinner of Beans, and gray Pease; or else Fames Trumpet, to blow him honorably
home after his many victories. But it was not so, nor so, nor so. But a Trumpet
it was, and a Ladies Trumpet too; but at this time, it blew no good to the Don;
it was a solemn Church Trumpet, sounding dolefully before an armory of Prayers
and tears, to remove a great drought from the Land, but it proved Quixot's day
of judgement-Trumpet, after the dismal sounds, whereof he was carried to the
Mancha to his old woman, which was as bad as Hell and furies to him.

Sancho saying, whither do you go Sr Don Quixot? What Devils do you bear in
your breast, that you run thus against the Catholic faith?] Contra Romanam
Catholicam fidem you should say Sancho, for Don Quixot and your self both, by
your stomachs Lutherans, (but by your provisions, Carthusians, or Cappucines)
might very well be against Images, and yet maintain the Catholic Faith
without mutilation of the second Commandment, or breaking one into two.

But Sancho labored all in vain.] The whole Council of Trent could not have
persuaded the Don from the attempt, who at this instant, fiercer then the
Council of Dort, feared no Anathemas, Bulls, nor Bears. This action (had it
been in late days) would have new dubbed him, Knight of the reformation, and
from the success of this adventure, as great an harvest of conversion might
have been expected, as was from the fall of Mahomets Tomb amongst the Jews and
Infidels; which Tomb has stood on the ground at Mecha, ever since the
imbalming of that impostor, although it is a piece of Alchoran faith, that he
in an Iron Chest, hangs in the air, supported by the equal attraction of two
loadstones.

He assaulted the Image-Carriers, one whereof leaving the charge of the
burden, encountered the Knight with a wooden forke, etc.] This fellow stood not
for an Image it seems: His faith was proved by his works; for he was resolved
to try which was the greater Pageant, that which they carried, or he which
Rosinant. O the unfortunatenesse of this adventure! Pitchforke prevails against
Sword, and Porter against Knight. The Don by one unhappy blow is deprived of
the use of his shoulder, a judgment (no doubt in specie) punishing that part,
which first did lift it self against the Idol. Nec enim lex justior ulla est,
etc.

Then might they hear Sancho bewailing him with tears in his eyes, in this
manner. O flower of Chivalry!]

O ye Knight-Errants past, and those to come,
Weep ye before you are born, you from the tomb:
This day was slain in homely fashion,
Their envy, and your, Imitation.
Whom they never lived to see, you never will see,
Unless it be in this sad Elegy;
Wherefore we will leave him in a Character,
For in effigy, 'twill be fowler far.
The Knight that Lady loved, and never enjoyed,
That fought with any thing, but never destroyed.
That eat but little, less then little paid,
That frighted every one, of all afraid.
That had a faithful Squire, that had an Ass,
That had an Island had but for this pass.
That Knight stretched out, lies to be seen at length,
That bestrid Rosinant, that Horse of strength,
That is the Knight, that must be the example,
That the prime horse, that with Knight-Errants vamp will.
That Squire that weeps, is he that is content
(That Island lost) to live of the continent,
Don Quixot was called again to himself with Sancho's outcries.] It had been
worth Sancho's question; and none indeed deserved the answer to it but Sancho;
whether in this deliquium and trance, his soul was transported? What more
eminent place in Elysium was prepared for Knight-Errants, then of any other
order? And whether he did see those many Hero's, whose Histories incited him to
this profession, advanced according to the merits of their undertakings in the
other world? What habits Amadis du ^aul, and the other Amadis of Greece wore?
Or whether there were any investitures at all, till the complete number of
Knight-Errants were accomplished in his departure? Or were there any more to
follow? But Sancho was overjoyed at the sight of his revoked Lord, and forgot
to move the question. And the Don (as all recoveries and victories, are imputed
to the sovereign aspects of their Ladies, so their defeats and crosses to
their aversions, or some obnoxious interpositions) Knight Errant like gave the
maxim of his sufferings, to be the absence and long distance betwixt the
Tobosian Lady, and his person, unto whom now, as to an Antidote, as fast as
Cart can go, he will hasten.

Sancho, replied Don Quixot, thou speak reasonably, and it will be great
wisdom, to let pass the cross aspects of those Planets that reign at this
present.]

Knight-Errantry does not engage the order of them against the Stars, if they
be Planet-struck once, they never return a blow; it is wisdom then, not valor
must manage the business.

Sapiens dominabitur astris. And certainly, if ever Knights were borne under
malignant Planets, ours was. Venus was cross legged; Mars retrograde; Sol in
nubibus; Jupiter excentrick; Saturn sullen; Luna and Mercury only conspired to
assist him home again; She, because he was her companion much on nights, the
other for his unwearied Errantry on days: Insomuch, that if the number ever be
augmented amongst them, he is in election to make the eight Planet: What
influence the septentriones had upon him at present, is to be easily guessed,
for he is upon his second hoyst into the Cart, and but that the Don was
provided, there was an Auriga for him too.

There the Wain-man yoked his Oxen, and accommodated the Knight on a bottle of
Hay.] Grass and Hay, we are all mortal, the greatest men must dye like
beasts, though the Don expires with what a beast would live. Rosinant only
envyed him this cushion, who for the present, wished to change places with him.
Thus you see the sad conclusion of this famous Knight, who indeed deserved a
more Sella Curulis; but his vast knowledge in the miscarriages of his
predecessors, made him slight these present indignities: For when he considered
Marius in a Lake, (as good a place as Tom Turds field) Orlando in Bedlam,
Amadis du Gaul in a Dungeon, and he of Greece in shackles; the Valiant Gataor
forced to run the Gauntlet, the Knight of the Burning Pestle in Cornelius
Tub, and most of their Squires like Sancho, indeed at the Carts tail, but not
like Sancho with his shirt on, he played a little with the hay he sat upon,
(the emblem of humane frailty) and after that (as if he eat it chopped) he said
nothing but this, Non sum majoribus impar.

Which some thought, he spoke, alluding to Bajazet, who was in this manner
carried about by the insulting Tamerlane. Others thought that he called to
mind, his Manchegall predecessors, who were Plow-men, and not disdaining the
contemplation of his originals, resolved to begin that world again, and
invert the Poem to Virgils Aeneids; Ille ego qui quondam Mavortis, terror in
armis,
Ad patriam redeo, ut parerent arva Colono.
Translated thus.
Since our design for Errantry is broke,
I Will still subdue, though Oxen under yoke:
Nor shall this Cage my vast ambition bound,
I Will fall to plough, and so I Will tear the ground.


Sancho Panca' s wife, as soon as ever she saw her husband, asked whether the
Ass were in health or no? etc.] The question serving for both man and Master;
Sancho replied to its double sense, and says, the Animal was in the better
condition of the two. Sancho's ears were fallen, and this dishonorable return,
cross to all his hopes, made him ashamed to see his wife, as he might well,
who expected the title of a Queen at least; but she is but Ione Pancha still:
'Twas well (since it could be no better) quoth Ione, that he brought the Ass
with him, and the fool that rode him; this night they will have an encounter,
and for more.

But of his end he could find nothing, if good fortune had not offered to his
view, an old Physician, who had in his custody a leaden box, etc.] Who this old
Physician should be, is very hard to conjecture, for he was a great Antiquary
beside, as will appear by his delight in these monuments, and rare relics of
the Don; Unless it should be John Dellues, I know not whom he means: For John
having lived famous throughout all Spain for mighty cures, at last fell sick,
and being near his end, some friend desired that he would not bury with him the
means whereby he grew so eminent; John told his friend all, that it was true,
a great fame lived with him, and would follow him; but for the critical
knowledge and success in his cures, it was thus: He had a fortune Physic
book, wherein the names of most diseases were wrote, and as Patients came for
his opinion, he withdrew for a season, and in that intervall, threw the dice,
and upon what disease the chance fell, that was the patients sickness, then he
threw again for the cures, and accordingly followed those medicines, on which
the dice rested. This was his directory for diseases and remedies, which he
made use of to his end, and the end of many; but the number of his cures
surmounting his losses, his bad casts went for nothing. By this easy way of
practice, (for illuminative and inspired physic he detested, as also all
counsels with other Physicians) he had the more leisure for the enquiry into
these old records; and amongst many, he at last happened upon those of the
Mancha; out of which he gathered some few Epitaphs, Elegies, and fancies, upon
Don Quixot, Dulcinea of Toboso, and in the praise of Rosinante and Sancho
Pancha; With which we shall conclude, desiring you to do the Don this last
honor, to see him in his urne, and hear what is said over his ashes.

The End of the Fourth Book.
Knights Templers on the worthy Knight, DON QUIXOTS Death.
AWakened from the round where we long lay,
Still men of Arms as you may see, not clay:
We shake our weighty limbs, and crested heads,
And would, but for the grates, rise from our beds,
Where we enchanted lie; no more the talk's
Of us, let Quixot's name fill up the walks.
Brother in Arms, we will afford thee room,
Lie close STEROPES, Don Quixot's come.
We will dispense this Temple for thy Coarse,
We have another for thy famous Horse.
Knights of Jerusalem on DON QUIXOT.
SInce the long days of old Mathusalem,
No Knights so great as the Jerusalem.
( The Knights o't'h Holy War) until the Don's
Renowned acts out-cry'd us of St John's.
We ventured to redeem the Sepulcher
From Pagan hands; but lie in Angli-terre:
Our monuments are now defaced, our Cavernes,
And nothing left of us, but signs of Tavernes:
But yet for all our injuries and wrongs,
We Will find a place for thee, near justice Longs;
Where in the memory of thy strange fights,
Thumping and beating is both days and nights.
Duke Humphrey to DON QUIXOT.
VNtombed I, a place to thee resign,
Lie, if thou will, in the same ground was mine;
'Twill be small charge to thy Executor
To raise a Tomb, for there are stones good store:
Thy Votaries as they do pass that way,
May fast as they did use, where they please pray.
Long Meg of Westminster, to Dulcinea of Toboso.
I Long Meg once, the wonder of the Spinsters,
Was laid, as was my right, in the best of Ministers;
Nor have the Wardens ventured all this whiles,
To lay, except my self, one in those Isles.
Indeed until this time, never any one
Was worthy to be Megs Companion.
But since Toboso has so fruitful been,
To bring forth one might be my Sister-twinne;
Alike in breadth of face, (no Margeries
Had ever wider cheeks, or larger eyes)
Alike in Shoulders, Belly, and in flancks,
Alike in legs too, (for we had no shancks)
And for our feet, alike from heel to toe,
The Shoomakers the length did never know.
Lie thou by me, no more it shall be common,
One I Will of man there is, this I Will of woman.
Bancks his Horse to Rosinant.
THough Rosinante famous was in fields
For swiftness, yet no Horse like me had heels.
Goldsmiths did shoe me, not the Ferri-Fabers;
One nail of mine, was worth their whole weeks labors.
Horse, thou of metal too, but not of gold,
('It Was best 'twas so, or often they had been sold)
Let us compare ou^ s^ats; thou top of Nowles
Of hills have often been seen, I top of Paul's.
To Smythfield Horses I stood there the wonder,
I only was at top, more have been under.
Thou like a Spanish Iennet, got in the wind,
Were hoysted by a Windmill; 'twas in kind.
But never yet was seen in Spain or France,
A Horse like Bancks his, that toth' pipe would dance:
Tell money with his feet; a thing which you,
Good Rosinante nor Quixot er could do.
Yet I do yield, surpassed in one feat,
Thou art the only Horse, that liv'dst sans meat.
The Aldermen of Gotam to Sancho Pancha.
O Do not grieve, (although thy loss,
To lose a Lord, not worth a cross,
Be loss enough) who now gone home is,
Unlikely ever to keep his promise.
We hearing of thy great renown,
Desire thee to o'r rule our Town:
You Will find us easy to be ruled;
People that will be, must be fooll'd.
A sort of cockscombs cannot tell
When we are ill, nor when we 're well:
Full of money, full of pride,
And want an ebb to our long tide.
You need not bring your Ass with you,
You shall have Asses here enough:
We will make good your Don's intent,
And seat you in this government.
Sancho did seem to shift it off,
But when he had it once, did laugh.
The Sexton of the Mancha on DON QVIXOT.
THE hardy Knight, and sole,
That ever lived under Pole,
Lies buried in this hole.
He that in the air did fly,
By windmill t^st on high,
Under a clod does lie.
H^ that gave Islands, and
Unto his Squire command,
Cannot stir foot nor hand.
Here, after all his tricks,
The bones are of Don Quix:
The rest is gone to Sty^.
The same upon Dulcinea Del Toboso.
HEre in a hollow trunk,
Full deep in the earth sunk,
Lies one, above ground stunk.
Who (saving her presence)
Had not been carried whence
She died, but for offense.
Who having lost her Lord,
Abhorring and abhorred,
Died of her own accord.
O let her ashes rest,
Now she is in her neast.
To stir 'um is not best.
FINIS.

