UPON THE MEETING Of the Sons of the CLERGY, At a Sermon Preached before them
in Saint Paul's Church the eighth of November, 1655.

SPECIFYING Their several Capacities, as they stood in the time of the LAW, AND
NOW UNDER THE GOSPEL.

By E. G.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. 1655.

Upon the meeting of the Sons of the Clergy, At a Sermon in Paul's Church,
Preached on the eighth day of November, 1655.
O For a new Elisha now your'r met, 2 Reg c. 6.

And in that unrepaired Temple set,
Who would commission you for stone and wood,
To build it as wise Salomons stood, Ezra 3. 2.

Or if such glory may not be hoped for well,
To make it such, as did Zerubbabel,
Though while the much unequal groundwork rears
Your joys are more, Ezra c. 20
but more your Fathers Tears.
Where are the Trumpets now? the Cymbals where?
All is dumb Music, 1 Chr. 6.
none of David's there,
Priests to your office yet, and sons of Priests,
(The meaner Levites were the Organists,
And Music part) keep up the alternate song. Ezra 11.

The office of the place in the holy Tongue,
Though 't be not musical, yet praise the Lord,
Since 't cannot be had in tune, in honest Word.
It is a great Indulgence that you meet
In your own place yet and your Brethren greet.
How know you whether the Power that is, Ezra ^^3.

May not restore you your Metropolis.
'When some more envious (then was liked of late)
'Of six score odd, thought yours too much of eight.
Complain not with the Sons o'th Prophets, 2 Reg. 6. 10.
that
The place wherein you pray or preach is straight.
It Is not the many Churches nor the Coaches,
Are God-sent Prophets Triumphs or Reproaches.
A little Zoar is enough: Genesis 19. 23.
when Fire
Is round obout the ears, no more Desire,
Nor yet with fled and sad Elijah grieve,
Or of Gods Providence so mean believe,
Because you see but few are Orthodoxe,
Therefore the Shepheard's worried and the flocks.
Alas fond Augurer! yet just condoles,
Upon a thousand hills in thousand holes. David in Psalm. 10

God does preserve whom he does forthwith call, ^. Reg. 19 18.

That never yet did bow the knee to Baal.
Complain not with the scanted sons of Levi,
When hunger and the Syrian host lay heavy
About besieged Samaria, that your pot
Has death int, 'cause of some bitterer lot,
Or herb of Rue fallen in, Wormwood is good
For mornings draughts, and brown bread is good food.
And purld estates are best which keep us fixed
Unto the hands by which our drink is mixed.
That he would temper it, so 't might not be
All Wormwood* But (...) for me.
Should it be bitter unto death indeed, Avert^t Deus.

Send you Eisha's (children) and with speed
That may unbitter all your Pottage, and
Give you the ancient service of the Land,
Pottage and Meat, That you may meet, and pray,
And praise your God, as is done on this day.
To the Sons of the Prophets as they are under the Gospel of Peace.
SOns of the Prophets still, for still you are,
Either in Ark, or else in Altar care.
Sons of the Prophets, so be always stild,
But he who knows his Father's a wise child,
Not then a lineall order, as the Jews,
Nor does a Priest with us a Priest traduce,
No Tribe of Levi now distinct, as that
Which was the third, which Prophet Jacob gat,
Yet from a Father still else how can ye
Derive till now a legal Progeny.
Spiritual Fathers yours, yet called as was,
From the Jews high Priest, and so you pass
By Ordination, not by birth, though they
That were so born, were called in that way,
A Priest ex traduce, but sanctifid,
And put in Robes, this world would not abide
Ointm^nts and Mitres, Bells and Ephods, Breeches,
More then our this day slighted Rubric Teaches,
No Priest (though their inheritance) unless
They did accept the Installment, and the Dress,
So Aaron was, so Hur initiate
So was it always, (until now of late)
Only the Order is not now confined,
Simeon may be a Prophet, all the kind,
And Zebulun and Naphtali and Dan
And Issachar and Gad and every man,
Here is indeed a thorough Prophecy,
Beyond my Doctor Tailours Liberty.
Joel did say it (before Jeremy)
His Spirit upon all the World shall fly.
And let us now the Prophets meaning know,
And not in Prophecy too much oreflow.
No more shall Israel, or a tribe of them.
No more Judea, or Jerusalem
Shall be the Church, but that shall spread,
As far as is the World inhabited.
You knowing Sons of every Trade shall be
Apted and called to his high Prophecy:
So Prophecy is Catholic and we
See Butchers sons in Episcopacy.
So Christ did call, but from the net and trade,
And of Fish-Fishers, Fishermen he made,
Those he instructed, blessed, ordained: no more
Then Fishers, in the sense they were before.
Nor was it an Inlightening only, that
But real Orders, Presbyterian Plat.
Disciples, that is, Deacons, first were sent,
And made by him, in whom was resident,
The Bishops power, nor did Apostleship,
Flow into seventy, but in Twelve did keep,
And when that one by Providence did fall, Judas.

Not every one was fit but only one had call
Yet all were Presbyters, Acts ^. 25.
but none could be
Apostle made, but out of that Degree.
New hands imposed upon a Presbyter, Quid potest Episcopus supra Presbyterum
praeter ordinationem.

Learned S. Jerome is our friend thus far.
Then I have found you Fathers (more than one)
And your Famed Preacher is a double Son,
Born of a Presbyter, and a Priests Father,
(But for the Times, I Would call him Bishop rather.)
Thus from the Shop by learning and the Schools,
Apted for Doctrine (not remaining fools)
By lawful imposition, all Trades heir
May be a Priest and Doctor of the Chair.
Nay and sometimes we may be retrograde, Gradus Simeonis.

Do as old Simeon, fall into a Trade.
As did Saint Paul, when powerful schisms and Rents,
And Poverties extreme, live by our Tents
Labor for victuals (in a common weal
That will not allow you) rather then to steal,
Now sons of the black coat, or cloth, that is all,
Now left to you of habit Clericall,
Honor your Parents, double honor give,
To those by whom you all do doubly live,
And from the banquet of the Ear, the quaint
Spiritual food now preached and soul provant,
Go to your Feast, more than Elisha made
The sons o'th Prophets, and when Grace is said,
Remember Joseph, sons of Levi, be
Not like Jobs sons in gallant jollity,
While that your Father prays and perchance fasts,
And on his watery eyes no feeling casts.
Take heed unto the House then, though it be
The Merchant Tailors, and my Company,
But I do know you sons of Temperance,
Who will your Feast to Charity advance.
Sic vovet totius Cleri, in Radice, Palmite, Flore, Autumno. Servus and
Ephestion, E. Gayton.

FINIS.

