Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domesticis.

Feb. 12. 1693/4.
THE HISTORY OF THE Church of Malabar, FROM The time of its being first
discovered by the Portuguezes in the Year 1501.

Giving an Account of The Persecutions and Violent Methods of the Roman
Prelates, to Reduce them to the Subjection of the Church of ROME.

Together with the SYNOD of DIAMPER, Celebrated in the Year of our Lord 1599.

With some Remarks upon the Faith and Doctrine of the Christians of St. Thomas
in the Indies, agreeing with the Church of England, in opposition to that of
Rome.

Done out of Portugueze into English.

By MICHAEL GEDDES, Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of SARVM.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith, and Benj. Walford, at the Prince's-Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT, By Divine Providence Lord Bishop
of SARVM, and Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
May it please your Lordship,
WHatever your Thoughts may be of all that can be called mine in this Work, I
am certain you will approve of the design I had in making it public; which was
to satisfy the World, That there has always been a considerable visible Church
upon Earth, that never believed the Doctrines of the Pope's Supremacy,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Adoration of Images, Auricular Confession, etc.
To which good End, if this Treatise should any ways contribute (as I am
persuaded it must) I am then secure, that for that Reason alone you will pardon
any Mistakes I may have made in putting it together; as also the Presumption of
inviting you to read it, by prefixing your great Name to it; a thing I should
never have ventured to have done, had I not found by experience your Lordship's
Candor and Goodness to be equal, to the known exactness of your Judgment. I beg
your Lordship's Blessing, and am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most obliged Servant, MICHAEL GEDDES.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters contained in the HISTORY OF THE Church of
Malabar.
A.
ABd-Jesu or Hebed, who, p. 13. Sent by the Chaldaan Bishops with the
Submission of their whole Church to the Pope, the Council of Trent then
sitting, ibid. Abehi, a famous Amazon comes to Goa, her Character and Business,
p. 43 Aleixo de Menezes, Archbishop of Goa, p. 39. desirous to reduce the
Christians of St. Thomas to the Obedience of the Roman Church, and to that end
treats with Jacob, Mar Simeon's Vicar General, p. 41, 42. Writes to Mar
Abraham, etc. ibid. Makes the Archdeacon of the Serra, Vicar Apostolical of
the said Diocese, in Conjunction with Francisco Roz and the Rector of the
Jesuits College of Vaipicotta, against the Pope's express order, p. 44.
Resolves to go in Person to the Serra, and why, p 46, 52. Writes a Letter to
the Archdeacon, p. 47. Blamed for employing the Jesuits, makes use of a
Franciscan Friar to go to the Archdeacon, and why, p. 51. His Design upon
Cunahle, p. 52, 53. Complimented by the Magistrates of Cochim, p. 53. He
recommends the Business of Cunahle to them, p. 54. His behavior to the King of
Cochim, p. 55. Applics himself to the reduction of the Christians of St.
Thomas, p. 56. Paniquais oppose him, p. 58. His reception at Vaipicotta, p. 59.
His Sermon and Text, p. 59, 60. Tells them the News of Purgatory, p. 60.
Resolves to hinder the Malabar Christians to pray for the Patriarch of Babylon,
p. 61. Excommunicates all that do, ibid. Causes the Archdeacon and Cacanares
to Sign the Excommunication, ibid. His obstinacy herein, p. 63. Confirms some
Boys at Faru, p. 66. Goes to Mangate but stayed not, and why, p. 67. Denied
Entrance at Cheguree, ibid. Dehorted from his Enterprise, ibid. He discourses
to the Chegureans of the Pope's Supremacy, p. 70. Received friendly at Canhur,
and why, p. 71. Sails for Porcca, and is kindly received, and why, ib.
Complimented by the King of the Country, who desires to be admitted a Brother
in Arms to the King of Portugal, p. 72. The Arch Bishop's Answer, ib. Breaks
his Promise, ibid. Goes to Coulaon, and why, 71, 72. Sends to the Captain
General to come and demolish it, p. 73. A touch of his Treachery and Cunning,
p. 73, 74. His high Posts, p 74. A Reflection upon him, p. 75. He disappoints
the Queen of Changanate, ibid. Sails to Cochim, and why, ibid. Goes to
Molandurte, p. 76. The King of Cochim jealous of him, ibid. The Archbishop
Excommunicates him, ibid. Sails for Diamper, p 78. Designs to confer Orders,
and when, ibid. Writes to the Archdeacon to to assist at the Solemnity, with
the Arch-Deacon's Answer, ib. Ordains 37 at Diamper, p. 79. Goes to Carturte,
and what happened in the way, p. 80. Gains Itimato Mapula and Itimane Mapula,
two Brothers, to his side, ibid. His Answer to the Queen of Pimenta, p. 81. A
pleasant Scuffle betwixt him and a Cacanar, p. 82, 83. Resolves to depose the
Archdeacon, but is persuaded to deferr it for Twenty Days, p. 83. Names Thomas
Curia, a Kinsman of the Arch-Deacon's, to his place, ibid. Makes another
Ordination, p. 84. Intends a Solemn Procession, wherein a Sorcerer undertakes
to kill him, but is prevented, p. 84, 85. Invited to the Nercha, p. 85. But
desires to be excused, p. 86. They send him his Portion home, and what it was,
ibid. Applauded for his Charity, ib. Confirms a great many at Nagpili, ibid. A
Reflection, p. 87. Goes to Molandurte, and what happened there, p. 87. The
difference between him and the King of Cochim touching the Christians of
Molandurte, p. 87, 88. Returns to Diamper, p. 89. Is angry with the Chief
Regidor, ibid, and 90. Preaches, Confirms, and acquaints them with his having
excommunicated the Archdeacon, p. 90. Carturte, Molandurte, Diamper, and
several other Villages brought under his Obedience, etc. p. 91, 92. Writes a
long Letter to the Arch Deacon, p. 92. Sails to Narame, and balked in his
design, how, p. 93, 94. Receives the Arch-Deacon's Letter of Submission, p. 94.
Orders him to Subscribe ten Articles, p. 94, 95, 96. Goes to Cochim, and why,
p. 96, 97. Receives advice of the King of Cochim's having begun a War with the
Caimal, p. 97. Disswades him from it by threats, and what passed between them,
p. 99, 100, 101, 102, 103. Writes to the King of Mangate to force the
Archdeacon to submit, p. 103. He submits, and is received, but desires to Sign
the Articles privately, p. 104, 105. Agreed to, ibid. The Archbishop returns
to Cranganor, p. 107. Composes the Decrees of the Synod, and engages the
Princes to assist him thereat, ibid. His trick to secure the Major Vote in the
Synod, ibid. and 108. Father Simon's Reflection upon him, ibid. Comes to
Diamper the 9th of June, and what he did, ibid. Antonio Galvam, with the help
of Francisco de Castro, said to convert five Kings in the Island of Mazacar, p.
28. He first discovered the King of Portugal's Title to the Clove, etc. ibid.
Archbishop: See Aleixo de Menezes. Archdeacon of the Serra declines the
Signing Pope Pius IV's profession of Faith, p. 44, 45. which is dissembled by
Dom Aleixo de Menezes, p. 45. Assembles a Synod at Angamale, and why, p. 45.
Afraid of the Archbishop's coming into the Serra, p. 47. Subscribes the Creed
of Pius IV. and why, p. 52. Meets the Archbishop at Cochim, p. 57, 58. Wherein
he was to comply, p. 57. His Attendance, p. 58, 59. The result of their
Meeting, p. 59. Deferrs to meet the Archbishop at Vaipicotta* and why, p. 60.
His Speech to the Christians of St. Thomas, p. 62, 63. Flings out of the Church
of Paru in a Passion, and why, p. 66. Shut up in a House at Cheguree, denying
to see the Archbishop, p. 67. The Archbishop makes him fair Promises, p. 68.
Whereupon he persuades the People and Cacanares to treat with the Archbishop,
ibid. His Discourse with the Archbishop, and the Archbishop's Answer, p. 69,
70. Pretending himself sick at Canhur, he returns to Chegaree, p. 71. Orders an
Edict to be published, and why, p. 79. Pretends to submit and Sign Articles, p.
94, 95, 96, 98. but makes delays, p. 98. The King of Mangate against his
submitting, ibid. The Archdeacon resolves to throw himself at the Arch
Bishop's Feet, but desires to wait upon him at some other place than Cranganor,
p. 104. Meets him at Valpicotta in the Jesuits College, and submits, p. 104.
B.
Babylon anciently subject to the Patriarch of Antioch, p. 16. The Romish
pretenses thereto contradicted, p. 17. Of old the Metropolis of Assyria, p. 18
Bread and the Cup delivered into the hands of Priests to be Ordained, not
essential to Orders, p. 34. Council of Florence in the same Error, ibid.
Condemned by all, particularly by Cardinal Lugo, Becanus, and Morinus, p. 34,
35, 36, 37. Fallibility of the Roman Church inferred from hence, p. 35
C.
Cacanar, the Oldest warns the Archbishop to leave Diamper, p. 79. Cacanares
abjure the Patriarch of Babylon, and reconcile themselves to the Church of
Rome, p. 83 Caimal of Angamale waits upon the Archbishop, who presents him, p.
106, 107. Carturte, High Mass performed there with Music, which put the
Cacanares and People quite out of conceit with the Roman Worship, p. 80, 81.
Catalogue of the Viceroys of the Indies, p. 110. And of the Prelates, Bishops,
and Archbishops of Goa and Bishops of Cochim, p. 111, 112, Cheguree, the
Inhabitants thereof Article with the Archbishop, p. 70 Christians introduce
the use of Artillery amongst the Malabars, p. 3 Christians of St. Thomas send
their Sons to the College at Cranganor where they are instructed after the
Roman Way, p. 9. Proves ineffectual to the reducing of them, p. 10. Enraged
against the Latins, p. 46. Two Jesuits narrowly escape being murdered by them,
ibid. The best Fire-men in the Indies, p. 58. Enraged at the Archbishop's
Excommunication, p. 62 Church of Mangate filled with Household Goods and Women,
and w^^, p. 67 Clement VIII. his Briefs against Ma^-Abraham, p. 40. Cochim,
King thereof grieved at Dom Aleixo's design upon Cunahle, endeavors to
dissuade him from it by Stratagem, p. 54, 55. without success, ibid. whereupon
he makes War upon the Caimal, and why, ibid. Coulaon, a Fortress belonging to
the Portugueze, p. 71. Crusado Bull brought into the Indies by Francisco Faria
a Dominican Friar, p. 44. Cunahle a strong Fortress possessed by Mohammedan
Pirates, p. 52.
D.
Dominicans build a Fortress at Solor, and Garrison it, p. 27.
E.
Elias pretended Patriarch of Babylon, his Disgrace, p. 14. Sends his pretended
Archdeacon to Rome with a Book and Letter, ibid. The Contents of the Letter,
ibid. Cajols Pope Paul V. with a Story of his own making, p. 15. which is
contradicted by the 33 Canon of the Council of Nice, p. 16. Eugenius the IV.
how he supported his Reputation, p. 14.
F.
Fernando Vinagre, a Secular Priest, commands a Squadron, etc. p. 27. St.
Francis destroys a whole Fleet of Jores for the Portugueze, the Manner how, p.
42, 43. Francisco Roz, a Jesuit, made Bishop of the Serra in Room of
Mar-Abraham deceased, p. 44. his Speech to the Archbishop, p. 84.
G.
Gemulio, who, p. 28. his Speech, ibid and seq. George: See Archdeacon.
Gregory the XIII. Issues his Briefs against Mar-Abraham, 32. A Provincial
Council called thereupon at Goa, ibid.
H.
The Hidalcaon's Letter to the Portugueze Viceroy, p. 24, 25, 26, 27.
I.
Jacob, Mar-Simeon's Vicar General refuses to comply with Dom Aleixo de Menezes
Archbishop of Goa, p. 42. Jesuits afraid of the Christians of St. Thomas, p.
46. their ill requital of Dom Aleixo de Menezes, and wherein, p. 48, 49.
Reflection on their insincerity, p. 50.
M.
Malabar its beginning and Latitude, p. 1. the Diverse Kingdoms thereof, ibid.
the Princes thereof Heathens, ibid. A Malavar Christian Boy beat by their
Priests for naming the Pope in his Prayers, p. 50. Manuel de Faria his
Character of Archbishop Menezes, p. 74. Mar Audixa, Patriarch of Babylon, p.
11. Mar Abraham succeeds Mar Joseph as Bishop of the Serra, p. 18. Sent
Prisoner to Rome, but escapes, p. 20. Goes thither voluntarily, etc. His
treatment at Venice, etc. p. 21. Expects a quiet Possession of his Bishopric,
p. 30. Tricks used by the Portugueze to detain him, ibid. Confined to a
Convent, p. 31. Escapes to Malabar, and how, ibid. Professes himself a Romanist
still, p. 32. Repairs to the Council, and once more abjures, p. 33. Sends the
Heretical Books of his Diocese to be burnt, etc. ibid. The Council ended, he
returns to his Bishopric and recants, p 37. His Letter to the Patriarch of
Babylon, etc. 37, 38. Receives Mar Simeon as his Coadjutor, p. 38. Who opposes
him, ibid. He openly owns the Chaldaean Faith, 40. Bedridden, p 41. Sends to
Babylon for another Coadjutor, but hindered by the Diligence of the
Archbishop, ibid. His Death, p. 44. Mar Joseph, Bishop of the Christians of
St. Thomas, p. 11. Taken Prisoner and sent to Portugal, etc. p. 12. Finds
favor with the Queen Regent, and is sent back, ibid. Promises to reduce his
Diocese to the Roman Obedience, ibid. Returns to Goa, p. 19. Denies to preach
the Roman Doctrines in his Bishopric, ibid. and pretends revelation for it,
ibid. For which the Archbishop is angry with him, ibid. His Bishopprick
divided, p. 20. Complains of Mar-Abraham to the Portugueze, ibid. Professes the
same Doctrines he abjured in Portugal, p. 22. Mar Simeon, Patriarch of Babylon,
p. 18. Another Mar Simeon, Mar Abraham's coadjutor, inveigled by the
Franciscans to go to Rome for Orders, p. 38, 39. Leaves one Jacob his
Vicar General in his Absence, ibid. Examined before the Inquisition, and
declared by Pope Sixtus V. not to be in Orders, ibid. Put into the Hands of Dom
Aleixo de Menezes Archbishop of Goa, ibid. Who confines him to a Franciscan
Convent in Lisbon, ibid. Dom Matthias Archbishop of Goa calls a Provincial
Council, p. 40. and summons Man Abraham to repair to it, ibid. Which he
declines, and declares himself for the Chaldaean Faith, ibid. Moses Bar Cepha,
who, p. 18.
N.
Nagg's-Head Ordination touched on, p. 21. Narame all in Arms for the
Archdeacon, p. 92. Nercha, what, p. 85.
O.
Olla's published for the calling a Synod the 20th of June at Diamper, p. 106
Oriental Prela^es never applied themselves to the Pope, but for Interest, p.
17.
P.
Pate Marca, a Mohammedan Pyrate, built Cunahle, p. 52. Paul III's pretense for
translating the Council of Trent to Bologma, p. 14. Paru and the Inhabitants
thereof described, p. 63, 64. They arm against the Archbishop, ibid. Their
Church full of Armed Men, ibid. The Archbishop's Sermon to 'em, p. 65. They
are angry thereat, ibid. Persuaded by the Archbishop grow worse, p. 66.
Pimenta, the Queen thereof orders the Archbishop to leave her Kingdom within
three days, upon pain of Death, p. 81. Pius V. issues a Brief for the
apprehending Mar Joseph, p 24. Portugueze, A Character of their Zeal by a
Minister of State, p. 4, 5. Another, p. 6. Try by Violence to bring the
Christians of St. Thomas under obedience of the Roman Church, p. 11. And in
order thereto resolve to seize their Bishop and send him to Rome, ibid. Manuel
de Faria's observation of their Tyranny, p. 22, 23. They so far provoke the
Infidels that they are like to lose all, p. 24. An Indian's opinion of them, p.
28. Driven out of the Island Ito, ibid. A great Slaughter of them before
Cunahle, p. 73. A resolute and noble Saying of a Portugueze Captain, p. 75
R.
Romans drove from Charamet by the Chaldaeans, p. 17.
S.
Serra, What, p. 2. Its Inhabitants called Christians of St. Thomas, how long
subject to the Patriarch of Babylon, ibid. When discovered to the Europeans,
and by whom, ibid. They put themselves under the protection of the King of
Portugal. p. 3. Socerer undertakes to kill the Archbishop but is prevented, p.
84, 85. His punishment, p. 85. Synod opened, p. 108, 109.
T.
St. Thomas his Cross and Relics found at Meliapor, p 6. The Legend thereof,
ibid. and p. 7. Bones of three Indian Kings found in his Grave, p. 7, 8. Also a
Copper Plato with a Donation engraved therein, containing an Imprecation still
used by the Kings of Spain, p. 8. Tum Siud who, p. 12. Submits himself to the
Pope, ibid. and receives the Patriarchal Pallium. ibid. Presents a Confession
of Faith to the Pope, p. 13. In stead of returning to Babylon goes to Charamet,
where the Mahometans put him to Death, and why, ibid.
U.
Vaipicotta, a College built there by the Jesuits, and why, p. 10. Ineffectual
to the reducing the Christians of St. Thomas to their Religion, ibid. Vasco De
Gama goes to Cochim with a Fleet, p. 3. The Christians of St. Thomas crave his
protection, ibid. Not in a Condition to effect it, ibid. Venetians, their
Policy to secure their Trade in the Indies, p. 3. Viceroy approves of a Peace
with the Samorim, p. 77. A Catalogue of the Viceroys of the Indies, p. 110.
Vincent, a Franciscan Friar sent to Cranganor to reduce the Christians of St.
Thomas to the Roman Church, p. 8. His Labors strangely magnified, and why, p.
9. Builds a College at Cranganor, and why, ibid. Vniare Cherare though
Christened, still professes himself a Heathen, and why, p. 77.
W.
War breaks out between the Kings of Mangate and Paru, p. 46. Wine not used by
the Malavars in the Ordination of Priests, p. 33. Denied the Laity in the
Sacrament by the Romanists, p. 33, 34.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE DECREES OF THE Synod of Diamper.
PVblication of the Synod, Page 89, etc.
ACTION I.
The Speech at the opening, p. 97. Decree I. For the extirpation of several
Errors, Heresies and Schisms out of the Church of Malabar, for Acknowledging
the Pope as Supreme, and for beginning the Synod in Order to a Reformation
thereof, p. 100. Dec. II. Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred by such as
have been called to the Synod, and depart without the Metropolitan's Leave:
Also a Command to all to offer any thing tending to the Honor of God, and the
Reformation of the Church of Malabar, p. 102. Dec. III. All differences about
Pre-eminence in the Church, to be decided by the Metropolitan, p. 103. Dec. IV.
Confession, Mass, and the Sacrament to be celebrated for the Success of the
Synod, in what manner. p. 103. Dec. V. Junto's prohibited during the Session,
p. 104.
ACTION II.
The Metropolitan's Speech, p. 105 Dec. II. That the Synod make profession of
Faith according to the Council of Trent, and take an Oath to follow it in all
things, p. 106. The Profession and Oath of the Faith, p. 107. Dec. III. All
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons of the Bishopric to take the same Oath, and
that none be admitted to holy Orders without it, p. 119
ACTION. III.
Dec. I. Errors in Faith Condemned, and a Rule for rectifying thereof, laid
down in XIV. Chapters, p. 120 Dec. II. Faults and Defects in the Syriack
Translation of the new Testament, condemned, and ordered to be restored, p. 133
Dec. III. To the same purpose, p. 135. Dec. IV. Condemns three Heathenish
Errors frequent among the Christians of Malabar, viz. Transmigration, Fate,
and, That every Man may be saved by his own Laws, all which are good and lead
to Heaven, p. 137. Dec. V. Condemns this Heresy, namely, That it is a grievous
Sin so much as to speak or think of the Passion of Christ, etc. p. 139 Dec. VI.
Condemns the Errors of the Nestorians against our Lady, p. 140 Dec. VII. That
the Law of St. Thomas is one, and that of St. Peter another, Condemned, p. 142
Dec. VIII. Orders Excommunication of any one that shall name the Patriarch of
Babylon Universal Pastor or H ad of the Catholic Church, or any other, except
only the Pope of Rome, P 144. Dec. IX. All Days set apart for the commemoration
of Nestorius, or any of his followers, prohibited, and Roman Saints ordered to
be commemorated in lieu thereof, p. 145 Dec. X. The Church of Angamale new
Christened and dedicated to St. Hormisda the Martyr; it having before been
dedicated to St. Hormusio the Nestorian Heretic, p. 150 Dec. XI. The Apostles
Creed restored as in the Roman Church p. 151 Dec. XII. Christian Children
permitted to be taught Reading and Writing by Infidel Schoolmasters with some
Limitations, p. 151 Dec. XIII. Christian Schoolmasters prohibited the Setting
up of Pagods in their Schools, p. 153 Dec. XIV. Prohibits all Christians to
keep, translate, read, or hear read to others, any Heretical Books, whereof a
great many are mentioned, p. 154 Dec. XV. Errors and Heresies in the
Common Prayer and Breviaries ordered to be corrected and purged, p. 167 Dec.
XVI. All Persons commanded to deliver their Syrian Books to the Metropolitan
and Francisco Roz, to be Corrected, etc. p. 171 Dec. XVII. None but such
Priests as are Licensed and Conform to the Doctrine of the Trent Council,
suffered to preach, p. 173 Dec. XVIII. All Priests that have delivered any
Errors or fabulous Stories in their Sermons are ordered to recant them
publicly upon pain of Excommunication, p. 174 Dec. XIX. Makes Void all Oaths
against yielding Obedience to the Roman Church under pain of the greater
Excommunication, p. 175 Dec. XX. Contains the Profession of the Synod, p. 177
Dec. XXI. The Synod resolves to be governed in all things by the last Trent
Council, p. 178 Dec. XXII. Submits to the Inquisition, p. 179 Dec. XXIII. All
Persons who shall Act, Speak, or Write against the Holy Catholic Faith, to be
prosecuted and punished by the Prelate, p. 181
ACTION IV.
Of the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation, p. 182 Of the Doctrine of the
Holy Sacrament of Baptism, 187. Dec. I. New form for Baptism, and the old ones
abrogated p. 189 Dec. II. All Baptized according to the old Forms to submit
themselves to the Metropolitan at his Visitation for his Directions, p. 189
Dec. III. Orders all Priests to make enquiry who have not been Baptized through
any Default, and to baptize all such privately, without taking any Fees, p. 190
Dec. IV. To the same Purpose p. 191 Dec. V. Children to be Christened on the
8th. Day, with some Limitations, p. 192 Dec. VI. The Error Condemned of not
Baptizing the Infants of Excommunicate Parents, p. 194 Dec. VII. Exhortation to
all Parents, and such as are present at Women's Labors, not to suffer an Infant
to die without Baptism. Allowance to any Man, Woman, or Child, that knows the
Form, to Baptize such in case of eminent Necessity. How the Child is to be
ordered if it recover, p. 194 Dec. VIII. Christian Daia's or Midwives
recommended, and Vicars exhorted to instruct them in the Form of Baptism, p.
196 Dec. IX. Infidel Slaves ordered to be Baptized, p. 197 Dec. X. Christians
not to be sold to Infidels for Slaves, p. 197 Dec. XI. Forbids Auguries, p. 199
Dec. XII. Foundlings how to be ordered, p. 200 Dec. XIII. Converts how to be
ordered, p. 200 Dec. XIV. Holy Oils commanded, with the manner of using them,
p. 201 Dec. XV. Commands the use of Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, not
used before, p. 202 Dec. XVI. Prohibits Old Testatament (some few excepted) and
Heathenish Names to be given to Children, ordering those of the New according
to the Christian Economy, p. 204 Dec. XVII. Orders Children to be called by no
other Names than those they were Christened by, p. 206 Dec. XVIII. Commands
that Children be Christened in order as they are brought to Church, without any
distinction of Persons, p. 206 Dec. XIX. Commands the building of Fonts. p. 207
Dec. XX. Register-Books to be used in all Churches, and their Use, p. 208 The
Doctrine of the Sacrament of Confirmation, p. 209 Dec. I. The Sacrament of
Confirmation commanded to be used, p. 213 Dec. II. Denounces Excommunication
against all those that speak against it or vilify it, p. 214 Dec. III.
Godfathers and Godmothers of what (...) to be used in Confirmation (...)
Chrism as well as Baptism, p. 216
ACTION V.
The Doctrine of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, p. 217 Dec. I. The Holy
Eucharist when to be Celebrated, p. 220 Dec. II. All Christians above the Age
of 14 commanded to Receive this Sacrament once a Year at least, p. 222. Dec.
III. None to Receive before Confession to a Lawful Priest, p. 223 Dec. IV.
Commands to Receive Fasting with some Limitation, p. 224 Dec. V. The Sacrament
to be received as a Viaticum in danger of Death. The Vicar that suffers any to
die without it, though his Fault, to be suspended for six Months, p. 225 Dec.
VI. Women with Child to Confess and Receive a little before their time, p. 226
Dec. VII. Priests to Communicate once a Month at least in their Surplice and
Stole, p. 227 Dec. VIII. Priests not to Receive the Sacrament before
Confession, nor say Mass having any scruple of Mortal Sin, p. 227 Dec. IX.
Deacons and Subdeacons when to Receive the Sacrament, p. 228 The Doctrine of
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 228 Dec. I. Directions for saying Mass, and
many things in the Chaldaean Missals to be rectified, p. 231 Dec. II The
Missals of Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodo^^s to be burnt, p. 245 Dec. III. A
grand Error of the Nestorians condemned, p. 246 Dec. IV. The Roman Mass to be
translated i^to Syrian, and used on particular Occasions, etc. p. 247. Dec. V.
Who to handle the Holy Vessels, p 248 Dec. VI. Permits the Stole to none but
Deacons, p. 248 Dec. VII. Orders Stamps to be made in all Churches for the
Host, p. 249 Dec. VIII. Orders what Wine is to be used in celebrating the
Eucharist, p. 250. Dec. IX. The King of Portugal to send a Pipe and an half, or
two Pipes of Muscatel Wine for the Use of the Sacrament, and how to be used, p.
250 Dec. X. Stones of the Altar to be consecrated by the Metropolitan, p. 252
Dec. XI. Holy Vestments to be provided by the Metropolitan out of the Alms of
the Parish, p. 253 Dec. XII. All Persons, not having lawful impediment,
commanded to hear a whole Mass every Sunday and Holyday, if, etc. p. 253 Dec.
XIII. Directs how often to hear Mass, to be capable of the Blessing, and such
as hear it not so often as directed, to be Excommunicate, p. 255 Dec. XIV.
Prohibits Heathen Musicians to remain in the Church after Creed or Sermon is
ended, p. 256 Dec. XV. Exhorts all to procure Masses to be said for the Souls
of their deceased Friends, p. 256
ACTION VI.
Of the Holy Sacrament of Penance and Extreme Unction, p. 261 Dec. I.
Non-Confession declared a Mortal Sin, p. 265 Dec. II. All Persons to come to
Confession from Eight Years old and upwards, p. 268 Dec. III. All Masters of
Families admonished to cause all in their Families to Confess, p. 269 Dec. IV.
Confession enjoined upon probable Danger of Death, or any great Sickness, p.
270 Dec. V. Obliges Women with Child to Confess, p. 271 Dec. VI. Orders how
those are to be confessed that have the Smallpox, p. 272 Dec. VII. Exhorts to
frequent Confession, p. 272 Dec. VIII. Who to take Confessions, p. 273 Dec. IX.
Absolution upon Confession how to be Administered, and by whom, p. 274 Dec. X.
Directs in what Cases Confessors may absolve Penitents, p. 275 Dec. XI.
Excommunication and Absolution when prope, p. 277 Dec. XII. Priests Confessors
to have a written License from the Prelate, p. 278 Dec. XIII. Confessors that
understand the Malabar Tongue, to be made Use of, and why, p. 281 Dec. XIV.
None can absolve in the Sacramental Court but such as took the Confession, p.
281 Dec. XV. The Sacramental Form of Absolution, not to be used as a Prayer,
but in its proper Place, p. 282 The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction, p. 282 Dec. I. The use of the Extreme Unction recommended, with
directions therein, p. 285 Dec. II. Confessors to Instruct Sick Persons in the
Use of Extreme Unction, p. 286 Dec. III. The Manner in which the Extreme
Unction is to be administered, p. 287
ACTION VII.
Of the Sacraments of Order and Matrimony, p. 288 Of the Doctrine of the
Sacrament of Order, p. 288 Dec. I. Ordains who are fit for Orders, p. 291 Dec.
II. Such as have been Simonaically ordained, dispensed with, p. 293 Dec. III.
None to celebrate that have the Leprosy, p. 293 Dec. IV. Such as live in
Malice not capable of the Casture, or Blessing, etc. p. 294 Dec. V. Directions
for saying the Divine Offices; declared a Mortal Sin not to recite the whole,
p. 295 Dec. VI. Commands the Athanasian Creed to be translated into Syrian, and
the Clergy to get it by heart, p. 297 Dec. VII. Exhorts Clergymen not to be
absent at Divine Service, with directions for their Behavior thereat, etc. p.
297 Dec. VIII. Clergymen to be deducted in their part of the Dividend for every
time of absence, except in case of lawful Impediment, p. 298 Dec. IX. Commands
that no Exorcisms be used save those of the Church of Rome, p. 299 Dec. X.
Forbids under pain of the Greater Excommunication all Superstitions, Heathenish
Customs of foretelling lucky and unlucky Days for Marriage, etc. p. 300 Dec.
XI. Priests not to Eat or Drink with Infidels, or in a Tavern or Public Eating
House upon pain of Suspension, and why, p. 301 Dec. XII. Commands the Clergy to
wear a distinct Habit from the Laity, with other directions for their
Behavior, p. 302 Dec. XIII. Clergy not to meddle in Secular Affairs, p. 303
Dec. XIV. Commands all the Clergy to wear the Habit, Tonsure, and Shaven Crown,
p. 304 Dec. XV. No Ecclesiastic to receive pay from any King as a Soldier, p.
304 Dec. XVI. No Clerk in Orders to Marry upon pain of Excommunication, p. 305
Dec. XVII. Suffers such as have been married, and turn away their Wives, to
exercise their Function, p. 308 Dec. XVIII. Wives of Priests called
Catatiara's, to be degraded from their Honor in the Church, and benefit in the
Profits, unless they leave their Husbands, p. 309 Dec. XIX. Declares how far
this Synod is to be guided by the Trent Council, p. 310 Dec. XX. Forbids
Simony, p. 311 Dec. XXI. Provides Means for the preventing of Simony, p. 314
Dec. XXII. Provides further for the prevention of Simony, p. 314 Dec. XXIII.
None to be put in Orders during the Vacancy of the Sea, and why, p. 316 The
Doctrine of the Sacrament of Matrimony, p. 317
Dec. I. Marriage to be celebrated according to the directions of the Council
of Trent, p. 320 Dec. II. None to be Married without present Consent, together
with the Marriage Form, and the manner of Consenting, p. 321 Dec. III. Banns to
be published according to the Council of Trent, how, p. 323 Dec. IV. Orders a
Register for Marriages, as also a Method for registring them, p. 324 Dec. V.
Marriages to be celebrabrated in the Church, and the Parties to be Married to
Confess, and receive the Eucharist before they can be Married, p. 325 Dec. VI.
Degrees of Kindred where Marriage is prohibited, p. 326. Dec. VII. Spiritual
Kindred prohibited, what, p. 328 Dec. VIII. The Metropolitan to dispense with
such Marriages both past, present, and to come, etc. p. 329 Dec. IX. Unlicensed
times for Marrying, which, p. 331 Dec. X. Ordains what Age Parties to be
Married shall be of, p. 331 Dec. XI. Separations in this Matter forbid, p. 332
Dec. XII. Declares all Marriages void that are not performed according to the
Form of the Council of Trent, p. 333 Dec. XIII. Forbids Polygamy, p. p. 334
Dec. XIV. Consulting of Wizzards, and using Heathenish, Superstitious
Ceremonies for success in Marriage prohibited, p. p. 335 Dec. XV. Against
Heathenish Ceremonies in Marriage Contracts, p. 336 Dec. XVI. Against a
Judaical Ceremony used by Married People, p. 337
ACTION VIII.
Of the Reformation of Church Affairs, p. 338 Dec. I. For dividing the Diocese
into Parishes, and appointing Ministers, etc. p. 338 Dec. II. Division and
Uniting of Parishes belongs to the Prelate, etc. p. 340 Dec. III. Pluralities
condemned, p. 341 Dec. IV. No Parochial Church to be without a Curate, p 342
Dec. V. The disuse of Christianity ordered to be enquired into, p. 343 Dec. VI.
Orders the Church of Travancor to be rebuilt, and a Vicar Collated to the
place, p. 344 Dec. VII. Orders Preachers to be sent to Tadamalla, and why, p.
344 Dec. VIII. Three Vessels of Oil to be kept in the Church, p. 345 Dec. IX.
Holy Days or Feasts of the Church, on what days to be kept, p. 347 Dec. X.
Fasts, upon what days to be kept, p. 350 Dec. XI. The Malavar Christians Custom
of Keeping Lent approved of, p. 353 Dec. XII. How far Fasting obligatory, p.
354 Dec. XIII. Some Heathenish Washings condemned, p. 355 Dec. XIV. The Use of
Consecrated Ashes, p. 356. Dec. XV. No Flesh to be Eat upon Saturdays, but in
some cases permitted on Wednesdays, p. 357 Dec. XVI. The Obligation of not
eating Flesh lasts from Midnight to Midnight, etc. p. 357 Dec. XVII. Water to
be blessed by throwing holy Salt into it; how to be used, p. 358 Dec. XVIII.
Boys and Girls to be instructed in the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, p. 360
Dec. XIX. Directions for saying the Ave mary, p. 362 Dec. XX. Commands Bowing
at at the Name of Jesus, p. 362 Dec. XXI. Mattins and Processions ordered on
Christmas Eve, p. 363 Dec. XXII. Surplice and Stole ordered to be used in the
Administration of Sacraments, p. 365 Dec. XXIII. Candles to be blessed, when,
p. 366 Dec. XXIV. Commanding an Universal Cessation from Work on the Sabbath
Day, p. 367 Dec. XXV. Churches formerly dedicated to Marxobro and Marphrod to
be dedicated to All Saints, etc. p. 368 Dec. XXVI. The Poors Box to be kept in
the Overseers House, and why, and how, p. 372 Dec. XXVII. Capiars appointed to
keep the Churches clean, p. 373 Dec. XXVIII. Cupboards and Chests ordered to be
kept in the Vestries, and why, p. 374 Dec. XXIX. Images to be set up in
Churches, p. 374 Dec. XXX. Churches to be re-consecrated, for what, p. 376 Dec.
XXXI. Sick Persons prohibited to lie in the Church, p. 377 Dec. XXXII. All dead
Corpse to to be buried in Holy Ground, and by a Priest, p. 378 Dec. XXXIII.
Orders for the Burying such as die of the Smallpox, p. 379 Dec. XXXIV. No
Church to change the Name by which it was consecrated, p. 379 Dec. XXXV. Gentle
Methods recommended for the reducing of Infidels to the Church, p. 381 Dec.
XXXVI. Orders all Poor People that desire to turn Christians to be received to
Baptism, 382 Dec. XXXVII. Commands that all be taught to Cross themselves from
the Left to the Right, p. 383 Dec. XXXVIII. Execution of Wills declared to
belong to the Bishops. p. 384 Dec. XXXIX. The Office of Burial to be performed
for all, except such as die under Excommunication or utter Impenitence, p. 385
Dec. XL. Grants License to the Jesuits of the College of Vaipicotta, and why,
p. 385 Dec. XLI. The Christians of St. Thomas to be obliged by the
Constitutions of the Bishopric of Goa, p. 387
ACTION IX.
Of the Reformation of Manners, p. 388 Dec. I. Orders the Extirpation of
Superstitious and Heathenish Customs, p. 388 Dec. II. Declares what is
Superstition, and what not, p. 389 Dec. III. Forbids Heathenish Purifications,
p. 391 Dec. IV. Forbids Christians to frequent Heathen Festivities, p. 391 Dec.
V. Contains some farther directions for Christians, p. 392 Dec. VI. Prohibits
the consulting of Witches and Fortune Tellers, p. 393 Dec. VII. No Christians
to practice Witchcraft or Conjuring, p. 395 Dec. VIII. Against Diabolical
Charms, p. 396 Dec. IX. Declares what Interest is lawful, p. 397 Dec. X. More
against Extortion, p. 398 Dec. XI. Forbids Concubinage, p. 399 Dec. XII.
Contains an Admonition to Masters and Fathers of Families, p. 400 Dec. XIII.
Prohibits Christians the Buying and Selling Children or Kindred, p. 400 Dec.
XIV. Approves of giving the Tenth part of their Wives Portion to the Church,
etc. p. 402 Dec. XV. Commands differences among Christians to be decided by the
Prelate, p. 403 Dec. XVI. Christians forbid to make use of Ordeals for trial of
their Innocence, p. 403 Dec. XVII. Christians commanded to distinguish
themselves from the Heathens, how, p. 405 Dec. XVIII. Prohibits Christians to
drink or sell Orraca, p. 406 Dec. XIX. A certain Weight for Merchandise
commanded, p. 406 Dec. XX. Females to inherit in default of Issue Male, p. 407
Dec. XXI. Adoption of Sons not lawful, except, etc. p. 409 Dec. XXII. Forbids
the Prelate to certify the Adoption of Children, where the Adopter has any of
his own, p. 410 Dec. XXIII. Christians desired to cohabit in Villages, and why,
p. 411 Dec. XXIV. Desires the King of Portugal to take all the Christians of
Malabar under his Protection, p. 411 Dec. XXV. Orders all Vicars to have a Copy
of the Decrees of the Synod, and why. The Conclusion, being a Recapitulation as
it were of the whole Synod, made by the Metropolitan to the Clergy and People;
with some other Remarkables, p. 413 Dom Andre Bishop of Cochim 's Letter to the
Synod, p. 432 The Synod's Answer, p. 440 A Preface to a Missal,
A Short History OF THE Church of MALABAR: From the time of its being first
Discovered by the Portuguezes, in the Year 1501. until the Celebration of the
following Synod in the Year 1599.
THE Country of Malabar begins at Cananor, a Town in the Northern Latitude of
11 degrees and 20 minutes, and ends at Cape Comorim, in the Northern Latitude
of 7 degrees and ds.

It contains diverse Kingdoms, as Cochim, Travancor, Gundaca, Pimenta, Margate,
etc. and abounds with Ports, as Calecut, Cale, Cochim, Coulam, etc. Most of its
Princes and Nations are Heathens, and extremely superstitious in the Worship of
Pagods, of which there are several among them of incredible Riches.

The Serra or Gate, as the Natives call it, is a Ridge of Mountains running 200
Leagues from North to South, the South end whereof is inhabited by Christians,
who call themselves the Christians of St. Thomas, upon the account of their
having first been converted to the Christian Faith by the Apostle of that Name.
They have always, or at least for 1300 years, been under the Patriarch of
Babylon, who, as their Meterane or Archbishop died, took care to send them
another, who resided still among them, and was had in great Reverence both by
Christians and Infidels. As for the Doctrines and Customs of this Church, I
shall referr the Reader to the Accounts he will meet with of them in the
following History.

The first news of this ancient, but remote Church, was brought to Europe by
Pedralvares Cabral, who putting into Cranganor in the year 1501. and meeting
there with several of those Christians, he persuaded two of them, who were
Brothers, to come along with him to Portugal, where the eldest, whose Name was
Matthias, died at Lisbon; and the other, whose Name was Joseph, went first to
Rome, and from thence to Venice, where, upon his information, a Tract was
published in Latin of the State of the Church of Malabar, and is printed at the
end of Fasciculus Temporum.

The year following the Christians of St. Thomas hearing of Don Vasco da Gama
being at Cochim, with a considerable Fleet of Ships, sent some of their Body to
let him know, that understanding that he was a Subject of a Christian King,
they begged the favor of him to take them under his Masters Protection, that so
they might be defended against the Oppressions and Injuries which were done
them daily by Infidel Princes, and for a lasting Testimony of their having put
themselves under the King of Portugal, they sent his Majesty a Rod tipp'd at
both ends with Silver, with three little Bells at the head of it, which had
been the Scepter of their Christian Kings, for such they are reported to have
had formerly, though upon no very good grounds, so far as I can perceive.

The Admiral Vasco da Gama, not being in a condition at that time, to do any
more for them, gave them a great many good words, promising them, in his
Masters name, the favor and protection they had desired, and which he was
sensible they stood in great need of.

In the year 1505 two Christians, who were famous for their great skill in
casting great Guns, and whom, for that reason, Don Vasco da Gama had taken
along with him to the Indies, ran over to the Samorim, and were the first that
introduced the use of Artillery among the Malabars: For the Venetians
foreseeing that their great Indian Trade would be utterly ruined, by the new
Passage that was discovered to the Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, if the
Portugueze should once get any footing in those parts, are said to have sent
those two Engineers, who were their natural born Subjects, into the Portugueze
service, on purpose to go over to the Indians, to teach them the use of Great
Guns, and other Firearms, that they might be the better able to oppose the
Portuguezes.

But after this forementioned Complement of the Admiral, we hear no more of
these Christians, till about the Year 1545, the Portuguezes being all that
while too busy in making new Conquests, and the Friars, who were sent thither,
too much employed in building and providing commodious Seats for their
Convents, to attend to any foreign Business, of what nature soever.

This 40 Years neglect of a Christianity, which was just under their Noses,
puts me in mind of what a Minister of State said of the Portugueze Zeal in the
Indies.

Vana es Senor ( speaking to Philip IV.) la Opinion que enter Nationes tudas
tienen Portuguezes de Religiosos por las conversiones Orientales: Aquilas
conquistas las Emprendio la codicia, no la Religion, las conversiones se
Hizieron por obra divina y charidad de personas religiosas particulares, el
commun y direction de la corona attendio a depredar Reynos y Cidades, alli avia
mas dilatados conversiones a donde avia mas que hartar la codicia, y alla eran
hombres obstinados, donde no avia que robar, concluding: y cessa Religion
quando no se sique la codicia, y que no entran en el cielo todos los, que dizen
senor abrid nos.

It is a vain conceit, if it please your Majesty, ( speaking to Philip IV.)
that the World has entertained of the Zeal of the Portuguezes upon accoun^ of
the Conversions that have been made by them in the Indies, for it was
Covetousness and not Zeal tha^ engaged them to make al those Conquests. The
Conversions that have been made there were performed by the Divine Power, and
the Charity of a few particular Friars, the Government and Crown having no
other aim therein, but the robbing of Kingdoms and Cities; and there were still
the greatest Conversions where there was most to gratify their Covetousness.
But where there was nothing to be had, there the People were Obdurate, and not
to be wrought upon. And so we see their Zeal expired quickly in all places,
where it was not animated by Covetousness, and how they who had nothing else to
say but, Lord open unto us, were not thought sit to enter into Heaven.

Manuel de Faria also in the Third Tome of his Asia Portuguesa, after having
reckoned up the Errors (as he calls them) of the Christians of St. Thomas,
makes the following Reflection upon his Countrymen's having been so long in
reducing them to the Roman Church.

Gran lastima es oir que uviesse esto in frente de los Portugueses en la India
a los cien annos de su assistancia en ella; y lo que es mas a los mesmos oios
de prelados en Goa. La verdad es que destos eran los Mercadores que Christo
hallo en el Templo y echo del acote.

It is a shameful thing (says he) that this Church should continue an Hundred
Years in the Neighborhood of the Portuguezes without being reduced to the
Roman Faith, and which makes it still the worse, under the Eye of the Bishops
of Goa; but the truth is, those Merchants whom Christ whipped out of the
Temple, were such as these.

Though after all, the Portuguezes Negligence in this matter was nothing so
scandalous as the Violences they afterward made use of in the reducing of them.

In the Year 1544. the Cross and other Relics of St. Thomas, which have since
made such a Noise in the World, were found at Meliapor, the Legend whereof in
short is, That the Portuguezes as they were pulling down an old Chapel in
order to rebuild it, met with a vast Stone some Foot underground, which having
lifted up with great ease, they found all the Earth under it stained deep with
Blood, that appeared very fresh, and thereon a Cross excellently well cut,
after the fashion of that of the Military Order of Aviz in Portugal, and over
it a Dove or Peacock (for the learned are not agreed which 'twas) and above
that a bloody Dagger. There was also an Inscription on the Stone, but in
Letters that no Body knew what to make of. There was a Cross of the same Saint,
and found much after the same manner by the Portuguezes in Meliapor in the Year
1522. with this Inscription: At the time when Thomas founded this Temple, the
King of Meliapor made him a Grant of the Customs of all the Merchandises that
were brought into that Port, which Duty was the Tenth part of the Goods. With
this Cross were also found the Bones of St. Thomas, which were reckoned by all
the World before to have been lodged at Edessa. There was also found an ancient
Record of St. Thomas 's having converted the King of Meliapor (who it is like
was the Prince that gave him the forementioned Grant) by drawing a great piece
of Timber ashore, which the King and St. Thomas both pretended a right to,
after all the King's Elephants, and all the Wit of Man were not able so much as
to wag it. A Prophecy of St. Thomas was also found in the same Treasure,
declaring that whenever the Sea should come up to Meliapor, which was then
Twelve Leagues from it, a Nation should come from the West, which should preach
the very same Faith that he had preached.

And to put all this Indian Treasure together, for it is pity any of it should
be lost, the Bones of the Three Kings were found in the same Grave with those
of the Apostle, which were known to be theirs, by an ancient MS. which gave the
following account of them. The King of Nubia and Arabia was Melchior, Baltasar
was King of Goli and Saba, Gaspar was King of Tursi, Insula, and Grisola or
Malabar, where the Body of St. Thomas lies, by whom they were all three
consecrated Bishops, and were afterward martyred with him. I leave the
Examination of the truth of this MS. to the City of Cologne, whose concern it
is.

Among other things there was a Copper plate found, with the following Donation
engraved upon it: This is the Testimony of Alms, by which Paradise is acquired,
and which all the following Kings, who shall distribute the said Alms, shall
certainly obtain: Whereas they that shall refuse to give them, shall be Six
Thousand Years with Worms in Hell. This Imprecation is literally used by the
ancient Kings of Spain in most of their charitable Donations; but whether the
Spanish Kings had it from the Indian, or the Indian from the Spaniard, is not
certainly known.

In the Year 1645. Dom Joan Dalbuquerque the first Archbishop of Goa, being
ashamed, it is like, of their talking so much in Europe, and doing so little in
India in the matters of Religion, sends one Vincent, a Franciscan Friar, of
which Order the Archbishop himself was, to Cranganor, to try what he could do
toward the reducing of those Christians to the obedience of the Roman Church.
The Labors of this single Friar are so strangely magnified by the Portuguezes,
that it looks as if it were done on purpose to excuse their not employing of
more Hands in a Work, which here in Europe they pretended was their chief
Business in the Indies. For he is said not only to have preached daily in their
Churches, which were built after the fashion of the Pagod Temples, but also to
have built several Churches among them after the Latin way; and at last, by the
order of the Viceroy and Archbishop, upon his having informed them of the
small success that his preaching had had among them, to have erected a College
at Cranganor in the Year 1546. in order to the instructing of their Sons in the
Learning and Usages of the Latin Church.

By the way, It is somewhat strange how Friar Vincent, who is not said to have
had the gift of Tongues, no more than the Jesuit Xavier, who himself
complained, That for want of it he was forced to prattle more like a Child,
than preach like an Apostle among the Infidels, should commence so powerful a
Preacher among the Malabars, the very first Year of his being in the Indies; a
Year being a very short time for a Man to make himself so far Master of a
strange Language, as to be able to Preach therein to any purpose.

But though the Christians of St. Thomas did not deny to send their Sons to this
College, several of whom, after their having been taught Latin, were Ordained
Priests, according to the Roman Rites: Yet this had little or no effect as to
the reducing of that Church to the Papal Obedience, to which they still
continued so averse, that they treated those Natives with the same disregard
that they did the other Latin Priests.

Thus matters continued with the Church of Malabar till the Year 1587. when the
Jesuits imagining the reason why this Christianity was so little benefitted by
having several of their Sons bred in the College at Cranganor, was their not
being taught Chaldee or Syriack, which is the Language all their Offices are
in, did thereupon erect a new College, which was built at the sole charge of
Antonio Guedes Morales, at a place called Chanota, or Vaipicotta, a Village
inhabited by those Christians, and which is about a League from Cranganor.

But notwithstanding the Jesuits, by educating several of the Malabars in the
Chaldee Tongue, and instructing them thoroughly in the Latin Faith, did qualify
them to serve the Roman Church in her Pretensions. Yet all this signified very
little, none that had been educated by them daring so much as to mutter the
least Word against any of their ancient Doctrines, or in favor of the Roman,
or to alter any thing in their Offices, or forbear praying for the Bishop of
Babylon as their Patriarch, in the Mass.

Wherefore the Portuguezes finding that these Christians were not by any thing
that Friars could say or do to them, to be persuaded out of their ancient
Faith, or to forsake their present Bishop to submit themselves to the Pope,
against whom they were so possessed, that they could not endure so much as to
hear him named, resolved, at last, to try other methods with them, that is, to
try what Violence would do, the Method to which Popery, wherever it is, owes
both its Propagation and Establishment.

And that they did not betake themselves to this course sooner, we are not to
imagine was in the least owing to their temper, or to any disposition that was
in them, to try first what fair and gentle means would do; for they must know
nothing of the Spirit of Popery, that can imagine it to be capable of any such
thing, but it was owing purely to the circumstances of their Affairs; for that
before their Government had spread it self, and taken a good root in those
Parts, it would not have been safe for them to have made use of those rude and
boisterous Methods for the reduction of these Christians, which we shall see
they did afterward, when they had in a manner gotten that whole Country into
their own Power: In pursuance of the forementioned Resolution, the Portuguezes
determined to have their Bishop, to whose presence among them they attributed
their constancy in their ancient Faith, seized in order to send him to Rome,
which was executed accordingly.

Their Bishop at that time (for they had but one of that Order among them) was
one Mar Joseph, who, according to ancient Custom, had been sent ^^^^er by Mar
Audixa, Patriarch of Babylon. He is acknowledged by the Portuguezes to have
reformed diverse Abuses in that Church, and to have put things in a much better
order than he found them in. Mar Joseph being brought Prisoner from Cochim to
Goa, was Embarked upon the first Ships that went to Portugal, with an intent of
sending him to Rome; but being arrived at Lisbon, he, by his Address and
appearances of an extraordinary Sanctity, did so far insinuate himself into the
favor and good opinion of Dona Caterina, who was Queen Regent at that time,
and of the Infanta Dona Maria, that he was sent back by the next Ships to Goa,
with the Queen Regents Letters, ordering him to be permitted to live quietly in
his Bishopric, he having promised the Cardinal Infant Don Anrique, who was at
that time Inquisitor-General, and the Pope's Legate a latere to the Crown of
Portugal, to do all that was in his power toward the reducing of his Diocese
to the Roman obedience.

In the Year 1552, one Tum Siud, or Simon Salacan, a Monk of the Order of St.
Pachomius, who pretended to have been chose Patriarch of Mosul, or Seleucia
Parthorum, or Babylon, for they are all the same by the whole Clergy of Persia
and Assyria, came to Rome and submitted himself to the Pope; by whom, according
to some, he was consecrated a Bishop, though others will have it, that he had
only his Eastern Consecration confirmed, and afterward received the
Patriarchal Pallium. He presented Letters and a Confession of Faith to the
Pope, which he pretended were sent by all the Eastern Bishops: In the Letters
the Pope's Supremacy was exalted as hig^, as if they had been writ by a
Parasite Canonist; which Letters, together with the Confession of Faith, were
done into Latin and Printed by Masius: He gave out also, that he was attended
by Seventy Persons of note as far as Jerusalem, and from thence only by Three,
whereof one died by the way, and another remained sick in the Journey; and the
third, whose name was Calafi, came with him to Rome. Tum Siud, after he was
dismissed at Rome, instead of returning to Babylon, went and lived in an
obscure place called Charamet or Amed, where in a short time he was put to
death by the Mahometans; and, as it is said, at the instigation of the
Christians of those Parts, who, to the great discredit of the pretensions he
had made at Rome, would never own him nor his Authority. But this ill Success
did not hinder another Monk of the same Order, whose name was Abd Jesu or
Hebed, who had writ several Books in defense of Nestorianism, from coming to
Rome with the same pretensions, in the Year 1562; and he could never have come
in a better time, by reason of the Council of Trent being then sitting, to
which he was sent with great Solemnity to represent nothing less than all the
Chaldaean Bishops, having before at Rome in their Name, made the submission of
that whole Church to the Pope: This method of making a noise with
Mock-Prelates, had been made great use of by some former Popes. So Eugenius the
IV. maintained his tottering reputation against the Council of Basil, by an
appearance of Graecians and Armenians in the Council of Florence: And Paul the
III. graced his Translation of the Council from Trent to Bolongia, which was so
stoutly opposed by the Emperor and Spanish Bishops, by sending one Stephen to
Bolognia with the splendid Title of the Armenian Patriarch.

This Humor was carried on by one Elias, who likewise pretended to be chose
Patriarch of Babylon; he sent several Nuncio's to the Pope with the Submission
of the Babylonish Church, and a Confession of Faith; but these Nuncio's spoiled
their business by over-acting their Parts; for it having been discovered, that
the better to support their Pretense of the Chaldaean Church agreeing with the
Church of Rome in all things, they had tore several Pages out of their
Church-Offices, they were dismissed with disgrace.

However this did not discourage Elias (as indeed what will a hungry Monk?)
from sending one Adam Camara, his pretended Archdeacon, to Rome, three Years
after that misfortune; who, together with his Patriarch's Letter, delivered to
the Pope a Book of his own composing, concerning the Reconciliation of the
Chaldaean Church to the Roman, which he desired might be diligently examined.
In his Letter he told Paul V. That let Heretics do what they will, he for his
part was resolved never to go against the Holy Precepts of the Apostles and
Orthodox Fathers, who had all affirmed the Sea of great Rome to be the Head of
all other Sees, but would always confess that the Roman Church was the Mother
of all the other Churches in the World, and that all that did not own her to be
so, were accursed. It Is observable, that this Elias had a stretch of Courtship
beyond his begging Predecessors; which was his assuring the Pope, That all
their Clergy anciently had their Orders immediately from Rome, and that that
Custom continued, till several that were going to Rome on that Errand were
murdered by the way; which having several times happened, the Pope when he came
to hear of it, did of his free Grace say, Let us ordain them a Patriarch; and
not only so, but permit them to choose him, that so they may not perish thus by
the way: And thus, said good Elias, we received all the Authority we pretend to
from Rome, and not from our selves, as they pretend to do; (and the greater
Wretches they) who trample upon the Canons of the Apostles, and the Laws of the
Fathers. It is from this blind Story that the Roman Doctors have endeavored to
persuade the World, that all the Babylonish Bishops do own, that they derived
their Power of Ordination from the Western Fathers, meaning the Bishops of
Rome, no doubt.

Now what crude Stuff is this, that those hungry. Monks served up to the Pope,
and was as greedily swallowed at Rome, there being not the least Color of
Truth in any part of the Story. For as to the ancient Custom that is so
confidently affirmed, it is plainly contradicted by the 33d Arabic Canon of
the Council of Nice, which though not the genuine Canons of that Council, are yet
very ancient. The Canon runs thus: Canon 33. Let the Sea of Seleucia, which is
one of the Eastern Cities, be honored likewise, and have the Title of
Catholicon, and let the Prelate thereof, ordain Archbishops as the other
Patriarchs do, that so the Eastern Christians who live under Heathens, may not
be wronged by waiting the Patriarch of Antioch's leisure, or by going to him,
but may have a way opened to them to supply their own Necessities; neither will
any injury be done to the Patriarch of Antioch thereby, seeing he has consented
to its being thus, upon the Synod's having desired it of him.

From which Canon it is plain, That the Church of Seleucia or Babylon was
anciently subject to the Patriarch of Antioch, who of all the Patriarchs was
their nighest Neighbor. So that if the Chaldaean Bishops do own that they
derived all their Authority from the Western Fathers, as is pretended they do,
they must mean by the Western Fathers, the Bishops of Antioch.

And as to its being said, That the Chaldaean Bishops do to this day own that
they had their Ordinations from the Western Fathers, meaning the Bishops of
Rome, the falsehood of that Pretense appears evidently, not only from what has
been said, but from the whole Tenor of the following Synod, and of all the late
Reports of the Portuguezes concerning that Church: As it does likewise, That
all those Patriarchs of Babylon, who came to Rome, notwithstanding the great
Noise they made in this Part of the World, were mere Impostors, never owned by
the Churches they pretended to be Patriarchs of. Father Simon speaking of this
in the 93 Page of his Histoire Critique, confesses their magnifying the Pope's
Power as they did, to have been a piece of gross Flattery, but withal, will
have it to have been Pardonable in such poor Wretches, who would not otherwise
have been suffered to have approached the Pope, to whom they came into Europe
on purpose to make their Court; for, as he observes upon the same occasion, few
or none of the Oriental Prelates ever applied themselves to the Pope, but for
the promoting of some particular Interest, which was one reason why the
reunions they pretended to make did not last long. But though for some time these
mock Prelates being supported by the Pope, made a shift to keep the face of a
Church at Charamet, none of them ever daring to go to Mosul, yet after a little
time the true Chaldaean Prelates obliged them to leave Charamet; from whence
they retired to Zeinalback, a yet remoter Place on the borders of Persia, where
from little, in a short time, they dwindled to nothing.

The Prelates of Babylon we see were anciently styled Bishops of Seleucia, a
City not far from Ctesiphon; from whence it was that Simon, who suffered
Martyrdom under Sapor is styled Bishop of Seleucia and Ctesiphon, of which City
we meet with this following Account in Strabo. Babylon was anciently the
Metropolis of Assyria, which now Seleucia of Tigris is, near to which is a
great Village called Ctesiphon, where the Kings of Parthia used to spend the
Winter to spare Seleucia, that it might not be continually oppressed with
Soldiers and Scythians: but notwithstanding this Change of the Metropolis, as
the Country all about is still called Babylon, so the Natives, though Born in the
very City of Seleucia, are still called Babylonians from the Region, and not
Seleucians.

In the Bibliotheca Patrum, there is a Treatise of Paradise translated out of
Syriack into Latin, by Masius, writ by one Moses Bar Cepha, who is styled
Bishop in Bethraman and Bethleno, and Curator of the Ecclesiastical Affairs of
the Mozul or Seleucia Parthorum. This Moses flourished in the Tenth Century.

But it is time to leave these Sham Prelates, who run so fast to Rome of their
own accord, and return to the true ones, who were forced to go thither much
against their Wills.

After the Christians of the Serra had heard of their Archbishop's being sent
a Prisoner to Portugal, despairing of ever seeing him again, they sent secretly
to Mar Simeon, Patriarch of Babylon, desiring him to order them a new
Archbishop, who straightways sent them one Mar Abraham, who having gotten into
the Serra in a disguise, notwithstanding the great care the Portuguezes had
taken to have intercepted him, he was received by the whole Church as their
Bishop, with great joy. But he had not been long there, before he had the news
of Mar Joseph's being returned to Goa, where having presented the Letters he
had brought along with him, he was permitted to go back to his Bishopric.

The Archbishop of Goa who had writ to Portugal, that they should by no means
ever suffer Mar Joseph to return to the Indies, was not without strong
jealousies of his having prevaricated in all that he had promised; and what did
very much confirm him therein, was, that Mar Joseph when he desired him to take
some Friars along with him to preach the Roman Doctrines in his Bishopric, did
not only deny to do it, but furthermore pretended, that it was revealed to him
the Night before, that it was no ways convenient. The Archbishop being netled
at this pretense, told him with great heat, That he had better Revelation from
the Scriptures of his not being the Pastor whom God would have to feed his
Sheep, but a Wolf in Sheep's clothing, of whom our Savior had said, That they
were to be known by their Fruits, and that their Highnesses would quickly be
sensible how much they had been imposed upon by him.

Notwithstanding all this, he was permitted to go to his Bishopric, though for
no other reason, its like, but to give birth to a Schism, by which means the
Portuguezes hoped to be able to compass their ends upon that Church the easier,
Divide and impera, being a piece of Policy that is well understood, and has
been much practiced by the Roman Church. And if this was their drift in sending
him back to his Diocese, they were not out in their Policy, for Mar Joseph was
not sooner in the Serra, than the whole Bishopric was divided, some adhering
to Mar Abraham, and others to Mar Joseph, as their true Prelate.

But Mar Joseph finding Mar Abraham's Party to be much the more numerous, by
reason of the Communication he had had with the Latins, did thereupon betake
himself to the course that all distressed People, who prefer their own
Interest to that of the Public, take, and complains to the Portuguezes of Mar
Abraham, not only as an Usurper, but as a most bitter Enemy to the Roman Church.

The Viceroy, who was glad of this occasion, straightways dispatched an Order
to the Governor of Cochim, to have Mar Abraham apprehended, and to send him
Prisoner to Goa, in order to send him to Rome, which was executed accordingly.
But the Ship whereon Mar Abraham was Embarked, being forced by stress of
Weather into Mazambique, a Port belonging to the Portuguezes in the Southern
Coasts of Africa, he made a shift to escape, and by the way of Melindo and
Ormus, to get to the Patriarch of Babylon, from whom having received new Briefs
to Fortify his Title, he resolved to return to his Bishopric; but having
afterward considered better on the matter, and being sensible, that if he went
thither without the Pope's Order, that the Portuguezes would quickly make the
Serra too hot for him, he altered his Mind, and resolved to try his Fortune at
Rome, and to take a Journey thither over Land; being come to Rome, after having
abjured his ancient Faith, and reconciled himself to the Church, and promised
to reduce that of Malabar to its obedience, he obtained of Pius the Fourth, all
such Briefs as were any ways necessary, having also the Title of Archbishop,
which he and his Predecessors had enjoyed, given him therein.

But being at Venice, in his way home, the Divines there discovering, as it is
said, both from the Nature of the Opinions that he had abjured, and from his
own Confession, that he had never been lawfully Ordained, did oblige him to
receive all Orders, from the first tonsure to the Priesthood. He was ordained
Priest by the Bishop of St. Salvador and Consecrated a Bishop by the Patriarch
of Venice.

This Venetian Consecration, if it is not a downright Naggs-Head Story, is a
Scurvy reflection upon the Pope's Infallibility, who herein was not only
deceived in a matter of Fact, in giving Briefs to one, as an Archbishop, who
really was not at all in Holy Orders, but he must also have been deceived in a
matter of Doctrine, in being Ignorant, that some of the Opinions which had been
Abjured before him by Mar Abraham, were of such a nature as to incapacitate him
for Orders.

While Mar Abraham was in this Voyage, Mar Joseph finding himself in the quiet
Possession of his whole Bishopric, did not forbear to profess and teach the
Doctrines he had abjured in Portugal. The Bishop of Cochim, who was his next
Neighbor, having heard thereof, acquainted the Archbishop of Goa therewith,
and he Don Anrique, the Cardinal Infant, who at that time Governed Portugal in
the Minority of his Nephew Don Sebastian, and the Cardinal informed the Pope of
the whole matter.

These repeated Tyrannies of the Portuguezes in the Indies, of dragging ancient
Bishops thus out of their own Country and Diocese, and tumbling them so about
the World, I cannot but reckon among those violent Injustices for which Manuel
de Faria in the very last words of his Asia Portuguesa, tells us, God has
punished them so visibly. The observation is so remarkable, and to this day so
literally true, as I have been told by several intelligent Portuguezes, that I
shall set it down in the Author's own words. Ponderacion muy notable ay en
esto, y es, que dequanta persona passaran a la India ya como Governadores, ya
como Capitanes, ya como Mercadores, aunque esto ultimo siempre fue de todos: y
de quantos destos alcancaran groessissimas haziendas, no seve oy in el Reyno de
Portugal ninguna casa o Mayo razgo que se fundasse con ellas, o lo menos que
sea cosa de importancia: ni tam poco ay en la India alguna casa grande desta
calidad: aunque tambien aya avido alla Portugueses q iuntaron mucho y uvo
algunos de a million, y de dos milliones y de a tres, y a un de a quatro, ye'l
no luzirse a nadie considerablemente tanta hazienda como tantos iuntaron, se
hade entendar, que fue, y es, y sera pero por una de dos razones, o por ambas,
la primera porq' permetiendo Dios este viaie solo para dilatar su nombre, y
verdedero culto, estos navigantes trataron por la mayor part de lo material de
la sacrilega codicia, cometiendo muchas maldades, para hartarse, en vez de
tractar de la religion: y otra porq' lo mas desto fue ganado por medios
injustos de tiranias, robos, y toda suerte de insolencia, como consta de muchos
lugares destas Historias. It is remarkable, that among all the Persons who have
gone to the Indies, whether as Governors, Captains, or Merchants, of which
sort most of them were in truth, there has not been one that has raised a
Family of any consideration out of the Goods they have got in those Parts,
either there or in Portugal, though there have been several of them that have got
there, one, two, three, or four Millions. Now, that nothing that is considerable
of all these vast Treasures, should any where appear, must be for one or both
of these two Reasons, first, that whereas God permitted the Discovery of this
Voyage, only for the propogation of his Name, and true Worship (but not by such
barbarous Methods as the forementioned I dare say) these Travelers have, for
the most part, pursued the ends of a Sacrilegious Covetousness, committing many
Injustices to fill their Coffers, instead of having any regard to Religion; the
other is, because the most of those Riches were gained by the unjust means of
Tyrannies, Robberies, and all sort of Insolences, of which you have many
Instances in the foregoing History.

Pius V. upon this Issued forth a Brief, bearing date the 15th. of January
1567. directing it to Dom Jorge, Archbishop of Goa, and commanding him to use
all diligence to have Mar Joseph forthwith Apprehended and sent to Rome, in
pursuance whereof he was seized, and sent Prisoner to Portugal, upon the first
Ships that went, whence he was carried to Rome, where he died.

Neither were the Violences they made use of to Convert Infidels, any whit
inferior to those they exercised upon the poor Chaldaean Christians, by which
they came to provoke the Infidel Princes to that degree, that they had like to
have lost all that they had in the Indies by it. For the Hidalcaon who Besieged
Goa in the Year 1570. both in his Letters to the Viceroy Don Luis d' Ataide,
and in the Speech he made to his Captains, when he first communicated to them
his design of driving the Portuguezes out of the Indies, gave those Violences
for the chief cause of his War. Those Letters and Speech being too long to be
here Inserted, I shall only set down so much of them as relates directly to
this matter.

In his first Letter to the Viceroy, after having complained of some other
Grievances, he tells him, That he was certainly informed that at Ormus, Dio,
Chaul, and all the other Portugueze Ports, his Subjects Ships were all strictly
searched, and all the Boys and Girls that were found Aboard, of whatsoever
Quality, Abyssnes or Mahometans, were forcibly carried ashore, and there
detained from their Parents or Masters. This, says he, is a matter that I
cannot but be extremely offended with; neither can I judge otherwise of your
permitting such Violences, but that you have a mind to break with me, for if
you had not I cannot be persuaded that your People durst presume to commit such
Insolences: He goes on. Let it suffice that no difference can happen between
us, but what gives me great displeasure, and that I am both a Brother and an
Allie of the King of Portugal, and do esteem you as my particular Friend, to
put a stop to this matter, that so my Subjects may have no further cause to
complain thereof. Besides, I am confident the King of Portugal will not thank
any, that shall be instrumental in making a Breach between me and him, by
compelling my Subjects thus against their Wills to turn Christians, a practice,
says he, that is abominable in the sight of all the World; nay, I am confident
that Jesus Christ himself, the God whom you adore, cannot be well pleased with
such Service as this: Force and Compulsion in all such Cases, being what God,
Kings, and all the People of the World do abominate. The work of turning People
from one Religion to another, if it be not done by the Divine Inspiration, and
the immediate Will of God can never be sincere, neither can Converts have any
inward respect for a Religion, which they are compelled to Profess. I do
thetefore entreat you to see that this matter be speedily redressed, but
especially that of taking Peoples Children from them by violence, which is a
thing I stand amazed at, and am in duty bound to see remedied.

In his second Letter he thanks the Viceroy for an Order he had sent to Ormus,
and the other Portugueze Ports, prohibiting all such Violences, but at the same
time tells him, That his Order was not in the least regarded; for that the
Portuguezes notwithstanding it, went on still in their former Courses, to which
he tells him, If there were not a speedy and effectual stop put, it must
necessarily beget a War betwixt him and the Portuguezes; adding, That as he
knew that neither God, nor wise Kings, took any delight in Discords, so he was
certain that there was no Religion in the World, that justified the forcing of
People from one Religion to another.

And in his Speech to his Captains he tells them, The Portuguezes at first came
among us, under the notion of Merchants, promising to help us to several Goods
that we wanted, but that afterward by making of trifling Presents to some weak
Princes and other Arts, they had obtained leave to build Storehouses for their
Wares upon the Coast; but that instead of Warehouses, they had built
Fortresses, by which means they had strengthened themselves so in India, both by
Sea and Land, that it was more than time for the Natives to look about them,
and to join together to extirpate such cruel Tyrants and Ravagers of so many
Kingdoms, and Enemies to the general quiet and commerce of the World; and that
for one thing especially, which was what no patience was able to endure, their
compelling the Indians in all places, where they had Power, to change their
Religion.

In this Affair the Christian and Mohammedan, of which Sect this Hidalcaon was,
seem to have changed Parts, the Mohammedan writing therein like a Christian, and
the Christians behaving themselves like Mahometans.

Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Vel dici potuisse.
About this time the Dominican Friars, under pretense of building a Convent,
built a Fortress at Solor, into which, as soon as it was finished, the Viceroy
put a strong Garrison: There were perpetual Bickerings betwixt this Garrison
and the Natives, in most of which, some of the Friars, as they were Converting
those Infidels, with Swords in their hands, suffered Martyrdom.

We read of a famous Portugueze Missionary about this time, it was one Fernando
Vinagre, who, though a Secular Priest, Commanded the Squadron that was sent to
the assistance of the King of Tidore; in which occasion he is said to have
behaved himself both like a great Captain, and a great Apostle, and to have
appeared one day in Armor, and another in a Surplice, and to have Baptized
several in his Armor, with his Surplice over it. In these a la Dragoon
Conversions, he was seconded by his Admiral Antonio Galvam, who with the
assistance of Captain Francisco de Castro, is said to have Converted five Kings
in the Island of Mazacar; and though he was really no other than a St. Ruth, yet
he is said by the Portugueze Historians to be another St. Paul, in Governing
all that came under his Power both with his Sword and with his Voice, A Sword
and Voice, say they, worthy of a glorious Eternity. It was this Antonio that
first discovered the King of Portugal's special Title to the Clove, which, for
having five Points, he said, had the King of Portugal's Arms, which are the
five Wounds of Christ stamped upon it.

The same Author tells us, and approves of what an Indian said of the
Portuguezes, when in the height of their Triumphs: Let them alone, said the
Indian, for they will quickly come to lose that as Covetous Merchants, which
they have gained as admirable Soldiers; they now Conquer Asia, but it will not
be long before Asia will Conquer them.

The Emperor of Persia is reported by the same Author to have made the same
Prediction, who being told by the Portugueze Ambassador, when he asked him how
many of the Governors of the Indies Heads his Master had chopped off, that he
had not taken off one, replied, If that is true, it is not possible the
Portuguezes should hold the Indies long.

About this time the Portuguezes were driven out of the Island of Ito by the
Natives. They were stirred up to do it by a Speech made by one Gemulio, a
considerable Native, wherein he told the Portuguezes in a full Assembly of
them, That if they Preached to others that there was a God in Heaven, who
observed all that was done on Earth, and would certainly Reward all Good, and
Punish all Evil-Deeds, without believing it themselves, or without practicing
what they believed, they were certainly guilty of the Abomination, which such a
God must detest above all others: He likewise told them, They were Strangers
come from the very Skirts of the World, and will you, says he, who are the
Offspring of the Shades, which the Sun leaves when it goes down, presume to
Tyrannize over us, who entertained you so kindly, and have been so long a
Sanctuary to you? If these be the Customs of your Country, you must know they
are what we Abominate; return, return therefore to your native darkness, or
your ancient Habitations, where the want of Light will hide your Actions, and
do you not come hither to commit them in the very apple of the Eye of the Sun,
as it rises out of his brightest Cradle. You preach Christ Crucified to us,
and at the same time Crucify those you have persuaded to believe in him. You
will make others to be Christians, without appearing to be such your selves.
You must know we are not ignorant of what you have done to the King of Xael,
and how you rewarded his great kindness and Civility to you, with Violences and
Outrages, and his Subjects good turns with dishonouring their Wives: We know
likewise how you have used the Queen of Aram, whom, after she had lost both her
Kingdom and Husband to secure you, you have dishonourably thrown off, as one
who could be of no further use to you. Be gone therefore immediately out of
this Island, and hereafter don't you presume to set your Foot, or so much as
cast your Eye upon it. The Historian who relates this, though a Portugueze, makes
this reflection upon it, Thus we lose Places by our Insolences, which we
gained by our Valor.

When Mar Abraham returned to Goa over Land, by the way of Ormus, and found Mar
Joseph Shipped off for Portugal, thereupon he flattered himself with the hopes
of meeting with nothing to molest him in the Possession of his Bishopric; but
he quickly found himself deceived, for having presented the Pope's Briefs, and
other Papers he brought along with him to the Archbishop, the Portuguezes not
having the same reason to permit him to return to the Serra, as they had when
they permitted Mar Joseph, which, as I have observed, was done on purpose to
give rise to a Schism, he was told, that before they would put him in
Possession of his Bishopric, they must first have both the Briefs and his
Informations strictly examined, that so they might be satisfied he had not
imposed upon his Holiness.

Wherefore, though resolved whatever came on it, never to let Mar Abraham go out
of their hands, yet that they might not seem to refuse to pay a due respect to
the Pope's Briefs; the Archbishop and others, after having examined all his
Papers, found several flaws in them, which were declared to be sufficient to
justify their detaining of him: This is no more than what the Canonists can
do, and do daily in the clearest cases, it being impossible to have any
Matrimonial or other cause drawn up, or worded so accurately, that the
Canonists, and especially if the Pope desire it, will not find several
Nullities in. Upon the publication of the nullity of the Pope's Briefs, as
having been obtained by misinformation, poor Mar Abraham, instead of being sent
back in Triumph to his Bishopric, as he expected, was, after all the Pains he
had been at, confined to the Dominican Convent at Goa, there to remain till
such time as the Pope's Answer came to the Archbishop's Information of his
Case.

Mar Abraham, being sensible that to be confined till that came, was the same
thing as to be condemned to be a Prisoner for Life, resolved, let what would be
the Issue, to try to make his escape, which, after several unsuccessful
Attempts, he did, at last, upon an Holy Thursday at Night, while the Friars
were all employed in the Chapel, and having gotten over to the Continent, he
posted away to Malabar, where he was received with great Joy and Festivity by
all the Christians, who having two of their Archbishops Prisoners among the
Portuguezes, despaired of ever seeing another Babylonish Bishop among them.

The Viceroy and Archbishop were much troubled at Mar Abraham's having made
his escape thus, and writ straightways to the Bishop of Cochim, and all the
Governors upon the Coast of Malabar, to have him apprehended if he was above
Ground; but Mar Abraham knowing how it would be, took care to keep himself, as
far as he could, out of their reach, never adventuring to visit any of the
Churches that were in the Neighborhood of Cochim, or of any other Portugueze
Garrison.

But though after this Mar Abraham is said, in all his Letters to the Portuguezes
to have still professed himself a Romanist, and not only so, but to have
re-ordained all that had been ordained by him formerly; yet it is certain, that
in all things else he acted quite otherwise in his Diocese, where he continued
not only to preach his old Doctrines, but in his Prayers still named the Bishop
of Babylon as his Patriarch.

Gregory XIII. being informed of this by the Archbishop of Goa, and other
Prelates of the Indies, issued forth a Brief, bearing date the 28th. of
November, 1578. directing it to Mar Abraham, and commanding him therein to
repair to the next Provincial Council that should be Assembled at Goa, to
assist at it, and to observe all the Decrees that should be made therein,
relating to his Bishopric, and that he might not excuse his not obeying this
Brief, by pretending that he could not do it with safety; the Pope likewise
sent him Letters of safe Conduct, to go and come without being any ways
molested.

In pursuance whereof Dom Vicente da Fonseca, a Friar, of the Order of St.
Dominick, and Archbishop of Goa, having called a Provincial Council, which was
the third of Goa, ordered the forementioned Brief to be intimated to Mar
Abraham, and together with the Pope's, his own, and the Viceroy's Letters of
safe Conduct, to be sent to him.

Mar Abraham, having well considered the matter, and perceiving how difficult
it would be for him to escape being Dragoon'd by the Portuguezes, whose power
increased daily in those Parts, if he should disobey this Summons, determined,
whatever came on it, to repair to the Council, at which he assisted, and was
obliged once more to Abjure, and make a profession of the Roman Faith,
promising withal, to see all the Decrees made in that Synod, in relation to his
Bishopric, punctually executed, and to send in all the Heretic Books in his
Diocese to be burned or amended; and having confessed, that in the Ordination
of Priests there was no Wine in the Cup, which he delivered into their hands,
together with the Host, he was commanded to Ordain all that he had Ordained
before over-again.

Now if this, of there being no Wine in the Cup, which was delivered into the
hands of those who were Ordained Priests, was the only ground whereon the
Romanists founded the invalidity of the Chaldaean Orders, as it is the only
thing they have been pleased to instance in, what a stretch was this to
invalidate the Orders of a whole Church by? But for Canonists and Schoolmen by
Subtilties invented on purpose to support a late Error, or to serve a present
turn, to wound Christianity in its very Vitals, is a practice too common to be
wondered at. I am sure the Church of Rome has much more reason to apprehend that
the Sacrilege of denying the Cup to the Laity in the Sacrament, may make her
Communion imperfect and ineffectual, than that this alone should make
Ordinations so.

But after all this stir, the Doctrine of the delivering the Bread and Cup into
the hands of those who are to be ordained Priests, being essential to Orders,
is so far from being true, that it is owned to be a Novelty by all the Modern
Learned Divines of the Church of Rome, and is moreover contradicted by her
daily Practice, who, as all the World knows, allows the Greek Orders to be
good, in the Collation whereof she knows, the Bread and Cup is not put into the
hands of those who are ordained Priests.

It is true, the Council of Florence, in her Instructions to the Armenians,
seems to have doted into the same Error with this of the Portuguezes, in making
that new Ceremony essential to Orders. But let that be as it will, it is
certain that both the present practice of the Roman Church, and all her truly
Learned Sons, the Modern Schoolmen not excepted, do condemn it as an Error; for
which I shall only quote two of her most eminent Schoolmen, and one of her
ablest Critics.

Cardinal Lugo, in his 2 Disp. de Sacramentis, says as follows, Aliunde
autem habemus, non porrectionem panis and vini determinate requiri ex divina
institutione, cum Graeci absque illa porrectione ordinentur; ergo fatendum est
Christum solum voluisse pro materia aliquod signum proportionatum hoc vel illud.

And Becanus, in the third part of his Scholastical Divinity, Chap. 26. of the
Sacrament of Order, has as follows: Concilium Florentinum in instructione
Armenorum solum meminit materiae accidentalis, quae ab Ecclesia fuit instituta,
which was the delivering of the Bread and Cup, non autem substantialis, quam
Christus praescripsit, which is the imposition of hands, Quia haec ex
Scripturis and antiquis Patribus erat satis cognita, non autem illa. Addo, si
hoc argumentum valeret, posse optime retorqueri ita, Antiqua concilia non
assignant aliam materiam nisi impositionem manuum, ergo, etc. He concludes
thus, Nota antiqua concilia assignasse materiam a Christo institutam,
Florentinum vero mateam assignasse, quam Ecclesia introduxit, that is the Latin
only. By this one may see, that the Church of Rome is not so uniform a Body as
she pretends to be, being thus inconsistent with her self in a thing of so high
a nature, as that, of what is, and what is not essential to Orders: and we my
see likewise, how she will break through all ancient Doctrines and Rules, rather
than not disgrace all Bodies of Christians, which deny her Obedience, by
unchurching them by some subtilty or other; and indeed, through the clearest
evidences of matter of Fact, as she does in the case of the Orders of the
Church of England. And furthermore, how apt she is to look upon her own novel
Inventions as the main Substantials of Religion.

To whom I shall only add Morinus, whose judgment in a case of this nature is
of more weight, than that of the whole Tribe of Schoolmen. Who in the 1 Chap.
of his first Exercitation, De Sacris Ordinationibus, says, Nemo, ut mihi
videtur, dubitare potest, antiquos Latinos, a quibus accepimus and
Ordinationes, and quod sacerdotes sumus, legitime and valide sacerdotes
consecrasse, and caetera sacrarum Ordinationum munia contulisse: Eadem
antiquorum Graecorum ratio. Certissimum enim est and evidentissimum, neminem
Ordinationes Graecas criminari posse, quin crimen in Latinas redundet, cum
utrique mutuo alterius Ordinationes probaverint: Graecusque apud Latinos, and
Latinus apud Graecos sine ulla unquam Ordinationis querela sacra Mysteria
celebraverit: pari veritatis evidentia certum est recentiores Latinos in hunc
usque diem legitimas Ordinationes celebrasse and celebrare, eadem ratio
hodiernorum Graecorum, cum ut ex iis quae manifestissime (...) quadam
demonstrata sunt, ab antiquis non differant, eosque public in suis Ordinibus
ministrantes suscipiat Ecclesia Romana, semperque susceperit. And in his
seventh Exercitation, speaking of the delivering the Bread and Cup into the
hands of those that are ordained Priests, he acknowledges it to be a late
Ceremony in the Roman Church. Antiqui Rituales Latini, non secus ac Graeci,
istam instrumentorum traditionem nobis non exhibent: Quidquid specta^ ad illam
materiam and formam ab iis abest. Du^ ritus Ordinationis editi, unus Romae in
sancti Gregorii sacramentario ex Bibliotheca Vaticana, alter Parisiis ab Hugone
Mainardo, ex Bibliotheca Corbeiens^ ista omnia nobis non repraesentant duo
antiquissim Petaviani literis uncialibus scripti qui prae caeteris eminent, duo
alii secundum istos antiquissimi and egregie splendideque scripti, qui ampli
sunt, and multa Ordinationibus illis exhibent, quae videri possunt non
necessaria, quorum unus est Rotomagensis, alter Rhemensis. Tres alii, quorum
primus Senonensis est, duo alii Corbeienses, unus a Rodrado scriptus, nunc
vertitur annus octogentesimus primus, alter a Rotaldo praecedente multo junior,
sed copiosissimus, qui quaecunque noverat ad Ordinationes pertinere, iis
ditavit Sacramentarium suum; denique unus e Bibliotheca Thuana perantiquus, and
alter Bellovacensis. In all which ancient Rituals, he says, there is a
profound silence of this Ceremony.

The Council being ended, Mar Abraham returned to his Bishopric, where he
observed nothing of what he had promised and swore, save that of ordaining his
Priests again the third time, at which Ordinations there were several Jesuits,
who were skilled in the Syriack Tongue, that assisted to see that nothing was
omitted that was essential.

Not long after a Letter of Mar Abraham to the Patriarch of Babylon was
intercepted, wherein he informed him of his having been at a Council of the
Bishops of the Indies at Goa, whither he had gone purely out of fear of the
Portuguezes, who, he said, were over his Head, is a Hammer over an Anvil: but
when he was there, that he had delivered in a Profession of his Faith, which
none of the Latin Bishops were able to contradict, professing himself to his
Patriarch a Dogmatist of the Chaldaean Faith.

Mar Abraham being grown ancient and very much broke, by the long and
unintermitting Persecutions of the Portuguezes, was willing to have a Coadjutor
from Babylon, who might, after his Death, also succeed him in his Bishopric,
and accordingly had one Mar Simeon sent to him by the Patriarch of Babylon.

Mar Simeon was no sooner fixed in the Serra, but, finding the People, by
reason of his never having had anything to do with the Latins, to have a much
greater Affection for him than they had for Mar Abraham, who, though to his
Sorrow, had been so much among them, he was encouraged to set up for sole
Bishop, and having fixed his See at Carturte, one of the principal Towns of the
Christians of St. Thomas, was much favored by the Queen of Pimenta, in whose
Territories Carturte is.

These two Bishops fell presently to fulminate their Excommunications one
against another, to the great disturbance of the whole Diocese, and Mar Abraham
finding his Adversary to gain ground of him daily, complains of him to the
Viceroy and Archbishop of Goa, desiring them to drive Mar Simeon out of the
Serra, who was not only an Intruder, but a bitter Enemy to the Latin Faith.

The Viceroy, though he had no great kindness for Mar Abraham, yet considering
that he wa^ Bishop of the Serra, by the Pope's appointment^ resolved, if it
were possible, to ease him of his Adversary, and understanding that it would be
a difficult thing for him to get Mar Simeon into his hands by open force, he
employed some Franciscan Friars to inveigle him with fair promises to go to
Rome, and get the Pope's Brief for the Bishopric, without which he could never
expect to enjoy it peaceably.

Mar Simeon having first constituted one Jacob, a Parish Priest his Vicar
General during his Absence, was persuaded by the Friars to go along with them
to Cochim, from whence he was sent to Goa, and from Goa upon the first Ships to
Portugal, and from thence to Rome, where, after having been examined by the
Inquisition, he was declared by Pope Sixtus V. not to be in Holy Orders, and
was with that Sentence upon him sent by the Cardinal St. Severiana to Philip
the Second, who put him into the hands of Dom Aleixo de Menezes, whom he was
then sending to Goa, to be Archbishop of that place.

Archbishop Menezes, instead of carrying him along with him to the Indies,
which was what Mar Simeon expected, confined him to a Franciscan Convent in
Lisbon, from whence he is said to have wrote Letters by every Fleet, that went
to the Indies to his Vicar General Jacob, and in all his Letters to have still
styled himself Metropolitan of the Indies, and to have professed the Chaldaean
Doctrines; these Letters were found by Archbishop Menezes in the Serra, when
he visited it, by whom they were sent to the chief Tribunal of the General
Inquisition of Portugal, where if they found Mar Simeon alive, they doubtless
made him change his Franciscan Prison for that of the Inquisition, where they
would take care he should write no more such Letters.

Dom Matthias, Archbishop of Goa, having in the Year 1590. called another
Provincial Council, did, in conformity to Gregory XIII's Brief, Summon Mar
Abraham to repair to it, who being sensible how ill he had complied with what
he promised in the former Council, returned no other Answer to the Summons, but
a Saying, which, he said, was a Proverb in his Country, That the Cat that bites
a Snake is afraid of her Cord, intimating thereby, that he durst not trust the
Portuguezes and Latin Bishops any more: After which he dissembled no longer,
but in all things declared himself to be of the Chaldaean Faith.

Clement VIII. being informed of all this, dispatched a Brief, bearing date the
27th. of January 1595. wherein he Commanded Dom Aleixo de Menezes, Archbishop
of Goa to make Inquisition into the Crimes and Errors of Mar Abraham, and in
case he found him guilty of such things as he had been accused of, to have him
apprehended and secured in Goa, as also to appoint a Governor or
Vicar-Apostolical of the Roman Communion over his Bishopric, and upon Mar
Abraham's Death to take care that no Bishop coming from Babylon should be
suffered to enter into the Serra to succeed.

This Brief was delivered to the Archbishop before he went to the Indies, by
virtue whereof, and in obedience to the Pope's Commands, he made Inquisition
into the Crimes and Errors of Mar Abraham, and finding him guilty of all that
he had been accused of, he sent him his Process without Summoning him to appear
at Goa, by reason of his having been Bedridden for some time.

The Archbishop furthermore understanding by the Informations he had taken,
that Mar Abraham, in conjunction with all the Christians of his Diocese, had
sent to the Patriarch of Babylon for another Coadjutor, Commanded those of
Ormus and of all other places that lay in the way, under grievous Censures, to
stop all Chaldaean, Persian, or Armenian Ecclesiastics that should come
toward the Indies without his Pass. This Order was so punctually executed,
that one who came to Ormus with the Title of the Archbishop of the Serra, was
discovered in a disguise, and sent home again. There were several others of
those Priests and Bishops who attempted to get into the Serra in the Habit of
Mariners, were stopped, to the great Grief of the Christians of St. Thomas, who,
the more they saw their Clergy Persecuted, respected them the more, and grew
every day more zealous for their ancient Doctrines and Rites.

The Archbishop being much encouraged by the Success of this diligence, laid
the matter of the reduction of this Church to the obedience of the Roman, much
more to Heart than any of his Predecessors had ever done. The first he applied
himself to was Jacob, whom Mar Simeon had left his Vicar General, to whom he
writ a long Letter, passionately entreating him to throw away the Commission he
had from Mar Simeon, who was Convicted at Rome of not being in Holy Orders, and
to submit himself to the Papal Authority; making him large Promises of what he
would do for him, if he complied with his desires. But Jacob, who died
presently after, was deaf to all the Archbishop could say to him, making it
his whole business to inflame his Flock against the Latins, and their Doctrines.

The Archbishop did not neglect at the same time to write earnestly to Mar
Abraham, as also to the Archdeacon, who is the only Dignitary in that Church
under the Bishop, and who is employed by him as his Vicar General, calling upon
them to purge their Diocese of the Errors wherewith it had been so long
infected, and to reduce it to the Roman Obedience.

St. Francis, about this time, destroyed a whole Fleet of Jores to the
Portugueze, who, though he was not seen by any of the Portuguezes in the Fight,
which was very bloody on both sides, yet a Cook who belonged to a Capuchin
Convent not far off, having hid himself in the Ruins of their Church, saw a
Friar in his own Habit Board the Fleet of Jores, one after another, whom he so
terrified with his very look, as to put them all to flight immediately, and
pursued them out of sight: This formidable Friar was afterward discovered to
be St. Francis; but though the Historian has not been pleased to tell us how it
came to be known certainly, he tells us it was an Action very proper for St.
Francis, who was the lively Image of Christ, to appear thus and confound the
Enemies of Christianity, by saying, It is I. Now, if this Story did not rebuild
the Capuc^^ ^^uined Church, the Portuguezes were not s^ ^^atef^^ (...) they use
to be in such cases. But (...) was ^^^^ing to what their own St. Anthony did
for them five or six Years afterward in a Land Battle, wherein he was seen by
several, where the greatest fury of the Battle was, Mowing down whole Squadrons
of the Enemy, and at the same time extinguishing the Fire of the Enemies
Artillery with the Sleeve of his Sacred Habit. There were several Portuguezes,
its true, fell in this Fight, but they must have been killed by something else
than Firearms, or at least than Cannon.

In the Year 1584. there came a famous Amazon to Goa, who had been drove out of
her Country by the Hidalcaon; her name was Abehi; she had Fought in several
Battles to admiration; and though when she came to Goa, she was 62 years of Age,
she is reported to have had a great deal of Wit, and the ruins of an exquisite
Beauty; she pretended to have business of great moment to communicate to the
Viceroy, but the Inquisition, no body knew why, put a stop to the Negotiation;
which, after having kept her Prisoner for some time, banished her to Ormus,
from whence having made her escape, she went to the Great Mogul's Court.

In the Year 1593. the Bull of Cruzada was first brought into the Indies by
Francisco Faria, a Dominican Friar; and indeed considering how great a Revenue
that Bull is to the Pope in Spain and Portugal, it is very much that it did not
find its way into the Indies sooner.

When the Archbishop was visiting the City of Damaon, he received Letters of
the 16th. of Feb. 1597. from the Viceroy Matthias Dalbuquerque, advising him of
the Death of Mar Abraham. On the same day he received this news, he in
obedience to the Pope's Brief, constituted Francisco Roz, a Jesuit, and who
was afterward made Bishop of the Serra, Governor and Vicar-Apostolical of the
said Diocese.

The May following the Archbishop being returned to Goa, a Consultation was
held about the Affairs of the Church of the Serra, where it was unanimously
agreed; that notwithstanding the Pope in his Brief had commanded none to be
made Governor or Vicar Apostolical of the Diocese, but what was of the Roman
Communion, it was convenient to nominate the present Archdeacon to it, which
they did, joining Francisco Roz, and the Rector of the Jesuites-College of
Vaipicotta, in Commission with him. But it being required of the Archdeacon,
that he should subscribe the Profession of Faith made by Pius IV. before he had
his Patent he declined doing it, pretending he was not satisfied with having
two joined with him in Commission.

The Archbishop, though he was sensible that it was the Subscription that stuck
with him chiefly, thought fit to dissemble, so far as to seem to believe him,
and by a new Patent constituted him the sole Governor of the Bishopric.

The Archdeacon accepted of this Patent, but at the same time declared, That
it gave him no Authority but what he had before; but when he was called upon to
Subscribe the forementioned Profession of Faith, he desired four Months to
consider of it, hoping by that time a Bishop might be sent them by the
Patriarch of Babylon, when the four Months were expired. Being urged a fresh to
Subscribe, he told them flatly, that he would never do it, nor submit to the
Roman Church, which he was sure had nothing to do with the Apostolical Church
of St. Thomas, no more than that of St. Thomas had to do with the Roman. And
not being satisfied with having made this Declaration as to himself, he
furthermore assembled a Synod of most of the Priests, and most substantial
Christians at Angamale, the Metropolis of the Diocese, where they all swore to
stand by their Archdeacon, in the defense of the ancient Faith they and their
Forefathers had been bred up in, so as not to suffer the least alteration to
be made therein, nor ever to admit of any Bishop, but what should be sent them
by the Patriarch of Babylon; of all which they made a public Instrument, and
having Sworn to maintain it with their Lives and Fortunes, ordered it to be
published through the whole Diocese.

After the meeting of this Synod, the Christians of St. Thomas came to be so
far enraged against the Latins, for what they had done to destroy their ancient
Faith, and for their having treated so many of their Archbishops, so
barbarously as they had done, that they would suffer no Latin Priest to
officiate in their Churches, nor so much as to live among them. Two Jesuits,
one at Angamale, and another at Carturte, having very narrowly escaped being
murdered by them. The Jesuits, and other Latin Priests, were so far
intimidated, by the fury that Synod had put that whole Christianity into, that
for some time none of them were found so hardy, as to venture to go among them.

The news of this great and unexpected Heat, as it did strangely afflict the
Archbishop, who had set his Heart so much on the reducing of those Christians;
so it was the thing that made him resolve to go in Person to the Serra to try
what his Presence and Authority would do.

Not only the Viceroy, but the whole Clergy and Laity, and particularly the
whole Chapter of Goa, together in a body, did all they could, as it is said, to
dissuade him from so dangerous an enterprise, but though he was deaf to all the
Remonstrances of his Friends, yet upon a War breaking out suddenly in the Year
1598. betwixt the Kings of Mangate and Paru, in whose Territories most of these
Christian Churches stand, he thought fit to put off his Journey for that Year,
satisfying himself with writing a Letter to the Archdeacon to persuade him to
reconcile himself and his Church to that of Rome, and acquainting him with his
Intentions to visit all the Churches in the Serra in Person, so soon as the
forementioned War was over, which he believed would be very speedily.

The Archdeacon, when he received this Letter, dreading nothing so much as the
Archbishop's coming in Person among them, declared that he had refused to
Subscribe the forementioned Profession of Faith, for no other reason, but
because he was Commanded to do it before the Rector of the Jesuits College of
Vaipicotta, with whom and his whole Order he pretended to be justly
dissatisfied, giving the Archbishop to understand at the same time, that if he
would order any other Priest or Friar to take his Subscription, that he was
ready to make it.

But the Archbishop looking upon this only as a Trick to throw an Odium upon
the whole Order of Jesuits, and that for no other reason, but because they
were the most industrious in the reduction of those Christians to the Roman
Faith, would not comply with the Arch-Deacon's Request, in naming some body
else to take his Subscription; for which Conduct the Archbishop was very much
blamed, most People, and especially the other Orders of Friars murmuring
against him, as one grown so fond of the Jesuits, as to lose the reduction of
so many thousand Souls, rather than displease the Jesuits.

But the Jesuits, who sacrifice all Interests and Obligations to the Honor of
their Order, have requited the Archbishop but very ill for this his great
kindness for them, in having reported this Affair so here in Europe, as to rob
him of that which he esteemed his chief Glory, to wit, the Reduction of this
Church to the Roman Faith.

For in the History of the Jesuits in the Indies, published by Pieire du
Jarri, a Jesuit, and printed at Bourdeaux, in the Year 1608. we have all that
is said by the Portuguezes of Mar Abraham, and his Arch-Deacon's great aversion
to the Roman Church, and particularly to the whole Order of Jesuits, flatly
contradicted; for in that History we are told that Mar Abraham had such an
extraordinary kindness for the Jesuits, that for some time before his Death,
he put himself so entirely into their hands, as to be governed by them in all
things; and that the Archdeacon George had such an high Opinion of their
worth, as to declare to all the World, that without their aid and assistance,
he should not know after the Archbishop's Death, how to Govern the Diocese. It
is furthermore said, that Mar Abraham, when he was upon his Deathbed called
the Rector of the College of Vaipicotta to him, and having all his Clergy about
him, declared, that he committed his Flock to the Bishop of Rome, as the chief
Pastor and Prelate of the whole Church, and Commanded the Archdeacon, and all
his Priests, to obey the Jesuits, whom his Holiness had sent to cultivate that
Vineyard in all things, and to be sure to follow the Doctrines that they
taught, which were the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; after which
Charge he is said furthermore to have beseeched and conjured the Rector, by the
love of Christ, and the great friendship there had been always between them, to
take care of the Government of his Church after his Death, and to have ordered
an authentic instrument to be made of all this to remain as a Testimony of his
last Will, and of the Faith he died in.

The same History furthermore tells us, That this Church was so far reconciled
to the Pope, in the Year, 1596. that when the Jubilee of Clement VIII. was
published among them by the Jesuits, they gave his Holiness a thousand
Blessings for it, and took a singular pleasure in pronouncing his Name; and
that during the whole time of the Jubilee, they were at Church from Morning to
Night, without taking any refection, and were so zealous to confess themselves
to the Fathers, that they waited in the Church till Midnight in great Crowds to
do it. Now according to this report of things, the Archbishop, when he came
into the Serra, had little more to do than to open his Arms to embrace a
People, who, being before hand prepared by the Jesuits, were ready to throw
themselves into them.

But to leave Romance, and return to History, having only observed by the way,
that it is visible from this gross misrepresentation of those Affairs, how
little regard is to be had to the Jesuits Reports of their Feats in the
Indies; since to support a Story purely invented for the Honor of their Order,
they do not boggle to pretend to have an authentic instrument of the truth of
it, and that drawn up by the Order of a dying Prelate.

But a thing happened at this time, which, though in it self not considerable,
did abundantly manifest how little disposed the Clergy of this Church was to
submit to the Pope.

A Boy, that went to School to the Jesuits at Vaipicotta, having been taught
by them to name the Pope in his Prayers before the Patriarch of Babylon, being
overheard doing it in the Church by some of the Malabar Priests, was, after
they had beat him severely, turned out of the Church; they spoke also to his
Father to whip him out of praying for the Pope, who, they said, was none of
their Prelate, nor had any thing to do with them. The Archbishop being
informed thereof, writ immediately to the Arch Deacon, commanding him to make
Examples of those impudent Heretics, for what they had said and done to the
Boy: which the Archdeacon was so far from doing, that he Honored them the
more for it. By the way, the Jesuits, teaching their Scholars to pray for the
Patriarch of Babylon, though after the Pope, is one instance, among others, of
their Conscience, in those Parts, being subservient to their Policy.

But the World continuing still to blame the Archbishop for not putting the
Affairs of the Serra into some other hands than those of the Jesuits, against
whose order that whole Church was so much incensed, he was obliged at last,
though contrary to his Inclination, to send a Franciscan Friar to the
Archdeacon, with authority to take his Subscription to the Roman Creed, and to
require him to punish the Priests, who had beat the Boy for naming the Pope in
his Prayers.

The Archdeacon having nothing to object against the Franciscan Friar, and
being extremely desirous, if it was possible, to keep the Archbishop from
coming into the Serra, though he refused to Subscribe the Creed of Pius IV. yet
condescended to Subscribe a Confession of Faith, wherein he professed himself a
Catholic, and that he believed as the Church believed, but without naming the
Roman, or acknowledging the Pope as universal Pastor of the Church; he is
furthermore said, upon the Archbishop's signifying his dissatisfaction at the
ambiguous Profession he had made, to have given his consent publicly to that
of Pius IV. being read to him in Portugueze, of which he did not understand a
Syllable. But let that be as it will, it is certain that he continued still to
teach, that the Pope was the head of his own Church, but had nothing to do with
that of St. Thomas.

The Archbishop not being able to brook such things any longer, fixed a day
for his going toward the Serra, and when the Viceroy and the whole Clergy
begged of him not to expose his Person to such visible danger, they could have
no other answer from him but this, That his life was but too secure in this
case, seeing he had never merited enough to entitle him to the Honor of being
a Martyr. However, lest his Humility might deceive him in passing a Judgment
upon himself, he did not think fit to trust too much to his want of Merits; and
for that reason went attended with a good Guard, he had also a Commission to
treat with all the Princes of Malabar, about Peace and War, and particularly to
engage the Samorim to assist the Portugueze to take Cunahle, a Fortress lately
possessed by a company of Mohammedan Pirates, who did very much disturb the
Portugueze Trade upon that Coast. This Nest of Pirates, was first built by one
Pate Marca, a Mohammedan, who having in a short time enriched it strangely with
the Spoils of the Portuguezes, both by Sea and Land, left it at his Death to
his Nephew Mahomet Cunahle Marca. This Mahomet was Governor, or rather Prince
of it at this time; and as he was nothing inferior to his Uncle in Courage or
Conduct, so he had Fortified the place so as to make it absolutely one of the
strongest Garrisons in the Indies, neither did he insult the Portuguezes only,
but the Malabars also, and particularly the Samorim, in whose Country Cunahle
stood, and who had given leave to his Uncle to fortify that place, on purpose
to incommode the Portugueze.

And though the Portugueze Historians will have it, that he took this Affair of
Cunahle only in the way to his Visitation; yet by the course of his procedure,
one would be tempted to think, that it was what principally carried him to
those Parts.

On the 27th. of December, 1598. the Archbishop Embarked upon a Gally
Commanded by Don Alvaro de Menezes, and on the day of Epiphany, arrived at the
Bar of Cunahle, where he joined the whole Portugueze Armada, Commanded by the
Viceroy's Brother, he was saluted with all the Guns and Music of the Fleet;
and having called a Council of War, and heard the several Opinions of all the
Captains concerning the best way to take Cunahle, he dispatched the resolution
they had come to thereon, to the Council of State at Goa; a most Apostolical
beginning of a Visitation. After having put the Siege of Cunahle into a good
Posture, he departed with a good Convoy to Cananor, where he continued 16 days,
and then sailed to Cochim, where he was splendidly received by the Governor
and the whole City, at the Stairs they had made on purpose for him to Land at.

Next day, when the Magistrates of the City came to Complement him at his
House, he acquainted them with his design of reducing the Christians of St.
Thomas before he returned to Goa, desiring their assistance therein, which they
frankly promised him.

The day following His Grace having called the common Council of the City
together, recommended the enterprise of Cunahle to them, whom he made so
sensible of how great importance it was to their City above all others, to have
that Fortress wrested out of the hands of the Mohammedan Pirates, who had lately
made themselves Masters of it, that they immediately caused 150 Men to be
Raised and Armed at their own Charge, whom, together with a great quantity of
all sorts of Ammunition, they sent upon five stout Ships to join the Armada
before Cunahle; the Archbishop also, to give the more life to the enterprise,
sent one of the best of his own Manchua's or Yachts, manned with his own menial
Servants, along with them.

The King of Cochim was much troubled to hear of the Archbishop's being so hot
upon the reduction of Cunahle, being sensible that a Peace betwixt the
Portuguezes and the Samorim, without whose assistance by Land, it would be hard
for them to reduce that Fortress, must be the Consequence of the enterprise.
And as there had been nothing, the Kings of Cochim had been always more careful
to hinder such a Peace, which they than did on purpose to keep the Portuguezes
in a closer dependence upon them; so the present King following the wise
measures of his Ancestors, endeavored, by a Stratagem, to destroy the
Confidence he saw the Portuguezes had already reposed in the Samorim. To which
end he sent his Chief Justice, and one Joan de Miranda, a Gentleman of Cochim,
to wait upon the Archbishop and to acquaint his Grace from him, that he had
received certain advice from some Spies he had in the Samorim Cabinet-Council,
that that Prince, whenever the Portuguezes Landed, instead of joining with
them, had determined to cut them all off in revenge of the many Injuries they
had done his Ancestors, of which danger he thought himself obliged, both as a
Friend and a Brother in Arms to the King of Portugal to advise him.

The Archbishop, who understood the Intrigues of Princes, as well as any Man
living, returned the King his Thanks for his Intelligence, but withal sent him
word, that they were resolved to trust the Samorim in this occasion; and the
rather, because they did not want Power to be revenged on all that should
deceive the King of Portugal either in Peace or War.

The King, when he found his Plot had not succeeded according to his
expectation, resolved to divert the Samorim from sending an Army to Cunahle, by
making a War presently upon the Caimal, or Prince of Corngeira his Friend and
Allie: and having with incredible expedition got an Army of 60000 Men together,
he sent to let the Archbishop know, that before he marched he designed to wait
upon him. The Archbishop, though he did not go over his Threshold to meet the
King, received him, when he came, with great Civility; and after the
Complements were over, acquainted him first, with his Intention of visiting all
the Christian Churches in the Serra, in order to reduce them to the true
Christian Faith, from which they had very much swerved; telling him, that since
great numbers of those Churches were within his Territories, he expected his
assistance in so good a work; of which being assured by the King, the
Archbishop went on and told him, that there was another thing that he must not
deny him, and that was to put off his War with the Caimal till Cunahle was
taken; the King gave many reasons why he could not deferr it; but the
Archbishop pressed him so hard upon the point, that before they parted, he made
him promise to disband his Army.

The Archbishop having put the Affairs of the Siege in a good posture, begun
to apply himself to the reduction of the Christians of St. Thomas, and the
first step he made toward it, was to send to the Archdeacon to come and speak
with him at Cochim. But after having expected him some days, and finding that
he neither came himself, nor returned him any answer, he concluded, as well he
might, that he was afraid to venture himself in that City; whereupon he sent
him a Letter of safe Conduct, swearing he would not question him about any
thing that was past.

The Archdeacon, upon this occasion, Assembled a great number of Cacanares,
and other considerable Christians to consult together what was best to be done.
It was agreed on all hands, that the Archdeacon should go and wait upon his
Lordship, who was a Person of that Authority as to be able to undo them all at
once, by depriving them of their Pepper-Trade, if they should disoblige him,
and besides, he was able to oblige their Kings, who were all very much at his
Devotion, to Sacrifice all their Lives and Estates to his displeasure; and what
made them the willinger to comply with him therein, was, their being confident
that they should be quickly rid of his Company, since Winter was at hand, which
they thought would certainly call him to Goa.

Upon all which Considerations it was agreed, That they should give way to his
saying of Mass, and his Preaching in their Churches, which their Books told
them was a common Civility, that is every where paid to Bishops, though out of
their own Diocesses; but as for any Acts of Jurisdiction, such as Visiting,
Conferring Orders, Excommunicating, and the like, if he should pretend to
exercise any such Acts, as it was to be feared he would, that they should then
put him off as well as they could with delays, until he returned to Goa, which
they thought he would in two Months at farthest; by which means they might,
without embroiling themselves with so powerful a Prelate, wait till they had a
Bishop sent them by the Patriarch of Babylon, to whom they had writ for one; of
all which they made a public Instrument, and for their further Security,
brought together a Body of 3000 brave Men, who were all well Armed; the
Christians of St. Thomas being, by much, both the stoutest and best Firemen in
the Indies, as the Portuguezes knew very well, which made them be the more
zealous to reduce them to the Roman Church, in order to make them Subjects to
the King of Portugal.

The Archbishop sent also at the same time to some of their Paniquais, some of
which have 4000, some 6000 Men at their Command, to come and speak with him at
Cochim; but they, instead of going thither, took an Oath solemnly to make
themselves Amoucos, after the Custom of the Malavars, against him, in case he
offered any violence to their Archdeacon, or to any other of their Priests.
When the Malavars devote themselves to be Amoucos for any cause, they defend it
to the last drop of their Blood, without either fear or wit.

With two of these Paniquais, and 3000 Men well Armed, the Archdeacon came to
wait upon the Archbishop at Cochim. Don Antonio de Noronha, the Governor of
the City, met them without the Gates, and conducted them to the Archbishop's
Palace. The Archdeacon, when he came before the Archbishop kneeled down and
kissed his Hand, as did all the other Cacanares that were in his Company; the
two Paniquais were also presented to his Lordship by the Archdeacon, who when
the Archbishop, and the Governor, and the Archdeacon came to sit down,
placed themselves at the Elbows of the Archbishop's Chair, where they stood
all the while with their broad Swords naked over his Head. The door of the Room
where they were being shut, to keep out the Crowd, those that stood without
imagining that it was done to make their Archdeacon a Prisoner, said to one
another, this is the time to die for our Archdeacon, and for the Church of St.
Thomas, but being assured that their Archdeacon was in no danger, they were
quieted.

After the hubbub was over, and they had discoursed together for some time, it
was agreed, that the Archbishop should go next day to Vaipicotta, which upon
the account of its having a College of Jesuits in it, should be the first
Church he should Visit, and that the Archdeacon with his Cacanares, should
repair thither immediately.

The Archbishop having furnished himself with all Necessaries for his Voyage,
embarked with all his Retinue upon seven Tones or Galleys, and Roque de Mello
Pereyro, who had been Governor of Malaca, attended him with two Galleys more,
and Joan Pereyra de Miranda, who was afterward Governor of Cranganor with one.

Being arrived at Vaipicotta, he was conduct^d by the Jesuits, and their
Scholars, and the whole Village to the Church, where, with his Mitre on his
Head, and his Crosier in his hand, he gave them a long Sermon. His Text was, He
that enters not in by the door, etc. on which words he told them at length,
That none were true Pastors, but what entered in by the door of the Roman
Church, and were sent by the Pope, who was Christ's Vicar; which none of their
former Prelates having been, who had been all sent to them by the Schismatical
Bishops of Babylon, they were all Thieves and Murderers of the Flock. When he
had done his Sermon, he bid them come next day to the Church to be confirmed,
which some did; to whom, after he had confirmed them, he told the news of
Purgatory, a place most of them had never heard of before.

All this while no Archdeacon appeared, who came not to Vaipicotta, till two
days after the arrival of the Archbishop. He had delayed his coming on
purpose, that he might not by his presence, seem to consent to any of those
things, which he knew the Archbishop would offer to do at that place.

Though the Archbishop knew well enough what it was that had made the
Archdeacon loiter so behind, yet he dissembled so far as to receive him very
kindly, treating with him about the course he was to take in the reduction of
the Church, who seemed to approve of every thing that was proposed to him.

The Archbishop went daily to Matins and Vespers, which were sung by those of
the Seminary in Chaldee, but coming to understand at last, for he understood
Chaldee no more than he did Malavar, that they prayed therein for the Patriarch
of Babylon, stiling him the Universal Pastor of the Church, a Title that all
Patriarchs, as well as the Pope, have assumed to themselves for some Hundred of
Years (nay, by what Gregory I. has said of that Title, I do not know but the
Pope might be one of the last that assumed it) he resolved not to permit so
wicked a thing to be done any longer, notwithstanding all that the good
Jesuits, who out of Policy had all along complied with it, could say to
dissuade him; and so having one Evening, without communicating his design to
any one, called all the Jesuits, Masters of the Seminary, and the Archdeacon,
and his Cacanares, together at his Lodgings, having first made a Speech to them
to prove, That the Pope was the only Head of the Church on Earth, and that the
Bishop of Babylon was a Heretic and Schismatic, he pulled out of his Pocket
an Excommunication latae sententiae, commanding his Secretary to read it with
an audible Voice, and his Interpreter to declare it to those that did not
understand Latin, in Malavar, by which he Commanded, That no Person Secular or
Ecclesiastic do from henceforward presume to pray for the Patriarch of
Babylon. He Commanded the Archdeacon and Cacanares to sign it, and finding the
Archdeacon had a great mind to have shuffled it off, he said to him, Sign it,
Father, for it is full time the Axe were laid to the Root of the Tree; to which
the Archdeacon returned no answer, but Signed it without saying a word, as did
all the other Cacanares, after which it was fixed to the Gates of the Church.

The Christians of the Village, when they came to hear of what had been done,
run, as if they had been Mad, in a Body to the Arch-Deacon's Lodgings, where,
with one voice, they set up a most lamentable howl, crying out, That the
Archbishop of Goa, with his Portuguezes was come to destroy their Religion,
and had affronted their Patriarch, by whom they had been Governed for above
1200 Years; and after having exclaimed against the Archbishop at a most bitter
rate, and bewailed their great Misery, in having Strangers come among them to
destroy the Religion they had been born and bred in, they told their
Cassanares, that if they would but give way to it, they would either Sacrifice
their Lives in defense of their Religion, or be revenged on those that had
affronted it.

But the Archdeacon having made a sign, that he desired to be heard, they all
held their Peace, he told them, There was a time for all things, and that that
was not a time for Revenge, but Dissimulation; that it was true he had Signed
the Excommunication, but that he did it purely out of Fear, for they were to
consider, that, besides the Strength the Archbishop had brought along with
him, he had engaged the King of Cochim, in whose Country they were, to protect
him in all he did, and who, if they should offer any affront to the
Archbishop, would certainly revenge it on their Lives and Estates. As to
himself, he was resolved to die in defense of the Religion of his Country,
sooner than consent to the introduction of Popery; adding, The Portuguezes, if
they liked their own Religion, might live in it, in God's Name, and he knew no
Body that would trouble them for it; but that he saw no reason why they should
thus disturb and persecute People in their own Country, because they will not
turn Papists, or change their old Religion for theirs, and that as to the
Archbishop, the thing that made him so furious to destroy the Authority of the
Patriarch of Babylon was, that he might make himself Primate of the Indies; to
which he hoped, none of the Christians of Malabar would ever consent, or would
ever be persuaded to forsake their old Religion for that of Popery. At this
they all gave a great shout, crying, They would lose their Lives, and all they
had in the World, before they would do it. But none of the forementioned
Amoucos being among them, it is like, at that time they went no further.

The Portuguezes upon this uproar, did not forbear to blame the Archbishop,
for having published such an Excommunication, contrary to the advice of all
that were about him, advising him to hasten aboard his Galleys if he would
secure his Person; he told them, He was so far from repenting for what he had
done, that were it to do again, he would do it, and that instead of retreating
to Cochim, he would go next Morning to Paru.

Paru is the Metropolis of a Kingdom, wherein the noblest Body of all the
Christians of St. Thomas lives, but withal, the most violent against Popery, as
they had sufficiently manifested on several occasions; for though Don Jorge du
Cruz, and Don Joan du Cruz, both Natives of the Country, had been sent by the
Portuguezes to Rome in the time of Gregory XIII. who had done them great
Honors there, and had granted them many Indulgences for their Churches, and
withal, a Privileged Altar therein, yet their Countrymen did not only slight
all those Indulgences, but would not so much as suffer them, though of two of the
noblest Families in the Country, to officiate in any of their Churches, and at
last forced them to leave the Kingdom, their own Brethren and Kinsfolk, having
the first hand in their expulsion.

The Christians of Paru, though thus affected to the Roman Church, had, according
to the forementioned Agreement, prepared great Festivities for the reception of
the Archbishop, hoping, by such Complements, to have kept him from doing any
business; but, having the Night before he came, heard of what he had done at
Vaipicotta to their Patriarch, they turned all their Festivities into Arms, and
were so much incensed against him, that when he Landed, he was met by eight or
ten Persons only that waited on the Archdeacon.

The Archbishop, though he read trouble and dejection in all their Countenances,
seemed to take no notice of it, but with his Cross carried before him went
directly to the Church, which, contrary to Custom, he found full of Armed Men,
without so much as one Woman or Child amongst them; whereupon, being
apprehensive lest his Guards and Servants, if they continued ashore, might come
to Blows with the Malavars, whom he saw so much disposed to Quarrel, he
Commanded them all aboard except two Priests, who were to assist at the Offices.

The Archbishop having put on his Pontificals, and given his Blessing to the
Congregation, made a long discourse to them, showing them, That there was but
one true Religion, which was the Roman, and that all Christians were under an
indispensable obligation to submit themselves to the Pope. After he had done
his Sermon, which lasted an hour and an half, and explained to them the
Doctrine of the Sacrament of Confirmation, and then called upon them to come to
it; the Congregation, though they had heard him till then very quietly; began to
cry out with great fury, That they would never be Confirmed by him, that being
a thing that none of their Prelates had ever used, and that it was no Sacrament
of Christ's Institution, but an Invention of the Portuguezes to make them their
Slaves, by setting a Mark on their Foreheads, and giving them a Box on the Ear,
which is what all the Roman Bishops do in Confirmation, and though the Dastards
in Vaipicotta had been so tame as to suffer themselves to be buffeted and
enslaved by him, they would never endure it, nor suffer him to touch their
Beards, or their Wives Faces; that he might go home in a good hour to his
Portuguezes, and let them alone with their Religion, and if he did continue to
disturb them thus, it should cost him dear. The Archbishop heard all this with
great patience, and sitting down, endeavored to convince them of the Truth of
the Sacrament of Confirmation; but when he perceived that they were the worse,
rather than the better for what he said to them, having mustered all his
Courage together, he rose up, and having advanced two steps with his Crosier in
his hand, he told them with great heat, That the Faith he Preached to them was
the Faith of Christ and St. Thomas, and was believed by all Christians, and
that he was ready to die to confirm the truth of it; but they being as ready to
die for their Religion as he was, or pretended to be, for his, that Argument
had no effect at all upon them. He furthermore challenged all those that Talked
against the Roman Faith by Night in Corners, to come forth, if they durst, to
dispute with him publicly; which the Archdeacon, who the Night before had
assembled most of the considerable Christians of Paru together, and had made
them promise never to throw off the Patriarch of Babylon, taking to himself, he
rose up in, a passion, and having asked aloud who they were that taught
Heresies in the dark, and that Preached no where but in Corners, flung out of
the Church, and going into the Town picked up eight or ten Boys, whom he
presented to the Archbishop to be confirmed by him, pretending, that with all
that he was able to do, he could persuade no more to come: The Archbishop
having confirmed these Boys, returned to his Galleys very angry, and finding
there was nothing more to be done at Paru, he determined to Sail next Morning
to Mangate, to see how those Christians stood affected.

When he came to the Church of Mangate, a Town chiefly inhabited by Christians,
he found the Church filled with Household Goods and Women, by reason of the War
that was then on foot between the Kings of Mangate and Paru. After having
comforted the Christians for the Losses they had sustained, and given them his
Blessing, he began to Preach against the Errors they had been Educated in. But
having advice that there were some Amoucos coming after him from Paru, he went
straightways aboard his Galleys, and rowing away before Night, he arrived next
Morning at Cheguree, a place belonging to his Friend the King of Cochim; where
having sent ashore an Order to the Cacanares and Christians to meet him at the
Church, he had word sent him, that the Church doors were all shut, and there
was neither Man, Woman, nor Child, to be seen in the whole Village; he was
informed at Night, that the Archdeacon was in the Town, but that he had shut
himself up in a House, and was resolved never to see his Lordship again.

The Portuguezes that were in his Train, as well Ecclesiastics as Seculars,
were at him perpetually to give over this enterprise, and not to expose his
Person and Dignity (as he did) to no purpose; but instead of returning any
answer to their Importunities, he retired all alone to his Cabin, where he
wrote a long Letter to the Archdeacon, in which he swore that he remembered
nothing that was past, and that he had no design of doing him any harm, and if
he would but do him the favor to come and speak with him once more, he did not
doubt but that he should be able to convince him of his Errors, promising with
all to do great things for him, if he would but entirely submit himself to the
Roman Church.

This Letter was delivered the same Night to the Archdeacon, who having read
it, called the Cacanares together, and told them, that it being a scandalous
thing in them to decline treating with the Archbishop above board, about the
Affairs of Religion, he was for their going to wait upon him to hear what he
could say, but with such a Guard, that it should not be in his Power to make
them Prisoners. Having all agreed to this Proposition, they sent to the Arch
Bishop to let him know, That if he would be please^ to come ashore, they would
wait, upon him The Archbishop sent them back word, That the Sun was too hot to
stand in, and desired the^ therefore to come aboard his Galley, which la^ with
her Stern on ground. The Arch-Deaco^ and Cacanares seeing the Galley quite
surrounde^ by their People ventured to go aboard; when being come, they were
conducted to the Arc^^Bishop's Cabin, where they found him with a^ his Priests,
Jesuits, and several Gentlemen e^pecting them. After some discourse, the
Arc^^Deaco^ told the Archbishop, That it was true they had not received his
Grace so courteously as might have been expected, nor indeed as they intended
to have done, had he not fallen so foul upon their Patriarch, whom, though he had
been pleased to call an Excommunicate Heretic, they knew to be both a
Catholic and a most holy Man, and endeavored to introduce several Novelties
into the Serra, which they and their Forefathers had never so much as heard of
before. To all which the Archbishop answered, That he was sure they were not
ignorant of the Patriarch of Babylon 's being a Professed Nestorian, and not to
trouble them with any Arguments to prove that all Nestorians must be Heretics,
he would only ask them one single Question, which was, Whether they believed
the Gospel of St. John? They told him they did, and would die rather than deny
any thing that was revealed in it. Well then, said the Archbishop, pray tell
me, how you can reconcile what St. John says, The word was made Flesh, and
dwelt among us, with what your Patriarchs and Bishops have taught you, to wit,
that the Word did not make it self Flesh, and that Christ was not God, and that
God did not make himself Man, for do you not sing in your Churches upon the
Feast of the Nativity, that the Word did not make it self Flesh, as the
unbelieving Romans teach, but did only dwell in Christ as in a Temple.

The Archdeacon returned no answer to this, but passing to another point, said
to the Archbishop, Your Grace would fain persuade us likewise, that none can
be saved out of the Obedience of the Roman Church, which is what St. John no
where says, that ever I could see; besides, we have in our Archives a Letter
of St. Caius, Bishop of Rome, wherein he confesses that he had nothing to do
with the Church of Babylon, no more than the Church of Babylon had to do with
his Church. We have also another Letter, which is called in our Books the
Letter of the Lord's Day, because it is said upon that day to have fallen down
from Heaven, wherein the same Truth is affirmed. Here the Archbishop run into
a long discourse of the Primacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope's being his
Successor, and Christ's Vicar upon Earth; after which they came at last to this
Agreement, That as to matters of Faith, a Synod should be called to determine
them; and that in the mean while the Archbishop might, if he pleased, give the
Blessing, and Preach in any of their Churches, but should not be received in
them as their Prelate, but as a Bishop that was a Stranger, neither should he
pretend to Confirm, or do any other Episcopal Act within that Diocese. This
Agreement was Signed by the Archbishop and the Archdeacon, and all the
Cacanares who were present, with a Declaration that the Synod should be
Celebrated before Whitsuntide, and that the Archdeacon should no longer stir
up the People against him, nor go attended with such Troops of Armed Men as he
had done formerly.

This Agreement being Signed, the Archbishop set Sail for Canhur, whither the
Archdeacon went by Land, not daring to trust himself by Water, where he would
have been in the Power of the Portuguezes.

At Canhur he was received very friendly by the Christians, who had been told
by the Archdeacon, that he did not pretend to come among them as their
Prelate, but only as a Stranger, but though he kept to his Agreement so far as
not to offer to do any thing but give the Blessing and Preach, yet in his
Sermon, which was a very long one, he talked so much of the Roman Church, and
its Supremacy, and of the obligation all Churches were under to submit to it,
that the whole Congregation were much offended with him; the Archdeacon was
likewise discontented with it, and being Sick, or at least pretending he was,
returned to Cheguree to be cured; and the Archbishop having other work on his
hands, was willing enough to dismiss him; who, in pursuance of the Instruction
he brought with him from Goa, was obliged to hasten to Coulaon, a Fortress
belonging to the Portuguezes, to see in what condition it was, and to take some
course to have the Fort the King of Travancor was building in its
Neighborhood, and would much incommode it, demolished.

On the first of March he set Sail for a Castle that is within two Leagues of
Cochim, where the Governor and Bishop of the City met him, to whom having
communicated his Designs, he Sailed directly for Porcoa, where the King of the
Country had been some days expecting him; he went to a Church that was there in
the Evening, where he was kindly received by the Christians; the King, who
professed a great Friendship for the Portuguezes, having Commanded them, upon
pain of his displeasure, to comply with the Archbishop in all things. After
having Preached, he went to Lodge at the House of the Cacanar, whither the King
came at Night to visit him; the Archbishop entertained him very friendly, and
thanked him for the kindness he had showed to the Christians of St. Thomas, and
their Churches, and for having cleared his Coast of Pirates: the King, after
some Complements desired to be admitted to the Honor of being a Brother in
Arms to the King of Portugal, as the King of Cochim had been: The Archbishop
told him, that was an Honor the King of Portugal never did to any King, before
he had merited it by some signal Service; however, he promised to do all that
lay in his Power to help him to it.

Next Morning the Arch-Bishap went to Church, where he said Mass, and
afterward confirmed the whole Congregation, notwithstanding his late solemn
Promise to the contrary, as indeed none but Fools will ever expect, that
Papists will observe any such Promises longer than the first opportunity they
have to break them.

From Porcoa he sailed directly to Coulaon, where, under pretense of visiting a
Church that stood near the Fort the King of Travancor was building, he took a
view of the Fort, and finding it was near finished, and would in a few days
have a Garrison put in it, he immediately dispatched away a Messenger to the
Captain General of the Fleet and Troops that were before Cunahle, to come
forthwith with his whole Armada to demolish the said Fort, which, if he came
quickly, he might do with great ease, for that he would find none in it but
Workmen.

Now you must know that the Archbishop, when he was last at the Bar of
Cunahle, notwithstanding that the King of Travancor and the Portuguezes were at
that time in Peace, had left a private Order with the General, that so soon as
he was Master of Cunahle, he should set Sail immediately with the whole Armada,
and demolish this Fort, which, by reason of Cunahle's not being yet taken, had
not been executed.

But while the Archbishop was expecting the Captain General, he received the
bad news of a great slaughter of Portuguezes in an Attack they had made upon
Cunahle, and that the Captain General was retired to Cochim to have his wounded
Men cured; from whence he intended to come and wait upon him for further Orders.

The Archbishop was extremely troubled at this News, as well upon the account
of the great numbers of Persons of Quality that had been killed in the Action,
as because he feared it would very much hearten the Kings of Malabar, who had
till then still looked upon the Portuguezes as Invincible. Wherefore, to
prevent the ill effects that the true News of this Defeat might have upon the
Minds of the Princes of Malabar, he dispatched Letters immediately to all of
them to acquaint them with the great Victory the Portuguezes had obtained
before Cunahle; and though he acknowledged, that it was purchased with the Blood
of several brave Men, among whom were some of his own Kindred, who were very
dear to him, yet he did not doubt but that they would infallibly carry the
Place, at the next Attack they made.

These tricks of the Archbishop coming so thick, one upon the neck of another,
for here we have no fewer than three of them in less than a Fortnight, puts me
in mind of what Manuel de Faria says of him in the 3d. Tome of his Asia
Portuguesa, which I shall give the Reader in his own words, Este illustre
Prelado estuviera yo por ventura en el numero de los santos, si no passara a
Espanna a donde le quito esta gloria, en la opinion mortal, la deficil del
acierto en el maneio de los grandes puestos que vinoa ocupar, o fuessen
solicitudos, o fuessen ofrecidos. This Illustrious Prelate, had he never
returned to Spain, had, in all probability, been made a Saint before this time,
where, through the difficulty there is in the managery of high Posts, whether
offered to him or procured by Solicitations, he lost all the Glory he had
acquired in the Indies in the Opinion of the World.

His High Posts in Spain, which the Author says he does not know whether he
procured by Solicitations or not, were the Primacy of Braga, and Viceroyship
of Portugal, under Philip III. for two Years, and the Presidentship of the
Council of State of Portugal at Madrid, in which Office and Court he died.

What his Miscarriages were in Spain, whereby he is said to have forfeited his
Glory, I have not been able to learn; but whatever they were, one would think
that the violating of a solemn Agreement openly, within a Week after it was
made, and the ordering a Fort belonging to a Prince, that was in Peace with
them, to be treacherously demolished, and the dispersing of notorious Falsehoods
only to serve a turn, ought to be no very good title to Saintship. But the
Archbishop, if he could have had hands to have executed it, had served the
King of Travancor a much worse trick than this, when he was upon his Visitation
that was after the Synod. We are told of a lively thing spoke by a Portugueze
Captain, that was very brave, but had scarce Bread to eat, who, in this Siege,
having seven of his Teeth struck out with a Musquet-Bullet, after he had wiped
his Mouth said, The Mohammedan had done him no Injury, and had known doubtless
he had no need of Teeth. But to return to the Story.

The Archbishop, after having sent this false News about, and having sent to
the Queen of Changanate, to let her know, that he should not be able to meet
her according to his Promise, until he returned; Sailed in great have to
Cochim, to conferr with the Captain General, and to consult whether it would
not be convenient to make an absolute Peace with the Samorim, and the rather
because he had been so true to his Word, in carrying on the Siege of Cunahle.
It was agreed on all hands that such a Peace would be convenient at that time;
however, they would not venture to conclude it before they had the Viceroy's
Opinion of it, to whom they sent the Project.

The Archbishop, after he had dispatched this business, Sailed to Molandurte,
a great place of Christians, where he was received very kindly, which kindness
of theirs is said to have cost them dear; for the King of Cochim, to whom
Molandurte belongs, being grown extremely jealous that the Archbishop, under a
pretense of reducing the Christians of St. Thomas to the obedience of the Roman
Church, designed to bring them under the obedience of the Crown of Portugal, as
it is plain he did from the 24th Decree of the last Action of the following
Synod, for this very reason laid a great Tribute upon them, which they have not
been able to this day to shake off; and furthermore Commanded them, upon pain
of Death, to repair to Angamale to their Archdeacon, who being there, and
having heard, it is like, of the Archbishop's having violated their Agreement
within less than a Week after it was made, begun to thunder out
Excommunications against him, writing to all his Churches to have nothing more
to do with him, and to all the Princes of Malabar, to have a care of him as a
Person that had ill designs upon their Subjects.

While the Archbishop was at Molandurte, where he confirmed and exercised all
Episcopal Acts, he received Letters from the Viceroy approving his Project of
Peace with the Samorim, and desiring him to return to Vaipim to Sign it, which
he did in great haste, as did the Governor and Bishop of Cochim also, who both
met him there.

This Peace was much promoted on the Samorim side by his Nephew and first
Minister Vniare Cherare, who, notwithstanding he had been privately Christened
by Father Roz, had leave to continue to Profess himself a Heathen still, the
better to enable him to serve the Portuguezes, which he did effectually, both
by communicating to them daily all the Secrets of his Uncles Cabinet-Council,
whereof he was President, and by disposing him to have a good opinion of the
Portuguezes; which was what he would not have been in a capacity to have done,
but would have been immediately disgraced, and turned out of all, had he
discovered himself to have been a Christian so soon as he was Baptized. And as
for the Archbishop, we find he was so far from condemning either the Prince or
the Jesuit for this scandalous dissimulation, that after the Celebration of
the Synod he confirmed and anointed the Prince therein, by giving him the
Sacrament of Chrism or Confirmation, with the same Secrecy, and the same
Dispensation as the Jesuit had given him that of Baptism.

After he had dispatched the Peace, Signed to the Captain General, he set Sail
for Diamper, the ancient Seat of several of the Bishops of the Serra, where
meeting with several that had a mind to take Orders, there having been no
Ordination in the Bishopric for two Years, he gave notice that he intended to
conferr Orders on the Saturday before the Fifth Sunday in Lent.

He writ also to the Archdeacon to come and assist at the Solemnity; the
Archdeacon was much concerned at the news, and writ him back word, That this
was contrary to the late Agreement they had made together, and that his doing
of it would put an end to the Affair of the Synod, which he seemed to desire so
much, since the principal point that was to be debated therein was, Whether he
was their Prelate or no? But the Archbishop fansying that the Archdeacon
talked of a Synod only to amuse him and gain time, writ him word, that nothing
should hinder him from Conferring Orders at the time appointed; and not only
so, but that he would exercise all other Acts of Episcopal Jurisdiction, in
obedience to the Pope's Briefs, to whom all the Churches of the World were
subject. The Archdeacon finding he was absolutely determined to Ordain,
desired him, since he was resolved to do it right or wrong, to Ordain none but
Latins, for so they called not only the Portuguezes, but all the Malavars, who
were bred up under the Jesuits. The Archbishop sent him word again, that he
would Ordain both Latins and Chaldaeans, it being his business to destroy that
distinction by bringing all Christians under one head. Upon this the
Archdeacon finding nothing else would do, ordered an Edict to be published in
all the Churches of the Diocese, prohibiting all Christians, upon pain of
Excommunication, latae sententiae, to receive any Orders from him, with which
he sent another Instrument, commanding all Priests and Christian People not to
suffer him to come into any of their Churches, as also not to be present at any
of his Masses or Sermons.

The Archbishop had Preached two days following, and had confirmed a great
many before these Instruments had reached Diamper; but after they came once to
be published, they put a full stop to what went on so currently before: The
oldest Cacanar of the Church requiring the Archbishop, upon the receipt of
them, to leave the place, and not to offer to set his Foot in their Church any
more, nor to Confirm any Body, which among them, who anointed Children on the
Head when they were Baptized, was an unnecessary Ceremony.

Notwithstanding this, the Archbishop continued still a Preaching, and when
the day appointed for the Ordination was come, Ordained 37 on it, having first
obliged them to subscribe the Faith of Pius IV. and to swear obedience to the
Pope. After this Solemnity was over, the Archbishop determined to pass the
Holy Week, and Easter at Carturte, a considerable Town of Christians in the
Dominions of the Queen of Pimenta. He took several Churches in his way thither,
at some of which he met with a kind Reception, at others the Christians would
not so much as see him. Being arrived at Carturte, after a dangerous Voyage, on
the Friday before Palm Sunday, he went to Church betimes next Morning, where
having said Mass, and Preached, he Commanded the Congregation not to fail to be
at Church next day, for that he had something of Importance to communicate to
them; and having the same Night invited several of the most considerable
Christians of the place aboard his Galley, by some means or other; for you must
understand he was not sparing of his Money in this occasion, no more than he
was of his Promises, he gained two of the most substantial among them entirely
to his Party, who did him afterward very great Service: Their Names were
Itimato Mapula, and Itimane Mapula.

The Archbishop not knowing but that the Portuguezes Music might charm the
common People, and reconcile them to the Latin Service, to which they seemed to
have a great aversion, sent for a full Quire from Cochim, and on Palm Sunday
had high Mass performed with the same Ceremony and Majesty that he could have
had it done at Goa: but the Cacanares and People were so far from being
satisfied with the Music and pompous Ceremony of that Service, that if they
liked it ill before, they liked it a great deal worse after that, as in truth
none but they that place all Religion in external Performances can do
otherwise, there being no Passion which that Service will not excite in its
Spectators (which is all the People are) sooner than Devotion.

The Queen of Pimenta being importuned to it by several Christians, and her own
Jealousies, sent an Order to the Archbishop to leave her Kingdom in three days
upon pain of Death, and not to trouble her Subjects with his Novelties, under
which, she had reason to apprehend some ill design against her State was
couched. But the Archbishop knew his own strength too well to be frighted away
with Paper Threats, and so sent the Queen back word positively, that he would
not stir out of her Territories before he had finished the work that had
brought him thither, telling her withal, That he was serving her rather than
otherwise in what he was doing, and that her Ancestors had granted Privileges
to the Archbishop of the Serra, but being Infidels had never offered to
concern themselves in the matters of their Religion; That if she should Murder
him, she must know, that she Muthered the second Man in the Indies; and that
his would be the dearest Blood that ever she spilt in her Life; since the
Portuguezes, the Greatness of whose Power she and her Kingdom could not be but
sensible of, having so often felt it, would infallibly Revenge his Death to the
utmost.

What made the Archbishop the stouter in this occasion, was his knowing that
he had secured most of her Regedores, namely him of Carturte, and the Country
about it to his Party, whom he had engaged by very rich Presents to favor and
protect him in the execution of his designs. The Archbishop having thus
intimidated the Queen, and bribed her Officers, began to make bolder steps than
he had offered to make before, and so seeing a Cacanar at Church one day, whom
he had excommunicated but a little before, for having presumed to excommunicate
him, he sent to him to get him out of the Church, which was no place for an
excommunicate Rebel as he was. The Cacanar laughed at the Order, and told him
very briskly, That he would not go out of the Church, for that he was none of
his Prelate, neither did he value Roman Excommunications no more than he did
the dirt under his feet; the Roman Church having nothing to do with the Church
of the Serra; the Archbishop not being able to bear such a public Affront,
and knowing his Party in the Church to be the stronger, commanded the Service
and Music to cease; and turning toward the place where the Cacanar stood,
commanded him to come up to him, which the Cacanar refusing to do with great
scorn; he was dragged up to him by some Cacanares, and others that he had
gained to his Party, and being kept down upon his Knees before him, was
commanded to beg his Lordship's Pardon; he told them resolutely, H^ would die
before he would do it, or any thing whereby he should acknowledge him his
Prelate. The Archbishop perceiving that he was not to be terrified into a
compliance, ordered him to b^ turned out of the Church; the Cacanar to^ him, He
would not be turned out of a Church where he had more to do than he had; upon
this the whole Church was all in an uproar, some striving to keep him in the
Church, and others to thrust him out, but the Archbishop's Party being the
stronger, after a great disturbance, turned out he was.

The Night following several Cacanares and others, abjured the Patriarch of
Babylon, and were reconciled to the Church of Rome at the Archbishop's
Lodgings, which were over the Church. After which the Archbishop was resolved
either to make the Archdeacon bend, or to break with him totally; and so
having all his Converts together, without whose advise he told them he would
never do any thing; he declared to them that he could no longer bear with the
Arch-Deacon's Rebellion, and was therefore determined to depose him, and put
another in his place, naming one Thomas Curia a near Kinsman of the
Arch-Deacon's, to be his Successor. They all owned that His Grace had great
reason to be angry with the Archdeacon; but yet seeing he was but a young Man,
and had had the ill luck to be in the hands of bad Counselors, they entreated
His Grace, before he declared his place void, to allow them some time to
admonish him in, and to try whether they could not persuade him to Conformity;
for which they desired but twenty days, promising, that if he did not submit
within the time, that they would never own him more, but would submit to any
Archdeacon that His Grace should set over them. Next day they sent six to
treat with him, who, though they took a great deal of pains to persuade him to
submit himself to the Archbishop, could not prevail with him to do it.

On Easter-Eve the Archbishop had a second Ordination, whereat he Ordained a
great many that had been hindered by the Regedores from coming to the first. The
same day Francisco Roz, the Jesuit, who was afterward made Bishop of the
Serra by the Pope, came to wait upon the Archbishop, who, after Mass, told
him, That he could not believe he was in Carturte, where, not many Months ago,
having a mind to say Mass, he was forced to have the Church doors opened to him
by the Queen's Regedor, and where, when he elevated the Sacrament, the People
all shut their Eyes, that they might not see it; and beat one of his Scholars
for having named the Pope in his Prayer's; and when he showed them an Image of
our Lady, cried out, Away with that filthiness, we are Christians, and for that
reason do not adore Idols or Pagods.

On Easter Day the Archbishop intended to have a most solemn Procession, which
the Heathens having notice of, were resolved either to hinder or disturb it;
but finding they were not strong enough to do the former, by reason of the
Regedore's guarding the Archbishop as he did, they hired the most infamous
Sorcerer of the whole Country to kill the Archbishop in the Procession, which
he undertook to do with a Charm that had never failed him, but as he begun to
do his Tricks in the Procession, he was seized on and sent to Prison, and a
Currier was immediately dispatched away to the Queen to acquaint her with what
had been done: The Queen straightways sent back an Order, that he should be put
on the Caloete, which is a sharp Stake fastened in the Ground, which being stuck
through the Body of the Malefactor, he dies thereon in great torment. But the
Archbishop would not give way to his being punished so, but condemned him to
greater punishment, in sending him to Cochim to Row in the Galleys as long as
he lived, which shows how great the Archbishop's Power, however he came by it,
was at Carturte, where he made his first great Conversion.

When the Morning-Service was over, the Archbishop was invited by the
Cacanares to the Nercha, which is a Feast kept in the Church on certain days,
all the Christians that are present sitting down to it. The Bishop, if present,
craves the Blessing, and in his absence, the eldest Priest of the Church. The
Bishop has one half of the Provision, the Priests a quarter, and the People a
quarter among them. In many Churches there are certain Rents dedicated to the
maintenance of those Feasts, which seem to be the same with the Apostolical
Agapae or Love Feasts, I do not know but St. Paul might allude to this double
Portion that the Bishop has at these Feasts, when he says, That they who rule
well, and labor in the Word and Doctrine, are worthy of double Honor; and the
rather because he immediately subjoyns, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that
treads out the Corn, etc. Besides it is evident from St. Cyprian, 34 Ep. to
his Church of Carthage, that the Clergy were said to be Honored, according to
the proportion they had of the Public Offerings where speaking of Aurelius and
Cellerinus, two Confessors, he writes, Presbyterii honorem designasse nos illis
jam sciatis, and sportulis iisdem cum Presbyteris honorentur, and divisiones
mensurnas aequatis quantitatibus partiuntur.

The Archbishop being tired with the Service of the day, desired to be excused
assisting at the Nercha; nevertheless he had his double Portion sent home. It
was a great branch of Figs, and several Cakes made of Rice and Honey, with
several other Dishes dressed a la Mode de Malabar.

In the Evening the Archbishop went and visited all the Sick in the Town, and
gave them both Money and Ghostly Counsel, the People imagining that this was
the common Practice of all the Roman Prelates, began to cry them up to the
Skies, as much more humble and charitable than the Chaldean Bishop.

On Easter-Tuesday the Archbishop went out to Nagpili, a Church about a
quarter of a League from Carturte, where having Preached, he confirmed a great
many, and reconciled several Cacanares to the Roman Church. By the way, it is
something strange too, how the Archbishop, though he was able to School their
Kings and Regedores, who all spoke Portugueze, should be so powerful a Preacher
as the Portugueze make him to have been among the Malavars, considering that he
neither knew a word of their Language, nor they of his.

Next day the Archbishop set Sail for Molandurte, where, when he arrived, he
found the People much changed from what they were, when he was there last, for
they had shut the Church doors against him, neither did there so much as one
single Person appear to receive him at the place where he was to Land, which
was a quarter of a League from the Town.

The Archbishop understanding how things were ashore, did not offer to Land
for fear of raising a Tumult, but wrote away immediately to the Governor of
Cochim, to send the King of Cochim's chief Regedor to him before Molandurte.
The King, though he did not love to hear of the Christians of St. Thomas,
submitting themselves to the Archbishop, being very sensible, if they were
once brought under Portugueze Bishops, it would not be long before they would
be entirely under the Crown of Portugal too, by which means he should lose
50000 of the best Soldiers in his Kingdom; yet at the same time he appeared
very zealous to promote that work, having more than once Commanded all his
Christian Subjects in all things to do what the Archbishop would have them,
and accordingly when the Governor sent him word that the Archbishop desired
to speak with the chief Regedor at Molandurte, he immediately ordered him to go
and wait on him.

When the Regedor was come, the Archbishop complained to him of the vexation
his Master had given the Christians of Molandurte, for no other reason but for
the kind reception they had given him when he was there last. The Regedor
endeavored to palliate the matter, and promised to acquaint his Master with
what the Archbishop had told him, Who, if any thing were amiss, he said, would
be sure to redress it, and to give his Grace satisfaction. The Archbishop here
took him up short, and told him, That he expected no kindness from his Master,
since he had denied him so small a favor, as to order the Muskets that were
lodged in the Quire of the Church, to be removed to a proper place, which, though
he had faithfully promised to do, yet he understood the Muskets were there
still. The Regedor told him, The Regedor of the Place, and not his Master, was
to blame for that, who, to his knowledge, was ordered to have done it.

Upon this the Archbishop and Regedor went to Church together, where the
Regedor, in his hearing, commanded all the Christians of the place, in the
King's Name, to do whatsoever the Archbishop should command them. But, though he
is said, at the same time to have whispered some in the Ear, That the King
would rather that they should adhere to their Archdeacon, and their old
Customs, than submit to the Archbishop, yet that did not appear in the sudden
change that was wrought in their Carriage, by what the Regedor had told them
publicly; for they who but the day before would not so much as endure to see
the Archbishop, were, without any other Argument, reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and him the next day.

From Molandurte the Archbishop went a second time to Diamper, where the chief
Regedor, according to his promise, met him again. The Archbishop complained to
him of the Regedor of the place, who had not only hindered the Christians from
coming at him, but encouraged several Heathens to deride and threaten him; as
the chief Regedor was offering to excuse his Brother, the Archbishop
interrupted him, and striking the Cane he had in his hand three times against
the Ground, bid him in a great fury not to offer to speak to him, for that he
knew his Heart well enough, and that he bore an ill will to all Christians; but
there is another, said he, I blame more than you, and that is your Master, who,
notwithstanding his being Brother in Arms to the King of Portugal, suffers me
to be abused in his Country; but you may tell your Master from me, that the
King of Portugal shall know how I have been used by him, and that it will not
be long before he shall smart for it. The Regedor desiring to appease him, did
assure his Grace, That his Master knew nothing of what had been done to him at
Diamper; and that so soon as he was acquainted with it, he would be sure to
make Examples of all those that had any way affronted his Grace. This put the
Archbishop in a greater Passion than he was in before; he said, This was all
Trick, and that he had treated too often with Kings, and knew their Tempers too
well to be made believe, that they would not see themselves obeyed when they
had a mind to it.

The Regedor assured him a second time, that his Master always had, and always
would favor his designs in the Serra, I shall quickly know that, said the
Archbishop, for if you be sincere, you will presently call all the Christians
together, and Command them, in the King's Name to acknowledge me as their
Prelate, and to unite themselves to the Church of Rome. The Regedor promised to
do it presently, and having called all the Christians together, commanded them
before the Archbishop on pain of the King's high displeasure, to obey the
Archbishop in all things, assuring them withal, that this was His Majesty's
Will, and therefore they should give no credit to any that should whisper the
contrary to them; and thus, by Hectoring and Bribing of Kings and their
Regedores, the Archbishop made both sudden and great Conversions.

Having dismissed the Regedor, the Archbishop gave them a Sermon, and
commanded them to come to Church next Morning to be confirmed by him. Next day
after the Confirmation, he told them, That he had Excommunicated and Deposed
the Archdeacon, as a Rebel to the Pope, who is Christ's Vicar on Earth; and
that he told them of it on purpose that they might have no more Communication
with such a Rebel, but might acknowledge him for their Prelate. The People
seemed to be satisfied with what he had done, and to blame the Archdeacon for
his obstinacy. In the Evening he visited the Sick, and gave large Alms to the
Widows and Orphans of the Town, telling them withal, that what he did was their
Prelate's duty, and not to take Money from them as their former Bishops had
done; but he forgot to tell them, that whereas their former Prelates had lived
altogether upon Alms, having no settled Revenues to maintain them, by reason of
their living under Princes who were Infidels, that he had above 20000 Crowns a
Year in Rents that were certain. Besides, by having represented what he was
doing in the Serra, as a great Service to the Crown, he had the Command of the
Public Treasure at Goa, which was never so great as at this time; the Viceroy
Don Matthias de Albuquerque having in the Year 1597 left 80000 Ducats, and an
immense Sum in Jewels therein.

This Trick, for it deserves no better Name, together with his Hectoring of
Kings and their Regedores as he did, made a great many People wish themselves
under Portugueze Prelates, who, they saw, would not suffer their Princes to
Tyrannize over them, but would espouse all their Quarrels, and defend them in
their Rights, which was what the Chaldean Prelates were not able to do.

The Archbishop now having by the foresaid Methods brought three such
considerable places, as Carturte, Molandurte, and Diamper, besides several
small Villages, under his Obedience; and being also sure of all the Churches
that are in the Kingdom of Porca, Gundara, Marca, and Batimena, whose Kings had
already Commanded all their Subjects to obey him in every thing: The
Archdeacon hearing how things went, began to be sensible, that it would not be
possible for him to contend with so powerful an Adversary much longer; and that
he must therefore, either submit or be sent a Prisoner to Portugal, the
Archbishop having so blocked the Serra up to prevent a Chaldean Bishop's
coming thither, that it was not possible for him to make his escape, if he had
a mind to run his Country rather than renounce his Religion.

The Archbishop being informed by a Cacanar, that the Archdeacon was in great
perplexity what he had best to do, writ him a long Letter, wherein among other
things he cited him to appear before the Judgment Seat of God, to answer for
the Souls that were now burning in Hell, by his having kept them from being
reconciled to the Roman Church, out of which there is no Salvation. To which
Letter the Archdeacon returned an answer in a strain quite different from what
he had writ in formerly.

Before this Letter came to his hand, the Archbishop having done his work at
Diamper, was sailed to Narame, a considerable Village of Christians, which he
found all in Arms, having all bound themselves with an Oath never to forsake
their Religion and Archdeacon, but to defend them with the last drop of their
Blood; and so when the Archbishop was ready to Land to go to Church, they
called to him to stay where he was; for besides that, the Church doors were
shut, there was not one Person among them, who would have any Communication
with him. Whereupon the Archbishop, according to his Custom, sent immediately
to the Regedor of the Country, which also belonged to the King of Cochim to
come aboard, for that he had something to say to him.

What made the Archbishop, making such great use of Kings and Regedores, who
were all Infidels in the Conversion of these Christians to the Roman Church,
the more unpardonable, was, that but a little before he had made the
Arch-Deacon's interesting of Infidel Princes in the Affairs of Christianity,
with which they were not to be suffered to meddle, the chief Article for which
he deserved to be deposed.

The Regedor being come aboard, the Archbishop spoke to him to go ashore, and
do as much for him at Narame, as the chief Regedor had done at Molandurte and
Diamper. The Regedor promised him he would, but when he came ashore to cause
the Church to be opened, there was no body left in the Town; for the Christians
hearing of his coming, and what his business was, had all hid themselves, that
so they might not be constrained to break the Oath they had made so lately. The
Archbishop, when the Regedor brought him word how it was, was in a great
Passion with him, and would not be persuaded but that he had underhand fomented
this division. But however these Christians came to be incensed against the
Archbishop, it is certain they were to that degree, that they denied him fresh
Provisions for his Money, so that he was forced to live upon the Rice and
Biscuit that was aboard for some days.

While the Archbishop was in this Diet, the Arch-Deacon's Letter came to his
hand, the substance whereof was, That he was overcome at last by the
irresistible force of Truth, and was resolved to submit himself to the Roman
Church, entreating his Grace to pardon all the by past Errors of an ignorant
Son.

The Archbishop though he was extreme glad at the news, would not discover that
he was, but told the Cacanar that brought it very gravely, That he had been so
often deceived by the Archdeacon, that he did not know how to trust him, and
that he never would any more, before he had subscribed the Ten following
Articles.

I. That he abjured all the Errors of Nestorius, and of all his Followers,
Diodorus and Theodorus (who, by the way, were both in their Graves before
Nestorius was ever heard of) acknowledging them to be cursed Heretics, that
are burning in Hell for their Errors.

II. That he should confess there was but one Christian Law.

III. That he should subscribe the Confession of Faith, which he sent to him
from Goa, when he made him Governor of the Bishopric.

IV. That he should deliver all the Books of the Diocese to be amended or burnt
according as they deserved.

V. That he should swear Obedience to the Pope, as St. Peter 's Successor, and
Christ's Vicar upon Earth, and the Supreme Head of all Christians, and of all
Bishops, Archbishops, Primates and Patriarchs in the World, so that none can
be saved out of his obedience.

VI. That he should curse the Patriarch of Babylon, as a Nestorian Heretic and
Schismatic, and swear never to obey him any more in any matter, nor to have
any further Commerce or Communication with him by Letters or otherwise.

VII. That he should swear never to receive any Bishop or Prelate in the Serra,
but what should be sent thither by the Pope, and to obey whomsoever he sent.

VIII. That he should swear to acknowledge and obey him for his true Prelate,
as being made so by the Pope.

IX. That he should pass Olas or Provisions for the Assembling of a Diocesan
Synod, to treat of all such matters, as the Archbishop should think fit, and
swear to be present at it himself.

X. That he should accompany the Archbishop peaceably, wheresoever he went,
without any thing of Guards, and should go along with him in his Galley to all
the Churches he had a mind to visit.

These Articles being made and signed by the Archbishop, he delivered them to
the Cacanar, together with a Letter, wherein he bid the Archdeacon, if he was
not fully resolved to subscribe them, allowing him but twenty days to do it in,
not to appear before him; and being willing to secure himself of the fidelity
of the Bearer, he obliged him, before he dismissed him, to swear obedience to
the Roman Church, making him swear also to return, and never to have any thing
more to do with the Archdeacon, in case he refused to sign the Articles.

Having dismissed this Messenger, the Archbishop returned to Cochim, where his
main business was to get the Governor of the place to join with him, to press
the King of Cochim to assist him cordially in his design of uniting the Church
of St. Thomas to that of Rome; and while he was satisfying the Governor of
what Importance such an Union would be to the Portugueze Interest in the
Indies, which was what he himself had all along as much in his Eye, as the
Governor could have for his Heart: The King having heard of his being in Town,
came very opportunely to pay him a visit, in which, before they parted, the
King renewed his promise to him of commanding all his Christian Subjects to
obey him in all things; with which promise the Archbishop returned well
satisfied to Cranganor, in order to settle the Affair of the Synod.

The day after his arrival there, he had Letters brought him by a Patamar, or
Currier, from the King of Samorim, advising him of the King of Cochim's having
begun a War upon the Caimal or Prince of Corugeira his Allie, to which if a
stop were not put suddenly, it would necessarily oblige him to withdraw his
Army from before Cunahle, which was what the King of Cochim aimed at. So soon
as the Archbishop had read these Letters, he dispatched a Currier away
immediately after the King of Cochim, who was already on his March, desiring
him not to make a War upon the Caimal till after Cunahle was taken, since it
could not be done without diverting the Samorim from the Siege of Cunahle, who
was then before it, expecting the return of the Portugueze Armada, which would
be with him in the beginning of the Spring, he writ also to the Governor of
Cochim, and the Commissioners of the Treasury to come to him; whom, after some
discourse about the business, he ordered to go after the King of Cochim, and to
stop him in his March.

Before the Archbishop left Cranganor, he received a Letter from the
Archdeacon, wherein he wrote to him, That, though he was ready to subscribe all
the Articles he had sent him, yet that it was not possible for him to wait upon
His Grace in so short a time as he had fixed.

The Archbishop understanding that the King of Mangate, in whose Country the
Archdeacon was at that time, was very much against his submitting to him, sent
a Servant of his own with a splendid Retinue to him, to let him know, That, if
he should offer to hinder the Archdeacon from coming to him, the King of
Portugal should know of it, who was resolved to revenge all the wrongs that
were done to him in the Serra to the utmost of his Power. The King, who had too
great a dependence on the Portuguezes, to provoke one of the Archbishop's
Character and Spirit, sent him word, That the Archdeacon might wait upon him
when he pleased for all him, an^ that he never had any thoughts of hindering him
For all that, the Archdeacon did not come having in truth no Stomach to the
morsel the Archbishop had prepared for him. Whereupon the Archbishop sent a
couple of Jesuits to him, t^ let him know, That that was his last admonition
and that if he did not come to him in eight da^ he would infallibly depose him
and put another in his place.

The Governor and Commissioners having prevailed with the King of Cochim to
desist from the War; the King, in his return home, resolved to take Cranganor
in his way. The Archbishop having received advice that he was ready to Land,
was civiler to him than he had been formerly, and went to the Caiz, of the
Castle to meet him, and after some Complements had passed on both sides, they
went together to an Hermitage that was not far off. Where they discoursed alone
for a considerable time; after which the King called in his chief Regedor, and
several of his Nobles, and the Archbishop, the Captain of the Castle, and some
of his own Servants. Before whom the Archbishop thanked His Highness for
having desisted from the War of Corugeira, promising him thanks also from the
King of Portugal for it, but told him withal, That this must not hinder him
from acquainting His Highness with his being much dissatisfied at his having
used him so as he had done. The King desired His Lordship to tell for what he
was displeased, there being nothing that he was so desirous of, as to satisfy
him in all things. The Archbishop told him with a frowning Countenance, That
when his Brother in Arms, the King of Portugal, sent him into the Serra, he
expected he should have been defended there by His Highness, and not only so
but that he would have assisted him to the utmost in the Pious design he came
about; in confidence of which Protection and Assistance it was that he left Goa
to come into those Parts, but that he had found himself miserably deceived,
there not being a Prince in Malabar, in whose Dominions he had been (and he had
been in the most of them) but what had showed him more favor than His
Highness, who had loaded some of his Christian Subjects with Taxes, for no
other reason, but for having given him a kind Reception. Here the chief Regedor
interposed, and desired him to let His Majesty know what the Affronts or
Injuries were that he had received in any part of his Dominions. The
Archbishop replied with great passion, Sir, There is no Body knows them all
better than you do, since they were done before your Eyes; however, you were
pleased to wink at them; nay, I do not know but you might have a hand in
procuring them; and therefore pray do not you offer to conceal them from your
Master. The King protested he had never heard of any Injury or Affront that had
been put upon His Lordship in any part of his Territories. The Archbishop,
without any Ceremony, told him, It was not so, for that he himself had
acquainted His Highness several times by Letter, of what he suffered from his
Subjects, but could never have them remedied as he expected, and as they ought
to have been by one that owed so much to the Portugueze as His Highness did,
wherefore, said he, for the future I Will complain of none but my own King, for
having sent me from a Palace at Goa, where I lived at my ease and in splendour,
to wander about the Serra, and be abused as I have been. This does not agree
very well with what is said before of his going into the Serra purely out of
Zeal and Devotion, and contrary to all that the Viceroy and others could say or
do to hinder him; but upon his upbraiding the King with his not having answered
his expectations, nor the obligations which he owed to the Portuguezes, who, of
a petty Prince, had made him a great Monarch; the King asked him, as well he
might, what his Lordship meant, desiring him to instance in what particulars he
had been thus aggrieved; whereupon the Archbishop told him of what had been
done at Molandurte and Diamper, and charged him with having encouraged the
Archdeacon in his Rebellion, to whom he had granted several Ollas or
Provisions, without having granted him one as yet. The King told him he would
treat with the Governor of Cochim about an Olla for his Lordship. This put the
Archbishop in a much greater passion than he was in before: for he reckoned
the King slighted him, in saying he would treat with the Governor about a
thing that was his immediate concern; whereupon he told his Majesty, That it
had been always his custom to put him off with delays, that for his own part he
desired none of his Ollas; and that the Christians of St. Thomas, if they had
been true Christians, would never have suffered their Kings to have meddled
with matters of Religion; but especially being Infidels and Idolaters, as he
was, and who not knowing the true God, Worshipped Stocks and Stones, and Devils
instead of him: That for his part he could not but wonder at His Highness 's
taking upon him to favor the Patriarch of Babylon against the Pope, who
understood nothing of the difference between them; That His Highness would do
well therefore to leave his Christian Subjects to him, who was their true
Prelate, and not to meddle with matters he did not understand: That as for the
Archdeacon he had determined that if he did not come and submit to him by next
Saturday, to turn him out of his place, and put another into it, and that he
could not but look upon the Archdeacon as an ill Christian, if for no other
reason, for that of having communicated the Affairs of Christianity to His
Highness, whom all the World know to be an Infidel. The King was desperately
angry at what the Archbishop had said of his Idols; however being a very wise
Prince he did not touch upon that string, but told him, His Lordship might
expect the Archdeacon one Saturday, two Saturdays, and three Saturdays. The
Archbishop took the words out of his Mouth, and striking his Cane against the
Ground in great Fury, said, I will not expect him one, two, and three
Saturdays, but if I live I will depose him if he does not come and submit
before the next, and that he deserved to be Deposed, if for no other reason,
for his having interested His Highness in the concerns of Christianity,
notwithstanding he knew him to be an Infidel. The King, who could not help
standing amazed at the Archbishop condemning the Archdeacon so much for
endeavoring to interest him in a thing which he himself at the same time was
swaggering him into, perceiving that the more they talked, the Archbishop grew
the more furious, and talked the louder, put on a pleasant Countenance, and
told him with great sweetness, That there was nothing he had ever studied so
much as to please His Lordship. With this the Archbishop's Passion being
something mitigated, he replied, It was what he had always expected from His
Highness, and that he hoped he would not wonder to see him put into so great a
Passion, in a case wherein Christianity was so much concerned, for the least of
whose Interest he was bound in duty to sacrifice his Head. The King told him,
That if he knew of any that sought after his Head, they should not keep their
own long upon their Shoulders. After they had made an end of this hot business,
they talked for some time of indifferent matters; and when the King was for
going, the Archbishop accompanied him to the Caiz, where they are said to have
parted very good Friends; which if they did, the King considering how he had
been treated, was certainly the best natured Prince that ever wore a Crown, and
in a very substantial point a much better Christian than the Archbishop.

This rancounter was of no small advantage to the Archbishop in the reduction
of that Christianity; for the King fearing to provoke one of the Archbishop's
Character and Temper, so soon as he had left him, writ away immediately to the
Archdeacon to come and submit himself to the Archbishop, he writ also to the
King of Mangate, in case he found the Archdeacon not willing to do it, to
oblige him to it.

Upon the receipt of this Letter the Archdeacon sent away immediately to the
Archbishop, to let him know, That he was ready to throw himself at his Grace's
Feet, and to obey all his Commands, and that within the time he had prefixed;
but withal, desired to wait upon him some where else than in Cranganor, which
being a Fortress belonging to the Portuguezes, he was afraid to trust himself
in, there being nothing that he dreaded so much as being some time or other
kidnapped for Goa. However the Archbishop complied so far with his Fears as to
order him to meet him at the Jesuites-College in Vaipicotta. They met first in
the Church, where the Archdeacon threw himself at the Archbishop's Feet, with
the words of the Prodigal in his mouth, Father, I have sinned against Heaven,
and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. I do humbly beg
Pardon for all my Errors, which have been great. The Archbishop lifting him up
and embracing him tenderly, told him, all that was past was forgot; and that
God's Mercy in reducing him to the Catholic Church was greater than the Malice
of the Devil, which had been the cause of his returning no sooner, that he
would certainly have that great Reward that is reserved in Heaven for those
that bring so many Souls to the purity of the Faith, as he was confident he
would do by his Example; that he would therefore have him subscribe the
Profession of Faith and ten Articles immediately. The Archdeacon begged to
speak one word first with His Grace in private, promising, after that to do
whatsoever His Grace should command him; and being alone, he told him, That if
His Grace would have it so, he was ready to subscribe the Profession and
Articles publicly, though, with submission he thought it would be better if he
would allow him to do it in private, for the sake of that Christianity who were
not as yet so well instructed as they ought to be; but that before the meeting
of the Synod, at which he promised to sign them publicly, he hoped to be able
to prepare them for the receiving of whatsoever should be therein determined,
which he believed he should be able to do the more effectually, if they knew
nothing of his having already submitted to the Roman Church. The Archbishop
answered, That notwithstanding a Profession of the Faith was by so much the
better, as it was the more public, nevertheless he so far approved of his
Reason as to dispense with his making it openly. Whereupon they and the Jesuit
Francisco Roz repaired to the Archbishop's Lodgings, and having shut the
doors, the Archdeacon kneeled down before a Crucifix that stood on the
Archbishop's Table, and laying his hands upon the Missal, swore to the Ten
Articles, and to the Profession of Faith, to which the Archbishop obliged him
to put his hand, to prevent his denying it afterward.

Next Morning all the Cacanares being called together, the Archbishop
acquainted them with his intention of calling a Synod very speedily, which they
all agreed to. It was then debated where it should meet, some were for its
being held at Angamale, the Metropolis of the Diocese, but the Archbishop
would not hear of its being held there for three Reasons; the first was, That
the Christians of Angamale were the Christians of the whole Bishopric that
were most addicted to their old Religion, Secondly, It was not in the Dominions
of the King of Cochim, the Prince of Malabar that had the greatest dependence
upon the Portuguezes; And Lastly, Because it was at too great a distance from
the Portugueze Garrison of Cochim. It was carried therefore that it should be
held in the Town of Diamper, which was but a little way from Cochim, and should
begin on the 20th. of June, being the 3d. Sunday after Whitsuntide.

In pursuance whereof the Archbishop and Archdeacon did both issue forth
their Ollas, commanding all Priests and Procurators of the People, who were
four from every Town, to assemble together at the Town of Diamper, on the 20th.
of June next, there to celebrate a Diocesan Synod. The Ollas bore date the
11th. of May, so that there were six Weeks allowed for the preparing of
business, which the Archbishop made good use of.

Before the Archbishop left Vaipicotta, the Caimal of Angamale, who was called
the black King of Malabar, came to give him a visit: The Archbishop received
him kindly, and at parting presented him with some pieces of very rich Cloth;
which was what he went well furnished withal from Goa, having laid out 18000
Pardaos in Goods, to make Presents of in the Serra. The Caimal, who was a
boisterous and bloody Prince, was so well pleased with his Present, that he
promised the Archbishop to see him obeyed in all things.

After which the Archbishop returned to Cranganor, where he composed the
Decrees of the Synod, which were all writ with his own Hand, word for word as
they are published. As soon as he had finished them he had them translated out
of Portugueze into Malavar. He likewise Consecrated there a Stone Altar for
every Church in the Serra, which was what they all wanted.

What remained to be done, after having engaged all the Neighboring Princes,
and their Regedors to assist him, was to secure the Major Vote in the Synod;
and in order thereunto he Ordained no fewer than fifty Priests on
Trinity-Sunday, in the Church of Paru, which fifty being added to the thirty
eight he had Ordained but a little before at Diamper, and to those he had
Ordained at Carturte, who are said to have been many, must make up at least two
thirds of the Priests that were present at the Synod, who in all were but 153.
of which two thirds the Archbishop was secure, having before he Ordained them,
made them abjure their old Religion, and subscribe the Creed of Pius IV.

He was also industrious to secure to himself the Votes of several of the most
considerable among the Procurators, by making them great Presents, giving to
one of them a Cross set with Diamonds of great value, as he did another of
equal price, to an old Cacanar, who had been a great Companion of Archbishop
Mar Abraham. Upon which, and the other Precautions made use of by the
Archbishop to compass his ends in the Synod, Father Simon in his 109 Page of
his History Critique, makes the following judicious reflection: All that these
methods have hitherto produced, serves only to let the World see by what means
the Roman Religion has been established in the East, which he that knows will
not wonder, that all the re-unions which have been made with those People we
call Schismatics in those Parts, have been so short lived.

On the 9th. of June the Archbishop accompanied with six Jesuits and his
Confessor, who were all Divines, and several Cacanares, arrived at Diamper,
where he immediately erected a Junto of eight of the most popular Cacanares,
before whom he laid the Decrees, desiring their opinion of them; and when they
came to consider the Decrees relating to manners, he called four of the gravest
of the Procurators also to be present at the Examination of them; after some
Debates the Decrees were all agreed to by the Junto, which, for that reason,
was given out to be the Author of them.

On the 20th. of June 1^99. the Synod was opened, at which solemnity were
present the Dean and Chapter of Cochim, with their whole Quire, as also the
Governor, the Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Chamber of the same City,
and several other Portuguezes of Quality.

I will detain the Reader no longer from the perusal of the Synod it self, in
which he is not to wonder if he meets with the whole mass of Popery,
considering that all its Decrees were composed by a Popish Archbishop who
assembled it on purpose to establish the Roman Religion in the Serra; in the
doing whereof, though he was instrumental in letting the World know more of the
Orthodoxy of that Apostolical Church, than its like they would ever have known
of it otherwise, we have reason to bless Providence, but none at all to thank
him for it, who intended nothing less than the making of such a happy discovery.

A Catalogue of the Viceroys and Governors of the Indies, from the Year 1505.
to the Year 1599.
1 DOn Francisco de Almeyda. 2 Alphonso de Albuquerque. 3 Lope Soars de
Albergaria. 4 Diego Lopes de Sequeyra. 5 Don Duarte de Menezes. 6 Don Vasco de
Gama Conde de Vidigueyra. 7 Don Enrique de Menezes. 8 Pedro de Muscarenhas. 9
Lope vaz de Sampayo. 10 Nuno de Cunha. 11 Don Garcia de Noronha. 12 Don Estevan
de Gama. 13 Martin Alphonso de Sousa. 14 Don Juan de Castro. 15 Garcia de Sa.
16 Jorge Cabral. 17 Don Alonso de Noronha. 18 Don Pedro Muscarenhas. 19
Francisco Barreto. 20 Don Constantino de Barganca. 21 Don Francisco Coutinbo
Conde de Redondo. 22 Juan de Mendoca. 23 Don Antonia de Noronha. 24 Don Luis de
Ataide. 25 Don Antonio de Noronha. 26 Antonio Moniz Barreto. 27 Don Lorenco de
Tavara. 28 Don Diego de Menezes. 29 Don Luis de Ataide Conde de Atouguia. 30
Fernando Tells de Menezes. 31 Don Francisco Muscarenhas Conde de Santa Cruz.
32 Don Duarte de Menezes. 33 Manuel de Sousa Coutinho. 34 Matias de
Albuquerque. 35 Don Francisco de Gama Conde de Vidigueyra.
A Catalogue of the Prelates, Bishops, and Archbishops of Goa, and of the
Bishops of Cochim, till the time of the Celebration of the Synod of Diamper.
THE City of Goa was taken by the Viceroy Don Alphonso Albuquerque, in the
Year 1510.

The first Prelate thereof was Dom Duarte nunez a Dominican Friar, and Bishop
of Laodicea.

The second was Dom Fernando Vaqueito, Bishop of Auren.

In the Year 1537. Goa was made an Episcopal See by Pope Paul III. and put
under the Metropolitan of Funchal, a City in the Island of Madera.

The first Bishop thereof was Don Francisco de Mela.

The second was Dom Juan de Albuquerque a Franciscan Friar, who held it above
14 Years. In his time, that is to say, in the Year 1557. it was made a
Metropolitan and Primate of all the Indies by Pope Paul V. who, at the same
time, erected an Inquisition at Goa.

The second Archbishop was one Dom Gaspar, who resigned it after he had held
it seven Years.

The third was Dom Jorge Temudo, a Dominican Friar, who was translated to it
from Cochim. He Governed it two Years and eight Months, and after his Death Dom
Gaspar who before resigned it, returned to it again and Governed it till he
died.

The fourth was Dom Enrique de Tavara, a Dominican Friar, who was also
translated from Cochim.

The fifth was Dom Vicente de Fonseca, a Dominican Friar.

The sixth was Dom Mattheo, a Friar of the Order of Christ, who was likewise
translated from Cochim.

The seventh was Dom Aleixo de Menezes, an Austin Friar, who was Governor
General of the Indies for three Years, and was afterward translated to the
Primacy of Braga, was Governor of Portugal for two Years; and after that
President of the Council of State of Portugal at Madrid, where he died.

Cochim was made a Bishopric in the Year, 1559.

The first Bishop thereof was Dom Jorge Temudo.

The second Dom Enrique de Tavara.

The third Dom Mattheo. These three were all translated to Goa.

The fourth was Dom Andres, a Discalceat Franciscan Friar.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Synod is printed at the end of the History of Dom Frey Aleixo de
Menezes, Archbishop of Goa's Visitation of the Christians of Saint Thomas in
the Serra or Mountain of Malabar, made immediately after the Celebration, and
in pursuance of the Order of the said Synod; the History of which Visitation
was composed by Antonio de Gouvea, an Austin Friar, and Reader of Divinity in
Goa, at the Command of the Provincial of his Order in Portugal. It contains
diverse things that are fit for all Protestants to know; namely, the rude and
boisterous Methods, that the Roman Prelates, where they may do it with safety,
make use of in the Reduction of those they call Heretics; together with clear
Confirmations of the Truth of what we meet with in the Fourteenth, and other
Decrees of the Third Action of this Synod; to wit, That the Three great
Doctrines of Popery, the Pope's Supremacy, Transubstantiation, the Adoration of
Images, were never believed nor practiced at any time in this ancient
Apostolical Church; but, on the contrary, were rejected and condemned by her,
and that in her Public Offices. So that upon what we learn from this Synod and
History, I think one may venture to say, That before the time of the late
Reformation, there was no Church that we know of, no not that of the Vaudois,
abating that one thing of her being infected with the Heresy of Nestorius, of
which too she is cleared by one of the Roman Communion, that had so Few Errors
in Doctrine, as the Church of Malabar.

If the Synod I here publish should be well received, as I have reason to hope
it will, by all Protestants, and lovers of Truth, upon the account of the clear
Discoveries it makes of the forementioned Popish Errors, having never been at
any time the Doctrines of the Universal Church, which we know is confidently
affirmed, and much boasted of; and for further satisfaction in so important a
Matter, the abovenamed History should be desired, I shall be ready to
translate and publish it with all expedition, alone, and in the same Volume
with this of the Synod; together with the best Account I can procure of the
Church of Malabar, and the other Oriental Churches, that were never within the
Bounds of the Roman Empire; for it is in those Churches that we are to expect
to meet with the least of the Leaven of Popery.

As to the Synod, to prevent all surmises of its being a Piece either forged by
some Protestant, or of no Authority in the Church of Rome, though set forth by a
Member of her Communion; I have, together with the whole Title Page, which
tells where, when, and by whom it was printed, translated and published all the
Licenses that it came out with: And if any should suspect the Translation, if
they please, they may satisfy themselves of its Fidelity, by having recourse
to the Original in the Bodleian Library at Oxford; to which, as the safest, as
well as noblest Repository of Books in the World, I design to give it.

I have here and there added some short Remarks upon some Passages, which will
not, I hope, be unacceptable to the Reader.

The DOCTRINES wherein the Church of Malabar agrees with the Church of England,
and differs from that of Rome.
1. SHe condemns the Pope's Supremacy. 2. She affirms that the Church of Rome
is fallen from the true Faith. 3. She denies Transubstantiation, or that
Christ's Body and Blood are really and substantially in the Eucharist. 4. She
condemns Images, and the Adoration of them as Idolatrous. 5. She makes no use
of Oils in the Administration of Baptism. 6. She allows of no Spiritual
Affinity. 7. She denies Purgatory. 8. She denies the necessity of Auricular
Confession. 9. She knows nothing of Extreme Unction. 10. She allows her Priests
to Marry as often as they have a mind, and Ordains such as have been married
three or four times, and to Widows, without any scruple. 11. She denies
Matrimony to be a Sacrament. 12. She holds but two Orders, Priesthood, and
Diaconate. 13. She Celebrates in Leavened Bread. 14. She Consecrates with
Prayer. 15. She denies Confirmation to be a Sacrament.
In the Account that is given of the Doctrines of the Church of Malabar, in the
Eighteenth Chapter of the First Book of the Visitation,

SHe is said, 1. Not to adore Images. 2. To hold but Three Sacraments, Baptism,
the Eucharist, and Order. 3. To make no use of Oils. 4. To have had no
Knowledge of Confirmation or Extreme Unction. 5. To abhor Auricular Confession.
6. To hold many enormous Errors about the Eucharist, insomuch that the Author
of the History says, he is inclined to believe, that the Heretics of our
Times, meaning Protestants, the revivers of all forgotten Errors, and
Ignorances, might have had their Doctrine about the Eucharist from them. 7. To
Ordain such as have been married several times, and to Widows, and to approve
of her Priests marrying as often as they have a mind. 8. That she abhors the
Pope and the Church of Rome as Antichristian, in pretending to a Superiority
and Jurisdiction over all other Churches.

A Diocesan SYNOD Of the Church and Bishopric of ANGAMALE, Belonging to the
Ancient Christians of St. Thomas in the Serra or Mountains of MALABAR.

Celebrated by the most Reverend Lord Dom Frey Aleixo de Menezes, Archbishop,
Metropolitan of Goa, Primate of the Indies, and the Sea being vacant, of the
abovenamed Bishopric, by virtue of two Briefs of the most Holy Father Pope
Clement 8th. on the third Sunday after Pentecost, being the 20th. day of July,
in the Year of our Lord 1599. in the Church of All Saints, in the Town and
Kingdom of Diamper, Subject to the King of Cothin, an Infidel; in which the
said Bishopric, with all the Christians thereunto belonging, submitted it self
to the Pope and the Holy Roman Church.

Printed at Conimbra, in the Shop of Diogo Gomez Laureyro, Printer to the
University, in the Year of our Lord, 1606.

THE Father of the Society of Jesus entrusted with the revising of Books in
Conimbra, having perused the Synod mentioned in the following Petition, and the
Inquisition of the said City having upon his Approbation, given License to
Print the same, we do Order, That after it is Printed, it be, together with the
Book Entitled, The Journey of the Serra or Mountains, transmitted to this
Council, that it may be compared with the Original, and Licensed; without which
it shall not be made public.

Marcos Teixira, Ruy Piz de veiga.


I Have perused this Synod, and to me it appears to be a Work that deserves to
be Printed; for besides the sound Doctrine contained therein, it will be of
great Use and Consolation to all, and very necessary to the extirpating of the
Errors, Schism, and Heresies sown by Heretics, and particularly the Nestorians
in the ancient Christianity, planted in the Indies by the Apostle St. Thomas.

October. 23d. 1605. Joan Pinto.

BY virtue of a particular Commission to us granted in this behalf, by the
Council of the General Inquisition of these Kingdoms; having seen the
Information of Father Joan Pinto, Revisor of this City, we give License for the
Printing of the Book Entitled, The Synod, and the Journey of the Serra;
provided that after it is Printed, it be sent to the said Council, to be
compared with the Original, and to have leave to be made public.

Jan. 11. 1606. Joan Alvarez Brandon.

It may be Printed,

Conimbra, 25th. of Feb. 1606. The Bishop Conde.

THE PUBLICATION and CALLING OF THE SYNOD.
DOM Frey Aleixo de Menezes, by the mercy of God, and the Holy Roman See,
Archbishop, Metropolitan of Goa, Primate of the Indies, and the Oriental Parts,
etc. To the Reverend in Christ, Father George, Archdeacon of the Christians of
St. Thomas in the Serra of the Kingdom of Malabar, and to all other Priests,
Curates, Deacons and Subdeacons, and to all Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, and
to all Christian People of the said Bishopric, Health in our Lord Jesus Christ.

We give you all, and every one of you in particular to understand, that the
most Holy Father Pope Clement VIII. our Lord Bishop of Rome, and Vicar of our
Lord Jesus Christ upon earth, at this time presiding in the Church of God;
having sent two Briefs directed to Us, one of the 27th. of Jan. in the Year
1595, and the other of the 21st. of the same Month, in the Year 1597; in which,
by virtue of his Pastoral Office, and that Universal Power bequeathed to the
Supreme, Holy and Apostolical Chair of St. Peter over all the Churches in the
World, by Jesus Christ the Son of God our Lord and Redeemer, he commanded us
upon the death of the Archbishop Mar-Abraham, to take Possession of this Church
and Bishopric, so as not to suffer any Bishop or Prelate coming from Babylon,
to enter therein, as has been hitherto the Custom, all that come from thence
being Schismatics, Heretics, and Nestorians, out of the Obedience of the Holy
Roman Church, and Subject to the Patriarch of Babylon, the Head of the said
Heresy; and to appoint a Governor or Apostolical Vicar to Rule the said
Diocese both in Spirituals and Temporals, until such time as the Holy Roman
Church shall provide it of a proper Pastor; which being read by us, we were
desirous to execute the Apostolical Mandates with due Reverence and Obedience;
besides, that the same was incumbent on us of right (the said Church having no
Chapter to take care of it during the vacancy of the Sea) as Metropolitan and
Primate of this and all the other Churches of the Indies, and the Oriental
Parts.

But perceiving that our Mandate in that behalf had no effect, what we had
ordered, not having been obeyed in the said Diocese, so that what our most Holy
Father, the Bishop of Rome, had designed, was like to be frustrated, after
having labored therein for the space of two Years, Schism and Disobedience to
the Apostolical See, having been so rooted in that Diocese for a great many
Years, that the Inhabitants thereof, instead of yielding Obedience to the
Apostolical, and Our Mandates; on the contrary upon the intimation thereof, did
daily harden themselves more and more, committing greater Offenses against the
Obedience due to the Holy Roman Church; after having commended the Matter to
God, and ordered the same to be done through our whole Diocese, and after
mature Advice, by which Methods the Apostolical Mandates might be best
executed; and being also moved by the Piety of the People, and the Mercy God
had shown them in having preserved so many thousand Souls in the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, from the time that the Holy Apostle St. Thomas had Preached
to them until this day, notwithstanding their having lived among so many
Heathens, and been scattered in diverse places, their Churches and all belonging
to them, having been always subject to Idolatrous Kings and Princes, and
encompassed with Idols and Pagods, and that without holding any correspondence
with any other Christians before the coming of the Portuguezes into these
Parts; we being likewise desirous that the Labors of the Holy Apostle St.
Thomas, which still remained among them, should not be lost for want of sound
Doctrine; and that the Apostolical Mandates might not be frustrated, did
determine, and having provided for the Government of our own Church during our
absence, did prepare to go in Person to take Possession of the said Bishopric,
to see if by our Presence we might be able to reduce them to the Obedience of
the Holy Roman Church, and purge out the Heresies and false Doctrines sown
among them, and introduced by the Schismatical Prelates, and Nestorian
Heretics that had governed them under the Obedience of the Patriarch of
Babylon; as also to call in and purge the Books containing those Heresies; and
according to our Pastoral Duty, so far as God should enable us, to Preach to
them in Person the Catholic Truth.

Accordingly going into the said Bishopric, we set about visiting the Churches
thereof; but at that time Satan, the great Enemy of the good of Souls, having
stirred up great Commotions, and much opposition against this our just intent,
great numbers departing from us, and forming a Schism against the Holy Roman
Church, after having passed through many troubles and dangers, out of all which
God of his great mercy, not remembering our sins and evil deeds, was pleased to
deliver us, and to grant us an entire Peace for the Merits of the glorious
Apostle St. Thomas the Patron of this Christianity, but chiefly of his own
great Clemency and Mercy, which makes, that he does not delight in the death of
a sinner, but rather that he should return and live; and by coming all to the
light of the Truth, may join with us in the Confession of the Catholic Faith,
approving our Doctrine and Intention, and submitting themselves to the
Obedience of the Holy Roman Church; which being by us observed, after having
returned Thanks to God, we thought fit, in order to the compassing and securing
of all those good Effects, to assemble a Diocesan Synod in some commodious
place near the middle of the said Diocese, there to Treat of all such Matters
as are convenient for the honor of God, the exaltation of the Holy Catholic
Faith and Divine Worship, the good of the Church, the extirpation of Vice, the
Reformation of the Christians of the said Diocese, and the profit and peace of
their Souls; to which end having pitched upon the Town and Church of Diamper,

We do hereby let all the Inhabitants and Christians of the said Bishopric, as
well Ecclesiastics as Laics, of what State or Condition soever, to
understand, that we do call and assemble a Diocesan Synod in the said Town of
Diamper, on the 20th. of June of this present Year 1599, being the Third Sunday
after Whitsuntide; and do therefore, by Virtue of holy Obedience, and upon pain
of Excommunication, latae Sententiae, Command the Reverend the Archdeacon of
this Diocese, and all the other Priests of the same, that shall not be hindered
by Age, or some other just Impediment, to be present in the said Town of
Diamper, there with us to celebrate a Diocesan Synod conformable to the Holy
Canons: And whereas by immemorial Custom, and a Right introduced into this
Diocese from its Beginning, and consented to by all the Infidel Kings of
Malabar, the whole Government as it were, and the Cognizance of all Matters
wherein Christians are any ways concerned, has belonged to the Church, and the
Prelate thereof; and it having likewise been an ancient Custom in the same, to
give an Account to the People of whatsoever has been ordained in the Church, in
order to its being the better observed by all: We do therefore under the same
Precept and Censure, command all Christians in all Towns and Villages of this
Bishopric; and where there are no Villages, all that use to assemble together
at any Church as belonging to it, immediately upon this our Pleasure being
intimated to them, to choose Four of the most Honorable, Conscientious, and
Experienced Persons among them, to come in their Name at the said time, to the
said Synod, with sufficient Powers to Approve, Sign, Confirm, and Consult in
their Name, so as to oblige themselves thereby to comply with whatsoever shall
be determined in the Synod. And that these Commissioners may demand or propose
whatsoever they shall judge to be of Importance to the Synod, and for the
Spiritual or Temporal Good of their People; We do grant free Liberty to all in
this Diocese, as well Ecclesiastics as Laics, that have any Complaints,
Grievances, or Controversies about any such Matters as are decidable by the
Prelate, or other Christians, to represent the same to the Synod; where they
shall be heard with Patience, and have Justice done them according to the
Sacred Canons, Customs, and lawful Vsages of the Country.

And whereas we are informed that there are several things in this Bishopric
which are the Causes of great Contentions, we do therefore not only give leave,
but do also admonish and command all that are concerned in any such Matters,
that forbearing all other ways that are prejudicial to Christianity, they do
now make use of this just and holy way of putting an end to all their Debates:
And since to bring all these things to a good issue the favor and assistance
of God is necessary, from whom all good things do proceed, and without whom we
can do nothing, wherefore to engage the Divine Clemency by Prayer to be
favorable to us, following the laudable Custom of the Holy Fathers, and
Ancient Councils, we do Admonish, and in the Name of God earnestly request, all
the faithful Christians of this Bishopric, from this time forward until the
end of the Synod, to exercise themselves with a pure and clean heart, in
Fasting, Alms, Prayer, and other works of Piety, instantly beseeching God to
enlighten the Understandings of all that shall meet together, and so to inflame
our Wills with Divine Love, that we may determine nothing but what is right,
and may observe and comply with whatsoever shall be Decreed; taking for our
Intercessor, our Lady the most Holy Virgin Mary, of whose Praise and Honor we
are to Treat particularly; as also the Glorious Apostle St. Thomas, the Master,
Patron, and Protector of this Church; and all the other Saints in Heaven, that
so this Synod may begin, and proceed in Peace and universal Concord, and may
end to the Praise, Honor, and Glory of God our Lord for ever. And that this
our Publication of a Diocesan Synod may come to the knowledge of all that are
concerned, we Will and Command it to be Read in all the Churches of this
Bishopric to the People on the Sunday next after the intimation thereof to the
Curates, and after that, to be fixed to the Gates of the Church.

Dated from Chanotta, the 14th. of May, under our Seal, and the Great Seal of
our Chancery, and Written by Andre Cerqueira, Secretary to the most Illustrious
Archbishop and Primate, in the Year 1599. Frey Aleixo Arcebispo, Primas.

THE ACTS and DECREES OF THE SYNOD of Diamper.
ACTION I.
IN the Name of the most Holy and undivided Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in the Year of our Lord 1599, on the 20th of June, being the third
Sunday after Whitsuntide, in the seventh Year of the Pontificate of our most
holy Lord, Clement VIII. the Supreme Roman Bishop, and in the first Year of the
Reign of the Catholic King Philip, the Second King of Portugal, and Algarves,
and of Malucco; the Illustrious Lord Dom Francisco da Gama Conde de Vidigeyra,
Admiral of the Indies, being Viceroy in the Town of Diamper, subject to the
King of Cochim, an Infidel and Heathen, in the Church of All Saints, in the
Bishopric of Angamale of the Christians of St. Thomas in the Serra of Malabar,
the Sea being vacant by the death of the Archbishop Mar-Abraham, there
assembled in a Diocesan Synod according to the Holy Canons, the most
Illustrious and most Reverend Lord Dom Frey Aleixo de Menezes, Archbishop
Metropolitan of Goa, Primate of the Indies, and the Oriental Parts, together
with all the Priests and Curates of the said Bishopric; and the Procurators of
all the Towns and Corporations in the same, with great Numbers of other Persons
belonging to the said Church, and called to the said Synod by the most Reverend
Metropolitan: Where, after having given Thanks to God for his having
extinguished and composed all the Alterations and Commotions by which Satan,
the Enemy to all that is Good, had endeavored to hinder the assembling of this
Synod; and being all filled with Joy, to see themselves met together to Treat
of things pertaining to the Service of God, the Purity of the Faith, and the
Good of Christianity and their own Souls; the most Illustrious Metropolitan did
celebrate the Solemn Mass for the removing of Schism, as it is in the Roman
Missal; and having preached to the People to the same purpose, the Mass being
ended, he re-invested himself in his Pontifical Robes, and read the Office for
the beginning of a Synod, as it is in the Roman Pontifical; which being over,
and the Metropolitan seated in his Chair, with all the Ecclesiastics and
Secular Procurators about him in their order, he told them, That he celebrated
this Holy Synod by Virtue of two Briefs of the Holy Father our Lord Pope
Clement VIII. in which his Holiness had recommended to him the Government of
that Church, after the death of the Archbishop Marabran, until such time as it
should be provided of a Pastor and Prelate; besides, that the same belonged to
him as the Metropolitan thereof, and Primate of the Indies, and all the
Oriental Parts, by the Canons, the Sea thereof being vacant, and it having no
Chapter to take care of it during the vacancy; which Briefs being faithfully
translated into the Malabar Tongue, were immediately read, and received with
that Reverence and Obedience that was due to them: After which the Lord
Metropolitan told them, That seeing he had but little knowledge of the Malabar
Tongue, it was necessary for him to have some faithful Person, and that was
well versed in Ecclesiastical Affairs, to relate truly in the Congregations
what he should say, or what should be spoke to him: Whereupon upon Jacob, a
Priest, and Curate of the Church of Pallurte in the said Bishopric, a Person
well skilled both in the Portugueze and Malabar Languages, was presently
pitched upon by common Consent; who being called by the Lord Metropolitan, was
charged by him with the Office of Interpreter to himself and the Holy Synod,
giving him an Oath at the same time upon the Holy Gospels, well and faithfully
to discharge the said Office, and truly and exactly to relate all that should
be said by his Lordship or any other Person in the Synod, without any addition
or diminution; as also to read in the Congregations all the Decrees and
Determinations of the Synod, which were to be in the Malabar Tongue: And
whereas Truth it self has testified, That in the mouth of two or three there is
all Truth; therefore for the greater security, there were given to the said
Interpreter, by the most Reverend Metropolitan, as Assistants, the Reverend
Fathers, He was afterward made Bishop of the Christians of St. Thomas.
Francisco Roz, and Antonio Toscano of the Society of Jesus in the College of
Vaipicotta in this Diocese, who being well skilled in the Malabar Tongue, were
to observe all that was related by the Interpreter, and in case he was at any
time faulty, to correct him; there were besides several others present, Natives
as well as Portuguezes, that were well versed in both Languages.

Decree I.
THe Congregation being met, and all placed according to their Order, the
Metropolitan seated in his Chair, said, In the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One only True God. Amen.

My beloved Brethren, you the Venerable Priests, and my most dear Sons in
Christ, you the Representatives and Procurators of the People, Does it please
you, that for the Praise and Glory of the Holy and undivided Trinity, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and for the Increase and Exaltation of the
Catholic Faith, and the Christian Religion, of the Inhabitants of this
Bishopric, and for the destruction of the Heresies and Errors which have been
sown therein by several Heretics and Schismatics, and for the purging of
Books from the false Doctrines contained in them, and for the perfect Union of
this Church with the whole Church Catholic and Universal, and for the yielding
of Obedience to the Supreme Bishop of Rome, the Universal Pastor of the Church,
and Successor in the Chair of St. Peter, and Vicar of Christ upon Earth, from
whom you have for some time departed, and for the extirpation of Simony, which
has been much practiced in this Bishopric, and for the regulating of the
Administration of the Holy Sacraments of the Church, and the necessary Use of
them, and for the Reformation of the Affairs of the Church and the Clergy, and
the Customs of all the Christian People of this Diocese; We should begin a
Diocesan Synod of this Bishopric of the Serra? They answered, It pleases us.
Then the most Reverend Metropolitan asked them again; Venerable Brethren, and
most beloved Sons in Christ, since you are pleased to begin a Synod, after
having offered Prayers to God, from whom all Good proceeds, it will be
convenient, that the Matters to be treated of appertaining to our Holy Faith,
the Church, the Divine Offices, the Administration of the Holy Sacraments, and
the Customs of the whole People, be entertained by you with Benignity and
Charity, and afterward by God's Assistance complied with, with much Reverence;
and that every one of you should faithfully procure the Reformation of such
things in this Synod as you know to be amiss, and if any that are present
should happen to be dissatisfied with any thing that shall be said or done
therein, let them without any scruple declare their Opinion publicly, that so
by God's Grace it may be examined, and all things may be truly stated as is
desired; but let not Strife or Contention find any room among you to the
perverting of Justice and Reason; neither be ye afraid of searching after and
embracing the Truth.

Decree II.
THe Synod by Virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be
incurred ipso facto, does command all Persons whatsoever, Ecclesiastical and
Secular, that have been called to, and are present at this Synod, not to depart
the Town of Diamper, where the said Synod is celebrated, without express leave
from the most Illustrious Metropolitan, before the Synod is ended, and they
have signed the Decrees thereof with their own Hand, or till all the rest are
dismissed: The Synod does likewise Request and Command all that have any Matter
that is fitting to be offered to it for the Advancement of God's Honor, and
the Good of the Christians of this Bishopric, to acquaint the Metropolitan
therewith, either by Word or Writing, or some Third Person, that so what is
convenient may be determined therein.

Decree III.
BE it known and declared to all present and absent, That no prejudice shall be
done, or follow to any Town, Corporation, or Village, as to any Preeminence
they may pretend to; by the celebration of this Synod in the Town of Diamper;
as also that no Church, or Person shall suffer by reason of the Places they sit
in, in this Synod, but shall have their Rights and Privileges, in the same
state and vigor that they were in before; and if any Doubts should happen to
arise about this or any such Matter, let them be brought before the Illustrious
Metropolitan; where both Parties being heard, they shall have Justice done them.

Decree IV.
THis Synod knowing that all that is Good is from God, and that every perfect
Gift comes down from the Father of Light, who gives perfect Wisdom to those
that with an humble Heart pray for it; and being withal sensible that the
beginning of true Wisdom is the fear of the Lord; we do admonish and command
all Christians, as well Ecclesiastics as Seculars gathered together in this
Place, to confess their Sins with a true contrition for them, and all Priests
to say Mass, and others to receive the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar,
beseeching our Lord with humble and devout Prayers for good Success to all that
shall be Treated of in this Synod; to which intent, there shall be two solemn
Masses said in the Church every day during the Session of the Synod, one of the
Latins to the Holy Spirit, and the other of the Syrians to our Lady the Blessed
Virgin Mary, whose Praise and Honor is to be particularly Treated of; which
Masses shall be said at such hours as to be no hindrance to the Congregations,
which henceforward shall meet every day in the Church at Seven in the Morning.
They shall likewise, Latins as well as Syrians, every day after Sunset Sing
the solemn Litanies of the Church, with a Commemoration of our Lady for the
good intention of the Synod.

Decree V.
THE Synod, for the preventing of some Inconveniences that may otherwise
happen, and to leave no room for unnecessary and hurtful Debates, does command
by virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto
incurred, That while the Congregations last, no Person whatsoever,
Ecclesiastic or Secular, presume to meet together in any Junctoes with any
Persons, Ecclesiastics or Seculars, to Treat of any Matters appertaining to
the Synod, or this Church, without express License from the most Illustrious
Metropolitan; that so all that is desired, may be handled publicly, and in the
Congregation, those Meetings only excepted which are kept by the People in
order to their proposing of Matters to be consulted about, according to ancient
Custom, and the Order of the said Metropolitan.

ACTION II.
ON the second Day after the singing of the Antiphony, Psalm, Prayers, and
Hymn, as they are in the Roman Pontifical, the most Reverend Metropolitan being
seated in his Chair, said, Venerable and Beloved Brethren, the Priests, and you
my dearest Sons in Christ, the Procurators and Representatives of the People,
We having done little more Yesterday than celebrate the Divine Offices, and
Preach to the People, it is fit we should begin to Day to Treat of Matters
appertaining to the Synod. In the first place, of those that belong to the
Integrity and Truth of our Holy Catholic Faith, and the Profession of the
same; which before we go about, I do again admonish you in our Lord Jesus
Christ, that all such things as you shall judge to stand in need of Reformation
in this Bishopric, or any part thereof, may be signified to us, or to the
Congregation, that so with the Divine favor and assistance, all things by your
Diligence and Charity, may be brought into so good Estate as is desired, for
the praise of the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Decree II.
THat this Synod may in all things Govern it self according to the Directions
of the Holy Canons, and tread in the Footsteps of the Holy General Councils,
and particularly of the Holy Council of Trent, upon the knowledge it has of the
Necessities of this Church, and of the diversity of Opinions that have been
hitherto therein concerning Matters of our Holy Catholic Faith, and of the
Errors contrary thereunto, which have been sowed in this Diocese by Heretics
and Schismatics: it does command all Persons Ecclesiastics and Seculars,
called hither, either in their own Name, or in the Name of others,
Ecclesiastics or Laics, of this Bishopric, to make Profession and Oath of
the following Faith, in the hands of the most Illustrious Metropolitan,
President of this Synod: And for the more effectual execution of this Decree,
and to provoke others by his own Example, the most Illustrious Metropolitan
having robed himself in his Pontificals, but without his Mitre, kneeling down
before the Altar, and having laid his hands upon a Cross that was upon a Book
of the Gospels, did in his own Name, as the present Prelate and Metropolitan of
the Diocese, and in the Name of all the Christians belonging to the same, and
every Person thereof, Secular and Ecclesiastic, make Profession and Oath of
the Faith following, which was immediately declared to all that were present.

The Profession and Oath of the Faith.
IN the Name of the most Holy and undivided Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, one only true God, in the Year of our Lord, 1599, in the Seventh Year of
the Pontificate of our most Holy Lord Clement VIII. Bishop of Rome, in the Town
of Diamper, in the Kingdom of Malabar, in the East Indies, in the Church of All
Saints, on the 21st. of June, in a Diocesan Synod of the Bishopric of Serra,
Assembled by the most Illustrious and Reverend Lord Dom Frey Aleixo de Menezes,
Archbishop Metropolitan of Goa, and the Oriental Parts, and the Sea being
vacant, of the said Bishopric;

I N. do of my own free Will, without any manner of force and constraint, for
the Salvation of my Soul, believing it in my heart, protest, that with a firm
Faith I do believe, and confess, all and every one of the Articles contained in
the Symbol of Faith which is used in Holy Mother Roman Church.

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible:

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all Worlds; God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made: Who for us Men, and for our Salvation, came down from Heaven, and
was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was
Crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate; He suffered and was buried, and the
third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven,
and sits on the right hand of the Father, and he shall come again with Glory
to Judge both the Quick and the Dead: whose Kingdom shall have no end.

And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of Life, who proceeds
from the Father, and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church; I acknowledge one Baptism, for the remission
of Sins; and I look for the Resurrection of the Dead; and the Life of the World
to come.

I do firmly receive and embrace all Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions,
and all the Observances and Constitutions of the said Church; I admit the Holy
Scriptures in that sense wherein it has ever been, and is still held by Mother
Church, to whom it belongs to judge of the true Sense and Interpretation of
the Holy Scriptures; neither will I either receive or interpret it but
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

I do confess likewise, that there are Seven true and proper Sacraments of the
New Testament, instituted by Christ our Lord, which are all necessary to the
health of Mankind, though not to every particular Person; they are, Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Order, Penance, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction,
which do all conferr Grace on those that receive them worthily; and of these
seven Sacraments, that Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, are to be received
but once, neither can they be repeated without great Sacrilege.

I admit and receive all the Customs, Rites, and Ceremonies, received and
approved of in the Roman Church, in the solemn Administration of the said seven
Sacraments, and do also receive and embrace all in general, and every thing in
particular, that has been defined and declared concerning Original Sin, and
Justification, in the Holy Council of Trent.

I do likewise confess, that in the Mass there is offered to God a true and
proper Sacrifice of Pardon both for the Quick and the Dead; and that in the
most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is the true, real, and substantial
Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and that the whole substance of the Bread is by Consecration turned into the
Body of Christ, and the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood; which
Conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation: Moreover, I do
confess, that under each Species Christ is entire, and the true Sacrament is
received.

I do constantly hold and confess, that there is a Purgatory.] John Fisher,
Bishop of Rochester, in his 18th Article against Luther, does acknowledge the
Doctrine of Purgatory to be an Article of Faith of no long standing in the
Church. Multa (inquit) sunt de quibus in primitiva Ecclesia nulla quaestio
factura fuerat, quae tamen posteriorum diligentia, subortis dubitationibus jam
evaserunt perspicua. Nemo certe jam dubitat Orthodoxus an Purgatorium sit, de
quo tamen apud priscos illos nulla, vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio, sed and
Graecis ad hunc usque diem, non est creditum Purgatorium esse. Legate qui velit
Graecorum veterum Commentarios, and nullum (quantum opinor) aut quam rarissimum
de Purgatorio sermonem inveniet. Quamdiu enim nulla fuerat de Purgatorio cura;
Nemo quaesivit Indulgentias, nam ex illo pendet omnis Indulgentiarum
existimatio; quum itaque Pugatorium tam sero cognitum ac receptum Ecclesiae
fuerit universae, quis jam de Indulgentiis mirari potest quod in principio
nascentis Ecclesiae nullus fuerat earum usus, coeperunt igitur Indulgentiae,
post quam ad Purgatorii cruciatus aliquando trepidatum est.
Purgatory, and that the Souls which are cleansing from their Sins, do receive
benefit from the Prayers and Devotions of the Faithful.

I do likewise affirm, that The Souls of the Just.] This was the common Opinion
of the Ancient Fathers; namely, Irenaeus at the end of his 5th Book; Justin.
Quaest. 76th. Tertullian in his 4th Book against Marcion; Origin in his 7th
Homily upon Leviticus, and a great many other places; Lactantius in the 21st
Chap. of his 7th Book; Victorinus in his Commentary upon the words, I saw under
the Altar; Ambrosius in his 2d Book of Cain and Abel; Chrysostom in his 39th
Homily upon those words, If in this life only, in the 1st to the Corinth. The
Author of the Imperfect Work, in his 34th Homily upon St. Matthew; Austin in
his Enarration upon the 36th Psalm; Theodoret in his Commentaries upon the 11th
to the Heb. Oecumenius in his Commentaries upon the same place; Theophylact in
his Commentaries upon the 23d of St. Luke; Aretho on those words, How long, O
Lord, etc. Euthymius upon the 23d of St. Luke; and Bernard in his Sermon upon
All Saints day: And to Pope John the 22d being charged with having believed
this Doctrine, Bellarmin returns the following Answer, Joannem hunc 22dum.
revera sensisse Animas non visuras Deum nisi post resurrectionem, caeterum hoc
sensisse quando adhuc sentire licebat sine periculo Haeresis, nulla enim adhuc
praecesserat Ecclesiae definitio. Which Confession makes the Doctrines of
praying to Saints, and of Purgatory, and of Indulgences, to be very new
Articles of Faith.
the Souls of the Just and Faithful, which at their departure out of this Life,
have entirely satisfied for the Punishment due to the Sins that they have
committed; as also those in Purgatory which have made an end of satisfying for
their sins according to the Divine Pleasure and Ordination; as also those who
after Baptism have committed no Sin, do at the moment of their death go
immediately into Heaven, where they behold God as he is: And I do condemn, and
anathematize the Heresy of those, who think that the Souls of the Just are in a
Terrestrial Paradise till the day of Judgment; and that the Damned are not
Tormented any otherwise than by the certainty they have of the Torments they
are to enter into after the day of Judgment.

And I do confess, and affirm, that the Saints now reigning with Christ in
Heaven, are to be Reverenced, and Invoked, and that they offer Prayers to God
for us, whose Relics are likewise to be reverenced on Earth: And moreover,
that the Images.] Gyraldus, a Learned Papist, in the 18th Page of the History
of the Gods, speaking of Images in the Church of Rome, says, At de istiusmodi
magis mutire possumus, quam palam loqui, idcirco satius ea fuerit Hippocrati
and Angeronae consignare; illud certe non praetermittam, Nos dico Christianos,
ut aliquando Romanos, fuisse sine Imaginibus in primitiva, quae vocatur,
Ecclesia.
Images of our Lord Christ, and of our Lady the Glorious Virgin Mary, and of
all the other Saints, are to be kept, used, and reverenced, with due Honor and
Veneration.

I do also believe, that our Lady the most Holy Virgin Mary is the proper and
true Mother of God, and ought to be called so by the Faithful, for having
brought forth according to the Flesh, without any pain or passion, the true Son
of God, and that she always continued a Virgin, in, and after her Deliverance,
having never been defiled by any actual Sin.

I do confess, that the power of granting Indulgences was left to the Church by
our Lord Jesus Christ; the use whereof I do affirm to be healthful and
profitable to all Christian People.

I do acknowledge the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church to be the
Head, Mother and Mistress of all other Churches in the World; and do hold all
that are not subject and obedient to her, to be Heretical, Schismatical, and
disobedient to our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Commands, and to the Order that
he left in the Church, and to be Aliens from Eternal Salvation.

I do promise and swear true Obedience to the Pope, the Roman Bishop, the
Successor of the Blessed Prince of the Apostles St. Peter, and Vicar of our
Lord Jesus Christ on earth, the Head of the whole Church on earth, and Doctor
and Master of the same, and the Father, Prelate, and Pastor of all Christians;
and do confess, that all who deny Obedience to the said Roman Bishop, the Vicar
of Christ, are Transgressors of the Divine Commands, and cannot attain to
Eternal Life.

I do without any scruple receive, approve, and confess all other Matters,
defined and declared in the Sacred Canons, and General Councils, and chiefly in
the Holy Council of Trent; and do in the same manner condemn, reject, and
anathematize every thing that is contrary to the same; together with all
Heresies condemned, rejected and anathematized by the said Church; Namely, the
Diabolical and perverse Heresy of Nestorius, together with its perverse Author
Nestorius, and its false Teachers Theodorus.] They should not have been so hard
upon Theodorus, for Pope Honorius's sake, who by Name was condemned together
with him by the 5th. General Council; and I am mistaken, if Pighius, and some
other Popish Writers, have not for that very reason labored hard to vindicate
Theodorus's Memory.
Theodorus and Diodorus.] Du Pin in his 4th. Century of Christianity, p. 189.
says: As to what concerns his Doctrine of the Incarnation, we could better
judge of it, if we had his Books; but there is no great probability, that one
who was praised, esteemed and cherished by Meletius, St. Basil, St. Gregory
Nazianzen, St. Epiphanius, and even by St. Athanasius, and his Successors Peter
and Timothy of Alexandria; who was also considered in a General Council as one
of the most Learned and most Orthodox Bishops of all the East; and in short,
who was Master to St. Chrysostom, should be guilty of so gross an Error as that
of Nestorius. It Is true, that he had for his Scholar Theodorus of Mopsuestia,
and that he was accused of the same Error with Nestorius, and that he was
condemned as convicted of this Error after his Death in the 5th. Council. But
besides, that there have been some Persons who have undertaken to justify him:
Yet if it should be granted that he was guilty of this Error, it would not
follow that he learned it of his Master, since we daily see Heretical Disciples
who have had Orthodox Masters. Should not the Faith of St. Chrysostom rather
serve to justify Diodorus, than the Error of Theodorus to condemn him?
Diodorus, and all that have and do follow it, who being persuaded and seduced
by the Devil, do impiously maintain, That our Lord and Savior Christ consists
of Two Persons, affirming the Divine Word not to have taken the Flesh into a
Unity of Person with it self, but only to have dwelt therein as in a Temple,
and so will not say, that God was Incarnate, or that our Lady, the most Blessed
Virgin Mary, was the Mother of God, but only the Mother of Christ; all which I
reject, condemn and anathematize as Diabolical Heresies; and do believe, and
embrace, and approve of all that was determined about this Matter, in the
Council of Ephesus, consisting of two hundred Fathers, in which by order of
Celestine 1st. Bishop of Rome, the Blessed St. Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria,
was President, whom I acknowledge to be a Saint now enjoying God, and that all
that blaspheme him are in a state of Damnation.

Moreover, I do condemn all that say, that the Passion of our Savior ought not
to be mentioned, and that it is an Injury to him to do it; on the contrary, I
do believe and confess, that the Consideration and Discourses thereof are holy,
and of benefit to Souls.

I do likewise confess and believe, that in pure Christianity there is only one
Law of our Lord Jesus Christ, true God, and true Man; in like manner as there
is no more than one only true God, one only Faith, and one only Baptism; which
one only Law was preached by all the holy Apostles, and their Disciples and
Successors after the same manner. I do therefore condemn and reject all those
who ignorantly teach, That there was one Law of St. Thomas, and another Law of
St. Peter, and that they are so different as not to have any thing to do with
one another; as also all other Heresies and Errors condemned by Holy Mother
Church. This true and Catholic Faith, out of which there is no Salvation, and
which at present I do of my own free Will, profess and truly hold and believe,
I shall with the help of God endeavor to keep entire, and undefiled to my last
breath; and constantly to hold and profess, and to procure its being held,
professed, preached, and taught by all that are subject to me, or that shall be
any ways under my care. I N. do promise and vow to God, and Swear to this Holy
Cross of our Lord Christ: So help me God, and the Contents of this Gospel
Pagninus Gaudentius, a Learned Papist, in his 2d. Book De Vita Christianorum,
makes this Judicious reflection upon the Church of Rome's long Creed. Mirabitur
aliquis, cum tam late pateant limits Theologiae Christianae, Scriptores
Vetustissimos, quique floruerunt ante Constantinum, brevi admodum ratione, non
multisque effatis complecti praecipua Capita Christianae Religioni^, Summamque
Mysteriorum quae tradita sunt ab Apostolis: Lege Justinum, Tertullianum and
observa quam parci sunt, dum referunt quid divina fide sentiant Christiani: Sed
subsecuta secula tam multa definierunt, and addiderunt, ut ingentia Volumina
nunc nostram complectantur Theologiam: ei ergo, qui de vita Christianorum ante
tempora Constantini agit, danda opera est, ut exponat incrementum Dogmatum
Catholicorum; quod tamen nescio annon offensurum set aures nostras.
.

I do also Promise, Vow and Swear to God, this Cross, and these Holy Gospels,
never to receive into this Church and Bishopric of the Serra, any Bishop,
Archbishop, Prelate, Pastor or Governor whatsoever, but what shall be
immediately appointed by the Holy Apostolical See, and the Bishop of Rome, and
that whomsoever he shall appoint, I will receive and obey as my true Pastor,
without expecting any Message, or having any further dependence upon the
Patriarch of Babylon, whom I condemn, reject and anathematize, as being a
Nestorian Heretic and Schismatic, and out of the Obedience of the Holy Roman
Church, and for that reason out of a state of Salvation: And I do swear and
promise, never to obey him any more, nor to communicate with him in any Matter:
All this that I have professed and declared, I do promise, vow and swear to
Almighty God, and this Holy Cross of Christ: So help me God, and the Contents
of these Gospels. Amen.

The most Reverend Metropolitan, after having made this Protestation and
Confession of Faith, rose up, and seating himself in his Chair, with his Mitre
on his Head, and the Holy Gospels, with a Cross upon them in his hands; the
Reverend George, Archdeacon of the said Bishopric of the Serra, kneeling down
before him, made the same Profession of Faith, with a loud and intelligible
Voice, in the Malabar Tongue, taking an Oath in the hands of the Lord
Metropolitan, and after him all the Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastics that were present, being upon their Knees, Jacob, Curate of
Pallarty, and Interpreter to the Synod, read the said Profession in Malabar,
all of them saying it along with him; which being ended, they all took the Oath
in the hands of the Lord Metropolitan, who asked them one by one in particular,
Whether they did firmly believe all that was contained in the Profession; as
also whether they did believe and confess all that is believed and professed by
the Holy Mother Church of Rome, and did reject all that she rejects, and if
they did anathematize the cursed Heresy of the Nestorians, with all its
falsities, and all the Authors and Cherishers of the same; Namely, the perverse
Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodorus, together with all their Followers; and
whether they did acknowledge the Holy Roman Church to be the Mother, and
Mistress There is no Christian Church besides the Roman, and a handful of
Maronites, who put together, are not the fourth part of Christendom, but what
deny this Supremacy, and do with Pope Gregory I. condemn i^ as an Antichristian
and Heretical Usurpation. It is nothing so much as this Magisterial Pride of
the Roman Church that makes the Papists to be by much the most generally hated
Sect of People in the whole World; for not to speak of the Jews, Mahometans and
Heathens, who hate them infinitely beyond all other Sects of Religion, the
Greek and Alexandrian Christians have them in such detestation, as to reckon an
Altar defiled by a Roman Priest's having celebrated thereon: And for the
Muscovites, Possevinus tells us, their greatest imprecation is, I hope, to live
to see thee so far abandoned, as to turn Papist. The Abbyssin Christians, as
Godinus tells us, do not only condemn the Romanists as Heretics, but do
affirm, that they are worse than Mahometans, and in the 28th. Chap. of the
first Book of Archbishop Menezes's Visitation, it is said that the Chaldaean
and Malabar Christians did so abhor the Pope, that they could not endure so
much as to hear him named.
, and Head of all the Churches in the World, and confess that all that were not
obedient to her, were out of a state of Salvation; and if they did promise and
swear true Obedience and subjection to the most Holy Father the Pope and Bishop
of Rome, as Universal Pastor of the Church, and Successor of St. Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Christ upon Earth, without any manner of
dependence upon the Schismatical Patriarch of Babylon, to whom though contrary to
Justice, they had hitherto been subject; and if they did promise never to
receive any other Bishop into this Diocese, but what shall be sent by the Holy
Roman Church, by the appointment of our Lord the Pope, and that whomsoever he
shall ordain, they will acknowledge and obey for their Prelate, as becomes true
Catholics, and Sons of the Church, anathematizing the Patriarch of Babylon, as
a Nestorian Heretic, out of the Obedience of the Holy Roman Church, and
promising and swearing never to obey him more in any matter, nor to have any
further Commerce or Communion with him in things appertaining to the Church.

To all which, and every particular, they did all, and every one of them for
themselves with their hands upon the Cross and the Gospel, swear and protest to
God by the Holy Gospel, and the Cross of Christ. After the Ecclesiastics had
made this Profession and Oath, the Procurators and Representatives of the
People, by virtue of the Powers they had, made the same in their own Name, and
in the Name of the People of the Bishroprick, as did also all the other
Christians that were present.

Decree III.
THe Synod does command all Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, of this
Bishopric, that were not present at this Solemnity, to make the foresaid Oath
and profession of Faith in the hands of the most Illustrious Metropolitan, at
the Visitation of their Churches, which he intends to make speedily, or in the
hands of such as he shall depute for those that shall be absent at the time of
the Visitation; that so there may be none in Holy Orders in this Bishopric but
what has made this Profession in the manner aforesaid. The Synod does likewise
declare, That hereafter none shall be capable of undertaking any Vicaridge, or
Cure of a Church, until they have made the said Profession, in the hands of
their Prelate, or of some Commissionated by him for that purpose; as also, that
all that take Holy Orders, do first make the said Profession in the same
manner; and if any of the forementioned, which God forbid, shall refuse to do
it, that they shall thereupon be declared Excommunicate, until they comply, and
withal be vehemently suspected of Heresy, and be punished according to the
Sacred Canons.

ACTION III.
BEcause without Faith it is impossible to please God; and the Holy Catholic
Faith, without which none can be saved, is the beginning of true Life, and the
foundation of all our Good; the Purity thereof being that, that distinguishes
Christians and Catholics from all other People; wherefore the Synod being
sensible, that by means of some Heretical Persons, and Books scattered all over
this Bishopric, many Errors and Falsities have been sown therein, with which
many are poisoned, and more may be, does judge it necessary, besides the
profession of Faith that has been made, further to declare to the People in
some Chapters, the chief Articles of our Holy Catholic Faith, and to point at,
and observe the Errors contained in their Books, and to have them Preached
against in this Bishopric, that so knowing the mischief and falsehood of them,
they may avoid them.

CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Faith.
OUr Holy Faith, that is believed with one unanimous consent by the Catholic
Church spread all over the World, is, That we believe in One only True,
Almighty, Immutable, Incomprehensible, and Ineffable God, the Eternal Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, One in Essence, and Three in Persons; the Father not
begotten, the Son begotten of the Father, and of the same substance with him,
and equal to him, and the Holy Ghost proceeding eternally from the Father and
the Son; not as from two Principals, or two Inspirations, but from both as from
one only Principal, and one only Inspiration; the Father is not the Son, nor
the Holy Spirit; the Holy Spirit is not the Father, nor the Son; but the Father
is only the Father, the Son is only the Son, and the Holy Spirit is only the
Holy Spirit, none of them being before another in Eternity, nor superior to
another in Majesty, nor inferior to another in Power, but were all without
beginning or end; the Father is he who begot, the Son is he who was born, and
the Holy Ghost he who proceeds, Consubstantial, Equal, alike Almighty, and
alike Eternal. These three Persons are one only God, and not three Gods, one
only Essence and Substance, one Nature, one Immensity, one Principal, one
Creator of all things Visible and Invisible, Corporal and Spiritual, who when
he pleased, created all things, with his goodness, and would that they should
be all very good.

CHAP. II.
FUrthermore; That the only begotten Son of God, who is always with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, Consubstantial to the Father, at the time appointed by the
profound Wisdom of the Divine Mercy, for the redeeming of Men from the sin of
Adam, and from all other sins, was truly Incarnate by the operation of the Holy
Spirit, in the pure Womb of our Lady the most Blessed Virgin Mary, and in her
took our true and entire Nature of Man, that is, a Body and rational Soul, into
the Unity of the Divine Person; which Unity was such, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is God and Man, and the Son of God, and the Son of Man, in as much as he
was the Son of the Blessed Virgin; so that the one Nature is not confounded
with the other, neither did the one pass into, nor mix it self with the other;
neither did either of them vanish, or cease to be; but in one only Person, or
in one Divine Suppositum, there are two perfect Natures, a Divine and Humane,
but so that the properties of both Natures are still preserved, there being two
Wills, the Divine and Humane, and two Operations, Christ still continuing one;
for as the Form of God does not destroy the Form of a Servant, so the Form of a
Servant does not diminish the Form of God; because he who is true God, is also
true Man: God, because in the beginning he was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and God was the Word: Man, because the Word was made Flesh, and died among
us: God, because by his own Power he satisfied five Thousand Men with five
Loaves, and promised the Water of Eternal Life to the Samaritan Woman, and
raised Lazarus from the Grave when he had been dead four days, and gave sight
to the Blind, cured the Sick, and commanded the Winds and the Seas: Man,
because he suffered Hunger and Thirst, was weary in the Way, was fastened with
Nails to the Cross, and died thereon: Equal to the Eternal Father as to the
Divinity, and Inferior to the Father as to the Humanity, and Mortal, and
Passible.

CHAP. III.
FUrthermore; That the same Son of God that was Incarnate, was truly born of
the Virgin Mary, and had his Sacred Body formed of the pure Blood of the same
most Blessed Virgin, and is truly her Son; for which reason we confess her to
be truly the Mother of God, and that she ought to be so called and invocated by
the whole Catholic Church; for that she really and truly brought forth
according to the Flesh, though without any Pain or Passion, the true Son of God,
made Man; and that the said Son of God Incarnate, truly suffered for us, and
was truly dead and buried, and in his Soul truly descended into Hell, or Limbo,
to redeem the Souls of the Holy Fathers, which were therein, and did truly rise
again from the dead the third day, and afterward for forty days taught his
Disciples, speaking with them of the Kingdom of Heaven, and immediately by his
own Power ascended into the Heavens, where he sits at the right hand of the
Majesty, Glory, and Power of the Father, from whence he shall come to Judge the
quick and the dead, and to give to every one according to their Works.

CHAP. IV.
FUrthermore; That none that are descended from Adam, ever were or can be saved
by any other means, than by Faith in the Mediator betwixt God and Man, our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God; who by his Blood and Death reconciled us to the
Eternal Father, by having satisfied him for our Debts; the Faith before our
Savior appeared in the World, being to believe in him who was to come; as
after his appearance, to believe in him who is come, and by his Blood and Death
has saved us.

CHAP. V.
FUrthermore; That all we who are born of Adam by the way of Natural
Generation, are born Children of Wrath, with the guilt of Original Sin,
incurred by the disobedience of Adam, in whom we all sinned, and which we all
committed in him; for which sin, Adam lost for himself, and us, Holiness and
Righteousness, and so that guilt of sin is derived to all of us by Generation,
we having all sinned in him, as the Apostle St. Paul tells us, that by one Man
Sin entered into the World, and by Sin Death, and so Death passed upon all Men,
all having sinned in him, but notwithstanding this guilt is derived to us by
Generation; nevertheless our Souls are not derived by Generation as our Bodies
are, but are created by God of nothing, and by the Divine Ordination infused
into our Bodies, at the time when they are perfectly formed and organized, and
in the instant in which they are infused into our Bodies, they contract the
guilt of Original Sin, which we committed in Adam, and for which we were all
expelled the Kingdom of Heaven, and deprived of God for ever; but which is now
pardoned by Holy Baptism, by which our Souls are cleansed from the guilt of
that sin, and of Children of Wrath, and Aliens from Glory; we are made the
blessed Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven; wherein likewise all our other sins
and actual transgressions, where there are any, together with all the
punishments due to the same, are forgiven.

CHAP. VI.
FUrthermore; That the Souls of all those that have committed no sin after
Baptism, and of those who having committed sins, have done condign Penance, and
have made an entire and equal satisfaction for them, are carried immediately
into Heaven, where they behold God, Three and One as he is; and do partake of
the Divine Vision, in proportion to the diversity of their Merits, some more
perfectly than others, and in the same manner they who die in any Actual Mortal
sin, without having done condign punishment for it; or only in Original sin, do
go straightway down into Hell, there to be tormented with Eternal punishments,
though unequal, according to the measure of their guilt.

CHAP. VII.
FUrthermore; That all Christians departing this life in Charity, and having
truly repented of the sins they have committed, before they have made full
satisfaction to the Divine Justice for the same, are at their death carried
into Purgatory, where their guilt is purged away by Fire, and other punishments
in such a space of time as by the Divine Ordination is suitable to their
Quality, or until they have entirely satisfied for them, after which they are
carried up into Glory, there to enjoy God; and that in Purgatory the Prayers,
Alms, and other Works of Piety that are performed by the Faithful that are
alive, for the Faithful that are dead, are profitable to them; but above all,
the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, for their being relaxed from the punishments
that they suffer, and for the shortning of their banishment from Heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
FUrthermore, That at the day of Judgment, our Bodies, though crumbled into dust
and ashes, shall be raised up the same that they were in this Life, and be
reunited to their Souls, those of the Righteous to be clothed with Glory, and
to reign with Christ for ever in the Heavens; and those of the Wicked, to be
together with their souls tormented for ever in the Company of Devils in the
Eternal and real Fire of Hell.

CHAP. IX.
FUrthermore, That in the beginning, and in Time God created all things Visible
and Invisible, Corporeal and Spiritual, and the Empyrean Heavens full of
Angels, of whom, those that continued subject to God were confirmed in Grace,
enjoying God with all the perfections and Gifts wherewith they were created, as
those who disobeyed him fell into Hell, which God so soon as they sinned made
for them, where they are tormented for ever with the rigor of Justice; not
only with punishments of loss, in being Eternally deprived of the Divine
Vision, which they were created to have enjoyed, but with real Fire, and other
Eternal Torments also; and do tempt men, endeavoring to do them all the
mischief they are able, out of envy, for the Blessings that are reserved for
the Just, and which they have forfeited by their sins, and out of hatred they
have for God and his Works, and that intrinsical Malice they are hardened in.

CHAP. X.
FUrthermore, That the Blessed Angels and Saints that reign with Christ in the
Heavens are to be venerated, and invoked by the Faithful, desiring of God a
Remedy for our wants through their Intercession; and of them that they would
intercede for us, which they do daily by offering up our Prayers and Petitions
to God; That the Bodies and Relics of Saints ought to be had in veneration,
in being carefully kept, kissed and adored by the Faithful, and placed under
the Holy Altars, and other consecrated places, upon the account of their having
been lively Members of Christ, and the Temple of the Holy Spirit, and because
they are to be raised again at the day of Judgment, and and clothed with
Eternal Glory in Heaven, and God vouchsafes many Blessings upon Earth by them.

CHAP. XI.
FUrthermore, That the Images of our Lord Christ, and of our Lady the Glorious
Virgin Mary, and of the Holy Angels that are painted after our manner, and of
other Saints which the Church believes to be in Heaven, ought to be kept and
used in all decent places; not only in the houses of the Faithful, but chiefly
in Churches and Altars, and to be reverenced and adored with due veneration,
and with the same that is due to the Persons they represent; not that we
believe that there is any thing of Divinity or Virtue.] If there is nothing of
Virtue in one Image more than another, why do People go so many hundred miles
to pray to some particular Images of the Virgin Mary, when there is scarce a
Church or Chapel in their way, wherein there is not an Image of her.
Virtue in them for which they ought to be honored, or that we put our Hope
and Confidence in them, as the Heathens] The Learned Heathens made the very
same declaration concerning their worshipping of Images.
Heathens did in their Idols; but because the Honor which we pay to them,
referrs to what they represent, so that in prostrating our selves before their
Images, we adore Christ, and reverence the Saints, whose Images they are: In
like manner we adore the sign of the Cross, with the Worship of Latria.] The
saying that this Latria, or Supreme worship is only Relative, cannot excuse it
from being Idolatrous, without excusing the grossest Worship among the Heathen,
it being impossible in Nature to give any other Worship, than what is relative
to an Image, when worshipped as such.

Martinus Peresius Aila, Bishop of Guidez in Spain, in the third part of his
Book of Traditions, p. 223. passes a severe, but just censure upon the Worship
here established. Cujus doctrinae, nullum (quod ego viderim) afferunt validum
fundamentum, quod possit fideles ad id quod docent obligari. Nam neque
Scripturam, neque Tracitionem Ecclesiae, neque communem sensum sanctorum, neque
Concilii Generalis determinationem aliquam, nec etiam rationem qua hoc
efficaciter suaderi possit adducunt. Et p. 226. Certe haud dissimile, imo forte
maj^s scandalum infirmis paratur, qui has distinctiones prorsus ignorant, nec
possunt nisi errando intelligere (ut ego ipse in multis simplicibus experimento
deprehendi, cum ab eis sciscitarer, quid de hac re sentirent) in eo quod
dicitur eadem adoratione adorandum esse Imaginem, qua and rem cujus est. Nam
cum videant simulachrum operose sculptum, affabre expolitum, in eminenti loco
templi positum, ipsumque a multitudine veneratum, and super haec audiant, quod
eodem honor debeat honorari quo and res cujus est, colitur, certe in multis
simplicibus periculosissimus erroris affectus facile potest adgenerari, quo
putent aliquid Numinis latere in imagine, sic quoque rei repraesentatae tum
nomen, tum gloriam, ad imaginem facile possunt transfer: quod maxim
periculosum esse judico.


Latria, which is due only to God, because it is a sign representing the Son of
God our Lord Jesus Christ upon the Cross, and which he himself has told us
will be the sign of the Son of Man in the Day of Judgment, and with the same
Worship of Latria we adore the Images of our Lord Jesus Christ, because they
represent him.

CHAP. XII.
FUrthermore, the Church professes that every Person as soon as he is born,
has a Guardian Angel given him, whose business it is to excite People to what
is good, and to deliver them from many evils which they would otherwise have
fallen into, which Angel protects and accompanies People through their whole
lives, doing all it can to keep them from Sin, and all other Evils, that so it
may bring them to Eternal Life, and is always suggesting good things to their
Free Will, from which we receive many Blessings as well Spiritual as Temporal,
notwithstanding we neither see them, nor understand how they do it; and these
we call our Guardian Angels.

CHAP. XIII.
FUrthermore, That the Catholic Church is one and the same all over the World,
having for its Pastor the chief Bishop of Rome, Successor in the Chair of the
Blessed Prince of the Apostles, St. Peter, to whom, and by him to his
Successors, our Lord Jesus Christ delivered the full power of ruling and
governing his whole Church; from whence it is, that the Roman Church is the
Head of the whole Church, and the Father, Master and Doctor of all Christians;
and the Prelate of all in common, and of all Priests, Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates and Patriarchs, of whatsoever Church they are; as also the Pastor of
all Emperors, Kings, Princes and Lords: In a word, of all that are Christians,
and of all the Faithful People. Hence it is, that all that are not under the
Obedience of the said Roman Bishop, the Vicar of Christ upon Earth, are out of
a state of Salvation, and shall be condemned to Hell as Heretics and
Schismatics, for their Disobedience to the Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Order that he left in his Church.

CHAP. XIV.
FUrthermore, that One and the same God is the Author of the New and Old
Testament, of the Prophets, and the Gospels, the Saints of both those
Testaments being inspired in the Writing of them with the same Holy Spirit; and
so the Catholic Church receives all the Canonical Books of both Testaments,
which contain in them nothing but what is infallibly true, and was dictated by
the Holy Spirit: To wit, of the Old Testament the five Books of Moses, Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; as also Joshua, the two Books of
Judges, Ruth, the four Books of Kings, the two Books of Chronicles, the first
Book of Esdras, the second which is called Nehemias, Tobit, Judith, Esther,
Job, the Psalms of David, being 150, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of
Songs, the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the four greater Prophets, viz.
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel; the twelve lesser, viz. Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi,
and the first and second of Maccabees; and of the New Testament, St. Matthew,
St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John, the Acts of the Apostles writ by St. Luke,
the fourteen Epistles of St. Paul, viz. One to the Romans, two to the
Corinthians, one to the Galatians, one to the Ephesians, one to the
Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, two to Timothy,
one to Titus, one to Philemon, and to the Hebrews; two of the Apostle St.
Peter, three of the Apostle St. John, one of the Apostle St. James, one of the
Apostle St. Jude, and the Revelation of the Apostle St. John, all which Books,
with all their parts are Canonical, and contain in them nothing but what is
infallibly true.

Decree II.
THe Synod declares, that in the Books of the New Testament used in this
Church, and writ in the Syrian or Syriack Tongue, there is wanting in the
Gospel of St. John, the beginning of the 8th. Chapter, the History of the
Adulteress that was carried before our Lord Christ; as also in the 10th. of St.
Luke, where it is said, that Christ sent seventy two Disciples, it is said, he
sent seventy Disciples; and in the 6th. of St. Matthew, the words, For thine is
the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever, is added to the end of the
Lord's Prayer; there is also wanting in the said Books the second Epistle of
St. Peter, the second and third Epistles of St. John, and that of Jude, and the
Revelation of St. John, and in the 4th. Chapter of the first Epistle of St.
John, this Verse is wanting, having been impiously left out, Qui solvit Jesum,
non est ex Deo; and in the 5th. Chapter of the same Epistle, these words are
wanting, There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, and these three are One; and in the Old Testament there are
wanting the Books of Esther, Tobit, and Wisdom, all which the Synod commands
to be translated, and the passages that are wanting to be restored to their
Purity, according to the Chaldee Copies, which are emended, and the Vulgar
Latin Edition made use of by holy Mother Church, that so this Church may have
the Holy Scriptures entire, and may use it with all its parts, as it was
written, and as it is to be used in the Universal Church; to which end the
Synod desires the Reverend Father Francisco Roz, of the Society of Jesus, and
Professor of the Syrian Tongue in the College of Vaipicotta in this Bishopric,
that he would be pleased to take the trouble thereof upon him, for which he is
so well qualified by reason of his great skill both in the Syrian Language, and
the Scripture.

Decree III.
WHereas the Holy Scriptures are the Pillars that support our Holy Faith, and
as it were the Foundations whereon it stands, and wherein the Truth and Purity
thereof is to be met with, which has made all Heretics in their endeavors to
destroy the said Faith, constantly and industriously to corrupt the Text of the
Divine Scriptures, partly by taking away such passages as did manifestly
contradict their Errors, and by perverting other places so as to make them Seem
to favor them.] It is hard to give any other reason than this, why the Church
of Rome, though since the time of the Council of Trent, she has corrected some
hundreds of Errors in the Vulgar Latin, did not think fit to correct that in
the 3d. of Genesis, which they apply to the Virgin Mary; nor that in the 11th.
of Isaiah, which they make use of to promote Pilgrimages to Jerusalem; nor that
in the 11th. to the Hebrews, which seems to make for the Adoration of Images;
nor that in the first Chapter of the 2d. Epist. of St. Peter, which seems to
give some countenance to the Invocation of Saints.
seem to favor them; which has also happened in this Bishopric, through its
having been governed by Bishops who were Nestorian Heretics, and that used the
same practices upon the Holy Scriptures, that were in their hands in favor of
their Heresies; as in the 20th. of the Acts of the Apostles, where St. Paul
says, Take heed to your selves, and the whole Church, over which the Holy
Spirit has made you Bishops to rule the Church of God, which he purchased with
his Blood; the word God is impiously changed for that of Christ, and it is said
that Christ has made them to govern his Church, which he purchased with his
own Blood; because the Nestorians, being instigated by the Devil, will not
acknowledge according to the Catholic Truth, that God suffered and shed his
Blood for us; and in the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle of St. John, this
Verse is left out, Qui solvit Jesum, non est ex Deo; because it contradicts the
Nestorians, who do impiously divide Christ, by making him to have two Persons;
and in the 3d. Chap. of the same Epistle, where it is said, In this we know the
Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, the word God is maliciously
left out, and that of Christ put in its stead, saying, That in this we know the
Love of Christ, etc. and so it favors the Nestorian Heresy, which denies God
to have dyed for us; and in the 2d. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where
the Apostle says, We have seen Jesus for the Passion of his Death crowned with
glory and honor, that he by the Grace of God should taste death for all men;
the Surian, the better to make a difference of Persons in Christ, which was
what Nestorius taught, has impiously added, We have seen Jesus for the passion
of his death crowned with honor and glory, that the Grace of God, (praeter
Deum, or besides God) might taste death for all; and in the 6th. of St. Luke,
where our Lord Christ says, Lend, hoping for nothing again; to favor and
justify their Usury, they have made it, Lend, and from thence hope for
something: All which places being depraved and corrupted by Heretics, the
Synod commands to be corrected in all their Books, and to be restored
according to the Purity and Truth of the Vulgar Edition used by Holy Mother
Church, entreating the most Illustrious Metropolitan forthwith to visit the
Churches of this Diocese, either in Person, or by some well skilled in the
Syrian Tongue, whom he shall be pleased to depute.

Decree IV.
THe Synod being informed that the Christians of this Diocese, by reason of the
Communication they have with Infidels, and by living among them, have imbibed
several of their Errors and Ignorances, namely, three that are the common
Errors of all the Infidels of these parts; the first is, That there is a
Transmigration.] This was not the Doctrine of this Church, as appears plainly
from what is said in twenty places of this Synod, of her believing, that the
Souls of the Just departed this Life, were in a Terrestrial Paradise, where
they were to remain till the day of Judgment.
Transmigration of Souls, which after Death go either into the Bodies of
Beasts, or of some other Men; which besides that it is a great Ignorance, is
also an Error contrary to the Catholic Faith, which teaches, That our Souls
after Death are carried to Heaven or Hell, or Purgatory, or Limbus, according
to every ones Merits, and that there is no such fabulous and false
Transmigration.

The second is, That all things come necessarily to pass, or through I am very
apt to believe that they are here falsely accused of attributing all things to
Fate, for no other reason but because they believed Predestination; which if it
was so, Archbishop Menezes, who was himself an Austin Friar, showed but little
respect to the Memory of his pretended Father, in making Predestination and
Fate to be equally destructive of humane Liberty.
Fate or Fortune, which they call the Nativity of Men, who they say are
compelled to be what they are, and that there is no help for it; which is a
manifest Error, and condemned by Holy Mother Church, for as much as it destroys
that Liberty of Will, with which God created us, leaving us in the power of our
own Will, to do Good or Evil, to obey his Holy Inspirations and Internal
Motions, by which he excites to Good, or to resist Evil; so that as it depends
on his Divine mercy and goodness to move us to Good, so it depends on our
Free Will, whether by his assistance we will obey those Inspirations, and will
profit our selves of his Internal Motions, or of our own free Will refuse to do
it; or in a word, do Well, or Ill; so that if we perish for doing any thing
that is Ill, it is the fault of our own Free Will; as the Catholic Faith
teaches us; and not from the fate of our Nativity, as the ignorant Heathens
will have it.

The third is, This is an Error that Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
others of the Philosophical Fathers seem to have been in.
That every one may be saved in his own Law; all which are Good, and lead Men
to Heaven. Now this is a manifest Heresy; there being no other Law upon earth
in which Salvation is to be found, besides that of our Savior Christ, for that
he only teaches the Truth; so that all that live in any other Sect, are out of
a state of Salvation, and shall be condemned to Hell; there being no other Name
given to Men, by which we can be saved, but only the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, who was Crucified for us: All which Errors, the Synod
commands the Vicars and Preachers often to preach against in the hearing of
the ignorant People; and all Confessors to examine their Penitents concerning
them, and to teach them the Catholic Truth.

Decree V.
THis Synod being informed, that there is a dangerous Heresy, and very
injurious to our Lord Jesus Christ, sown and preached through this Diocese;
which is, That it is a Grievous Sin.] How does this consist with their having
so many Crosses in their Churches, and Houses, as they tell us they had; or
with their administering the Sacrament of the Eucharist; or with their Preaching
that it was Christ, and not the Son of God, that suffered upon the Cross.
grievous sin so much as to think or speak of our Savior's Holy Passion: and
as there are a great many of this Opinion, so the doing of it has formerly been
prohibited by impious Censures; all which is a manifest Error, and extremely
prejudicial to the Souls of all faithful Christians; and the fruit and profit
of Souls, arising from such Considerations, and Discourses, which is very
great, as well for that love and affection which they beget in us, for our
Savior, who suffered for our Salvation, as for the Example of those Virtues
which were so Illustrious in his Holy Passion, and the hatred of Sin, for which
he suffered so much, and the fear of the Divine Justice which he so rigorously
satisfied, and the confidence of our Salvation by such a plenteous Redemption;
and the use of the Sacraments, to which he applied the virtue of his Holy
Passion, and other infinite benefits which are derived from thence to our
Souls, which Error included another no less prejudicial, and which is also
common among the Nestorians; the condemning of Holy Images; for that if it were
an Impiety to think of the Passion of our Lord Christ, it must follow that all
those things are unlawful, that move or contribute thereunto; as, the Sign of
the Holy Cross; and all Images of the Holy Passion; all which is a gross and
manifest Heresy: Wherefore the Synod does recommend it to all Preachers,
Confessors, and Rectors of Churches, frequently to persuade their People to the
consideration of those Divine Mysteries; and to that end, they shall advise
them to the Devotion of the Rosary of our Lady the most Blessed Virgin Mary;
wherein are contained all the principal Mysteries of the Life of our Lord
Christ, with profitable Meditations upon them.

Decree VI.
AMong the many Errors sown in this Diocese, and left in the Books thereof, by
the perfidious Nestorian Heretics, there being several against our Lady, the
most Blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, the only Remedy of Christians, the
Mother of Mercy, and the Advocate of Sinners, the Queen of Angels. The Synod
does therefore declare, That it is the Doctrine of the Catholic Faith, that
the Holy Virgin was never at any time stained with the guilt of any actual sin;
and that it is Pious to believe, that she was also Conceived without Original
Sin; it seeming to be most agreeable to the Dignity of the Mother of God, that
it should be so; though it is true, that Holy Mother Church Has not as yet
determined] It is much she has not, since the Invention of the Holy Relics in
the Mountains of Granada, among which there was a Book in Arabic of S.
Cecilius, who was consecrated Bishop of Eliberis by St. Peter and St. Paul at
Rome, with this Title, De Dono Gloriae and Dono Tormenti; in which there is the
following Definition of the Immaculate Conception made by all the Apostles,
being met together to Solemnize the Exequies of the Blessed Virgin: Illa Virgo
Maria, Illa Sancta, Illa electa a primo, Originarioque peccato praeservata
fuit, and ab omni culpa libera; atque haec veritas Apostolorum Concilium est,
quam qui negaverit, maledictus and excommunicatus erit, and salutem non
consequetur, sed in aeternum damnabitur: All which Relics, and this Book
among the rest, were after a severe and impartial Examination, approved of, and
received as genuine, by a late Provincial Synod in Spain.
has not as yet determined any thing about that matter. Furthermore, the
Catholic Faith teaches, that she was always, before, in, and after
Childbirth, a most pure Virgin, and that she brought forth the Son of God,
made Man, without any Pain, or Passion; having none of those things which are
common to other Women after Childbirth, nor no need of any created assistance
to help her to bring forth, or afterward, there being nothing in her but what
was pure, the Eternal Word, made Flesh, springing out of her Womb, the
Claustrum of her pure Virginity being shut, when the time, determined in the
Consistory of the Holy Trinity was come, to the great Spiritual Joy and
satisfaction of the said Blessed Virgin; for which reason she ought truly to be
styled the Mother of God, and not only the Mother of Christ; and that when she
departed this Life, she was immediately carried up into Heaven, where by a
particular privilege due to her Merits, she enjoys God both in Body and Soul,
without waiting for the general Resurrection; there being no reason why that
Body, out of which there was most Holy Flesh formed, for the Son of God made
Man, should as other Bodies be dissolved into Dust and Ashes, but that it
should be immediately exalted and glorified, and placed high above all the
Quires of Angels, as Holy Mother Church sings and confesses; concerning the
whole of which matter, the Impious Nestorian Heretics have spoke, and writ,
even in the Breviaries used in this Bishopric, a great many Blasphemies and
Heresies.

Decree VII.
THe Synod is with great sorrow sensible of that Heresy, and perverse Error,
sown by the Schismatics in this Diocese, to the great prejudice of Souls;
which is, That there was one Law of St. Thomas, and another of St. Peter, which
made Two different.] By all this which the Synod calls Two Laws, the Christians
of St. Thomas meant only, That the Churches planted by the Apostles in diverse
Regions, had nothing of Superiority or Jurisdiction over one another; which is
a most certain and ancient truth.
two different and distinct Churches, and both immediately from Christ; and
that the one had nothing to do with the other; neither did the Prelate of the
one owe any obedience to the Prelate of the other; and that they who had
followed the Law of St. Peter, had endeavored to destroy the Law of St.
Thomas, for which they had been punished by him; all which is a manifest Error,
Schism, and Heresy, there being but one Law to all Christians, which is that
which was given and declared by Jesus Christ the Son of God, and preached by
the Holy Apostles all over the World, as one Faith, one Baptism, there being
but one Lord of all, and one Catholic and Apostolic Church, of which our Lord
Christ, God and Man, who Founded it, is the only Spouse; and one only Universal
Pastor, to whom all other Prelates owe obedience, the Pope and Bishop of Rome,
Successor in the Chair of St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles; to whom our
Lord Jesus Christ bequeathed that Supreme Authority, and by him to his
Successors; which Catholic Doctrine is necessary to Eternal Life: Wherefore
the Synod does command all Parish Priests, and Preachers, to Treat often of
this matter, by reason of the great need there is of having this Bishopric
well instructed therein.

Decree VIII.
FOr that, till the very time of the most Illustrious Metropolitan entering into
this Diocese, there was a certain Heresy twice repeated in the Holy Sacrifice
of the Mass, and twice more in the Divine Office, in calling the Patriarch of
Babylon, the Universal Pastor, and Head of the Catholic Church, in all places,
and as often as they happen to name him; a Title that is due only to the most
Holy Father, the Bishop of Rome, Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, St.
Peter, and Vicar of Christ on Earth: the Synod does therefore command in virtue
of Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, that
no Person of this Bishopric, Secular or Ecclesiastical, shall from
henceforward presume, by Word or Writing, either in the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, or in the Divine Office, or in any other occasion, to bestow that Title
on the said Patriarch of Babylon, or on any other Prelate, besides our Lord,
the Bishop of Rome; and whosoever shall dare to contravene this Order, shall be
declared Excommunicate, and held for a Schismatic and Heretic, and shall be
punished as such, according to the Holy Canons: And whereas the Patriarchs of
Babylon, to whom this Church was subject, are Nestorians, the Heads of that
cursed Sect, and Schismatics out of the Obedience of the Holy Roman Church,
and Aliens from our Holy Catholic Faith, and are for that reason Excommunicate
and accursed; and it not being lawful to join with such in the Church in
public as stand Excommunicate: Wherefore this Bishopric, upon its having now
yielded a perfect Obedience to the most Holy Father, the Pope, Christ's Vicar
upon Earth, to which it was obliged by Divine Authority, and upon pain of
Damnation, shall not from henceforward have any manner of dependence upon the
said Patriarch of Babylon; and the present Synod, does under the said precept
of Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred,
prohibit all Priests, and Curates, from henceforward to name the said Patriarch
of Babylon in the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, or in any other Divine Office, in
the Prayers of the Church, even without the false Title of Universal Pastor;
but instead thereof, shall name our Lord the Pope, who is our true Pastor, as
also of the whole Church, and after him, the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, for
the time being; and whosoever shall maliciously and knowingly act the contrary,
shall be declared Excommunicate, and otherwise punished at the pleasure of his
Prelate, according to his contumacy.

Decree IX.
WHereas all the Breviaries used in this Church are Nestorian, and by the
commands of Prelates of the same Sect, on a certain day the impious and false
Heretic Nestorius is Commemorated in this Bishopric, and a Day is kept to his
Honor, and at other times, Theodorus, Diodorus, Abbaratho, Abraham, Narsai,
Barchauma, Johanan, Hormisda, and Michael, who are also Nestorian Heretics,
were likewise Commemorated; Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodorus, being
commemorated on the Friday after the Nativity; and on the seventh Friday after
that, Abraham, and Narsai, and all the abovenamed; and all of them on every
Thursday in the Year, in the said Nestorian Office, and every day in the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Divine Office; and notwithstanding in some
places they have not of late named Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodorus, but do
still continue to name Abraham, Narsai, Abba Barchauma, Johanan, Hormisda, and
Michael, in the Blessing that the Priest gives to the People at the end of the
Mass; wherein they desire Hormisda to deliver them from evil, being his
Disciples; as also on all Fridays in the Year they commemorate as Saints, the
said Hormisda, Joseph, Michael, Johanan, Barchauma, Barianda, Rabba Hedsa,
Machai, Hixoiau, Caurixo, Avahixo, Lixo, Xaulixo, Barmun Lixo, Metidor, Cohada
Israel, Ezekiah Lixo, David Lixo, Barai Israel, Julianus Haudixo, etc. who were
all Nestorian Heretics, and as is evident from the said Masses, and from their
Lives, Commemorations, and Praises, bestowed upon them, the Heads of the said
Sect. Therefore the Synod in Virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of
Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, does prohibit all Priests, and
Curates, and all other Persons, as well Secular, as Ecclesiastics, in this
Diocese at any time, either in common, or in particular, to commemorate any of
the foresaid Heretics, or to keep a day to them, or to celebrate their
Festivities, with any Solemnity, or to make any mention of them in the Divine
Offices, or in the Mass or any where else, or to direct any Prayers to them,
either in common, or particular, or to make any Vows, Promises, Offerings, or
any Nercha's to them; or to have their Images either in the Churches, or in
their Houses; and in no wise to give them that Worship, and Veneration, which
is due to Saints; and that they raze their Names out of their Books, Calendars,
and Offices; and that their Masses be cut out of their Breviaries, and Missals,
and burnt, and their Commemorations extinguished, that so their Memory may
perish among the faithful, all of them having been cursed and excommunicate
Heretics, and condemned by Holy Mother Church, and are At this time burning]
This rash Judgment brings to my mind what the Conde de Ereicera, in his History
printed about fourteen years ago at Lisbon, said of King Charles having spent
some time in Devotion upon the Scaffold, that seeing he died a Heretic, that
Devotion was of no other benefit to him, but as it prolonged his life a few
minutes: But though our Princes for I have reason to believe they heard of it,
did not think fit to resent this Sauciness, as well as Impiety, so far as to
have the Author questioned for it; yet it would seem that God would not suffer
it to go long unpunished; who a few years after, suffered that great Minister
to go out of the World after such a manner, that they must have a great deal of
Charity indeed, that can think well of the future state of his Soul; for the
unhappy Man Murdered himself; which is a thing that very seldom happens in
Portugal.
at this time burning in the torments of Hell, for their Crimes and Heresies,
and for their having been the Followers of such] The Church of Rome is not
without Heretics in her Martyrologies, and Calendars; for, not to speak of
Eusebius Caesariensis, St. George, Lucifer Calaritanus, Barsanuphius, and
others; the Learned Valesius, in his Tract of the Roman Martyrology, gives the
following Account of Theodotus Bishop of Laodicea: Jam vero illa quae in dicto
Martyrologio, Adonis sc. and Roswedi, leguntur secundo die Novembris. Laodiceae
Theodoti Episcopi, qui art Medicus fuit, descripta sunt ex Ruffini, lib 7.
cap. ult. Sed Compilator iste non animadvertit Theodotum hunc Laodi^eae
Episcopum, cujus eo loco laudationem intexuit Eusebius Arianarum partium
praecipuum fautorem fuisse; quippe qui and ab initio Arianum dogma tutatus est,
and post Nicaenum Concilium, conspiratione cum Arianis facta, Eustathium de
Antiochena sede dejecerit; ut scribit Theodoretus lib. 1. hist. cap. 24. Hic
est Theodotus cui Eusebius libros suos de Praeparatione Evangelica nuncupavit;
and cujus meminit Suidas in voce, (...). Idem quoque Error irrepsit in
Martyrologium Romanum, quod Patrum memoria, jussu Sixti quinti editum, and
Baronii notationibus illustratum est; nec satis mirari possum quonam modo id
Baronii diligentiam fugerit. Furthermore, The Church of Rome has several Saints
in her present Calendars, and Martyrologies, that were never in being, or were
never of humane race; and here not to mention St. Almanakius, or St. Almanak,
upon the 1st. of January; nor St. Zinoris, on the 24th. of the same Month; on
the 24th. of July, in the present Reformed Roman Martyrology, it is said,
Amiterni in vestinis Passio Sanct^rum Militum Octoginta trium; among whom (as
Baronius learnedly observes) Florentinus and Foelix were two of the most
Eminent. Now in the ancient Martyrology published by Maria Florentinus, it is
said upon the same day; It Amiternina civitate Miliario 83o ab urbe Romana via
Salutaria natalis Sancti Victorini; and in another ancient one, called
Martinian^^, it is writ, In Amiternina civitate Mil. 83 ab urbe Romana via
Salutaria Sancti Victurini; and in the Queen of Sweden's Martyrology, is writ,
In Amiterna civitate Mil. 83 ab urbe Roma Sancti Victurini; and in the Corbey
Martyrology, thus; In Amiternina civitate Miliario Octogesimo tertio ab urbe
Rom^ via Salutaria natalis Sancti Victorini Martyris. So that here we have
Eighty-three Italian Miles Canonized, and made Eighty-three Martyrs, and
Soldiers, with their Captain and Lieutenants Names.

Again, On the 16th. of Feb. in the present Reformed Roman Martyrology, it is
said; In Aegypto Sancti Juliani Martyris, cum aliis quinque Millibus: Now if
this is the Julianus that was Pamphilius's Companion, as doubtless it is, they
must then have increased his Company mightily, for they were but five that
suffered with him in Egypt, who it is probable were Soldiers; and so the
contracted word Mill. came to be taken for Mill: This makes me suspect that
there may be some such mistake in St. Vrsula's Army of Eleven thousand Virgins.
For some of her Saints who were Heathens, see the Remarks upon 25 Decree, Act.
8.


followers of such a cursed Sect; the Synod does furthermore command, that
instead of them, on the Friday next after the Nativity, St. Athanasius, St.
Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil, St. John Chrysostom, and St. Cyril of Alexandria,
shall be Commemorated; and on the seventh Friday following, St. Austin, St.
Ambrose, St. Gregory, and St. Ephrem, who was mentioned by them among the
Heretics, and on Wednesdays, All Saints and Confessors together; and in the
Commemorations of the Divine Offices, and Mass, they shall Commemorate all the
forenamed Saints, in the place of the abovementioned Heretics; neither shall
any one that shall presume to do the contrary, be absolved from the Censures he
has incurred, until he has undergone a condign Penance, or such a one as his
Prelate shall think fit to impose upon him, and shall thereupon be obliged to
curse all the said Heretics, and their damnable Sect, and to make Oath of the
Faith publicly, and to submit to all other punishments that his Rebellion
shall deserve, and if he is an Ecclesiastic, he shall moreover be suspended
from his Orders, and Benefices, and punished according to the Holy Canons.

Decree X.
WHereas the Church of Angamale, called the Archbishop's, was built by
Mar-Abraham, and dedicated to Hormisda the Abbot, commonly called St. Hormusio,
who was a Nestorian Heretic, and a great Ringleader of that Sect, and for
that reason was abhorred by all Catholics, who are called Romans, as is
reported in his Life writ in the Surian Tongue, and which was ordained to be
burnt by the most Illustrious Metropolitan, upon the account of the manifold
Heresies and Blasphemies contained therein, and the many false Miracles said to
be wrought by him, in confirmation of the Nestorian Sect: Therefore the Synod
does in virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication, to be ipso facto
incurred, prohibit the Observation of the two Festivities that have been
dedicated to his Memory, the one upon the first of September, the other sixteen
days after Easter; and the dedicating of any Church to him, commanding the
abovenamed Church to be dedicated to St. Hormisda the Martyr, who was also a
Persian, and whose Festivity is celebrated upon the 8th. of August, upon which
day the Feast of the said Church shall be observed; and on the Retablo they are
to make the Picture, wherein the Martyrdom of the said Saint shall be drawn to
the best advantage, that so the People may learn to what Saint the said Church
is dedicated, and all the Prayers and Devotion that used to be performed upon
the Festivities of the Heretic Hormisda, may be directed to this Glorious
Saint.

Decree XI.
SEeing in the Creed, or Holy Symbol of Faith, ordained by the Sacred Apostles,
and declared by the Holy Councils, which is sung in the Mass, all the principal
Mysteries and Articles of our Faith are contained, it is not fit that any thing
should be added to it, or taken from it, but that it should be sung in this
Bishopric as it is all over the Universal Church; wherefore the Synod does
Order, that the words which are wanting in the Creed that is said in the Mass
be added to it; where speaking of Christ, it it said, that he was born of the
Father before all Times, there is wanting, God of God, Light of Light, very God
of very God, that so it may in all things be conformable to what is sung in the
Universal Church, using also the word Consubstantial to the Father, and not
what is said instead thereof in the Surian, Son of the Essence of the Father.

Decree XII.
NOtwithstanding it is contrary to the Sacred Canons, That the Children of
Christians should go to School to Heathen Masters: Nevertheless, seeing this
Church is under so many Heathen Kings, who many times will not suffer any but
Infidels to be Schoolmasters; wherefore the Synod does command and declare,
That in all Schools, whether for Reading or Writing, wherein the Masters have
Pagods, to which they oblige their Children at their coming into the School to
pay their Reverence, as the Custom is; that it shall not be lawful for
Christian Parents or Guardians to send Christian Children to such Schools, upon
pain of being proceeded against as Idolaters; but if there should be any such
Schools, wherein the Heathen Masters will consent that Christian Children shall
pay no Reverence, nor be obliged to any Heathen Ceremony, in case there is no
Christian Master near, they may be sent to such Schools, their Parents
instructing them that they must pay no reverence but only to the Master, and
that they must use none of the Ceremonies of the Heathen Children, that so they
may not Suck in Idolatry.] They would have done well to have considered,
whether the introducing of the Adoration of Images into a Christianity that was
planted amidst Heathens, and under Idolatrous Princes, how Innocent soever it
may be in other places, was safe or not in Malabar, before they did it, and
whether the reconciling them to Images might not dispose them to Heathenism.
such in Idolatry as Mothers Milk. Furthermore, the Synod does earnestly
recommend it to all Towns and Villages, to do all that is in their Power to
have their Children Educated by Christian Masters, and as for Reading and
Writing, to have the Parish Priests to teach them to do that in their Houses:
But as to those masters who do oblige Christian Children to do reverence to
their Pagods; the Synod in virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of
Excommunication to be Ipso facto incurred, does command all Fathers of
Families, and others that have charge of Children, not to consent to their
going to such Schools; and doing the contrary, let them be declared
Excommunicate, and be rigorously punished by the Prelate, neither shall such
Children be suffered to enter the Church; as to which matter the Vicars and
Priests ought to be extremely vigilant, to prevent Childrens being Educated in
Idolatry; and wherever there is a Christian Schoolmaster in any Town, or
near it, the Children of Christians are not to go to School to Infidels.

Decree XIII.
THe Synod being certainly informed, that there are some Christian
Schoolmasters, who to conform themselves to others, and to have the more
Scholars, do set up Pagods and Idols in their Schools, to which the Heathen
Children pay reverence, does command all the said Schoolmasters, so soon as it
shall be intimated to them, upon pain of Excommunication, to remove the said
Pagods Idols, and Reverence out of their Schools, and not to give way to
Heathen Children, paying any such adoration; and whosoever shall be found
guilty thereof, shall be declared Excommunicate, and denied the Communion of
the Church, and of all Christians, and dying, shall not be buried in holy
Ground, nor have Christian Burial, nor have any Prayers said for them, and let
this Decree be published by the Vicars of the Churches to which such do belong.

Decree XIV.
THe Purity of the Faith being preserved by nothing more than by Books of sound
and holy Doctrine; and on the contrary, there being nothing whereby the Minds
of People are more corrupted, than by Books of suspicious and Heretical
Doctrines; Errors being by their means easily insinuated into the Hearts of the
Ignorant, that read or hear them: Wherefore the Synod knowing that this
Bishopric is full of Books writ in the Surian Tongue by Nestorian Heretics,
and Persons of other Devilish Sects, which abound with Heresies, Blasphemies
and false Doctrines, does command in virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of
Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, that no Person, of what quality and
condition soever, shall from henceforward presume to keep, translate, read or
hear read to others, any of the following Books.

The Book entitled, The Infancy of our Savior, Or The History of our Lady;
condemned formerly by the ancient Saints, for being full of Blasphemies,
Heresies, and fabulous Stories, where among others it is said, that the
Annunciation of the Angel was made in the Temple of Jerusalem, where our Lady
was, which contradicts the Gospel of St. Luke, which says, it was made in
Nazareth; as also that Joseph had actually another Wife and Children, when he
was betrothed to the Holy Virgin; and that he often reproved the Child Jesus
for his naughty Tricks; that the Child Jesus went to School to the Rabbis, and
learnt of them, with a thousand other Fables and Blasphemies of the same
Nature, and things unworthy of our Lord Christ, whereas the Gospel says, that
the Jews were astonished at his Wisdom, asking how he came by so much Learning,
having never been taught; that the Devil tempted Christ before his Fast of
forty days, which is contrary to the Gospel; that St. Joseph, to be satisfied
whether the Virgin had committed Adultery, carried her before the Priests, who
according to the Law gave her the Water of Jealousy to drink; that our Lady
brought forth with pain, and parting from her Company, not being able to go
farther, she retired to a Stable at Bethlehem; that neither our Lady, nor any
other Saint is in Heaven enjoying God, but are all in a Terrestrial Paradise,
where they are to remain till the day of Judgment, with other Errors, too many
to be related: But it is the Synod's pleasure to instance in some of the chief
Errors contained in the Books that it condemns, that so all may be satisfied of
the reason why they are prohibited to be read, or kept upon pain of
Excommunication, and that all may avoid and burn them with the greater Horror,
and for other just and necessary respects.

Also the Book of John Barialdan, wherein it is said in diverse places, That
there were two Persons, a Divine and Humane, in Christ, which is contrary to
the Catholic Faith, which confesses one only Divine Person: It is also said,
That the Names of Christ and Emanuel are the Names of the Humane Person only,
and for that reason that the most sweet Name Jesus is not to be adored; that
the Union of the Incarnation is common to all the Three Divine Persons, who
were all Incarnated; that our Lord Christ is the adopted, and not the Natural
Son of God; that the Union of the Incarnation is accidental, and is only that
of Love betwixt the Divine and Humane Persons.

Also the Book entitled, The Procession of the Holy Spirit; wherein it is
endeavored to be proved at large, that the Holy Spirit proceeds only from
the Father, and not from the Son, which is contrary to the Catholic Truth,
which teaches, that he proceeds from the Father and the Son.

Also the Book entitled Margarita Fidei, or The Jewel of Faith; wherein it is
pretended to be proved at large, That our Lady, the most Holy Virgin, neither
is, nor ought to be styled the Mother of God, but the Mother of Christ; that in
Christ there are two Persons, the one of the Word, and the other of Jesus; that
the Union of the Incarnation is only an accidental Union of Love and Power, and
not a substantial Union; that there are three distinct Faiths, which is divided
into three Professions, the Nestorian, Jacobite and Roman; that the Nestorian
is the true Faith that was taught by the Apostle, and that the Roman is false
and Heretical, and was introduced by force of Arms, and the Authority of
Heretical Emperors, into the greatest part of the World; that to Excommunicate
Nestorius, is to Excommunicate the Apostles and Prophets, and the whole
Scripture; that they that do not believe his Doctrine, shall not inherit
Eternal Life; that they that follow Nestorius, received their Faith from the
Apostles, which has been preserved to this day in the Church of Babylon of the
Syrians, That Matrimony neither is, nor can be a Sacrament; that the sign of
the Cross is one of the Sacraments of the Church instituted by Christ; that the
Fire of Hell is Metaphorical, not real; that the Roman Church is fallen from
the Faith, condemning it likewise for not celebrating in leavened Bread,
according to what the Church has received from the Apostles, for which it is
said the Romans are Heretics.

Also the Book of the Fathers, wherein it is said, That our Lady neither is,
nor ought to be called the Mother of God; that the Patriarch of Babylon of the
Nestorians, is the Universal Head of the Church immediately under Christ; that
the Fire of Hell is not real, but spiritual; that it is Heresy to say, that
God was born, or dyed; that there are two Persons in Christ.

Also a Book of the Life of Abbot Isaias, commented by a Nestorian, wherein it
is said, That the Union is common to all the Three Persons; that St. Cyril of
Alexandria, who condemned Nestorius, was an impious Heretic, and is now in
Hell, for having taught, that there is but One Person in Christ; whereas, as
often as Nestorius, Theodorus and Diodorus are named, they are styled Saints,
and blessed; by whose Authority it is there proved, that the Saints shall not
enjoy God before the day of Judgment; and that till then they shall be in an
obscure place, which they call Eden, near to the Terrestrial Paradise; and that
by so much the worse as any one has been, he is tormented The less for it in
Hell.] This of fixing something that is justly abominable to all Mankind, upon
her Adversaries, has been the constant practice of the Church of Rome: So the
Emperor Michael Balbus, because he was an Enemy to Image Worship, is said to
have laughed at the Prophets, not to have believed there were any Devils, and
to have placed Judas among the Saints; the Templars, upon the Pope and the
French Kings conspiring together to destroy their Order, are said to have
obliged all their Novices to blaspheme God, to renounce Christ, the Virgin
Mary, and all the Saints in Heaven, to spit and trample upon the Crucifix, and
to declare that Christ was a false Prophet; the Albigenses are said to have
held it lawful to deny their Faith, when interrogated upon it by a Magistrate,
to have held, that promiscuous Venery was lawful, but that Matrimony was Hell
and Damnation; that the Souls of Men were as Mortal as their Bodies; that the
way of choosing their chief Priests, was by tossing an Infant from one to
another, and that he in whose hands the Infant expired, had that Office, and
that the Devil was unjustly thrown out of Heaven.
the less for it in Hell, by reason of his greater conformity and friendship
with the Devils; that the Word was not made Man, and that it is Blasphemy to
affirm it; that Christ conquered all the Passions of Sin by a Power derived
from God, and not by his own strength; that St. Cyril was a Heretic in
teaching, that there was but One Person in Christ; that the Divine and Humane
Nature were united in Christ accidentally by Love; that the whole Trinity was
incarnated; that God dwelt in Christ as in a Rational Temple, giving him power
to do all the good things he did; that the Souls of the Just will be in a
Terrestrial Paradise till the day of Judgment; that the Wicked when they dye in
Mortal Sin, are carried to a place called Eden, where they suffer only by the
sense of the punishments they know they are to undergo after the day of
Judgment.

Also the Book of Synods, wherein there is a forged Letter of Pope Caius, with
false Subscriptions of a great many other Western Bishops, directed to those of
Babylon, wherein it is acknowledged, that the Church of Rome ought to be
subject to that of Babylon, which with all that are subject to her, are
immediately under Christ, without owing any reverence to the Roman Bishop; they
say likewise, That the Roman Church is fallen from the Faith, having perverted
the Canons of the Apostles, by the force of Heretical Emperors Arms; and that
the Romans are Heretics, for not celebrating in leavened Bread, which has been
the inviolable Custom of the Church derived from our Savior, and his Holy
Apostles; that all the Bishops that followed Nestorius, ought to be much
esteemed, and when named, to be styled Saints; and to have their Relics
reverenced: That Matrimony is not a Sacrament, that it may be dissolved for the
bad conditions of the Parties: That Usury is Lawful, and there is no Sin in it.

Also the Book of Timothy the Patriarch, where, in three Chapters, The most
Holy Sacrament of the Altar is blasphemed; it being impiously asserted in them,
That the true Body of our Lord Christ is not there, but only the Figure thereof.

Also the Letter which they pretend came down from Heaven, called the Letter of
the Lord's day, wherein the Roman Church is accused of having fallen from the
Faith, and having violated the Domingo, or Lord's Day Letter.

Also the Book called Maclamatas; wherein the distinction of two Persons in
Christ, and the accedental Union of the Incarnation are pretended to be proved
at large, and are confirmed with several false and Blasphemous Similitudes.

Also the Book entitled Vguarda, or the Rose; wherein it is said, That there
are two Persons in Christ; that the Union of the Incarnation was Accidental;
that our Lady brought forth with Pain; and the Sons of Joseph, which he had by
his other Wife, being in company, went for a Midwife to her, with other
Blasphemies.

Also the Book entitled Camiz; wherein it is said, That the Divine Word, and
the Son of the Virgin are not the same; and that our Lady brought forth with
Pain.

Also the Book entitled Menra; wherein it is said, That our Lord Christ is
only the Image of the Word; that the Substance of God dwelt in Christ as in a
Temple; that Christ is next to the Divinity; that Christ was made the Companion
of God.

Also the Book of Orders; wherein it is said, That the Form, and not the
Matter, is necessary to Orders; and the Forms therein are likewise Erroneous;
that there are only two Orders, Diaconate and Priesthood; that Altars of Wood,
and not of Stone, are to be Consecrated; there are also Prayers in it for those
that are converted from any other Sect to Nestorianism, in form of an
Absolution from the Excommunication they had incurred for not having followed
Nestorius, and of a reconciliation to the Church.

Also the Book of Homilies; wherein it is said, That the Holy Eucharist is only
the Image of Christ, and is distinguished from him, as an Image is from a true
Man; and that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ is not there, nor no where else
but in Heaven: That the whole Trinity was Incarnate; that Christ is only the
Temple of the Divinity, and God only by Representation; that the Soul of Christ
descended not into Hell, but was carried to the Paradise of Eden; that
whosoever affirms the contrary, errs, and that we therefore err in our Creed:
There are therein likewise some Letters of some Heretical Synods, in which it
is said, That the Patriarch of Babylon is not subject to the Roman Bishop; with
an Oath to be taken to the said Patriarch, as the Head of the Church, wherein
People Swear to obey him, and him only, and not the Bishop of Rome.

Also a Book entitled, An Exposition of the Gospels; wherein it is every where
pretended to be proved, That there are two Persons in Christ, and that Christ
as a pure Creature, was obliged to adore God, and stood in need of Prayer; that
he was the Temple of the most Holy Trinity; that Christ's Soul when he died,
descended not into Hell, but was carried to the Paradise of Eden; which was the
place he promised to the Thief on the Cross: That our Lady, the Virgin,
deserved to be reproved for having vainly imagined, that she was Mother to one
that was to be a great King; looking upon Christ as no other than a pure Man;
and presuming that he was to have a Temporal Empire, as well as the res^ of the
Jews: That the Evangelists did not Record all Christ's Actions in Truth as they
were, they not having been present at several of them; which was the reason why
they differed from one another so much: That the Wise Men that came from the
East, received no favor from God, for the Journey they took; neither did they
believe in Christ; that Christ was the adopted Son of God, it being as
impossible that he should be Gods Natural Son, as it is that Just Men should be
so; that he received new Grace in Baptism, which he had not before; that he is
only the Image of the Word; and the pure Temple of the Holy Spirit; that the
Holy Eucharist is only the Image of the Body of Christ, which is only in Heaven
at the right hand of the Father, and not here on Earth: That Christ, as pure
Man, did not know when the day of Judgment was to be: That when St. Thomas put
his Hand into Christ's Side, and said, My Lord, and my God! he did not speak to
Christ; for that he that was raised was not God; but it was only an Exclamation
made to God upon his beholding such a Miracle: That the Authority that Christ
gave to St. Peter over the Church, was the same that he gave to other Priests;
so that his Successors have no more Power or Jurisdiction than other Bishops:
That our Lady, the Virgin, is not the Mother of God: That the first Epistle of
St. John, and that of St. James, are not the Writings of thole Holy Apostles,
but of some other Persons of the same Name, and therefore are not Canonical.

Also the Book of Hormisda Raban, who is styled a Saint; wherein it is said,
That Nestorius was a Saint, and Martyr, and suffered for the Truth; and that
St. Cyril, who persecuted him, was the Priest and Minister of the Devil, and is
now in Hell: That Images are filthy and abominable Idols, and ought not to be
adored; and that St. Cyril, as a Heretic invented and introduced them: There
are also many false Miracles Recorded in this Book, which are said to have been
wrought by Hormisda in confirmation of the Nestorian Doctrine; with an Account
of what he suffered from the Catholics, for being obstinate in his Heresy.

Also the Book of Lots, into which they put that they call the Ring of Solomon,
with a great many more Superstitions, for the choice of good Days to Marry
upon, and for several other uses; wherein are contained many Blasphemies, and
Heathenish Observances; as also all other Books of Lots, and for choosing of
Days, the Synod prohibits under the same Censure.

Also the Book written after the manner of Flos Sanctorum.] Let their Legends
^e as fabulous as they will, I am sure they cannot be worse than those of the
Church of Rome; namely, her Flos Sanctorum, which is certainly the dullest
Romance that ever saw the Sun.

Melchior Canus, the Bishop of Cana^ies, in his 11th. Book de Locis
Theologicis, gives this just Character of them: Dolenter hoc dico potius, quam
contumeliose, multo a Laertio severius vitas Philosophorum scriptas, quam a
Christianis vitas Sanctorum; longeque incorruptius and integrius Suetonium res
Caesarum exposuisse, quam exposuerint Catholici; non res dico Imperatorum, sed
Martyrum, Virginum, and Confessorum. Illi enim in pr^bis, aut Philosophis, aut
Principibus, nec vitia, nec suspiciones vitiorum tacent, in improbis etiam
colores virtutum produnt. Nostri autem plerique vel affectibus inserviunt, vel
de industria quoque ita multa consingunt, ut eorum me nimirum non solum p^deat,
sed etiam taedeat. In illo enim Miraculorum monstra saepius quam vera miracula
legas: hanc auream sc. legendac homo scripsit serrei oris, plumbei cordis,
animi certe parum severi and prudentis.


Flos Sanctorum; wherein are contained the Lives of a great many Nestorian
Heretics, who are there called Saints; and not only that entire Book, but also
any of the Lives contained therein, which may be current separately; namely,
those of Abraham, styled the Great, of George Abbot Cardeg, whom they call a
Martyr; Jacob, Abban, Saurixo, Johanan, Gauri, Raban, Sabacat, Ocama, Daniel,
Barcaula, Raban Nuna, Jacob, Rabai the Great, Dadixo, Jomarusia, Schalita,
Ihab, Abimelech the Expositor, Abraham, another Abraham Natpraya, Jobcarder,
John, Ircasca, Nestorius, Jaunam, Barcurra, Raban Gabarona, Schabibi, Barcima,
Titus, Raban Sapor, Gregory the Metropolitan, George, Monach, Xahucalmaran,
Joseph, Nathanael, Simon Abbot Chabita, Zinai Abbot, Audixo, John Crascaya,
Barcahade, Italaah, John Sahadui, Aha, Xalita, Joanacoreta, Xari, another John,
Elias, Joadarmah, Ananixo, another John, Barhetta, Rabai Simeon, Narsai Naban,
Raban Theodorus, Rabai Doctor, Abda, Abolaminer, Rabantarsaha of Cadarvi,
Xuuelmaran, Sergiududa, Xuuealmaran, Dadixo, another Abraham, Ezekieldasa,
Rabai Perca, David Barnutar, Hormisda, Pition, Solomon Abbot, Raban Machixo,
another George, Muchiqua, another Abraham, Apuimacan, Xaurixo, Ixosauran,
Josedec, Raban Camixo, Bardirta Abbot, Abraham Barmaharail, George Raban, Zliva
Abbot, Guiriaco Rabanbaut, Joseph Abbot, Zaca, Nasbian, Jesus Abbot, Aaron
Bucatixo, Ascan, another Abraham, Xonxa Abbot, Amanixo Gasraya, Sahedona
Bishop, Joseph, Azaya, Isahaha Bishop, Jacob, whom they call a Prophet,
Ixaiahu, Eunuco Ramain, Jobar Malchi: Who were all Nestorian Heretics, and the
chief followers of that cursed Sect, as is evident from their Lives, which are
full of Heresies, Blasphemies, and false and Fabulous Miracles.] For people not
only to condemn that in others, which they themselves are visibly and
infinitely more guilty of; but to do it with the Air, and assurance of an
unquestionable Innocence, cannot be denied to be no common privilege; for were
all the false Miracles, that have been pretended to be wrought by all the other
Sects of Religion, put together, they would fall infinitely short of what may
be met with in any single Saint's Life, or in confirmation of any single
Doctrine of the Church of Rome; most of which too, are what Canus said of them,
rather Monstra Miraculorum than vera Miracula, or any thing else.
fabulous Miracles, with which they pretend to Authorize their Sect.

Also the Book called Parisman, or the Persian Medicine, which is full of
Sorceries, teaching certain Methods whereby one may do mischief to their
enemies, and may gain Women, and for a great many other lewd and prohibited
purposes; there are likewise in it strange Names of Devils, of whom they
affirm, that whosoever shall carry the Names of seven of them about him writ in
a Paper, shall be in no danger of any Evil: It contains also many Superstitious
Exorcisms.] I do not think they had an Exorcism in any of their Books, that was
more absurd than that we meet with in the Sacerdotale Romanum, printed at
Venice no longer ago than the Year 1576. where the Priest when he meets wi^h a
sullen Devil, that will not tell his Name, nor give any account of himself, is
ordered to fall upon him with Praecipio tibi sub poena Excommunicationis
majoris and minoris, ut respondeas, and dicas mihi Nomen and Diem and Horam
exicus tui: I shall not make that reflection upon this Exorcism, which is very
obvious at the first hearing of it. It was with some such Exorcism as this,
doubtless, that they got out of the Devil that raised the terrible Persecution
in Japan, that he was sent thither from England, where he had been employed a
great many Years in persecuting of Roman Catholics; upon which the Jesuit Luys
Pineyro, the Writer of the Persecution, makes this grave Remark; That doubtless
it is with Devils as it is with Men; that some of them have particular Talents
for some particular works; and that this Devil's Talent must doubtless have
lain chiefly toward the raising of bloody Persecutions against Catholics, and
the Christian Faith.
Superstitious Exorcisms for the casting out of Devils; mixing some Godly words
with others that are not Intelligible; and with the Invocation of the most Holy
Trinity, oftentimes desiring the doing of lewd things, and enormous sins,
joining the Merits of Nestorius and his followers, many times, in the same
Prayer with those of the blessed Virgin, and those of their Devils, with those
of the Holy Angels; all which is very common in this Diocese; most Curates
having this Book, and making use of it to this very day; all which sort of
Books the Synod prohibits in this Diocese under the forementioned censures; and
whosoever from henceforwards shall be found to have any of them, besides the
censure they have incurred thereby, shall be severely punished by their Prelate.

Decree XV.
BUt the forementioned Heresies are not only to be met with in these Books, but
are likewise in the Common Prayer, and Breviaries that they use in their
Churches, which having been composed by Nestorian Heretics, are full of
Blasphemies, Heresies, Fables, and Apocryphal stories, whereby instead of
praising God, they are continually blaspheming him in their Divine Offices.

In the Book called the Great Breviary, it is said, That the Divine Word did
not assume Flesh, ignorantly pretending to prove it thus; because if the Word
had assumed Flesh, to what purpose was the Holy Spirit's overshadowing the
Virgin? In the same Breviary the whole Office of Advent is Heretical, it being
every where affirmed therein, that Christ had two Persons, and calling him
continually only the Temple of God; and in the Feast of the Nativity, there is
a proposition in one of the solemn Antiphona's, that directly contradicts St.
John, in which it is said, that the Word was not made Flesh, and that all that
believe the contrary, are disobedient to the Church, and are obstinate Rebels
against the Faith; so that the whole Offices of the Advent and Nativity are
little else than pure Blasphemy.

In the Book of Prayers for the great Fast, it is frequently said, that there
were two Persons, a Divine and Humane in Christ. It contains also several
Commemorations of Nestorius, and other Heretics his Followers, affirming
Marndeay, Theodorus and Diodorus, and other Nestorian Heretics, to have been
the Followers of St. Ephrem.

In the Greater Breviary, which they call Hudre and Gaza, or The Treasure of
Prayers, it is every where said, that there are two Persons in Christ, and one
representation of the Son of God; that he is the Image of the Word, and the
Temple of the same; that the Divine Person did enlighten the Humane, and that
Christ advanced in Grace and Knowledge by degrees; that our Lady never carried
God in her Womb, as Heretics affirm, Christ being a Man like to others, and
that she ought not to be called the Mother of God, but only the Mother of the
second Adam; that the whole Trinity assumed Humanity, and that St. Matthew
taught the Hebrews so; that God did not make himself Flesh, which he only took
as a Dwelling to cover his Glory; that God accompanied Christ on the Cross, but
had not taken the Humanity, neither was it God that suffered; that the Word of
the Father changed it self into Humanity, and by the Son of Mary redeemed
Mankind; that the Father Eternal took Flesh in the same manner as the Son; that
the Angel delivered his Message to the Virgin in the Temple, and not at
Nazareth; that the pains of travail opened the Womb of the Virgin, who brought
forth with labor after the manner of other Women; that In the most holy
Sacrament.] The Christians who live scattered about Mesopotamia and Assyria,
and whose Patriarch resides at the Monastery of St. Raban Hurnez the Persian,
in the Gordyaean Mountains, 40 miles above Niniveh, though Eutychians, and for
that reason Enemies to the Chaldean Christians, do agree with them in denying
Transubstantiation, as appears from the following Prayer taken out of their
Missal, and communicated to me by my Learned Friend Dr. Hide. Angeli and
homines laudabunt te, O Christ, Sacrificere pro nobis, qui per Sacramenta,
quae sunt in Ecclesia tua, docuisti nos, secundum magnificentiam tuam, quod
sicut in Pane, and Vino Natura sunt a te distincta, in Virtute and potentia
idem sunt tecum. Sic etiam Corpus quod a nobis, distinctum est a verbo in
substantia, cum illo tamen qui accipit illud, adunitum est in magnificentia and
potentia. Sic credimus and non metuimus ab iniquitate, quod in uno (sc. una
Hypostasi) sit filius fatemur, and non est duo sicut improbi, (id est, sicut
dicunt Nestoriani) non enim in completionibus Sacrificii, Corpus and Corpus
frangimus, sed unum per fidem, sicut docuisti nos in Evangelio tuo, laus tibi
qui per Sacramenta tua, instruxisti nos ut lau^emus nomen tuum.

Now I take this Testimony against Transubstantiation to be much the stronger
for it is being given by the Eutychians, to whose Heresy Transubstantiation,
had it been believed, would have given great Countenance; as indeed I cannot
but reckon those Heretics having no where made use of that Doctrine to support
their Heresy, to be a considerable Argument of its not having been believed
either by themselves, or by the Orthodox; for had the latter believed it, though
they had not done it themselves, they could not have failed to have used it as
Argumentum ad hominem, which is what they have no where done. It is true, this
is only a Negative Argument, but it is as true, that it is so circumstantiated
as to be of equal force with one that is positive. So again, I do not see how
we could have had a clearer proof of Transubstantiation, not having been
believed either by the Manichees, or the Orthodox, than we have from the
Manichees abstaining from the Cup in the Sacrament for no other reason, but
because they did not think it lawful to drink Wine, and from the Orthodoxes
proving against them from that very Institution that it was lawful, and
endeavoring to convince them by several Arguments, that it was their Duty to
receive the Cup in the Sacrament; and all this without ever so much as once
intimating, that the Liquor in the Cup, when it came to be received, was Blood
and not Wine.


in the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is not the true Body of
Christ; with a thousand more Blasphemies about it; that Nestorius was a
Preacher of Truth; and in several places God is praised for having declared the
Truth to Theodorus and Diodorus, who was Master to Nestorius; and in several
Prayers they beseech God to chastise those that believe otherwise than
Nestorius, and his Followers, whose Faith they say is founded on St. Peter's,
and the rest of the Apostles; Moreover it is said, that the Holy Virgin, and
her Spouse Joseph, appeared before the Priests, who could not tell how she had
conceived; and that Images are Idols, and ought not to be adored, nor so much
as kept in Churches or in Houses of Christians; there are likewise Offices of
Nestorius and his Followers, and Commemorations of several Heretics.

In the Office for Priests departed, it is sung, That in the most holy
Sacrament of the Altar, there is only the Virtue of Christ, but not his true
Body and Blood; all which Books and Breviaries, though they do well deserve to be
burnt, for these and other Errors that they contain, yet there being no other
at present in this Diocese, for the keeping up of Divine Service, and the
celebration of Religious Offices, until such time as they shall be furnished
with new Breviaries, which the Synod desires they may speedily, and that some
may be Printed for them at St. Peter's in Rome; the Synod does order them to be
corrected and purged from all their Errors, and Commemorations of Heretics,
and the entire Offices for all such; and the Offices of Advent and the Nativity
to be entirely tore out of their Breviaries and burnt, entreating the most
Illustrious Metropolitan to see it done at his next Visitation in all the
Churches of the Diocese, commanding all Curates in virtue of Obedience, and
upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, to produce the said
Books, and all the other Books that they have, as well of public as of private
Use, and of Prayers, as well as of the Mass, before the said Lord Metropolitan
at his Visitation, in order to their being corrected by Persons appointed for
that work, in conformity to what is here ordained.

Decree XVI.
FOR the preservation of the Purity of the Faith, the Synod does command all
Priests, Curates, and all other Persons, of whatsoever Condition, or Quality,
within this Bishopric, in virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of
Excommunication within two Months after the publication thereof shall come to
their knowledge, to deliver all the Books they have written in the Syrian
Tongue, either with their own hands, or by some other Person, to the most
Illustrious Metropolitan, which they may do at the Visitation that he intends
to hold speedily, or to Father Francisco Roz, of the Society of Jesus,
Professor of the Syrian Tongue in the College of Vaipicotta, or to the said
College, in order to their being perused and corrected, or destroyed, as shall
be thought most convenient, the Books of Common Prayer being excepted, which
are to be emended in the form abovesaid; and under the same Precept of
Obedience, and pain of Excommunication, the Synod does command, That no Person,
of what Condition or Quality soever within this Bishopric, shall presume to
translate any Book into the Syrian Tongue, without express License from the
Prelate, with a Declaration of the Book to which it is granted, the Books of
Holy Scripture and Psalms only excepted; and until such time as this Church
shall be provided with a Bishop, the most Illustrious Metropolitan does commit
the Power of granting all such Licenses to the Reverend Father Francisco Roz,
of the Society of Jesus, by reason of his great skill in those Books, and in
the Chaldee and Syrian Languages.

Decree XVII.
SEeing the Purity of Faith and good Manners does very much depend on the
Doctrine that is preached to the People; wherefore the Synod, being informed
that there are several ignorant Curates who do take upon them to preach, and
make Discourses in public, wherein they teach several Errors and Heresies that
they meet with in Books that they do not understand, and several fabulous and
Apocryphal things, those especially which they take out of the Book of the
Infancy of our Savior, and other Apocryphal and Heretical writings, does
command that none presume to preach, or make any set Discourse to the People,
but who are Licensed by the Prelate in Writing, who shall first examine them
diligently, as to their sufficiency and Doctrine, according to the Holy Council
of Trent; and when there shall happen to be no Prelate during the vacancy of
the Sea, the most Illustrious Metropolitan does commit the care thereof to the
Rector of the Jesuits College of Vaipaicotta in this Diocese, that so he, and
such of the Fathers as he shall name, may make the said Examinations, of which
they shall give a Certificate sealed by the Rector; and at the next Visitation
the Lord Metropolitan shall name such as shall appear to him to be most for the
benefit of the People of this Bishopric, in order to their being rightly
instructed; and whosoever shall, without having undergone such an Examination,
and without having obtained a License thereupon, in writing, under the hand of
the Bishop, or Prelate, presume to preach, or make any Discourses to the
People, shall be suspended from their Office and Benefice for a Year;
nevertheless, all Vicars may in their own Churches make such Discourses to
their People, as they shall judge necessary, out of the Holy Scriptures, and
other approved Books; to which end the Synod does earnestly desire, that there
may be a Catechism made in the Malabar Tongue, out of which there may be every
Sunday something read to the People: And whereas the Synod is informed that the
most Illustrious Metropolitan is already about such a Work, and has reason to
hope that it may be done by the end of the Visitation, it does command, so soon
as it is finished and published, That all Vicars do every Sunday at the time of
Offering, or before, or after Mass, read a Chapter of the same to the People in
conformity to the Orders they shall receive.

Decree XVIII.
WHereas, through the Ignorance and bad Doctrines of the Priests of this
Diocese, occasioned by their having been accustomed to read Heretical and
Apocryphal Books, they do many times deliver Errors, and fabulous Stories, in
their Sermons, and Admonitions to the People, without knowing what they say
themselves: Therefore, to prevent the Peoples being mistaught, the Synod does
command, That whenever it should be proved to the Prelate, that any such
thing has been delivered in public, or in any Congregation, that the Prelate
having drawn up a Form of Recantation in Writing, shall send to the said
Curates, or the Persons that have delivered such things, commanding them to
retract and unsay the same in public, either by reading the said Recantation,
or by declaring the Contents of it to the People, and teaching them the Truth;
which if any shall refuse to do, which God forbid, they shall be declared
Excommunicate, and shall be punished according to the Holy Canons, and the
quality of the Matter they delivered; which shall be executed with great
rigor, if it shall appear to have been spoke with Knowledge and Malice; but
where it shall be found to have flowed from Ignorance, and an innocent Mind, it
shall suffice that a ready Obedience be paid to the said Satisfaction and
Recantation.

Decree XIX.
THe Synod having been informed of several Meetings that were in this Diocese,
upon the death of Bishop Mar-Abraham, in which both public and private Oaths
were taken, against yielding Obedience to the Holy Roman Church, several
Curates, and others, obliging themselves never to consent to any change either
in the Government of the Bishopric, or in matters of Faith, nor to receive any
Bishop that should be sent to them by the Holy Apostolical See, or by any other
way, than by the Order of the Schismatical, Heretical, Nestorian Patriarch of
Babylon, with several other particulars, contrary to the Sacred Canons, and the
Obedience that is due to the most Holy Roman Pontificate; does declare all Such
Oaths.] We may see by this what doughty Securities, Promises, or Oaths made to
defend a Church that is not Popish, are, in the opinion of Papists.
such Oaths, or any other taken, or that shall be taken in the same manner, to
be void, and of no force; and that they do not only not oblige the Consciences
of those that have taken them, but that as they were rashly and maliciously
taken, so it is an Impiety and Schism to keep them; denouncing the Sentence of
the greater Excommunication upon all those that made them, or took them; This
Synod having above all other things promised and sworn to yield Obedience to
the Commands of the Pope, and the Holy Apostolical See, according to the Holy
Canons, and never to receive any Bishop or Prelate, but what shall be sent by
the Holy Roman Church, to which it of right belongs to provide Prelates and
Bishops to all the Churches in the World, and to receive those that he shall
send, without any doubt or scruple, acknowledging them for the true Prelates
and Pastors of their Souls, without waiting for any other Order, besides that
of the Bishop of Rome, notwithstanding any impious Oaths that may have been
made at any time to the contrary.

Decree XX.
THis present Synod, together with all the Priests and faithful People of this
Diocese, does embrace all the Holy General Councils received by Holy Mother
Church, believing and confessing all that was determined in them,
anathematizing, rejecting, and condemning all that they have rejected and
condemned; but especially it does with great Veneration receive and embrace the
first Holy Council of Ephesus, consisting of 200 Fathers, firmly believing all
that was therein determined, and rejecting and condemning whatsoever it
condemned; but above all, the Diabolical Heresy of the Nestorians, which has
been for many Years preached and believed in this Diocese; which together with
its Author Nestorius, and all his Followers, the said Council did reject, and
anathematize; who being taught by the Devil, held that there were Two Persons
in our Lord Christ; affirming also, that the Divine Word did not take Flesh,
into the Unity of its Person, but only for an Habitation, or Holy Dwelling, as
a Temple; and that it ought not to be said, that God was Incarnate, or that he
Died, nor that our Lady, the Glorious Virgin, was the Mother of God, but only
the Mother of Christ, with other Diabolical Heresies, all which this Synod does
condemn, reject, and anathematize, embracing the Holy Catholic Faith, in that
purity and integrity, that it is believed, and professed in, by the Holy Mother
Roman Church, the Mistress of all Churches, to which in all things it submits
it self according to the profession it has made. Furthermore, this Synod does
acknowledge the Glorious Cyril Archbishop and Patriarch of Alexandria, who by
Order of the Bishop of Rome, Presided.] St. Cyril presided in the Ephesan
Council in his own right, being the only Patriarch that was present at it.
presided in the Holy Ephesan Council, to be a Blessed Saint, at this time
enjoying God in Heaven; and that his Doctrine in the said Council against the
Nestorians, is Holy, and universally received in the Catholic Church,
professing all that reject it, to be Excommunicated Heretics.

Decree XXI.
FUrthermore, This present Synod, with all the Priests and faithful People of
this Diocese, does embrace the last Holy Council of Trent.] Justinianus, a
Noble Venetian, in the 15th Book of his History of Venice, gives the following
account of the Holiness of the Trent Council: Religionis causa in Tridentino
Concilio parum prosperos successus habebat, ob dissentientes animos, coecamque
Praelatorum ambitionem. Solus autem Cardinalis Lothoringius, Vir pietatis
Studio, and dicendi art clarus, que ad Dei honorem, and veram Ecclesiae
reformationem essent, fuadebat; cui plerique ex Concilii Patribus, humanarum
potius rerum, quam divinarum curam habentes, refragabantur: variisque
opinionibus Sancta Synod^ dissidente, nil quod rectum, sanctum, piumque foret,
decerni potuit, omniaque confusione, and coecitate plena erant, tantaque
Praelatos ambitio coeperat, ut nulla apud eos fidei, Religionisque pro vera
Ecclesiae reformatione ratio haberetur.
Holy and Sacred Council of Trent, and does not only believe and confess all
that was determined and approved of therein, and reject, and anathematize all
that that Council rejected and condemned; but does moreover receive and embrace
the said Council as to all matters therein determined, relating to the
reformation of the Church, and all Christian People, promising and swearing to
Govern it self according to the Rules thereof, and to observe the same Forms
that are observed in the Catholic Church, and as are observed in this Province
of the Indies, and in all the other Provinces, and Suffragans to the Metropolis
of Goa; in order to the removing of all Abuses and Customs that are contrary to
the Decrees of the said Council of Trent; by which only it is resolved to
Govern it self as to all matters relating to the Government of the Church, and
the Reformation of the Manners of this faithful and Catholic People, any
Customs, though immemorial, in this Bishopric, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Decree XXII.
THis present Synod, together with all the Priests and faithful People of this
Diocese, does with great submission, and reverence, submit it self to the Holy,
Upright, Just and Necessary Court of the Holy Office of the Inquisition.] This
agrees with what Paul the IIId. said of ^he Inquisition upon his Death^ed, that
it was the Pillar of the Church of Rome; if he had been in his Chair he could
not have delivered a greater truth. A Heathen Roman Synod would never have been
guilty of calling that an Upright and Just Court, which neither suffers its
Prisoners to know the particular Crime whereof they are accused, nor the
Persons that accuse them, nor the Witnesses that depose against them, Acts 25.
ver. 16. I referr those that have a mind to be satisfied of the Justice of this
Court, to the History of the Inquisition of Goa, which was the Inquisition this
Synod put the Church of Malabar under, published by a French Papist who was
himself a Prisoner in it; though I must tell them, that as bad as his Treatment
was therein, that it was but Play to what it would have been, had he professed
himself a Protestant, or not to have been of the Roman Communion, though he had
once been of it.

Bulenger, though otherwise a fierce Papist, gives this following account of this
Holy Office. Inter haec actum a Pontifice cum H^spaniae Rege, ut Inquisitio
Hispanica Mediolanum inserretur, quod tam acerbe tulere Insubres, ut
defectionis consilia inierint. Ea quaestio in Hispania Mauris deprehendendis
instituta est, per cuj^^ causam, and nomen, crebro innocents ac sceleris
integri custodiae mancipa^tur, opibus evertuntur, vita and dignitate falsis
criminibus circumventi spoliantur. Si vocula forte a Delatoribus excepta est,
Majestatis illico postulantur, in ultimae sort^^ hominibus crimina praetentata,
m^^ in Viros Principes districta sunt. Jacent plerumque tres annos in fit^ and
paedore carceris, priusquam libe^^^ aut noto crimine arcessantur: al^^ nullius
criminis comperti judicio affliguntur: quidam in squalore carcer^ ignorati
contabescunt. Auricularii, frumentarii, quadruplatores subd^^^ grassantur, qui
rei faciendae St^d^^ in Divitum capita involant, and (...) tam crimina judicio,
quam object^ menta jurgio prolata quaerunt. Sermones inter familiares habitos
in re^ non modo seriam, sed capitalem ducu^

And Mazeray a Papist too, (...) the Life of Henry II. calls the Inquisition a
Dreadful Monster.


Inquisition, in these Parts Established; and being sensible how much the
Integrity of the Faith depends upon that Tribunal, it does promise and swear to
be obedient to all its Commands in all things thereunto pertaining; being,
after the Example of all other Bishoprics in this Province, willing that all
matters of Faith should be judged of by the same Court, or by such Persons as
it shall depute: And notwithstanding the said Holy Office has not hitherto, by
reason of this Church's having been separated, and had little or no
correspondence with the Apostolical See, or with any of the Churches that are
subject to it, meddled with any Persons belonging to this Bishopric, yet now
for the benefit of their Souls, as to Absolutions in cases of Faith, which are
known to be reserved to that Court; This present Synod does beseech the Lords
Inquisitors to Authorize some Learned Men within this Bishopric, or the
Jesuits of the College of Vaipicotta, and of other residences of the same
Religion in the said Diocese, to Absolve all such as shall stand in need
thereof, and that with such limitations as they shall think fit; considering
how difficult it is for the People inhabiting the Serra, to have recourse to
the Tribunal at Goa; neither can it be otherwise, considering that they live in
the midst of Infidels, but that such necessary Cases will sometimes happen, and
especially to rude and ignorant People.

Decree XXIII.
THe Preservation of the Purity of the Faith, and the prevention of Peoples
being corrupted with false and strange Doctrines, being a thing of the greatest
importance; this Synod does therefore command all Persons, of what Quality or
Condition soever in this Bishopric, that whenever they shall happen to know
of any Christians doing, speaking, or writing any thing that is contrary to the
Holy Catholic Faith, or of any that shall give assistance or countenance
thereunto, to What a Confusion must this is newly and forcibly converted to
practice needs make in a place that the Roman Church.
dilate them with all possible Expedition and Secrecy to the Prelate, or to the
Vicars of the Church, or to some other faithful Person, who will immediately
give an account thereof, that so such a course may be forthwith taken, as the
necessity of the Matter shall require; the Synod in virtue of Obedience
commanding the said Vicars, and Persons to whom such things shall be denounced
to intimate them with all possible speed.

ACTION IV. Of the Sacraments of Baptism, and Confirmation.
THe Holy Sacraments of the Gospel, instituted by our Savior and Redeemer
Jesus Christ the Son of God, for the Remedy and Salvation of Men, and to which
he has applied the Virtue of his Holy Passion, and infinite Merits, and by
which all true Holiness begins in us, and being begun, is increased, and being
lost is recovered, are Seven.] The Doctrine of the Seven Sacraments is so great
a Novel^ ^n the Church of Rome, (for it is in no other Church) that Bellarmine
with all his reading, was not able to produce the testimony of one Father for
it, Greek nor Latin: Peter Lombard, who lived above a thousand years after the
Apostles, being the first he quotes for it. This is a long time for an
Apostolical Tradition to run under ground; and which is yet more wonderful,
that it should break out in an Age that knew nothing of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, or indeed of any other sort of Learning; but this was the common
fate of all the Roman Doctrines and Rites, which they pretend to have received
from the Apostles, only by the way of the dark and uncertain conveyance of Oral
Tradition.
Seven, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penitence, Extreme
Unction, Order, and Matrimony: All which do differ much from the Sacraments of
the Old Law, which did not cause, but did only signify the Grace that was to
be given by the Passion of Christ, whereas our Sacraments do contain Grace, and
give it to all those that receive them worthily; the first five were ordained
for the Spiritual perfecting of every Man only with relation to himself, the
two last were appointed for the good Government and increase of the Church; by
Baptism we are spiritually born again to God; by Confirmation we are advanced
in Grace, fortified in the Faith, and being Regenerated and strengthened, we
are supported by the Divine Food of the Eucharist, and Sacrament of the Altar;
and when we chance by Sin to fall into any distemper of Soul, we are
Spiritually restored by Penitence, and both Spiritually and Corporally by
Extreme Unction; by the Sacrament of Order, the Church is governed, and
Spiritually multiplied, and by Matrimony Corporally: All these Sacraments are
perfected by three Causes; that is, Things as their matter, Words as their
form, and the Person that is to administer them with an Intention.] This
Doctrine after all their talk of the necessity there is of an infallible
certainty in all matters of Religion, must make them to be very far from having
any such certainty of their being Christians, or of their having either a
Priest, or a Bishop in their Church. For as they cannot be infallibly certain
of any Bishop or Priest's Intention in the Administration of the Sacraments, so
they may be certain that it is possible that Bishops and Priests may be so
wicked as not to intend what the Church does in such administration, nay, to
intend the contrary; for there was a Parish Priest burnt not many Years ago at
Lisbon, who confessed at his Death, that whenever he baptized, or consecrated,
he had a formed Intention not to administer those Sacraments.
Intention of doing what the Church does; and where any of these three Causes
are wanting, they are not perfect, neither indeed is any Sacrament
administered; all the Ceremonies and Rites, approved and made use of by Holy
Mother Church, in the administration of the Sacraments are holy, and cannot be
despised, neglected, or Changed.] This is very strange, considering that most
of those Rites are but new even in the Roman Church, that of the Elevation of
the Host not excepted: Of the Elevation of the Host, Cardinal Bona in the 13th.
Chap. of his 2d. Book of Liturgies, says, Non enim liquet quae prima Origo
fuerit in Ecclesia Latina, elevandi Sacra Mysteria, statim ac consecrata sunt;
in antiquis enim Sacramentorum libris, and in codicibus Ordinis Romani, tam
excusis quam MSS, nec in priscis rituum Expositoribus, Alcuino, Almario,
Walfrido, Micrologo and aliis, aliquod ejus vestigium reperitur.

As to Peoples being present at Mass, that did not communicate at the same
time, the same Cardinal says in the 14th. Chap. of his first Book, Primi and
Secundi post Christum saeculi foelicitas haec fuit, cum multitudo credentium,
quorum and erat Cor unum, and animae una, ardentissimo Dei amore succensa,
nihil impensius desiderabat, quam ad hoc supercoeleste convivium accedere, in
quo anima de Deo saginatur, ut loquitur Tertullianus; at prope finem Tertii
coepit fervor ille languescere, and numerus communicantium imminui, quam
tepiditatem aegre ferentes Patres Concilii Illiberitani, Cap. 28. Statuerunt,
Episcopum non debere munera ab eo accipere qui non communicate. Patres item
Conc. Antioch. Can. 2. Omnes qui ingrediuntur Ecclesiam, and se a perceptione
Sanctae Communionis avertunt, ab Ecclesia remover decreverunt: Patres denique
Conc. Tolet. Cap. 13. Eos abstineri praeceperunt, qui intrant Ecclesiam, and
non Communicant. What the Cardinal says here of these two Practices, makes
almost the whole Roman Worship at this time to be a mere Novelty, the whole of
that Worship consisting almost now in Peoples going o Mass upon Sundays and
Holy Days, which the Church obliges them to, not obliging them at the same time
to communicate above once a Year, and in adoring the Host when the Priest
elevates it As to the Priest's putting the Sacrament into the mouth of the
Communicants, the same Cardinal in the 17th. Chap. of his second Book, says;
Sacra Communio antiquo ritu, non ore excipi solebat, ut hodie fit, sed manu,
quam qui susceperat, Ori reverenter admovebat. As to the Priest's speaking the
words of Consecration so low that no body can hear him, in his 12th. Chap. of
the same Book, he says; Graeci and alii Orientales verba consecrationis elata
voce pronunciant, and populus respondet, Amen. Eundem morem servabat olim
Ecclesia Occidentalis, omnes enim audiebant verba consecrationis; postea
statutum est, ut Canon submissa voce recitaretur; and sic desiit ea consuetudo,
seculo decimo, ut conjicio.

As to the usage of her denying the Cup to the People, in the 18th. Chap. of
his second Book, he says, Semper enim and ubique ab Ecclesiae primordiis usque
ad saeculum duodecimum, sub specie panis and Vini in Ecclesiis communicarunt
fideles; coepitque paulatim ejus saeculi initio usus calicis obsolescere,
plerisque Episcopis eum populo interdicentibus, and sic paulatim introducta est
Communio sub sola specie panis; quod a nullo negari potest, qui vel levissima
rerum Ecclesiasticarum notitia imbutus est.

And as to her making use of Unleavened Bread, in the 23d. Chap. of his first
Book, he says; Quod si Veteres Patres, percurrere and omnem evolvere
antiquitatem libeat, inveniemus proculdubio sic a tempore Apostolorum, and de
inceps de pane Eucharistico, omnes loqui, ut non nisi de communi, and
fermentato commode intelligi, and explicari queant.

As to her giving the Sacrament in Wafers, in the 23d. Chap. of the same Book,
he says; Vivente Humberto qui floruit Anno 1245. panis consecrandus in
Eucharistia tantae magnitudinis erat, ut ex eo consecratae tot particulae
frangi possent quot erant necessariae ad populum communicandum, and panis qui
tradebatur talis fuit, ut deglutiri non posset, nisi dentibus comminutus.

And as to her keeping the consecrated Bread, or Hosts as she calls them, after
the Communion is over, he says in the same Book; Ne reliquiae Sacramenti
superessent, saepe decretum est, ut tot particulae consecrarentur, quot erant
parati ad communionem; and si quid residuum foret, a sacerdete, seu Ministris
commederetur; quod si contigerit ut Ministrorum incuria putrescerent, statuit
Concilium Arelatense apud Joan. X. 2. Cap. 56. ut igne comburatur, and cinis
juxta Altar sepeliatur; idque in usu fuisse docet Algerus, Lib. 2. Cap. 1.

Now I take this acknowledged change of Rites in the Administration of the
Eucharist, to be a very great Evidence, that there has been a Change of belief
about it, and indeed to have been the Natural Consequence of such a Change, and
so I believe will any body else that shall consider it impartially.


changed for others without a great Sin, notwithstanding they do not appertain
to the Integrity or Essence of the Sacraments; there are three that imprint a
Spiritual sign on the Soul, that can never be blotted out; it is called a
Character, which is the reason why those Sacraments are never to be repeated;
they are Baptism, Confirmation and Orders; the other four, that is, Penitence,
the Eucharist, Extreme Unction, and Matrimony, imprint no Spiritual Sign in the
Soul, and so may be repeated with due Order; but though these seven Sacraments
are all Divine, and do contain Grace, and dispense it to their worthy
Receivers, deserving our most profound Reverence and Adoration, on the account
of the Majesty of their Institutor, who was our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of
God, as also for the assistance of the Holy Spirit, who operates in conjunction
with them; and for the virtue that is in them for the curing of Souls, the
Treasure of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, being deposited in them, and
dispensed to us by their means; Nevertheless this does not hinder, but that in
some respects, some of them may be more worthy than others, and may deserve a
greater reverence and veneration. These Sacraments were all instituted by our
Lord Jesus Christ before his Ascension into Heaven, that so by their means he
might communicate Grace, and other Spiritual Benefits, he had merited for us by
his Death on the Cross, confirming them to the faithful by his Word and
Promises, that so by using them lawfully, and with due dispositions, we might
be ascertained of his communicating himself, and all the fruits of his Passion
to us, in every one of them, in such a manner as he represents himself in them.

The Doctrine of the Holy Sacrament of Baptism.
THe first of all the Sacraments is that of Baptism, which is the Gate of the
Spiritual Life, and that whereby we are made capable of the other Sacraments,
of which without it we are no ways capable; for as a Man must first be born,
before he can enjoy the good things of the Natural Life, so Men before they are
born again in Baptism, are not capable of enjoying the heavenly advantages of a
Spiritual Life, it being by Baptism that we are made Members of Christ, and are
incorporated into the Christian Commonwealth, and the Mystical Body of the
Church; for as by the first man Death came upon all, for the Sin of
Disobedience committed by him and us, for which Sin we were excluded the
Kingdom of Heaven, and were born Children of Wrath, and separated from God, so
that without being born again of Water and the Spirit, we cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, as Christ himself has taught us; so that as we were born
Children of Wrath, by Baptism we return to be Children of Grace, and as we were
born in sin the Sons of Men, in Baptism we are born the Sons of God; all that
are baptized in Christ, as St. Paul has it, having put on Christ: The Matter
of this Sacrament, is true, natural, and common Water, as of the Sea, Rivers,
Fountains, Lakes, or Rain, and no other, though never so pure and clean; all
others being Liquors, and not natural Water: The Form is, I Baptize thee in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Minister of this
Sacrament is a Priest, to whom it belongs by virtue of his Office; but in case
of necessity, not only a Priest or Deacon, but a Layman, or Woman, nay an
Infidel, a Mohammedan, a Heretic, or Jew: In a word, any Person that can
Baptize, using the Form of the Church, and intending to do what she does, may
administer this Sacrament: For seeing none can be saved without being Baptized,
therefore as our Lord ordained Water, than which nothing is more ready at hand,
to be the matter of this Sacrament, so he would exclude no Man from being the
Minister thereof; the effects and virtue of this Sacrament, is, the pardon and
remission of all sins Original and Actual, and of all punishments due to them;
for which reason there is no Penance to be enjoined those that are Baptized,
for any sin they committed before Baptism, all that die after Baptism, before
they have committed any sin, going directly to Heaven, where they enjoy the
Divine Vision for ever.

Decree I.
WHereas in the Examination of the Forms of the administration of the
Sacraments of the Church in this Diocese, made by the most Reverend
Metropolitan in his last Visitation, he found that in diverse Churches there
were different Forms used, and written in the Baptisteries, some Curates using
the Form following; The Ancient Form of Baptizing was by Prayer.
N. is Baptized and perfected, in the name of the Father, Amen; in the name of
the Son, Amen; in the name of the Holy Ghost, Amen: Others using the Greek
Form, saying, Baptizetur servus Christi, in nomine Patris, Amen; in nomine
Filii, Amen; in nomine Spiritus Sancti, Amen. The Synod in virtue of Obedience,
and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, does command, that
no Person shall presume hereafter to use either these, or any other Forms, but
that which is used in the Holy Roman Church; I Baptize thee in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and that all other Forms be
blotted out of their Baptisteries, and Books, and this be put in their place.

Decree II.
THis Synod being informed, That at diverse times they have used different Forms
of Baptism in this Diocese, which were introduced by Schismatical and Ignorant
Prelates, some of which were not Legitimate, neither was the Sacrament
administered by them, as was declared by the most Illustrious Metropolitan, and
others, after a strict Examination; and others were very doubtful, does
therefore in the name of the Holy Ghost, desire and command all the faithful
Christians of this Diocese to declare to the said Metropolitan at the
Visitation he intends to make of the Churches of this Diocese, or to Persons
deputed by him, the time when they were Baptized, that so according to the Form
that was then used, a saving remedy may be provided, in conformity to what
shall be ordained therein, and that all submit themselves to whatsoever he
shall be pleased to order.

Decree III.
FOrasmuch as the Synod is informed, that there are many Persons in this
Diocese, and especially among those that live in the Heaths, and are far from
any Church, who though they are not Baptized, yet being of a Christian race, do
profess themselves Christians, and when they come where there is a Church, do
go to it and receive the Holy Sacraments with others, and out of mere shame of
letting it be known that they are not Christened, do die without Baptism; and
others because they will not pay the Fees, which are Simoniacally demanded of
them: It does therefore command all Vicars of Churches to make diligent inquiry
through their whole Parishes and the Heaths, to see if there are any that are
not Christened, besides the search that the most Illustrious Metropolitan does
intend at his next Visitation, as he did at his former; and that the said
Vicars on the high Festivals, upon which those that live in the Heaths do
usually come to Church, shall admonish them all in general, that in case there
are any among them that have never been baptized, or that have some reason to
doubt whether they have or not, that they go to them and acquaint them
therewith in private, that so they may be secretly Christened, and without
paying any Fee, letting them know that they are not Christians, nor capable of
inheriting Eternal Life, nor of receiving the Holy Sacraments without being
baptized; and all Preachers shall frequently give the same admonition, and all
Confessors must be careful to ask all rude Christians that live in the Heaths,
whether they have been baptized, and in case it appear doubtful, they shall
then baptize them privately. The Synod grants the same License to all Priests
within or without this Diocese, to baptize all such secretly, in what place
soever they shall think fit.

Decree IV.
THE Synod being informed that there are some small Villages in this Diocese,
which, by reason of the great distance they are at from any Church, and through
the negligence of their Prelates and Priests, though they call themselves
Christians of St. Thomas, because descended of such, yet are not Baptized,
having nothing of Christians but the bare name, does command a diligent enquiry
to be made into this matter, recommending the same to the most Reverend
Metropolitan, and commanding all Vicars of Churches to search all places
bordering upon their Parishes, and to oblige all such to be Baptized: The Synod
does likewise command Chapels to be built in or near to all such Villages, and
to be provided with such Curates as may instruct them in all matters of Faith,
that so there may be none in all these parts that call themselves Christians of
St. Thomas, but what are Baptized; and of some Parish where they may receive
the Sacraments.

Decree V.
BY reason of the great negligence that is so visible in the Christians of this
Bishopric, in bringing their Children to be baptized within eight days after
they are born, according to the Custom of the Church, but chiefly among those
that live at a considerable distance from any Church, whose Children are many
times some Months or Years old before they are Christened; the Synod does
strictly command, That all Children be baptized on the 8th. day after they are
born, according to the custom of the Universal Church, without there should be
some danger of their dying before, in which case they ought to be Christened
immediately, or that it should so happen, that if they are not baptized sooner,
they cannot be in a long time, in which case also they ought to be presently
Christened; and for those that live in Heaths, and far from any Church, if they
should not be able to bring their Children to be baptized on the eighth day,
they must not fail to bring them betwixt the fifteenth and the twentieth; and
all that are found to be negligent herein, let them be punished severely; and
whosoever shall neglect to bring their own Children, or others that they have
the charge of, though their Slaves, to Baptism for above a Month, let them be
thrown out of the Church, neither shall it be lawful for any Priest to go to
their Houses, or to give them the Casturi, or a Visit, no not in order to
persuade them to bring their Children to Baptism: But if it should be probable
that the length of the Way might endanger the Child's Life, then let the Father
or Guardian signify so much to the Vicar of the Church to which they belong,
that a fit remedy may be taken therein, that the Baptism of the Infant be no
longer deferred; and in such Cases the Synod does command all Vicars either in
Person, or by some other Priest, to hasten to go; the doing thereof with
diligence being one of the highest Duties of their Function.

Decree VI.
THe present Synod does condemn the Custom or Abuse which has hitherto obtained
in this Diocese, of not Baptizing the Infants of Parents that are
Excommunicated, for fear of having some Communion with them, by which means it
often happens, that Children continue unbaptized for many Years, thereby
running a great hazard of dying without Baptism; and ordaining the contrary,
commands the Children of Excommunicated Parents to be Christened as well as
others, and to that intent declares, That they that go into such Families to
fetch such Children, or shall carry or accompany them to Church, shall incurr
no censure or punishment whatsoever for so doing; nevertheless, the Persons
that are Excommunicated shall not be suffered to go along with them, nor shall
others go to any Feast or Banquet at their Houses which they may have made on
that occasion.

Decree VII.
THe Synod does exhort and admonish all Fathers and Mothers, and all other
Persons that are present at Women's Labor, to be careful not to suffer any
Infant to die without Baptism: Wherefore if they shall perceive the Child when
it is born, to be weak, or in danger of dying presently, they shall then, if it
can be done, call the Vicar, or in his absence any other Priest, to come
immediately to Baptize the Infant; but if the danger shall be such as not to
admit of any delay, in that case any Person that is present shall Baptize it in
the Church; throwing Water upon its Face, and saying, I Baptize thee in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen: which shall be
done by Ecclesiastics, if any are present, rather than Laics, and by Men,
rather than Women, if they know the Form; but if they do not, then any one that
knows it may perform it; and when Infants are in danger of dying in the birth,
in case the Head or any other principal Member does appear, though the whole Body
should not, they shall sprinkle the Member that appears with Water, using the
Form. And as for those that have been Baptized in this manner, if they shall
happen to live, and it shall be proved that they were Baptized on the Head, or
the greater part of the Body, they shall not then be Christened again, but
shall only be carried to the Church to be anointed with the Holy Oils; but if
the Baptism was performed on any other part, they shall then be Baptized again,
but with a Condition, saying, If thou art not Baptized, I Baptize thee in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen: And after the
same manner Priests, and others shall behave themselves, as to such Persons of
whose Baptism they have any reason to doubt; provided, if there are any other
present, it shall not be lawful for the Parents of such Infants to Baptize
them, that they may not contract the Spiritual Relation of Godfather, or
Godmother; but in case there should be no body else present, and the Child
should be in apparent danger of Death, in such a case of necessity, the Father
or Mother must Baptize it.

Decree VIII.
THe Synod does earnestly recommend to all People, to procure Christian Daia's
or Midwives in all their Towns, and such as know the Form of Baptism, and are
able to succor the necessities of Infants when born in danger: And whereas
Infidel Daia's do use a great many Ceremonies and Superstitions with Infants,
which are foreign to the purity and integrity of the Gospel, and especially
such of them as are Mahometans; the Vicars shall therefore take care frequently
to instruct all their People, but especially the Daia's, in the Form of
Baptism, that so every body may know how to succor the necessities of Infants
when they are born; and the Confessors of the Daia's must be sure to examine
them as to the said Form, and having instructed them therein, shall acquaint
them how much it is their duty to be perfect in it.

Decree IX.
THe Synod does command, That no Person presume to keep an Infidel Slave
without Baptizing him; whom, if they are Infants, they shall Baptize presently;
and if come to years of discretion, they shall take care to instruct in the
Faith, in order to make them Christians, but without any manner of Compulsion,
besides that of continual Persuasion; and whosoever should be found to have an
Infidel Child that is not Baptized, or one that is of Age and does desire to
be, shall be severely punished by the Prelate, and the Parties shall be
Christened: In this the Vicars ought to be extremely vigilant, and especially
when they make the Roll of Confessions, and inquire what Persons are in every
Family, and who are not Christians, and why they are not.

Decree X.
THere being some Christians so unmindful of their Christian Obligations, as to
sell Christians to Infidels, contrary to the Holy Canons, who by that means are
certainly constrained to Apostatize from the Faith; wherefore the Synod in
virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto
incurred, does command, That no Christian presume to Sell any of the Faithful
to Infidels; and that whosoever shall be found to have done it, shall be
forthwith declared Excommunicate, and shall not be Absolved, until he has
redeemed the said Christian, though he should cost him more than what he sold him
for; or until it shall be manifest to the Vicar of the Church, and to other
Curates, and the whole People, that it cannot be done; in which case he shall
not be Absolved until by way of Penance he has refunded the Money that he
received, with which the Vicar and Churchwardens shall buy an Infidel, whom
they shall Christen, great numbers of such being sold daily in Malabar; and the
Person so bought shall have his liberty, and shall be cemmitted to the care of
some devout substantial Christian that will Educate him for God's sake.
Moreover, the Synod in virtue of Obedience, does prohibit all Christians to
Sell any Boys or Girls, though they are not Baptized, to any Mohammedan, Jew, or
Heathen; it being certain, that such when sold to Infidels, will never come to
the knowledge of the Faith; though when it is necessary, and they are their
lawful Slaves, they may sell them to other Christians: Whosoever shall
transgress herein, shall be severely punished, except the Person that was sold
was Twenty Years of Age; and it is manifest to the Vicar, to whom he shall be
carried before he is sold, that he refused to be Baptized.

Decree XI.
THe Heathens of these Parts being so strangely addicted to Auguries, and
Superstitions, as sometimes to kill their Children which are born on those days
which they reckon to be Unlucky, imagining they must be miserable if they live,
the Mothers, that they may not Murder them with their own hands, leaving them
in Heaths, or at the bottom of some Tree, or in a Ditch, there to perish;
wherefore the Synod does command all the faithful Christians of this
Bishopric, That whereas living among such Heathens, and being their
Neighbors, they cannot for the most part but know what passes in their Houses,
to be very watchful in this case; and whenever they shall know of any Infants
being thus exposed, or shall find them at any time in the Heaths, to carry them
home to their Houses, and cherish them with Christian Charity, either Baptizing
them themselves, or procuring it to be done; and if when they find them, they
shall apprehend them to be near dying, notwithstanding they may know that their
Parents will take it ill of them, who by thus exposing them have lost their
dominion over them, they shall Baptize them immediately, whereby the Church
will acquire a right in them, and as a Holy Mother, is glad to receive them;
and if it should so happen that those by whom they are found, are not in a
condition to breed them up, they shall then carry them to the Vicar, and the
other Curates of the Church, whom we command in the name of Christ, to call
together the chief Men of the Parish, to take some course about the bringing up
of the Child; and if there is no well-disposed Person that will for the love of
God, take the charge thereof upon him, they shall then procure a Nurse, and
whatsoever else is necessary, if there can be no other way found, out of the
Alms and Fabric of the Church.

Decree XII.
THe Synod commands, That the Infants that are left at the Gates of the
Churches, or in any other place, if it does not manifestly appear that they are
already Christened, shall be Baptized, and shall be brought up in the same
manner as is prescribed for the Children of Infidels that are found exposed in
the Heaths, the Vicars doing all they can to prevail with some to undertake the
charge of their Education for God's sake.

Decree XIII.
ALL that shall be converted from Heathenism to Christianity, being of Age,
shall be well instructed in the matters of Faith, before they shall be admitted
to Baptism, and shall know at least how to Cross themselves, and be able to say
the Pater Noster, Ave Mary, the Creed, and the Commandments, as well as they
can be taught; in which Matter there has been hitherto a great Neglect,
commanding the Vicars to examine all such in the Faith before they Christen
them, without they should happen to be in danger of Death before they have
learned those things; in which case their making a profession of Faith, and the
necessary Mysteries thereof, and signifying a desire to be Baptized, shall be
sufficient: And whereas the Synod is informed, that great numbers of Infidels
living among Christians, have long desired Baptism of them, but through the
coldness of Priests and others, have had none that would be at the pains to
instruct them, it does therefore charge the Consciences of the Vicars
therewith, speedily to set about instructing such, according to the fervor of
those that desire it, that so they may be brought to the Sacred Font of
Baptism, desiring all other Christians likewise to be diligent and zealous in
that Matter.

Decree XIV.
THe Holy Oils having hitherto not been used in this Bishopric in any of the
Sacraments, and if any have been used, it having been without any distinction,
and without being Blessed by the Bishop; wherefore for remedy thereof, the most
Illustrious Metropolitan, in his Reformation of the Affairs of this Church,
having on the Thursday of the last Holy Week blessed the Oils, and furnished
all the Churches therewith, instructing them in their Holy Uses and
Distinctions; the Synod does therefore command all Vicars in virtue of holy
obedience, to use the said Oils in Baptism, Anointing all that are Baptized
therewith on the Breast, and the Sides, and after they are Baptized, anointing
them with the Holy Chrism on the Head, and making the sign of the Cross thereon
with their Thumb dipped in the Holy Oils, or with a Feather kept in the Vessel
for that use, wiping the Oil off afterward with a Cloth or Towel, which shall
likewise be kept in the same place: The Synod does also command under the same
Precept, That all Curates and Vicars do celebrate this Sacrament, with the
Rites and Ceremonies, Exorcisms and Prayers, that are contained in the Roman
Ceremonial; which the most Illustrious Metropolitan has ordered to be
Translated into Syrian for the administration of all the Sacraments, and is to
be kept in all Churches; and that the Priests when they administer Baptism
solemnly in the Church, shall have on a Surplice, and a Stole about their
Necks, for the more decent administration of that Sacrament, and shall not
perform it in their ordinary wearing Habit, as they have done hitherto.

Decree XV.
WHereas hitherto the ancient Custom of the Church of having Godfathers and
Godmothers, has not been in use in this Bishopric, by which means there has
been no knowledge therein, of the Spiritual Affinity that is contracted betwixt
the Party Baptized, and the Parents thereof, and the Godfathers and Godmothers;
therefore the Synod does command, That all that are Baptized, shall have one or
two Godfathers and Godmothers, to present them in the Church, and to touch them
on the Head before Baptism, and to receive them from the Holy Font: The Men
must be fourteen Years of Age at least, and the Women twelve; neither shall any
be admitted under those Ages. The Synod does likewise declare, That there is
such a close Spiritual Affinity betwixt the Godfathers and Godmothers, and
their God-children, and the Parents of the Children, that they can never Marry
with one another, without a Dispensation from the Pope, or from one empowered
by him, and which is seldom granted, and never but when there is a very urgent
cause for it; and that such Marriages celebrated without a Dispensation, are
void, and of no effect. The Synod furthermore declares, That this Spiritual
Affinity reaches no further than to the one or two Godfathers, and one
Godmother, but not to those that shall stand for them, though they touch the
Heads of the Children, neither shall the Priest admit above two.

Decree XVI.
SEeing that by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Death, we are passed from the
Old Law, to the New Law of Grace, it is therefore reasonable, that we should in
all things be ingrafted into the same: and whereas in this Bishopric
Christians do take several of the Names of the Saints of the Old Testament, as
also several of the Names of the Country, insomuch that there are but very few
called by any of the Names of the Law of Grace; wherefore the Synod does
command the Priests to do all they can to have the Names of the Law of Grace
given in Baptism, but chiefly those of the Holy Apostles, and of the Saints
that are most celebrated in the Church, not intending hereby to take them from
any Devotion that several among them may have for some of the Saints of the Old
Testament, whose Names have been hitherto very common in the Diocese, such as
Abraham, Jacob, Zacharias, and others; nevetheless from henceforward they shall
not presume to take the Name of Hijo, which has been very common among them,
neither shall the Priests ever give it to any, it being the most sweet Name of
Jesus.] The Portuguezes had the least reason of any Christians that I know of,
to be offended with such a Name; Emanuel being by much the most common Name in
Portugal.
Name of JESUS, to which that Respect and Reverence] Francisco Roz, and the
other Jesuits, ought to have had their Order excepted here; for if the Synod's
Reason why none ought to be called by that Blessed Name holds good, it will
reach their Order no less than particular Persons.
Reverence is due, that none ought to take it upon them; for that in the naming
thereof, all Knees both in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, ought to bow
themselves, and every Tongue ought to confess, that it is from that Divine Name
that we desire all the good things that we enjoy on Earth; commanding all that
are called by that Name, to change it for another when they come to be
Confirmed; and as for the common Names of the Country, they may still retain
them, if they are such as have been used only among Christians, but not among
the Heathens, for as to those Names which the Heathens have In common.] The
Popes, among whom we have had so many Alexanders and Julius's, have had little
regard to this Rule.
in common with Christians, the Synod will not have them to be given in
Baptism, charging the Vicars and Priests that Baptize, to take care thereof.

Decree XVII.
THe Synod being informed, That there are some Christians so far unmindful of
their Duties in this Matter, as to give other Names to their Children, than the
Christian Names.] This is what several Popes have done, who upon their
Creation, have left their Baptismal Names which were Christian, and have taken
those that were rank Heathen.
Christian Names they received in Baptism, and sometimes such as are not used
among Christians; it does therefore strictly command, that no Christian shall
presume to give their Children, or to call them by any other Names, than those
that were given them when they were Christened; or when there shall happen to
be any just cause for the changing of their Baptismal Names, it shall be done
only at their Confirmation, and whosoever shall transgress herein, shall be
severely punished by the Prelate; and the Priests must not be wanting
frequently to admonish their People thereof.

Decree XVIII.
THe Synod being informed, That when many Children are brought together to be
Baptized, there are great heats, which shall be first Christened; and that
after having laid Wagers, they give Money to the Curates for the preference,
all which are intolerable disorders, and such scandalous abominations as the
Church ought not by any means to give way to, and which might be easily
prevented, if People could but be persuaded to bring their Children to be
Christened upon the eighth day, it being their deferring of their Baptism so
long, that is the cause of so many coming together; wherefore for the removing
of these disorders in the Church, the Synod does command that the Children be
baptized as they come, without any distinction of first or last, and that the
Priests do accustom themselves, either to baptize the poorest first, or all
indifferently; and the Vicar or Priest that shall be found to have taken Money,
or any Fee, before or after Baptism, though it should be voluntarily offered, and
of never so small value, or only what is to be Eat, shall be condemned of
Simony, and punished according to the Canons.

Decree XIX.
IN all Parochial Churches there shall with all possible expedition be Fonts
provided for Baptism, which may be built with the Fabric Money, or with the
Alms Money of the Church, or by a Collection among the Parishioners; it must be
erected in a decent place, in a corner of the Church, and shall have a hole in
the bottom, through which the Water may be conveyed away, that so it may not be
thrown out where it may be trod upon, or treated with any irreverence, it shall
also be close covered at top, and locked up, and until such time as a Font
shall be provided, they shall have a Vessel of some Metal or other, which shall
be put to no other use, and shall be always kept in some decent place in the
Church, or Sacristy; neither shall they hereafter make use of any common
Vessel, as has been the Custom hitherto; and the Water they have baptized with,
shall be thrown in some place of the Church, where it will not be trod upon,
and all the Water that shall be made use of in Baptism, whether it be in a
Font, or a Vessel, shall be blessed with the Holy Chrism, according to the
Roman Ceremonial, which they are to make use of.

Decree XX.
THis Synod, conforming it self to the Decrees of the Holy Council of Trent,
and the Universal usages of the Church, does command every Parish Church to
provide a Book, wherein the Vicar shall register the Names of all that are
baptized, together with the Names of the Parents, and of the place where they
live, and of the Godfathers and Godmothers, naming the place also where they
were Christened, the day of the Month, and the Year, in this Form: On such a
day of the month, in the Year N, I N. Vicar of the Church of N. baptized there,
or in such a place, N. the Son of N. and of N. naming the Father and Mother
Natives of such a place, and the Godfathers and Godmothers were N. and N. the
Vicar signing his Name to it at the bottom; and when any Priest that is not the
Vicar shall Christen a Child, which shall never be done without the Vicars
leave, he shall Register it thus: I N. Curate, with leave from the Vicar of
such a Church, naming both the Vicar and the Church, did Baptize N. and so on
as above, signing his Name at the bottom; which Book shall be always kept in
the Church, and the Vicars shall be obliged to give an account thereof, and at
every Visitation to show it to the Prelate, out of which the Curates are to
give Certificates of the Age of such as are to be Married, or to receive Holy
Orders, that so their Age may be certainly known; and that such Matters may not
be so in the dark, as they have been formerly, when there was no certain way of
coming to the knowledge of Peoples Age, which must needs create great scruples
in the Minds of such as were to be Married or Ordained.

The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
THe Second Sacrament is Confirmation, which our Lord Christ instituted, in
order to the confirming and establishing of Christians in the Faith, so that
nothing might be able to separate them from it through the Power of the Holy
Ghost which is given therein, particularly to that effect; besides the
sanctifying Grace which it gives in common with the other Divine Sacraments;
the Matter of this Sacrament is the Holy Oil of Chrism, made of the Oil of the
Olive Tree, signifying the light and purity of the Conscience; and of Balsam,
which signifies the sweet smell of a good Name, both mixed together, and
blessed by the hand of the Bishop; the Form are the words spoke by the Bishop
when he dips his Thumb into the said Chrism, making therewith the Sign of the
Cross on the Forehead of the Person that is confirmed, saying, I sign thee with
the sign of the Cross, and do confirm thee with the Chrism of Health, in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; to which the Bishop
subjoyns three holy and wholesome Prayers, wherein he beseeches God to fill
those that are confirmed with his Divine Spirit. The ordinary Minister of The
English Jesuits, who could not endure that the Pope should put a Bishop over
them here in England, in their Books wherein they labored to prove that there
was no need of one, spoke very slightingly of Confirmation; affirming it to be
a Sacrament that was not enjoined but only where it might be had very easily;
that the effects thereof might be abundantly supplied by the other Sacraments,
nay by ordinary Assistances, that the Chrism in Baptism had not only the
signification, but all the effects of Confirmation, so far at least as to make
it not to be very necessary. In a word, that Confirmation was not simply
necessary, neither Necessitate Medii, nor Necessitate Praecepti; so that it was
not likely, that the want of it in E^^land was the cause of so many Peoples
apostatizing from the Catholic Faith: So little do either the Sacraments, or
the Hierarchy, not excepting the Papacy it self, signify, when they stand in
the way of the Jesuits ambition.

I do not except the Papacy, because when it was generally believed that
Clement the VIIIth. was resolved to condemn Molina's Book of Scientia Media,
the Spanish Jesuits endeavored to ward off that blow, by affirming in their
public Conclusions in their College at Complutum, that it was not a matter of
Faith, to believe that Clement the VIIIth. was true Pope; for which Luisius
Turrianus the President of the Disputation, the Rector of the College, and
Vasquez, who were present at the Act, were all summoned to appear before the
Inquisition of Toledo, as Gaspar Hortadus, Gregory de la Camara, and Alvarez de
Villegas, were to appear at Rome before the Pope, for having defended the same
Conclusion publicly in the said University much about the same time; so that
had Clement the VIIIth. condemned Molina's Book after the whole order of the
Jesuits had espoused the merits thereof so publicly, which the Dominicans say
he would certainly have done, had he but lived a few Months longer, Ignatius
Loyola appearing to some Jesuits in Spain, and assuring them that Molina's Book
would never be condemned by any Pope notwithstanding; we should have had
Simony, or some other Nullity found in his Election by the Jesuits before this
time: By this we see that Jesuits have wherewith to intimidate Popes, as well
as Princes and Bishops.


Confirmation is the Bishop, for though simple Priests may perform several other
Unctions, this can be done only by a Bishop, the Bishops being the Successors
of the Apostles, by the imposition of whose hands the Holy Ghost was given; in
the place of which imposition of hands the Church gives Confirmation, Christ
having so ordained it, wherein the Holy Ghost is given likewise; Nevertheless,
by a dispensation from the Holy See, and by no other way, when there is any
very urgent Occasion, or when it happens to be necessary for the good of the
Faithful, simple Priests may confirm with Chrism, that has been consecrated by
a Bishop in the forementioned Form; the effect of this Sacrament is, that
therein the Holy Ghost is given, to the strengthening and fortifying of the
Soul, as it was given to the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, that Christians
may with boldness confess the Name of Christ and his Catholic Faith, for which
reason the Person confirmed is anointed on the forehead with the Sign of the
Cross, that being the most open place of the Body, and the Seat of Shame and
Confusion, which is very different from what is done to People when they are
baptized, who are anointed on the Head; People are confirmed on the forehead,
that they may not be ashamed to confess the Name of Jesus Christ and his Cross,
which as the Apostle says, is to the Jews an Offense, and to the Heathens
foolishness; this Sacrament differs much from that of Baptism, for as by
Baptism we are born into the Faith, so by this we are confirmed therein; for as
in the Natural Life, to be born is different from growing, so in the Spiritual
Life it is one thing to be born to Grace and Faith, which is done in Baptism,
and another to increase and grow stronger therein, which is done in
Confirmation, and so in Baptism we are born to a Spiritual Life, and are
afterward prepared and confirmed for our Warfare, and do receive so much
strength, that no dangers or terrors of Punishments, or Losses, or Torments, or
Deaths are able to separate us from the Confession of the Name of Christ, and
of the true Faith we profess.

Decree I.
FOrasmuch as hitherto there has been no use, nor so much as Knowledge of the
Holy Sacrament of Confirmation among the Christians of this Bishopric, the
Heretical Prelates that governed it, having neglected to feed the People in a
great many cases with wholesome Catholic Food; therefore the Synod does
declare, That all Persons who are come to the use of reason, ought to receive
this Holy Sacrament, having the opportunity of receiving it at the hands of a
Bishop, and that all Masters of Families, and others having the Charge of
Children, are in Duty bound to command their Children and Slaves to receive the
said Sacrament, and that all who out of contumacy or contempt shall refuse to
receive it, or to order such as belong to them to go to it, are guilty of a
Mortal Sin, and if they neglect it out of a conceit of it is not being a
Sacrament, they are Heretics and Aliens from the true Catholic Faith;
wherefore the Synod does command, that in the Visitation that is to be made
speedily by the most Illustrious Metropolitan in the Churches of this
Bishopric, all Men and Women that are above seven years old do come to be
Christened or Confirmed, those only excepted who were confirmed by the said
Lord in his former Visitation, or at some other, or on some other occasion, by
some other Bishop; this Sacrament as well as that of Baptism being never to be
repeated, in so much, that all that receive it a second time wittingly, are
guilty of a great piece of Sacrilege, besides, that they receive no Sacrament
thereby: But in case any are doubtful whether they have ever been confirmed or
not, or should not remember that they were ever, they shall declare so much to
the said Lord, or to the Bishop that is to confirm them, that they may order
the matter according to the merit of their doubts: But if any, which God
forbid, should sacrilegiously and obstinately despise the said Sacrament, it
being proved upon them, they shall be declared Excommunicate until such time as
they have done condign Penance, and shall be punished at the pleasure of the
Prelate.

Decree II.
THe Synod, to its great sorrow, having been informed, that some ignorant
Persons in Sacred Matters and the Doctrine of the Holy Sacraments of the
Church, being instigated by the Devil to persist in their cursed Schism, did in
several places resist the most Illustrious Metropolitan in his former
Visitation of these Churches, so far as not only to refuse to receive the Holy
Sacrament of Confirmation from him, but did also oppose him publicly in the
Churches, and that many did absent themselves, some whereof excused themselves
by pretending, that it was an unnecessary thing, and that they had never seen
nor heard of it before, and others that they should be affronted by the Holy
Ceremony of the Prelates touching their Cheek, scurrilously upbraiding those
that had received it, with base provoking words, telling them that they had
suffered themselves to be affronted and buffeted, with other such Sacrilegious
Expressions, full of Infidelity and Heresy, arising from the Schism wherein
they have been brought up: Whole Towns conspiring together so far in this
Mutiny, that the despising or receiving this Holy Sacrament, became the Test of
their obedience or disobedience to the said Metropolitan, does therefore
(notwithstanding it knows they have all in common, and every one in particular
repented of this, and being sensible of the greatness of the error they
committed therein, have begged pardon for it, and upon their having confessed
their Ignorance, have been graciously received by the said Lord Metropolitan,
and having submitted themselves to the obedience of the Holy Roman Church, are
ready to do all that shall be enjoined them, to prevent the life however, that
none for the time coming may commit the like faults or Sacrileges) command,
That if any (which God forbid) shall dare to do or say any such thing against
this Sacrament or the Holy Ceremonies and Rites wherewith it is administered to
the Faithful, that they be declared Excommunicate, and be separated from the
Church and the Communion of the Faithful, until such time as they have
undergone condign Penance at the pleasure of the Prelate, and shall demonstrate
their due subjection to the obedience of the Holy Church, and have taken the
Oath of the Faith contained in this Synod, and declared that all that reject
and despise the Rites and Ceremonies approved of, and received in the Church,
in the solemn administration of this and the other Sacraments, are Heretics
and Apostates from our Holy Catholic Faith, as was determined in the Holy
Council of Trent, and ought to be proceeded against and punished as such,
according to the Sacred Canons.

Decree III.
THe Synod does declare, That in the Sacrament of Confirmation or Chrism, there
must be a Godfather and Godmother as well as in Baptism, to present such as are
to be Confirmed according to the ancient Custom of Holy Mother Church, but
there shall be but only one Godfather and Godmother, who must themselves have
been Confirmed; it being very indecent, that any Person should present one to
have that done to him, which they have not had done to themselves; and that the
Man shall be above 14, and the Woman above 12 Years Old, or one of them at
least shall be of that Age; and in this Case the Godfathers and Godmothers do
contract the same Spiritual Affinities and the same Impediments that the others
do in Baptism, the said Spiritual Affinity being equally contracted in both
these Sacraments.

ACTION V. Of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and of the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass.
The Doctrine of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.
THe third Sacrament in the Order of the Spiritual Life, is the Holy Eucharist,
though in Veneration, Sanctity and Dignity, it is the first and most excellent,
for containing in it the true, real and substantial Body and Blood, together
with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, true God,
and true Man, our Savior and Redeemer; which was instituted by him the day
before he suffered for us, as the most sweet Remate, or Conclusion of all his
Works, and a Memorial of his Passion, the fulfilling of all the ancient
Figures, the greatest of all the Miracles that ever he wrought, and for the
singular Consolation of the Faithful in his absence. The Matter of this
Sacrament is Bread of Wheat, and Wine of the Grape only; so that all that
Consecrate in Bread made of Rice, or of any thing else but the Flower of Wheat,
or of Wine that was not pressed out of the ripe Grape of the Vine do not make
the Sacrament; there must also be Water mixed with the Wine before it is
Consecrated, but in a much smaller quantity than the Wine, that so it may
easily Turn.] For Water to turn it self into Wine, is as great a Miracle as for
the Priest to turn Wine into Blood.
turn it self into Wine before the Consecration: which mixture is therefore
made, because from the Testimony of Holy Fathers, Holy Mother Church believes
that our Lord Christ himself did so, whose having mixed Water with the Wine
that he Consecrated, makes it a great Sin to omit to do it. It is also
agreeable to the representation of the Mystery of what passed on the Cross, and
of our Lord Christ, out of whose precious Side flowed Water and Blood; as also
to signify the Effect of this Sacrament, which is the Union of the Faithful
with Christ, the Water signifying the Faithful, and the Wine our Lord Christ,
and the conversion of the Water into the Wine, the Union of our Souls with
Christ by means of this Divine Sacrament, according to what our Lord said; He
that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. The
Form of this Sacrament is the words of our Savior, by which the Sacrament is
made; for though the Priest pronounces many and diverse words in the Mass, and
makes many Prayers and Petitions to God, yet when he comes to Consecrate, he
uses only the words of Christ, none others belonging to the substance of
Consecration; so the Priest speaking in the Person of Christ, makes this Divine
Sacrament, because by virtue of those words, he turns the substance of Bread
into the substance of the Body of Christ, and the whole substance of the Wine
into his Blood, there remaining nothing of Bread and Wine after that, but only
the Accidents or Species of them; and that after such a manner, that the whole
of Christ's Body and Soul, and Divinity, are contained under every Particle of
both, though never so small when separated; so that in every crumb of the Host,
though never so small, there is Christ entire, and in every drop of the Species
of Wine that is separated there is Christ entire, so that in each of the
Species whole Christ, God and Man is received, as also the true Sacrament; for
which reason Holy Mother Church does not use to Communicate the Faithful but
Under one Species.] What makes the Sacrilege of denying the Cup to the People
in the Sacrament to be something the greater, is, that most of the Roman
Doctors do hold, that there is more Grace conveyed to People by communicating
under both the Species of Bread and Wine, than under that of Bread only,
Vasquez Cap. 2. Quaest. 80. Art. 12. Disp. 215. Nay, Pope Clement the VIth, in
his Bull to the King of England in the Year 1341, acknowledges as much,
wherein he tells that King, that he granted him the privilege of communicating
under both kinds, that he might receive the more Grace by receiving the
Sacrament so.
under one Species, because in that they receive Christ entire. To this Divine
Sacrament the Worship, Veneration and Adoration.] The Primitive Christians must
have been People of a strange confidence in triumphing as they did over the
stupidity of the Heathen Worship, for being directed to Objects that were
subject to all the Accidents and Casualties, that any other Bodies are subject
to, had they themselves at the same time Worshipped the Host, which is subject
to more Accidents than the Stone, Wood, or Brass of the Heathen Images; for
they that do Worship it cannot deny, but that the Host may be Stole, Burnt, eat
by Mice, or other Vermin, and if kep^ too long, will of it self Mould and
Corrupt. They must certainly have the privilege of believing what they have a
mind to, that can believe, That if the Primitive Christians had had any such
Doctrine as this of Transubstantiation among them, considering how many,
especially in times of Persecution, apostatized from the Faith, that it was
possible for them to have concealed it from Celsus, Lucian, Porphyry, and above
all, from Julian the Apostate; or that those Heathens, if they had but had the
least inkling thereof, would not have made the World to have rung with the
noise of it; wherefore their having never mentioned any such thing, considering
the Wit and Spite of the Men, is a demonstration, that there could be no such
Doctrine among Christians in their days; neither can Schelstrat's Doctrina
Arcani, considering the great numbers, quality, and temper of Renegado's, do
any service in this case.
Adoration of Latria is due, or the same that is due to God who is contained
therein, and is really present there. The Effect that this Sacrament works on
the Souls of those that receive it worthily, is the Union of the Man with
Christ, and by it, through Grace, the Man is incorporated into Christ, and
joined to his Members: Moreover by this Sacrament, Grace is increased in all
such as receive it worthily, so that whatever effects Carnal eating and
drinking works upon a Man as to his Corporal Life, the same are wrought upon
Man by this Divine Sacrament as to a Spiritual Life.

Decree I.
THere being nothing so necessary for the Faithful, as the acknowledgement of,
and thankfulness for so profound a Blessing, and so excellent a Mercy as that
which our Lord Christ did for us, in leaving himself under the Sacramental
Species, to be the true Food of our Souls, and for the consolation, support,
and remedy of the Spiritual Life of Believers; we ought therefore wholly to
occupy our selves in the Veneration of that Divine Mystery: In order whereunto,
Holy Mother Church, besides the continual Thanks and Veneration which she
always gives and shows, has ordained a particular Day in the Year for the
celebration of the Memory of so great a Blessing: which not being Observed in
this.] This Feast is of later standing by at least 100 Years, than the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation: It was Instituted in the Year 1240 by Pope Urban, as is
commonly said upon a Vision a Nun had, of the Church's being Imperfect for want
of it; but the Spaniards will have a Miracle that was wrought in Spain at th^^
time, which is both too long and too ridiculous to relate, to have given
occasion to the Pope's instituting it. The Indulgences granted to it by Pope
Urban, Martin, and Eugenius, are 500 days Pardon to all that shall be present
at its first Vespers, 500 to all that shall be present at the Mass of the day,
500 to all that shall be at its second Vespers, and 500 to every day of its
Octaves, as also 500 to every hour of them; and wheresoever it finds any place
interdicted, it takes off the Interdict for eight days.
observed in this Diocese, the Synod desiring that in all things this Church
may conform her self to the Customs of the Holy Mother, the Universal Church of
Rome does command the Festivity of the most Holy Sacrament to be Celebrated in
all the Churches of this Diocese, on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday,
according to the Style of these Parts, and the said Day to be kept by all sorts
of People; and that thereon, either before or after Mass, they make a
Procession through the Town, or in some convenient place with all possible
Solemnity, in the same manner as they do upon Easter Day.

Decree II.
THe Synod does declare, That every faithful Christian so soon as he attains to
the Years of perfect Discretion, that is, to say, Men at the Age of fourteen,
more or less, according as their Confessors shall think fit, and Women having a
Capacity to know what they do at the Age of twelve, are obliged to receive the
most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, once a Year in Lent, or at Easter, from
the hands of their own Vicar or Curate of their Church, and that whosoever does
not receive it, being capable, betwixt the beginning of Lent, and the second
Sunday after Easter, shall be declared Excommunicate on the third Sunday, and
be held as such until they have confessed themselves, and Communicated.
Nevertheless the Synod gives License to such Vicars as know their Parishes to
be of that Nature, that it is not possible for the People to comply with this
Obligation in so short a time, to wait 'till Whitsuntide, and then to declare
them; provided that before they declare those that live on the Heaths, they
shall first take care to admonish them, either by themselves, or by others of
known fidelity, that so they may do their Duty herein, letting them know if
they fail, that they must be declared Excommunicate. The Curates must also be
sure to observe who have complied with this Obligation, putting their Names in
a Roll as is ordered in Confession. But notwithstanding the Sacred Canons do
oblige the Faithful only to confess and communicate once a Year at the time
aforesaid, nevertheless the Vicars shall advise their Parishioners to do it
oftener, namely at Christmas and Whitsuntide, and the Assumption of our Lady,
giving warning thereof still the Sunday before.

Decree III.
THe Synod does declare and teach, That no Christian, how contrite soever for
his Sins, may lawfully come to receive the Divine Sacrament of the Altar, being
guilty of any Mortal Sin, without having first confessed all his Sins entirely,
to some approved Priest that has Authority to receive his Confession, that
being the Trial and Examination that the Apostle speaks of, and says a Man
ought to make of himself, and being so approved and confessed, let him eat of
the Divine Bread, and drink of the Divine Cup; For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, and with a Conscience of Sin, eats and drinks Judgment and
Condemnation to himself; for which reason this Divine Sacrament must not be
given to public Sinners, without they have left their Sins, as public
Witches, and common Women, and such as keep Concubines publicly, and such as
are in open malice, before they are reconciled, and all other open Sinners
whatsoever. In which Matter the Vicars must be extremely careful, being
sensible, that as it is a grievous Sin in such to receive the Divine Sacrament,
before they have forsaken their Sins; so it is likewise a grievous offense in
them to give the Sacrament to such public Sinners, and who are known by all to
live in such Sins, and not to have forsaken them, notwithstanding they should
have been confessed by others, and should bring a Note of their being absolved.
This matter ought to be laid home to the Consciences of the Vicars by reason of
the great dissoluteness that there is in this Bishopric in giving the
Communion to public Sinners, and especially to those that keep Concubines, and
are Married, but will not live with their Wives, and to others who live in open
Malice, without any Body to hinder them, of all which the Vicars must give a
strict Account to God; but at the point of death they may give the Divine
Sacrament even to such as have been public Sinners, if they are not finally
impenitent.

Decree IV.
THe Synod teaches, That this Divine Sacrament ought to be received Fasting,
as Holy Mother Church commands, and that upon the day on which people are to
communicate, they are neither to eat nor drink any thing from Midnight until
after they have received the Communion, not to do so being A most grievous
Sacrilege.] Though the custom of receiving the Sacrament Fasting is very
laudable, yet considering that it was not so received by our Blessed Savior
himself, nor his Apostles when he first instituted it, nor by the Faithful for
some Ages, they must needs carry the matte^ too far, that call the receiving it
otherwise than Fasting, a grievous Sacrilege.
a most grievous Sacrilege, such only excepted as are under any great
infirmity, or much spent with Sickness, who may take Electuaries, and other
light things to strengthen them, of which the Confessor must be judge.

Decree V.
CHristians are not only bound to receive the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar
once a Year, at Easter, but as often as they are in probable danger of Death,
and especially in any great Sickness, for which reason this Divine Sacrament is
called the Viaticum, that is to say, the Support in the way from a Mortal to an
Eternal Life, wherefore the Synod does command all Sick People, whose
Distempers are any thing dangerous, to receive it with much Devotion; and as
they that look after the Sick ought to give the Vicars timely Notice, so the
Vicars themselves must be diligent to enquire what Persons are sick in their
Parishes, that so before they come to be too weak, at a time when it will do
them no prejudice, they may be brought in a Palanquin, or in something else
that covers them, to the Church, there to receive the Holy Sacrament; for which
use there shall be a Palanquin, or Net, made commodious with Carpets, in every
Church, in which the Sick shall be carried with due care, which shall be bought
within a month after the publication hereof out of the Fabric money of the
Church, all which the Synod does recommend earnestly to the Vicars, this being
truly the chief Duty of their Office; and if it shall any time happen that a
Parishioner shall die without having received the Communion, through the Vicars
default, the said Vicar shall be suspended for six months, from his Office and
Benefice, and if it happen through the Vicars not having been advised thereof,
then those that attended the Sick Person, shall be severely punished by the
Prelate.

Decree VI.
WHereas Women are many times in danger of Death in Childbed, a great many
dying therein, the Synod does therefore declare, That all Women with Child
ought about the time when they reckon they are to be delivered, to confess
themselves, and receive the Holy Sacrament, but especially before the Birth of
their first Child, in which the danger is greatest, recommending it to them to
be careful to do it in time, that they may not be prevented by their Labor
from going to Church. Such also as design to undertake any long and dangerous
Voyage, ought to do the same, to whom the Synod recommends it much, and
requires it of them.

Decree VII.
FOrasmuch as there are several Priests and Cazanares of this Diocese that do
never celebrate, some by reason of their having been ordained when they were
but Boys, and so do wait till they come to be of a due Age, and others through
other Impediments, therefore the Synod does command all such to receive the
Holy Sacrament upon all the solemn Festivities, and at least once a month,
wishing they would do it every Sunday with a due preparation and reverence; and
as often as any Priest does communicate, he shall be in a Surplice and Stole,
with a Cross on his Breast to distinguish him from other People, by reason of
the Reverence and Respect that is due to the Sacerdotal Office which he bears.

Decree VIII.
SEeing as is aforesaid, it is not lawful for any Person to come to the most
Holy Sacrament of the Altar, having the least scruple of any Mortal Sin about
him, without having been Sacramentally confessed, the Synod does declare, That
even to Priests it is not lawful, and that none finding in themselves the least
scruple of Mortal Sin, and having an opportunity of a Confessor, shall say
Mass, though under an Obligation to do it, without having first confessed
themselves: But besides, that such when under any scruple are obliged to
confess, for the greater purity of their Souls, though under no scruple the Synod
commands all Priests to confess at least once a Week.

Decree IX.
THe Synod does furthermore command all Deacons and Subdeacons, that Minister
solemnly in the solemn Masses on Sundays and Saints-days, to receive the most
Holy Sacrament at those times, and on the Festivity of our Lord Christ, our
Lady, and the Holy Apostles, all the Chamazes, or Clergy that are in the
Church; of which the Vicars ought to take special care, and the Prelate in his
Visitations is to make diligent Inquiry, how these things are observed.

The Doctrine of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
THe great Love of God to Mankind, does not only appear in the Institution of
the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and in the putting of his Divine Body and
Blood under the Sacramental Species, to be the heavenly Food of our Souls, by
which the Spiritual Life is maintained and preserved, but in his having
likewise so instituted it, that the Catholic Church Militant might have a
perpetual and visible Sacrifice for the purging away of our sins, and for
turning the Wrath of our Heavenly Father, who is many times offended with our
wickedness into Mercy, and the rigor of his just punishment into Clemency: So
in the Mass there is offered unto God a true and proper Sacrifice, for the
pardon both of the Living and of the Dead, by the offering of the which
Sacrifice the Lord is so far appealed as to give Grace, and the Gift of
Repentance to Sinners, and by means thereof does forgive Men their Sins and
Offenses, though never so enormous; the Host that is offered by the Ministry of
the Priest on the Altar of the Church, being one and the same that was offered
for us on the Cross, with no other difference besides that of the reason of
their being offered: And so it is not only offered for the Sins, Punishments,
Satisfactions, and other Necessities of the Faithful that are Living, but also
for the Dead, departed in Christ, and that are in the Torments of Purgatory,
being not as yet fully purged by reason of their not having made a complete
satisfaction for the punishments due to their sins, it being but just and
reasonable, that all should be benefited by a Sacrifice, which was instituted
for the Remedy and Health of all Mankind; which Oblation is of that purity,
that no indignity or wickedness in the Offerers is able to defile it: so that
as to the substance, value, and acceptance, it is the same when offered by a
wicked and unclean sinner, as when by a pure and holy Priest, because it does
not derive its Dignity from the Offerer, but from the Majesty and excellency of
what is offered, neither does the Eternal Father accept thereof for the Merits
and Virtue of the Priest that offers it, but for the value of the Sacrifice it
self, and the infinite Merits of Christ, who is offered therein; so that our
Savior being about to offer himself to God the Father on the Altar of the
Cross, could not possibly have given us a greater expression of his immense
Love for us, than by leaving us this visible Sacrifice in his Church, in which
the Blood which was presently to be once offered upon the Altar of the Cross,
was to be renewed every day upon the Altar of the Church, and the Memory
thereof to our great profit, was to be adored every where in the Church until
the end of the World; which Divine Sacrifice is offered to God only,
notwithstanding it is sometimes celebrated in Memory and Honor of the Martyrs,
and other Saints in Bliss; it not being offered to them but to God only, who
has been pleased to Crown them with Immortal Honor, rendering him thereby our
bounden thanks for the notable Victory of the Martyrs, and the public Mercies
and Blessings he has vouchsafed to other Saints, and for the Victories which by
these means they obtained over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; beseeching
the said Saints to be pleased to intercede for us in Heaven, whose Memories we
celebrate on Earth: and though the Divine Eucharist does still continue to be a
Sacrament, yet it is never a Sacrifice, but as it is offered in the Mass.

Decree I.
FOrasmuch as it is of great moment, that all things belonging to the Sacrifice
of the Mass, should be preserved pure and undefiled, and whereas this Church
has been for 1200 Years.] It would puzzle them to prove that they had ever been
at any time under her obedience; however this shows what a Cheat that
submission of the Patriarch of Babylon, in his own name, and in the name of all
the Churches that were subject to him, to the Pope at the Council of Trent,
was; which Father Paul tells us made a mighty noise in the World, the Court of
Rome boasting thereupon, that the Pope had got more new Subjects by that
submission, than he had lost by the Reformation.
1200 years from under the Obedience of the Holy Roman Church, the Mistress of
all the other Churches, and from whence all good Government and true Doctrines
do come, all the Bishops that came hither from Babylon having been Schismatics
and Nestorian Heretics, who have added to, and taken from the Mass at their
pleasure without any order; from whence it has come to pass, that several
things are foisted into the Syrian Mass which is said in this Diocese, without
any consideration, and such things too as may give occasion to many Impious and
Heretical Errors: For which, if due Order were observed, all the Missals of
this Bishopric ought to be burned, as also for their having been of Nestorian
use, and compiled by Nestorian Heretics; but being there are no other at
present, they are tolerated, until such time as our Lord the Pope shall take
some Order therein, and there shall be Missals sent by him printed in the
Chaldee Tongue, which is what this Synod humbly and earnestly desires may be
done: And in the mean time it does command, that the Missals now in use be
purged and reformed as to all the following Matters, and that till such time as
they are so purged, which the most Illustrious Metropolitan, with the
assistance of some Persons well versed in the Chaldee Tongue will see done the
next Visitation, no Priest shall presume to make use of them any more.

Whereas from the above declared Doctrine of this Sacrament it is evident, that
the Priest does not Consecrate with his own words, but with those of our Lord
Christ, the Author and Institutor of the said Divine Sacrament; it is not
therefore lawful to add any Clause, how good soever in it self to the Form of
Consecration, or to what our Lord Christ said therein; in which we do not
comprehend the word Enim, which the Church of Rome adds to the Consecration of
the Body and Blood; for besides that, there is the Tradition], This is what she
confiden^ly pretends to have for all her N^^elties. Cardinal B^^a in the 23
Chap. of his first Book of Litargies, passes the following true judgment upon
the common practice of the Church of Rome in all such Matters; Orta deinde est
4 fere seculis post 6 Synod ^mcon^rove^sia de and Azymo fermentato, and diu
agitata inter Graec^s and Latinos, partium potius quam veritatis inveniende
studio, ut in similibus fieri solet, atque hinc factum est ut pertinaciter
contenderint suam quisque consuetudinem, a Christo and ab Apostolis ad nostra
usque tempora derivari: sed si omissis hac de re Scholasticorum subtilitatibus
and argumentis quae apud ipsos legi possunt, veritatem sincere and sine affectu
ad alterutram partem ex veterum Patrum monumentis and ex praxi Ecclesiae
investigare voluerimus, inveniemus proculdubio, quam parvi momenti sint in re,
quae a facto pendet, Doctorum speculationes; tum perspicue cognoscemus multum
interesse inter tempora quae praecesserunt, and quae postea secuta sunt, e^sque
turpiter errare, qui ex praesenti rerum statu omnem aestimant antiquitatem;
which is what the Church of Rome has done above these 600 Years, and will do
for all that Cardinal Bona or any body else can tell her of the
unreasonableness of it. But the Cardinal goes on, Quis non videt Scholasticos
ad hanc rem pertractandam pr^occupatis mentibus accessisse, cum enim ab
infantia sola azyma offerri viderint, eaque sola in scholis and in exedris
praedicari audierint, ea sola semper in usu fuisse crediderunt, and hoc posito
varias subinde convenientias, variaque argumenta excogaitrunt, ut quod semel
conceperant, firmius stabilirent. Never was there a truer description given of
any thing, than this the Cardinal gives of the Genius of the People that defend
the Novelties of the Church of Rome.
Tradition of the Holy Apostles, for our Lord Christ's having used it in the
Consecration of the Body; and that St. Matthew also relates it in the
Consecration of the Cup, it is no Clause or distinct Sentence, but a
conjunction to a Sentence of the words of Christ which immediately follow. As
also the word Aeterni in the Consecration of the Cup; and the words Mysterium
Fidei, which though not mentioned by the Evangelists, yet as it is proved by
Apostolical Tradition, were used by our Lord Christ in the Consecration of the
Cup, and for that reason the Holy Church continues to use them in the same; but
as for the words added to the Consecration of the Cup in the Syrian Missal, Et
hoc erit vobis pignus in saecula saeculorum, they being no where in any of the
four Evangelists, nor in any Book of the New Testament; and it not appearing to
the Church by Apostolical Tradition, that Christ used them in that
Consecration, the Synod does prohibit them to be used therein any more; but the
words in themselves being good and Holy, and agreeable to what Holy Church
sings of this Divine Sacrament, that it is the pledge of the Glory that we
expect, that we may keep to the Old Missal so far as the sincerity of the
Faith, and the purity of this Divine Sacrifice will permit, the Priest shall
say them after the elevation of the Cup, where making a profound Reverence, he
shall begin the following Prayers with them, only changing the word Vobis,
which was used as spoke by Christ, for Nobis, as spoke by himself, saying, Hoc
erit nobis pignus; and for the words in saecula saeculorum which follow, they
being commonly said in the Church of such Matters only as are to last for ever,
or are wished to be Eternal, seeing the use of this Divine Sacrament as well as
of the rest, is to continue but to the end of the World, (they having been
instituted only as a remedy for our Spiritual necessities in this life, for in
the other we are to see our Lord no more under Sacramental Species, but clearly
as he is, neither shall we in Heaven eat this Divine Bread of Angels
Sacramentally, but shall eat as the Angels do in the Vision of the Divine
Word.) The words in saecula saeculorum shall be therefore left out, and instead
thereof shall be put usque ad consummationem saeculi, saying, hoc erit nobis
pignus usque ad consummationem, saeculi, the Sacrament being a pledge only for
so long as we do not see the Glory that we hope for, but is and ever will be
such a pledge in this life, Christ having promised to his Church, that he will
be with her to the end of the World; so that the Divine Sacraments, which were
instituted for our benefit, can never fail till then; after these words the
Priest shall go on with what immediately follows in the Mass, Gloria tibi,
Domine, gloria tibi, and so on.

Furthermore in the Consecration of the Cup there is added to the words of
Christ, novi testamenti qui pro vobis, etc. novi and aeterni testamenti
mysterium fidei, qui pro vobis and pro multis, etc. Therefore the Synod does
command, That the words of Consecration of the Body and Blood be reformed, and
put in all their Missals, according to the Canon of the Roman Missal used in
the Universal Church without the least addition or diminution, and with the
same Adorations, Inclinations, and Ceremonies as are in the Roman Missal.

Furthermore, where the Priest says Dominus Deus noster quando spirabit in
nobis odor suavissimus, it is said in the same Prayer, and cum animae nostrae
veritatis tuae scientia fuerint illustratae, tunc occurremus dilecto filio tuo,
etc. speaking of the day of Judgment, it shall be said, Cum corporae nostra
veritatis tuae splendore fuerint illustrata, tunc occurremus dilecto filio tuo,
the Souls of the Just being illuminated and glorified in Heaven before the day
of Judgment, which is the time when the Bodies receive their Glory; this
Passage seeming to allude to the Nestorian Heresy, which teaches that the
Souls of the Just do not see God, nor are Glorified, nor are in Bliss, before
the day of Judgment.

Furthermore, where the Deacon says, Orando pro sanctis patribus nostris
Patriarcha nostro pastore universalis totius Ecclesiae Catholicae, meaning the
Schismatic of Babylon, and Episcopo hujus Metropolis; it shall be said Pro
sanctis Patribus nostris, beatissimo Papa nostro totius Ecclesiae Catholicae
pastore, naming him by his Name, and Episcopo hujus Metropolis, naming him
also, and Ministris ipsorum; and a little lower where the Deacon praying,
says, praecipue nos oportet orare pro incolumitate Patrum nostrorum sanctorum,
domini Patriarchae totius Ecclesiae Catholicae pastoris, naming the Patriarch
of Babylon by Name, instead thereof he shall say, Praecipue oportet nos orare
pro incolumitate patrum nostrorum Domini Papae, naming him also, and Episcopi
hujus Metropolis, naming him also.

Furthermore, when the Deacon a little before says, Commemoramus autem
beatissimam Mariam, virginem Matrem Christi and salvatoris, it shall be said
Sanctam Matrem Dei vivi, and salvatoris, and Redemptoris nostri, etc. because
the perverse Nestorians do impiously deny the Blessed Virgin to be the Mother
of God, as has been observed.

Furthermore, when the Deacon a little lower says, Commemoramus quoque Patres
nostros sanctos and veritatis Doctores Dominum and Sanctum Nestorium, etc. all
which is Heretical, it being an impious thing sacrilegiously to pray to God to
preserve the Doctrine of Nestorius, and of other Heretics his followers in the
Church, all the forementioned having been such except St. Ephraim; wherefore
instead of them he shall say, Commemoramus quoque Patres nostros sanctos
veritatis Doctores S. Cyrillum, etc. And though in some Missals the Names of
Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodorus are already left out, yet they do still
remain in some, and the Names of Abraham and Narcissus, two of the Ringleaders
of that cursed Sect are in all of them. Wherefore there must be care taken to
have them also left out.

Furthermore, in the beginning of the Prayer wherein the Deacon says, Oportet
nos orare and exaltare unum Deum Patrem Dominum omnium adoratione dignissimum,
qui per Christum fecit nobis bonam spem, it shall be said, Qui per Jesum
Christum filium suum Dominum nostrum fecit nobis bonam spem.

Furthermore, where the Priest pouring the Wine into the Cup says, Misceatur
pretiosus Sanguis in Calice Domini nostri Jesu Christi, it shall be said,
Misceatur Vinum in Calice Domini nostri, that no occasion may be given to the
Error of calling the Wine before it is consecrated, The Precious Blood of
Christ, alluding to the condemned Custom of the Greeks, who as they offer the
Bread and Wine before they are consecrated, so they adore them too, saying they
do it for what they are to be; and presently after where the Priest says,
Expectans expectavi Dominum, Corpus Christi and sanguinem ejus pretiosum super
sanctum altar offeramus, it shall be said for the same reason, Panem Sanctum
and Calicem pretiosum offeramus; and immediately after where the Deacon says,
Edent pauperes and saturabuntur, Corpus Christi and Sanguinem ejus pretiosum
super sanctum altar offeramus: He shall say for the same reason, Ede^ pauperes
and saturabuntur, Panem sanctum, and Calicem pretiosum, etc.

Furthermore, where the Priest with a low Voice in the Prayer, which begins,
Offeratur and gloriae immoletur, says, and Christus qui oblatus est pro salute
nostra, he shall say, Jesus Christus Dominus noster Dei filius qui oblatus est,
etc. And where the Priest raising his Voice says, Gloria Patri, etc. Fiat
Commemoratio Virginis Mariae Matris Christi, he shall say, Fiat commemoratio
Virginis Marie Matris ipsius Dei and Domini nostri Jesu Christi; And a little
lower, where the Deacon says, In saecula usque in saecula, Amen, Amen,
Apostoli ipsius filii and amici unigenti; he shall say, Apostoli ipsius filii
Dei and amici. And where the Priest begins, Pusilli cum majoribus, and says,
Resurrectione tua supergloriosa resuscitabis eos ad gloriam tuam, he shall say,
Per Resurrectionem tuam supergloriosam suscitabis eos.

Furthermore, where the Deacon says, Effundite coram illo corda vestra,
jejunio, oratione, and poenitentia, placaverunt Christum, Patrem quoque and
Spiritum ejus sanctum, where in saying, Spiritum sanctum ejus, they seem to
allude to the Error of the Greeks, that the Holy Spirit proceeds only from
the Father, and not from the Father and the Son, as from one principal, as the
Catholic Faith confesses, and because the Nestorians by reason of the great
Communication they have had with the Greeks, have imbibed some of their Errors,
that there may be therefore no countenance given to such an Error, it shall be
reformed thus, Placaverunt Patrem Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum.

Furthermore, In the Prayer where the Priest says, Dominus Deus fortis, tua
est Ecclesia sancta Catholica, quae admirabili Christi tui passione empta est;
it shall be said, Quae admirabili Christi filii tui, etc.

Furthermore, near the end of the Gospel taken out of that Chapter of St. John,
which, as has been observed, is corrupted in the Syrian Translation, where it
is read quoniam venit hora in qua omnes qui in monumentis sunt audient vocem
ipsius, it shall be read audient vocem filii Dei, as it is in the Gospel.

Furthermore, in the Creed that is sung in the Mass there are wanting several
substantial words, where speaking of our Lord Christ, and saying that he was
born of the Father before all Worlds, there is wanting God of God, light of
light, very God of very God, all which shall be added to it: as also the word
consubstantial to the Father, leaving out the words that are in its place, in
the Syrian, filius essentiae Patris, and the whole shall be reformed and
translated into the same words, as it is sung in the Catholic Church in the
Roman Missal.

Furthermore, presently after the Creed, where the Deacon praying for, and
making a Commemoration of the Holy Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, desires of
God that he would raise them up that they may be Crowned with Glory at the
Resurrection of the Dead, saying, Oremus, in quam, ut resurrectione quae est ex
mortuis a Deo corona donentur, which besides that it is not the Custom of the
Church to pray for the Holy Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, nor to desire
any good thing for them, whom we believe to be in possession of Bliss, but much
rather to Pray to them.] The Malabar Custom in this is much the ancienter, as
appears from all the ancient Liturgies; in all which Petitions Christians
prayed for the Dead no otherwise than as we pray for them in the Lord's Prayer,
in the Petition Thy Kingdom come; and in the Office for the Burial of the Dead,
where we beseech God of his gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number
of his Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom.
Pray to them, to intercede for us, and to obtain for us of God, whose familiar
Friends they are, all that we stand in need of, and is of importance, both as
to all our Spiritual and just Temporal Concerns; it seems to allude to the
Nestorian Opinion, That the Souls of the Saints are not to see God, until after
their Bodies are raised at the day of Judgment, and that till then they are in
a Terrestrial Paradise, which is Impious and Heretical; wherefore the Synod
does command, That since there are no such Prayers used in the Church, nor any
such Petitions made to God in behalf of the Saints, notwithstanding they are
said in the Revelation to make them for themselves, that those words be blotted
out, and what follows be joined with what went before, saying, and Confessores
hujus loci and omnium Regionum, oremus, inquam, ut det nobis ut efficiamur
socii eorum, etc. leaving out the forementioned words; and at the end of the
Prayer where it is said, per gratiam Christi, it shall be said Per gratiam Dei,
and Domini nostri Jesu Christi.

Furthermore where the Priest begins Confitemur and laudamus, Domine Deus
noster, where he says below Dignos nos fecisti dispensatione sacramentorum
sanctorum corporis and sanguinis Christi tui, it shall be said Christi filii
tui; as also before where the Priest speaks to those on the right side of the
Altar, and they answer with the Deacon Christus exaudiat orationes tuas, hoc
sacrificium quod tu offers pro te, pro nobis, and pro toto orb a minimo usque
ad maximum, the last words and pro toto orb a minimo usque ad maximum, must be
left out, for the Mass being a public Prayer of the Church, Infidels,
Schismatics and Heretics are not to be prayed for therein, but only
Catholics, and such as are united to the Church; wherefore instead thereof it
shall be said, quod tu offers pro te, pro nobis, and pro universa Ecclesia
Catholica, and omnibus orthodoxis, atque Apostolicae and Catholicae fidei
cultoribus.

Furthermore, where the Priest begins Etiam Domine Deus Exercituum, where he
says, and pro Sacerdotibus, Regibus, and Principibus, it shall be said, and
pro Regibus and Principibus Catholicis, the Christians of this Church being
subject to Infidel Princes; and a little lower, where the Priest begins Tu
Domine cui propter, etc. where he says, recordatione corporis and sanguinis,
it shall be said, Christi filii tui; and a little lower in the same Prayer,
near the end, it shall be said, sanguine Christi filii tui redempta.

Furthermore, where the Deacon and Clergy praying, do say, Et pro omnibus
Patriarchis, Episcopis, and Presbyteris, etc. it shall be said, and pro
beatissimo Papa nostro, naming him, and pro omnibus Patriarchis and Episcopis.

Furthermore, in the Hymn said by the Clergy and the Deacon alternatim after
the elevation of the most Holy Sacrament, in the Verse where the Priest says,
Quando ad sanctum altar ingreditur, manus suas pure protendit in coelum, and
invitat spiritum qui de superis descendit and consecrat corpus and sanguinem
Christi, in which words the Priest seems to call upon the Holy Ghost, to come
down from Heaven to consecrate the Body of Christ, as if it were not the Priest
that consecrated it; whereas in truth it is the Priest that does it, though not
in his own words, but the words of Christ; wherefore that no color may be
given to such an error, it shall be said, manus suas pure protendit in coelum
and consecrat corpus and sanguinem Christi, leaving out the words of and
invitat spiritum qui de superis descendit, etc. and the following words a
saeculo usque in saeculum.

Furthermore, in the Prayer said by the Deacon, which begins Omnes timore
pariter and amore accedamus, where it is said, unigenitus Dei mortale corpus
and spiritualem, rationalem, immortalemque animam ex filiis hominum suscepit,
that there may be no countenance given to an error held by some, and followed
by several Nestorians, that the Soul as well as the Body, is ex traduce, or
derived from the Parents; whereas in truth it is created by God out of nothing,
and infused into the Body when it is perfectly formed; it shall therefore be
said unigenitus Dei mortale corpus ex filiis hominum, and spiritualem,
rationalem, immortalemque animam suscepit. As also where the Deacon after the
Communion of the Priest, inviting the People to communicate, says, fratres mei
suscipite corpus ipsius filii, he shall say ipsius filii Dei.

Furthermore, in the first word of the Benediction of the People, where he
says, Ille qui benedicit nos in coelis, per filium Humanitatis, he shall say
Per filium suum; and in the first Blessing which the Priest gives to the
People, at the end of the Mass, where he says, Cathedra gloriosa Catholicorum
orientalium, meaning Schismatical Babylon, he shall say benedicatur Cathedra
gloriosa Romana, and in the following verse of the same Blessing, where
speaking of the Bishop of the Diocese, he says, Dominus totius gregis
episcopus plenus sobrietate custodiatur a malo, etc. he shall name our Lord the
Pope, saying, Dominius totius gregis catholici Papa N. plenus sobrietate
custodiatur a malo, una cum bono Doctore, and Episcopo nostro N. naming him by
his Name: And a little after in the same Blessing, where he says, Illustris in
congregatione Sanctorum religiosus Hormisda, sanctitas sanctitatum, etc. the
name of Hormisda, who as has been observed, was a Nestorian Heretic, shall be
left out, and instead thereof he shall say, Illustris in congregatione
Sanctorum S. Apostolus Thomas, etc. all that follows agreeing very well with
that glorious Apostle, who first taught the Faith in these parts, and not to
that false Heretic.

Furthermore, in the first Verse of the Blessing of the Solemn Days, where it
is said of the Divine Word, Qui factus est homo, and operuit speciem suam in
filio hominis, for fear of the Nestorian Doctrine it shall be said, Qui factus
est homo, and operuit Divinitatem suam humilitate nostra; and a little lower
where it is said, Benedic Ecclesiam tuam quae patitur, and in ovili pessimi
Daemonis ecce comprehenditur, it shall be said, Quae patitur infestationes a
pessimo Daemone, libera illam, etc. for the Catholic Church though it be
infested and persecuted by the Devil, is not held nor overcome by him, our
Savior having promised, that all the Powers of Hell shall never prevail
against her. And afterward where it is said, Benedic dextratua, Christ,
congregationem hanc, it shall be said, Benedic dextra tua, Jesu Christ, etc.
and in the same Blessing, where it is said, Salva Reges nostros and Duces
nostros, it shall be said, Salva Reges nostros and Duces nostros Catholicos,
all the Kings and Princes of this Church being Infidels, and so ought not to be
prayed for in the public Prayers of the Mass; and a little after, where it is
said, Sicut decet coram ipso Jesu Salvatore, it shall be said, Coram ipso Jesu
Deo Salvatore, because of the Nestorian error; and in the last Verse but one of
that Blessing, where it is said, Qui comedit corpus meum and bibit ex sanguine
meo sanctificante liberabitur ab inferno per me, the words of Christ, Habet
vitam aeternam, shall be used instead of Liberabitur ab inferno; and in the end
of the third Blessing, where it is said, Gloria illi ex omni ore Jesu Domino,
it shall be said, Jesu Domino Deo, because the Nestorians do impiously affirm,
That the name of Jesus is the name of a humane Person, and does not agree to
God.

All the abovementioned particular the Synod does command to be Corrected, as
is here ordered, with such caution as is necessary in these Matters, wherein
the cursed Nestorian Heretics have sown so many Errors.

Decree II.
WHereas in the Missals of this Diocese there are some Masses that were made by
Nestorius, others by Theodorus, and others by Diodorus, their Master, which are
appointed to be said on some certain days, and which, carrying those Names in
their Titles, are full of Errors and Heresies; the Synod does command all such
Masses, entire as they are, to be taken out, and burnt, and in virtue of
Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication Latae Sententiae, does prohibit all
Priests from henceforward to presume to use them, ordering them to be forthwith
cut out of their Books, and at the next Visitation to be delivered by them to
the most Illustrious Metropolitan, or to such as he shall appoint to correct
their Books, that so these Masses may be burnt.

Decree III.
WHereas in the Masses of this Bishopric, there is an impious sacrilegious
Ceremony, which is the Priests, after having dipped that part of the Host, after
his having divided it, which he holds in his right hand, and has made the sign
of the Cross upon the other part that is upon the Patin, opening this latter
part that was upon the Patin with the Nail of his right Thumb, to the end,
according to their Opinion, that the Blood may penetrate the Body, that so the
Blood and Body may be joined together, which is ignorantly done in allusion to
the Heresy of Nestorius, or of his Followers, who do impiously affirm, That
under the Element of Bread is only the Body of Christ without Blood, and under
the Element of Wine the Blood without the Body: Wherefore the Synod does
command in virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be
Ipso facto incurred, that no Priest presume to use any such Ceremony, and that
they throw it out of their Masses, for that besides it alludes to the
forementioned Heresy, it contains a great ignorance in supposing that the
Species can penetrate the Body and Blood of Christ.

Decree IV.
FOrasmuch as the Syrian Mass is too long for Priests that have a mind to
celebrate daily, the Synod does grant License for the translating of the Roman
Mass into Syrian, desiring the Reverend Father Francisco Roz, of the Society of
Jesus to undertake the Work, which Mass together with all the Roman Ceremonies
the Priest may say on particular Occasions, but the solemn and sung Masses of
the day shall be always the Syrian, as they shall be emended by the most
Reverend Metropolitan: and such Priests as are able to say Masses both in Latin
and Syrian in the Churches of other Diocesses, may say it in Latin, but not in
this Bishopric, in which to avoid confusion, it shall be said only in Syrian.
Wherefore the Synod desires the Bishops of those parts to give License, that
the Priests of this Diocese, having Letters dimissory from their Prelate, that
do not know how to say Mass in Latin, may be permitted to say the Syrian Mass
in their Churches, or at least the Roman translated with all its Ceremonies
into Syrian; the Schism which this Church has been in, being now through the
goodness of God removed, entreating the most Illustrious Metropolitan, the
President of this Synod, that he would be pleased to present this Petition in
behalf of the Priests of this Dioces^ to the first Provincial Council that
shall be celebrated in the Province, that so if the Fathers shall think fit, it
may pass into a Decree.

Decree V.
WHereas the Power of handling the Holy Vessels is given particularly to the
order of the Subdeacon, this Synod does command that from henceforward if the
Minister that assists at the Mass be not a Subdeacon, that the Priest shall not
put the Patin into his hand, when he is ordered by the Syrian Mass to do it,
such a one having no Authority to touch it; but he may lay his hand only on the
stone or wood of the Altar, so as not to touch the Patin, which is according to
the Rubric of the Missal, which supposes the Person that assists at the Mass
to be a Deacon, ordering expressly that the Priest shall put the Patin into the
hand of the Deacon.

Decree VI.
WHereas the Stole that is thrown over the Shoulders is the particular Badge of
the Order of Deacon, it is not lawful therefore for any Person that has not
taken the said Order, to use the Stole in the Church with any public Ceremony;
and whereas hitherto all of the Clergy that have assisted at Mass, though but in
inferior Orders, or without them, have wore the said Stole over their
shoulders, no less than the Deacons, contrary to the Ceremoniale, which
supposes him that assists at the Mass to be a Deacon; the Synod does therefore
ordain and command, that from henceforward the Chamazes, who do assist at the
Mass, and are not Deacons, be not permitted to wear the Stole; it would also be
decent for the Deacons when they wear the Stole, to be in a Surplice, and to
have a Towel, and not to have it over their ordinary wearing Cloths, as has
been hitherto the Custom.

Decree VII.
THe Synod does command, That in all Churches there be Stamps of Hosts (or
Instruments wherewith to print the Wafers that are to be Consecrated) which
shall be bought forthwith out of the Fabrick-money, or the Alms of the Church;
and that the Vicars take care to be always provided of the flour of Wheat, for
the making of them, which they must be sure not to mix with any thing else, as
is done commonly in other Bread, for fear there should be no Consecration
therein; wherefore they must either make them themselves, or employ such as are
of known Skill and Fidelity to do it, and the same care shall be taken of the
Wine that it be no other than that of Portugal, and that it be not mixed with
the Juice of Raisins, or with any other Wines of the Country for the same
danger.

Decree VIII.
THe Synod does earnestly recommend it to the Priests of this Diocese to take
heed in what Wine they celebrate, having been informed, That as some Churches,
by reason of their Poverty, are without Portugal Wine, so where it is that the
Priest keeps it in Glass Bottles, where being in a small quantity, and kept a
long time, it must necessarily decay and turn to Vinegar, with which they
celebrate notwithstanding, not considering the danger there is of there being
no Consecration; for remedy whereof the Synod in the strictest manner that it
can, does command, That in every Church there shall be in the Vicars keeping a
sweet pipe, or small Runlet of Wood, or a Frask, in which the Wine for the
Masses shall be kept, and that the Vicars be extremely careful, that the Wine
do not decay or turn to Vinegar; which if it should happen so as to have lost
the essence of Wine in the Opinion of those that have good Palates, they shall
not then celebrate therewith, it being a great Sacrilege to do it, seeing there
can be no Consecration.

Decree IX.
WHereas for want of Portugal Wine, it many times falls out that there are no
Masses celebrated in this Diocese, to the great prejudice of the Faithful
Christians, who for that reason are several months without hearing Mass, and
without an opportunity of receiving the most Holy Sacrament, and the Sick of
receiving the Holy Viaticum; wherefore the Synod, for remedy hereof, does
entreat his Majesty the King of Portugal, out of his great Piety, and as he is
Protector of the Christians of these parts, once a Year to send us as an Alms,
a Pipe and a half, or two Pipes of Muscatel Wine of Portugal, to be distributed
among the Christian Churches of this Bishopric, and of the whole Indies; and
till such time as an Answer shall be returned to this Petition, the most
Illustrious Lord Archbishop of Goa, Dom ffray Aleixo de Menezes, Metropolitan
of this Church, Primate of India, and President of this Synod, is pleased to
give the said quantity of Wine to be distributed among the Churches of this
Bishopric, the distribution whereof shall be made by the Prelate according to
the Informations he shall receive of the Necessities of every Parish, and
whereas all the successes of this Life are uncertain, if this should happen to
fail at any time, the Prelate shall then at his Visitation take so much out of
the stock of every Church as shall suffice to purchase what Wine is necessary,
and the Wine shall be committed to the Vicar, who shall make use of it only in
the Masses that are said in the Church, and order shall be taken that the Mass
of the day, which belongs to the whole Parish, and is the chief obligation of
the Church, shall be celebrated without fail.

Decree X.
THis Synod being very doubtful whether the Stones of the Altar, on which the
Masses are said in the Churches of this Diocese, be consecrated with Holy Oil,
or truly Blessed, by reason of the small care and knowledge which the former
Prelates coming from Babylon had of such Matters; does command, That all such
as are not well known to have been lawfully Consecrated, shall be brought to
the most Reverend Metropolitan that they may be Consecrated by him, whom the
Synod does entreat to provide such Churches with Stones as want them:
Commanding likewise, all Cups that are not of Gold, Silver, Copper or Tin, to
be broke, and No Cups.] In the Primitive Church they thought it no such Crime
to make use of wooden Chalices in the celebration of the Sacrament. So Honorius
in the 89 Chap. of his 3. Book De gemma animae, says, Apostoli and eorum
success^res in ligneis Calicibus Missas celebrarunt: And Boniface Bishop of
Mentz, being asked in the Council of Triburis, whether it were Lawful to
celebrate in Wooden Chalices, answered, Quondam Sacerdotes aurei ligneis
Calicibus utebantur, nunc e contra lignei Sacerdotes aureis utuntur Calicibus.
no Cups to be used but what are made of one of these Metals, and that Mass be
never said in any of these after they are broken; and seeing there are many
Churches that for want of Cups have no Masses, the Lord Metropolitan is desired
to give order, that all Churches be furnished with Cups.

Decree XI.
WHereas there are many poor Churches in this Bishopric, and especially in the
Heaths, that have no consecrated Vestments for the saying of Mass, and for that
reason have but few said in them, to the great prejudice of the faithful
Parishioners; therefore the Synod does command, That out of the Alms of the
Parish the most Reverend Metropolitan may provide all Churches with Holy
Vestments, so that none may be without them, and for that reason be without
having Masses every Sunday; and in those Parishes where the Alms shall not be
found to be sufficient to do it, the said Lord Metropolitan is desired to take
such order therein, that they may be some way or other provided, and have so
great a want supplied.

Decree XII.
WHereas the Christians of this Diocese have not hitherto heard Mass as upon
obligation, having never imagined that the not hearing thereof upon some
particular days was a mortal sin; for which reason, some have without any
scruple neglected going to hear it, and others have not stayed to hear it out;
therefore the Synod does declare, That it is the Precept of the Universal
Church, and that upon penalty of a mortal Sin, that all Christians, Men and
Women, having no lawful impediment, do hear an entire Mass upon every Sunday
and Holy Day that is commanded to be kept, if they have the opportunity of a
Priest to say it to them. As also, that all Masters of Families are obliged by
the said Precept, to make their Children, and such of their Servants and Slaves
as are Christians, and all other Persons living in their Families, to go every
Sunday and Holy Day to hear Mass, which every one shall endeavor to hear at
his own Parish Church, or at the place where he then happens to be; and as for
those who with just reason are afraid to leave their Houses alone without any
body in them, and especially such as live in Heaths, and are a great way from
any Church, they shall so order the matter, that all in their Families shall
take their turns of going to Mass and staying at home on Sundays; and the
Vicars of the Churches must be careful to mark all such as are negligent
herein, and reprove, admonish, and punish them, so as they shall judge
necessary: and where there is any number of Clergy, they shall sing the Mass on
Sundays and Holy Days: and when there is not a competent number, there the Mass
shall be said at a convenient hour, the whole Parish being present, and he
shall at the same time Preach, publish their Admonitions, the Banes of
Matrimony, and whatsoever else is necessary in the Church.

Decree XIII.
THe Synod being informed that most of all the Christians that live out of
Towns and Villages in the Heaths, being a great way from Church, do go to
Church but once a Year, on the three days before Lent, which they call Monorbo,
and then rather to fill their Bellies with what is given by Christians at that
time, than to hear Mass; and that there are others who content themselves with
going to hear Mass twice or thrice in the Year, and so have no opportunity of
being instructed in matters of Faith and Religion as they ought to be, nor of
complying with their Obligations, does command all Christians living within two
Leagues of the Church to go to Mass at least once a Month, and on the principal
Festivities of our Lord and Lady, commanding the Vicars also to constrain them
to do it; and all such as are but one League, to hear Mass once a Fortnight,
and such as are less than a League, to hear it every Sunday and Holy Day;
commanding all that shall trangress herein, being obstinate, after the third
Admonition, to be thrown out of the Church when they come thither; neither
shall the Priest go to their Houses, or give them the Casture, or Blessing,
until they shall come to hear Mass, more or less, in the Form aforesaid; and
besides, they shall be punished by the Prelate as he shall think good.

Decree XIV.
WHereas upon several Festivals of the Church there are Musicians called to the
celebration thereof, according to the custom of the Country, who are all
Heathens, small care being taken in what part of the Church they are placed, or
to hinder them from playing during the time of the Holy Sacrifice, at which no
Excommunicate Person or Infidel ought to be present, therefore the Synod does
command, that great care be taken not to suffer them to remain in the Church
after the Creed is said, or the Sermon, if there be one, is ended, that so they
may not behold the Holy Sacrament; the Vicar shall also be careful to drive all
Heathens who may come upon such occasion, from the Doors and Windows of the
Church.

Decree XV.
WHereas there is nothing that is so great a help to the Souls of the Faithful
that are in the Fire of Purgatory.] I shall give the Reader one instance out of
a hundred of the Popes liberality in the matter of Indulgences to Souls in
Purgatory. INdulgencias Concedidas pello Papa Adriano VI. de boa Memoria as
contas, ou graos que benzeo a Instancia do Illustrissimo Cardeal Laquinaues
Trigermano Barbarino no Anno de 1523. E. Confirmadas pelo Santissimo Padre
Gregorio Decimo tercio aos 26 de Mayo de 1576. E bien assi confirmadas pelo
Sanctissimo Padre Pape Paulo quinto no anno de 1607. E. tambem agora
confirmadas por nosso santissimo Papa Urbano Octavo no quarto anno de sue
Pontificado.

Primeiramente, quem tiuer huma destas contas, rezando hum Pater Noter, et huma
Ave Maria cada dia tira tres Almas das penas do Purgatorio and de for em
Domingo, ou em Dia se festa rezando dobrado tira de is.

Item, Cada sexta feira rezando sinco vezes O Pater Noster, and Ave Maria a
honra das sinco chagas, de Christo, ganha setenta mil annos de perdam, et
remissam de todos seus peccados.

Item, em cada Sabbado rezando sete Pater Nostres, et sete Ave Marias, aos sete
gozos de nossa Senhora, ganha indulgencia sem numero.

Item, Quem nano poder correr as estacoens de Roma na Quaresma rezando sinco
Pater nostres, et sinco Ave Marias diante da imagem de nam Crucifixo ganha as
ditas estacoens dentro et fora, dos muros de Roma and Jerusalem.

Item, Trazendo consigo huma destas contas confessado, et comungado ganha
indulgencia plenaria, et remissam de todos seus peccados.

Item, O Sacerdote, que confessa et comunga ganha indulgencia plenaria, et
remissam de todos seus peccados, et alem disto ganha tam bem todas as
indulgencias, que estam dentro, et fora de Roma, and Jerusalem.

Item, avendo comungado, quantas vezes rezer O Pater Noster, and a Ave Maria,
tantas almas tira do Purgatorio.

Item, Concede sua Santidade, que estas contas, qua sua Santidade benzeo,
possam tocar a outras, as quaes tocadas ficam com as mesmas gracas, salvo que
estas tocadas nam possam tocar as outras Dada em Roma a 15 de Janeiro de 1607.

Nos Joano Ambrosio Referendario Apostolico Visto estar conform com o
Original, pode correr este Summario de Indulgencia Lisboa 11. de Junho de 1642.

Er. Joano de Vascocel. Franc. Card. de Torn. Sebastiano Caesar de Meneses.

Com. Licenca. Em. Lisboa Na Officina de Domingos Carneyro Anno 1660.

Indulgences granted by Pope Adrian VI. of Blessed Memory, to some Beads or
Grains which he blessed at the instance of the most Illustrious Cardinal
Laquinaues Trigermano Barbarino, in the Year 1523. and which were confirmed by
the most Holy Father Gregory X. on the 26 of May 1576. and were also confirmed
by the most Holy Father Pope Paul V. in the Year 1607. and were now again
confirmed by our Holy Father Pope Urban VIII. in the 4th Year of his
Pontificate.

First. Whosoever shall have one of these Beads, and shall recite a Pater
Noster and an Ave Mary every day, shall take three Souls out of the Torments of
Purgatory; and if he shall double them upon a Sunday or Holy Day, he shall take
out six.

2. If he shall say five Pater Nosters and five Ave Mary's to the honor of the
five Wounds of Christ upon a Friday, he shall gain seventy thousand Years
Pardon and Remission of all his Sins.

3. If he shall every Saturday say seven Pater Nosters, and seven Ave Mary's to
the seven Joys of our Lady, he shall gain Indulgences without number.

4. He that cannot go the Stations at Rome in Lent, if he shall say five Pater
Nosters and five Ave Mary's before a Crucifix, he shall gain the said Stations
within and without the Walls of Rome and Jerusalem.

5. He that shall bring one of these Beads along with him, and shall Confess
and Communicate, shall gain a plenary Indulgence and remission of all his Sins.

6. The Priest that shall Confess him, and give him the Sacrament, shall
likewise gain a plenary Indulgence, and the remission of all his Sins; and
moreover, all the Indulgences which are within and without Rome and Jerusalem.

7. Having Communicated, as often as he shall say a Pater Noster and Ave Mary,
so many Souls he shall take out of Purgatory.

His Holiness does likewise grant, That these Beads which have been blessed by
his Holiness, may touch other Beads, which being touched by them, shall have
the same Graces, saving that those which are touched cannot touch others.

Dated at Rome the 15th. of January, An. 1607.
We John Ambrosio, Referendary Apostolic, having seen this summary of
Indulgence to be conformable to the Original, it may be Published.

Er. Joan. de Vasconcel. Franc. Card. de Torn. Caesar de Meneses.

With License. In Lisbon in the Shop of Domingo Carneyro, 1660.


Purgatory as the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, of which there is no memory
remaining in this Diocese; that Holy Sacrifice having been instituted for the
health and remedy of the Living and of the Dead: Wherefore the Synod does
exhort all the Faithful of this Bishopric to accustom themselves to procure
Masses.] Private Masses are not only a flat contradiction to the Primitive
Practice, but to the very Office wherein they are celebrated, all that Office
being made in the name of a Congregation, not only as present, but as
communicating. A demonstration that the Offices of the Roman Church are older
than her Errors; it is plain likewise from the very Canon of the Mass, that
when that Office was composed, Transubstantiation was not so much as dreamt of
in the Roman Church; but as to the thing in hand, Cardinal Bona in the 3 Chap.
of his 1 Book of Liturgies, says, Ab initio Sacrificium principaliter
institutum fuit, ut public: ac solemniter fi ret, Clero and populo astante ac
communicante, ipse tenor Miss and veteris Ecclesiae praxis evincunt; omnes
enim Orationes atque ipsa Canonis, verba in plurali numero tanquam plurium
nomine, proferuntur: hinc sacerdos populum invitat ad Orationem dicens Oremus,
and post Communionem ait quod ore sumpsimus, etc. Suntque fere omnes ejusdem
tenoris Orationes quae peracta Communione recitantur: And in the 18th Chap. of
the same Book he says, Solenne hoc fuit in utraque Ecclesia Graeca and Latina,
ut unum and idem Sacrificium a pluribus interdum Sacerdotibus celebraretur;
Episcopo enim sive Presbytero celebrante, reliqui quotquot aderant Episcopi seu
Presbyteri simul celebrabant ejusdemque Sacrificii participes erant, etc. And a
little after he adds, Cur autem desierit ille mos causa mihi videtur fuisse
primo quidem quod fundatis ordinibus mendicantibus and long lateque
propagatis, multiplicata sunt ones a Missarum, atque adeo necesse fuit singulos
Sacerdotes, ut iis satisfacerent singulis diebus privatim celebrare, deinde
quia charitas multorum refrixit, cessarit etiam frequens accessus ad hoc
Sacramentum adeo ut hodie nec ipsi quidem ministri in plerisque Ecclesiis
Communicent, licet Sacrificio cooperantur. To which the Cardinal might have
added the Introduction of the Doctrine of Purgatory, and the consequent
Doctrine of Masses being the most effectual means of delivering the Souls out
of the Torments thereof. So John the IV. of Portugal, ordered ten thousand
Masses to be said for his Soul, as soon as he was dead.
Masses to be said for the Souls of their deceased Friends, and to leave
something by Will that they may have Masses said for their own Souls, which
will be much more profitable for them than the Feasts that they used to make
for their Kindred and others invited to their Funerals; which Custom shall be
left off, and instead thereof, they shall give a Dole to the Poor, which is
also very profitable to the Souls of the departed. And that the Decree relating
to such Masses may have its due effect, the Synod does command, That all that
shall be found to have died worth 2000 Fanoins, and have left nothing for a
certain number of Masses to be said for their Souls, shall have so much taken
out of their Estates before they shall be divided among the Heirs, as shall
procure the saying of five Masses for their Souls, which shall be deposited by
the Executors in the hands of the Churchwardens, by them to be distributed
among five Priests, that they may be the sooner said; and where there are more
than five Priests, the Alms shall be given to the five Eldest, there not being
sufficient to divide among them all; and where there is only the Vicar of the
Church, the whole shall be given to him: which Custom of procuring Masses to be
said for the Souls of the Faithful departed this Life, as it is used in the
Universal Church, so it is what this Synod is extremely desirous to introduce
into this Bishopric, wherein it has been totally disused, recommending this
Matter earnestly to the Preachers and Confessors, to persuade all Christians to
it in their Sermons and Confessions, and to the Vicars to do the same in their
Admonitions.

ACTION VI. Of the Holy Sacrament of Penance and Extreme Unction.
THe Fourth Sacrament is that of Penance, in which the Acts of the Penitent
are, as it were, the Matter, and are distinguished into these three parts,
Contrition of Heart, Confession of the Mouth, and Satisfaction for Sins,
according to the direction of the Confessor. It belongs to the Contrition of
the heart, that the Penitent be sorry at his Soul for the Sins that he has
committed, and detesting them, is firmly resolved not to commit them any more:
which Contrition, though it sometimes happen to be perfect through Charity, so as
to reconcile one to God even before he has actually received the Sacrament of
Confession, yet it can never be perfect, nor a means of reconciliation with
God, if not attended with a readiness and purpose of mind to confess those very
sins which it is conversant about; such sins being no less subject than others,
to the Keys and the engagements to Confession. It belongs to the Confession of
the mouth, that the Penitent Confess himself entirely to his own Priest, as to
all the sins that he remembers, using all due diligence according to the length
of the time, since he last Confessed himself; and this Confession is not to be
only of sins in general, nor only of the Species of them, but of every sin in
particular, and as far as the Penitent is able to remember of their number;
declaring withal, all the aggravating Circumstances, and all such as change the
Species; in a word, all mortal sins, how secret soever, though only in thoughts
and wicked desires; as also all faults committed against the two last
Commandments; Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife; Thou shall not covet
any thing that is another; such sins being at some times more dangerous for
the Soul, than others that are open; all which we are commanded to do by the
Divine Law; our Savior when he ascended into Heaven, leaving the Priests for
his Vicars upon Earth, and constituting them Judges, before whom all mortal
sins committed by Christians, were to be brought, that by the power of the
Keys, which he committed to them to forgive or retain sins, they may pronounce
Sentence, which cannot be just and Righteous, neither can the punishments they
impose be equal or proportionated to the Nature of the Faults, without their
having a full knowledge of the same, as of the matter that they pass Sentence
upon; which knowledge cannot be had but by the Penitents confessing all and
every Mortal Sin, whereon Judgment is to pass, not only in general, but in
specie and number, making mention of every such Sin in particular, with all its
necessary circumstances, that so a just sentence o^ absolution or retention may
be pronounced upon them. And as to Venial Sins which we frequently fall into,
and for which we are not excluded from the Grace of God, though the confessing
of, and being absolved from them, is very profitable to the Soul, yet we are
not under any such precise obligation of confessing them, there being other
ways by which they may be pardoned, so that it is no sin not to discover them.
The third part of Penitence, is, Satisfaction for Sins according to the
judgment of the Confessor; which satisfaction is chiefly performed by Prayer,
Fasting and Alms, the Penitent being obliged to comply with the Penance imposed
upon him by the Priest, who being as a Judge in the place of God, ought to
impose what he thinks to be necessary, not only with respect to the amendment
of Sin for the future, but chiefly with respect to the Satisfaction and Penance
of past Sins. The Form of this Sacrament is, I absolve thee, to which necessary
words the Church has thought fit to add the words following, from all thy Sins,
in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. There are also
some Prayers which the Priest says immediately after over the Penitent, which,
though they are not essential to the form, yet are very profitable and healthful
for the Penitent. Now by pronouncing the form, not only all the Sins that are
confessed, but all those likewise which after a due diligence and Examination
of the Conscience do not occurr to the Memory, so as to be discovered, all such
being included in the said Confession, are all pardoned; though with an
obligation of confessing them, if they should ever after come to be remembered,
sins being as it were chains to the Soul, from which it is delivered by the
absolution of the Priest, which is applicable to such, as by virtue of
contrition joined with a desire of confessing, have obtained pardon of God for
their Sins, which they were under an obligation to have confessed: as also to
those Sins which were never confessed, because not remembered after a due
diligence, and to those likewise which having been once lawfully confessed and
truly pardoned, are by the Penitent of his own accord, and for the greater
Penance confessed and submitted to the Keys several times. The Minister of this
Sacrament is a Priest, who has Authority to absolve, and is either the
Ordinary, as the Prelates, or such as are commissioned and approved of by them.
The effect of this Sacrament is, The absolution and pardon of Sins, and for
that reason it is by the Doctors properly called the Table after Shipwreck,
because the Grace which was given to us in Baptism, being lost by the
commission of Mortal Sin, by which we make Shipwreck thereof, and of all the
other Virtues and Gifts, which together therewith were poured down upon us,
there remains no other remedy or means whereby we can be saved, but only by the
plank of Penance, or the Sacrament of Confession; for that without this either
actually received, or firmly purposed according to the command of Holy Mother
Church with contrition, wherein such a purpose is always included, we cannot be
saved nor enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for which reason this Sacrament
ought to be much reverenced and frequented, as the only remedy that sinners
have for all their evils.

Decree I.
WHereas an entire Sacramental Confession is of Divine right, and necessary to
all those who after Baptism fall into any Mortal Sin, and Holy Mother Church
does command all faithful Christians who are come to the use of Reason, upon
pain of Mortal Sin, to confess at least once a Year in the time of Lent, or at
Easter, when all that are capable are bound likewise to receive the most holy
Sacrament of the Altar, declaring all that neglect to do it, to be
excommunicate; and notwithstanding, this Precept has not hitherto been in use
in this Bishopric, in which no Christian has ever confessed upon Obligation,
and a great many not at all, which was occasioned through their ignorance of
this healthful precept, and of the necessity of this Divine Sacrament, this
Church having been governed by Schismatical Chaldaeans, and Nestorian
Heretics, the particular Enemies of this Sacrament, being the cause of their
being totally unacquainted with the Virtue, Efficacy, and Necessity thereof.
Some not using it all, others being persuaded by the Devil into a vain and
superstitious Opinion, That if they should confess themselves, they should die
immediately, all which having been made known to the most Illustrious
Metropolitan in his first Visitation of these Churches, he at that time
persuaded a great many that had never done it before to confess themselves,
having undeceived them as to the unreasonable and pernicious mistakes which
they lay under, therefore the Synod the more to further this, does declare that
it is the Duty of every faithful Christian, upon penalty of Mortal Sin, to
observe the precept of the Church concerning Confession, at the time by her
determined and founded on the Divine precept of Confession, for all such as are
fallen from Grace, by the Commission of any Mortal Sin, and does command all
faithful Christians Men and Women, that are arrived at the Years of Discretion,
to confess themselves to their own Vicar, or to such Priests as are licensed by
the Prelate to hear Confessions, at the time of Lent, or against Easter, and
that whosoever shall not have complied with this Precept, or is not confessed
sometime betwixt the beginning of Lent, and the second Sunday after Easter,
shall be in the Church declared Excommunicate by the Vicar without waiting for
any order from the Prelate to do it, until he has effectually confessed
himself, and has undergone the punishment due to his Rebellion; and if the
Vicar shall for some just reason think fit to wait any longer, for some that
have been negligent, and who being busy have desired to be dispensed with till
Whitsuntide, it shall be in their power to bear with them, according to what is
determined in the 2d. Decree of the 5th. Action, of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, having first admonished those that live in the Heaths, or are at
Sea, or engaged in Business in such places where there are no Churches to
confess in, that when they return home, they are bound to do it within a month.

And that the whole of this may be executed, with the more ease, and be
performed as is reasonable, the Vicars of the Churches shall be obliged a month
or more before Lent, if it be necessary to go to all the Houses of their
Parishes belonging to Christians, however remote in the Heaths, either in
Person, or by some other Clergyman, whom in Conscience they can trust with such
a business, and taking the Names of all the Christians even to the very Slaves
in every Family that are nine Years old and upward, and of those too that are
abroad, observing whether they do return home after the time of the Obligation,
and having made a Roll of Parchment of all that are of Age to confess
themselves, they shall afterward make a mark at their Names as they come to
Confession, that so they may know certainly who have, and who have not
complied, that the Disobedient may be Excommunicated, which we declare to be
the precise Obligation of their Office, the Pastor being bound to know his
Sheep, that he may give them Food, and so far as he is able, supply all their
necessities, Temporal as well as Spiritual, and to have their number, that he
may know when any are lost; and for the perfecting of such a Roll the Vicars
may take the advantage of the Monoibo, at which time all Christians do flock to
the Churches, at which time likewise they may hear of many that live in the
Heaths. And as to those that have confessed themselves to some other approved
Confessors, they shall bring a Note signed by them of their having been
confessed, which they shall deliver to their Vicar, who shall thereupon mark
them in his Roll; but though it is lawful for them to confess themselves to
Confessors that are Strangers, yet they cannot receive the most Holy Sacrament,
nor the Communion upon Obligation in Lent any where, but in their own Parish
Churches, and the Prelates in their Visitations shall call for those Rolls, in
order to inform themselves how this Decree is observed.

Decree II.
WHereas the Precept of Confession obliges all that have the use of Reason,
and conscience of mortal Sin, which happens sooner to some than others, the
Synod therefore taking the most safe and probable way, according to the
knowledge it has of the People of Malabar, does ordain, That at eight Years
old and upward, all People shall Confess themselves, and that without
prohibiting such as are younger and capable to do it sooner; on the contrary,
the Vicars, if they shall understand that there are any under eight, of so much
Judgment and Discretion, as to be capable of committing a mortal Sin, they
shall immediately constrain them to come to Confession, as being obliged to it,
which must be left to the discretion of the Parish Priests.

Decree III.
THe Synod does admonish all Masters of Families, and all that have the charge
of others, to be careful to make all the Persons in their Families to confess
themselves at the time of Obligation, and particularly their Servants and
Slaves, both Men and Women, who if they do never come to Confession, their
Masters and none else must be certainly in the Fault, in having neglected to
put them in mind of it, and to order them to do it, it being their Duty, and
that upon penalty of Mortal Sin, to call upon them to do it, of which they must
give a strict Account to God, the Apostle St. Paul affirming, That he who does
not take care of his Servants, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
Infidel; which words are chiefly to be understood of the Spiritual Necessities
of those of his Family, and of Matters appertaining to their Salvation; about
which matters the Vicars ought to be very careful, and must observe whether the
Slaves, whose Names as well as others, they must have down in their Rolls, do
come to Confession, declaring such of them as have not complied with their
obligation at the time appointed, Excommunicate, having first admonished their
Masters to command them to come, and acquainted them with the Declaration that
will be made if they do not: and the Vicars that shall be found negligent
herein, shall be punished at the discretion of the Prelate.

Decree IV.
ALL faithful Christians are not only obliged to Confess themselves once a
Year, under penalty of mortal Sin, but also as often as they are in any
probable danger of Death, or are very Sick, they are under the same obligation;
wherefore the Sick Persons or those that attend them, so soon as ever they
shall apprehend any danger, wherever they live, though in the Heaths, shall
send to call a Confessor, and shall advise the Vicar of the Church thereof, who
shall either go himself, or send another to hear their Confessions. The Vicars
are also to understand, that it is their indispensible duty to enquire after
the Sick, and either to go to Confess them themselves, or to send another to do
it, whenever they shall be sent for, that so none may die without the Holy
Sacrament of Confession, they being guilty of the Condemnation of such of their
Sheep as go to Hell for not having confessed their Sins before they died, if it
was through their fault or negligence it was not done. And the Vicar, through
whose fault or negligence any of the Parish shall die without Confession, shall
be suspended from his Office and Benefice for a whole Year without any
dispensation, and another shall be appointed to supply his Cure, and the
Persons that attend the Sick, that shall neglect to send for the Parish Priest,
shall be severely punished at the discretion of the Prelate; and such as die in
Hamlets or in Heaths without Confession, if they did not send to call a
Confessor, if their death was not so sudden as to prevent them, shall not be
buried in Holy Ground, neither shall the Clergy go to their Houses, or say the
Office of the Dead for them, nor so much as the Chata.

Decree V.
NOt only such as are dangerously Sick, but all that are any ways in danger of
Death, are obliged to Confess themselves; wherefore since all Women in
Childbirth are in danger thereof, they shall before they are in Labor,
Confess themselves, but especially before the birth of their first Child, at
which time the danger is known to be the greatest; and shall likewise, if
capable, receive the most Holy Sacrament; and if any such, not being surprised
by their Labor, shall die without Confession, or being in visible danger, did
not desire it, their negligence being proved, and especially if they lived in
Towns, they shall be proceeded against in the same manner, as those are who
through their own fault die without Confession as is above decreed.

Decree VI.
THe Synod being informed that the greatest part of those that die of the
Smallpox, though they lived in Towns and desired Confession, do die without it,
that Distemper being so very dangerous and infectious, that the Priests are
afraid of coming near those that have it; does command all Vicars to be
careful, that none such do die without Confession, and either to go themselves,
in Person, or to send one to Confess them; a due regard being still to be had
to their own health, either by confessing them at some distance, or so that the
Wind shall blow the steams from them, and by having taken preservatives against
the Distemper; that so none may die without Confession, which is what the Synod
does very earnestly recommend to them in the Lord.

Decree VII.
THe Synod does earnestly recommend to all the faithful Christians Inhabitants
of this Bishopric, not to satisfy themselves with having confessed their Sins
once a Year at Easter, when they are bound to it upon the penalty of mortal
Sin; but that they do frequently make use of this Sacrament, in proportion to
the Sins they fall into daily, and not to fail to Confess themselves on the
Festivities of the Nativity of the Holy Ghost, and the Assumption of our Lady,
and at the Wake of their Parish, and the Vicars must not fail to admonish their
People thereof on the Sunday before those Festivities.

Decree VIII.
THe Synod does declare, That notwithstanding the power of pardoning Sins is
annexed to the Sacerdotal Order, nevertheless that all Priests cannot hear
Confessions, but only such as are Licensed by the Prelate; for the Act of
Absolution being an Act of Jurisdiction, and Judicature, cannot be without
Subjects, which the Prelate only can give when he appoints Confessors with such
limitations as he thinks necessary; so that a Priest having no License, or
transgressing the bounds that were set to him by his Prelate, if he shall
presume to hear Confessions and Absolve, his Confessions and Absolutions are
void and of no force; neither are the Sins of the Penitents pardoned, who are
therefore bound to Confess themselves again to a Confessor that has power to
Absolve, as if they had not Confessed before; but when any one is in probable
danger of Death, and cannot have a Priest that is Licensed, any Priest, though he
is not Licensed, may Confess and Absolve him in that case.

Decree IX.
WHereas it belongs to the good Government of the Church and the Faithful, that
Crimes of a heinous nature should be judged not by every Priest, but by
Prelates or Bishops, because for that reason Christians will be the more
fearful to commit them; besides that, it has always been the Custom of the
Church, to reserve to the Prelates, and even to the Pope as the Universal Head
of the Church, some Crimes from which they and none else can Absolve, or not do
it without their leave: therefore the Synod does declare, That notwithstanding
this Doctrine has not hitherto been understood or practiced in this Bishopric,
by reason of the great Ignorance of the Church and sacred Canons that has
reigned therein: Nevertheless, that the ordinary Confessors have no power to
Absolve in cases reserved to the Prelate, and least of all in those that are
reserved to the Pope, namely, those contained in the Bulla Coen^ Domini; which
all Confessors ought to be acquainted with; neither can they Absolve in the
Crime of Heresy, or in any cases wherein the Faith is concerned; all which do
belong to the Court of the Holy Office of Inquisition, or to such as are
Commissioned by them, or to the Bishop who by himself may Absolve in the Form
of the Holy Council of Trent; and according to the Ordinations of the Holy
Fathers: Neither can ordinary Confessors dispense with or change the Vows of
Penitents, because that belongs to the Prelate, or such as are deputed by him,
or that have obtained Apostolical Privileges to that effect. Only at the point
of Death, not only approved Confessors, but also all simple Priests, there
being no other to be had, are obliged to hear Confessions, and may also Absolve
in all Cases and from all Censures to whomsoe'er reserved. Though as to the
Censures with this Obligation, that if the Sick Person shall recover, they
shall return to the Persons again to whom they were before reserved, from whom
they shall receive such healthful Penance as shall be thought meet.

Decree X.
THat Confessors may the better know in what Cases they may, and in what Cases
they may not absolve their Penitents, having no Authority to do it, the Synod
does command the Bulla Coenae Domini, and all the Cases reserved in this
Bishopric to be pasted on a Board, and set up in all Sacristies, and where
there are no Sacristies, in the chief Chapel in every Church in the Malabar
Tongue, for the direction of the Confessors, and does furthermore in its
regulation of the reserved Cases in this Diocese, declare, That willful
Murder, publicly committed with violence on the Person of an Ecclesiastic,
the voluntary firing of Houses, or of any Goods belonging to Christians, formal
Simony both in the givers and receivers, marrying without the Vicar and two
Witnesses, Schism and Disobedience against the Prelate, in all that are guilty
thereof, or that favor such as are, the having of any of the Books condemned
by this Synod in their Houses, or the reading of any of them, the performing of
the public Ceremonies called Taliconum Coliconu, the having of Pagods or Idols
in their Houses, and the giving them any Veneration, have all the censure of
Excommunication annexed to them, of which though some are Reserved.] This is what
destroys all Discipline in the Church of Rome, and what the Bishops thereof
complain of so much. Didacus Abulensis in the 73d. page of his Book of
Councils, gives the following account of it, Est in to be Romana perniciosus
abu^us qui dissimulatione quadam jam diu toleratur, nam sceleratissimi homines
Episcoporum and aliorum Judicum ordinariorum, justissimam punitionem
effugientes tanquam ad tutissimum asylum Roma^am accedunt curiam, nihil aliud
cogitantes quam quod eo ipso sint a gravissimis maxima cum Justitiae jactura
immunes: Hinc sane passim videmus Clericos Criminum atrocissimorum autores, ab
ordinariis Judicibus sugientes in Romanam Curiam, propriis beneficiis, quae
obtin^bart, aequissime privatos, brevi compendio temporis in Hispaniam
patriamque redire ita liberos, ut non tantum beneficia, quibus ob scelera
privati fuerant, cum maximo dedecore and justitiae, contemptu, favore and
importunis precibus obtinuerint iterum apud Romanam Curiam; sed and aliis
pinguioribus honorati in praemium criminum, liberam iterum millies peccandi
licentiam fere impefraverint; sunt enim in Curia Remana tot Officiales, quorum
munus potissimum est prae avaritia maxima and voracitate ab ipsis litigantibus
and aliis extorquere, ut tandem jam nihil obtineri apud eandem curiam possit,
aliter quam ingenti pecunia, veluti in pretium rei impetratae impensa. And in
the 62d. Page he gives the Pope himself the following wholesome advice: Cavere
debet summus ipse Pontifex, ne dum agitur de morum censura, quae a^ Clericos,
Episcopos and alios Christian^ professionis homines, omnino in ips^ omnium
capite requirantur, ea morum correctio atque institutio quae a subditis
exigenda est: praesertim vero illud est ab eo postulandum, ac denique summopere
petendum, ne in curia Romana oscitanter tot contractus Simoniaci, tot
manifestae frauds, tot adversus naturalia and Divina jura scelera, palam in
totius orbis scandalum permittantur; ad enim adeo jam in omnium aures devenit,
ut a nemine, nisi is prorsus a sensu alienus judicari cupiat, taceri possit.
reserved by Law, yet that they might be the better known, it was thought fit
to have them expressed here.

Decree XI.
THe Sentence of Excommunication being the last and most rigorous punishment of
the Church, and which for that reason ought not to be inflicted but with great
Caution and Consideration, the Synod does therefore condemn the facility
wherewith it has been used in this Diocese upon very slight and impertinent
occasions, commanding it not to be inflicted hereafter, but for weighty causes,
and with great consideration, and never by word of mouth, but always in
Writing. The Synod does likewise condemn what has been formerly commanded in
this Bishopric, which was, that in certain Cases Penitents were not to be
absolved, but at the hour of Death, and in some not then neither, which is
contrary to Christian Charity, and the Rules of the Church, who as a Pious
Mother at all times receives true Penitents, and never shuts the Gates of
Salvation against any of her Children: So that let their Crimes be never so
enormous, yet upon their doing Penance, and expressing a deep sorrow for their
Sins, and yielding the satisfaction that is imposed upon them, they are
graciously received, and made free at least in the Internal or Sacramental
Court: But being there is no other punishment in this Church, by reason of its
being under Kings that are Infidels, beyond that of Excommunication or
Exclusion from the Church, some who are absolved in the Internal Court may
still continue excommunicate in the External, so as not to be permitted to
enter the Church; and though the Priests may go to their Houses, they shall not
give them the Casture, until such time as the Prelate shall order it to be
done, having a regard to the heinousness of their Crimes, and the length of
time from the Commission of them, that by this means the facility wherewith the
Christians of this Diocese commit several Crimes, namely Murder, and the
Ceremonies of the Taliconum may be removed.

Decree XII.
FOrasmuch as the Ignorance of Confessors is the destruction of Penitents, and
through the Error of the Key, there is nothing done, and it being known to the
Synod that in this Diocese there are many Confessors that are such Idiots, as
not to know what they do in Confession, all the Priests exercising themselves
therein without ever having been examined as to their sufficiency; it does
therefore command, that from henceforward no Priest shall presume to hear
Confessions without being Licensed thereunto in writing by the Prelate, which
License shall not be granted to any, but what have been first examined by
Learned Persons, as to their sufficiency for such an Employment, and until such
time as this Church is provided of Prelates to regulate all such matters to the
best of their understanding, the Synod does commit the Examination and
Approbation to the Fathers.] This is what the Bishops and other Orders in the
Church of Rome complain of so much, that the Jesuits every where in the Indies
ingross all Jurisdiction and Advantages to themselves. Of their engrossing all
to themselves to the exclusion of all other orders in China, Japan, and the
other parts of the East Indies, we have large complaints in the Apologies of
Diego Collado a Dominican, and in the Letter of Father Luis Sotela, a
Franciscan, written to Urban VIII. and as to the West Indies, Bishop Pallabox
in his Defense of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction against the Jesuits, who had
worryed him out of his Archbishopric, after twenty more such charges, says,
En las provincias del P^ru ha setenta annos que se quez an las Cathedrales, de
que las Religiosos de la Compania com immoderadissimos adquisciones les
despoian de los diesmos, ellos callando y passando y comprando, haziendos con
grandissima paz y silencio van desnudando a los ocispos de sus rentas, a los
pohes de su socorro, a los Cabildas de su congrua sustentacion lo mismo hazen
ein la nueva Espana, quanto mas corre et tiempo, tanto mas cr^ce eldano legan
ya con la navaia hasta el huesso. That is, In the Provinces of Peru, the
Cathedrals have complained these 70 Years of the Jesuits robbing them of their
Tithes, by their vast purchases, they hold their Tongues, and go on purchasing
Estates, without any noise, thereby stripping the Bishops of their Rents, the
poor of their Alms, and the Chapter of a convenient maintenance; they do the
same in New Spain, and this e^il has gone on increasing daily, so that they are
now come to the bone with their Rasor. Revego a Dios, says the same Bishop,
Que ne sean las pin^as de un tabardillo peligrosissimo, que necessi^e de
ser^urado en algunos hijos desta Religion porlamano del pontifice sumo com
repitidas sangrias de ^anto po^^r; And I pray God that these things be not the
spots of a most dangerous malignant Feavour, not to be cured in some of the
S^ns of that Religion, any otherways than by repeated bleedings from the Chief
Pontiff.
Fathers of the Society of Jesus, of the College of Vaipicotta, upon whose
Examination and Approbation, and a License granted by the Governor whom the
most Illustrious Metropolitan will leave in this Bishopric, the Priests may
hear Confessions with the limitations expressed in the said Licenses, and all
such as are at present Confessors, shall be examined by order of the Lord
Metropolitan at his next Visitation, and such of the Clergy as shall be made
Parish Priests, or Vicars, shall be first examined, and approved of in the same
form to be Confessors, that so such as are not qualified to be Confessors, may
not be admitted Vicars, whose precise Obligation it is to confess their Sheep:
And all Confessors that are not approved of by the said Lord Metropolitan in
the form aforesaid, this Synod does suspend from the Office of Confessor till
such time as they shall be effectually examined and allowed of, and if any
Priest, which God forbid, shall be found hearing Confessions without such a
License, except in the case of danger of Death, and where no Confessor is to be
had, he shall be suspended from his Office and Benefice for a Year, and be
further punished according to the degree of his Contumacy, and the Penitents
shall be admonished to confess themselves again to some approved Confessor.

Decree XIII.
BY reason of the great want there is of knowing and able Confessors in this
Bishopric, the Synod for the sake of the Sheep thereof does approve of all
such Confessors as understand the Malabar Tongue, and are Licensed Confessors
in any other Diocese, of whom also the Prelate may make use for the assistance
of the Parish Priests in Lent, where it shall be judged necessary, and
especially of the Priests of this Diocese residing at Cochim.

Decree XIV.
THe Synod does grievously condemn the Sacrilegious Ignorance of those Priests,
who when they have confessed any at the command of the Prelate, or of any other
by whom they are authorized, after having heard the Sins of their Penitents, do
carry them to the said Prelate, to be absolved by him in the Sacramental Court;
which was what happened to the most Illustrious Metropolitan in these parts;
the Synod does therefore teach and declare, That none can absolve the Penitent
in the Sacramental Court, but the Priest only that heard his Sins; for whereas
he is the Judge, it is he that ought to pass sentence and absolve, in
conformity to what he has heard confessed, the contrary being a gross and
manifest Error.

Decree XV.
FOrasmuch as there are some ignorant Clergymen, who being desired by
Christians to read the Gospels and Prayers to them, or to give them the
Blessing on their heads, do ignorantly use the form of Sacramental Absolution,
saying, I absolve thee from thy Sins in the Name of the Father, etc. wherefore
the Synod does advertise and admonish them not to commit such an Error, it
being a most grievous Sacrilege to apply the Sacramental form, where it ought
not to be, wherefore they shall only read the Gospels and Prayers allowed,
ending with the Blessing In the Name of the Father, etc.

The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
THe fifth Sacrament of Extreme Unction has for its matter, the Oil of Olive
blessed by a Bishop, it is called Extreme Unction, because it is the last of
all the Holy Unctions, instituted by our Lord Christ in his Church, and the
last that is received by a Christian; this Sacrament is to be administered to an
adult Person that is sick, when apprehended to be in probable danger of death,
who is to be anointed by the Priest the only minister of this Sacrament, on
those parts wherewith he has offended God chiefly; that is to say, on the
Eyes, because of Sins committed by the sight; on both the Ears, because of Sins
committed by hearing; on the mouth, because of Sins committed by tasting and
speaking; on both the hands, for the sins committed in feeling and touching; on
both the Feet, for the Sins committed in walking; on the Loins and Reins, for
being the chief seat of Carnal pleasure; every one of which parts must be
anointed by the Priest, making the sign of the Cross upon them with his Thumb
dipped in Holy Oil, and at the same time repeating the words of the form, which
are, By this Holy Unction, and his most tender mercy may our Lord forgive thee
all the Sins thou have committed by thy sight; and so on, naming every part or
sense as it is anointed: The effect of this Sacrament, is the Health of the
Soul, and of the Body also, so far as it is convenient and necessary to the
Soul, which is the chief; moreover, it washes away the Relics of sin, if
there are any remaining in the Soul, comforting the Soul of the Sick withal,
and confirming and exciting in it a great confidence in the Divine Mercy, by
virtue of which Consolation it suffers the troubles of Sickness with the more
patience, and with the greater ease resists the Temptations of Satan, whose
custom it is to assault the Soul with extraordinary violence in its last Hour:
It likewise cherishes and succors the Body, so far as it is convenient for the
salvation of the Soul, as S. James teaches us in his Canonical Epistle,
saying, Is any one Sick, let him call for the Priests of the Church, and they
shall pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord, and the
Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall give him ease, and if
he be in Sins, they shall be forgiven him: The Apostle in saying they shall be
pardoned, demonstrates it to be a Sacrament, whose Virtue and Nature is to
conferr Grace, that pardons Sins; and in saying, If any are sick among you,
he declares the time when this Sacrament is to be received, that is in time of
dangerous Sickness; and in saying, they shall call the Priests of the Church,
he shows that the Priests are the only Ministers of this Sacrament, and in
saying, they shall be anointed with Oil in the Name of the Lord, he shows,
that Holy Oil is the matter of this Sacrament; and in saying, they shall pray
over the Sick, anointing, he shows, that the form of this Sacrament is to be
pronounced by way of deprecation, or Prayer; and in saying, the Lord shall give
him ease, he shows also, that the effect of this Sacrament is to give health
to the Body, so far as it is convenient and necessary to the health of the
Soul. And whereas this Sacrament was instituted for the use of the Sick, none
but what are dangerously so must take it, and a Person who shall recover after
having received it, may when dangerously sick receive it again, it having been
instituted by our Lord for that end; and to prepare, defend and fortify us at
the time of our departure out of this life, whenever it is.

Decree I.
WHereas in this Bishopric there has not been hitherto any use of the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction, in which for want of Catholic Instruction, there
has been no knowledge of the Institution, Effects, or Efficacy thereof;
therefore the Synod does most earnestly recommend the use of this Sacrament,
commanding the Vicars to be vigilant over the Sick of their Parishes,
wherever they live, whether in the Villages or in the Heaths; and whenever
they shall hear of any in danger of Death, to carry the most Holy Sacrament of
Unction, and administer it to them according to the Roman Ceremonial, which is
to be translated into Syrian, and kept in all Churches, anointing them with
Oil, and making the sign of the Cross with Holy Oil on both their Eyes shut;
doing the right first, and then the left, upon the Eye-lashes, and upon both
the Ears, the Nostrils, and the Mouth, being shut, on both the Lips; but if the
Distemper should be such, that the Sick Person's Mouth cannot be shut, or not
without danger, then the upper Lip shall be anointed, making the sign of the
Cross upon it; as also both the Palms of the Hands, the Balls of the Feet and
the Loins, ordering the Sick Person to be moved gently; neither is it necessary
that any more of these parts should be anointed than what is convenient for the
making the sign of the Cross with the Holy Oil; and the Priest must be sure to
remember in this, as in all other Sacraments, to join the Form with the Matter,
repeating the words of the Form as he anoints the parts: If the Sick Person
shall happen to expire while the Priest is anointing, the Priest being
satisfied that he is dead, shall proceed no further with the Office; and the
Vicar, through whose negligence any Parishioner shall die without having
received this Sacrament, shall be suspended from his Office and Benefice for
six Months.

Decree II.
FOrasmuch as the Troubles the Sick are in, together with the want of good
Instructions in matters appertaining to their Salvation, do but too often make
them unmindful of the Holy Sacraments; wherefore the Synod does command and
earnestly recommend it to all Confessors that are called upon to Confess any
Sick Person to instruct them in the Doctrine and Efficacy of this Sacrament of
Unction, admonishing, persuading and entreating them when they shall come to
stand in need of it, to have it administered to them; and they shall also
admonish the People, and particularly those who attend the Sick Person, not to
fail to call the Vicar when it is necessary, that is, when they apprehend the
Sick Person to be in any danger, and before he has lost his Senses, to give him
the Holy Unction; and such as shall be negligent therein, besides the offense
they do to God and the Sick Person, shall be punished severely at the pleasure
of the Prelate.

Decree III.
THe Synod does command the Priests that go to anoint the Sick, though it should
be to the Hamlets, to go in their Surplice and Stole, carrying the Vessel the
Holy Oil is in, in their hands, covered with a piece of Silk, with great
reverence, having the Chamus or Parish-Clerk before them with the Cross of the
Church in his Arms, who, or some other Person, shall also carry a Pot of Holy
Water, and if it is in the Night, a Lanthorn or some other Light before him,
that so all People may know what he is going about; and if the Sick Person is
in a condition, he shall persuade him to Confess himself again, and be
reconciled, notwithstanding he should have Confessed himself the day before;
letting the Sick Person know that it is necessary in order to his receiving the
Holy Sacrament of Unction with the greater purity; and when the Priest shall be
to carry this Sacrament a long way to those that live in Heaths, he shall go in
the best Form he can, and shall carry the Surplice and Stole along with him,
that so when he comes to administer the Sacrament, he may do it with all due
reverence; he shall likewise, if the Sick Person has not a Crucifix of his own,
leave one upon his Pillow, exhorting him to fix both his Eyes and confidence
thereon at his last minute, begging by it the pardon of his Sins of our Lord,
who for our sake died thereon.

ACTION VII. Of the Holy Sacraments of Order and Matrimony.
The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Order.
THe sixth Sacrament is that of Order, which was instituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ the day before he suffered for us, after that he had made an end of
instituting the Sacrament of the Eucharist, that so he might institute the
Sacrifice and the Priests that were to offer it together; at which time he
created the Apostles Priests, giving them withal power to consecrate others,
that so the Sacrifice and the Priesthood might be continued in the Church till
the end of the World. The Matter of this Sacrament is that which is delivered
to the Person that is ordained, for the exercise of that Order he has received;
to the Priests, a Cup with Wine in it, and a Patten with Bread; to a Deacon the
Book of the Gospels; and to a Subdeacon an empty Cup and Patten, and so as to
the other inferior Orders: The Form of the Priesthood and other Orders, are
the words spoke by the Bishop when he delivers to every one that which belongs
to his Ministry and the exercise of his Order. The Minister of this Sacrament
is only a Bishop, to whom only Christ committed the power of Consecrating
Priests; the effect of it is the increase of Grace, to the end that the Person
ordained may be a fit Minister. This Sacrament was instituted by Christ as
highly necessary in his Church; for a Sacrifice and Priesthood are so joined,
that the one cannot be without the other; wherefore since under the New
Testament the visible. Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist was to be instituted, it
became therefore necessary, that there should be a new, visible and eternal
Priesthood in the same Church, whereby the ancient Priesthood of the Old Law
was translated; and there were Priests provided accordingly for the Offering of
the Divine Sacrifice; which Priests being lawfully ordained, our Lord Jesus
Christ has given them power over his true and real Body, to Consecrate, Offer,
and Administer it, as also over his Mystical Body the Church; giving them power
to pardon and retain Sins; to which power ^t likewise belongs to rule and
govern all Christian People, and to lead them in the way to Eternal Life. Now
the Priesthood being so high an Office, that it may be exercised with the more
decency and veneration, it was convenient that there should be different Orders
or Ministers, who are bound by their Function to serve the Priesthood, and to
be divided in such (...) manner, that after having received the Clerical
Tonsure, they are to ascend through the lower to the higher Orders. The Lower.]
That there was none of the lesser Ecclesiastical Order in the Primitive Church
is acknowledged by Ca^d. Bona in his Book of Liturgies, Tertia classis
Ministrantium, says the Card. Clericos minorum ordinum complectitur,
Acolythos, scil. Exorcistas, lectores and Ostiarios, quos antiquissimos esse
and ab Apostolis vel ab immediatis eorum Successoribus institutos, Doctores
Scholastici asserunt, sed non probant, dicendum igit^ cum St. Thoma, quod
temporib^ Apostolorum, omnia Ministeria qu^ ordinibus minoribus competunt, non
(...) distinctis personis, sed uno duntax^ Ministro exercebantur, contingit
(...) mirum Ecclesiae quod hominibus sole^ qui dum ten^e patrimonium h^be^ uno
servo contenti sunt, qui sol^ omnia administrat, si vero redi^^ augeantur,
servorum etiam auget^ numerus, eoque modo crescit famili^
lower are the Ostiary, Reader, Exorcist, Acolythus. The higher those which are
called Holy, and are the Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest, to which degrees there
is joined that of Bishops, who succeeded in the place of the Apostles, and as
St. Paul says, are ordained to govern the Church of God; so that they are in a
higher degree than the Priests, and to them only it belongs, by virtue of their
Office, to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, to Consecrate the Holy Oil
of Chrism, and to Consecrate Altars and Churches, and ordain Priests and other
Bishops. The Church enjoins Continency and Chastity to all that take Holy Holy,
that so being disingaged from all other business they may employ themselves
wholly in the Ministry of the Altar, and be intent only on matters appertaining
to our Lord, and Divine Worship. The Church does not admi^ Slaves to be
Priests, because it is necessary to the Divine Worship, that the Ministers
thereon should be free and not subject to others, and that they should not have
been guilty of Murder or Blood, neither must they have been born out of lawful
Wedlock, nor have any blemish or maim, nor have been twice Married, nor have
married a Widow, nor be Boys that are not come to perfect Age; all which is
ordered for just Reasons and Considerations, and out of respect to the high
Mystery wherein they are exercised.

Decree I.
WHereas it has been hitherto the Custom of this Diocese to ordain Boys even
Priests, and that without examining their Lives and Manners, having for Money
and not for any extraordinary sufficiency, all the Orders Inferior, as well as
Holy, conferred upon them in one day, contrary to the Holy Canons and the Laws
of the Church: Therefore the Synod does command, That from henceforward, none
be ordained but what have first been examined as to their Sufficiency, Lives,
and Manners, which shall be done by the Prelate, or by some appointed by him,
fearing God, and who are observers of the Holy Canons, and the Forms of the
Holy Council of Trent. And whereas in the said Council it is commanded, That
none be ordained Subdeacon under Two and Twenty, nor Deacon under Three and
Twenty, nor Priest till they are Five and Twenty, this Synod does command the
same to be inviolably observed; declaring, that no Prelate can dispense
therewith without being particularly empowered and authorized thereunto by the
Apostolical See. And forasmuch as there are great numbers in this Diocese that
have been ordained before they were at that Age, the Synod suspends all such,
whether Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, from the exercise of their several
Functions, until such time as they have perfectly attained to it, they shall
nevertheless hold their Places, and reap the benefits thereof, in the same
manner as if they were in the exercise of their Functions: And as to their
Sufficiency, the Synod does declare, That as the Council of Trent requires,
that all that are ordained do understand Latin, so in this Diocese it is
required, that all that are ordained if they do not understand Latin, should
understand Syrian: Neither shall any Syrian that does not understand it so
well, as to be able to read and sing it, so as to understand what they say in
the Offices, be admitted into Orders, or at least not into those that are Holy.

Decree II.
ALL that are in Orders in this Diocese having been Simonaically ordained in
having paid a certain price, upon a formal Bargain for their Orders, have
thereby incurred the grievous punishments of the Law. Nevertheless in
consideration of their Ignorance, and the false Doctrine wherein they have been
educated by their former Prelates, the Most Reverend Metropolitan, both by his
ordinary Authority, this See being vacant, and the Apostolical Authority
committed to him over this Church, does Absolve all that have been so ordained,
from all Penalties and Censures which by the Law they have incurred, by having
been Simonaically ordained, commanding them to have no further scruples about
that matter, and dispensing with them all as to the exercise of their Orders,
so that they may lawfully officiate, as in right they may and ought to do.

Decree III.
THe Synod being informed that there are several Priests, who though infected
with the Leprosy, and miserably deformed thereby, do presume to Celebrate, to
the great loathing of the People, and to handle the Holy Vessels and Vestments,
to the endangering of the health of others, does command, That none that are
notoriously Leprous, do presume to Celebrate, ^ll such being irregular
according to the Law of Corporal defects, on the account of the disgust they
give to People when they see them Celebrate in such a condition, and receive
the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar at their ^ands.

Decree IV.
WHereas it is the custom to receive the Casture or Blessing from the hands of
the oldest Clergyman that officiates in the Quire, and for all that are
present to return it to him; which according to the usage of this Diocese,
contains in it a Symbol of Charity, Communion, and Brotherly Love; the Synod
being informed that there are those, who not being in Charity with their
Neighbors, do not speak to them, nor take them by the hand, and do neither
give nor take the Casture from them, thereby discovering that they live in
malice with their Neighbors, denying them the ordinary Ecclesiastical
Salutation used in the Church of this Diocese; does command, that all that
shall refuse to give or receive the same, be punished by the Prelate as Persons
living in hatred or out of charity with their Neighbors; and that until such
time as they shall give the said Casture, they shall not be suffered to come to
the Altar, according to the command of our Lord Jesus Christ: Neither shall
they be permitted to officiate or Minister in the Church; neither shall the
Blessing be given them until they have effectually reconciled themselves to
their Brother.

Decree V.
WHereas it is the Precept of the Universal Church, that all that are in Holy
Orders do recite the whole Divine Office, and the usage of this Diocese is, to
recite it only when they go to Church, and there, though it happen to be near
ended before they come, having heard a little to go away immediately, reckoning
they have complied with their Obligation, though they do not say over what they
were not present at, there being very few that recite the Divine Office in
their Houses, some imagining that they are not bound to do it any where but in
the Church, and others excusing themselves for want of Books, there being but
very few, and those that are, are in Manuscript in this Bishopric; therefore
the Synod does declare, That all that are in Holy Orders, are obliged upon pain
of Mortal Sin, to recite the whole Divine Office as it is recited in the
Church; and that all such as shall come late, shall be obliged to recite what
they have missed; and if they do not recite it in the Church, they shall do it
at home in their Houses, having the convenience of a Book, which being what a
great many do want, the Synod obliges all such to recite the said Divine
Office by Beads, that so there may be none but what perform this duty either by
Book or Beads: And though the Divine Office consists of seven distinct Canonical
hours, yet in this Church, in conformity to the Breviary thereof, they shall
only recite one part at two times in the Morning, and the other part in the
Evening, without making any other difference in the Divine Office, besides that
of repeating one part thereof in the Morning and the other in the Evening; and
whereas they who have no Books are to recite with Beads, such beginning in the
Morning as the Divine Office is begun in the Church, shall say Thirty-three
Pater Nosters, and as many Ave Mary's, with the Gloria Patri, etc. in the
Morning; and when they are ended, they shall moreover say twelve Pater Nosters,
and twelve Ave Mary's, for the Souls of the Faithful departed, and one Pater
Noster and one Ave Mary for the Pope, and the same for the Bishop, instead of
the Prayers that are said for them in the Church: and instead of the Prayers
that are to be recited by them in the Evening, they shall say Thirty-three
Pater Nosters, and as many Ave Mary's, with the Gloria Patri, etc. as in the
Morning; and when they are ended, they shall say Nine.] It would have been no
true Roman Devotion, had not the Ave Mary's exceeded the Pater Nosters; for one
may speak within compass, and say, that the blessed Virgin has ten Prayers and
an hundred Vows made to her in the Church of Rome, where Christ has one made to
him; and of this the Tabulae Votivae in their Churches, are a clear
demonstration, there being few or none of these Tables (and there are vast
numbers of them in several Churches) but what are dedicated solely to the
honor of the blessed Virgin.
nine Ave Mary's to our Lady, and one Pater Noster and one Ave Mary for the
Pope, and another for the Bishop as in the Morning, provided that such as have
Books shall recite by them, and not by Beads, and such as recite by Beads, if
they have said any of the Prayers either in the Morning or Evening at Church,
shall not be obliged to recite them again, but shall only recite those which
they may have omitted there.

Decree VI.
THe Synod does command the Creed of St. Athanasius, Quicunque vult, to be
translated into Syrian, and to be put into all the Breviaries, and Books of
Prayer of this Diocese, and to be read every Sunday in the Church immediately
after Morning Service, desiring the Reverend Father Francisco Roz, of the
Society of Jesus to translate it, and all the Curates and Clergy to learn the
said Creed by Heart, which is what the Holy Canons recommend to them, for as
much as that Creed contains in it summarily the chief Mysteries of our Faith,
and is used and sung in the Universal Church.

Decree VII.
THe Synod does earnestly recommend it to all the Clergymen and Curates, not to
be absent from Church at the time of Divine Service, Morning nor Evening, and
that none offer to talk or divert themselves there any other way, as has been
the Custom, or to dispose themselves to sleep whilst others are reciting, who
are also to take notice, that in reciting they ought not to begin a new Verse
before the Congregation has done with the former, and that though it has hitherto
been the custom for the oldest Clergyman that was present at Divine Service to
give the Casture, that from henceforward the true Vicar of the Church being
present, shall in every thing be preferred to all others as he is the
particular Pastor of the Church.

Decree VIII.
THere being no reason why they that do not minister in the Church, should be
equally rewarded with those that do; it seems just to the Synod that the
Curates and other Clergymen, that are absent either from Morning or Evening
Service, or from the Mass of the day on Sundays and Holydays, be marked by the
Vicar, or the oldest Clergyman in his absence, that when the Dividend comes to
be made, for every time they have been absent so much may be deducted from
their share, as they that make the distribution shall think fit, in proportion
to the quantity of the Dividend, which shall be done only when they are not
hindered by some lawful Impediment, as Sickness, or are not otherwise employed
in the Service of the Church, or by the Prelate, in all which cases they are to
be excused: and the Sconses shall be equally divided among the rest.

Decree IX.
THe Synod being informed, that great numbers of Clergymen do use
superstitious and Heathen Exorcisms, taking words out of an impious and
prohibited Book called Parisman, for the casting out of Devils, does command in
virtue of Holy Obedience, that none presume to use any other exorcisms to that
effect, but such as the Roman Church makes use of, and have been approved of by
the Holy Fathers, which are to be bound up with the Offices of the
Administration of the Sacraments, and all Clergymen, that shall be found to use
any other, or to use any unknown superstitious words or Ceremonies with such as
are possessed, shall be suspended from their Office and Benefice for a Year,
and be subject to what other penalties the Prelate shall be pleased to lay upon
them, according to the quality of the Superstitions they have made use of; and
in case they shall after they have been admonished and censured, persist
therein, they shall then be Excommunicated; and when it shall appear that any
have acted thus upon any compact or contract with the Devil, which God forbid,
as it is said some do, they shall be declared Excommunicate, until they have
done the condign Penance, which the Prelate shall have imposed upon them, and
shall be moreover suspended from their Office and Benefice during their Lives,
without any hopes of a dispensation, and shall be yet further punished, as the
Law requires they should be, who are guilty of such Crimes, and are convicted
of having had a compact with the Devil.

Decree X.
WHereas there are several Clergymen, who according to the superstitious Custom
of the Heathens, do give good days for Marriages, and do several other things,
at the request of Christians for the Heathens, and for that end keep an account
of the lucky and unlucky days of the Gentiles in their Books, and do use some
of their Prayers, and do make Schemes after the manner of Astrologers, as
appears from several even of their Church-books, the Synod does command in
virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of the greater Excommunication, that no
Ecclesiastical or Secular, or Cassanar, shall dare to give good or bad days for
Marriages, or on any other occasion, or to draw any thing out of a Book of
Lots, and namely out of that which is generally bound up with the Book called
Parisman, or out of any other place, or by whomsoever invented; and whosoever
shall transgress herein shall be declared excommunicate, and shall be suspended
from their Office for a Year, and six Months from their Benefice; it being the
duty of the Priests rather to admonish the People to avoid all Heathen
Superstitions, and to choose the solemn days of the Church, or the Saints days,
who may entreat God for them, for the celebration of their Marriages, or any
other days they please, all days being good to those that do good upon them,
being all equally the work of Gods hands. Those only which are spent in the
greatest works and the higher celebration of the Divine Mysteries, being the
days that are to be most reverenced.

Decree XI.
WHereas it is decent that Priests being the Masters, from whom the People are
to learn good Manners should themselves give good example, the Synod is
therefore much concerned for the scandal some give by their being disorderly in
their eating and drinking, to the great disgrace of the Sacerdotal Office among
so many Infidels, and does recommend Moderation to them, ordering such as shall
be found at any time overtaken with drink to be sharply reproved by the
Prelate, and if it appear that they are frequently so drunk, as to lose their
Judgment, they shall be suspended from the Exercise of their Orders for ever,
though not from reading Prayers with others in the Church, nor from the profits
they may receive from thence. The Synod does likewise command, That no Priest
shall dare to eat or drink in a Tavern or Public Eating house, it being very
unbecoming the gravity of the Sacerdotal Office so to do, and is therefore
forbid the Priests by Law: it does likewise prohibit all Priests to eat with
Infidels, whether Heathens, Mahometans, or Jews, upon pain of being suspended
for four Months, from their Office and Benefice.

Decree XII.
IT being convenient that Clergymen should always go in a habit different from
that of the Laity, and in such a one as becomes their Function, wherefore the
Synod does command, that no Clergymen presume to go abroad in Doublets with
their Skirts flanting out, as has been too customary, or with any open Linen:
but when they shall go into Town, or to the Church, or when they travel upon
the Road, they shall wear a white and black, or blew Vestment, according to
Custom, and a Hat or Bonnet on their Heads; neither shall they at any time go
disguised, no not at Nights, nor when they go a hunting, or Fishing: and all
that shall transgress herein shall be severely punished; neither shall they
wash themselves, or if they do, it shall not be in the Company of Women,
according to the custom of the Country, it being a thing very unbecoming the
gravity of the Ministers of the Church: and as for their Beards, they shall be
left to their liberty to do what they shall think fit, only such as are Young
shall not suffer their Beards to grow, but shall still keep them shaved, and
they that wear them very long, shall take care to Cut] This is one of the many
superstitious Cautels that the belief of Transubstantiation has introduced into
the Roman Church.
cut off the Hair, that grows near their Lips, that so they may not be a
hinderance to their receiving the Blood of the Cup in the Mass, by being so
long as to touch it.

Decree XIII.
WHereas the Apostle S. Paul says, That the Persons that are particularly
dedicated to the service of God and the Divine Worship, ought not to entangle
themselves in secular Affairs; for which reason all Clerks are by the Sacred
Canons prohibited to Merchandise, a thing very little observed in this Diocese,
therefore the Synod does prohibit all the Clerks thereof to go upon the public
Exchange, or to Farm any of the Revenues, or to be Factors or Agents, or to
farm any Contracts singly, or in Company: or to sell any sorts of Merchant
Goods publicly in their houses, or any sort of Victuals, or to bear any
Secular.] There are several Custom-houses, where you shall seldom fail to find
Jesuits dispatching Sugar, Tobacco, and other Goods: The Archbishop who within
5 years was made the Supreme Governor of the Indies, could not but execute this
Decree with a very good Grace.
secular Office, all that shall transgress herein, shall be most rigorously
punished by the Prelate, and if they do not reform, shall be suspended from
their Orders, and such as are Taregas, if they shall not renounce that Office
within a month, shall not be suffered to enter the Church, and shall be
suspended from their Office and Benefice, until such time as they have
effectually abandoned it.

Decree XIV.
WHereas several Priests in this Diocese not having the fear of God or of the
Church, or of their Prelates, before their eyes, and without having a due
regard to the high Station and Dignity they are in, do occupy themselves in
Secular Business and in public Merchandise, and that they may do it the more
securely, do neither wear the Sacerdotal Habit, nor the Tonsure, nor any manner
of Crown, but do wear their Hair long like the Laity: Therefore the Synod does
command in virtue of obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication, That all
Clerks in Holy Orders, do wear the Habit Tonsure and shaved Crown, and not long
Hair after the fashion of the Laity; and that whosoever shall transgress
herein, shall be declared Excommunicate, until they have put on the said Habit
and Tonsure, and shall have their Crown shaved as other Ecclesiastics.

Decree XV.
WHereas there are several Ecclesiastics, as well Cassanars as Chamazes, who
being unmindful of their obligations, to free themselves from some vexations of
Infidel Kings; or, which is yet more scandalous, to be favored and protected
by such Princes against their Prelates, that they may not punish them for their
faults, do receive Pay from the said Kings as the Natives do, whereby they are
obliged to take the Field as Soldiers, and Fight when commanded, which is
expressly contrary to the Holy Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws: Therefore the
Synod does command in virtue of obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to
be ipso facto incurred, That no Cassanar nor Chamaz do from henceforward
presume to receive pay from any King as a Soldier; and that whosoever shall
transgress herein, shall be immediately declared Excommunicate, and shall not
be Absolved before they have renounced the said pay, and all the obligations
thereof, and have undergone condign punishment for their fault.

Decree XVI.
IT having been the Universal custom from the beginning of the Church, for all
that are in Holy Orders, and especially Priests, to keep Chastity and
Continency, as is evident from all the ancient Councils, Eastern and Western;
and though in the beginning of the Church, as well for the want of Priests, as
for the making use of several Learned Men who were Married when they turned
Christians, but not having been twice Married, several who were Married were
not only consecrated Priests but Bishops also; which custom still remains both
in the Greek Church, and in some that are subject to the Apostolical See, by
which it is tolerated for just Reasons: Nevertheless the Church Catholic did
^ever consent that Priests should Marry after they are in Orders, but was much
rather for having such as were Married to leave their Wives, that that they
might serve the better in the Holy Ministry: And whereas in this Diocese (which
the Synod has taken notice of with great sorrow) through their vile ignorance
of the Law, and the abounding iniquity of the Times, and their having been
governed by Schismatical Prelates, Priests have Married after they were in
Orders, nay have taken Orders on purpose that they might Marry the better, and
have frequently Married Widows, and some have Married three or four times,
making no account of the impediment of Bigamy, so strictly observed in the
Church from the beginning, but did, notwithstanding that, go on still
exercising their Function, some few excepted, who after they had been twice
Married, gave over celebrating and performing all other Exercises and
Ministeries of Priests; all which they thought they might do lawfully by virtue
of a License granted by their Prelates, who notwithstanding they prohibited
them to Marry upon pain of Excommunication, and had declared them
Excommunicate, did nevertheless Absolve them for a sum of Money, or upon some
Simonaical contract; so that notwithstanding that Excommunication, they did all
Marry and continued in Wedlock, reckoning themselves safe in Conscience upon
their having obtained a License after such a manner: All which being detested
by the Synod as the inventions of the Devil, and devised by the covetousness of
Schismatics, and desiring to restore this Church to its due purity, and the
usage of the Roman Church, does command, in virtue of obedience and upon pain
of Excommunication latae Sententiae, that henceforward no Clerk in Holy Orders
presume to Marry, nor shall any Cassanar Marry any such, nor shall any presume
to be present at any such Marriage, nor give Council, Favor, or Assistance
thereunto: And whoever shall offend in any of these particulars, must know that
they are Excommunicate and Cursed, and are to be declared as such by the
Church; and as to those who are already Married, the Synod suspends them all,
whether Married once or oftener, from the Ministry of their Orders, and all
Sacerdotal Acts, until such time as they have put away their Wives effectually,
which is what the Synod entreats them in the Lord to do: And to those who have
been twice Married, or have Married Widows, or Women that were publicly
dishonest, the Synod does command all such as being Bigamists, and having
Married contrary to their consciences, as it appears several of them have done,
by their giving over thereupon to Celebrate, notwithstanding their having
obtained a License from their Bishop, in virtue of obedience and upon pain of
being declared Excommunicate, so soon as this Decree shall come to their
knowledge, to turn off the said Women, not only as to Bed and Board, but so as
not to dwell in the same House with them; declaring, that until they have done
it they are in Mortal Sin, and do live in Concubinate, such Marriages having
never been true or valid; but on the contrary, void and of no force: neither
can any Prelate or Bishop grant Licenses in such cases, having no Authority to
do it, by reason of its being contrary to the Rules of the Church, that have
been always punctually observed, and contrary to the Holy general Councils
received all over the World; and as to those who have been but once Married,
the Synod will consult the most Holy Pope and Bishop of Rome, that he as
Prelate and Head of the whole Church of God, and Master and Doctor of the same,
may teach and command what ought to be done therein, and whatsoever his
Holiness shall ordain, shall be punctually observed.

Decree XVII.
THe Synod does declare, That those Priests who as obedient Sons shall follow
the advice of the Synod in turning away their Wives, may, after they have so
done, continue in the exercise of their Functions; and if not otherwise
hindered, may Celebrate, notwithstanding they have been twice Married, or may
have Married Widows, since by such Weddings not being true Marriages, they did
not incurr the irregularity of Bigamy: All which the Synod grants out of pure
Grace, being extremely desirous to have them turn away such Women, and out of
respect to their Ignorance, and the Cheat that was put upon them by their
Prelates, who instead of instructing them better, granted them Licenses: And
whereas all Priests that Marry are Irregular, according to the Holy Canons, the
most Illustrious Metropolitan by the Ordinary, as well as the Apostolical
Authority, that he has in this Church by reason of the See's being vacant, does
dispense with the Priests and all the other Clergymen in Holy Orders that
shall yield obedience to the Synod, in turning away their Wives, and shall
desire to continue to officiate, as to the said irregularity which they have
incurred, granting them License as to this freely and without scruple, to
exercise their Orders.

Decree XVIII.
WHereas the Wives of Priests who are called Catatiaras or Cassaneiras, have
not only the most Honorable place in the Church for their being such, and are
the more reverenced, but do moreover partake of the profits of the Churches
wherein their Husbands ministered equally with the surviving Priests, and have
sometimes a greater share of them than any of the Priests, by reason of the
Seniority and Pre-eminence that their Husbands had in the Church; therefore the
Synod does ordain, That such of them as do not from henceforward depart from
their Husbands, shall receive no such benefit: but if obeying the admonition of
the Synod they shall leave their Husbands, they shall then immediately receive
their proportion as an Alms to help to sustain them and their Families, and
shall enjoy the same place and Honor in the Church, and every where else which
they did before.

Decree XIX.
THe Synod does declare, That notwithstanding it has received the Holy Council
of Trent, with all its Decrees, relating both to the good Government of the
Church and Manners, nevertheless that what was declared therein relating to
Priests Bastards, not being permitted to Minister in the same Church, wherein
the Fathers have Ministered before, is not to be extended to the Sons of the
Married Priests in this Diocese that are now born, by reason of the great
numbers there are of such at present in all Churches, and of other great
inconveniences that would follow thereupon; it is therefore permitted to such
to Minister, nay to be Vicars of the Churches wherein their Fathers have
officiated; but this is to be understood of such only as were born of
Marriages, that were reputed true, the provision of the forementioned Holy
Council being to take place, as to all that shall be born hereafter.

Decree XX.
WHereas the sin of Simony.] This noise of Simony was raised for no other
reason, but to throw Dirt on the Memory of their former Bishops, whose Fees at
their Ordination were not in all probability so great as they are at Goa, and
had as little in them of a formal Bargain: But the truth is, Simony, as well as
Heresy, is a Stone the Church of Rome throws blindfold at all that displease
her, though at the same time she is the Church in the World that is most guilty of
it; so when she was crying shame of the Emperors as Simoniacks, Petrus
Clemangis tells us, she her self was totius negotiationis, latrocinii and
rapinae officina, in quo venalia exponuntur Sacramenta, venales ordines. And
Didacus Abulensis, a learned Spanish Bishop, and who was no stranger at Rome,
at the same time she was thus reproaching the poor Church of Malabar, tells us
in his Book of Councils, that vitium Simoniae frequens est and veluti res
honestissima in usum deducitur in Curia Romana, nulla unquam punitione hujus
sceleris a judicibus Ecclesiasticis praemissa, I do not deny but the Canons and
Bulls of that Church are severe against all sorts of Simony, namely, the Bull
of Julius the II. published in the Year 1553, against Simony, in obtaining the
Papacy; I shall here set down the substance of that Bull, and then leave it to
any to judge, whether according to that Bull we have had so much as one true
Pope since it was made, or are likely ever to have one so long as the Papacy
continues so great a preferment.

Si Papa el^gatur per Simoniam, nempe aliquo Cardinale quomodo libet suffragium
ferente, data vel accepta vel promissi pecunia, vel honis cujuslibet generis,
Castris, Officiis, Beneficiis, Promissionibus, vel Obligationibus, vel per se,
vel per alium, pro Pontifice non habeatur, item etiamsi duarum partium
suffragiis, vel unanimi Cardinalium concordia, etiam per viam assumptionis
concorditer nemine discrepante, and etiam sine scrutinio facto sit electio,
nullus existat and nihil juris electus acquirat, sive in Spiritualibus, sive in
Temporalibus, and contra electum per Simoniam opp^ri criminis exceptio possit,
sicut contra electum potest opponi vera and indubitata haeresis, and electus
Simoniace a nullus pro Papa habeatur.


Simony is one of the greatest offenses in the Church, and a pernicious plague
therein, which God has always punished with great rigor, it being the selling
of Spiritual things for Money; and this Bishopric, which the Synod takes
notice of with great regret, having hitherto abounded with it, Money having
been publicly taken for the administration of the Holy Sacraments, and after
such a manner that none of them were given, before the Money was either put
into the Priest's hands, or into the Church Box, to be divided among them, no,
not so much as the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, at which all pious Ears do
tremble, nor any other Sacraments or Dispensations for Marriages, nor
Absolutions from Excommunication, nor the Consecrations of Stones, nor any of
the lesser Orders, nor Licenses, nor Reverenda's, to go to receive those Orders
in another place, nor Letters Dimissory for Clerks, to go to other Diocesses;
all which was done at a Rated Price, or by a Public Agreement: All which the
Sydod detesting as a most execrable and horrid abomination, does therefore in
virtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication to be ipso facto
incurred, command, That no Money, nor nothing else, be taken for any of the
foresaid things; and that no Priests shall dare to take any thing for the
administration of any of the Sacraments, nor to give them upon any such
consideration to any Person whatsoever, but shall give the Holy Sacrament
gratis to the Faithful, according to the Precept of our Lord Christ, who said,
Freely you have received, freely you shall give; neither shall they so much as
receive Alms that the Faithful would give voluntarily, though not given with
any respect to the Sacrament, if offered at the same time when the Sacrament is
administered: And the Priest that shall be found to transgress herein, besides
being Excommunicated, shall be suspended from his Office and Benefice for three
Years, and the Vicars must take care to advertise the People thereof. The Synod
being moreover informed, That a great many poor People who live in the Heaths,
do not bring their Children to be Baptized, because they have not so much Money
as is demanded, does order the Priest to be satisfied with the profits arising
from the Dead, the Alms they receive for their Masses, in which the Synod
declares there is nothing of Simony; but only a congruous maintenance for the
Priest that Celebrates, given by the Person that he recommends, and with the
other Alms which the Faithful are accustomed to give; which being Just and
Holy, shall be divided after the same manner as they have been formerly: And
the Synod does declare further, That such as are absolved from Excommunication,
if it was for any great Crime that they were under that Censure, though there
can be nothing taken for their Absolution, yet for the Fault that they have
committed, they may, by way of Punishment, be Condemned in a Pecuniary Mulct,
if Authorized by the Prelate, which Money must be put to some Pious use, or
employed in the building of a Church; and the Offender being Poor, he may be
employed in Person to do some work about a Church, for so long as shall be
thought fit, and in that Case no Money shall be required of him.

Decree XXI.
THe Synod desiring by all means possible to destroy and root out of this
Diocese the pernicious Vice of Simony, which it understands to have been
increased in part by the want the Ministers of the Church are in of a necessary
maintenance, does therefore most earnestly entreat the People of this
Bishopric to apply a certain Yearly Sum to be raised by the way of Alms,
Collection, or Assessment, or by the way of Tithes, according to Peoples
Abilities; for the support of the Vicar and Curate of their Souls, and the
other Ministers that are necessary to the Divine Service in the Church, which
the most Reverend Metropolitan may treat about in every Parish; for they must
know, that Christians are bound both by Divine and Humane Laws to maintain the
Priests which pray to God for them, and give Spiritual Food to their Souls, of
which they are to render an account to God and their Prelates.

Decree XXII.
THat this Synod may by all ways possible supply the Necessities of the
Ministers of the Church, and by that means extirpate Simony; besides what it
desires the People to contribute toward their maintenance, understanding their
Poverty to be such, that they are not able to supply them with so much as is
necessary, it does further beseech his Catholic Majesty, the King of Portugal,
that as Protector of the Christians of these parts, and the only Christian King
and Lord in the Indies, he would be graciously pleased to provide the Vicars of
this Church with a sufficient Maintenance, as he does in all the other Churches
of the Indies, allowing them at least fifteen thousand Cruzado's to be divided
among them all, besides what shall be gathered for them in their respective
Parishes; which as the Synod is informed, is the Sum that was formerly desired
of his Majesty in the third Provincial Council of Goa, in order to the reducing
of this Church to the Obedience of the Church of Rome, and the extirpating of
Simony. The Synod does moreover entreat the most Illustrious Metropolitan to
present this their Petition to his Majesty, in the Name of this Church,
representing therewith the great Necessities of the Ministers thereof, and that
until such time as they shall have his Majesty's Answer, the said Lord
Archbishop, Metropolitan of this Church, and President of the Synod, Dom fray
Aleixo de Menezes, understanding how effectual a course this will be for the
rooting the Pestilential Sin of Simony out of this Diocese, and for the tying
of Vicars to their Churches, there to govern the Faithful, and administer the
Holy Sacraments to them, would be pleased to give the said Sum of fifteen
thousand Cruzado's Yearly out of his own Revenues, and to pay it Quarterly at
Goa, to be divided among the said Vicars, the distribution whereof the Synod
orders to be made in all Churches according to the Allotments, in the
Instrument passed, and signed and sealed by the said Lord Archbishop, under
the Great Seal of his Chancery, every Church being to receive so much, as was
now read in the presence of the whole Synod.

Decree XXIII.
WHereas this Diocese is not only provided with a sufficient number of Clergy,
but has a great many more than are necessary, and the Holy Council of Trent
having prohibited that any more should be ordained than what are necessary for
the Churches, the Synod does therefore command, that during the vacancy of this
See, none shall be put into If this was one of the Grievances of this Church,
the ArchBishop did not do well in Ordaining above a Hundred Priests among them
in less than three Months time.
Holy Orders, neither shall any Reverenda's, or Licenses be granted for that
purpose, such only as are in Holy Orders may go ascending therein, as the
Governor, who is to be left in this Diocese by the most Illustrious
Metropolitan shall judge convenient: The Synod does also put such as do aspire
to Priests Holy Orders in mind of not failing to learn the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, and the Form of Sacramental Absolution, so as to be ready to use
them on all occasions, and in all Cases of Necessity, as also the absolution
from Censures, or at least the Conditional one, which always goes before the
Sacramental Absolution from Sins in Confession.

The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Matrimony.
THe seventh Sacrament is that of Matrimomony, which according to the Apostle
is the signification of that Union which is betwixt Christ and his Church. The
efficient Cause of Matrimony regularly, is the Consent of both parties declared
by Words or Signs de praesenti. This Sacrament our Lord Jesus Christ Founded on
the Matrimonial Contract, which has always been in the World, and in all
Religions, from whence it is that Matrimony is to be considered in two
respects; either as a Natural Contract, or as a Sacrament instituted by our
Lord Jesus Christ: The Bond of Matrimony God has made to be perpetual,
insomuch that it cannot be dissolved by any thing but Death, according to what
Christ said, Whom God has joined let no Man put asunder; which is also in it
self very convenient. As it is a Sacrament, there is Grace received therein, as
in other Sacraments, our Lord Christ, who was the Author and Institutor of the
Divine Sacraments, having by his Passion merited Grace for us, whereby the
Natural Love which is betwixt the Married couple is perfected, and the
conjunction that is betwixt them is confirmed, and made Perpetual, and the
Husband and Wife are Sanctified. There are two Reasons or Ends for which
Matrimony was ordained and instituted; the first and principal is the
Procreation or Generation of Children, for the conservation of the World, and
the multiplication of the Faithful, and Servants of God. The second is, for a
remedy for Uncleanness; and that such as are inclined to that Vice, might have
a remedy given them by God, so that living with their Wives, they might not
fall into that Sin, from whence it is that People may not only Marry once, but
as often as one of the Parties dies, because this end of Matrimony may not only
be compassed in the first, but equally in the subsequent Marriages; wherefore
the Church detests those as Heretics, who condemn second Marriages, holding
them to be unlawful; as some Heretics did anciently; and as some of the most
Superstitious Heathens do at this day in these Parts; from whence it may also
be collected, that this Sacrament may not only be lawfully celebrated betwixt
Persons capable of having Children, but also betwixt those, who according to
the ordinary course of Nature, cannot have any, because the second end may be
answered in such Marriages; but where neither the one nor the other end can be
answered, as in Children, for whom the Church has set a certain time, and in
such as are under a Natural Impotency that will last as long as they live, as
to Matrimonial Acts, Matrimony is not to be celebrated: And though both under the
Law of Nature and of Moses, there were Dispensations whereby Matrimony was made
to deviate from its first Original, some of the Patriarchs having had several
Wives at once by a Divine Dispensation, and the Law of Moses having permitted
Divorces, or the repudiating of Wives, yet under the Evangelical Law, by which
Matrimony was perfected and restored again to its first Estate and Purity, it
is prohibited for a Man to have more than one Wife at a time, and to turn away
his Wife and take another so long as she lives. The Benefits of Marriage are
three principally; the first is the Generation and Education of Children for
the Worship and Service of the true God; the second is the Fidelity which the
Married couple ought to keep to one another; and the third is the Perpetuity of
Matrimony, which, in that it cannot be dissolved, signifies that inseparable
Conjunction and Union that is betwixt Christ and his Church: And
notwithstanding for the cause of Fornication or Adultery, it is lawful for the
Married couple to part as to Cohabitation, yet it is not lawful to Marry with
any other, because the Bond of Matrimony, being once lawfully tied, is
Perpetual, and cannot be dissolved by any thing but the death of one of the
Parties.

Decree I.
HOly Mother Church has always so ordered the celebration of Matrimony, as to
make it to be understood to be a Holy thing, and that as Holy, it ought to be
Holily treated; wherefore for the removing of several inconveniences, and
those especially that attend Clandestine Marriages, she has ordained and
commanded, that Matrimony be celebrated in the face of the Church by the Vicar,
or Parish Priest, or some other Priest, Licensed by him or the Prelate, and in
the presence of two or three Witnesses at least; and that all Marriages that
are not celebrated with this Solemnity by the Parish Priest before two
Witnesses, are void and null: And that the Priest, who without leave from the
Parish Priest, and the Parish Priest who without two Witnesses shall presume to
Marry any couple, shall be severely punished. Now the Synod understanding that
this Rule is not observed in this Diocese, but that the Persons who are to be
married do employ any Priest, and are married where they please, from which
great Inconveniences and Disorders do many times follow, different Rites and
Ceremonies being also used in diverse places in the celebration thereof, does
command, that all that is above related be punctually observed according to the
Decrees of the Holy Council of Trent, which has been received by this Church in
this Synod; declaring all Marriages not celebrated in this Form, or not by the
Parish Priest before two Witnesses, to be null, and the Parties not to be
Married, neither are they to be permitted to live together as Man and Wife: And
the Priests who shall presume to Marry without leave from the Parish Priest or
Ordinary, shall be suspended from their Orders and Benefices for one Year
without Indulgence, and the Marriage shall be declared void, and the Parties
shall be obliged to Marry again in the foresaid Form. The Synod does
furthermore declare, That the Contracted may be Married by the Parish Priest of
either of the Parties, though the ordinary Custom is to be Married by the
Parish Priest where the Woman lives.

Decree II.
WHereas Matrimony ought to be celebrated with words signifying a present
Consent, and in many places of this Diocese, it is commonly celebrated with
words signifying only a Consent for the time to come: Therefore the Synod does
command, That when the Persons that are to be Married, come to the Door of the
Church, the Parish Priest, or some other Priest, having his or the Prelates
License, being in his Surplice, with his Stole, and at least two Witnesses
present, shall ask them, if they are pleased to Marry; and if they say they
are, or express their Consent by some other evident signs, the Priest then
shall take one end of his Stole, and laying it on the Palm of his left Hand,
shall take the right Hand of the Bride and lay it on the Stole, and lay the
Palm of the right Hand of the Bridegroom on the Palm of the right Hand of the
Bride, in form of a Cross, and covering both their Hands with the other end of
the Stole, and laying his own right Hand upon all, so that the Hands of both
Parties, and both the ends of the Stole are betwixt the Priest's Hands; after
having blessed them with the sign of the Cross, he shall say, In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen; and shall make the
Bride say first, I N. receive thee N. for my lawful Husband, so as the Holy
Mother Church of Rome does command; and shall afterward make the Bridegroom
say the same words, I N. receive thee N. for my lawful Wife, so as the Holy
Mother Church of Rome does command; and after they have both said these words,
the Priest shall say, I, by the Authority I have, do join you in Matrimony in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen; after
which he shall sprinkle them both with Holy Water, saying, By this sprinkling
of Holy Water the Lord give you Health and Blessing, Amen. And if neither of
the Parties was ever Married before, they shall then be carried before the Hig^
Altar, where being upon their Knees, the Pries^ shall give them the Blessings,
as they are in the Roman Ceremonial of the administration of the Sacraments,
which is to be translated into Syria^ and to be used in all Churches; but if
either of the Parties have been Married before, he shall not then give them the
said Blessings, but dismiss them, after having said a Prayer in the Church.

Decree III.
THat there may be no Frauds in Matrimony, and that the Impediments, which, if
they were known, would hinder the same, may be discovered; and that in all
things we may conform our selves to the Decrees of the Holy Council of Trent,
the Synod does command, That what is ordained by the said Holy Council, be
punctually observed; to wit, That the Parties to be Married, shall have their
Banns published by the Vicar, or by one appointed by him, on three Sundays or
Holy Days in the Churches where the Bridegroom and Bride live, when the People
are assembled at Mass, in this Form; N. born in such a place, does purpose to
Marry N. the Daughter of N. and N. born in such a place; wherefore if there be
any that know any Impediment, they must declare it upon pain of
Excommunication: And the Vicar, in case he has any lawful Impediment declared
unto him, shall not Marry the Parties before he has made the Prelate acquainted
therewith, that so he may determine what is just to be done therein; which
Publications cannot be dispensed with by any but by the Prelate, or one
representing him: And in case it is probable that if such Publications are
made, there are those that will maliciously endeavor to hinder the Marriage,
though in such a case the parties may be received without them, yet for the
better discovery of other Impediments that may happen to be therein, they
cannot be joined together, nor receive the Blessings, though capable thereof,
before the publications are made in the Churches, without the Prelate should be
pleased to dispense therewith, to whose Prudence and Judgment the Holy Council
of Trent has committed the whole of this Matter, and the Priest who shall
receive any couple without a License from the Prelate, before such publications
have been made, shall be suspended from his Office and Benefice for six months.

Decree IV.
THis Synod conforming it self in all things to the Holy Council of Trent, does
command that in every Parish there be a Book, as was ordered as to Baptism,
wherein the Vicar of the Church shall write the Names of the Married Persons,
and the Place, day of the Month, and Year, and the Names of the two Witnesses
commonly called the Padrinhos, where they were Married, registring them thus,
On such a Day of such a Month and Year, I N. Vicar of the Church, naming the
Saint to whom it is dedicated, in such a part, naming where the said Church is,
did join N, the Son of N, and N. to N. the Daughter of N. and of N. born in
such a place, both at the gate of the Church according to the Holy Council of
Trent, the Witnesses were N. and N. to which the Vicar and the two Witnesses
shall sign their Names, and when any Priest shall by a License from the Vicar,
or Prelate, marry any couple, he shall write, On such a day of such a Month,
and Year, I N. a Priest, by a License from the Vicar of such a place, or from
the Bishop, if he granted the License, did receive at the gate of the Church N.
naming him, the Son of N. and N. naming his Parents, born in such a place,
naming the Town according to the Holy Council of Trent, the Witnesses were N.
and N. to which the said two Witnesses and Priest shall put their Names; which
Book shall be kept among the Registers of the Church, and the Prelate at his
Visitations shall see that there be no fault or neglect therein.

Decree V.
AS Holy Matrimony is a Sacrament, and as such conveys Grace, it ought
therefore to be received with great Purity and Holiness, wherefore this Synod
conforming it self to the Holy Council of Trent, does exhort and admonish, and
command all that are to be Married, that at least three days before the
celebration of this Sacrament, they do confess themselves, and being ca^able do
receive the Holy Sacrament of the Eu^harist neither shall the Vicars receive
them before they have complied with this Obligation, concerning which they
shall make diligent Enquiry. The Synod does furthermore command, That all
Marriages be celebrated in the Church, and that the Parish Priest do not
accommodate himself to the negligence of those who do not care to be seen to
marry in the Church; but declaring withal that wheresoever Matrimony is
celebrated, if it be done by a Parish Priest, and in the presence of two
Witnesses, it is true and valid, though the Parish Priest ought not to Marry any
out of the Church, but upon very urgent Reasons.

Decree VI.
THere have been always in the Church, even under the Old Law prohibited
degrees of Kindred, within which Matrimony was not to be celebrated, and being
celebrated, was null; and that not only as to such as were prohibited by a
Divine Natural Law, as betwixt Persons in the first degree, and betwixt
Brothers and Sisters, but as to others also who are prohibited by a Divine
positive Law; wherefore the Synod does declare, that the degrees at this time
prohibited in the Church, without which Matrimony cannot be celebrated without
a Dispensation, and being celebrated, is void, are only to the fourth degree
inclusive of Consanguinity, and of Affinity only to the second degree, as first
Cousins, second Cousins, third Cousins, fourth Cousins, by Father and Mother,
and the same degrees are prohibited in the Kindred of Affinity, betwixt the
Kinsfolk of the Husband and Wife, with whom either of the Parties have been
Married; and besides, that the Kindred in the first and second degree only with
such, or of those with whom either of the Parties have at any time had unlawful
Carnal Knowledge, beyond which degrees there are no other of Carnal Kindred
that can hinder Matrimony, but in all these that have been mentioned, all
Marriages that are made, are null, and of no force, and all those that have
Married so, do live in the Mortal Sin of foul Fornication: but if any upon just
and reasonable accounts shall desire to Marry within any of these degrees that
are prohibited only by a positive Law, they must have Recourse.] The Church of
Rome seems to have multiplied prohibitions in Matrimonial matters for no other
end, but to get the more Money by Dispensati^ns. In Romana Curia, says
Did^acus Abulensis, adeo frequentes dispensationes ad Matrimonia contrahenda
inter Consanguineos, ut juris Canonici prohibitiones hac in p^rte nullis sint
impedimento, nisi ^i^ qui pauperes sunt, nec patrimo^i^m habent unde possint
aliquam ^^mam pro obtinenda dispensatione ^^igare. I have a rate by me of
Matrimonial Dispensations, which is too long to be here inserted. I had it from
a Protestant Merchant, who upon receiving the rated sum in Portugal, had the
Dispensation dispatched at Rome, and sent to him by the Jews that live there,
who by reason of their general Correspondence, have in a manner engrossed the
whole trade of Dispensations, so little is the honor of Christianity regarded
by some People, where it clasheth with conveniences. Emanuel King of Portugal,
with a dispensation Married two Sisters, notwithstanding his having had a Son
by the first; and I knew a Nobleman in a certain Popish Country that was both
Uncle and first Cousin to his Wife.
recourse to the Holy Apostolic See for a Dispensation, or to their Prelate,
having power from the said See to do it, declaring the degree of Kindred
wherein they desire to be dispensed, together with the Causes why they do
desire it, in which the Prelate shall do what he shall judge convenient in the
Lord, and so the Prelate being empowered by the Holy See to do it, shall do it
gratis, without taking any thing for the dispensation, though the Parties of
their own accord should offer to pay him for it.

Decree VII.
BEsides the Carnal Kindred of Consanguinity and Affinity, which hinders
Matrimony in certain degrees, there is also another sort of Kindred that does
the same, which is called Spiritual Kindred, and is contracted in Baptism
betwixt the Godfather and Godmother, and the Child that is Baptized, and the
Parents of the said Child, and in Confirmation or Chrism betwixt those who
offer and present the Person that is confirmed, as was ordered in the Decrees
of Baptism and Confirmation; which Spiritual Kindred of Godfathers and
Godmothers, and Gossips, does so hinder the celebration of Matrimony, that
without a Dispensation from the Apostolic See, or from some authorized by the
Pope to that purpose, the Matrimony is null, and of no force, all that live
therein living in Fornication, and a state of Damnation; and if any that are
thus a kin have a mind to marry together, they shall prefer a Petition, as
they shall be directed hereafter, but are to know that the Church does very
seldom or never, but for weighty Causes dispense in Cases of Spiritual Affinity.

Decree VIII.
WHereas hitherto the prohibited degrees, and the reservation of dispensing
with the same to the Apostolical See, has not been understood in this Diocese,
the Prelates thereof having dispensed in all degrees, prohibited only by a
positive Law, without having had Authority for what they did, so that great
numbers by virtue of such Dispensations, have lived many Years in a Married
Estate, without any scruple concerning what was granted by their Prelates; for
which reason the Synod for the greater security of the Consciences of such
People has thought fit that the most Reverend Metropolitan should dispense with
them in all the said degrees, by virtue of the Apostolic Authority granted to
him in these parts to that effect, and particularly by the brief of Gregory the
XIII. of glorious Memory, obtained at the instance of the Jesuits, and
confirmed by our Holy Father Clement the VIII, at this time presiding in the
Church of God; wherefore for the quieting of the Consciences of such as have
been Married with the forementioned Dispensations, the said Lord with the
approbation of the Fathers of the Society, does by the Authority of the said
Brief, effectually dispense in all and every one of the said degrees of
Spiritual as well as Carnal Kindred and Affinity, which are prohibited only by
a positive Law, and with all Persons who have Married within the same with such
dispensations so far as of right can or ought to be done, as much as if they
were here particularly named; commanding them for the further security of their
Consciences to be Married.] By this Decree all the Children born before such
Marriages were born Bastards; now how many thousand Bastards would such a
Decree make in any Country, where such Prohibitions concerning Natural and
Spiritual Affinity are not regarded?
Married again privately in their Houses, or elsewhere, as they shall judge
most convenient, by any Priest they please, there being two Witnesses present,
according to the form of the Holy Council of Trent: And the Synod does command
that henceforward such Dispensations be not granted any otherwise than in form
of the Briefs of the Holy Apostolic See in these parts to that effect,
declaring all that shall be granted otherwise to be null, and of no force; and
the Marriages that are celebrated by virtue of them, to be void, and the
Parties not to be Married.

Decree IX.
THe Synod recognizing for the time to come the ancient prohibition, observed
in the Universal Church of not Marrying, from the first day of Advent until the
Epiphany, and from Ashwednesday until the Sunday of the Octaves of Easter
inclusive, does command the same to be inviolably observed in this Diocese,
adding to those days the time from Quinquagesima Sunday forward when by ancient
custom Lent is begun in this Church, but that at all other times, though of
Fasting, marriage may be celebrated as People shall think fit.

Decree X.
Whereas in this Diocese there has hitherto been no respect had in the
celebration of Matrimony to the Age of the Parties that the Law appoints,
therefore the Synod does command, that no Man shall be Married hereafter, until
he has attained the Age of fourteen Years at least, nor no Woman before she is
full twelve, declaring that herein the Prelates have no power to dispense, but
can only, if any that are under that Age should pretend to marry, judge in
their Consciences whether they are ripe for Matrimony, and judging them to be
so, may grant them a License, and dispense with their marrying; nevertheless,
for several just respects, and the greater security of Peoples Consciences, and
to remove as far as is possible for the Synod to do it, the imitations of the
marriages that are so much in use among the Heathens, who marry people very
young, there being also great numbers in this Diocese who have been married at
nine or ten Years old, or under, the Synod will not have the said Dispensation
or Anticipation of time to exceed four months as to men, and six as to Women;
nor to be granted by any but the Bishop; and if any man hereafter shall presume
to marry without such a Dispensation, before he has attained the Age of
fourteen, or any Woman while she is under twelve, all such marriages shall be
void, but may be resolved into Contracts de futuro, and the Priests that shall
marry any such, shall be suspended from their Office and Benefice, for six
months, and the Parties shall be kept asunder until they are of a due Age.

Decree XI.
THe Synod being informed, that great numbers of married people in this Diocese
do, without any sentence of the Church, (to which all Matrimonial causes do
belong) forsake their Wives, and, to the great offense of God, absent
themselves from them for a long time together, does command that there be no
such separations made without the order of the Church, and if any shall presume
to make them, that they be constrained to come together again, upon pain of
Excommunication, or whatsoever other Penalty the Bishop shall think fit to
inflict; and in case they refuse to comply, they shall be declared
Excommunicate, until such time as they return to one another; and in case they
have any just Cause to separate, they shall carry it before the Prelate to be
Judged according to Law, and what is Just, and shall be obliged by Censures to
stand to his last determination. The Synod does furthermore declare, That the
non-payment of the Portion that may have been promised, is no just Cause to
leave their Wives, which they might have been careful to have secured before
they were Married to them; and that whosoever shall forsake their Wives on that
account, shall be punished and constrained by Excommunication to live with them.

Decree XII.
THe Synod being informed that the Black Slaves that are Christians, and even
such of them as live in the Mountains with Christians, do Marry without a
Priest, by only tying a Thread about the Brides Neck, according to the usage of
the Heathens, does declare, That all such Marriages are void and null, and that
all that live so, do live in Uncleanness; commanding all that have been so
Married, to be brought to the Church, there to be Married by the Vicar,
according to the Form of the Holy Trent Council, and as is above ordered. The
Vicars must take pains to inform themselves of the Marriages of all such
Slaves, in order to make them observe the said Decree inviolably; and the
Masters who have consented that their Slaves or Servants should be thus
Married, and have celebrated such Marriages themselves, and shall not send them
to Church to be Married, though they desire it, shall be severely punished at the
pleasure of the Prelate, and shall be told of the great wrong they do to their
own Consciences therein, and of the Scandal they give to Christianity.

Decree XIII.
THe Synod being informed that some of the Christians of the Mountains have
been Married to several Women in the face of the Church, their first Wife being
still alive, to the great affront and injury of the Holy Sacrament of
Matrimony; does command all Vicars and Curates at their first institution into
their Churches, immediately to make strict enquiry into this Matter, and to
force all such to live with their first Wives; and, in case they refuse, to
declare them Excommunicate, until such time as they comply, and do turn away
all their other Wives, removing them from the place where they live, which
shall be done to all, who during the life of their first Wife have presumed to
take others until they shall be brought to live only with the first; and
besides, they shall be punished with other punishments at the pleasure of the
Prelate, or of the Holy Office of There are two Crimes which both the
Inquisition and Civil Courts take cognizance of, that is, Polygamy and Sodomy.
The Civil Courts punish both with Death, the Inquisition only with Penances:
This makes, that all that are guilty of either of those Crimes, when they
apprehend themselves in any danger of being accused of them before the Civil
Judges, do take Sanctuary in the Inquisition, where having confessed their
Fault, and submitted themselves to Penance, they are in no further danger, and
so by that shift save their lives. Now this Politic piece of Clemency, for it
is no other, quite drowns the noise of all the barbarous Cruelties of the Court
of Inquisition, and alone gains it the reputation of being a much more merciful
Tribunal than the Civil.
Inquisition to which this does belong.

Decree XIV.
WHereas it is a thing unworthy of a Christian to observe the Superstitious
Ceremonies of the Heathens, from whence it is imagined good Success may be
derived, the Synod being informed that there are some ill Christians, that, in
imitation of the Heathens, do go to some of them, and others to some of their
own Superstitious Priests, to learn which are the best Days and Hours to be
Married on, after the manner of the Infidels; and do furthermore on their
Wedding Day make certain Circles, into which they put Rice, and certain Persons
using several Superstitious Ceremonies, which are plainly Heathen; and do
moreover make certain Figures behind their Doors to make their Marriage
Fortunate, and use several Prayers with Ceremonies, which they call the Ring of
Solomon; all which being Devilish, Superstitious, and Heathenish Ceremonies,
condemned by Holy Mother Church: Wherefore the Synod does command and exhort
all Faithful Christians, neither to practice any such Ceremonies themselves,
nor to suffer others to use them in their Houses; and that all who shall
presume to practice them themselves, or permit others to do it in their Houses,
shall be denied the Sacrament for a whole Year, and be rigorously punished at
the pleasure of the Prelate: and the same shall be done to those that go to
Heathens, to learn what Days are Fortunate.

Decree XV.
THe Synod having been informed, that when Contracts de futuro are celebrated
among the Christians of this Diocese, or Marriages are concerted, that it is
performed with some Heathenish and Superstitious Ceremonies, and that many
times when the Parties contracted are not of Age, or have not Judgment enough
to give their consent, does command, that no such Contracts be made, but when
the Parties contracting are of sufficient Age to understand what they do, and
are capable of giving their consent de futuro; and, if the Parents will make
such Matches, they shall do it by a simple Writing, or by shaking Hands, or by
any other way that has nothing of Superstition in it; neither shall they use
any Superstitious Ceremonies, upon pain of being severely chastised at the
pleasure of the Prelate; commanding the Priests, in virtue of Holy Obedience,
not to be present at Contracts, where any such damnable Superstitions are
performed, that so they may not seem to Authorize them by their Person and
Dignity.

Decree XVI.
THe Synod does condemn the Custom, or abuse that has obtained in this Diocese
of the new-married couple's not going to Church till after the fourth day after
their Marriage, when they use to Wash themselves, which is according to the
Judaical Ceremonies condemned by the Law of Christ, but on the contrary, does
exhort all new-married People, without respect of Days, to go to Church and say
their Prayers, knowing for certain, that if any of the Days that they stay from
Church, should happen either to be a Saint's-day or a Sunday, upon which all
People are obliged to hear Mass, that they sin mortally in not hearing it, if
hindered by no other cause: Neither are they to imagine, that such Washings do
any way contribute to the Spiritual Health of their Souls, the Worship of God,
or the Reverence of the Church.

ACTION VIII. Of the Reformation of Church Affairs.
Decree I.
WHereas the Universal Catholic Church is Ruled, Inspired, and Taught by the
Holy Spirit, by whose direction, for the better Government of Christians, and
the more commodious administration of the Sacraments to the Faithful, it has
divided the Provinces of the whole World into Diocesses, which are all subject
to their several Bishops; and the Diocesses into Parishes, which are all
subject to their Parish Priests, so that as the Diocesses and all the faithful
Inhabitants of the same are subject to their several Bishops, and through them
to the Bishop of Rome, the Universal Pastor and Head of the Church, and
Christ's Vicar upon Earth; so all the faithful Inhabitants in every Parish are
subject to their Rector or Vicar, that administer the Sacraments to them, and
are the particular Pastors and Curates of their Souls, through whom they are
subject to their Bishop, and through the Bishop to the Pope, and through the
Pope to Christ; which Order has been at all times preserved in the Church all
over the World, and for want whereof, this Church is so Confused and Disorderly
as it is; every one doing what seems good in his own eyes, without ever being
called to an Account for what they do, having none that are under any
obligation to take care of their Souls, nor no particular Pastor to assist them
in their Necessities, nor distinct Parishes, unto which every one is bound to
resort; therefore this Synod conforming it self to the Government of the whole
Catholic Church, does ordain, that this Diocese be also divided into Parishes,
allotting such a number of People to each Parish as shall be found most
convenient, and furnishing them with particular Vicars and Curates, to watch
over the Souls of the Faithful; and as for other Priests and Curates that shall
be in any Church, they shall be therein as Beneficed Persons, and Co-adjutors
to the Vicars in the administration of the Sacraments to the People, as also in
the Divine Service and Worship of the Church, as they have hitherto been,
having the same Profits and Dividend they had formerly, save that the Synod
intends to deprive them of those Fees which formerly they Simonaically received
for administration of the Sacraments, as to which they shall observe what is
before decreed, as the Vicars and Parish Priests are to have what is allotted
for their maintenance in the Twenty-first and Twenty-second Decrees; and the
said Vicars shall make a Roll of all the Inhabitants of their several Parishes,
that so they may be acquainted with their Customs and way of living, and may
administer the Sacraments unto them, and comfort them in their Troubles and
Necessities; neither shall the Faithful receive the Sacrament from any but
their own Vicar, without his License in Form.

Decree II.
THe Synod does declare, That the Division of Parishes, and the laying of
People to them, has at all times belonged to the Prelate; so that he may at any
time Divide or Unite Parishes at his pleasure, and as he shall find to be most
convenient for the administration of the Sacraments to the Faithful, to whom it
also belongs to provide Vicars and Curates for Churches, whom he may Institute
or Depose as often as he shall judge it to be necessary, to the better feeding
of the Flock of Christ, which he is charged with, and is to give an account of;
and for the present the most Reverend Metropolitan shall make such a reparition
of Parishes and People in this his Visitation, Uniting or Dividing them as
shall seem to him to be most commodious for the administration of the
Sacraments to the Faithful, who at the end of the Synod will name Vicars for
every Parish: And the Synod, for the just Respects and the better Government of
the Church, will not have any Vicars so Established, as not to be removable at
the pleasure of the Prelate.

Decree III.
THe Synod does furthermore declare, That no Priest shall hold Two Churches
with Cure, or receive the Fruits of them according to the Holy Canons: And
whereas in this Diocese there are many that have two or three Churches, which
they have had commended unto them in several parts, either because they were
built by their Relations, or for some other Reason; all which being a great
Abuse, the Synod does declare, That after the division of the Parishes is made,
none shall have any Jurisdiction therein besides their proper Vicars, to whom
only it shall belong to order all the Affairs of their Churches, and to whom
whosoever shall deny to yield Obedience, shall be declared Excommunicate, and
shall be punished at the pleasure of the Prelate as disturbers of the Church;
and all such Priests as are in present possession of the Churches, if
qualified, and there be no just Impediment, the Synod will have it be
instituted Vicars of one of their Parishes, as the most Reverend Metropolitan
shall think fit; not that the Synod intends to prohibit the Prelate, in case he
is not provided of a sufficient number of able Priests, or where there is not a
sufficient maintenance, to recommend two Churches to one Vicar, provided they
are at such a distance that he can look after both, without any wrong to the
administration of the Sacraments. However, this shall never be done, but when
there is an urgent and necessary Reason for it.

Decree IV.
WHereas there are a great many Churches in this Diocese that have no Priests,
to the great detriment of the Faithful, who by that means are for several Years
without Mass, or any to administer the Sacraments to them, as has appeared to
the Reverend Metropolitan in his Visitation of the Churches, in some of which
he found there had been no Masses said in five or six Years, and that there are
Children of that or a greater Age, that have never been Baptized; therefore the
Synod both command, That there be no Church that is made Parochial, how poor
and inconsiderable soever the People may be, for any long time without a Curate
or Vicar to administer the Sacraments to the Faithful, of which the Prelate is
to take special care; and if it should so happen, as it does too often, that he
cannot have a Priest to supply such Cures, in that Case, the Synod declares,
that the Prelate may oblige whomsoever he pleases, by Penalties and Censures
to serve such Churches, that so the Necessities of the Faithful may be provided
for, giving them whereon to subsist in the said Churches.

Decree V.
THe Synod being informed that there are many Villages in this Diocese, which,
by reason of their great distance from any Church, have little of Christianity
left in them besides the Name of the Christians of St. Thomas, which has been
occasioned through the great negligence of the former Schismatical Prelates of
this Bishopric; wherefore the Synod does, in virtue of Holy Obedience, command
all Priests that are nominated Vicars, so soon as they shall come to their
Churches, to make a strict inquiry into the Christians that live in the Skirts
of their Parishes, and to report what they shall discover as to this Matter to
the most Reverend Metropolitan, that so he may take such course therein as
shall be most for the Service of Christ, and the Benefit of Souls; and the same
diligence shall be used in all Parts, where there are such People found, and
have never been Baptized, and where it is thought necessary, there shall be New
Churches built, and Vicars appointed for the reducing such to true
Christianity, and the use of the Holy Sacraments of the Church.

Decree VI.
WHereas the Church of Travancor is at this time totally demolished, the
greater part of its Parishioners having above forty Years ago turned perfect
Heathens, all which has happened through the negligence of sending Priests
among them by reason of their great distance from any other Church, there being
nevertheless several good Christians there still, therefore the Synod does
command, that a Vicar be forthwith collated to that place, who shall set
immediately about rebuilding the Church; there shall likewise be some Preachers
sent along with him to reduce the said People into the bosom of Holy Mother
Church, and to the Holy Catholic Faith of Christ, according to the Orders
given therein by the most Reverend Metropolitan, and the Vicar shall continue
there baptizing and receiving all, according to the necessity of the Church,
for which an Olla, or License has been already obtained from the King of
Travancor, and shall from henceforth continue in the Church according to the
necessity thereof.

Decree VII.
THe Synod being informed, That upon the borders of the Territories belonging
to the Samorim King of Calecut, at the distance of four leagues from any Church
in this Bishopric, there is a Country called Tadamalla, in which there are
certain Villages of Christians, who were anciently of this Church, but at
present have nothing of Christianity but the bare Name, does command that
Priests and Preachers be sent thither immediately from this Church to reduce
them to the Catholic Faith, and baptize them, in which matter, through the
diligences that have been used by the most Reverend Metropolitan, they will
meet with no difficulties on the part of those who have lost their Christianity
only for want of Instruction, and the Synod does recommend this People, as a
Member of their Church to the Spiritual Care of the most Reverend Metropolitan.

Decree VIII.
WHereas the use of the Holy Oils was instituted by Christ in the Church, who
made the Oil of Chrism, the matter of the Sacrament of Confirmation and Extreme
Unction; and did furthermore appoint other Holy Unctions for the Catechumeni,
delivering the Doctrine of the Consecration of such Oils in his last Supper to
his Disciples, as we are taught by Holy Tradition from the Apostles and the
Doctrine of the Holy Fathers of the Church, and there having notwithstanding
this been no such thing in use, or known in this Church to this day: Therefore
the Synod does command, that in all Parish Churches there be a Box that shall
hold three Vessels of Plate, Tin, or Glass, in which the Holy Oils shall be
kept with due Decency and Reverence, with their several Names upon each Vessel,
so that they may not be used one for another, commanding the Vicars that are to
be nominated, not to go from hence without carrying these Boxes along with
them, to their respective Churches, which the most Reverend Metropolitan will
furnish them withal, and with the Holy Oils which he consecrated on Holy
Thursday last for this purpose in the Church of Carturte in this Diocese, which
Boxes they shall put under Lock and Key in their Repositories, either in the
chief Chapel of the high Altar, or in their Vestries, or near to the Font,
having them always decently covered with Silk, or in case the Vicars live at a
considerable distance from their Churches, or in the Heaths, in some decent
place in their Houses for fear of Infidel Robbers, and that they may be always
at hand, when they shall be called to administer the Sacrament of Unction, and
whenever they are carried to Church for Baptism, or are carried to the Sick,
they shall be always carried by a Priest, if it is possible, but at least by
one in Holy Orders; and upon Holy Thursday they shall either burn all the Oils
that remain of that Year in the Lamps of the Church, or pour them into the
Font, so as after that day not to make use of any Oils but such as are new,
which after Easter they shall either go or send to the Prelate for, or to the
place where he has ordered them to be distributed, and in case the Sea be
vacant, they shall then by order from the Governor of the Diocese, have
recourse to the Bishop of Cochim, and the Vicars that shall neglect to go or
send for the said Holy Oils for the use of their Churches, so as not to have
them within a month after Easter, shall be suspended by the Prelate, who is
desired to be very watchful in this matter, from his Office and Benefice for
six months, and be obliged to fetch them, and the Children that shall be
baptized during that time, shall be anointed with the Holy Oils of Baptism when
they come, neither shall the Vicars depart from hence, until they are fully
instructed in the use of the Oils by Persons appointed by the Synod to teach
them, that so they may not be mistaken in the administration of the Holy
Sacraments.

Decree IX.
THere being a great Confusion in this Bishopric as to the Holy days that are
to be kept under the Obligation of a Mortal Sin, as well as to the hearing of
Mass, as to the doing of Work; wherefore the Synod does declare that they are
these following, to wit, all the Sundays in the Year.

In January, the first day being the Circumcision of our Lord, and the sixth
being the Feast of the Epiphany.

In February, the second day being the Purification of our Lady, and the twenty
fourth being the Feast of the Apostle St. Matthew, which in the Bissextile is
to be celebrated on the twenty fifth.

In March, the twenty fifth day, being the Anunciation of our Lady.

In April, the twenty third being the Feast of St. George the Martyr, according
to the custom of this Bishopric.

In May, the first being the Feast of the Apostles St. Philip and St. James.

In June, the twenty fourth being the Feast of St. John the Baptist, and the
twenty ninth being the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul.

In July, the second being the Visitation of our Lady, and the third being the
Feast of the glorious Apostle St. Thomas, which by some is said to be the day
of his Translation, by others of his arrival in these parts, and which has by
ancient custom been still kept in this Bishopric; and the twenty fifth being
the Feast of the Apostle St. James.

In August, the sixth being the Tranfiguration of our Lord, according to the
custom of this Bishopric, the fifteenth the Assumption of our Lady, and the
twenty fourth the Feast of St. Bartholomew the Apostle.

In September, the eighth being the Nativity of our Lady, the fourteenth the
Feast of the Holy Cross, according to the custom of this Bishopric. The twenty
first the Feast of St. Matthew the Apostle, the twenty ninth the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel.

In October, the twenty seventh being the Feast of the Apostles St. Simon and
St. Jude.

In November, the first being the Feast of All Saints, the thirtieth of St.
Andrew the Apostle.

In December, the eighth being the Conception of our Lady, the eighteenth being
the day whereon the Holy Cross.] The stone Cross that was found under ground at
Maliapor, with the Blood of St. Thomas, and Sword wherewith he was Married, by
Gabriel de Ataide, a Portugueze Priest, as he was digging a Foundation for a
Church, about the Year 1547. is reported to have sweat at a most prodigious
rate upon the day of our Ladies Expectation, being the 18th of December, in the
Year 1557. and to have continued always to sweat upon the same Festivity until
the Year 1566. to which pious Fraud, for that is the best that can be said of
it, the Archbishop and Synod it seems gave so much credit, as to dedicate the
18th. of December to the Memory thereof.
Holy Cross of the Apostle St. Thomas did sweat: the twenty first being the
Feast of the same Holy Apostle St. Thomas; the twenty fifth the Feast of the
Nativity; the twenty sixth the Feast of St. Stephen the Protomartyr, the twenty
seventh of St. John the Evangelist, the twenty eighth of the Innocents.

The Thursday of our Lord's Supper, from the time the Offices are begun in the
Church until midnight, according to the custom of the Church. Easter, and the
three days following, notwithstanding they may have hitherto observed only two
days. The day of our Lord's Ascension, the most Holy Feast of Pentecost, with
the two following days.

The most Holy Feast of the Body of God, or of the most Holy Sacrament, which,
according to the custom of these parts, they celebrate on the Thursday after
Easter.

Also the days of the Consecration of their Churches, and the Feasts of the
Saints, to whom they were Dedicated, in their own Parishes only.

The Synod does furthermore declare, That the Fridays from Christmas to Lent,
which use to be observed in some Parts, shall not be kept hereafter, the Saints
that were Celebrated on some of them, having their particular Feasts; and
others of them being Dedicated to Heretics, as is above observed, whose
Memories ought not to be Celebrated; and the Vicars shall not fail on Sundays
at Mass, to warn the People of all the Holy Days of the Week, that so they may
be advertised to keep them.

Decree X.
NOt only what Holy Days were to be kept, were uncertain, and not uniformly
observed in this Bishopric, but the same also happened to the Fasting-days,
which Christians are under an obligation to keep; wherefore the Synod does
declare, that the Fasting-days, as well the Ancient ones, as those that are now
commanded, are these following.

The Holy and Solemn Fast of Lent, which according to the Custom of this
Bishopric, begins upon the Monday after Quinquagesima.

The Holy Fast of Advent, which is kept in this Bishopric with great rigor
from the Sunday, that is next to the first of December, until Christmas.

The first day of February, being the Vigil of the Purification of our Lady,
the 23d. being the Vigil of St. Matthias the Apostle.

The 23d. of June, being the Vigil of St. John the Baptist, and the 28th. of
St. Peter and St. Paul.

The 24th. of July, being the Vigil of St. James the Apostle.

The 12th. of August, being the Vigil of the Assumption of our Lady, and the
23d. of St. Bartholomew the Apostle.

The 7th. of September, being the Vigil of our Lady's Nativity, the 13th. of
the Holy Cross.

The 27th. of October, being the Vigil of St. Simon and Jude, and the last, of
All Saints.

The 29th. of November, being the Vigil of St. Andrew.

The 2d. of December, being the Vigil of the Glorious Apostle St. Thomas, on
the 24th. of our Savior's Nativity, notwithstanding these two do both fall in
Advent.

And that this Diocese may be in all things conformable to the Customs of the
Universal Church, the Synod does command, the Fast of the four Times to be
published and observed therein; they are the first Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday after the first Sunday in Lent; and the the first Wednesday and
Friday, and Saturday after Whitsuntide; and the first Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday after the Feast of the Holy Cross, in September; and the Wednesday,
Friday, and Saturda^ after the Feast of the Holy Cross, on the 13th. of
December, which falls in with the Advent Fast.

And the Synod does furthermore declare, That the Fast of our Lady's
Assumption, which begins on the first of August, and lasts to the day of the
Festivity, and the Fast that is called the Apostles, which begins on the first
day after Whitsuntide, and lasts fifty days, notwithstanding they are Holy and
Laudable, it wishes they were not kept as they are by the Christians of this
Diocese, after the same manner as the ancient Fasts are; nevertheless, since
they are observed by some and not by others, that there may be no Scruples nor
Disorder, the Synod does declare, that the keeping of them is not commanded
under the Precept of a Mortal Sin, though they may be kept out of Devotion by
those that have a mind to it, neither are People under any obligation to a Lent
Fare on these Days; and as to the three Fasting Days of the Prophet Jonas,
called Mononebo, which begins eighteen days before the first day in Lent, the
Synod, out of respect to its Antiquity and Holiness, does permit it to be
observed with great strictness: But whereas People do assemble together in the
Churches on those days, there to eat the Nercha's that are distributed, the
Synod, though it is not willing to oblige People to Fast on those three days
under the obligation of a Mortal Sin, does nevertheless oblige them to a Lent
Diet at least upon them; and the Vicars shall be obliged to give notice to the
People of all the Fasts of the Week upon Sundays, that so all may be warned to
observe them.

Decree XI.
THe Synod does approve of the Holy and Laudable Custom observed by the
Christians of this Diocese, of eating neither Eggs nor Cheese, nor any thing
made of Milk, nor of Fish, and of abstaining totally from Wine, and from their
Wives during the whole time of Lent; all which it desires them to continue to
observe inviolably, as also to begin the Fast upon the day after Quinquagesima
Sunday; and some Abuses being reformed, it does declare, That Fasting does not
only consist in Peoples abstaining from some sorts of Meat, but also in their
not eating so often as they may desire, the Integrity of the Precept of Fasting
obliging People not to eat above one Meal a day; and that at The Fasts of the
Church of Rome, as they are now observed, are little else than a Mockery of the
Duty, of which Card. Bona in the 21st. Chapter of his first Book of Liturgies,
complains as loud as he durst: Ita factum est, says the Cardinal, ut non
prorsus veneranda vetustas interterit, dum ordo a sanctis patribus praesciptus,
saltem in publica officiorum recitatione, retinetur, quamvis legitimus horarum
punctus nullo modo attendatur, neque enim horae nonae officium, tertia vel
quarta post meridiem in Vigiliis psallimus, neque vesperas in Quadragesima,
circa solis occasum, sed una vel duabus horis ante meridiem, quae anticipatio,
ut doctissimus Francelinus scribit Cap. 34. quaedam est nostri temporis
calamitas, ne dicam abusus: Caepit hac hora^um pra ventio post saeculum
duodecimum introduci, cum pristina severitas paulatim relaxata, mollim
disciplina successit, de qua satius est tacere quam loqui. And so that they may
observe the ancient Rule of not eating upon a Fasting day till after Vespers,
they have turned the Morning into Evening, and say the Vespers ^Ten a Clock,
that they may go to Dinner at Eleven.
an hour appointed, and at Night they that shall stand in need of it, and have
an appetite to drink for their Healths-sake, may eat a light Collation,
according to the permission of the Church; but if they shall exceed either in
the quality or quantity of the said Collation, or eat oftener than twice after
this manner, they do violate the Fast, and Sin Mortally; and if through
infirmity or weakness, they should break the Fast upon any day, they shall not,
as some imagine, be released by their having broke Lent once: from continuing
the Fast, but on the contrary, they shall be guilty of so many Mortal Sins, as
there are days of Obligation, on which they neglect to Fast: They are also
bound to Fast on all the Saints days, though never so Solemn, that shall fall in
Lent, Sunday only excepted, upon which it is not lawful for any Christian to
Fast, as to which matter there are great Abuses introduced in to this Diocese.

Decree XII.
THe Synod does declare, That notwithstanding Fasting is of great benefit, that
it does not intend to oblige any that are under one and Twenty, nor such as are
very ancient, or weak, or sickly, nor Women with Child, nor those that give
Suck, nor those that cannot Fast conveniently by reason of some hard Labor
they are obliged to, to Fast any otherwise than by eating a Lent Diet on
Fasting-days, as to which too the weak and sick are excepted, who may at all
times eat what is necessary to their health; and it shall also be lawful for
Women with Child to eat whatsoever they long for, to prevent Abortion.

Decree XIII.
THe Synod does very much condemn what some ignorant observers of Heathenish
Superstition imagine, viz. That if they do not wash their Bodies betimes in the
Morning on a Fastday, their Fast will be of no worth; and that if they happen
to touch any of a base Race, or a Naires, they must wash themselves to make
their Fast to be of any Merit; and declares, that all such Washings and
Superstitious touches, are commanded neither by God nor the Church, and are no
ways proper for Christians; and does furthermore command the observers of all
such Superstitions to be punished severely by the Prelate, as followers of
Heathenish Superstitions.] The Church of Rome has little reason to condemn any
practice purely for being Heathen, her Creature Worship, with all the
Ceremonies thereof, being visibly of such extraction; for it was a true
judgment that the Fathers of the Council of Constantinople under Leo Isaurus,
passed upon the endeavors of those who were for introducing Images into the
Christian Church; That to do it would be to restore Heathenism again under a
Scheme of Christianity.
Heathenish Vanities, condemned by Holy Mother Church, earnestly desiring that
all such things may be totally rooted out of the hearts of the very Infidels in
this Diocese.

Decree XIV.
NOtwithstanding the Synod does approve of the laudable Custom that has
obtained in this Diocese, of beginning the Holy Fast of Lent, upon the Monday
following Quinquagessima Sunday: Nevertheless in conformity to the usage of the
Universal Church, it does ordain and command, that on the Wednesday following,
they consecrate Ashes in the Church, which shall be sprinkled on the Heads of
the People by the Priest that celebrates Mass, using these words, Remember Man
that thou art dust, and that to dust thou shall return, as he is directed by
the Roman Ceremonial translated into Syrian, by the order of the most Reverend
Metropolitan, leading by this Holy Ceremony the Faithful to a deeper
Repentance, for their Sins, and a sense of their own vileness in that Holy
time; which Ashes so far as it can be done, shall be made of the branches that
were blessed the former Year upon Palm Sunday, which is called Osana in this
Diocese, a^ it is likewise ordered in the said Ceremonial, bu^ at the same time
the People shall be told tha^ this is only a Holy Ceremony of the Church, and
not a Sacrament.

Decree XV.
THat this Bishopric may in all things be conformable to the Customs of the
Catholic Church, the Synod does command all the Members thereof upon pain of
Mortal Sin, not to eat Flesh upon Saturdays, in memory of our Lord's Burial,
but Eggs, Milk, Butter or Cheese they may lawfully eat upon Saturdays, as also
upon all Fish days that are not Fasts, and since the custom of not eating Flesh
on Wednesdays is not observed over the whole Diocese, but only in some parts
thereof, and that but by a few; the Synod does declare, that albeit that custom
is Holy and Laudable, and it were to be wished that it were universally
observed by all Christians, it does not think fit to oblige People thereunto
upon pain of Sin, so that all that list may eat Flesh upon Wednesdays.

Decree XVI.
THe Synod does declare, That the Obligati- of not eating Flesh on prohibited
days, lasts from midnight to midnight, beginning at the midnight of the
prohibited day, and ending at the midnight of the day following, so that the
Obligation of not eating Flesh upon Frydays and Saturdays, begins at the
midnight of Friday, and ends on the midnight of Sunday, and the Obligation of
ceasing from labor begins at the midnight of the said day, and ends at the
midnight of Monday: being to understand that in beginning the Fasts and
Festivities on the Evening of the former, and continuing them to the Evening of
the latter day, they do conform themselves to the Customs and Rites of the Jews
condemned by Holy Mother Church, in which days and their observances are not
reckoned from Evening to Evening, but from midnight to midnight.

Decree XVII.
WHereas it is the Custom of the Universal Church, to have Holy.] This Ceremony
of sprinkling the people with Holy Water, is no less of Heathen Extraction than
the washings condemned in the former Decree, as is acknowledged by the Learned
Valesius, in his Annotations on the 6 Chapter of the 6 Book of Sozomen.
Holy Water at the entrance of the Churches, that so the Faithful by sprinkling
themselves therewith, may have their Venial Sins pardoned, and the Holy Water
that has been hitherto made use of in this Diocese has not been blessed by the
Priest, nor by any Prayer of the Church, the Sextons only throwing a little of
the Clay into it, that is brought by Pilgrims from the Sepulcher of St. Thomas,
or from some other Holy Place relating to him, and where such Clay has been
wanting, the said Sextons have thrown some Grains of Incense into it: Whereupon
without any further Consecration, it has been esteemed Holy: Therefore the
Synod does declare, that such Water is not Holy, and that the Faithful ought
not to make use of it; and albeit that all the Earth of Holy places, and of the
Sepulchers of Saints approved of by the Church, ought to be kept with much
Veneration, yet that the Earth of the Holy places belonging to St. Thomas, has
not the virtue of such a Consecration in it: for which reason it commands all
Priests to bless the said Water, by throwing Holy Salt into it, according to
the custom of the Universal Church, as is directed by the Roman Ceremonial
translated into Syrian by the order of the most Reverend Metropolitan,
according to the Form whereof the true Vicars shall take care to consecrate
Water, and every Saturday Evening, or Sunday Morning to furnish the Water-pots
therewith; and upon Sundays the People being assembled, the Priest being in his
Surplice and Stole, but without his Planet, shall before he begins Mass,
sprinkle the whole Congregation, repeating the Antiphona, and the Prayer
contained in the said Ceremonial: and at Masses at which the Deacon and
Subdeacon officiate, the Deacon may repeat the Antiphona, but the Prayer shall
always be said by the Priest. The Vicars must also instruct the People at their
entering into the Church, to take Holy Water and bless themselves therewith, in
the form of a Cross, and to give over the saying the Prayer to the impious
Heretic Nestorius, which they used to do when they took Holy Water as they
entered into the Church, the Synod condemning the same as Heretical and
Blasphemous.

Decree XVIII.
WHereas the greatest part of the People of this Bishopric are not instructed
in the Doctrine, and they that are, know only the Pater Noster, and Ave Mary in
the Syrian Tongue, which they do not understand, and most of the Children know
not how to bless themselves, nay the Clergy themselves are ignorant thereof,
not being able to say the Commandments; therefore the Synod does command, that
in all Parish Churches in the Morning and Evening, as the Vicar shall think
most convenient, one of the Boys or the Bell-man shall ring the little Bell to
call the Boys and Girls together in the Church, where being assembled, the
Vicar, or some other Clergyman that he shall appoint, shall instruct them in
the Doctrine, that is to say, the Sign of the Cross, the Pater Noster, Ave
Mary, the Creed, and the Commandments of God, and the Church, the Articles of
Faith, and other Christian Doctrines in the Malabar Tongue, that so all may
understand them, and not in the Syrian, which the People do not understand, it
being the custom of the Church to teach the Doctrine to Children, and to the
People in their Mother Tongue, and furthermore upon all Sundays and Holydays,
either before or after Mass the Vicar shall teach the said Doctrine in the
Congregation, that so all may be instructed there in, and shall also after
having called the people together with a Bell, teach it on the Evenings of
Sundays, and as for the Churches that are in the Heaths, the Vicars shall give
orders that the Children, or at least such of them as are nighest to the
Church, shall upon a certain day of the Week come to learn the Doctrine,
employing others persons to instruct the rest therein, and the Schoolmasters
that teach Syrian, or that teach to read and write, shall every day before they
begin School repeat the said Doctrine to their Scholars in Malabar, neither
shall any inferior Orders, no not the first Tonsure, be given to Children
before they can say the whole Doctrine in Malabar, in which they must be
examined according to the Holy Council of Trent, and in all Church s there
shall be a Book of the Doctrine.] The Christians of Malabar would certainly
lose the second Commandment, by receiving this Roman Doctrine, in which that
Commandment never appears, no not as part of the first, nay in the Tridentine
Catechism, though writ in Latin, and for the use of Parish Priests, there is only
the three first words of it mentioned, and I do not believe there is one Priest
of a thousand in Spain or Portugal, who if they should have the whole Second
Commandment repeated to them would not say, what I have heard more than one,
and those very grave Priests too, say of it, That it might be John Calvin's,
but they were sure it was none of God's Commandments.
Doctrine in the Malabar Tongue, for the instruction of Children: which the
Synod does entreat the Father Rector, of the College of Jesuits of Vaipicotta,
to order to be translated by some of that College, commanding all the Churches
of this Diocese, as also exhorting all the Christians thereof at Night to cause
the said Doctrine to be taught in their Houses to their whole Families, that so
their Servants and Slaves may be instructed therein, and the Confessors in
their Confessions must not fail to examine their Penitents in the Doctrine, and
to exhort them to learn it.

Decree XIX.
THat the Faithful Christians in this Diocese may in their Common Prayer be
conformable to the whole Catholic Church, they must not from henceforward say
the Ave Mary, as they have been taught by the Perfidious Nestorians, but must
say it thus, Ave Mary full of Grace, the Lord be with thee, blessed art thou
among Women, blessed is Jesus the fruit of thy Womb; Holy Mother of God pray
for us Sinners, now, and at the hour of our Death, Amen, Jesus. And in this
form it shall be inserted into all the Prayer Books of this Diocese.

Decree XX.
Whereas the Christians of this Diocese do not show the least Reverence to the
most Holy Name of Jesus when it is mentioned, which arises from the false
Doctrine of the Nestorian Heretics, who do impiously assert, That it is not
worthy of Reverence, being the Name of a Humane Person, teaching falsely that
there are two Persons in Christ, therefore since that Divine Name contains in
it so many Divine Mysteries, being the Name of our Redemption, and the Name
above all Names, At which St. Paul says, every knee in Heaven and in Earth,
and below the Earth ought to bow, the Synod does command, that as often either
in the Gospel or Prayers of the Mass, or Offices, or any where else that that
Name is mentioned, all People do reverently bow their Body, whether they be
sitting or standing, and the Clergy and other Christians, having their Caps on
shall take them off, and the Vicars and Preachers must not neglect to put their
People frequently in mind thereof; and whereas the Name Lyo is the same with
the most sweet Name of Jesus in the Malabar Language, and is commonly given to
Children in Baptism; the Synod does strictly prohibit the giving of that Name
to any body for the future, commanding all that are called by it, to take
another Name in Confirmation, or at any other time, it being a great
irreverence for any one to be called by so high and Divine a Name.

Decree XXI.
WHereas it is necessary that the Feast of Christ's Nativity should be
celebrated with great solemnity and uniformity through the whole Catholic
Church; the Synod does command that on the Eve of that Festivity, all the
Clergy and People do assemble together in the Church, there to say the Matins,
with the greatest Solemnity possible; and that after they have done these
Prayers, which shall end about Midnight, they shall make the customary
Procession, which being over, a Solemn Mass shall be said, with all possible
Festivity, after which the Priest may say a Mass at break of day, and a third
at the usual time of Mass; for the Priest must know, that for the greater
Solemnity of this Festival, they are permitted to say three Masses upon it,
that is, one at Midnight, one at break of day, and a third at the ordinary
time; or being private Masses, all three together after break of day, but being
public, shall be all said in the forementioned Order; neither shall they
after the first two take the Lavatory, but after having received the Blood,
shall go on with the Mass without taking the Lavatory, that so they may be
Fasting to celebrate the third; and they shall be very careful to have the Cups
well scoured, and their Fingers washed clean with Water, which shall be
preserved in a particular Vessel in order to its being afterward either thrown
into a Pond, or poured under the Altar, or into the Baptismal Water that is in
the Font; and if any Priest through carelessness should in either of the two
first Masses take the Lavatory, after that it shall not be lawful for him to
say any more, because the Mass is not to be celebrated but Fasting, which the
taking of the Lavatory breaks.

Decree XXII.
THe Synod does command, That the Priests in the solemn administration of the
Sacraments of Baptism, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, or when they administer
the Holy Eucharist without the Mass, for the greater decency and reverence for
what they are about, do wear a Surplice with a Stole about their Necks: And
whereas hitherto there has been no such thing as a Surplice in this Bishopric,
the most Reverend Metropolitan having been pleased to provide such Vestments as
are necessary in this Bishopric, no Vicar shall go from hence without taking a
Surplice along with him, which he is to wear in the administration of the Holy
Sacraments, wherein the Synod commands them likewise to use the Rites and
Ceremonies prescribed in the Roman Ceremonial, which the said Lord Metropolitan
has commanded to be translated into Syrian and to be kept in all Churches,
which contains the Forms of Baptizing, of Anointing the Sick, of Marrying, of
Sacramental Absolution, with the customary Prayers therein; of administering the
Holy Sacrament of the Altar, of the Exorcisms of the Church, for People
possessed with the Devil, the Blessings of Holy Water, of Ashes, of Chains and
Branches, as also the Form of Burying the Dead, Old and Young, and of
reconciling Churches and Churchyards. Which Books being Bound, shall be kept
in all Churches; neither shall any Priest presume to apply them to his own
private use, or to take them out of the Church: And the Synod does earnestly
recommend it to the Rector of the College of the Jesuits of Vaipicotta, to have
always some of these Books Translated by some of the said College by him, in
order to the supplying of the Necessities of these Churches.

Decree XXIII.
THe Synod desiring that this Church may in all things be conformable to the
Holy Roman and whole Italian Church, does command, That on the second of
February, being the day of our Lady's Purification, before Mass, the Wax
Candles which are in the Church, be Blessed, as also all the Candles that shall
be brought by the People out of Devotion, according to the Roman Ceremonial,
translated into Syrian; and after the public and solemn Benediction is over,
there shall be a Procession in or round the Church, in which all the Clergy
shall carry Blessed Candles lighted in their hands, as the People shall also do
that have any, in Memory of the Mystery of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Divine
Light and Splendour of the Father, first entrance into the Temple, there to
offer himself to his Eternal Father, clothed with our Humanity: So likewise
upon the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday before the Feast of our Lord's Holy
Ascension, in the Morning, either before or after Mass, there shall be a
Procession in the Church, or where the Vicar shall appoint, in which the
Litanies shall be said according to the customs of the Church, which shall also
be translated in the said Roman Ceremonial, expunging the Names of all the
Heretics, who according to the custom of the Nestorians, were commemorated in
this Church; and it is the desire of the Synod, that the use of the said
Litanies be brought into this Church to be read in their Necessities, or when
they desire to implore the Divine Mercy.

Decree XXIV.
THe Synod being informed, that in the remote parts of this Bishopric, as well
toward the South, as toward the North, the Christians that dwell in the
Heaths are guilty of Working and Merchandising on Sundays and Holy Days,
especially in the Evenings, does command the Vicars to be very vigilant in this
Matter, and to admonish and reprehend all that they shall find so doing; and if
after three particular Admonitions, they shall not reform, they shall after
that be thrown out of the Church, and have the Casture denied them; neither
shall any Priest go into their Houses until they have yielded Obedience.

Decree XXV.
WHereas in this Diocese there are many Churches dedicated to Marxobro and
Marphrod, who are commonly styled Saints, of whom there is Nothing known.] At
Compostella, the most famous place of Devotion in all Spain, the People pray to
some that they know as little of, as the Malabars do of Marphrod.

For the famous Spanish Antiquary Ambrosius Morales, in the 9th. Book of his
Chronicle, gives us a particular Account of an Altar with some Names upon it
that he met with there, and that had great Devotion paid to it.

In the famous Monastery of the Benedictine Nuns that joins to the Holy Church
of St. James, says Morales, and is dedicated to the Glorious Martyr Pelayo,
whom in that Country they commonly call St. Payo, there is an Ara on the Altar,
which they affirm to have been Consecrated by the Apostles, and that they
themselves said Mass on it, and that it was brought thither with the blessed
Body of St. James. Now there is not, says Morales, not only no foundation for
the Truth of this Story, but there is just cause to believe, that that Stone,
which is at present in the same state it was in when it was first made, could
never be an Altar. I observed it with great attention in the company of several
great and learned Men, who had all the same thoughts of it that I had, the
thing indeed being in clear and manifest for any such to doubt of; for it is
visible, that the Stone is the Gravestone of some Heathens, with this
following Inscription.

D M S ATIAMO ET AT T LVMPS AO VIRIA EMO NEPTIS PIANO X^ ET S. E. C. The
words are very plain and clear, there not being a Letter wanting; so that
notwithstanding the Blunders committed by the Grace in Spelling it, they may be
with great ease Translated, which I will (...) as well as I can into Spanish.

This Stone is Consecrated to the Gods of the Dead, and Dedicated to the
Memories o^ Atiamo, and of At, and o^ Lumpsa, as also to her Memor^ who
Erected it, Viria Em^s^ their pious Grandchild, being 16 Years of Age.

This is what the Stone contains, therefore they that Consecrated it an Altar,
would have done well to have defaced the Letters, by which means they would
have removed the indignity that states all People in the face, that consider
what a thing it is to have the most Holy Body and Blood of Christ our Redeemer,
consecrated and placed upon the Tombstone of Heathens, whereon the Devils are
invocated.

Thus far Morales.

But as this Stone has had a great deal of Honor done it, in coming to be
Consecrated an Altar in such a famous place of Devotion, so the Persons whose
Names are upon it, have had no less done to them, who are all great Saints in
that Country, and particularly Piano, who in all probability is the St. Payo,
to whom the Church and Monastery is dedicated.

For first, Salazar in his Spanish Martyrology upon the 30th. day of December,
gives this following Account of the said Stone and Persons. Don Didacus
Sequinus, Bishop of Auria, who has Epitomized the Life of his Predecessor
Serrandus, gives therein the following Exposition of the Inscription that is
upon this Altar Stone, in the Galecian Language, which History I have now by me
in MSS.

Consegrada a Deos Maximo,

Atiamo, Erato, Telumpsa Viriamo Nepotispiano, Xuuito, Teliforo,

Forem Martyrs e padezeron em Galizia, no Pago Sarense antes que o Apostolo se
fose a Jerusalem, e por isto deyxon esta Ara, a seus Discipolos, paraque sobre
de la dixiesem Missa, en membraza destes Santos: asi dexou escrito o Bispo Don
Serrando:

That is to say,

Consrecated to the greatest God,

Atiamo, Erato, Telumpsa, Viriamo, Nepotispiano, Xuuito, Teliforo,

Were all Martyrs, and suffered in Galecia in the Village of Sarep, before the
Apostle went to Jerusalem, who for that reason left this Altar to his Disciples
to say Mass on in memory of those Saints, as Bishop Don Serrando has left upon
Record.

Lobarinus tells us, that Don Serrandus after having given a description of the
Altar, subjoins the following Account of it

Este he o Retrayto de Ara que deyxo escripta o Apostol Santiago, a seus
discipolos, e he un tanto da que trouxa con sigo no mar, sobre que, pausaran o
santo corpo e sobre de la deria missa Arcadio 1 Bispo do Orenes en san Maria
Madre; autro tanto como este esta en san Payo, de Santiago com istas mismas
letras destos Santos Martyrs. That is to say: This is the Portraiture of the
Altar which the Apostle St. James left, with an Inscription upon it, to his
Disciples, who carried another of the same Dimensions, and with the same
Inscription, along with him to Sea; upon which his Holy Body was laid, and
Arcadius the first Bishop of Orenes, said Mass upon it in the Church of St.
Mary the Mother of God; the other which is the same with this, is in the Church
of St. Payo of Compostella, with the same Names of these Holy Martyrs.

I hope the Reader will pardon me, if I offer one or two more instances of the
same Nature.

In the Spanish Martyrology upon the 22d. of May, it is said, Sanctus Publius
Bebius Venustus Martyr qui pontem in honorem templi beatae Mariae condidit,
petente Ordine Oretanorum ut pateret aditus ad Templum, XX. CHS. in quo ponte
suae Pietatis, hujusmodi in visceribus lapidis Monumentum reliquit.

P. BAEBIUS VENUSTUS P. BAEBIIVENETIEP BAESISCERIS NEPOS ORETANUS. PETENTE
ORDINE ET POPULO, IN HONOREM DOMUS DIVINAE, PONTEM FECIT EX HS XXC. CIRCENSIBUS
EDITIS. D. D. This needs no Commentary, it being plain from the Monument it
self, that this P. BAEBIVS was a Heathen, and that Domus Divina herein
mentioned, was not a Church dedicated to the blessed Virgin, but to some
Heathen god. And at Ebora in Portugal, St. Viarius, who infallibly cures all
pains in the Loins, and for that reason is very much prayed to, was raised out
of such another Heathen Roman Monument, whereon Viarum Curator was writ, as
Resendius tells us.

But as in some places they have made Saints of Heathens, in others they have
made Heathens of Saints: For in the Castle of Liria in Portugal, there is over
the Inner Gate a Stone Statue, with a long inscription under it, of which there
is nothing legible from the ground but the word Veneris, which is very plain,
the Portugueze who showed us the place, for we were several Protestants in
Company, told us very gravely that the Castle was built by the Romans, and that
the Statue we saw so much defaced, the Head and Arms being broke of, and the
Body very much malled with Stones, was the Statue of the Roman Goddess Venus:
we kept our Countenances as well as we could, perceiving plainly, that neither
the Castle nor the Statue were Roman work, and the Letters of Veneris were
perfectly Gothic, so I and two more having industriously lost our Portugueze,
we resolved if possible to find out the truth of the matter, and after some
poring, we began to discover some more Letters, and with some pains spell out
the word Ante after Veneris; whereupon we concluded, that Veneris there must be
a Verb, and not a Substantive, and that Veneris ante must be the end of a
Monkish Verse: and we were quickly satisfied that it was so by what followed,
which was, Pertransire cave, nisi prius dixeris Ave
Regina coeli matter,


What followed was so defaced that we could make nothing of it, neither indeed
were we solicitous about it, being abundantly satisfied from what we had read,
that it was a Statue of the most Blessed Virgin; when we returned to our
Portugueze, we asked him as we did the People also at our Inn, how he came to
know certainly that it was the Statue of a Heathen Goddess, and we found him
and them all in the same Story, that the Name of the Goddess was written under
it, and that it was the constant Tradition of the City and Country.


nothing known, only it is commonly said, That they came into these Parts and
wrought wrought Miracles, and returned afterward to Babylon, from whence they
came, others affirming that they died in Coulaon, there being nothing writ of
them that is Authentic, neither does it appear that they were ever canonized
by the Church; but on the contrary, since they came from Babylon, there is just
cause to suspect that they might be Heretics: Wherefore the Synod does
command, That all the Churches which are dedicated to them, be dedicated to all
the Saints, and that the Festivities used to be kept to their Honor, and the
Nerchas that used to be given upon their days, shall be given on All Saints
day, being the first of November: and for the future there be no more Churches
dedicated to them, Churches and Festivities being never to be dedicated, nor
Prayers made to any but to Saints canonized and approved of by the Church.

Decree XXVI.
WHereas Experience has demonstrated that many Churches have been Robbed by
reason of the Poors Box being kept in them and not opened in many Years, no not
when the necessities of the Churches did require it; therefore the Synod does
command, That in every Church upon the first of January there be chose four
substantial and conscientious Men to be Overseers of the Poor, and to take care
of the Church, who at the end of the Year shall open the Poors Box and take out
all the Alms they find therein, which shall be put down in a Book by one of the
four Overseers, and the said Alms shall be afterward put into a Chest Locked
with three different Keys, which shall stand in any one of their Houses as they
shall agree, of which Keys the Vicar shall have one, and the other two the two
Overseers, who are not the Scrivener, nor in whose Houses the Chest is not
kept: He that is the Scrivener shall also have a Book, in which he shall set
down the Expenses of the said Alms, how much has been laid out upon the Fabric
of the Church, and in the reparation of the Walls and Roof, how much in
adorning it, and in necessary Linen, and in Pictures, and in keeping it clean:
And whenever there is any great extraordinary Expense, it shall not be made
without the consent of the four Overseers, according to custom; neither shall
the Chest be opened but when they are all five present, or some one in the
place of him that is lawfully hindered; and when new Overseers are chose, the
old ones shall deliver the said Chest to them, for which the Elect shall give a
Receipt, that so it may always appear how much has been received and how much
is remaining: And the Prelate in his Visitation shall look over the said Books
and inform himself of the Expenses, and may order the Alms to be disposed of as
he shall think fit and necessary. And the Synod entreats the most Reverend
Metropolitan to see that this Decree be put in execution at the Visitation he
intends to make, it being a thing of great advantage to the Churches.

Decree XXVII.
WHereas most of the Churches of this Diocese are kept very Nasty, being full
of Dust and Cobwebs, for want of an Officer to keep the Church clean, therefore
the Synod does command, that the Overseers appoint a Capiar, who shall be paid
out of the Alms, for Sweeping the Church and keeping clean the Lamps and
Candlesticks; and the Capiar shall take care that the Church be Swept at least
three times a Week, and there be always one Lamp at least lighted before the
High Altar, and the Vessels wherein the Lamp-Oil is kept, without they be so
small as not to be seen, shall not be kept in the Church, nor the Bategas or
Kettles, nor any thing else that is undecent, but shall be kept in the Capiar's
or Overseers Houses, that so the Church may be kept clean and decent.

Decree XXVIII.
THe Synod does command, That in all Vestries of Churches there be Cupboards
and Chests with Locks, to keep the Cups, Corporals, and Ornaments in; and where
there is no Vestry until one shall be built, they shall be kept some where in
the Church; except in the Heaths, where the Churches are in danger of being
robbed, where the Vicars shall keep them in their Houses, and shall by no means
leave any of them upon the Altars, as has been the custom, which was the
occasion of the Ornaments being so dirty, and of the Altars being so much out
of order: And whereas most of the chief Chapels are extremely dark, they shall
take care to have Windows opened, and fortified with Iron to let in Air and
Light, which must nevertheless be so contrived, that the Heathens when they
come may not see the Divine Mysteries through them.

Decree XXIX.
WHereas almost all the Churches of this Diocese are without Pictures, which
was the effect of their being governed by Nestorian Heretics, who do not allow
of the healthful use of Sacred Images; therefore the Synod does command, That
in Churches that are finished, the first work that shall be done after that of
the Baptismal Font out of the Alms of the Parish, shall be to set up some
Images, according to the directions of the Prelate, who shall always be
consulted about every Picture, and after that of the High Altar is once set up,
if the Church has any Side-Altars, they shall also have Images set up in them,
and on every Altar besides an Image, there shall be a Cross or some Matter or
other set up; and in all Churches that are large enough, and yet have no
Pulpits, Pulpits shall be erected for the Preaching of the word of God; and
they shall also put Bells in their Steeples to be rung at meet times, and to
call the People to Church, which shall not be hung within the Church, where
besides that they cannot be rung as they ought to be, they do take up too much
room; and in places where there is danger of having their Bells stole, they
shall have their Steeples fortified and shut up after the manner of Towers; and
where the Kings and Bramens of the Pagods will not consent to their having a
Building higher than the Church, which often happens through their imagining
that the Pagods are made melancholy by the hearing of such Bells; they shall
hang them within the Church but at such a height, that they may ring them
without touching them with their hands, and that they shall take up no room
below in the Church; and in those Churches where they have no Bells, the Synod
grants License until such time as they can procure some, to make use of Boards,
as they have done formerly, to call the Faithful together, and to give the
Signal at the Mass.

Decree XXX.
THe Synod does teach and declare, That by ancient Right always observed in the
Church, Churches may be so violated in certain Cases, that it is not lawful to
Celebrate in them, nor to bury the Dead until they are reconciled, which
through ignorance of the Canons has not hitherto been observed in this
Bishopric; the Cases are, when humane Blood is injuriously shed in the Church,
or there is a Natural Cause given of such shedding, or of Death; as if one has
a Mortal Wound given him in the Church, or a Wound that fetches Blood,
notwithstanding the Wounded Person shall be got out of the Church before any
Blood is shed; but if the Wound was given without the Church, notwithstanding
the Blood thereof should come to be shed therein, the Church is not violated
thereby; and by a Wound that is injuriously given in the Church, whereby Blood
is shed, though the Wound should not prove Mortal, the Church is violated. The
second Case is, when humane Seed is voluntarily spent in the Church, though in
conjugal Copulation: The third is, when one that is Excommunicated is buried in
the Church: The fourth when an Infidel is buried in it; in which Case the
Church is not only to be reconciled, but the Walls are also to be scraped: The
fifth is, when the Church has been Consecrated or Blessed by a Bishop that was
publicly Excommunicate; in all which Cases the Church is to be reconciled,
which reconciliation being to be done to a Church that was Consecrated by a
Bishop, none but a Bishop can perform it: But having been only Blessed by one,
or by a Priest, the Vicar may perform the Reconciliation, according to the
Form, and with the Prayers and Ceremonies contained in the Roman Ceremonial
Translated into Syrian; and it is to be observed, that when a Church is
violated, the Churchyard that belongs to it is violated also, if they are not
at some distance the one from the other; but when the Churchyard is violated
in any of the forementioned Cases, the Church it belongs and is joined to, is
not violated thereby.

Decree XXXI.
IT being of mighty moment that Consecrated Churches be had in great Reverence;
and whereas in this Diocese it is a common thing for Sick People out of
Devotion to lie in Churches with their Wives and Families for several days,
hoping thereby to be cured of their Distempers, which cannot be done without
many Services; wherefore the Synod does command, That no Person whatsoever,
though never so Sick, do lie in the Church with his Family, the time of War only
excepted, but the Sick having performed their Devotion, shall lie at home at
their own Houses, or if they shall desire it may Lodge in some Houses that are
near to the Church, or in the Porches thereof, but by no means within the
Church.

Decree XXXII.
WHereas there is a great neglect in carrying the Corpse of those that die in
the Heaths to the Church, which are sometimes buried without a Priest, and in
unconsecrated Earth; wherefore the Synod does command, That the Kindred, or
those in whose Houses Christians do die, do carry their Corpse, how far soever
they may live off, near to the Church, where the Vicars shall go to fetch them,
with the Cross of the Church, and in their Surplice and Stole, praying all the
way they go with the rest of the Clergy, and Interr them, which all, though never
so poor, shall be obliged to do: And if at the time when they bring the Corpse
they shall meet with no Priests in the Church, they shall then assemble as many
Christians together as conveniently they can, and bury the Corpse in the
Churchyard, praying for their Souls with Christian Charity: And whosoever
shall neglect to bring their Dead to the Church, and shall bury them in Profane
Ground, shall be severely punished by the Bishop.

Decree XXXIII.
WHereas the Smallpox is looked upon in these parts as a very dangerous and
infectious Distemper, for which reason a great many Christians dying thereof
are not carried to the Church, nor buried in Holy ground; herefore the Synod
does very much recommend it to the Vicars to take order, that the Corpse of such
as die of that Sickness may be brought with due caution to the Churchyard,
where they with the rest of the Clergy at some distance are to recommend them,
and pray for them, as they do for others, and to see them interred: all which
Christian Charity will teach them to do, according to the Obligation of their
Office.

Decree XXXIV.
THe Synod does order that no Town or Village, wherein there is a Church
dedicated to any Saint, shall dedicate the same to any other, or if they do,
they shall appoint another Orago, or Wake, so as to have two Festivals to
prevent those Emulations that are common in these parts. The Synod also
condemns the Ignorance.] Upon S. Teresa being joined with St. James, in the
Patronage of Spain by Pope Urban the VIIIth. how loud did a great many people
complain of the Indignity done to St. James, their old Patron and General in
all their Wars, by that Partnership. Among others, Quivedo, as in Honor bound,
being a Knight of the Order of St. James, drew his pen in his Patron's Quarrel,
and having laid down this as an undeniable position, That St. James must
necessarily be disparaged by having one joined with him, and especially a
Woman, in a Patronage he had enjoyed solely for so many Ages; did manfully
maintain that, its being said in the Pope's Bull, That nothing was granted
therein to S. Teresa that should be in any wise to the prejudice or diminution
of St. James, did make that whole grant null and void, for that joining her
with St. James in such an Office must necessarily lessen him: 2dly. That the
Saints in Heaven did resent such Affronts. 3. That it was monstrous Ingratitude
in Spain to treat a Patron thus, who had fought personally on Horseback for her
in all her Battles with the Moors; among whom to this day the Captain on the
Whitehorse was formidable. As to the Text in Scripture urged by S. Teresa's
Friends for such a partnership. viz. It is not good for man to be alone; I will
make him an help meet for him. He says, That considering what was the true
intent of those words when they were spoke, such an application of them was
profane and Heretical.
Ignorance of those Christians who imagine that they do an injury to a Church,
in dedicating a New one in the same Country to a different Saint, from whence
it is that all the Churches in the same Country are as it were called by the
same Name, and does furthermore command, That upon the Orago's of Churches
where there are Sermons, people having no Sermon in their own Parish, do repair
thither that so there may be no divisions among Churches, to the prejudice of
Charity and Christian Unity, as the Synod is informed there is in many places,
all which it is desirous to remove, as not becoming Christians, and for the
further service of the Church commands Fraternities to be erected, but
especially for the festivities, by which means such things as are necessary for
the Church may be greatly advanced.

Decree XXXV.
THe Synod does very much recommend it to the Vicars of Churches, and other
Priests to labor much in the Conversion of Infidels, and that by just and
gentle methods, namely, by the preaching of the Gospel to bring them to the
Catholic Faith, and to omit no opportunity, of instructing as well the Naires
as the Chegos, or baser sort of People in the knowledge of the Truth; but above
all, the poor Malleans who live in the Heaths, who as the Synod is informed,
are less wedded to their Errors, particularly that of the Adoration of Idols,
and are much better disposed to receive the Evangelical Doctrine than others;
and whenever any Infidel is converted, the Priest shall advise the Prelate
thereof, that he may take such order therein as he shall judge most convenient,
and to be most for the service of Christ, earnestly entreating that the
Conversions that are begun in some parts by the most Reverend Metropolitan, may
be carried on by the Clergy of this Diocese, by providing themselves
continually of such Priests as are fit to advance the same, and wherever
there is any considerable number of Converts, they shall immediately build
Churches, and appoint Vicars to take the Cure of their Souls.

Decree XXXVI.
Whereas the Synod is informed, That the meaner sort of People are much better
disposed to receive the Faith than the Naires, or Nobles, and being extremely
desirous to find some way whereby such well disposed People may be made
Christians, so as to assemble together with the old Christians, as why should
they not, since they all adore the same God, with whom there is no distinction
of Persons, and are all of the same Faith, and do all use the same Sacraments,
and whereas after mature deliberation, and having oftentimes recommended the
matter to God, and conferred about the most proper methods for the effecting of
it in the Congregations, we have not been able to find any that are effectual,
by reason of the Heathen Kings and Lords to whom all the Christians in these
parts are subject, who, if they should observe that we withdraw their common
Subjects from their Religion, would correspond with us no longer to the loss of
the Trade and Commerce we do at present maintain with them, all which being
observed by the Synod, it does command that if any of the poorer sort of People
shall desire to turn Christian, that they be received to Baptism, and the
Prelate shall be advised thereof, that he may give order for the building of
distinct Churches for them, and may appoint Priests to take the Cure thereof,
that so the meaner sort of People may not have the Gate of Christianity and
Salvation shut against them, as it has been hitherto in this Church; and in
case they have not a Church to themselves, they shall then hear Mass without
doors in the Porch, until Christ shall provide some better way for them, and
the Heathen Kings shall be brought to allow the mean People that turn
Christians to be esteemed as Noble, upon the account of the Relation that all
Christians stand in to one another: and the Synod does beg it of His Majesty
the King of Portugal, that by means of the great Power he has in these parts,
he would procure this privilege of the Kings and Lords of Malabar.

Decree XXXVII.
THe Synod being desirous that the Church of the Serra, should in all things be
conformable to the Latin customs, or Holy Mother Church of Rome, unto which See
she has now ^ielded a perfect Obedience, and whereas in the Roman Church, the
custom is to make the Sign of the Cross and Blessings from the left to the
^ight, so that in saying, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, they ^ut their hand on their Forehead, and after that descended to
their Breast, where after having ^rossed themselves, they go next to the left
Shoul^er, and from thence to the right, thereby sig^ifying among other
Mysteries, that by virtue of the Cross of Christ the Son of God, we are
translated from the left hand, the place of Reprobates, to the right, the place
of the Elect; and the custom of this Diocese is to make the said sign from the
right to the left; wherefore the Synod does command that all Children and all
other People be taught to cross and bless themselves from the left to the
right, according to the Latin custom, which shall also be observed by the
Priests in the blessings they give to the People, and in the Crosses they make
in the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Administration of the other
Sacraments.

Decree XXXVIII.
THe Synod does declare, That the Execution of Last Wills lawfully made by
deceased Christians does by the Canon Law belong to Prelates and Bishops, who
are to take care that they be observed; and that whatsoever Christian has made
a Will that is valid according to the custom of the place, if it is not
complied with in a Year after the Death of the Testator, the Bishop shall by
censures, and other Penalties, if found necessary constrain the Heirs, or
others, whose Duty it is to fulfill the same.

Decree XXXIX.
WHereas it often happens that Persons dying who were under the scandal of
ha^^^g committed some grievous Sin, though never ^^oved upon them, are upon that
account de^^ed the Prayers, and other Offices of the Dead, ^^ecially if they
desired Confession, and were ^^^fessed at their Death, which is contrary to the
^^der and custom of the Church, which deprives ^one of her public Prayers, but
such as die Excommunicate, or in the Act of some Mortal Sin, without having
given any sign of Contrition: Therefore the Synod does command, that whatsoever
Sins one may have committed, if the cen^^^e of Excommunication was not annexed
to ^^m; or unless the Person died in the very Act (...) some Mortal Sin,
without giving any sign of ^^ntrition, or slowly in his Bed, without desi^^^g
to be confessed, or to have a Priest called to (...) to that effect, as is
appointed by the Decrees (...) the Sacrament of Penance, they shall pray and
^^^form the Office of the Dead for him, and bu^y him in Holy Ground with the
same Prayers they do other People.

Decree XL.
THe Synod having thanked the Jesuits of the College of Vaipicotta in this
Diocese, and of the other Residencies, for the pains they have been at in
instructing the Christians of these parts, does for the greater benefit of the
Souls of the said Christians, grant License to the said Religious, as well of
the College, as of their other greater Residencies to preach and hear
Confessions, and administer the Sacraments in all Chu^ches wherever they
come, without standing (...) need of any further License, the Sacrament of
Matrimony only excepted, which it shall not be lawful for them to administer
without leave from or at the request of the Parish Priests, commanding all
Vicars and Curates of Churches, and (...) the People to receive the said
Fathers cheerfully, and to entertain them with great Kindne^^ and Thanks, for
the great trouble they are (...) in traveling continually over the Mountains
on^ for the Salvation of their Souls, and rejoice (...) learn from them how to
administer the Sacraments, and to have their Flocks instructed (...) them in
all such Doctrines as are necessary (...) their Souls, and their Vicars shall
oblige the^ People to come to Church, to hear them, when ever they preach, the
Synod being very con^^dent, that the said Fathers will exercise all the said
Functions in great Love and Charity with the Parish, and all the other Priests
of the Church.

Decree XLI.
WHereas the Constitutions of the Bishopric of Goa have been received in the
Pro^^ncial Councils thereof, and have been ordered (...) be observed through the
whole Province, of which this Church being a Suffragan, is obliged by ^e said
Councils, and to which this Synod yield^g a due Obedience, does command, That
in (...) things that can be observed in this Bishopric, (...) concerning which
there is no provision made (...) this Synod, the said Constitutions be kept ^d
obeyed, and does likewise command, That ^peals whenever made from Sentences
given (...) this Bishopric to the Metropolitan, such Ap^ls being made in such
Cases wherein the Ca^^s allow them, shall be granted; neverthe^ not intending
hereby to alter any thing in ^t mild method of the Prelate, and four or ^ore
Persons composing Matters amicably to the ^evention of many Discords, but if
the Parties ^^ll not submit to such determinations, but will ^peal to the
Metropolitan, it shall not be denied ^m, being done in due form.

ACTION IX. Of the Reformation of Manners.
Decree I.
WHereas of all the evil Customs that are to be rooted from among the Faithful,
tho^ are the most dangerous which have something (...) the Heathen Superstition
in them, of which the Bishopric is full; therefore the Synod desiri^ that all
such customs were totally extirpated, the so Christians may enjoy Christianity
in its purity does in order thereunto command, that all Superst^tious washings
which are by some most superstitously practiced as Holy Ceremonies be utterly
abolished, such as the washing of Dead Corpse the Da^ after they have given a
Dole, reckoning it a S^ to neglect such washings, the making of Circl^^ with
Rice, into which they put the Parties that a^^ to be Married, having given Rice
before to Children, as also the taking a thread out with great Superstition when
they cut a Web of Cloth, and the taking two grains of Nele back again, after
they have sold and measured it: all which Heathenish Vanities the Synod totally
prohibits, commanding all that shall use them hereafter to be severely punished.

Decree II.
Though it would much rejoice the Synod to see the Superstitious and absurd
Customs of the Heathen Malavars of the better sort not mixing with the lower,
and of having no communication or correspondence with those that ^ave but
touched any of them, totally abolished among the Christians of this Bishopric;
yet for^much as the Christians thereof, by reason of ^^eir being subject to
Infidel Princes, whom they ^e forced to obey in all things, wherein the ^^ith
is no ways concerned; and that Christians, (...) they should but touch those of
the baser rank, ^^uld not after that, according to the Laws, have ^y Trade or
communication with the better ^rt of People, and so would not be able to live
among them; for which reason the Synod does ^clare, That the custom of not
touching any (...) the baser sort, being observed only in com^yance with the
Heathens, and looked upon as (...) Superstitious Heathen Vanity, and not
volunta^^y observed, is no Superstition, nor for the above^entioned Reasons any
matter of scruple, and ^^at Christians may in all places thus lawfully observe
it, where there are Naires or any of the better sort, or where it is likely
they may ^e, or may come to hear of it: But in all places where these Causes do
not concur, or in secret, or among the Portuguezes, this Superstition cannot
be observed without doing a great injury to their Consciences; on the contrary,
the Synod does admonish all the Faithful to receive all such with great Love
and Charity, though never so poor and mean, and especially if they are
Christians, knowing that there is no distinction of Persons with God, who is
Lord of all: And albeit they do not touch the base sort of People upon the
forementioned account, yet if the^ should happen to touch any of them, they
shall not wash themselves thereupon, that being a thin^ that can never come to
the knowledge of the Heathens, and would therefore be a manifes^ Superstition;
those also that will not touch the Naires, or if they should, do wash
themselves which, as the Synod is informed, is what the Christians in the
Southern parts do observe, where the forementioned impediment is not among the
Heathens, who are rather scandalized by such a contemptuous Carriage: Therefore
the Synod does command all that shall be found guilty of forbearing to touch
such, or having touched them, shall wash themselves, to be severely punished as
Superstitious followers of the Heathen Customs, and commands the Preachers and
Confessors to admonish them thereof in their Sermons and Confessions.

Decree III.
THe Synod being informed, that in some parts when any one of the baser sort do
but touch the Cisterns of Christians, that Christians do Disempolear or Purify
them, by performing certain Ceremonies after the manner of the Hea^hens, which
is very contrary to the Purity of ^^e Christian Religion, being an intolerable
Su^^rstition, does with great rigor command those that make the said
Disempoleamento or Purificati^^ or use the said Ceremonies, to be thrown out
(...) the Communion of the Church, and to be de^^ied the Casture during the
Prelate's pleasure, or at ^^ast for one Year, and to be punished with the
^enalties that such Ceremonies do This word Disempelear, comes ^^m Ioleas,
which is the name this vile cast of People is called by.
deserve.

Decree IV.
WHereas in the Feast of the Heathen, called Ona, which is Celebrated in
August, in which they go out one against another with Bows and Arrows, and
other Arms, in which conflicts some are killed, and more wounded; and some
Christians, unmindful of their Obligations, living among them, and
communicating much with them, do go forth with them, and Armed as they are to
the said Feasts, and are thereby liable to the same Disasters: Therefore the
Synod does command all the Faithful Christians of this Bishopric, in Holy
Obedience, and upon pain of Excommunication, not to presume to resort to this
or any other Heathen Festivity, though there should be no Ceremony belonging to a
Pagod therein; forasmuch as all such Feasts are dedicated to the said Pagods,
and are celebrated and observed to their Honor and Veneration; which is the
rather to be forbore in this of the Ona, by reason of the danger of death that
there is probably therein, the Heathens superstitiously imagining that all that
die in that occasion, go immediately to Heaven; but Christians shall only
observe their own Holy Festivities among themselves, and that with a due
moderation and decency, as becomes the Professors of the Law of Christ; without
having any thing to do with the Superstitious Festivals of the Heat^ens, which
are dedicated to the Honor of the Devil, and if any Christian shall die in the
said Heathen Feast, he shall be denied Ecclesiastical Burial.

Decree V.
FAithful Christians must not only avoid the Ceremonies and Superstitions of
the Heathens, but the Judaical Rites and Ceremonies also, which were all
abrogated by the sufficient promulgation of the Gospel, for which reason the
Synod, though it does very much commend the Holy Custom of carrying Children to
Church forty days after they are born, to offer them to the Lord, in imitation
and praise of what was done by our Lady the most Holy Virgin; nevertheless it
condemns the separating of Women for the said forty days after the birth of a
Male, as if they were unclean so as not to suffer them to enter into the
Church, imagining they would sin in doing it, and eighty days after the birth
of a Female; both which are Jewish Ceremonies, that are now abrogated, and not
only useless but prejudicial, and as such, the Synod does totally prohibit the
observance of them; declaring, that if Women have Health and Strength sooner,
they shall be obliged to go to Church to hear Mass upon Sundays and Holy Days:
and after forty days they may, according to their Custom, carry their Sons to
Church with Devotion, understanding that there ^s no Precept of the Church for
it, but that it is only a pious Devotion of faithful Women that are willing to
make such an Offering of their Sons to God in imitation of the most Holy Virgin
Mary, the Mother of God, taking her for the Intercessor of the Children thus
offered to God both for Spirituals and Temporals.

Decree VI.
ONe of the greatest Sins in the sight of God, and which he has always
prohibited and punished above all others, is the consulting of Witches, and
such as hold a correspondence with the Devil; wherefore the Synod being
informed that a great many Christians of this Bishopric, and especially among
those that live in the Heaths, by reason of the Communication they have with
Infidels, and their having so many Witches and Fortune Tellers about them, when
they intend to Marry, have recourse to such People to know what Success they
shall have, governing themselves so much by what they are told, as to break off
Matches after they are concluded, and to make new ones at the pleasure of the
said Witches; as also when they are Sick, that they send for such People to
perform some Ceremony whereby they hope to have their Health restored; and at
other times to help them to Children, and to discover Thefts, and f^^ several
other purposes; all which are things repugnant to the Christian Religion, does
command all Christian convicted of having consulted any of the said Witches for
these or any other purposes, to be thrown out of the Church, neither shall any
Priest go to their Houses o^ give them the Casture, during the Prelate's
pleasure, or for one Year at least, and shall be punished with such other
Penalties as the Ceremonies they performed and consented to shall deserve.

Decree VII.
THe Synod being informed, that some wicked Christians are not content only to
go to Witches to consult them, but do furthermore send for them to their
Houses, where they join with them in the Invocation of their Pagods, and (...)
making offerings and Sacrifices to them, in killing Dogs, and performing other
Ceremonies, that are contrary to the Faith, namely, one which ^^ey call
Tollicanum, Ollicanum, Bellicorum, Co^^^, which they do often publicly to the
great ^^^ndal of Christianity, as if they were not Chri^^ans, and at other
times permit the Heathens to ^^rform them in their Houses, does command in
^^rtue of Holy Obedience, and upon pain of ^communication to be Ipso facto
incurred, that (...) Christian shall presume to perform any of (...) said
Ceremonies, or consent to the perfor^^ng of them in their Houses, and that all
that do ^^nsgress therein, shall be declared Excommuni^^te in the Church, until
they shall beg for mercy, and have undergone condign and public Punishment in
the Church, and though upon their ^epentance appearing to be true and sincere,
^hey may be absolved, yet they shall not have the Casture given them, neither
shall any Priest go to their Houses in two Years, save in case of peril of
Death; and they who shall go to offer ^ay thing to a Pagod, or shall make any
Vow to one, shall be punished after the same manner, and with the same Penance,
and shall incurr Excommunication Ipso facto, in all which Matters the Vicar
must be very watchful for the prevention of all such Idolatries.

Decree VIII.
A Great many ignorant Christians of this Bishopric being unmindful of the
Purity of their Christian Obligations, do carry Notes about them which have
been given them by Witches for the Cure of their Distempers, hoping for relief
from their virtue, hanging them likewise about the Necks of their Cattle to
keep them well, and putting them in their Orchard^ to increase the Fruit, and
communicating them to several other things for various effects; all which the
Synod detesting as Diabolical, dot^ command all that are guilty thereof to be
severely punished by the Prelate, and all Vicars not to permit any such
Offenders to enter into the Church, nor to give them the Casture, and no
Priests to go to their Houses, and they shall be compelled to deliver all such
Notes to their Vicars to be torn, and all that have used any of them, though they
should never do it more, shall be punished for the space of six months with the
said Penalties.

Decree IX.
THe Onzena, or practice of Usury, is a grievous Sin in the sight of God, and
is very much condemned in the Scriptures, Christ commanding us to lend to
others, hoping for nothing again, and the Synod being very much troubled to
find the greatest part of the Christians of this Diocese entangled therein,
through their ignorance of what gains are lawful, and that are not, and of what
may be kept, and what ^^ght to be restored, does therefore admonish (...) the
Lord, all Faithful Christians to consult ^he Learned about these Matters,
giving them (...) account of all their Contracts, in order to ^^eir being
rightly instructed as to what they ^ay lawfully take for Money they have lent
out. and the Synod does furthermore declare, that according to the best
Information it has receiv^d, the Interest of Money in Malabar is Ten per ^ent.
and whatever is taken more, if the Principal runs no Risk.] Most Convents in
^^ding Cities lend out Money at ^ or 7 per Cent. and take as much care to
secure their Principal, as ^y Usurer whatsoever, so that the distinction of
Lucrum Cessans, and Damnum emergens will either justify a legal Interest in
general, or it will not justify what ^^e lending Convents do. But though this
Decree falls in exactly with the common practice of the Church of Rome, the
Monks and Friars not excepted, yet it plainly contradicts the Doctrine of that
Church, which is, that all sort of Usury is a Mortal Sin; for if the taking of
10 per Cent. for Money, and that where the principal runs no risk, is not
Usury, it will be hard to tell what is.
risk is Onzena, or Usury, and as to the Ten they shall likewise consult the
Learned, to whom they shall declare how Money may be improved in the place
where it is lent, that so they may be able to tell them, whether it be lawful
for them to take so much, for it may happen that in some places, there will not
be so much to be got by the Negotiating of Money, which must make such an high
interest to (...) there unlawful, and whosoever shall take more than Ten per
Cent. if his Principal runs no risk, after having been three times admonished
by the Prelate or Vicar without Amendment shall be declared Excommunicate, and
shall not be absolved until he has dissolved the said Contract.

Decree X.
THe Synod does condemn the taking of One per Cent. by the month, where the
Principal runs no risk, being secured by a pledge, and of Two per Cent. by the
Month, if the one is not paid punctually, such Contracts being very unjust and
manifest Onzena, or Usury, so that neither the want of a pledge, nor any thing
else can justify the taking of Two per Cent. by the month, if the Principal is
not in danger, all which Contracts the Synod does prohibit, and the Vicars to
give their consent to any such, and where they are made to dissolve them,
compelling all that are faulty therein by Penalties and Censures if it shall be
found necessary: The Synod does furthermore condemn their calling all Gain
arising from Money, Onzena, because it gives occasion for some to imagine that
all such Gain is unlawful, and notwithstanding such Gain is law^^l, and may be
justly taken in several Cases, to ^^ruple the taking any.

Decree XI.
WHereas there are great numbers of Christians who for want of having the Fear
of God and the Church before their Eyes, do co^bit publicly with Concubines,
to the great ^^ndal of Christianity; the Vicars shall there^^re with great
Charity admonish all such Of^^nders, three times declaring to them, That if
^^ey do not reform, they must declare them Excommunicate, and if after so many
Admonitions they do not turn away their Concubines, they must be Excommunicated
until they are effectual^^ parted, and be punished with other Penalties (...)
the pleasure of the Prelate, according to the ^^me that they have lived in that
Sin, and ^hen it shall so happen that their Concubines are their Slaves, they
shall constrain them not only to turn them out of their Houses, but to send
them out of the Country where they live, that there may be no more danger of
their relapsing, which shall be likewise observed as to all other Women where
there is the same danger.

Decree XII.
THe Synod does very earnestly recommend it to all Masters and Fathers of
Families, to be very watchful over the Lives and Manners of their Slaves and
Servants, and the rather for having been informed, that most of the Black Women
belonging to Christians in this Bishopric, do lead very ill Lives in being
public Whores, and known to be such by their Masters, never going to Mass or
Confession, and being totally ignorant of the Christian Religion, their Mast^^
taking no care to have them instructed therei^ or of the good of their Souls,
notwithstandin^ the Obligation they are under of doing it, S^ Paul having told
us, that he that does not ta^^ care of his Family, is worse than an Infidel.
Wherefore the Synod does very much recommend it to the Vicars of Churches to be
very watchful ove^ and to make diligent Inquiry into the Lives o^ the Slaves
that are in their Parishes, and as they shall see occasion to exhort their
Masters, and oblige them not to suffer their Slaves to live in a sinful State.

Decree XIII.
WHereas several poor wretched Christians following the Custom of the Heathen
among whom they live, when they find themselves pinched with any want, do,
contrary to all right and reason, sell their Children: Wherefore the Synod does
in Virtue of Obedience, and upon pain of the greater Excommunication, prohibit
all Christians to sell their Children, or any of their Kindred, no not to other
Christians, and does under the same Precept and censure forbid all Christians
to buy any such, or to keep them as Slaves, except when they see Parents so far
despise this prohibition, as to be ready to sell their Children to Infidels, in
which case they may buy them to keep the Christian Children from coming under
the power of Heathens, whom nevertheless they shall not keep as Slaves, but
shall forthwith signify what they have done, to the Prelate, that he may take
such course therein, that the Buyer may have his Money, and the Child its
liberty, and the Seller may be punished: all that shall buy such Children in
any other case, as well as those that sell them, shall be held Excommunicate
until they have effectually dissolved all such Bargains; and if the Child do
happen to be made an Infidel, he that sold it shall not be absolved until he
has ransomed the said Child, or at least until the Vicar and People are
satisfied of his having done all that he is able to have redeemed it, and the
Synod does furthermore recommend it to the Vicars and Curates of Churches, and
to all Christian People, that whenever any such thing happens, they do all that
is in their power to recover such Children, and to ransom them whatever it
cost, by contributing Money toward it, and by complaining thereof to their
Kings, and advising the Prelate of it, leaving no means untried to rescue such
Children, that so they may not be bred up Infidels.

Decree XIV.
THe Synod does approve of the laudable Custom of this Diocese of Men's giving
the Tenth part of their Wives Portion when they are Married, to the Church; as
also of that of making a repartition of the said Alms betwixt the Fabric of
the Church and the Priests thereof; and whereas this Custom does not obtain all
over the Diocese, and especially in the Southern Parts, the Synod does entreat
and command all People to conform themselves to the same, and wills that the
People among whom this Custom is not as yet introduced, may be obliged to it by
their Procurators, there being no reason, since it is observed in the greater
part of this Diocese, why it should not be established all over it.

Decree XV.
WHereas by the ancient Custom consented to by the Infidel Kings of Malabar,
the whole Government of the Christians of this Bishopric, not only in
Spirituals but in Temporals also, is devolved to the Church and the Bishop
thereof, who is to determine all differences that are among Christians, and
that some dreading the Justice and Judgment of the Prelate in their
Controversies, do without any fear of God, carry them before Infidel Kings and
their Judges, who are easily bribed to do as they would have them, to the great
prejudice of Christianity; the said Kings taking occasion from thence to
intrude themselves into the Affairs of Christians, by which means, besides that
they do not understand such Matters, being Tyrants and Idolaters, they become
very grievous and vexatious to Christians; for the avoiding of which, and
several other mischiefs arising from thence to Christianity, the Synod does
strictly command all the Christians of this Diocese, not upon any pretense
whatsoever, to presume to carry any of their Causes before Infidel Kings or
their Judges, without express License from the Prelate; which, whenever it
shall be judged necessary, shall be granted to them as shall be thought fit in
the Lord; but all Causes shall be first carried before the Prelate, that he may
judge or compose them according to Reason and Justice; and all that shall do
otherwise, shall be severely punished for the same, at the pleasure of the
Prelate, and be thrown out of the Church for so long time as he shall think fit.

Decree XVI.
WHereas the Christians of this Bishopric are subject to Kings and Lords that
are Infidels, by whom they are many times obliged to handle Bars of hot Iron,
or to thrust their Hand into boiling Oil, or to swim through Rivers that are
full of Snakes; reckoning, that if they are Innocent, none of those things can
hurt them, but will certainly, if guilty of what they are accused: And seeing
there are not wanting, some ill-minded Christians, who finding themselves
unjustly accused, do voluntarily offer themselves to undergo the said Ordeals
for the manifestation of their Innocence; and notwithstanding that it is true
that God has sometimes concurred with Peoples Innocence and Simplicity in such
Cases, by not suffering them to be hurt by such things; nevertheless since for
any to offer themselves to undergo such Ordeals, is to tempt God, and to
pretend to work a Miracle, which is not lawful, and may sometimes so succeed,
as to be a great affront to our Catholic Faith; therefore the Synod does
prohibit all Christians to presume to offer themselves to undergo any such
Ordeals, knowing that they sin mortally in so doing, in being guilty therein of
tempting God; commanding all that shall transgress therein, to be severely
punished. And when it shall happen that any such Ordeals shall be so imposed
upon them by their Infidel Princes, that there is no avoiding it, in such Cases
they shall submit themselves to the Will of God, as to the Injustices and
Violences laid upon them by Infidel Tyrants; and in case of any Oath being
tendered to them by Infidels, wherein they must swear by their Pagods, they must
know that they ought rather to suffer death, than take any such Oath, the
taking of an Oath being an act of Worship and Veneration, that is due to God
alone: Neither shall Christians use any Ordeals among themselves, or Oaths, but
such as were in use in the Church, the foresaid Oaths being what Christians
ought to dread more than all the Torments of the World.

Decree XVII.
WHereas the distinction of the Faithful from Unbelievers, even by outward
signs and habits, is a thing which has always been endeavored, that so the one
may be known and divided from the other; therefore the Synod having observed
that there is no distinction neither in their Habits nor in their Hair, nor in
any thing else, betwixt the Christians of this Diocese and the Heathen Naires,
does command, that henceforward no Christian do presume to bore their Ears, or
to do any thing to make them large, except Women, among whom it is an Universal
Ornament; and whosoever shall transgress herein, shall be punished at the
pleasure of the Prelate, who shall not suffer them to wear an Ornament of Gold
or of any thing else in their Ears; and whosover shall presume to wear any such
Ornament, shall be thrown out of the Church, neither shall the Casture be given
them until such time as they are brought to yield effectual Obedience, and to
leave off all such Ornaments; but as for those whose Ears are bored already, if
they are not Children, they may wear what they please, or what they have
accustomed themselves to.

Decree XVIII.
THe Synod being desirous to rectify whatever is amiss in this Diocese, and so
far as it is possible, to reform all evil Customs; and having observed the
great Debauchery of many, and especially of the poorer sort, in drinking
Orraca, from whence do follow many Disasters, Murders, and Wounds; wherefore in
order to the preventing such Mischiefs so far as is possible, the Synod does
prohibit the selling of Orraca in any Christian Inn, neither shall Christians
Trade in that Commodity upon pain of being punished at the pleasure of the
Prelate, by which means not only Disorders, but the great Communication the
Faithful has with the Heathen in such Inns, will also be prevented.

Decree XIX.
WHereas it is a manifest Injustice to have diverse Weights in the same
Country, the Synod being informed, that in many Markets of this Bishopric
every one sells with what Weights they please, does command, That there be but
one Weight for the same Merchandise in a Market and all the Shops thereof, and
that it be the usual Weight of the place; to which all that do not yield
Obedience, shall be admonished by the Vicars, and if they do not reform
thereupon, shall chastised at the pleasure of the Prelate, who shall constrain
them to the same by Penalties and Censures, if they shall be found necessary;
there being no other Government among the Christians of this Diocese but that
of the Church, nor no other coercive Power but that of Censures.

Decree XX.
WHereas an unreasonable Custom has obtained in this Diocese, viz. That Males
only inherit their Fathers Goods, the Females having no share at all thereof;
and that not only when there are Sons, but when there are Daughters only, and
they unmarried, and many times Infants, by which means great numbers of them
perish, and others ruin themselves for want of necessaries, the Fathers Goods
falling to the Males that are next in Blood, though never so remote or
collateral, there being no regard had to Daughters no more than if their
Parents were under no obligation to provide for them; all which being very
unreasonable, and contrary to the natural right that Sons and Daughters have to
succeed, to the good of their Parents; the Kindred who have thus possessed
themselves of such Goods, are bound to restore them to the Daughters as the
lawful Heiresses to them; wherefore the Synod does decree and declare this
Custom to be Unjust, and that the next akin can have no right when there are
Daughters to inherit their Father's Estate; and being possessed of such
Estates, are bound in conscience to restore them; neither is it lawful for the
Males to divide the Estate among them, without giving any equal Portion to the
Females; or if they have not done it already, they stand indebted for their
Portions; or if the Father has disposed of the third part of his Estate by
Will, the remaining two parts shall be equally divided betwixt the Sons and the
Daughters, the Portions that have been received by those that are married being
discounted; all which the Synod does command to be observed, entreating and
commanding all the Christians of the Diocese to receive this Decree as a Law,
and observe it entirely, it being laid as a duty upon their Consciences; and if
any shall act otherwise, and being a Kinsman, shall seize upon the Goods
belonging to Daughters; or being a Son, shall deny to give Portions to his
Sisters, or being in possession of the said Goods, shall refuse to make
restitution; the Prelate, if it cannot be done otherwise, shall compel them to
it by Penalties and Censures, declaring them Excommunicate, without any hope of
Absolution, until such time as they shall pay an effectual Obedience, and shall
make restitution.

Decree XXI.
THe Adoption of Sons is not lawful, but in defect of natural Children; which
not being understood by the Christians of this Bishopric through their
ignorance of the Law, they do commonly Adopt the Children of their Slaves born
in their Houses, or of other People, disinheriting their lawfully begotten
Children, sometimes upon the account of some differences they have had with
them, and sometimes only for the affection they have to Strangers, all which is
contrary to Law and Reason, and is a manifest injustice and wrong done to their
legitimate Children; wherefore the Synod does declare, that the said Adoptions
must not be practiced where there are natural Children, and being done are
void, so that the Persons thus Adopted are not capable of inheriting any thing,
except what may be left them by way of Legacy, which must not exceed the third
of the Estate; no, not though the Adoption was made before there were any
Legitimate Children to inherit. The Synod does furthermore declare, That the
Adoptions which have been made before the celebration of this Synod, where
there are Children, and the Adopted are not in actual possession of the Estate,
are void, neither shall the Adopted have any share thereof, or having had any,
shall be obliged to restore it, to which if it be found necessary, the Prelate
shall compel them by Pennalties and Censures; but as to those who by virtue of
such Adoptions, have for a long time been in quiet possession of Estates, the
Synod by this Decree does not intend to dispossess them thereof, by reason of
the great disturbance and confusion the doing so would make in this Diocese,
which is what this Synod pretends to hinder, leaving every one however in such
Cases, at liberty to take their remedy at Law.

Decree XXII.
WHereas the way of Adopting by ancient Custom in this Diocese, is to carry the
Parties that are to be Adopted before the Bishop or Prelate, with certain
Testimonials, before whom they declare, that they take such a one for their
Son, whereupon the Bishop passes an Olla or Certificate, and so the Adoption
is perfected; the Synod does command, That from henceforward, the Prelate do
not accept of an Adoption from any that have Children of their own; or in case
they have none, yet it shall be declared in the Olla, That if they shall
afterward happen to have any, that the said Olla shall be void to all intents
and purposes; by which means the great Injustices that are now so common in
this Diocese will be prevented.

Decree XXIII.
THe Synod being desirous to have all the Christians of this Diocese to live
together in Villages, by reason of the great inconveniences they are under
that live in the Heaths, as well by reason of the great communication they must
have with Infidels, as for wanting opportunities of going to Church, and
Sacraments, whereby they are kept in ignorance of Christianity, does in order
thereunto very earnestly recommend it to all Christians that live in Heaths, to
do all they are able, either to come and live in some Village, or to build new
Villages with Churches, that so they may live more civilly, and be separated
from the communication of Infidels, and be the better instructed in the Customs
of our Holy Catholic Faith, recommending it earnestly to the Vicars to
persuade their Sheep thereunto, for the Spiritual profit they will receive
thereby: which the Prelate shall also endeavor with all his power.

Decree XXIV.
THe Synod having taken into consideration the manifold Injustices, Oppressions
and Grievances wherewith Infidel Kings and Governors do often treat the
Christians of this Bishopric; and that out of enmity to our Holy Catholic
Faith, and observing the necessity they are in of Defense and Protection, does
with great instance desire, That his Majesty the King of Portugal would be
graciously pleased to take all the Christians of this Bishopric under his
Favor and Protection.] By this we see, the King of Cochim was not jealous
without reason, that the Archbishop had a State design in the great pains and
charge he was at in the reduction of his Christian Subjects; and though nothing
was talked of but the Pope, and the Roman Obedience, that the King of Spain,
and the augmentation of his strength in the Indies by the accession of so many
new Subjects, was the main Spring in the Enterprise. I will not say, though it is
probable enough, that the Archbishop by magnifying this Service at the Court
of Spain, got first to be Governor of the Indies, and afterward to be
Governor of all the Dominions of Portugal, and President of the Council of
State at Madrid; but this we are sure of, that that Service to the Crown of
Spain was much boasted of here in Europe by others. For the Jesuit Ilayus in
his Book De Rebus Japonicis, speaking of this very thing, ^^ith, Cuae res
quanto Regie Majestati emolumento sit latura, norunt qui non ignorant, quanti
sit momenti, gentem in tota India lectissimam, a temporibus B. Thomae
Christiano cultui deditum, tamque numerosum and potentem, ut armatos ad
Triginta Millia in promptu habeat cum Lusitanis unire, ad Ecclesiae Romanae
obedientiam revocare, and in Fidem ditionemque Regis Catholici accipere.

But as it is visible that the increasing of the Portugueze strength in the
Indies, by the accession of so many new Subjects, was what both the Archbishop
and Spanish Government aimed at chiefly in the troublesome and chargeable
reduction of this Church: So it is certain, that from this very Year 1599, the
Portugueze Historians do begin to reckon the declination of their strength in
those parts; who give the following Account of the three Ages of their Indian
Government; that it was in its Infancy till the Year 1561, and from that time
till the Year 1600, in its Manhood or full strength, and ever since has been in
its Old declining Age, and is now in truth become so decrepid, as to be only
the Ghost of a great Name. Neither is this to be wondered at, considering how
common a thing it is for God to blast the most promising Securities, when
obtained by such violent and unlawful Methods.


Protection, he being the only Christian King or Lord in all these Oriental
Parts; and the Christians of this Diocese shall on their parts be ready at all
times to sacrifice their Lives to their Holy Catholic Faith, the preservation
of Christianity, and the defense of Christians, which they shall be always
prepared to do with their Lives and Fortunes; beseeching the most Reverend
Metropolitan, President of this Synod, to present this their Petition to his
Majesty, and to let him know how ready all the Christians of this Bishopric
are to serve him.

Decree. XXV.
WHereas in this Synod, Matters pertaining to our Holy Catholic Faith, the
Holy Sacraments of the Church, the Reformation of Affairs thereof, and the
Customs of Christian People have been handled; the Synod does command all
Vicars of Churches not to fail to have all its Decrees Transcribed from the
Original Malabar, and to have a Copy thereof in all their Churches, Signed by
the Reverend the Archdeacon of this Diocese, and the Rector of the College of
Vaipicotta, and upon every Sunday and Holy Day, when there is no Sermon nor no
Lecture upon the Catechism set forth by the most Reverend Metropolitan, that a
portion of this Synod be read to the People; but on the Seasons when the said
Catechism is ordered to be read, it shall be read on Sundays, and the Synod
upon Holy Days, that so all that is decreed therein may come to the knowledge
of the People, and may be remembered and observed by them; the Original of the
said Synod being Signed by the most Reverend Metropolitan and all the other
Members thereof, shall be put in the Archives of the Jesuits College of
Vaipicotta in this Diocese, from whence so many Copies as shall be thought
necessary, shall be transmitted to the Churches; there shall also be another
Original Signed by the most Reverend Metropolitan, the Archdeacon, and other
Members, kept in the Archives of the Church of Angamale, called the
Archbishop's See, that all Copies may at all times be Corrected according to
either of those Originals; and the Synod does furthermore recommend it to all
Vicars, Priests, and Curates, and to all and every Christian of this Diocese,
and commands them all in the Lord to conform themselves to the Decrees of this
Diocesan Synod, and so far as is in their power, to observe and cause them to
be observed inviolably, and to govern themselves by them in all things; which
the Synod is confident they will do with the help of God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, who lives and reigns for ever: Amen.

After the Decrees were read, the Bishopric was divided into Seventy-five
Parishes, whose Bounds were greater or lesser as was judged to be most
convenient for the administration of the Holy Sacraments, and the Spiritual
Food of the Faithful; Vicars were also nominated to them all, and the Churches
that were not able to maintain a Vicar were united: The Vicars after they were
named, were brought in one by one to kiss the Metropolitan's Hand, who at the
same time gave them their Collation, declaring to them the greatness of their
Authority, and of the Obligations of their Office, and commanding the People to
acknowledge them as their Parish Priests and the Shepherds of their Souls.
After they had all, one after another, performed this Ceremony, they were
admonished all together in the presence of the People by the most Reverend
Metropolitan, to comply with the Obligations of their Function, and being all
upon their Knees before him, he delivered the following Charge to them.

Venerable and beloved Brethren, and fellow Priests, and particular Pastors of
the Faithful, We let you all to understand, that we, though unworthy of it, are
in the place of Aaron, and ye of Eleazar and Ehitaman, the lower Priests; we
are in the place of the Apostles of our Lord Christ, ye in that of the
Seventy-two Disciples; we are to give a strict Account of you at the tremendous
Day of Judgment, you of the People that are now committed to you: Now that we
may be all found good and faithful Stewards in our Master's House, we do
admonish and beseech you, beloved Brethren in Christ, to remember what we are
about to say unto you, and which is of most importance, be sure to observe it
and put it in execution. In the first place we do admonish and beseech you in
the Lord, to have your Life and Conversations unblamable, yielding the savor
of a good Name, and Example to the People of God, in suffering no Women, and
especially those of which the World may entertain any suspicion, though Slaves,
to live in your Houses; neither are you to converse with any of the Sex; you
must not fail to rise every Night to recite the Divine Office in the Church,
which must be performed at some certain hour; and after that is done, none of
you must say Mass otherwise than Fasting, and after Midnight forward, and in
the Holy Habits, which must always be kept clean, ye shall receive the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all Reverence and Humility, confessing
your Sins to some approved Confessor, with great contrition and sorrow for
them, but especially if your Consciences do check you for any fault you have
committed. The Corporal and Palls must be made of Linen, neither can they
without an Apostolical dispensation, be made of any other Cloth, and must be
always kept clean. The Holy Vessels you are always to wash with your own hands,
and that in other clean Vessels dedicated to that use; putting the Water
wherein they were washed, either into the Font or into some Cistern dug for the
purpose in the Churchyard, and drying them with all diligence. The Altar must
be covered with clean Towels, of which at the time of Celebration, there must
be at least three with a Corporal, neither must any thing besides Relics or
Sacred things belonging to the Altar be laid upon it. The Missals, Breviaries,
and Prayer-Books, must be perfect and entire: Your Churches must be well
covered, and both the Walls and Pavements must be kept clean. In the Sacristy,
or ^omewhere near to the High Altar, there must be a place to hold Water,
wherein the Corporals and Holy Vessels are to be washed, as also the Hands of
those that have touched any of the Holy Oils; and in the Sacristy there must be
a Vessel with clean Water for the Priests and others that have ministered at the
Altar, to wash their Hands, and a clean Towel to dry them; the Gates and
Porches of the Churches must be strong and well shut. None of you shall take
^he cure of a Church upon you without the Prelate's knowledge and order,
notwithstanding you should be called to it by the People; neither shall any of
you leave the Churches you have a Title to, nor be translated to another Church
without his Order. None shall presume to hold more than one Church, contrary to
the disposition of the Holy Canons. The Jurisdiction of no Church shall be
divided among many, but every Church shall have its own Parish Priest and
Pastor. None shall Celebrate any where but in a Church, or with any sort of
Arms. None shall give the Holy Sa^rament to any of another Parish, without
leave from their Parish Priest. In the celebration of ^he Mass ye shall all
observe the same Ceremonies, that there may be no Confusion nor Scandal. The
Chalice or Patten must be of Gold, Silver, Brass or Tinn, and not of Iron,
Glass, Copper, or Wood. The Parish and other Priests must visit and comfort the
Sick in their Parishe^ Confessing them and giving them the most Holy Sacrament
of the Altar, and the Holy Uncti^^ with their own hands, admonishing the Si^^
when they visit them to desire those Sacramen^^, when they shall judge them
necessary. Non^ shall take any Fee for baptizing or for the administering of any
Sacrament, or for burying the Dead. No Child shall die without Baptis^ through
your negligence, nor no sick Person without Confession, and the Holy Communi^^
None of you shall Drink to excess, or be not^^ for the same, or for being
quarrelsom; No^^ of you must bear Arms, nor eat and drink (...) Taverns and
Inns. Ye shall not eat with (...) Infidel, Mohammedan, Jew, or Heathen; neith^^
shall you employ your self in Hawking, Hu^^ting, or Shooting. What you know of
t^^ Gospel of Christ, of the Holy Scriptures, and of good Examples joined with
pure Catholic^ Doctrine, ye shall deliver to the People on the Lord's Day and
Holy Days, preaching the word of God, to the edification of your Flocks. You
must take care of the Poor, and of Strang^^^ and Widows, of the Sick and the
Orphans, (...) your several Parishes. You must be sure to ke^^ Hospitality,
inviting Strangers to your Table^ therein giving good Example to others. Upon
every Lord's Day before Mass ye shall Bles^ the Water with Salt in the Church,
with which you are to sprinkle the People, taking it out of a Vessel or Pot
made for that purpose. Ye shall not pawn any Sacred Vessels or Ornaments of the
Church, neither to Heathen nor Christi^n. Ye shall not take Usury, nor engage
your ^elves in Contracts or Farms, nor in any Secular ^ublick Office; ye shall
not alienate the Goods which ye have acquired after ye were in Orders, because
they belong to the Church; neither shall ye sell or change any thing belonging
to ^he Church. In Churches where there are Bap^^smal Fonts, they shall always
be kept clean, and where there are none, ye shall have a par^^cular Vessel for
Baptism, which shall be put ^o no other use, and shall be kept in some de^ent
place in the Church or Sacristy. Ye shall ^each your Parishioners, and
especially the Chil^ren, the Articles of the Creed, the Pater Noster, ^he
Commandments of the Law of God and of Holy Mother Church, the Fasts of the ^our
Seasons, and the Vigils. And before ^ent ye shall call upon your People to
Confess, and shall hear their Confessions with ^^eat charity and zeal, for
their Spiritual profit. Upon the Feasts of the Nativity, Easter, and
^hitsuntide, ye shall exhort all the Faithful to re^eive the most Holy
Sacrament of Christ's Body, and at Easter at least ye shall take heed that all
that are capable do receive it. All quarrels, diffe^^nces and enmities that
shall arise among your ^^bjects, ye shall endeavor to compose and ^blige them
all to live as Friends in Christian Charity; and if there be any that give
offense by refusing to speak to their Neighbors, being so malice with them, ye
shall admonish them thereof, and so long as they continue to behave themselves
so, ye shall not suffer them to receive the Holy Sacrament of the Altar. At
certain times, but chiefly upon solemn Festivities and Fasts, ye shall admonish
Married Men, according to a Holy Council, to abstain from their Wives, None of
you shall wear colored Clothes, o^ any Habit but what is grave and decent for
Priests to wear. Ye shall instruct your People to forbear Working on Sundays
and Holy Days neither shall ye suffer Women to Sing or Dan^^ in the Church. Ye
shall not communicate wi^^ any that are Excommunicate, nor presume (...) much
as to Celebrate where any such are pr^sent. Ye shall admonish your People not
(...) Marry with any that are contracted to other nor with their near
Kinswomen, nor with a^^ they have stole out of their Fathers Houses neither
shall ye suffer the solemnities of Marriage, and of carrying home a Bride, to
be (...) a time prohibited by the Church. Ye shall constrain Shepherds and
other Servants to he^^ Mass at least every Lord's Day, and shall a^monish
Godfathers and God mothers to tea^^ their God-children the Creed and Pater
Noste^ or to appoint others to instruct them. The Chrism or Holy Oil of the
Catechumeni, and Sick, shall be kept in the Church under Lock and Key, and in a
decent and secure place, of which ye shall give none away, no not by way of
Alms, it being a most grievous Sacrilege to do it. Every one of you must have a
Catechism, an Exposition of the Creed, and of the Prayers of the Church,
conformable to the Exposition of the Holy Catholic Doctors, by which ye may
both edify your selves and others. Ye must also have this Synod, that so you
may govern both your selves and your People by its Rules. Ye shall declare the
Catholic Faith ^o all that will learn it. The Introitus to the Mass, the
Prayers, Epistles, Gospels, and Creed (...) the Mass, shall be read with a loud
and ^^telligible Voice; but the Secret Prayers of the ^anon and Consecration,
shall be spoke slowly and distinctly, but with a low Voice: When ^^e recite in
the Quire, ye must let one Verse (...) ended before ye begin another, and not
^onfound the Service by chopping it up and ^umbling it together. Ye must study
to have (...). Athanasius's Creed, which contains the Ca^holick Faith, by
heart, and repeat it daily: ^he Exorcisms, Prayers, the order of Baptism,
^^nction of the Sick, the recommendation of ^he Soul, and the burial of the
Dead, ye must ^nderstand and practice, according to the Holy ^anons, and the
use of the Holy Roman Church, ^^e Mother and Mistress of all the other Churches
(...) the World; as also the Exorcisms, and the ^^secration of Salt and Water.
Ye shall study (...) understand Singing, and the things that are ^hanted in the
Church, as also the Rubricks of the Breviary and Missal, that ye may be able to
find what you look for; as also the Account of the Moveable Feasts, and of
Easter; in which, that you may not be mistaken, ye must be sure to have the
Martyrology of the Saints in all your Churches, which we will take care to have
translated into Syrian. All which ye shall observe, that so by these and your
other good Works, ye may, by the help of God, bring both your selves and your
People to that Glory which shall endure for ever, and be bestowed on you
through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, lives and reigns for ever and ever: Amen.

The Speech and Admonition to the Vicars and Priests being ended, the most
Reverend Metropolitan commanded them all to Sign the Original Decrees of the
Synod, translated into Malabar, desiring them, if they had the least scruple
concerning any thing commanded or declared in the Synod, those excepted that
have been decreed and decided already, that they would signify them openly
before they Subscribed, that there might be no doubt or controversy about any
thing hereafter: So after several Doub^ had been considered and satisfied, they
did all unanimously Subscribe to the Synod.

Then the Books of the Synod were delivered to the most Reverend Metropolitan,
who being in his Pontificals, and seated on his Throne with a Mitre on his
Head, Subscribed the said Decrees; which being done, a Table was set in the
middle of the chief Chapel, and the Decrees being laid upon it, all that were
called to the Synod, as well Ecclesiastics as Secular Procurators, Signed and
Subscribed them with their own hands before the whole Synod and People. The
Synod consisted of 813, viz. 133 Priests, besides Deacons and Subdeacons, and
others of the Clergy, and 660 Procurators of the People, and other principal
Men of the Laity, besides the Inhabitants of the Town of Diamper, where the
Synod was held, and of several other neighboring Villages; there were likewise
present a great number of Portugnezes, who came along with Don Antonio De
Neronha, Governor of Cochim, who together with all the other Magistrates of
the City, assisted at the Synod.

The Decrees being Signed, the most Reverend Metropolitan rose up, and having
taken off his Mitre, kneeled down before the High Altar, and begun the Te Deum,
with which, to the great joy of all that were present, a solemn Procession
^ound the Church was begun, the Quire singing that and some other Psalms, the
Latins in Latin, and the Native Priests in Chaldee, and the People their
Festivity in Malabar: proceeding to praise God with abundance of tears and joy,
in three Tongues in the Unity of the Faith, and Goodwill among them all, for
having at last obtained that, which they had so long desired of Almighty God,
Three Persons, and One Nature, the Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who
lives and reigne^^ for ever: Amen.

After the Procession was over, the most Reverend Metropolitan going to the
High Altar, read the Prayer Exaudi quaesumus, Domine, as it is in the
Pontifical; which being ended, he seated himself upon his Throne with the Mitre
on his Head, and his Pastoral Staff in his Hand, and directing his Discourse to
the People said, I give many thanks to Almighty God the Author of all good
things, for this great favor he has vouchsafed to me and you, and all the
faithful People of this Bishopric, in permitting us to celebrate this Synod
maugre all the impediments which Satan the enemy of Souls, had created to
obstruct it, by stirring up Contentions and Debates on purpose to separate this
Christianity from the Union of the Catholic Church, and to keep them in their
old Errors, as you all very well know. I do also give many thanks to God, for
his having been pleased to order Matters so, that this whole Affair should end
with so much Joy, Peace and Concord, as you all see it does, and so much to the
sorrow of Infidel and Idolatrous Kings, and of all the other Enemies of our
Holy Catholic Faith. I do also thank you my most dear Brethren and fellow
Priests and Coadjutors, and you my beloved Sons the Procurators of the People,
and all the other principal Persons who have been present at this Synod, that
not regarding the troubles of the Ways and Times, nor the displeasure of the
Kings to whom you are subject; you have, as true Christians desirous of
Salvation, over-looked all those Inconveniences, and obeyed our Precept in
assembling your selves together to treat about the good of your Souls, for
which God will reward you with Eternal Life, if you persevere in the purity of
the Faith you have here professed, and which you have been taught by this Synod,
and shall conform your Lives and Manners to its Decrees. I trust in the Lord
that he will carry you back safe to your Houses, and bless you and your
Families and Posterity for ever; which God of his infinite Grace and Mercy
grant. Amen.

This Discourse being ended, the most Reverend Metropolitan rose up, and with
abundance of tears gave his solemn Blessing to the People, and after that, the
Archdeacon with a loud voice said, Let us depart in peace; to which the whole
Synod answered in the name of Christ, Amen. And thus the Diocesan Synod ended
the 26th of June, in the Year 1599, to the Honor and Praise of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns for ever:
Amen.

The Synod being ended in conformity to what had been ordained therein, there
was given to every one of the Vicars that was nominated to any Church by the
most Reverend Metropolitan, a Stone Altar, Consecrated by his Lordship for that
purpose, their former Altars not having been duly Consecrated; as also a Box
with the Vessels of Holy Oils, together with Directions how to use them: There
was moreover a Book of the Administration of the Sacraments according to the
Roman use, translated into Chaldee and Syrian, given to every Vicar, and
another which contained the whole Christian Doctrine in the Malabar Tongue, for
the instruction of Children and others, as also a Surplice to be used in the
administration of Sacraments, which was what had never been in use among them;
the Churches were also furnished with Corporals, Vestments, Frontals, Cups, and
whatever else was necessary to the Ministry of the Altar, all which were
wanting in most Churches; and all the Controversies, whether betwixt
Corporations or particular Persons, that were brought before the Synod, were
decided by the most Reverend Metropolitan and his Assessors, after which they
all departed in peace.

The most Reverend Metropolitan, as soon as the Synod was ended, begun his
Visitation of all the Churches in the Diocese, in order to put the Decrees of
the Synod in execution, reciting the principal and most necessary of them in
every Church, and delivering the Books, Breviaries, and Missals, as well of the
Churches as of particular Persons every where, and burning the Books condemned
by the Synod, and correcting others, putting the Vicars in possession of their
Churches, who were every where received as such by the People, who settled
Revenues upon them; of which, together with what was given them by the most
Reverend Metropolitan, they made Ollas, or Instruments in the Churches,
creating four Churchwardens, and opening the Church Boxes, and in a word,
ordering whatever was necessary to be done. The Clergy, who had not been
present at the Synod, made a profession of the Faith, the Confessors were
examined, and had Licenses given them in writing according to their abilities,
and the necessity of the Church, prohibiting all others to hear Confessions:
Where there was a Font, they also Baptized all the Children that they found
unchristened, and had those brought in that were in the Heaths, where there
were many that were Eight and Ten Years old unchristened. They Confirmed the
whole People, and Absolved all that were Excommunicate; many of which,
according to their custom, had continued so for twenty or thirty Years, and
especially for Murder, for which they never grant Absolution, no not at the
hour of death; the Metropolitan preached every day to Christians in the Church,
and to Infidels (who flocked to see him) in the Church Porch, treating with
them about Baptism when he came to say Ingredimini in Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam,
several of which he persuaded to turn Christians, who after having learned
their Catechism, were Baptized by him at other places: He Catechized the
Children in the Malabar Tongue; and finding there was none of them that
understood their Catechism, he ordered them to be taught it every day out of
Books that were kept in the Church. Finally, where he met with any that were
disposed to Marry, he Married them, and gave Orders about every thing else
relating to the Synod, which he did in the Form following.

After the most Reverend Metropolitan had been received by the whole People
with great Joy and Festivity, according to their fashion, and carried in
Procession to the Church, the way as he went being covered with Cloth or Mats,
or Boughs of Trees, after the common Ceremony of Blessing and Absolution, the
whole People both Men and Women, came with a most profound Humility and
Reverence to kiss his Hands, and to yield Obedience to him; he went to Church
betimes in the Morning with the whole Clergy and People; where after having
Confessed himself before the High Altar, which he did for the great need there
was of having those Christians instructed in the Sacrament of Confession, which
was in use among them but in few places, he said Mass. When Mass was ended,
Father Francisco Roz, Master of the Chaldean and Syrian Languages in the
Jesuits College at Vaipicotta, with the rest of the Fathers deputed to that
Work, and some of the most learned Cacanares assembled together in the
Sacristy, or in some other place appointed, where in obedience to the
Excommunication of the Synod, all the Syrian Books were brought before them, as
well those that belonged to the Churches, as those belonging to private
Persons; all which were emended, delivering those which were condemned by the
Synod to the Metropolitan, who burnt them all. The Metropolitan having in the
mean time put on his Pontificals, sat down and Preached at length to the
People, all the necessary Doctrines of Faith and Manners; after which Discourse
the chief Decrees of the Synod were published, and a Procession for the Dead
was made round the Church, to which such vast multitudes of Heathens resorted
to see the Novelty, and the Pontifical Vestments, that they filled the
Churchyard and Windows: After the Procession for the Dead was ended, and the
Doctrine of Purgatory, and the benefits of praying for them declared, the
Metropolitan having seated himself, began a Discourse of the Sacrament of
Confirmation, according to the necessities of the People, and after that
Anointed all that were present, then he Baptized all the Children of Christian
Parents in his Pontificals, and such of the adult Heathens as desired it, who
were called together the day before to that purpose. The Metropolitan whenever
he came to the words Ingredimini Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam, beginning a Discourse
to the Heathens and Naires, that flocked to see the Ceremony performed, who
though all Armed with Bows and Arrows and other Weapons, and in their own Country
remote from the Portuguezes, did quietly and cheerfully hear all that he said
to them, not only concerning the Faith of Jesus Christ, but also the
indignities and hard words which he bestowed upon their Idols and Priests in
order to undeceive them: When the Sermon and Baptism was over, the
Ecclesiastics that were not present at the Synod, made a profession of the
Faith before the People in the hands of the Metropolitan, and having called all
the Children together, and ordering them to kneel round his Chair, he began a
Chamaz, or set of Prayers in their own Tongue, which they all said after him,
and having Blessed them all, made a Discourse to them suitable to their Age, to
the great satisfaction of their Parents, teaching them the Veneration that is
due to the most sweet Name of Jesus, to which, agreeable to the Nestorian
Doctrine wherein they had been educated, they had paid no manner of Respect:
After that he inducted the Vicar in the presence of the People, charging him
with the Flock which received him for their Pastor, and where there were any to
be Married he Married them; great numbers also Confessed themselves to him, and
received the most Holy Sacrament at his hands, among whom were abundance of
Ancient People, who had never Confessed themselves before: In the Evening the
People assembled together and agreed about the Stipend, they determined to
settle upon their Vicar, which was Registered in Ollas, that were to be kept in
the Church; and having opened the Money-Box of the Church, they distributed
such Alms as they thought necessary. The Metropolitan and the Fathers that were
in his Company, having examined the Cacanares, to such as he found to be
qualified for it, he granted a License in writing to be Confessors; after that
he heard all the Complaints and Controversies that were among Christians, and
having those four principal Men, with the consent of the Parties, they decided
them all according to the Customs of the Country, and the Judgment of the
Metropolitan, so as to exclude all farther Process or Appeals; be then Absolved
all that were Excommunicate, and several that had lain twenty or thirty Years
under that Censure, there being several Cases wherein they were so barbarous,
as never to grant Absolution, no not at the hour of Death, injoyning every one
such Penances as were suitable to their Faults, omitting nothing that he judged
necessary to the good of the Church and People; in all which he was accompanied
and assisted by five Jesuits, who were all zealous for the Salvation of Souls,
and well skilled in the Malabar Tongue, and two of them in the Chaldee also;
they were Father Hieronymo Cotta, Father Jorgye de Crasto, Father Francisco
Roz, who is now the most worthy Bishop of that Diocese, Father Antonio Toscano,
and Brother John Maria: Father Frey Braz de Santa Maria, a Divine of the Order
of St. Austin, was Confessor to the most Illustrious Metropolitan; there were
also three Canons of the Metropolitan Church of Goa, and the Metropolitan's two
Chaplains, and several Cacanares that were Natives, who celebrated the Divine
Offices both in Chaldee and Syrian, whom the most Illustrious Metropolitan made
great use of in several Occasions. In the reduction of this Church to the
Catholic Faith, many remarkable things happened, in which God manifested how
much that Work was for his Service; and in the Visitation of the Churches there
were several Successes of great edification, and that were much for God's
Praise, which shall, God willing be written in another place, for his Glory w^^
lives and reigns for ever. Amen.

The Letter of Dom Andre Bishop of Cochi^ to the Synod, being Assembled.
BRethren, in my judgment all you who are called the Christians of St. Thomas,
do owe much to God for his having by means of the Apostle, chose you from among
such multitudes (...) Infidels as the East is filled with, to enlight^^ your
understandings with the Truth, and for having made you, as St. Peter says, a
Holy Nation, (...) purchased People: For you are not to imagine that your
Forefathers did deserve more at the hands of God, than the other Infidels that
were their Contemporaries, and yet you see how God was pleased to choose them,
and you by their means, when (...) the same time he left others and their
Poster^^^ in their natural Misery; for which there can be no other Cause
assigned, but that it was the Wi^^ of God to extend that Mercy to you and your
Forefathers, which he denied to all the other People of these Parts; and what
makes this Mercy (...) be the greater and more Illustrious, is, That Go^ was
pleased to bring you to the Faith, not by (...) Ministry of some obscure Person
of small Authority, which has been the Case of many other Christians, but by
sending two chosen and beloved Apostles to you, for your greater Honor, and
that this Church might justly style it self Apostolical; a privilege that was
granted but to few Churches that are now in being in the World, and which the
Metropolitan of Constantinople was long ago ambitious of usurping to himself,
if he might have been permitted. But Satan, the great Enemy to all that is Good,
envying the great Glory of this Church, labored to sow the Tares of Errors
and Heresies in this Field of Christ's, and the Apostle St. Thomas; and so
coming from Babylon and the Land of the Chaldeans, he brought along with him
some of the Disciples of the perfidious Nestorius to pervert this Church^ This
Nestorius was condemned as a Heretic in Asia minor, in the City of Ephesus, in
a Council of 200 Bishops, and afterward in a Council of 630 Bishops: He was so
wicked and perverse an Heretic, that besides the punishment inflicted on him
for his Sins by Men, God also begun to punish him in this Life, giving him as
it were an earnest of those Punishments and Torments which he is now suffering
in Hell; for besides his being deposed and deprived of his Bishopric, and
Condemned by the forementioned and other following Councils, and Banished by
the Sentence of the Emperor Theodosius the II. who then Reigned, in the
Deserts of Egypt, and his having his Books ^^rned by the command of the said
Emperor before his death, his Tongue with which he h^d uttered such great
Blasphemies, rotted in his Mouth, as did also his whole Body, and being eat up
with Lice he expired, surrendering his Soul to the Devil, as Evagrius, a Noble
Writer who lived at the same time, relates; and the same is reported of him by
Nicephorus, Cedrenus, and other Greek Writers. The Disciples of this cursed
Heretic being brought into this Church by the Devil, sowed their Errors in it
without being observed by you, who were a simple sincere People; insomuch that
St. Thomas when he was on Earth, might have said the same that St. Paul did to
those of Ephesus, where Nestorius was afterward Condemned; I know that after
my departure greedy Wolves shall come among you, not sparing the Flock: And
well might the Pastors you have had among you be called devouring Wolves, who
being a base and inconsiderable People, had no other intent but to rob you of
all they could, taking Money for Orders, Dispensations.] What could the poor
Malavars conclude from hence, but that either no such thing as the taking of
Money for Dispensations, etc. was ever heard of in the Roman Church, or that
the Declamer was one of a strange assurance to condemn the doing of it at such
a Tragical rare as he does.
Dispensations, for Absolutions, and for all Sacraments and Sacred things, as
you very well know; a thing so abominable in the sight of God, that St. Peter
the Prince of the Apostles, for this Sin only threw Simon Magus out of the
Church, and Excommunicated him, as you may see in the Acts of the Apostles;
insomuch, Brethren, that we see that fulfilled in you, and in your Prelates,
who came from Babylon, which was foretold by God so many Years before by the
Prophet Isaiah, The Shepherds themselves had no understanding, they have all
gone out of the Way, and from the first to the last are all turned to
Covetousness. For God's sake, Brethren, tell me what sort of Prelates and
Bishops could they be, who sought nothing but their own Interest; and who gave
Orders and Dispensations, and did every thing that belongs to a Bishop, without
being Bishops themselves, or so much as Priests or Clerks, but were pure
Laics, as they themselves afterward confessed: What Dispensation, what
Sacrament, what Grace, could he who was dispensed with and ordained, receive
from those who were no Bishops, nor so much as Clerks, but pure Laics, nay
Lascares, in whose Habit they came out of their own Country. Brethren, this is
the Fruit which they send you from Babylon, Heretics and pure Laics, and
Barbarians for Bishops: Tell me what has Malabar to do with Babylon, and what
correspondence is there betwixt the most pure Doctrine of Christ, which was
preached to you by the great Apostle St. Thomas, and the barbarous Errors
which were brought hither by Arabians and Chaldeans from Babylon; and from
their Master the Apostate Nestorius? Believe me, Brethren, these are they of
whom St. Paul spoke in his Epistle to his Scholar Titus, That there should come
Men teaching what they ought not to teach, for filthy lucre: And so it fell out
for these Men, that they might not lose the Profits and Honors they were
unjustly possessed of, did all they could to put into your heads that the
Doctrine of St. Peter was different from that which had been taught you by St.
Thomas: It is true that the Doctrine of the Apostle St. Peter is contrary to
the Heresies that have been brought hither from Babylon, but not what was
preached here by St. Thomas: For what St. Thomas, that also St. Peter taught,
and Christ himself and all his other Disciples taught; for as St. Paul says,
there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one Church, of which Christ is
the Head, and that on Earth St. Peter and his Successors the Bishops of Rome:
For that St. Peter and his Successors are the Head of the whole Church On
earth.] Bishop Andre did not so fair in quoting. [ And on Earth, St. Peter and
his Successors, the Bishops of Rome, etc.] as St. Paul's words.
on Earth is plain from what Christ before his Passion promised St. Peter, as
it is recorded in the 16. Chap. of St. Matthew, where Christ, after having
examined his Faith, said to him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, and I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
Words which he spoke to None.] This is a mistake, for he gave the same
Commission to all his Apostles after his Resurrection.
none of the rest of the Apostles, but to St. Peter only. And St. John in the
last Chapter of his Gospel tells us, That Christ, after his Resurrection,
having asked St. Peter if he loved him more than all other things, and, St.
Peter had answered, that he knew very well that he did, said to him three
several times, Feed my Lambs, feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep: By which words he
made him the universal Pastor of his Sheep, and after him all the Bishops of
Rome who were to succeed him in that Office; for Christ h^s but one Fold for
all his Sheep, and one only Church: and so in the Creed that is sung in the
Mass, we say, I believe in one Holy and Apostolical Church: and so Christ her
Spouse said of his Church in the Canticles, My Dove, my perfect, is but one;
that is to say, my Dove, my perfect, which is the Church, is but one: And St.
John in his 10th. Chapter tells us, that the Son of God speaking to his
Disciples concerning his intent of calling the Gentiles to his Faith, said, I
have other Sheep which are not of this Fold, whom I must bring in, that there
may be one Fold and one Shepherd. Now that Fold wherein the Jews and Gentiles
were to concur in one only Faith, is the Catholic Church, and that Shepherd
was St. Peter, and all his Successors the Bishops of Rome; every one of which
as he is Bishop of Rome, is the universal Pastor of the Whole.] If this had
been the Faith of the whole Christian Church at the time when the Creeds were
made, the compilers of them would and ought to have added Roman to Catholic in
the Creed.
whole Church of God, insomuch as that all who will not be subject to him, are
not of the number of the Sheep of Christ, but are without the Fold of the
Church, being Schismatics and Heretics, for such are all who are disobedient
to the Roman Church; in which Roman Church there never was nor will be any
error in Faith, by reason of Christ's promise, who, as St. Luke reports,
speaking to St. Peter, said to him; I have prayed for thee, Peter, that the
Faith.] Here the Bishop makes very bold with the Scripture again in quoting the
[Faith of thy Church] as St. Luke's words.
Faith of thy Church may never fail: The Faith of other particular Churches, as
we have seen, may fail, but the Faith of the Roman Church has never failed nor
never will. Wherefore, Brethren, fasten your selves close to this firm Pillar
of the Roman Church; against which, according to our Savior's promises, the
Gates of Hell shall never prevail; which Gates are the Heresies that are, and
have been in the World: You ought therefore to render many thanks to God, for
his having relieved you at this time, by sending you the Lord Archbishop for a
Spiritual Pastor and Master, who having left his Dwelling, and quiet is at all
this Trouble, only for the sake of your Salvation, and to rescue you from the
errors you have hitherto lived in: For I know and am certain, that he is one of
those Pastors which God spoke of by Jeremiah; And I will give you Pastors
according to my heart, and they shall feed you with Knowledge and Doctrine.
Hitherto you have been fed with Errors and Ignorances, and your Pastors have
sought gain, and not the Salvation of your Souls: This Pastor, as you see, does
not come to take any of your Goods from you, but to spend his own for your
profit, and to put you in the right way to Heaven and Salvation: From Whence.]
I do not believe that the Archbishops of Malabar made half so much of their
Bishopric, as Bishop Andre did of his of Cochim, or as Father Rez the Jesuit
made of Malabar, after he was preferred to it by the Pope.
whence you may clearly perceive the great difference there is betwixt him and
those other Pastors, or to speak more properly, those Wolves, which you have
had hitherto among you, as our Lord says, in Sheeps clothing. Hitherto your
Errors have had some excuse, because you could know no more but what your
Masters taught you; whereas from henceforward, you shall have no manner of
excuse, neither before God nor Man, if you do not become such, as all that love
you desire you to be. The Faith and Doctrine that has been preached to you by
the Archbishop, is the Faith of all the Christians in the Indies, and of all
Clerks and Religious in these Parts, and which all Portugal, Spain, and in a
word all Christendom.] The Reformed, the Greek, the Muscovite, the Georgian,
the Armenian, the Antiochian, Alexandrian, and Abyssin Church, are it seems no
part of Christendom with this Declamer.
Christendom holds. This is the Faith that was taught by the Son of God, the
Faith that St. Thomas preached, and was preached also by St. Peter and the rest
of the Apostles; and if any shall teach the contrary, let him be, as St. Paul
says, Anathema, and Excommunicated and expelled the Society of the Faithful,
as he is from Christ, his Faith and Grace. The Lord give you a perfect
knowledge of himself, as it is desired by your Brother in the Lord. Writ at
Cochim the 28th of June, 1599.

Your Brother in the Lord, Bishop FREY ANDRE.

The SYNOD'S Answer,
The Lord Assist Us. To the most Illustrious and Reverend Lord Dom Andre, the
most worthy Bishop of Cochim; The Diocesan Synod of the Christians of St.
Thomas of the Bishopric of the Serra, assembled in the Town of Diamper,
wishes eternal Health and Prosperity in our Lord.
Our most Reverend Metropolitan ordered your most Illustrious Lordship's Letter
to this Synod to be read in a full Assembly of the Priests and People; and
having heard and understood it, we rejoiced exceedingly in the Lord, to
perceive that the Holy Doctrine taught us by your Lordship, is the same with
that our Metropolitan has preached in all our Churches, and has declared in
this Synod, as also the same that is preached by the Fathers all over this
Diocese, by which means we are the more confirmed in the Catholic Faith, and
the Obedience we owe to the Holy Roman Church, our true Mother, and to our Lord
the Pope, the Successor of St. Peter, and Christ's Vicar upon Earth, as is
manifest from the Acts of the said Synod, Signed by Us, as your Lordship may
see; and if we have hitherto been wanting to our Duty in these Matters, it did
not proceed from any Obstinacy of Mind, or from any Inclination we had to be
Heretics, or Schismatics, but purely for want of the Light of true Doctrine
and healthful and Catholic Food, which was not given us by our Prelates, but
who did instead thereof, poison us with the false Doctrines of Nestorius, and
several other Errors; from which we are now, by the Divine Mercy, rescued; and
by the goodness of God, and the Ministry of our Metropolitan, enlightened: from
whence also rose the Rebellion which was made by us, when the Truth began to be
first preached to us; as also all the Troubles and Vexations that we gave to
our Metropolitan, and the manifest Dangers we exposed him to; for all which we
are now heartily sorry, and do daily more and more lament it: But whereas God
has been pleased to enlighten us with his Doctrine, the Metropolitan being
discouraged by none of those things to go on preaching in our Churches, the
light of the Truth coming to us by that means, we have cordially embraced, and
have with an unanimous consent and great alacrity, made profession thereof in
this Synod; having also put the Affairs of our Church in the best Order we were
able, and submitting our selves to the Judgment of our Metropolitan Mar Aleixo,
who as our Master, has instructed us in all things: But whereas his Lordship,
after his Visitation of this Diocese is over, is to go to reside in his Own
Diocese.] The Archbishop cured them of these fears, for some time at least, at
the end of his Visitation, when he made a solemn renunciation of the
Archbishopric of God, and as solemn an acceptance of that of the Serra, and
that judicially and in Form; desiring the Christians of St. Thomas, to whom he
delivered both those Instruments, to solicit the Pope and King of Spain to
give way to the Translation; and promising withal to employ all his own
interest in both to persuade them to it; but it seems all would not do, for the
next News we hear of him, is, That instead of being gratified with the
Archbishopric of the Serra, he was condemned to be Governour-General of the
Indies for three Years, and after that translated to the Primacy of Portugal.
own Diocese, which we take notice of to our great Sorrow, by which means we
shall want a Special Protection; we do therefore beg, that until such time as
God shall be pleased to send the Pastor among us, which we expect from the Holy
Apostolical See, your Lordship, as being the Prelate that lives nearest to us,
and from whom and your Predecessors, this Church has received so many Favors,
would be pleased to take us under your protection, and to concern your self in
all our Affairs, and to favor the Prelate, which the Metropolitan with his
wonted kindness and benignity to his Flock, intends to leave among us. And
seeing your most Illustrious Lordship in your Charity has been pleased to
favor us with a Letter, we take confidence from thence, to beg of you, That
whereas our Priests, both for their Spiritual Consolation, and other
Necessities, do frequently resort to your City and several parts of your
Diocese, where it will be necessary for them to say Mass, which they have
hitherto been hindered from doing, by reason of their not being in a perfect
Union with the Holy Mother Church of Rome; we now being in such an Union, as
much as can be desired, the Synod does humbly beseech your Lordship that you
would be pleased to give leave to such of our Priests as have a License from
our Prelate to say Mass in your Churches, at least the Roman translated into
Syrian, that it may appear thereby that we are all one in the Unity of one only
Catholic Church; and that the division which Satan had made betwixt us, and
most other Churches is at an end, all Churches making one only Catholic
Church, as your Lordship has clearly taught us, as a vigilant Pastor, in your
learned Letter. The Lord preserve your Lordship's most Illustrious Person, and
prolong your Years, for the good of the Church and the profit of the Sheep of
Christ.

Writ in the Synod of Diamper the 25th. of June, 1599. Praise be to God.
A Preface to a MISSAL.
The Mass that is henceforth to be used by the ancient Christians of St. Thomas
of the Bishopric of Angamale in the Serra of Malabar, in the East Indies,
purged of the Nestorian Errors and Blasphemies it abounded with, by the most
Illustrious and Reverend Dom Frey Aleixo De Menezes, Archbishop of Goa, and
Primate of the Indies, at the time when he reduced them to the Obedience of the
Holy Roman Church. Translated word for word out of Syriack or Syrian, into
Latin.

AMong the other things which the most Reverend Archbishop of Goa, and Primate
of the Indies, Dom Frey Aleixo de Menezes, put in Order in the Diocesan Synod,
assembled by him in the Bishopric of Angamale of the Serra of Malabar, of the
Christians of St. Thomas, in which he purged the Church of the Nestorian
Heresies, and reduced it to the Obedience of the Holy Roman Church; one of the
chief was the reforming the Syrian Mass, which was said in the Chaldee Tongue
in this Bishopric, which having been composed or enlarged by Nestorian
Heretics, was full of Errors and Blasphemies both in the Prayers and
Commemorations of Nestorius, Theodorus, and Diodorus, and several other
Nestorian Heretics, to whom as to Saints, they prayed, for to intercede for
them: And whereas this People was in a profound Ignorance, nay the very
Bishops, who came from Babylon, not knowing the true Form of Consecration, all
of them adding to it and taking from it at their pleasure; there being no
certain particular Form of Consecration among them, until a certain Archbishop
came who had more knowledge than the rest in Ecclesiastical Matters, and the
Holy Scriptures; who perceiving that the Form wherewith they Consecrated,
contained in it some Errors, contrary to the Truth of the Divine Sacrament, did
establish the true Form, adding some words to it, both in the Consecration of
the Body and Blood, in contradiction to the Error and Heresy of those who say
that the Sacrament is only the Figure of the Body of Christ our Lord. From
whence it is more than probable, the Heretics of our Times, the revivers of
the Errors of all the ancient condemned Sects, took this Opinion: The Form
established by the forementioned Archbishop, was, This is in truth my Body;
this is in truth the Cup of my Blood, which was shed for you and for many, for
the propitiation and remission of your Sins; and this shall be a Pledge to you
for ever and ever; in which Form they have now Consecrated for several Years.
But the most Reverend Archbishop Primate, having removed the words that are
not necessary, established the proper Form used in the Catholic Church, as it
is in the Roman Missal, laying aside diverse and Sacrilegious and ignorant
Ceremonies also, which signified some Heresies and Errors that were amongst
them: And having thus reformed their Mass, he continued it however in its
ancient Form, until such time as he had consulted the Apostolical See about it,
to know what our Lord the Pope would determine in that Matter; many of the
emendations are noted in the Synod, Dec. 10. Act. 5. of the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass, and in the Action of Matters of Faith, where they are to be seen; I
shall here present the Curious only with the Mass reformed, and as its said
among them at this time.

I Have Published this Preface for the sake of the Testimony that is therein,
of this Church's not having believed Transubstantiation, but have forbore to
Print the Missal it belongs to, because it is the Missal that was imposed upon
this Church by Archbishop Menezes, or their Old Missal, so altered and mangled
by him, as to be truly what Father Simon calls it, A confused indigested
Office, and withal very tedious.

FINIS.

