THE Art of Longevity, OR, A Diaeteticall INSTITUTION.

Written by Edmund Gayton, Bachelor in PHYSIC, of St. John Bapt. Coll. OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1659.

TO THE Most Virtuous, Accomplished and Ingenious LADY, THE LADY ELIZABETH ROUS,
The meriting Wife of the most Munificent JOHN ROVS Esquire Of Henham Hall in
Suffolk.
SINGULAR MADAM,
UNto none more properly does the Dedication of this Book belong, then to your
excelling Self, who (being by Birth first, then Accomplishments, then Marriage,
the unenvied Paragon of two great Counties, that of Norfolk by your Originals,
this of Suffolk by your Nuptials, in honor to those Counties that are proud of
you, and the rest that contend for you) should be continued to as much
duration, as the Art of Physic is able to contrive. It ought to be the labor
of a College of Physicians (not of one pitiful Pretender) to advance the
preservation of such a person, which if lost, the following age must faintly
hope to re-example. In the want therefore, or failings of Physical Counsels be
your own Lessius, be to your self a Cornara, since it has so providentially
fallen out, all other outward embellishments being abundantly bestowed upon you,
that you need not spend any time to adorn, or trick up your self, but only to
express your thankfulness to the gracious Opificer of so rare a piece, and
employ some hours (as is your practice) that your Country, Family, and Friends
may be happy in the long possession of you. For really your own Practice (
Madam) will outdo all my Precepts, your Gardens and Parks outvie the
Physick-Gardens; your Closet is as considerable as the Countess of Kent's with
her Powder in it. At Henham-Hall (the Seat of your Noble Husbands Ancestors)
what is wanting to Satiety? yet your Deer outlive the ages of their
Neighbour-commoners, and their Parks too; it is possible to find a Stag as
ancient as that of Caesar's: nor is this done by the diet of your Keeper, or
your keeping your Deer from being your Diet, but by a successive spending of
your Park, not destroying it, by letting us eat Venison, but not to such
excess, as if your Guests were to feed themselves into Elkes. Your Deer fall
(as our Colledge-copices should do) at so many years growth, that so the
succeeding scholars may have wood of their own, and not expect Coals from
New Castle. Your Table is Mezentian in this respect; for alive Deer look in at
your windows, and see their dead Brother in a Coffin. So rare is your Cookery,
it makes slaughter amiable, and the Heard desire to be wounded, that they may
be so dressed. I have seen your Table furnished with more Dishes then my Book
has Chapters in it, and yet the Temperance did exceed the Dishes, so that if
ever Abstinence was paramount, and in its Zenith it was at Henham, where
Self-denial (so much spoke of) was truly visible, even in the fullness of the
Creature, and your Guests dined Philosophically, at a City Feast. This is true
Temperance (Madam) to refrain where there is variety of temptation to excess;
to stint the stomach, in full view of the game of Luxury, otherwise it is
Penance, not Abstinence, and the Mind and Appetite not commanded, but a string
tied about the throat, which is Cormorant sobriety, for which the Fowl wishes
him hanged that throtled him.

Having thus commended ( Madam) your Diet, it is not with any Stratagem to get
Applause to my own, which is too course for your Palate, and scarce fit for
your Servants. But as you sometimes are pleased to leave the Rarities of your
own Table and Caresse in a Cottage, where the Earthen Platter, the Barley
Pudding, the Fool, and the plain Country Houswife, are both Meat and Sport,
and delight and nourish beyond the wisdom of multiplied Cookery. So let it
fare (best Lady) with this slender treatment of your Servant, which is not a
Present, but a Debt of a long Promise, and not in that kind paid that it was
promised. I did intend you a Grace, some Divine Poems, but present you with all
manner of Diet, for fear being without Grace, it might be supposed all of
Oysters, or Melons. The Book is a Hieroglyphick salt, not that with the head of
Mortification on it, which is melancholy, or a Charing-cross-trencher salt,
which is impious; but this is a pillar of Salt, or rather of Temperance, which
is healthful (and at least in wish) Festivous, the Motto as it may be
translated, Poets should always write,
To profit, and delight.
And calls to mind the ancient frugality of our predecessors, which were wise,
valiant, and abstemious, three habits much advanced, if not begot by Diaetetick
Rules. To the moderate observance whereof, in the pursuance of your Honored
Husbands, and your Ladyships and Families health, this Rythmicall Tract invites
you, until I can face to face, and viva voce wish your double healths (as a
Physician ought to do) in your celebrious Goblet at Henham-Hall. Till then, and
ever, I am

(MADAM) Your most grateful Servant, Edmund Gayton.

TO THE Candid LADY-READERS.
Madams,
THis Book, entitled The Art of Longevity, or, A Dieteticall Institute, may
very well seem unnecessary and superfluous, after so many Tracts of the same
subject, by the long-lived Lessius, Cornarus, and others, who have engrossed
all that can be said, and left Posterity nothing but to practice. But as i^
Divinity (that of the Times, called Preaching) repetition is not uncommendable;
so in Physic, a round Recapitulation, or trim Compendium and Abridgement,
may help the memory, though not the understanding; wherefore the succinct and
ingenious Salernitan Precepts fasten more then Hypocrates profounder Aphorisms,
or Galens Comments upon its Auditors, and Sandersons Verses, are oftener and
easier remembered then their rugged Prose, Feet and Rythm sweetning the
sowreness of the moral letter. Verses indeed have the fate to be both slighted
and condemned, and yet, like other faults, retained. And though Poetry and
Oratory both (if looked upon in the art and respect) are but the lowest of
endowments; yet as their subjects may be, they both raise them and themselves.
I confess my Subject is above my Dress, and I have deprest the Argument by the
mould I cast it in, yet a plain Suit by the Fancies may be made conspicuous,
and attract more for the mode then the stuff. So here serious Mattter in a
fantastical or light Dress, may one with another perchance find a liking,
sometimes applause. I know, Ladies, that you are all of a neat extraction,
choice and sifted earth, and so resolve to keep your selves, being by
self-affection principled to* a spare Diet, whereby your own mirrours reflect
you pleasing and lovely to your selves, and admirable to others. Wherefore in
all Physical practice there are no such observant Patients as your selves,
whether the business concern your health or your ornament, your being or your
well-being. Now a book of Diet presented to you is like to be of most happy
events, who if you are told the quality of your food, will not err in the
quantity. The first of these is my care at present, the second is your constant
use: for neither to your noble sex, nor any of the nobler, will I prescribe any
measure in meat, though there ought to be one in all things: the Beasts
themselves (even all but Horses, Dogs, and Swine) have attained to such a
natural stint. Rare is the temperance of the Elephants, Apes, Birds, as may be
read in Aelians Varia Historia, nay Dogs themselves (a voracious animal) though
they will eat to surfeit, cure themselves by abstinence, and Swine-physick is
grown into a Proverb. If your Ladyships enquire at what demensum or exactness I
live my self, with a Medice, ostende teipsum, that is, show me thy Diet by thy
Practice; I answer, Madams, Truly I find it the best rule, as to my
particular, to keep no ^ule at all, for the Times have been more then Lessius
to me, and brought me to less then twelve ounces in two days, which is a most
slender proportion; they have taken care that I shall never have the worst of
surfeits, that of bread: yet sometimes I offend in poculentis, in the excess,
oftener in esculentis, in the defect; in Fastings often, in Prayers less, yet
still in some, enough Religion for a Physician. And beside the Coloquintida of
the Times, in frequent mornings doses of the leaves of Wormwood, Scurvy Grass,
and Watercresses, which makes me look at the present Mastigation like
Vespatian, Clodius, or John Whis^ler, the sometime good-fac^d Recorder of
Oxford (as if I were going to sacrifice to the Lady Cloacina.) Such severe
Discipline is not fit for your tender Architecture, that may ruin Plaster of
Paris, which will scarce smooth the rougher Lime and Sand. In short, I know it
is a Latin Proverb, Misere vivit qui vivit Medice, that is, Madams, They are
most miserable Fools
That always live by Physick-rules.
And so Misere vivit, qui immodice vivit, They Are slaves unto their ap^etite
Which golden moderation slight.


In a word of exhortation then, Ladies, be neither Hermits nor Carthu^ians,
Ca^uchins nor Mon^^nists, that is, not of too severe a Regulation; yet a Nuns
diet for your sex, and the Collegi^t for ours, will make you Mother- Pyrrha's
for Age, Penelopes for Beauty, Cassandra's for Wisdom. In short, it will keep
your Spirits active, your Skins clear, your Limbs vigorous, your souls and
bodies apt for all Divine and Natural actions, whereby you may be (as you wish
your selves, and I too cordially) both beloved of God and men. And thus I
humbly submit these Conceits following to your Ladyships view, under
correction; unto which (especially from such hands) I were unkind to my self if
I should not most willingly lie down, and subscribe my self

(LADIES) Your most Obedient and Corrigible Servant, EDMUND GAYTON.

Upon his Friend, Mr. Edmund Gayton's Book of Diet.
WIt without wine, mirth without any meat?
Then let the dead that neither drink nor ea^,
Read thee for me; I am not so d^v^ne,
That I can live, and neither sup nor dine.
For though man lives not By bread alone,
Yet there is no man ever lived with none.
Devouring Wood of Kent (who at one bait
Could eat as much as Noah's World of Eight)
Being dead, may be thy guest; for thou do give
Something so near to nothing, none can live.
Thou have forgot how freely thou did laugh,
Being told thou had eat up thy Beadles staff;
Yet would persuade us temperance; O no,
Live by thy Book (if thou would have me do so)
Experiment thy self, first dine one week
With bread two ounces just, and ana Leek,
Sup with the learned Worm: that eats thy book,
And let thy Readers see how thou would look,
Printing thy bare-bone picture on thy sheet,
And then consider whether it be meet,
All mankind to persuade to starve themselves,
Because thou have no victuals on thy shelves.
As the long Graces that in fashion be,
Suit with thy minute meal, so both with me,
Thu^ for the glut^on and good fellow now
Thy Friend speaks truth, and freely does allow
Thy temperate presc^iptions; for our life
Is less in danger of the Plures occidit gula, quam gladius.
Sword then Plures occidit gula, quam gladius.
Knife;
And would we keep thy Rules (for no one can
Say that he cannot, if he be a man.)
D^ctors (as do Divines) might change their trade,
The Sexton burn hi^ Ma^tock and his Spade*
The elder World might die first, you and I
Might live till we were changed, and so never die.
Nominibus multis notus sine nomine prodis
Optime amico^um, non te sed memet honoras,
At quo^am proprios titulos (perdure) negasti
Hos cape. Vir auri es, virtutum dignior h^res.
To Mr. Gayton on his Art of LONGEVITY.
FOr Surfeits some pay dear, even all their wealth,
Others far dearer, their more precious health.
Yet heavier punishment, we see, or ^ead,
Poor Copenhagen feels it from the Swede,
Whose Sword, with Famine sharper then its edge,
Now sadly gives the Danish Healths a Pledge.
Could now one cure this feasting evil, give
Sick appetite the great Restorative;
Teach us to feed like Burgers, yet to rise
Like Doctors, less mercy, and more wise,
To such a Gale^, Cities that abound
In Riches, noble Pen^^ons might pro^ound:
I wish they would, facetious Gayton, then
Should thou have Fees due to thy learned Pen;
That from the Arabians has to us transferred
The Secret, that prese^ves that long-lived Bird,
Which thou prescribed, not in hard words, that make
The Bill as nauseous as the Drugs we take.
'So clearly and so well thy Book is writ,
That we have here choice Diet, and choice Wit*
Robert Stapylton Knight.

To his quondam Fellow Oxonian EDMUND GAYTON.
THese Dietetick Laws thou do here give,
Do teach us how, but make thy self to live,
And so they shall, industrious Mun, till time
Do once restore thee unto Prose from Rhyme:
Sometimes in Latin verse, in English now
You do, (God bless it) drive Poetic plough.
Whence are these Institutes, and whence these Rules?
Not from the Apothecary Shops, or Schools?
Thou talk Arabian Authors, but thy pains
Speak lowdly, thou have no Library but brains.
Longevity thou giv'st us from Jove's Bower,
And temperance from Friar Bacon's The S^and where the Author was first placed
a Centry
Tower.
Who'd think a Man should fall so mightily,
Who had his Rudiments of War so high?
VVho'd think that thou, a Centry in the air,
Should e're come down to teach us grosser Fare?
A Parac^l^^an then (without disgrace)
I Will call thee, instructed by the Prince oth' Place.
Bred in the Air, and War, what Powders may
Not come from thee? my Lady Kents give way.
Both Monk and Soldier owns thee, for I know,
Both Presses thou do stoutly undergo.
And now to please the Ladies thou have brought,
Not things far fetched, nor yet too dearly bought:
Thou make their Kitchin-Gardens give them more
Then Egypt and both the Indies did before.
Thus common things, not vulgar, are made nice,
And cheapness sometimes may enhanse the price.
What thou have done with staff of place and wealth
We know not, but I Am sure the staff of health
Thou carri'st still before us, and our part
Is but to follow well, and praise thy Art:
Great Art, that does not only save but cure,
Preventive too, as well as make to endure.
Wherefore I shall no more of thee rehearse,
Who giv'st us Mirth, and Physic, in a verse:
And those that will not for thy dose give Fee,
Let them want verses, and their health for me.
Philogeiton. H. I. Dr. L. L.

To the honored Author upon his Diaetetical Institute.
WEre the world but one Giant-thing that lived,
And had a soul, (as the old Sage believed)
But could it eat too, for one meal I Would swear,
Thou meant'st thy Book its general Bill of fare;
Great Clerk of Natures kitchen! we never knew
She was so good an Housekeeper till now.
Some Naturalists served up a course, or so,
Garnished to boot with their own fictions too;
But thou in this great Oleo have co^bin'd,
What e're her want or luxury could find.
If in her dining room thou serve so well,
In The drawing room sure thou must needs excel.
I. Heath.

To his Friend the Author.
WHat is it is writ? It is a noble Diet:
Oh! for a Soldiers stomach to be quiet,
And not conceive such Dainties placed upon
Some Ladies Board; then let the Gods look on,
With all their Goddesses, and tell me where
They met with wholesome diet and such cheer;
But their immortal diet's only known
And rarely fancied to us, then were shown
By power of Poets wits: I would not wish
This my good friend present us such a dish:
What he has done it is all substantial good,
Not only Babes, but Lords and Ladies food;
Such as may make our youth old Nestor's grow,
And then confess their age to him they owe:
Yet if our stomachs want a dish to bait on,
No wit like thine, in the second Course, dear Gayton.
E. ALDRICH, Tribunus militum.

To his honored Friend Mr. Edmund Gayton on his Art of Longevity.
WHy how now fellow Soldier! what you write?
It must be sure to get what you by sight
Have lost; in troth we had ill luck by the Sword;
Those were By-blows, thou better art at word:
And why of Diet prithee, when we know
All Cavaliers are forced to live too low
Under the Rule of Lessius, small provant
Will serve those men of the Gar^ison of Gaunt:
So often r^form'd (that is squeezed) they't brought alas:
Toth' Mum, and Diet of Pythagoras.
Platonic love we new may justify,
Since meats Platonic make sobriety;
And what in the fullness of the Court was Fable
Romance all, is true from thy spare Table,
And yet the sheet abounds in services,
The worst of service, only of the eyes.
He that does feed on thee Poetic Mun,
Must change himself to a Camelion:
For all thy Diet,, and choice Bill of Fare,
Is only words, and that is but wind and air.
FRANCISCUS ASTON Capt, Militiae Puerilis.

A Diaeteticall INSTITUTION.
CHAP. I.
Whilst I intend a wholesome Diet-Rule,
And write of Meats and Drinks from Physick-Schoole,
It ought to be presumed our state is good,
And that we have to buy our daily Food:
For what has he to do to vex his thought
How he should eat, that has no victuals bought?
Wherefore we do amand Duke Humphrey's Guest*
For their Provision truly is of the least.
A Dog does fare much better with his bones,
Than those whose table meat and drink are stones:
But that great Duke is out of house and home,
And his grand Palace is a Den become;
But not so good as is the Lions den,
Or Foxes holes, there is scraps for many men;
There is no Ordinary of News and Talk,
No not so much is left as Weymarks Walk,
No not so much (if you will please to go in)
Does the head remain of Welsh Cozen Owen;
Who for this violence done unto his name
Will rise and pay her with an Epigram:
He was set up with such a peaking Face,
As if to the Humphreyans h' had been saying Grace;
That word does hint our business, does as well
As if I Would heard the College Buttry-bell.
Then first we shall rehearse in humble Rimes
What time and hour we mount our Belly-chimes;
For it does stand with excellent reason
To have for meats, as other things, a Season.
For so it was ordained by our Creator,
(And still performed by naturated nature)
The Earth, the Air, the Sea, (would y' have more
Than such an able triple Providore?)
With tempestivous delicacies strive,
To please us in a various nutritive:
And with successive courses interchanging,
They have for every time a several ranging;
No Aulicus, Culman, no nor Clerk,
Show such a bill of Fare as was in the Ark:
And as by Couples they to Noah came
To be preserved, they do the very same
To us to be destroyed; for Master Venture
Consumes all that into it does enter:
It is for this luxurious Anthony,
And puired vice, our Cleopatry,
The ransackt Elements do not afford
Enough Provision for the Bed and Board.
Would it not prove thy whole Arithmetic
To cast in Ciphers what is spent by the week?
(Friend Noah) in this great Metropolis,
Without the Tavern style, of Bread and Cheese,
What droves of Higlers post in from the Fens
With Fowls most Epicaene, both Cocks and Hens?
Of all which company I don^t enjoy
One Duck, and yet related to a Coy.
But oh the heads we see of greater beards!
Not I^ was so fair when Jove afeard,
(That Juno did suspect her self cornute)
Had turned his delicate Lady to a Brute:
Nor when himself was pleased a Bull to low,
Could he our two late Fausen Beeves out-show?
The ways on every rode are all blockt up
With the whole family of those that Tup:
Who all like other innocents come
Unto these Shambles, to receive their doom.
St. Lukes is past, and Rumford rode does whine,
As if that Circe were alive with Swine:)
'Piggs have their Tide too, and there is a Fare
'For those, who in their lives most filthy are.
How many Babies on S. Margrets Hill
(If all that name to her continue still)
Lie pil'd in Tray (as they were wont in Trough)
And yet (as if there were not Pigg enough)
Old Bartholmew with Purgatory Fire
Destroys the Babe of many a doubtful Sire:
Nor does the Sea deny his vast supplies,
In greater Fishes and the lesser Fries,
As to our cost, the street of the name can tell,
How cheap soever the Fish, the dressing's fell.
The very King of Fish his season knows,
And in vast shoals his just obedience shows;
So all the rest of that blew Monarchy
Follow their leader, all resolved to die.
How do the painted Mack'rell load our Shallops*
And lest they smell, do put the winds to the gallop.
Lord, what a din the Sluts at Billingsgate
Do make about the the other cast of Sprats!
And open more their monstrous mouths in vain,
Than do their Oysters against tide or rain:
Nor may we pass the place where Chimney-sweep
Does now instead of the Cross his station keep:
In Cheapside where the Herb-market was, but now without a Writ removed into S.
Paul's Chapter yard.
There is a Cornucopia walk but thorough,
(Where is the like, except at Edenburough?)
Oh had our Sister Borough such a fate,
TO have had her double stalls of Flesh and Plate,
Her name might then have Eden been, whereas
For want of both she came e'ne where it was;
And so retains unto this Nations sorrow,
From our lost gewds, the last part of it borrow.
But I believe the Sallads of the place,
And Physical Herbage, for a twelve-months space
Would be too great a freight and sum to try
The bank of the Caledonick Pedlary.
And now I think it is time the Bill of Fare,
Given in and read, for Dinner to prepare.
Chap. II. Question I.
WHat time and hour is best to eat at? Answer,
An Ara^ian Phy^^t^an.
As Rasis does advise in his A (...) Directory so called.
Almansor,
(Now Rasis was in Physic a sage Solon)
After our former meats have passed grand The great (...).
Colon,
And the Saburra of the place unloaded,
No longer meat, no longer drink be avoided:
A little exercise, but not to sweat,
Excites the duller appetite to eat:
Soon as the eager Gentleman is raised
Fall on a Gods name (that is with God be praised:)
Do not defraud him, nay, we cannot, I fear,
Hope to dissuade, where there is never an ear.
But as it happens at a Lord Mayors Show
(For greater Festivals we do not know)
It is so long before the hundredth dish
Is placed, and the Sword Bearer to his wish,
Has changed the Sword of the City for a Knife
(Sharp as the Carver) so did tew to the life,
And laid about most powerfully (his heat
And the sharp humor laid) does no defeat:
'Then or with vinegar or violets syrrup,
'You may this lazy couchant Lion stir up;
But if you have not any of those at hand,
(I hope hot water may be at command)
Not Aqua vitae (though a dram for crude
And pituitous stomachs may be good:)
But here it is Aesops heated water meant,
Which once taken down, the stomach upward sent:
After relouncing, if the stomach bray
(Like a sharp Ass, for thistles or for nay)
Give its demensum, let it feed pro more
On any meat that is set down before ye;
And for the quoties, let it as it wont
(Unless some vicious custome's paramont)
Then by degrees relinquish that, not sudden,
'No hasty thing is good, scarce hasty pudding,
Twice in a day, or what is more temperate,
Thrice in two days, or as it is forced of late,
(Once in a day) for squeezed and dreyn'd Revenue
Is good to feed the bellies lank Retinue;
Take It from a prudent Prince, who will tell ye,
By no means make a Cloke-bag of your belly. That is, to carry double provision
for two meals.

CHAP. III. Upon the Appetite, and custom of eating.
AS we have used for Custom (as a second
Nature, is by learned A^o^her Arabian Physician and grand Philosopher, called
for his expositions of Aristotle the Commentator.
Averroes reckoned)
So still persist, for it is good for men
To eat what they are wont, says Avicen;
For total change of diet cannot be
Commended, nor from hence has warranty.
Nor we mean here, like Henry of Narar,
(The happy Thunderbolt of the French war)
(Who angry with his chiding Confessor,
A jerfe is an animal, that eats so much until it is forced to get betwixt
two cleft parts of a tree for exenteration, that is, unloading, vid. my uncle
Pliny, and Alian de vari^ historia.
'Cause he enjoined frequent penance for
His often Peccadilloes, against the breach
Of the seventh Precrept, and did Doctrines teach
Of conjugall charity) this Prince wroth,
Confined the Priest to Capon and white Broth
For constant diet, it was a dish he lov*d,
But for so long continuance not approved.
The Story's known, apply but meat to wives,
But does not hold in things we treat with knives.
More than one dish may be by us accosted,
Whether the fare be baked, sodden, or roasted:
The Crambe of one dish a Greek 'twould kill,
If he is enforced to feed upon it still:
Nor Epicurrs, another Philosopher.
Epicurus like, or like his drove,
To gurmundize and Jerfe it do we prove,
And wish to find the lech'ry of Provant,
Philoxenus his neck, or Cormorant.
This were to be a Wood or Maxriot,
Two English Helluas for his daily pot,
The heads of Beasts, with their appertinance,
Entrails and all, would not a meal advance,
Such throats (as Cormorants are used in game)
Should be string-throtled, or the poor will blame;
No, rather do, as we in sundry places
In his Almanzor are advised by Rasis,
Make an election of your food (and where
There^s choice, one dish is not presumed the cheer)
Nor have at all, for then we eat a Musse,
That is not manly, Swine do only thus.
Then let our meats themselves be simply good,
Yet one man's poison is another food:
And what our palate takes and custom likes,
Though not so nourishing, will pass the pikes,
I mean the Palisadoes of the face,
Which have, in point of eating, the first place;
For manduration and our thorough chewing
Prepares what is into the stomach going,
And does facilitate the work of the place,
(Which does not gobbets like, nor gubbins base)
For as it goes it pays a certain toll
To the palate, does that Avenue control;
There it receives an introductive change,
Before it come into the stomachs range:
And therefore Brawn, thouh a most lusty meat,
Is no ways for a toothlesse Dame to eat,
Beside the hazard, which way ere 't should slip,
(Or down the throat, or back to the dish skip;)
Without good chewing it would lie to heavy
For the Aqua vitae bottles used Replevy:
Yet unto such, whose constitution,
Like Cato's, needs no contribution
Of Counsels, nor of dose from Medicil Art,
(Who for his proper safety had a part
Of pitiful Physic, in moroser adage,
Teaching all cures by vomit and by Cabadge,
So did preserve unto a wondrous length
His Iron sides, and almost Ostrich strength.)
(Pardon the space of this Parenthasis)
To such we say, Athletick bulks as his;
Diet that is simply bad you may not give,
He might with Cabbadge, not with Hemlock live:
Let us I pray be rightly understood,
You may eat bad, but not your basest food;
Nor bad at all, if it disgust, but naughty
And pleasing meat does well, as has been taught ye.
CHAP. IV. Of the order of Refection.
LEt not your checkered Table crack with dishes,
Pil'd like a structure with Land-Beasts and Fishes;
'For multitude of meats, as well as books,
'Distracts the brain, and belly likewise looks
For a digestion, to eat at all, or read
Without it, shows rather have than good speed:
The brain or stomach, if o're-cloy'd
By superfluities, are both dostroy'd:
Nature has but one Cook, then send not in
The studied work of ten Cooks managing;
It would be thought a wonder amongst men,
If one Esurient Cook should eat up ten.
Thence comes corruption, when that Cook is tired,
Gives over the work, and in the kitchen mir'd:
Oh how he fumes! all Cooks are Choleric,
And sends his vapors crude and phlegmatic
About the house (makes a foul house with all)
Diseases spring is Cacochimicall.
Next, let your lighter meats, and the subtiler
Be fallen upon before the gross and viler.
Wherefore my Don, not Don Quixot, I mean,
(For such provision seldom there was seen)
At second course begins, and to be brief,
Eats (if he have it) at the last his beef.
Take heed, good Simon, how you sup your broth,
Much mischief comes through the accustomed sloth
And negligence of Cooks, both he and she,
Of all such Cooks, clean^y come thou to me:
Not sifting Oatmeal, and the ingredients,
Which make your Mattin-cawdle liquaments,
Is cause, that frequently most durty Atoms
In silver Cup go toward the Ladies botomes:
'Now, though that blind men use to swallow flies,
'They would not surely, if they had their eyes.
This may be helped yet, by a wholesome drainer,
(If that you think the caution's not the vainer.)
To things more pertinent we will proceed,
('Yet a good Poet died by a An Acreo^.
Grapes seed)
No man will therefore (I do mean that wise is)
Contemn us for our mean, but true advises:
But as our various dinner is a fault,
So is our stay, and long remove of the Salt;
It is not good (like Dutch) I cannot Dutch spreaken,
To sit at Table till our bellies breaken:
Feed until midnight, and charess all comers,
And think all Physic is in crowned Rummers.
A dangerous custom, and does cause the stivers
To march apace into their intrail-drivers.
Oh how our Farriers thrive by fitting drenches
For many a Hogen Mogen, Men and Wenches!
But shall we eat at all? or what? you will say
Yes, yes, you shall, and shall no longer stay.
Since that in Winter 'twas my hap to write,
Actual hot meats are best for the appetite:
And when the Summers pleasing heat is come,
Let actual cold meats be in the others room:
Think not all hots are of the Po^tage-pot,
Nor nothing cold but what its dressing got
The night before, but what by nature is,
Or hot or cold, are so with emphasis:
Wherefore those things, whose quality's so cold,
As if made so by snow, from them withhold;
Or whose intensive heats (without the fire)
Do warm, to eat have not too much desire:
Lubrick, that is glibbery, and the meat that is moist
And juicy, before drier fare accost;
Sweet meats, and sauce that is sour (though an old Saw)
Is a good Rule in Avicenna's Law;
So mix your cold and hot, your moist and dry,
That neither have a grand predominancy:
And with these four precautions you may dine,
For contraries do their own selves refine:
And while they strive each to be Master,
The broken Elements are safest posture;
So they do rarely temperate become;
Such Wars produce a Peace, it is Pipe and Drum;
Wherefore let fat and unctions Swines-flesh swim
In sharp and sawces tart up to the brimme:
Methinks it is a Dish highly abhorrens
To see a Pig bemeasl'd all in Currants.
D' you ask what place is best to take repast in?
(Not such as mine, for that is a place to fast in:)
But you that have your residence for food,
The coolest place, except the Cellar,'s good;
And sometimes I have known that has been used,
And for its coolness ought not be refused:
But for its heat, as from a noli me
Tangere, fly, for there the Bottles lie:
And ever since Erasmus called it Hell,
You might in one as welll as the other dwell,
In that with liquid fire they are hard put to it,
In this God Bacchus is drunk up in boot:
Certes this custom is in memory,
The pretty Bulchins Cradie was a Thigh.
But in the Summer your cool um-brages,
And hid Recesses be your Diet-stages,
Provided that no intervemient wind
Through doors or crevises nor strained air find
Access unto the place, for it is debated,
And found, the worst of air is preco-lated;
But chiefly choose a ventilated place,
When that the Sun is in his highest race:
For native heat's by that extracted much,
Just as the fires, if Sunbeams do it touch;
But interpose a Screen, or else the Maid
Your fire's preserved, your stomach by the shade.
But if you have no such Sycamor places,
Eat at an hour that is cool then (says my Rasis)
After meat taken, rest, or sleep, says he,
Sleep not, say some, The Doctors disagree:
Revive Mayerne, and he will bid you sleep,
Old Paddy bid you smoke, your eyes open keep:
I Am for the later Knight, my patron, who
Gave me his College, shall give Counsel too.
CHAP. V. Of Meats in general.
THe first considerable food is Bread,
Which He in Sacred Prayer hallowed,
Who in that Prayer (...) (which bears
Its high-sprung Makers name, and to all years,
Must stand Matrix of holy Liturgies,
And be both Form and Part of the Services,
Better than all the whole) the platform lead,
*Of whom to ask, and wherewith to be fed.
Our daily bread includes, as in a word,
The All-abundance of our fullest beard:
And he whose belly's full with bread alone,
(And blessing before and after) were it a stone,
Shall find a satisfaction in his fare,
As great as if h' had dined with my Lord May'r:
There is a taste of his Religion,
Who dares not write so large as Dr. Brown.
Now to our Phisical design, we treat,
Therefore the civilized part of the world with Wheat,
The Bread compacted, and most stoutly kneaded,
Sifted most clean from bran, and as it needed,
Salted and leavened by your Barm and Quickening,
And thoroughly baked, will keep you best from sickening;
It Is light and tart, as your good houswives say,
And makes in the body a convenient stay:
For cleansed from its Bran, which makes it swift
Of passage, and is only good for drift,
Or scouring hands or pewter, or the hair,
(But for the rich Jessimy Butters rare,
And Mr. Cutbeards Powder) it will fix,
And till a due egestion moves it, sticks:
And oven-bak'd is best, the hearth is poor,
And only fit for Caledonian Boor;
Except their Oat-cakes, nothing does me please,
Nor Solan Geese, Bannock, nor Barnacles:
And spungy let it rise by its quick leaven,
For bread unleavened is not easily driven
Out of the stomach, but does stay too long,
And by its pains does do the belly wrong:
It makes obstruction in the Liver, and
Who would imagine Bread should turn to Sand?
Or to a Stone? its evil quality
Does slime the reins, and there does petrifie.
The Bread of Barley, the tough plowmans food,
Is colder nutriment, and not so good:
But those who sweat, and swink, and thwack, like sten^ors,
will digest stones, if on them they adventure;
But otherwise that Bread does little nourish;
It Is windy too, and makes the Colic flourish,
'And causes cold diseases, binds the belly,
And lies quiescent like a costive jelly.
As other grains are in their natures, so
Is the Bread is made of any Dough:
Bean-bread is flatulent and course,
But good for those have stomachs like a horse;
So Turnip-bread, a new and late devise,
To fatten Hogs and Horses in a trice*
The curse of all Corn-Chandlers, who, by that
Project, do keep their grain for the old Rat.
Lastly, your Bread, when hot, by no means eat,
Nor buttered loaves, they are clungy clogging meat,
And bung the intrails up, you cannot make
A passage, though you down long confects take;
Yet it is Scholars breakfast of the Times,
Which makes them of such pregnancy in Rimes.
Yet if hot loaves you do account so dear,
You may for worms apply 'um to your ear.
CHAP. VI. Of Drinks, and first of Wine
Whilst I do write thy profits, and the good
Thou do confer (plump Grapes most noble blood)
In either have nor call for helps from thee,
Thou voucht infuser of high Poetry;
It is enough for those who write thy praise,
Such as my Father Ben, whose head with bays,
Scarce yet inherited, thou justly crown'dst,
To be Silenus like, well souc'd and plounc'd
In essences of Sack, whence spirits follow,
Richer and higher than his own Apollo.
Let those thy brave and warm contagions boast,
Who do recite the profit of their host
And club-delight, whatever the hesternall fire,
(Not at next meeting quenched) did fore-inspire:
A long forgetfulness has seized my soul,
Nor have I felt thy flames since Henham Bowl;
The cooler Hypocrene is spurn enough,
And the clear liquor headed from the hoof
Of the winged Courser, serves for such poor stuff,
As humbly now comes forth his Muses Cell,
Is suitable, and has its name from Well; Well-hal in K^nt* the Manou^ of M^
Roper, of he descent o^ the lear- Sir (...) Mo^r, L. Chapter of Engl.

Yet we will yield thee a just Elogie,
Far from a strained and wrackt Hyperbole,
Whereby it shall appear thy fotive fire,
Was present in our wish; and full desire
We say, and prove, thou art that nutritive
That keeps the spirits and the soul alive:
And thy known pregnant operations joins
Those cognate paires, as to thine Elmes, are Vines,
Supporting those most rare Auxiliaries The Spirits

By thine allied and subtle offices:
So that ^ame The Soul.
Psyche does no servant more
(Being absent long) than thine own self-deplore:
At thy returns (for Queens do love and keep
Their State too) though in sorrows plunged peep,
She is revived, and her quick actions prove,
Her altered instruments and her close love.
'For thy affini^y is such, so like
'With natural heat, that as the flint does strike
'Sparkles and fire, the ready tinder takes
'The darted Stars, and a glad union makes:
So when thy vigorous cherishing gleams
Reflect upon our blew and purple streams,
They all receive an influence from Thee,
And their alliance forthwith gratify:
Then as a loyal kinsman would, thou do
Nourish and heal, and do expel the frost,
Both natural and Christian away flies,
At thy approaches cold, and crudities:
And in the Christian Frost thou art as brief,
'Making the afflicted to forget his grief;
The grosser blood thou straight do clarify,
No Scavenger in all the world like Thee,
Who by no tricks of Dung-carts new or old
Cleansest the purple The Veins.
channel when it is foul'd.
Then to the common shore of blood thou go,
And all obstruction from the liver throwest;
And thy new bush, not broom, sweeps clean,
And mundifies the sinck of All, the Spleen.
What misty vapor, or opacous fume
Dare stay, when that thy excellence is come?
'As if some unthought Prince had fallen from high,
'(Lost in opinion, and to the common eye)
'His half incredulous friends, 'twixt joy and fear,
'Dare not believe, nor dare not doubt him there;
'But settled in a view instead of Bells
'And Bonesires, the heart flames, the pulse beats peals.
So at reception of this Prince of Drinks,
The exalted hearrt it self in Paradise thinks,
And every member of its warmed Trunk
Shoots out, and leaps, though once 'twere sinew-shrunk.
Joy is dispersed, and the relieved soul
Does all her ransomed Ministers control;
A noble boldness does possess the mind,
To suffer injuries of any kind,
Not to commit the least, and she dares do
What in her shrivel'd state she feared to show.
Magnanimous indeed, and prone to seek,
Adventures, and her self to express and speak,
Not as the overheated valiant Swine
(Pot-pertinacious sometimes, but not Wine.)
But these are sober Animosities,
Which raise our wisdoms, as our Fantasies,
Which coupled friendly in a social heat,
They can the tract of any business beat.
'Wherefore let Proclamation forthwith be,
'That every Sex and Age have liberty
'At any time, to taste this precious juice,
'Whose virtues are so high, so good his use.
And for the Quantum? or how much we may,
(Methinks the Vintnes cry, Tel's that I pray,
That the last Impost by a general draught
May be forgot, and the sunk price out-quaft;)
And truly, so it will make friends, we may
Drink what our natures well can bear away,
And the firm habits of unspoiled brains
'(Some drink not freely, but are in wine-chains)
Can gallantly discharge, without a spoil
Unto our purse, or to our souls a soil.
Now Wine is wondrous like Theriaca, Trea^^e.

So strange his various numerous virtues play;
Cold humors it does heat, infrigidates hot*
Moistens the dry, and where tough moisture's got,
Extenuates; such Protean qualities
Has the rare Plant, that smoke* before our eyes:
Of both which excellent creatures, Wine and Smoke,
I dare affirm, that were you like to choke
With thirst, the one or the other shall your droughth
Assuage, before the coolest water down your mouth.
Now take what Rasis says, Wine does retard
Old age, and all its lazy phlegmatic guard:
Unto the stomach it is the sworn Ephaestion,
Corroborates, and ministers digestion.
But after all these Panegyric shows,
There is, beware, a Serpent in the close;
I mean not that is drank with Vipers in it,
But in every Butt that passes by the pint.
';If you abuse it to undecencies,
'And murder it in superfluities,
'The virtue's lost, and in the vacant place
'Your own Diseases come, and Wine's disgrace:
'The dried up Liver, and the trembling Nerves,
'Caus'd from the moistened brains, returned reserves:
Contracting Spasma, and cold Apoplexy,
Abused Grapes, conspired friends will vex ye.
CHAP. VII. Of Mead or Metheglin.
THe Be, that subtle and industrious creature,
Of pains incredulous, but little feature,
Does from the profits of his balmy thighs,
For lazier men, hive up his sweet supplies:
If from the eater honey came, the be
Both emblem is and child of industry.
Madam, your self is an unwinged Be,
Disdain not (Lady) this mean simile,
When the grand Plato, learned, grave and wise,
Described a man by these two differences,
Unfeather'd and two-legg'd, so in a mock,
They sent him home his own man, a plucked cock:
When that I saw more then Hyblean skill,
And Bees to have but one art* you what you will;
The Ants and Grasshoppers submit to you;
And think themselves but drones when you are in view;
Your various artifices your sex disgrace,
(Even unto painting skilled, all but the face)
It put me to an Emulation then,
(Oh that there were no other strifes amongst men)
To see a Lady of such diligences,
Of more Professions Mistress then of Senses*
And I that paid for dearly what they call,
However the seven endowments liber^ll,
(But foolish purchaser took but small w^^e
For money and time, the which was (...) more rare)
Could not for all my seven years penniwo^th,
Show so good a^ts as you did then hold forth;
Nay I profess it, were expe^ience made,
(Excepting in this scribbling quibling taade)
The exigent put, you would your fortunes carve,
In any part of the world, tnd I might starve;
Nay in my very subject, if you please,
You could out-vy me too in recipes,
And teach the meddling fool to be more quiet.
And come to Henham-hall to study diet;
Where Metheglin every winter morn,
With tossed and tankard to our lips are born:
For honey is exceeding hot (says Rasis)
And is high food for bodies cold, and places:
The pea^l of the morning genders blood and choler,
So one way good, and the other naught for scholar:
B^t for complexions sanguine, such as mine,
It is less wholesome, then a little wine;
But to cold persons, and of sinews weak,
And phlegmatic* and Ladies stomack-sick,
It is a high and sure corroborator,
As says our Avacena's commentator:
The ways to make it are so many, I
Had rather drink a cup often, then descry.
CHAP. VIII. Of Ale.
DRnk famous, infamous, praised and disprais'd,
From stygian lakes, that is muddy harbors raised
From common shores and father Ben's adventures,
How dare thou boiled bog or muzzles enter?
But when the keen cheroketh blows sat Bumpkin,
Who will refuse to drink thee in a Rumpkin?
Enough is written for thee, pro and con,
Yet since hops came thy name is almost gone:
But that the Alderman has cleans'd thy tide,
And makes us wish thee yet amongst us Bide*
And Huff of famous memory, that Huff,
Who to his ale had no sign but his ruff;
That, and his ale most smooth, did so well work,
The house was full of Christian and of Turk;
And in demulsing lubrick mornings drafts,
A good estate into old Huff was quaft,
What is ale good for? look against his doors,
And you shall see them rotted with ale-showrs:
It has this special commendation,
To cleanse the ureter, and break the Stone:
Just as a feather-bed the flint does break,
So the other stone your North-down-ale alike:
Thy mother Ba^ly is an enemy
To the nerves, that makes men stagger after thee,
Drunk beyond Huffs demensum, who did stint
In's regular ruff, his guests unto a pint.
(But at one session) yet go forth, and face
About, and then you might take the other glass:
Windy thou art, wheth^ in bottles close
Corkt up a prisoner, and as bad let loose;
Yet foul and gravelled reins thou do make terse,
Not made too strong, and by good store, disperse:
It Is weight, as much as virtue, does that feat,
Tunbridge and Barnet, of opinion great,
Are no more sovereign then the wholesome spring,
To which sir Thomas gave a covering,
And bowls in chains, the aged man can tell,
When Barnet fails, those waters sell as well
To cousend citizens, yet we cannot deny.
Ta many baths specific quality:
But chiefly (as by parentage I Am bound)
I like the wells in Wellingborrough-ground;
Whose spring's renoun'd for virtue uterine,
And still is famous for our pregnant queen.
But to our ale (and there is humming stuff
As good as any tinker did ere cuff.)
Those who indulge themselves to too much wines,
Allay that heat by thee, and cool their chines:
Only like nitty sack it leaves a tail,
And lies in the clung'd throat most roapy ale,
But daughter of the the other mother, wheat,
And mixed with mint or smallage, thou art neat;
And sage or wormwood in a small degree,
Do clear thy fog, and grossness clarify:
But now these later knowing days have made
Thee fit infusion for our physick-trade:
The Lettices of ale-compounded shops
Are now as numerous as those of hops:
There Is scarce a street in which out worships go in,
But that thy name in some new mode does crow in;
A proper word, since every where they drape on,
In live ale or mortified Cock or Capon;
The physic of the Spring and Fall is ale,
And bags of drugs and Simples by sea sail,
As they were returning from the Indies,
To be ingredients for this woort so windy
Had Culpeper but strained his faculties,
And stead of what he did translated this
Into some foreign Country, and not Tongue,
He had the nation been the prime among:
But now Riverus and the Staple-book
Of Compositions, on him scurv'ly look,
For prostituting the art; for no Bawd,
Moral or civil, can our Verse applaud;
Vehiculum of every drug, I may
Call thee most aptly by the name of Dray,
Nay to the very arts of Schools you are come,
By sad exchange of rods for lotium,
And made most swingeing ale for butts,
I mean the place econtrae to the guts:
Tradition pleads for thee (for ale is old)
And since thy sad disuse, the world is bold
To charge the Stone in the body, and the Church,
Upon thy vale Doctors make a search,
And try if Heresy, and that sharp pain
From ale's desertion, did not footing gain.
CHAP. IX. Of Beer.
Beer is a hop removed from ale, the hop
from a damned weed is a common crop:
'So things condemned and censured, are retained,
'Because forbidden, it more credit gained:
Yet if maturely rotted, where no fault
Is in the beer by foul and wively malt,
Well kept and lodged, and purged by the sea,
Or Marches two, it may probatum be:
But in digested hops and unboil'd beer
Make Doctors Jubilee every year:
Some anti-hoppists are for b^oom, and make
The blessed Carduus, that infusion l^ke.
This last is physick-drink, and your broom-beer
Is bitter, and to wood-dry'd malt is near;
But gentle Purle is good, and botled best;
And Twist is good, so sings Will Hoopers guest.
CHAP. X. Of Flesh-meats in general.
IT is an an axiom in Philosophy,
That every like its like is nourisht by:
Wherefore consid'ring that we are flesh and blood,
And flesh and blood is our most proper food;
But general rules have their exception,
Grammar and Nature in like orders run,
For whom all things were made; Man paramount,
Lord of the creature, may the creature count,
His diet and his staves, he may eat all,
Except himself, he is no Caniball:
And though unto a proverb it is true,
Man is a woolf to man; 't should not be so:
For the most ravenous of creatures do forbear,
And don't themselves a dire provision ^ear;
That sow's unfed will their dead babies eat,
And hounds do make the noble horse their meat,
Is not enough to make a president, no,
But what is always, or plerumque, so;
The princely Eagle, and the Buzzard base,
Feed not on birds when offal's in the place;
So at the Samaria's siege, the King did give
A sentence for that child that was alive,
Not of the dead, for grand necessity,
And famine's nurse to Anthropophogie.
This does not hinder then, but still Thesis
Holds Flesh is food general, and pl^^^es;
Nothing so fattens* so corroborates,
Nothing the body's lifeguard so creates.
(The red coat blood, in blew coat veins of State)
The yellow coat's of cholar, phlegmatic,
Of white and blak coats that in the rear does stick;
Of earthly melancholy, who'd suppose
His body did four Regiments enclose?
Wherefore the persons that do feed so high,
Have often need of good Phlebotomy:
For flesh provision of all sorts does heat,
Wherefore in Fevers we prescribe small meat,
Or none at all, unless the Patient please,
Spite of advice, to feed his own disease;
The fleshy substance stripped off't, the sat
Does nourish best, and lesser harms creat:
Strengthens the stomach, and does kindly lie
For coction, Suns much supefluity.
Herculean bodies and Pyracmon sides
Can digest Garlic, and the Onion fried;
Butter and bacon may devour and swallow,
Yea, and put over too a Beev's whole tallow;
Athletick bodies we provide nor for,
Nor yet for Wood, nor the sharp Counselor;
But sedentary men of little pains
Must not with such gross stuff anoint their veins:
A lighter diet, and a modicum,
Little and often food their states become*
CHAP. XI. Of Wood-Animalls.
NOw we are in a Wood, yet no such Wood,
As girts your palace, nor the Deer so good;
Where in some summer walks with early thought,
The velvet drove I to acquaintance brought;
As known to them almost as were your keepers,
(Scholars and Forresters are little sleepers)
I had my walks, my Hamadryades,
But his shrill Syrinx did out ec^ho these
Oaten and slender pipes, though not so vocal,
Which have their Forest too but it is not local:
Poets have all things in their fancy, good,
So the poetic man is always Wood;
And as old writings were on barks of trees,
Without a Figure Books are Copices,
And such a Rus, and in Fenestra too
Is mine, Beasts subject, Trees a Book or two;
And I your sable Forrester, yet John a Green
In heart* am frequent in my night-walks seen,
Where if I like a Fawn of the nobler head,
With all have (Madam) to your self it is ^ed.
Creatures of the Wood are wooden Animals,
That is, are dry, compared to Beeves of stalls;
The household creatures, which by ease do fat,
And nothing of their flesh evaporate,
Yield a more jucy nutriment, then Deer,
Cutting half knife in fat, meat for a Peer;
The active tenants of the in losed Wood,
By constant motion cleanse their chafed blood,
And ratify their spirits by Levaltos,
Like the rare Turk, in all your pleasant Saltus;
Besides their situation, hot and dry,
Does always much obesity deny.
Who ever saw a Spaniard over fat?
Their Countryman (the SUN) prohibits that,
Who by extensive heats exhals their moist,
Unless perchance some Spaniard the Seas crossed,
And Leiger lay in England then he might
Return a Show, and the Madrids delight:
Of all that wild and noble Caravan,
The skipping Kid is soundest meat for man;
Who by his frequent exercise does cure
The coldness of his temper, and dispure*
The tincture of his coat and fulsome skin
Into Rufillus A perfumed Roman Courtier.
perfumed sweet-balling.
Quick of digestion is this nimble bruit,
And passes Presto, and does blood recruit;
And if the stomach were his park, he plays
His usual tricks and makes no tedious stays;
Domestic Brutes of the Pasture or of the Down,
Of other air, and seldom motion,
Are of a nourishing meat, but grosser fare,
And threfore harder of digestion are;
Amongst which the males have the precedence,
Hotter and moister concoct presently,
Before their females, of less heat and juice,
And therefore are not of so praised a use:
The gelded crew of middle temp'rature,
Colder then males (whose fire does yet endure)
Yet hotter than their females, (who despise,
Since their exection, their shab companies)
Do make a middle food; thus Eunuchs may,
When they are dead, serve for a wedding day.
But Kid is temperate without the least
Mixture of malice, a most innocent beast:
The blood which that creates is middle sized,
Neither too gross, nor too much subtiliz'd;
Neither too cold nor hot (a temper naught
^n our Religion, but in Physic sought)
^ood for an errant Knight, or any thing,
Whose body's lightness would be on the wing;
For the Repletions are gentile, yet not
So slender, that no nutriment is got:
Whence it appears Kid has the Ladies love,
It Is delicate diet, and it is smooth-skinn'd gloves.
But above all, the Infant-kids are best,
As we say, taken from the mothers breast,
So full of sappy nutriment, and smart,
That without sawces sweet, alid, and tart,
You may fall on; what would we more than taste,
And good blood breed, when just digestion's past?
CHAP. XII: Of the flesh of Lambs, Rams Wethers and Calves. Of LAMBS.
EMblem of Innocence! and yet not good*
Is Lamb a Shynx, not to be understood?
Some Butcher Oaedipus with knife drawn out
Of The scabberd of thy mouth, resolve this doubt,
(As did Macedo to the Gordian Knot)
And in Aenigma's dubious leave us not.
For your sake (Madam) who a little claim,
And stand hard for the Hieroglyphick name
Of Spotless Innocence, even against all
Lambs, but that one, that you your pattern call,
(Slain from before all worlds) I shall untack
This knot, by the help of Rabbi Isaak,
Not Idumaean Isaak, Abraham's son,
Who by parentall hand had like to have gone
To sacrifice, but that the Angels grace
Disposed a bleating Proxy in his place;
The heir of the flock yean'd on the coldest Lease,
Is then worse meat, when nu^s'd upon his knees:
(Some may obedience from that posture learn,
Nothing so dutiful as the yews barn)
Yet as if now we were Herodians all,
Nothing then Lamb comes oftener to the stall;
The flesh is viscous, and ingenders phlegm,
So it is a bad dish, a good Apothegm:
Yet when in flesh a fair foundation's laid,
And on a dish or two invasion's made,
Then from your Lambkin (Madam) never withhold,
But let it have its course, be it hot or cold:
In hotter Countries, such as Spain, the Lamb
Gets hotter temper from his curled Dam.
DHAP. XIII. Of Rams.
THis goodly ^uffle-head with winding horns,
Though he looks scurvy, and the whole flock scorns,
Yet is the grossest meat; this surly sir
Is good, if he exceed not his first year;
If well digested, it does generate
Good blood, and much; but if it had the fate
To fall in the hands of cursed Armenian Libbers, Cutters of Lambs.

After exection he is much the glibber;
And though he be a lost Ram, as we say,
To the Yews, he is good however the other way;
His flesh is tempered by his deprived fire,
And having lost his own, gets our desire:
It has a winning and delicious gust,
Though Father Galen, whom we credit must,
Condemns all Mutton, but he wrote in Towns
Where little was, and never saw Cotsall Downs,
Nor this same land of Sheep, whose noble wool
Clothes the Muscovian, and the great Mogull;
The English Fleece does proudly pass the gulf,
And fears no hazard but its native Wolf;
How many Nations Fleets empty the fraughts,
And do return this Fleeces Argonauts?
Then for the Back it is good, and in keen hunger,
Were Galen here he would be a Mutton-monger:
But Ram from Wether-mutton you may know,
That Is yellow, this Because an Eunuch.
no cause has to be so.
CHAP. XIV. Of Calves.
Welcome thou Increment of Bully Bove,
(Or when a Bull, why not as well of Jove?)
A Calfe, says Averaoes, is brave food,
Of temperate blood, not viscous, cold, but good,
And has a flavor and odorous gust,
And therefore before Kid, his praise is just:
For though the Kid we did extol but now,
'Twas amongst his Montaneirs, so we allow:
But for Calves frag^an^ies, we are none of those,
That for our diet will be led by the nose,
Although it is confessed by all (forsooth)
The Calves head's never without its own sweet tooth;
To make no long tail of it then, it breeds
Humors most fine, and therefore cleanlier feeds.
But flesh of Bulls and Oxen, those Calfe's sire,
These Uncles (better by their loss of fire)
Breed black, and much, and melancholy blood,
Our veins of blew are made a sable flood;
And as alive we Bulls do stiff-necks call,
So are they too Knock-downed in the stall:
It Is a most rebellious nutriment, dead,
And lies in the stomach heavy, as is lead:
It Is slowly altered, turns to chyle as slow,
As slow dissolved does to the members go:
It wants a goad when it is drove alive,
A Clarret goad may't through the stomach drive;
The lazy Surloin, glory of the roast,
And Knighted, and yet was never Knight of the Post;
Unless when thou (brave Alderman Robinson, Coss. Land.
Sheriff) do refine
His duller blood with thy for bon French Wine:
If by complexion men adust (that is sad)
Or splenatick, do like this beveridge bad.
'Ware Quartan Agues, Dropsies, and the Itch,
The Leprosy, or Tetter, choose you which,
Dandry and surfie heads, this blood of the Ox
Bestows all these, and yet the Butcher knocks:
Wherefore most wisely have our Masters stated,
That Bulls, before they die, shall all be baited.
CHAP. XV. Of the Flesh of Swine, Deer, Hares and Bears.
First, of Swine.
MY Father (a) Ben, discoursing of this Grunter,
In that so famous Play, where old Sir Punter
Being turned Oxlando for the loss of's dog,
Did lug the jeering buffon like a hog:
There in that celebrated Comedy,
(Whether my Father Ben, as well as I,
Met with Arabian Comments) the smart Play
Does patly what my ancient Authors say:
There Is wit to the height, read it, and try our Dogma,
Whether from both the places we a Hog may
Not all alike commend; first Avicen
Says, Pork's most natural to men, so Ben;
Hogs flesh is likest man's, says Isaak;
The same again says Ben, but adds, that Sack,
A Hogshead full, for a vehiculum,
Will spoil its grumbling in our medium,
(Or middle Region of our Trunk) for Swine,
Alive or dead, will be still laid with Wine.
Indeed my Father Ben does there produce
A reason why they were denied the Jews;
Because that Nutrimentall Animal
Of a provoking sap, and Hogo^ all,
Would have disordered and o're-pamper'd those
Who newly come from Egypts hard dispose:
Rebels in rough Mosaic Discipline,
How much more Rebels, had they eaten Swine?
Which makes me think the Caledonians,
Alike in Sins, alike in Onions,
Are of affinity with the old Jews,
Both for Rebellion, both do Pork refuse.
Now of this Animal there are two sorts,
The one domestic, the other extra Ports,
(That wild and foreign) whose food is such
As the Wood yields, when winds do lust'ly touch,
And flaile the Oaks and Chestnuts, and the berries,
Which Nature for the birds meant winter cherries. Hyp^ and Haw^s.

But oh the flesh of choice-fed household swine!
And of the quarters, the renoun'd cold chine!
Eaten, or sung, or played by Wilson, Dr. Wilson Musit. Laure.
sure
For old Sir Mammon it were yet a lure
Sufficient to leave Doll, and for a bone,
To pass his part of the Philosophers Stone;
Hampshire is rare for reering such, and may
Contend almost with black Westphalia;
The moister feeding is the home-fed swine,
Hotter and dryer is Sow Peregrine:
See the attendancy of Suffolk Pigs,
Fed by the hoopt-coat merry milking grigs,
Cleansed with whey, and fatted with the same,
Or Snailes, or good Vine leaves (which Pigeons blame)
Or else the Turnep; oh the Turnep-fed
Swine! may chance save us, Turnips being dead,
With grains, these Girls and such Hog-provender,
Will you a Porker of that fullness rear,
That Circes brood, and all her changed Elpe-nors
Cannot parallel for meat nor for demeanor:
Such dieted swine are cold and moist, a rare
Temper, and to the gust most relishing are;
But quite another thing, when dried by salt,
It is exuct, and laid up amongst the malt:
Now in hot Countries, where our Commentator
Lived they prescribed the extremities of the creature,
The luggs, the legs, the souced feet and snout,
I Am for the Roman way, dish it whole Totas ponit A^ros Iuv.
out;
Or as I Have seen it rarely raised and drawn
By Henham cook, up to a (...) of B^^wn,
Where wicked (...), yet good (...) ^^^berry,
Has made the ^a^er, not the brawn^^, c^y;
Then from the tun too, o^ the th^ee (...) come
A Ganymed with Sa^k, and warmed ^heg me,
That the old Matron that old m^mbling ^eed
Before, did after swallow't with less heed:
The infant, or the sucking baby dies
About this season, Aug. 24.
a large ^ac^i^ice;
The ways are thronged, blockt up with bellies big,
(And bellies would be so) for crackled pig;
St. Bartholmew the great, and Bat the little,
Afford not room enough, but the Hospital
Is pressed into, wherein whosoever looks,
Shall see all dressing on, chirgians and cooks:
Well fare you sisters of my native soil,
Eat pig and multiply, recruit your oil
With unctio^s di^^, it breeds noble chyme,
Call for the other half, and by that time
Your men will come with the reckoning, so
You may from Pig unto the Puppets go:
And then to Islington, and so about,
Until what is pigged in be pigged out.
CHAP. XVI. Of the flesh of Deer.
SUppose us (Madam) in your park, where Deer
Are kept for every season of the year:
Do any ask how they are at such command?
Then know my Lady has Orphaean hand.
If He wild beasts by courtly music tamed,
You may do more, unless the bruits be maimed,
And cannot come; for otherwise your stroke
Upon the Lute will spi^itize an o^k,
And make the Park to dan^e, and humbly follow
Thee as the mistress of the skilled Apollo;
The late erected House and Garden pales,
Rose by thy hand (just as did Theb^n w^lls;)
Thy nimble fingers do so stir the Lute,
(Like David's Harp) they may a Devil confute:
Brave Gunning, by his learned arts and t^ngue,
Gains not so much upon the Anabaptist throng,
Then you upon these cognate droves, who stand
and listen (they love music) to your hand.
I could into a wood of lawful p^aises launch,
And p^^ise the creature full^, side and haunch:
But Rabbi Isaak says their flesh is hard,
(Not to be go^) at Henham none's debarred:
Thy Husband's old Canary, and fat Buck,
With dogs run down, or else with arrows stuck;
Yet they are melan^holy diet, but
They all ^^e so which are much given to rut:
The Fa^^ns a^e wholso^e an^ the hei^s digest
Better then (...)* or mother of the beast:
The youthful stand is very hot and d^y,
When old, like other things, their worst is nigh:
The Eunuch Deer is temperate* and most
Pleasurable when its pleasure's lost:
Troch upon troch troch troch a reverend Stagg,
He does of age and red-Deer-p^s^y b^agg;
And though it is dry yet let the Venison pass,
His own fat s^pples it, and the other glass;
It is o^ quick descension, and the marrow
Slides through ^he bo^y from the Gutturall narrow:
And learned Avicen does say for certain,
That then^e are p^ocreated many a Quartane:
Ca^ses of Q^artanes we have many sure,
Oh for an Avicen could tell's the cure!
Now for conclusion, this beast for game
And entertainment, has with us the name:
Know then, the body is a joviall meat,
Fit so^ Squire Rous, yea for a Prince to eat;
Its upper part is Antidote* but oh,
There Is poison lies in the tail (the part below:)
Emblem of humane Chance! in this sad veil
Nothing's thorough blessed from head to tail.
CHAP. XVII. Of Hares.
THe Rabbis say, the Lion sneezing, out
Started a Cat from his Majesti^k snout,
Without the Pythagorean motion rare,
The Cat then sneezing started out a Hare;
For there is nothing among creatures that
(B^t Hare) is melan^holy as a cat;
And we do call them Pusses both; one purres
Only, and both are vengeance 'fraid of curres.
Hare is good sport, as all our Gen^^y know,
The only Recreation left us now;
For Plays are down, unless the puppet-play,
Sir William's lost, both Oil and Opera;
The noble Cock-fight done, the harmless bears
Are more then ring'd by the nose or b^ the ears:
We are serious people grown, and full of cares,
As melancholy as cats, as glumm as hares.
Yet though it generate the grossest blood,
Then Goats and Ramms, these are more praised food.
Oh for the pretty sucking Leveret,
(An excellent dish if that I could it get;)
Not yet so dry are Conies in degree,
Moist are the breed of Aubern Conigree;
Laden with kidneys white, what can you lack,
Except a glass of Squire Bonds Ogburn Sack?
CHAP. XVIII. Of Bears.
TEll me you traders for the Greenland wares,
(For you know best) what diet are the Bears?
Not only the left shoulder, I believe,
But the whole Bear is Ven'son, Sheep and Beeve;
It viscous is, and disobedient,
And a most indigestive nutriment;
More fit, says Rabbi Isaak, for cures
And medicines, th^n for hungry stomack-lures,
Unless a drunken Tinker, me^all'd man,
(Who his teeth out of's budget strengthen can)
Should fall to tooth and nail, in's pot he spares
Nothing that is next, then away with your bears:
Yet in high Russia, and in the land of Whales,
Bears may be dressed, if ye catch 'um by the tails;
And so a^e Apes, that inortogious lump,
Or any thing, indeed that wants a rump.
Those men, who, ships departed, staid behind,
(For no man's sake will water stay, and wind)
Can give us best account of this rough beast,
Whose sad society, most unwelcome guest,
Was very uncouth and suspicious, when
'Twas doubtful which was prey, Bears or the men:
Those Greenlanders, hutched up in frosty Cabbins,
Shall be our Aelians, let alone the Rabbis;
If like to Conies Bears will fat, I know,
Those must be fausen bears that live in snow:
Our Paris-garden bears, had they not died,
Might have been eat, but for Sir Thomas Pride.
CHAP. XIX. Of the members and parts of Creatures.
THe Heads of Creatures Countenance, or Faces,
As Swines and Oxen are gross mea^, says Rasis,
They'^ hot and nourish much, not a good fa^e,
Unless when Titan's farthest from the Bear;
In winter deep when you may freely ^rolick
In cheeks and heads, but that they breed the Cholick:
The Brain of temper cold does na^seat,
And is offensive to the stomach: what?
May we not eat them? yes, if you are
Of constitution hot; the b^ain is rare,
Eat it the first, and before other dishes,
But cold complexions, and akin to fishes,
Or whose distemperature arise from cold,
With this Meninges guest be not too bold:
The Marrow is of ^emper cold, but not
So cold as that, though thence its rise is got.
Hot, and by cold (if in our art there be
Any such Point found out, unless by me)
Good for Sir Epicures, and men of the chine,
Who sacrifice to Venus, both in Wine
And Ceres, and a grand Provision make
To gratify the flesh, these C^nons take,
And in a Meal o^ Marrow-bones advance
As great a show as so much great Ordnance;
But not so great a noise, when these Guns play,
The s^lpher's white, and will not it self betray,
This Sperm-ingenderer is good for such
Who Paul's strict Canons do not trouble much,
The spungy Udder and the ^nctious Papps
(The fulsome diet of Sir Mammon's chapps)
Do nourish most exceedingly, yet slow,
And in a gen^le pa^e to chile do go:
Those who have stomachs hot, and livers like,
May their flesh-hook into the ^udder strike.
Livers of Beasts are hot and moist, and breed
Much blood (they are conge^led blood indeed)
But hard and heavy: that of Lamb or Calf,
Or of the sucking Pig, is diet safe:
But Isaak says that liver does p^efer,
Of the sweet Mistress of sir Chanticler:
The same Arabian discommends the heart,
A solid, but an indigestile part;
But when digested, it does breed good blood,
And nourishes as well as any food.
Why not as well as liver? this we call
Font of venal blood, that arterial.
The lights and lungs are of a substance rare*
And light, and therefore soon digested are;
So soon they pass, and from the stomach go,
(Our bellows called, but yet not windy though)
D^ess'd with appertenances of the Sows bearn,
They Are too opiparous for Country Kern.
The reigns are for two reasons not approved,
First they are gross and hard, not easily moved
Out of the caldron natural; but when
(That pot has mastered them) they are naught then:
And 'cause the serous part of u^ine takes
His tincture from the reigns, them all ^orsake.
The flesh of creatures, mo^e especi^l that
Which is of fatter cattle (no^ the ^a^)
Is excellent, breeds spe^m and nobl^ blood,
And in this n^tion is too gene^al food:
The fat is loa^hsome, and as oil^ grea^e
Is the most moist of all, it does increase
Cold and moist humors, and such feeders be
Full of ungoverned s^pe^fluity:
But interlined flesh, as I may say,
Some lean, some fat, carries the praise away^punc;
And breeds most temperate blood and sperm alike;
Hence is our Nation ruddier, and the Pike
Of English war far moves the Curtesan,
That she cries out, Oh my brave English man!
The Feet do generate a viscous blood,
And therefore to the Stone in^lin'd, not good:
The Rump of creatures then the interior parts
Ho^^er and lighter are, for the kind darts
Of Scrotums warm inhabiters (o^ heat
A second forge) the adja^ent parts do beat
And ^^imulate, and warms that utmost bit,
There Is something go^ by good neigbour-hood yet:
The nearer then the Tes^i^les more hot,
The farther off by situation naught:
We will not in our Rules a Proverb cross,
The extremities are always at a loss.
CHAP. XX. Of Bake-meats.
BAke-meats are generally naught, and Pie
Is disapproved, though Alholland-day be nigh:
We write not unto children, whose spoiled gumms,
(Whatever the Coral gained) confess that Plummes
And o're-warm'd Custard have edentifi'd,
(That is, made toothless) many a simp'ring Bride:
Who for this very reason, all their life,
Are feign to laugh behind a handkercheif:
So have I seen a toothless Bridegroom sit
Hungry at's wedding, nor could chew a bit,
Until the spoon-meat came, then his throat strain
So wide, you might have seen his heart again:
Wherefore forbear them, Rabbi Rasis says,
But against Pie-meat there is little faith:
To bodies troubled with an acid wind
And eructations sower, bake-meats are kind;
They do eventilate and lay that Flatus,
Which smells so mawkish from its foul Hiatus;
For little nourishment they yield, but those
Whose spungie bodies slimy phlegm o're-flowes,
Or do desire to be gentile, that is gaunt and fine,
May eat this drying diet (none of mine.)
Roast-meat, which long-back'd curres do spin on spits,
Are far more nutritive, though they are gross bits,
And not digested, but by stomack's dint,
And when the ventricle has vigor in it;
It binds the belly, yet there is help for that,
If you do eat good store of the roast fat:
But flesh with generous eggs and pepper dressed,
Of any bake-meat is accounted best.
Oh for a Pie-meat, be it at any rate,
Raised by thy hand and ar^ (dear Oxford Kate)
The wisdom of thy Cookery does raise
Unto thy self, and Dishes lofty praise:
Thy meats are a brave winter food, and when
I do indulge my genius like those men,
Thy gallant guests, a stately Pie of thine
Shall fit us for the pretty friend of Wine,
And Mother of Proserpina: all this
(Kate) at the length will bring us unto Dis.
Bake-meats corroborate and nourish more
Then any diet we have named before:
But in the summer ( Kate) we will forbear,
They are too hot for us in sultry air,
And breed the Stone, a thing (sweet Cate) which I
Nor you would see, to find one petrifie.
And though thy praises I do gladly vent,
I would be loath to be thy Monument.
CHAP. XXI. Of Birds in general.
THE Arabian Isaak dictateth, that Fowl
Compared with walking creatures, are the Soul,
They but the Body of meat; they are light and fine,
And do the feeder to quick works incline;
As if their feathers still were on, they spring
Thorough the quarters, and are all of the wing:
Rare and aeriall, yet the nourishment
Is small, and less then walking Fowl or Pent;
Yet our Silvestrian, then Domestic bird,
Is tenderer, as once before y' have heard,
And of digestion facile, the reason
Is, their assiduous labor and dry season.
If Daedalus with any wings of wax,
Could a made it fly, how light had been an Ox?
Which now must be most heavy, gross and dull,
Though it were dressed in Phalaris his Bull,
As I may guess by Milo, who in sweat
Of's brows did find an Ox was heavy meat:
But these high flyers rare, 'cause they do move
Often, and the dry air to traverse love;
But the Domestic, that less plye the oar
Of feathered pinions, succulent, are more,
And generate a noble blood, being moist
Of temper, nor wirh aerie swimming tossed:
Of all the Birds that skirre the liquid air,
Our Aurhor says the Sturn^s caeteris volatilibus subtilior.
Starling is most rare;
(A most rare Singer if his tongue be slit,
Confessed) but not with us a dainty bit:
Yet if you bring it to an English Cook
Uncas'd, he will make him taste like any Rook:
The masculine bearns of Partridges are neat,
The mother's Hen and Pheasant, Lady-meat;
The Cockrels of all birds are lightest food,
And breed the laudablest and wholsom'st blood,
Strengthens the appetite, their gendring fire
Fitting them both for diet and desire:
But yet the Arabian Doctor Avicen,
Preferres before all these the creaking Hen,
And says that Hen-broth is a remedy
Probatum against scurfie Leprosy:
Besides, who'd think the female had such praise,
Since females are the worser many ways?
The brains, says he, of Hens increases wit,
Augments its namesakes substance; there is it;
For those who are fantastic, idle, vain,
As if their food were so, we call Cock-brain.
CHAP. XXII. Of Hens.
THe Doctors differ, for Rabbi Isaak
Does pull our Hen, and will not allow the crack,
But justifies the Chick against the Damme,
(A Physical, not Divine Axiom)
And in comparisons not odious,
Bids us the Chick before the Mother choose,
As being the tougher nourishment, enough,
But for my meal give me a Hen tooth-proof,
Not tough as buff, nor yet as whit-leather,
But often humbled by Sir Chanticler:
Then full of Embrion chick, let her appear
In Claret-sawce throughout all Ianivere.
But for the limber thighs of infant-fowl,
Which you may draw like Peascods through your jowle,
Unless in acute Fevers, let them eat,
Whose teeth dare not encounter tougher meat.
Next unto these the flesh of Quails is thought
Exceeding good, especially Iew-bought,
(That Is at the price they were in the Wilderness)
But to eat them now in London-dresse,
Or Partridge-chicken (which is grosser food,
Costive, but nourishing) though the meat's good.
I shall not venture, and I know the cause,
Because it did rain Quails, but never sauce.
CHAP. XXIII. Of Pigeons, their young ones, and Ducks.
THe infant-Pidgeon, and the suc^ing Dove,
Emblem of Innocence, of Lust, of Love,
Are a most high and filling diet, hot
And inflaming, thence are Feave^s got;
'Ware Pidgeon therefore, till his early flight
Has purged his heaviness, and made it light;
To these invite your flegmaticks, a scholar,
Men sedentary, but not a man of choler.
Ducks of aquatick fowl are far the worst,
Whether Fen-fed, or in your own moats nursed;
Hot is their blood, and of a Saturn die,
Gives nauseas and superfluity,
Yet nourishing enough, if it were good,
(He don't prescribe a copious, but sound food;)
Of all the fowl which on the lakes do wander,
From the wild Duck unto the Goose and Gander,
There Is none but are repletive, if it smell
Amiss it is naught, though 'twere a Barnacle:
This hinders not the profits of the Coy,
The smell of gain is sweet, Bon par ma foy.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the parts of Fowl.
THe bellies of all Fowl, brawny and tough,
Are of digestion long, and hard enough;
But mastered by the culinary fire,
They Are as good nutriment as you desire.
The wings of Geese in moistness do abound,
And so in Hens is the like juicenesse found;
Their constant motion makes them simply good,
An excellent and inoffensive food.
But oh the liver of the stubble Goose!
Set it before the gross Vitellius,
Or Otho either, and this Emperor
Shall leave his glass for it, 'tother his whore.
Wisdom of Cooks! oh arts of cramming Geese!
When Kitchen Machiavilian policies
Shall so contrive, that the attractive Liver
Shall starve all members to augment the liver,
And by devices Hyperphysicall,
Translate the Rickets from the head to the caul.
Wonder in Caponry! but they grow plump
And fat, by stitching up the merry rump.
The necks of Geese and Hens, which we do cast
To the dunghill, are an excellent repast;
Arabic dainties bought up by us of late,
By one, who on all City Feasts do wait,
The Factor of our Poultery gubbins, that
He may feed high his rare musk-making Ca^.
The wings of flying creatures do excel
The legs of walking, motion does expel
Superfluous humors: so Fowl crammed and pent,
Though they be fat, are not good nourishment:
I do abominate the City-glutton,
Fat Capon-fed, and shoulder of Mutton:
If that must be th'entertainment and the cheer,
Give me the barn-fed bird and mountaneer.
The Eunuchs of all Fowl are best, and so prevail
With us, they are no longer meat but Ale:
Cock is an English malt, and we drink Fowl,
What once was dish'd is now swigg'd up in the bowl,
So that we do not now those gluttons think,
Who Capons eat, but those who Capons drink:
Cock-broth, the Ladies sure confortive
Is gone, for China Ale does keep alive;
Who can desire more? Physicians unde
Is this rare cure from Monday At Temple^ar, who sels China-Ale.
until Sunday.
The brains of Fowl, less viscous and less dry,
Are better then of walking Poultery,
Who are of temper ex opposito,
(That Is clean contrary, if you do not know.)
The brains of infant-Starling, Partridge, Pheasant,
And Cocks and Hens (Sir Mammon judge) is pleasant.
CHAP. XXV. Of Eggs and their proprieties.
AS at Creation, so our book proceeds,
Hens before Eggs, perfection's in the deeds
Of the best best Opificer; he made
Nothing potentiall, perfect 'twas when said,
That Protoplastes the first species framed
Entire, nothing was impotent or maimed
In its own essence, then he virtues gave,
Prolifick and conservative, to save
And propagate, which hid in seminall power,
Traduces the first work unto this hour;
The parent, not the chick, oviparous,
The mothers labor hatched in feathered house
Of her own body, yet 't does safer dwell,
And has a cottage of its own, a shell:
Our subject is this Embrion in's cradle,
Both possible to live and to be adle,
Or damned to be devoured before a taste
Of life, and into various coquery cast*
Bred of D. Harvey's opinion.
contagion of Sir Chanticlers,
Upon the bag prolifick, the case clear,
And settled now in plain Anatomy,
'A spiritiz'd flavor gets, and egg, and me,
So that the cock-tread and the grosser sperm
(Which our old Philosophy affirm
Did generation raise) are only here
The conduct and the warm conveyancer
Of this brave Monsieur, and Grand Signiour spright,
Whose warm Afflation does the work of the night:
This Egg I set before you, (Madam) sloth
Makes this poor Book Trencher and Table-cloth,
Not set in salt (unless of slender wit)
And though but small, yet a most dainty bit,
Of such vicinity with humane blood,
It strait incorporates, and i^ quick food;
Especially the golden part, the Yolk and White.
Argent is
Frigid and viscous, of Activities
Unequal much; so that in thi^ white shell,
The Sun and Moon may be affirmed to dwell:
The yolk's spermatick, like the gendring Sun,
The Eggs in watery efficacies run.
The Eggs of Hens and Partridges incite,
And those of Ducks are servient ^o delight
(Though fouler nourishment.) The lay of Geese*
Of odor bad, does loathsomne^s increase,
Yet are pr^vocative; of Turkeys more,
Although the waddling treade^'s long, before
He act (the fu^bler of the Fowls) but mounted*
This cobbling ^ame^^e is a The gre^^ Turk.
Signiour counted.
But hear what Rasis says, and Avicen,
Most temperate the l^y's of the pressed Hen,
And Part^idges, so little loss in the food,
That weight for weight, the yolks convert to blood:
Boiled ra^ely, they digest a^ace: but hard,
They do digestion and themselves retard:
Ta^ne when the cackling Hen Alarm gives
Of her delivery, Restora^ives:
Immixt with Honey good for throats are sore;
And in Consum^tion^ we their aid implore:
No flesh so nourishing and temperate:
Let those forbear them who are over fat;
Buttered with Ambergriss a lusty meat,
V^^ellius (le gross) did often eat;
A Prince of a short reign, which amply shows,
Gluttons no fighters are, but for night blows.
CHAP. XXVI. of MILK.
KInsman to blood, but twice removed, in Breasts
Of Women pregnant, in Udders of Beasts
Elaborated, and the tincture white,
In Venis Lacteis, (unknown to sight,
Unless upon dissection) is made,
Which is this lukewarm Candidates parade.
It is of equal temper with our blood,
And having been so once, most proper Food:
Not dreadful when a Read-coat, and a friend,
When White-coat to our Ages Infancy and old Age.
either end,
Its temper does incline to moist and cold,
It wets, and fats: Those whom long Hecticks hold,
Or the dry Cough, or Urine sharpness pricks,
And those of Constitutions dry as sticks,
It benefits, and brings to temper just,
It foments blood, and the white stream of Lust:
It Is of concoction quick, and gets the dye
(Whether the Liver or Veins sanguifie,
Or both, it matters not) which once it had,
White into red is no conversion bad.
Wherefore we say, in Fevers, are acute,
In pains oth' head, in Dropsies, and Scorbute,
And other cold Diseases, Milk forbear,
Though Io were the Cow, (and she was rare)
Of all that spend the Teat, the Milk of Cows
Is grossest, and most nourishment allows.
Who do desire Matho's bulk (to fill
A Coach alone) let him the Milk-pail swill.
Yet I have heard a Matho of our own
(By's surcingle of Sheeps-heads quickly known)
So huge a quantity of Milk did drink
(A Horse of water could not more I think)
Yet never was the fatter, nor would be
If he had eaten Cow, Milk-maid, and me.
Such Guts should be their mutual punishment,
And Marriot should have eaten Wood of Kent.
The Milk of Asses Avicen advises,
To give to all who labor of a Phthisis,
Or have bad Lungs. The Milk of Goats partakes
Of either temper, and a medium makes:
Such wonders are rehearsed of Goats, that if
You hear 'um you will hardly give belief;
The very herbs they feed on turns to physic;
Give them specificks for the Cough or Ptisick,
The infusion is their Milk, and it retains
The virtue sans Apothecaries pains,
A living rare Pharmacopoeia, and
Not yet translated by Culpepper's hand.
The Milk of Sheep is worst, very unsound,
And does with su^erfluities abound.
Milk boiled with Rice, or the like grain (and free
From its in^^igidating quality)
Breeds wholesome blood, moistens belly and breast,
And to the bladder is a welcome guest.
And Buttermilk in Fluxes, and so Whey
Is excellent for Lactium tormina,
If in them you throw in burnt gad of steel,
You need no other Medicine, they it heal.
Against diseases of the yellow Bi^e,
Nothing so sovereign, nothing so Cheap.
vile.
Distempers of much Bacchus, and the Itch,
And yellow jaundice, Faces called the rich,
Are cured by these, and Butter that is unsalt,
By Fricacy does remedy the fault
Of filthy morphy'd skins: Butter next grace
Is eaten first, eaten in the last place.
Then let not Hogens Mogeas only sing,
Bouter, Bouter is good for any thing.
CHAP. XXVII. Of CHEESE.
ALL Cheese is naught, says the Salernitan,
The Fresh is cold and gross, yet if a man
Be not of constitution cold, it is good,
A tolerable, but not commended food.
Old Cheese (as is its Age) is worse, or better
The tarter sort is hot, and burns, a getter
Of extreme thirst, calls for the other Can,
Be it Holland, Chedder, or Parmizan.
Yet after meals a slender quantity
Corroborates the stomachs mouth, and by
The sharpness of the Rennet does remove
All N^^sea from them, who sweet mee^s love.
But scraped, as Dr. Buttler ordered Cheese,
(Who then a Buttler more can palat-please?)
It Is excellent against most Surfeits, saving
No Sugar spoil the Cambro-britan shaving.
Ha, ha, Cause Day! yet our Arabians hold,
No Cheese is safe, whether it be new or old:
It loads the stomack's of digestion slow,
And if the Colic or the Stone you know,
Eat, and be sick, then leave't, if not too late,
Or if you will eat, eat but a penny weight.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of FISHES.
FIshes are like their Element, and place
Wherein they live, both cold and moist, a ^ace
Of phlegmatic Creatures, yet they are meat
Which dry, and choleric tem^e^s may well eat;
And those who would look smug, or el^e snout-fair,
May take this live^-cooling di^h for fare.
In f^^vid seasons, and in Climates hot
Use them: But if the Be^^^ the helm has got,
Or under Charles his seven-starr'd heavy W^ne,
From this dull nourishment let them refrain*
And pituitous bodies must fo^bea^,
Unless they like the Dropsy in the Rear.
The Seafish, and of those, they in Rocks dwell
Are finer, and in temperament excel,
Digest more easy, and breed better blood
Then the loose fry, that shoal it in the Flood:
Yet in the stomach and the entrails they
(Being little vi^cous) make too long a stay.
Sweet River-fishes slimy, and gross diet,
Are glibbery, and make egression quiet,
More nourishing then Seafish, and of these,
Those (which the current streams and gravel please,
And do abhor annoyances of sinks,
Which spoil their channels with their loathsome stinks)
Are most delicious, such as Perch and ^^out;
Your Mud-fish all incline you to the Gout.
But those delighting in sweet scowres refine
Their squamy sides, and clarify their live.
The Fi^^ of Lakes, and Motes, and stagnant ponds
(Remote from Sea, or where no Spring commands,
And intermingling its refreshing waves
Is Tench unto the Mote, and Tenches saves,
And keeps them medical) are of all sorts
Less innocent, unless some River courts
The ^ullen Nymph, and blending waters she
Of a foul Mops^'s made Leucothoe.
Her inmates otherwise, like her self, smell,
Taste of the Harbor (that is) scent not well;
Slow to digest: alive, they lived too close,
And dead they cannot their native dulne^s lose.
Give me a Salmon, who with A^a Remigii.
winged Fins
Against tide and stream ^i^ks over the fishing-gins
Of locks and Hives, and circling in a gyre
His v^ulting co^^s, he leaps the basfled wyre.
Let Fish have room enough and their full play,
No liquor want, not on a Fish-street day.
But they are all meat indigestible,
Creating thirst, and spawn diseases well.
Take the less viscous, gracile, cleanly swimmer,
Smelling like S^elts, whose watery hutts are trimmer,
Then those of Pools and Ponds, or where on weed,
Or nasty Alga, and base herbs they feed.
Salt Fish, Can you with patience, Brethren all,
Hear it, of Salters and Fishmongers Hall?
Salt Fish is never good, but on a day
When you a vomit take, and't may not stay:
Charge upon charge, ten shillings cost to dine,
And h^^f a Crown in Crocus and Squills Wine,
To cast it up again? whose will adore
My Arabian Doctors, o^ Sir Theodore:
Vomits nor lead I like, the pendent bullet
Shall never be the sweeper of my Gullet.
What I do eat, I do intend to keep,
By exercise digest, and little sleep.
But feed not like Sir Theodore for fear
Vomit nor bullet your o're-charg'd stomach clear.
The Barrel Codd, and courtly Pole of Ling,
Butter and Oil marching in either wing,
And Rope-Canary on the Van and Rear,
Or Graves, or Bourdeaux in a glass for Beer
Bring on a Friday, storm Arabians then,
Mr. of the Swan Fishstreet.
Cloudsly and Mr. of the Swan Fishstreet.
Ruckly are the better men.
The River Shellfish, and less Lobster-coats,
Crayfish and Crabbs that swim, as those in boats
Do row, are in a Pthisis singular
Boiled in milk oth' Beast of the long ear,
And for Consumptive persons made a Cale,
As much as My confiding Fishmonger.
Colchis high fetched herbs prevail.
You have the Fish, pray fall on if you will,
Madam, the sauce shall not besowre the Bill.
CHAP. XXIX. Of PULSE or GRAIN.
WE take our rise from Rice, which we find dry,
^th' fourth, and moderate hot i^h first degree:
Boiled in fair water against the Colic good,
They call (the Windy) but a noble food
Boiled in the milk of Almon^s, which does lose
Its ^^iptick quality, then La^yes don't refuse;
The Candle-cup, they bravely nourish,
Caus^ng the blood, and seminal virtue flourish.
If that their Ladi^^ips will make a wash
Against the Morphies, Ri^ie ^lower ^ash
In ^ountain water, and this clean^ng grain
Shall clarify the skin, and null the ^^ain.
But you must ^^ri^ it from its husk, its Rind
Is venomous; and ^lee t^in any wine,
Or water, ^ain in the mouth it does create,
Says Avicen, and will imposthumate.
Beans are of double sort, or dry, or green,
Those for your Bo^^, these for your Boo^e^ for-b^n*
The g^een in the (...) degree are moist and cold;
But cold and dry in the^ (...) height the old:
Bad nourishment an^ filthy humors b^eed,
To a proverb ^^^ive, Ladies, take heed,
Beyon^ the excuse oth' Pu^py they exceed:
Creates by vapors on the inju^'d brain,
Malignant dreams, and our ch^st^^e p^ofane.
The great white Bean in his minority,
Boiled in successive waters, happily
May be permitted, loose their Windiness
If boyld with Mint or Comine, you them dress
Both Phlegmatic and Windy meat within
But the Bean-floor is excellent for the skin.
"Yet spite of Doctors, and when all is done
"We will make bold with Pulse at Thorington,
"And this stern Doctrine against Beans shall never
"Be held, nor gain repute in Leicestershire,
Nor yet in Somerset, where Odcombe, bred
Famous Tom Coriat, Pudding and Bean fed.
Lentils says Rasis are both cold and dry,
Of temper middle others, so let't be
Bread, melancholy blood, lick up the juice
Of succulent bodies; spoil the visive use
By drying qualities, for Corpulent,
And persons phlegmatic a cure present,
Used of^ says Isaac, fill with fumes the Brains,
And cause amazing dreams, and capital pains.
Ciches are of two sorts, one black, one white,
The white is hot in the first degree, that's right,
And moist in the middle site, hard to digest
Causing inflammation in the puffed breast.
Dilate the skin, as 'twere upon the wrack
Eat (horses) then, until your bellies crack,
And look most fair, and plump and round
Fillet and Cascoines will lite, and sound,
The black Ciche is more hot, of moisture less
Against obstructions of the Sp^een redress
And liver opilatio^s, boiled, best,
In horse reddish, it raises milk suppressed;
Urine provoks, and the Spermatick vein,
A great increase by this stout Pulse does gain:
Wherefore to Stallions it is a generous food,
And makes them active for that noble brood.
Peases (says Arnoldus) are not much unlike,
Wherefore some eat them, bravely by the Strike.
Then Beans less windy, nor so smoothly pa^^
The ventricle, lookin the Herbal glass
Gerards, and Iohnsons mirror, and their Pease
Will every longing eye that sees them please.
I have a friend that loves them, had a Tutor
Would eat three mess without a coadjutor.
Obedience the efore and affection move
Not to dispraise, what two such wise men love.
CHAP. XXX. Of Herbs and Plants.
HElp Pauls-church-yard our Physic garden now,
(And let Tredeskin no more simples show.)
Where simpling Girls, and simpler Women stand
To sell the gathered Herbage of the Land.
Medaea when she took her flight in the air
Culled not so great ingredients, nor so rare*
Hither Apothecaries, hither have
Chi'rgians, and Midwifes (busy Quacks at last)
And decayed gallants, Lords of Lands are passant,
And Sequestered Divines buy up the grass out.
The Ewe, sad Box and Cypress (solemn trees)
Once Churchyard guests ( till burial rites did cease)
Give place to Sallads, and confined Apollo
Trades in these Plants, that do hereafter follow*
Ladies secure your Noses, for I bring
Garlic my first high sented offering.
It Is temper hot and dry, whatsoere does sent
So strongly is of such a temperament,
It warms cold bodies, hot anoys, expells
Wind, and such vapors from the bodies cells.
It does incite to lust, an opener high,
And in a Tertian makes the cold fit fly.
A Lohoc, that's a Lambative, of this
Deserves a sanum and expertum; it is
Rare against Coughs, obstructions thick
Extenuates, and cuts (ye but a lick
Administered upon a liquorish stick
For hotter Regions naught, but where the Bear
Rules, it is a lusty, nasty, warming fare.
The Ploughmans Treacle, and sole Antidote,
Let in the Patient, cure him for a groat.
Its filthy Hogon is corrected thus
Bo^^it, it is not so odoriferus.
Lentills or Beans eat after it do lay
The strong Mephitis, Mints will take it away
"But oh the proof of Mowers intrailes, which
"Digest this Plant, as well as Horses Cich.
Sorrel (says Rasis) is both hot and dry,
Gerard does say it cools ( undoubtedly)
Exasperates the stomach, by which fight
It moves it to a grateful appetite,
In Summer season a most delicate sauce,
In which the taste does mightily rejoice
And used with many meats: But when Saint Luke
Appears once in the now un-red-letter'd book,
The salted legs, and springs of slaughtered Swine
With Sorrel sauce do make us rarely dine.
To those abound with yellow choler good
And quenches thirst (especially that of the Wood)
If p^ssessed, the inflamed blood retreats
From pestilent Feavors, Agues, and all heats.
What virtue have the seeds if you do ask?
Drunk in red wine, their good against the Las^.
Now (Montebancks English, or (...) de France)
Its juice (old Avicen) does high advance
And says against the Tooth Ach it is as sure
As any Causticks or your handkerchieff cure.
Diu's hot and dry, says Isaac, refines
Ventosities, and Tumors, stepped in wines
The top's of Dill dryd, and decocted, raise
The candid flood in the via lacieas.
Cleansing and causing milk, and does remove
Its windiness, Nurses, and Mothers love.
Provokes urine, is to sperm a friend,
And puts the mounting Hickets to an end,
So do the seeds smell't to: Hippocrates.
Confounds the Hicquets with a lusty sneeze,
For by that violent stomach-quake, all meat
(That lay offensive there) does change its seat;
Sunned, or boyld in oil, it mitigates
Great pains, and shuts up Morpheus heavy gates,
Allaying vapors, that disturb the head,
And makes us take the other napp at bed,
No less affective is this precious Dill
If boyld in wine against the Matrix ill.
It does disperse those clouds, with choke, and smuther
The uterm vault, called (but not making) mother.
This Laus Rei hitherto now comes
Who'd think could hurt? its vitupexiums.
All humane good is mixed; wherefore be wise
Use not daily, for it spoils the eyes.
Smallage, or Garden Parsley, or that which
Delights in waters, or the banks of the Ditch.
Is hot, and dry, but yet the little seed
Above the leaves in the qualities exceed.
A mighty opener of obstructions tough,
And smooths the way of the ureters, when rough,
Provokes that serious tide, much more the root
Boyld in a Broth, does put the bladder to it.
The root, or seeds in clysters help alone
To evacuate, if not contuse the stone.
It lays the torment of the guts, which may
Be done by Epsam-beer or else by Whey.
Most excellent in sauces, and in broth,
Parsley, and butter, and the Table cloth,
Are half the charge of a Fish dinner; so
It is good, and bad sauce, the caveat know.
Then as in Ruartaines it is, and Agues seen,
It opens Liver stoppages, and spleen.
So to the Vintners most assiduous curses,
It will set open wide your Fish-day purses
Amongst its mischiefs that, and this shall lie
Its very hurtful to the Epilepsie.
"Which sickness is more dangerous of late
"To fall in the street, or Tavern-fall in the State?
Or age, or Oruch (for both words do hold)
Are moist in degree second, in first cold,
A Kitchen Garden Herb, for the pot chief,
But Boyld a Sallad, bellies bound relief,
Nourish, and Livers hot gently assuage,
And raw, or sod allay a guttural rage,
Or inflammation in the throat, withal
The seeds in Mead drank, cure the Icterical.
Parsneps are of a Temper hot, more dry
Then moist, and nourish well, not dainty,
A thicker blood create, but yet not bad,
A root spermatick makes a Scotchman mad,
Inflative too, correct them then with Pepper,
It is no Dulman, no nor nimble leaper
Out of the stomach, but makes wholesome stay,
And for the Stagnant Urine ridds the way.
Beets are of diverse colors, white, black, red,
According to their hues so tempered,
The white are moderately moist; and hot
A garden herb good for the pottage pot.
The red, and black more hot, abstersive all;
Because compound of n^tro^s stuff, and sal,
Whence their virtue Diergertick's, sed
To purge by its The Nose.
Emunctory the head,
Good against sounds in the ear, and the tooth ach,
And does the Cupidinean locks unlach.
But oh the riot of the Roman. Beet
With such a Sallad their Grand Signior treat*
Rub up your noddles my brave English Cooks
And make our red Beet; that excells in looks
Excel in taste: what cannot your wisdoms do
With Oil and Vinegar, and Pepper too.
Make it an Antidote (my cunning men)
And then you jump with Father Avicen.
Borage is hot and moist, in the first degree,
Or set in the confins of each quality.
Both hot and cold, in its natural poise so just,
That neither temperature exceeds it trust.
A Plant ad Pondus (as they say) and where
You find such balance, the proportions rare.
The virtues eminent: Have you no courage?
At any time revive your soul with Borage.
That Azure flower has in it a sovereign gift,
And when a Sallad can the heart up lift.
Good against either choler, red or black
(Infus^d in wine de France, or nobler Sack.)
Sirrup of Borage will make sad men glad,
And the same sirrup does restore the mad.
A rare receipt for Bedlam, under deck,
Prisoners, or my companions under se^*
Colo^orts are hot, and of a nitrous juice
By the first they bind, by the latter, loose,
The broth is laxative, there runs the Salt,
Eat, without broth their stiptick, there is their fault.
To make it unmalitious boil the cole
In fountain water, cast it away whole,
Then in a broth, where virtuous powder Beef
Is boyld, boil that, Cato shall cry it chief
Of meats, with which he will most amply dine,
And frolic it, and lick the lusty wine
That to his Crambe, Caulis, or our coals
His bellies debtor, and his jobbernole.
For Colewort is an enemy toth' vine,
And can our wits wine forfeited refine.
Then Socrates, and Cato fear no baggage
Nor scold, take to'ther bottle, to'ther Cabbage.
It is for shaking hands, and dim eyes good,
Forgive one fault of melancholy blood.
What though its windy, Pepper will reform
That tempest, and appease its flative storm.
Onyons are hot and dry, in the fourth degree
But Garlic does exceed in the quality.
Onyons are chopped into three several sorts,
And never a one has any good reports.
As to our diet purpose boyld their best,
Raw eaten worst, but with Vinegar dre^^*
They neither heat nor cool, says Rasis, how?
When Vinegar both virtues does allow?
So ordered, they inflame not unto thirst,
But raise an appetite, the Carriers first
And only sauce, his snuff, for the squ^^'d juice
From's glanderd brains the humor will produce.
(Good for his Teem and him) with Vinegar
Immixt, it will the spotted Cutis clear.
Provoks to sleep, so that your drowsy pate
Is called most pat, an Onyon head of late.
But yet beware, my friends of sleep, and night,
It Is good to shut your eyes, but naught for sight.
It dulls the senses, does infect the breath;
O does it so! away with it it is death.
The Gourd (says Avicen) is hot and dry
(Like the wild Colequentida.
Ci^rul on its quality.)
In degree second, and its virtues, these,
It purges yellow choler, disagrees
With Melancholy; wine all might in the Gourd
That has been housed, purgation will afford.
Much like our Melon, if they stand, and thrive,
Are good to make the body laxative.
Dioscorides says, that the gourds juice
Held in the mouth, will ease to the pain produce
Of Toothache. Bitter it is of Taste: know
Most things that are of special* good, are so.
Cumin is hot and dry, says Rasis, good
Against wind in the stomach; after food
Taken a help at Maw, that's to concoct,
By'ts seeds dr^nk Matrix* and the guts unlock't.
From the pain colick^s the result is
The very same by clyster or by Pultis.
With Vinegar immi^t, the overflows
Called menstruall are repulsed, and bloody nose.
Secundum artem handled it asswages
Whatsoever swelling^ in the scortum rages,
And Genitals, it is good for Gouty joints,
And the procedure of it disappoints.
Boyld with inflative meats, a remedy
Against their Genuine ventosity.
What would you more? there is not a nurse nor slut
But knows it is good against Worms in the maw and gut.
Coming again we shall more virtue find
Those whom the Pl^urisie, or stich do grind,
Let them a bag of Cummin seed, and sal
(Le-Bay) quil up and warm them all to mal.
Besprinkled well with good wine Vinegar
And hot applied to the side oth' sufferer,
It is probatum, and will save well nigh
The Pl^u^us noted help, Plebotomy.
Fennel is hot, and dry in the third degree,
The seeds or leaves in P^^san made, the dry
Breasts do replenish, and those hills of silk
And snow, refurnish with the purest milk;
Made a decoction they cleanse the reins,
Open the Liver, and the kidney lanes.
Do force the stone, and urine to avoid.
And has C^t^dian Feavors often destroyed.
By die^retick faculty, now tell
The verses made on Oxford Holowell.
"No man will hurt this well, that's wise,
"For this hurts none, but cures the eyes.
So Fennel, Roses, V^r^^n, Rue, and Celandine
Made a water will do good unto thy eyes and mine.
And to such persons cover to be lean,
Fen^cularis aqua, scowres them clean.
Hysope is hot says Rasis, and if eaten
Or into powder with some mixtures beaten
Good for the dark of sight: A water made
With this and Figs by the skillful in the trade,
Gurgl^d, does unimpostumate the thro^,
And when by rheumes a difficulty's got
Of swallowing, the straightened passages
To this decoction yields, and the stops cease
Lettuce is cold to the end oth' third degree,
With us a Sallad of high dignity;
Loaf'd, and unwasht is best, cooles the chaf't blood,
For sperme, for milk, for generation good.
But not the seeds, they are of a quali^y
Anterostical, that's quite contrary,
It does provoke to urine and to sle^p,
Naught for Letharg^ck pa^es: this Sallad keep.
And till the Spring, its usual leaves produce,
Its kindred Corn-Sallad shall be in use.
Mints in degree the second, hot and dry
In The third, says Gerard, of famed memory.
If smelt unto Pliny the Historian writes
The duller appetite to eat excites.
Confortative to stomach, we commend
It in burnt Claret at a vomits end.
It stays the Hi^quets, Parbrake, and the scowre
By choler made in ventricle the lower
Taken in juice of sour Pomegranats: So
In Vinegar if upward blood do flow.
In broth if boyld, Senior Pliny writes,
It stays the blood profluvium, and the whites
Good against Watry-eye, and scurfie head,
Of children, and any tumor therein bred.
With Honey and Spring water mixed it cleers
Absurd obstructions of surda^ter ears
Infused in milk, against a mad dogs bite,
It Is good for man, but hang the dog out right.
Boiled in wine, and vinegar, alone
It cures the strangury and Kidneys stone
Against the stings of Waspes applied, and Bees
It Is good. I would there were no worse then these?
Cresses though in the water do lie,
Yet are of temp'rament most hot, and dry,
Especially the seeds to the fourth degree
A Sallad, mixed with Herbal company,
Virgils moretum makes it one of those
Herbs, which do sting with its sharp bite the nose.
Et na^es a^ri strin^^nt Naftur^ia morsu.
It Is good against Scarbute, or Scorbuch,
Be the disease old English, or new Dutch.
It warms the stomach, and the Liver clears
A^ by the cure before full well appears.
For against the Scorbute nothing is so good
As that which by its virtue cleers the blood,
It cures the worms in the belly, not the head,
Not in a sheeps, wherein a long ones bred.
Good for the stomach says the Arab Rasis,
But Dioscorides the herb disgraces,
As to that vigor, but commends its power
For expediting off the bloody scower,
And though it hurts the early Embryo
It does provoke to that, which Venus.
made it so:
Poppy is white, and black, of this does come
The high Nercotick, dulling Opium:
The whites more candid, and more la^dable,
This causes sleep, that death (says Pliny well)
Poppy both seed, and leaves, and heads are cold*
Stays Rheumes a cerebro: Be not too bold
However with it, unless it tempered be
With good allays, then it is a Remedy
Not dangerous: Beware, best Lady, still
Of herbs, that do some good, but greater ill.
Of this is made rare Diacodium,
The wand of Mercury, and Morpheus drum,
When sharp diseases, and malignant Feavor,
Disturb your rest (as I could wish it never)
A Poppy cawdle made with Almond-cream
Shall bind the senses, and incline to dream.
Parsley is hot in the second, dry in the third
Degree: By it the stagnant urin's stirred,
And femal courses fixed do find their way
And the red tide obeys her Cynthia.
The seeds are hotter then the leaves or Root,
They open, are abstersive, and drive out
Aeolian Blasts, and stomack-tearing-toind,
And them expel at fore door, or behind.
I^ is as helpful to the stone, and gains
Credit upon the bladders grief, and reins.
The cholick passion is appeased: The doors
The little doors 'oth body called the Pores,
It opes by sweat, and makes transpire such vapors
As fume the house, like ill extinguished tapers.
It purifies the Liver; made an oil
It cures the Morf^e, and the speck'd skins soil
Boiled in Ale the roots and seeds have got
A ^ame against poisons, are an Antidote,
And for its common use, there is scarce a dish
Without this sauce to your quaint Flesh or Fi^h
Leeks, or but leek with number singular
E'ne which you like, hot, and dry tempered are?
Rasis commend^, and discommends the plant
It is the Appetites friend to its provant
But enemy to the head which it does pain
And fills with dreams malignant the fumed brain,
If that the Fountain of the Body's ill
(The head I mean) let Leeks grow where they will
Except on thy brest-plat. But if youl' need
Upon this great Extenuator feed,
Eat them with Endives, Purslane, Lettuces
Charge of a sallad will his heat appease
Made in a Lohoc, or a loch, with Figs
With Bdellium, almonds (tell me Dr Trigs
Must they be blanched or no?) with liquorice*
A quantum sufficit, in short R S.
With candid sugar, Ana, and these all
Boiled in a Balneo, till Syrrupical,
Against Catarrhes, and suffocating Rheumes
And squinances a power it assumes.
Madam you will think I cant, or little lack
Of John Pontaeus, or an English Quack
The Emperor Nero called Parrophagus
That Is Leek devourer, eat them like a sus,
That Is like a swine, which is the cause I think
His memory unto this day does stink
Purslane is cold 'ith degree third, and moist
In second: For stomachs by much wine deboyst
And high inflamed is good, and extreme thirst
Purslane will quench (when if your belly burst.
With water, 'twill not slake) and for your tooth
Aching or edge, the leaves are good forsooth
The faemal flux, and of Bile Of Chole^ yellow.
rubea
Or any flux of blood the juice will stay
If by a syringe you the same minister
It cures the Matrix heats, the Guts by Glister;
And Avicenna a new virtue starts
That the leaves rubbed are medicine against the Warts,
The Butchers against the Herb-wives seek relief
And think that Purslane will put down raw beef
Radish is hot, and dry, a sauce of course
Both that called biting, and that called horse,
Both heavy of digestion, both excite
Before and in the Meal the appetite
The leaves are more digestive then the root
Which is a vomit, with some oxymel to it
It cuts the Phlegm, and by it is gravity
Like cheese* it make our victuals downward ply
Water of Radish, or horse radish Ale
Is good for urine, and provokes to stale,
But leaves a ^^gou so distastful I
Wish that my nose, my palate were not nigh
The root with Darnel, meal and vinegar
Of wine de-^^anch, blew and black speeks does clear
That mixed with salt (says Dioscor^des)
Will milk in dried paps, and teats increase*
Secundum artem ordered makes away
For the descension of the menstrua
And mixed with Vinegar has good dispatch
Against Hodontalgia, or Toothache.
And without Rasis, or Hippocrates
Rind on, and off, is eaten with green cheese
Turnep (says Isaac) 's moist in the first degree
And ^ot in the second, a good quality.
Nature consists in hot and moist. We fall
When fire licks up the humor Radical.
Then Turnips eat, which though they ill digest,
Of Garden roots they are accounted best.
It makes the skin fair as it self, and raises
That Plimme, and somewhat more, and yet more praises
For Spermatick recruits it gets, they are all
Good, long, the small, or round, which bears the ball.
The sheets or tender topps for Sallads use,
Boiled, they do belie Asparagus:
The Commentator (if he guesseth right)
Affirms they have a virtue good for sight.
And Pliny (natures great Philosopher)
Says, boyld, to frigid feet they heat confer.
I hold with Pliny, and almost dare swear
My foot a boyld Turnep will not bear.
But what says Dioscorides, alone
A Turnep stamped is for Kib'd heels for-bone,
To made an Oven for the oil of Roses
To roast in Embers, is the best of doses.
Then Turnips, An abstreperous eryer of Turnips, and that disturbs the Author
with his b^^ling.
cry man, East, North, West and South,
And when they are sold, with wheelbarrow stop thy mouth.
Rue is both hot and dry, in the third degree,
At its approach flys cold ventosity,
And clogging humors jogge, it does remove
The sent from those Garlic and Onyons love.
The Herb (like Sampier pickled) helps the sight,
But so, or not so eat, spoils Cupids fight.
In Pestilential times like these, if you
Do love your safety, stuff your nose with Rue.
Who can deny what Pliny then attests,
The leaves in wine are Antidote of the best.
The water thrice distilled, the kidneys cleanse,
And send all sand incontinent, from thence.
Sage is of temper hot, and dry, the School
Salernitan, concludes him for a fool
That dies with Sage in garden. It Is a herb
Of virtue singular to a Proverb.
And in its name are high auspicia
Healthful and sovereign that is Sage.
Salvia.
Let those who to Abortions subject are
Make this same prudent herb their constant fare,
And what it does post Partum, for the next
Consult Agrippas, and Aetius text,
Good for the Matrix, and its tenant, naught
For the person, who, that to lodge there brought.
And bridles natures itch: Good for the Brains,
And head, and senses, which the head contains.
And how in Ale infused, and brewed, we cry
It up, with Scabius, Fennel, Betony,
Apothecaries shops can tell, whose trade
During these Sage Ale morning draughts does fade.
The juice, as well as any black lead Comb
Where white hairs are, will make the black ones come.
And Macer says, that Pulveris'd, it takes
Away the venomous bites of poisonous Snakes.
How in our late malignant Feavors we
Account Sage possets a grand remedy,
The Country cures can speak: Then for a stich
Or Pleurisy it is poormans cure, and rich
If in a wooden dish with coals the leaves
Be dried, Vinegar aspersed, it nere deceives.
No maid nor man Cook (unless fool by Age)
Will dress a Pigg and not in the sauce have Sage.
Spinach is cold and moist, so temperate,
The lungs, the throat, the stomach gratulate.
This wholesome pot herb, which does exercise
His lonosing virtues against the bellies ties.
Will it untie the bound? such recipes
Restrained persons will extremely please.
^t breeds but little, yet good nourishment
We give't in Feavors to a good intent,
And with as good success, if you herbs mate
Alike, both open, and Refr^gerate.
Mushroms, or Toadstools, offspring of the earth,
Or else of Trees a puffy spungy birth.
Are unto danger cold and moist, if eat,
And raw cold pituitous blood beget.
Those whose concavities are red, are worst,
Let those feed on them to the Colic cursed.
Pepper and Oil, and Salt, nay all Cooks Art
Can no way wholsemness to them impart.
What Doctor Butler said of Cucumber,
Of these ground-bucklers, we the same aver.
Dress them with care, then to the dunghill throw'um
A hogg wont touch um, if he rightly know um.
Toadstools are worse then Mushromes of the ground,
And with a poisonous quality confound:
A pappy, viscous, gross, cold substance can
Here find no praise, nor in the Salernitan:
These four are signs of Death, says Isaac,
(An old Arabian, and no late-sprung Quack)
Which if you cut in the middle, and let lie
Till morn, you shall their putrid state descry.
But oh the praises of the Roman wits:
Meat for the gods, the Emperors choice bits.
Poets and Cooks are friends, and no^ at odds*
I join, and say they are meat too for such gods.
CHAP. XXXI. And first of FIGS.
PReposterous! Figs before Apples placed,
The Diet's false, and all the Work disgraced.
Who marshals in the fruit? a Squire, 't may be,
But yet no Apple-squire you plainly see.
A fig for such a Squire: Madam, with leave
You shall our Reasons for our Figs receive.
'Both are coaevous fruits of Edens earth,
'The Fig and Apple don't contend for birth;
'Onely the Apple, to one Sexes shame,
'Had the misfortune of the leading name.
That fruit is inauspicious to your kind,
And purposely I placed the dish behind,
Lest being percht into the upper place,
You would not think it a Banquet, but disgrace:
Think you I should quick Atalanta please
With golden Apples, whilst Hippomanes
With Laurel crowned, revives the fatal story
Of her deluded soul and long lost glory?
Give place then exprobrating fruit, and come
Thou Cover-shame, old Fig Tree, in the Room:
Though men of all the fruit, that hangs of the tree,
Should love none less for your obscurity:
For by its leaves we lost the precious sight
Of that which is the masculine delight.
Figs, either green or dry, do cleanse the sand
From that straight Quarter, where the reins command.
Windy when green, but then are laxative,
Dry they do nourish, make the body thrive,
And warm the blood, but an excessive use
('As all exceedings turn unto abuse)
Does cause the Itch and Lice, but yet you may
Give Wormwood in a Fig, for all I say.
So much says Rasis, hear what Isaak says,
(For a few Figs you have two Physicians, faith.)
If that you eat them fasting, when all is clear,
And no crude humors in the stomach rear,
They make digestion noble, cleanse the breast,
The lungs, the reins, and stones The bladder.
membranous nest,
Has it no other virtue? this in sum,
Roasted it is good for an impostum'd gum.
Dates are in temper like to Figs, that is dry
And moist, but nourish not (so cleverly,
As we may say) if often eat, they cause
Gross blood, and both infect the teeth and jaws;
Provoke to urine, but do swell the S^leen
And Liver, and the blood turn all to phlegm.
Still worse and worse; then take them Oxford Kate
For Marrow-pies, with me they are out of date.
Grapes are less hot then Dates, a luscious fruit,
And its alliance blood does straight recruit,
Fattens the body, and extends one part,
For which we need not wicked helps, nor Art.
The thinner coated Grapes do the less harm,
And though themselves be slender clad, will warm.
They all are windy, so are bellows, yet
Both these and they will fires and flame beget.
The sweet Grape fattens, and the sharp makes lean,
Infrigidates, if steeped in water clean.
Sour Grapes are very cold, the belly bind,
By them the yellow bile and blood's confined.
P^e^s'd Grapes and Raisons are of temperate heat,
A nourishing fruit, plau^^ble and neat;
Good against ob^^ructive coughs, and in a Phthisis,
Steept a whole night in Sack do strange devices.
Fruit of Granado, or Pomgranates, are
Both sweet and sour; both small nourishers*
The sweet are rather hot then cold, dispense
Swellings and thirst, to Agues an offense.
The sowre-sharp Granate cools, dries, and binds,
Those flux-oppress'd his noble virtue finds:
In Morbus Cholera a present cure,
Against either evacuation sure,
Then Syrrup, Conserves, make with Art, and know
It is ubique good above, below:
And in the ^aundice, if its juice you try,
None shall say long, that yellow is your eye.
Quince, or Cydonean apple's cold and dry,
Like to the former Pomegranate is called Malum Punicum.
Punick in degree.
Second, o^ sweet, or sour, they are binders stout,
The sow^e are most restrictive without doubt;
They rouse the appetite, they bind and loose:
How Is that? both fast and loose? we will us pose*
The empty stomach it does bind, you will say
It night* where nothing is to send away.
But ea^ Quince after a full meal, anon
It shall (...) down and send to m' uncle ^ohn:
Raw not so good as roast, or bak^d, by Art
It i^ conveyed in every Apple-tart;
Costive by quality, and therefore is Elixir,
Where Vomitings* o^ Lasks, or bloody flix are:
Against immoderate Me^ses good, and ^uch
Who blood from head, or stomach vomit much.
But hear what Simeon Sethi says, if woman
Pregnant, do make of Quinces a food common,
She shall bring forth wise and discreet sons;
'Eat Quinces, Ladies, bring forth Solomon's.
Pears are all cold, of binding quality,
Both sweet and sour, and choak-pear belly-tie,
Unle^s in post-ca^es eaten, then they do
As Quinces, which like them are costive too:
Eaten with Toad-stools, or with Mushromes, they
Lose their restringency, and pass away.
Eight sorts of civil Pears, beside the wild,
Gerard has told in's Herbal well compiled,
The Katherine called the proud; and James his Pear,
The Burgomot, or the Palati^er,
The Royal Pear, and Bishops Pear, and had
He found a Lower House pear (though never so bad)
I durst profess ^ohnson, and he had meant
To make of Pears, and Peers a Parliament:
Apples, says Rasis, are restringent all,
Both sweet and sour; the Salern School will call
The Arab to account, since it is d^ctatum,
'Post pyra da po^u^, post pomum vade cacatum.
Gocl^vius help to reconcile this Pique,
Or else we must no more of Apples speak
Then thus; Apples are windy, if you eat
Them with Annise seeds, or such like good meat;
So Apples spic'd, and made a good Lambs wool,
(As says Salerna) set us to the stool.
Sweet smelling Apples are restorative,
Plucked from their mother they do shorte^ live*
Baked in a Pie with Quinces amongst them cut,
They do the appetite to's business Put.
But frequent eating weakeneth the nerves,
Unless you use the syrrup or conserves:
I have a Doctor H.H.
Doctor's, and a learned one
'S word for it, that eat, they mitigate the stone:
So though an Apple were the first fruit ill
It keeps the Ladies at their closets still.
'An excellent revenge, for this bad food,
'By your rare skill preserved, conserved, is good.
Peaches are cold and moist in degree second,
A very fruitless fruit, and dangerous reckoned:
If eaten after meat, it has a quality
Corruptive, and the chile does putrify,
In Sack imbibed, what will not Sack make good?
They are admitted, but before your food.
Unripe they are costive, Ripe they are laxative:
'No man by Peach (in any sense) did live;
The Peach D' Avaunt, that is called praecocia,
And in the Roman tongue called Persica,
Are ^alatsome, the nausea's abated
By them, it is fit the fruit should be translated.
Medlars, says Isaac, are both cold and dry
In The first degree, famed for astringency:
Especially Medlar the dwarf, procure
The Gyant-Medlar, that is a Hector sure.
Strengthens the stomach, and like Hercules
Allayes the tumults and the raging seas
Of yellow Bile, by two commotions,
The G^zzards glimmering called in strange notion,
A report goes, says Dioscorides,
That Medlars eaten do the toothache ease.
Gerard assures, that by the kernels bruised
Gravel and urine's purged, the stone contus'd:
Thy English Open A.
nickname does so much divine;
But were it so, the Drug gifts would repine.
Aprecocks in my Authors are not found,
I shall transplant them from our Gerards ground:
Alike in nature to the Peach, so may
Praecocia be the same with Praecoqua.
We Are at a loss, Johnson and Gerard both
Know not their virtues (no nor I in troth.)
'Preserve on Ladies, howsoever, it is good
'Presum'd, until it is hurtful understood.
Citrons, Pomecitrons, Lemons, Oranges,
Are odoriferous and the scent please,
Whether from Eden, Media, or Italy,
Or his dominions, on whom both Suns lie;
The Catholic Kings Hispania's, they proceed
The Earth don't rarer fruit nor fragrant breed;
Delitious to the eye, sweet to the nose;
It Is thought the fruit that Adam did depose
From his high Paradise, un^o^thy wa^e,
'And sad exchange! had it been never so rare:
Lets search it* ve^tues, for our Mother Eve
Its outside glory could not so deceive:
Though by the eye much mischief is conveyed,
'Those eyes, those eyes, cried the just yielding Maid.
Then what magnetic force convinced that soul,
Which did the Monarch of the World control,
And moved his ca^tiv'd ^a^^ions to a deed,
Has set an edge his long traducted seed?
Was it the Rinds ^weet smell? My Py^^ha Eve.
knew
'Twas bitter, hot, and dry for all its h^e)
'Children are caught with Pictures: Vas't the juice?
My Grandam knew 'tw^s sour, and knew its use;
Knew the seed bitte^, of like quality
With the odorous rin^s; she would not dye
For Coloquintida; what though she knew
It had hid virtue poison to subdue?
Ah but the venom of that crafty Beast
That circled 'bout he Tree, and stung her breast
Wo^se then the (...) did Cleo^atra: not
Mi^h idatu^, Tri^cles, not Antidote
Sufficient to ex^el: He whispered Death,
And conv^igh'd H^ll in a soft, gentle, b^eath,
Less could the ho^es of kee^ing ever fair
(For Citron juice, for that is highly rare)
Corru^t her judgment, whose tran^parent skin
Was glass unto her nobler thoughts within.
'That is the least of Beauty, that o'th ^lass;
'But since her fall, is all that is left alas!
No the same Ap^le by its Proxy told
Of s^range Omniscience, The Devil.
Never being old:
'These were sure baits; since 'twas her fate to fall,
'She fell not like a Fool; 'twas gallant all.
Mulberryes, cold and dry in the third degree,
Ri^e make the belly moi^t, and lenifie,
Pass quickly out of stomach, or else have
A pu^refaction, and there find a grave.
Their juice is like the taste of Wine, and will
Assuage the heat of any guttural ill:
With Album graecum mixed, and gargled, cure
Against Squinancies, and throat-Calenture.
Infused in Fountain Water thirst remove,
Ta^ne before meat the appetite improve.
By stiptick quality they are very good
Against all Fluxes of luxuriant blood.
Madam, let none offend this prudent Tree,
Which blooms not till old Winters gusts do fly;
Reserves its juice within its principal,
Wise as the Creature which it feeds; for all
The bitter season of the year, his guest
The Silkworm keeps within its downy nest,
And when Provisions on the Tree appear
He does unwind himself, and falls to's cheer:
So may your Ladyship pass out of door,
And feed on them under a Sycamore,
Which with umbratile leaves will let no Sun
Hurt your Silk-gown, by its namesake Creatures spun.
Plumms, says old Isaac, are both black, and white,
And red, and many colored for delight:
They Are cold in general, and moist, do loose
The belly, yellow Bile drive out o'th house.
If eaten, as we use at Barthol'mew-tide,
Hand over head, that is without care or guide,
There is a Patient sure; Physicians sums
Have never quicker Counters then these Plums.
If you will needs be at it before Dinner,
Eat and be regular, no Diet-sinner:
Or else they putrify, and breed diseases;
Wherefore in times of Plague it always pleases
The prudent Magistrate to inhibit fruit,
And Dogs and Hogs, which all are helpers to 't.
The Damson or plum Damascene is best,
Plums that are dried give to a welcome Guest.
But if I sup or dine, it well shall please,
If that the Buttle^ eat those Services.
Cherries (who'd think it! Yeomanry of Kent
It is enough to lose your half years rent)
Are all unwholesome, generate bad blood,
Viscous and phlegmatic, a feavorish food.
The tarter tasted are the best, although
The sweeter at a greater price do go.
But Galen in his sage formality
Must yield, if Round-cap Cherry ripe do cry.
Almonds; the sweet are temperate, the bitter
Better, and for Physical uses fitter:
Their moderate heat and oily juice
Does lenifie the throat, yet they refu^e
To pass the stomach, unless sugared well;
Then urine and obstructions they expel,
And sperm augment: unskinn'd they nourish worse,
Their coats, like b^an, a passage for them force.
Skinn'd they are stiptick, and ^erform good task,
When ordered against bloody Flix and Lask.
The bitter, hot and dry, are wholsomer,
Dissolve gross humors, cleanse the ureter,
Expectorate and sweep the clogged lungs,
And mundifie the S^^leen, and Liver dungs.
Their oil for many uses serve, get grace
For keeping terse the Ladies skins and face:
In Physic more successful; so we shall
Not give our Almonds only unto * Pal.
Nuts are dry whorsons, though the Tree complain,
She Is thwack'd and banged by every Country-Swain;
It Is not without a Fault, by Virgil's leave,
Who did the Nut an innocent fruit conceive.
For sim^ly of themselves they do great harm,
Are most obstructive, and in stomachs warm
And chol^rick engender fumes, and make
The pate virtiginous, and deadly ache.
Infused in Sack, their mended quality's
Approved, who will not in Walnuts sacrifice
An afternoon to Bacchus, if it rain,
And moistened skies offend the studious brain?
But Nuts, two Figs, and twenty leaves of Rue,
And Salt contunded, ( give the Devil his due,
He is a Nutter too) will expel poison;
N^y, taken fasting keeps off all that is noysom.
In Hazel-nut, or Filbe^d, cold and dry
Of temper, does a windy moisture lie,
Which yields but little nourishment, so tough,
It will not pass the stomach soon enough,
But lies like bullet, or small shot of lead,
Yet upon these the vulgar sort do feed.
And at the Play houses, betwixt the Acts,
The Music Room is drowned with these Nut-cracks;
Whose kernels made into a milk do bind,
But of themselves the contrary we find,
And rather cause the bloody Flix, and Lask;
Wherefore forbear you brethren of the Cask,
Who in your leather coats eat sacks of Nuts,
You Will need no new Beer to keep clean your guts.
VValnuts, or Royal Nuts, or Juglans Jovis glans.
Nuts of Jove,
(Here Is name enough to get a noble love)
Are the best sort of Nuts, and newly plucked
Delight the taste, but little juice is sucked
From its dry kernel, which does slow desc^^^,
And by its h^r^ concoction does offend.
Made in oil* like Almonds, they make smooth
The hands and face, like chizel to a booth,
Or bo^rd, they ^lain the su^fie head, and scales,
And ^ave the labor of our itching n^ils.
The green and tender Nut, like Suck^d made,
And boiled in Sugar (it is Confectioners trade)
Is ^o^t delightful and confortative,
And anti^oticall, then eat, and live.
Chestnuts are dry and binding, in a mean
'Twixt hot and cold (Nut Laodicaean then)
But yet Sardi^ian breed, inflative high,
As (...) in the ^ire, their bouncing does descry.
After its windy ru^ture roast it well,
And stee^ it in good Sack, until it swell
By the infusion, then this Nut is good
Provocative, and plenty makes of blood:
Thus rarefied by fire, and sowe'd in Sack,
We may commend it fulcrum to the back.
There is a Chestnut called Equina, which
Is Horse-chesnut in our sole English speech,
Which from the ^astern Country came, and can
Horse coughs and Astma's cure, why not in Man?
We have a Nut too that is called Po^cine,
An Acron wild we give it to our swine;
Not meat for men, unless when so tunes all
Are spent, we diet with the Prodigal*
CHAP. XXXII. of SPICES.
PEpper is vehement hot, and mixed with meat
Assists the stomach to make quick defeat,
And noble change, on that Mesh or Hoch-podge,
Which else would longer in her region lodge;
Great crutches to digestion, and disperses
Wind, as King Aeolus in Virgils verses.
Wherefore on all inflative roots and grass,
Asperse the Pepper-box, and they will pass.
But let hot tempers, and in summer time,
Fobear, unless they will inflame the chyme:
There are some persons too; be none of those,
Who if they take it, take more then in the nose:
But they that love the haunch of hunted Deer,
With salt and pepper, make a noble cheer;
Yet 'cause my reverend Prelate loves it not,
With other spices let him make it hot;
Churchmen must be approved, and verily
I do submit in more then ordering pie.
Ginger is hot and moist, and well digests,
The City Cooks do wisely in their Feasts,
(Not use it gingerly whereby such Fire,
And piles of meat concoction safe acquire.
Wherefore the use of it, and other Spices,
Have raised the Groce^s, and some quaint devices
To be of the Twelve, to wit, twelve Companies,
Because of these salvifical supplies,
As Pepper, M^ce, Cloves, Currants and Raysons,
And Prunes, rare ware! kept we the old seasons:
But that high drug Tobacco free does pass,
Whether we have a Christ-tide, or Christ-masse.
But to our Ginger (which besides in Ale
Against its flativeness it does prevail)
To livers cold, and stomachs likewise so,
It does a friendly heat and hel^ bestow;
Its virtue's known in Com^osition,
For obscure eyes, so says my Portington,
And so says Rasis, if that dimness be
Produc^d from moisture and humidity.
So Avicen commends it to the head
And throat, with raw cold rheumes incumbered.
Good for the memo^y (says the same man)
Forget not then the old Physician,
For your old Blades are best when all is done,
For they were wise, and had read Solomon.
Zedoary's hot and dry in the degree
Next to the first: The Dispensato^y
Is frequent in its use, for it discusses
All flatulency which in bodies buzzes;
It fattens too by occult quality,
(That Is the old help in Physic) let it be;
The world is not discovered all, we cannot
Know any thing completely, not a Plant,
For every Plant does hide a Deity,
And like the Sensitive shrinks when we pry,
Or touch, beyond decorum, stands the show
When modest inquisition comes to know.
But for its virtue known, let it suffice,
It has the name of Triacle by the wise;
Good against poisons, and infections good,
Whether they center in the spirits or blood.
Wherefore its use we may commend to all,
In this next Spring, and in the present Fall.
It is to the stomach most comfortative,
Raises the appetite, the scent does drive
Of noisome Garlike, Onions, and strong Leek,
(Which make the Ladies at a kiss turn cheek.)
Good against Colic, Stomack-Pains, and Lask,
And drunk in wine allayes our heat of Cask;
A Panacaea Rustic, not sure a greater;
Yes, Doctor Everard has found a His universal M^dicine, Tobacco.
better.
Galingale, both the small and greater root,
(From India this, from China that sought out)
Is hot and dry in the third degree, sovereign
Against the maladies of a col^ brain
If it is but smelt unto; but chewed is rare
For those whose lungs and breath ill savored are,
But if the stomachs region's stuffed, and torn
By wind, let no man this rare Medicine scorn.
Or when we stomach lack unto our meat,
It will ^rocure it, and do greater feat,
(Digest) and greater yet; helps after third
Concoction, prime food for Venus Bird:
And for the Colic grief and colder reins,
The shops can tell you what a price it gains.
Clove-berry's hot and dry, astringent too,
Like Cloves in virtue, and in outward show.
In scent and taste most aromatical,
(Such Alexander fumed his skin withal,
Unto odorous transpiration)
Is good against Goat-evacuation,
And Rammish breathings: good too for the eyes,
Annoyed by cold Catarrhs and Crudities
Bred in the stomach; Livers cold it warm,
Would all exotic things did no less harm.
Rasis says Cynamon is hot and dry,
Strengthens the Liver by that quality,
And stomach too, and gets an appetite,
And sweeps the wind out of that region quite:
It does obstructions clear, that stop the reins,
Forcing the u^ine in strangurial pains;
Provokes the Menstrua, old Isack says,
The Mid-wives are of a contrary faith.
It Is wholesome made in sauce, and fumes the breath,
And a Sack posset rarely flavoreth.
Saffron is hot and dry in the first degree,
The weakened stomachs friend: no enemy
Unto obstructed Livers, not their breath,
Which is so short (it differs not from death.)
The feeble parts it comforts: don't you see
The Saffron Cawdle every morning fly
Into the Ladies chambers; they are wise,
And will take nothing dangerous before they rise.
For women hard of labor present ease,
Rasis prefers it before Man-midwiferies,
Or women's too, and says that this alone
Is the Lucina to be called upon.
Put into wine it does inspirit that,
Firks up its virtues, were it never so flat;
And in the drinker strikes a cheeriness,
That Plunder cannot allay, nor lay distress.
It is enough; thy virtues are so high,
I do commend thee to the Cavalry.
Carawayes, or seeds of Caria, whence they take
Their name, are hot and dry, when made in Cake,
Or into Confects* wholesome Recipe*
Against the urines painful stoppages:
Dissolve collected wind in stomachs crude,
And blasts Hypocondriacal extrude:
They Wor^s in children mortify; are best,
Eat in the van, not in the rear* of the Feast,
(As is the usual custom) when with cheese
And apples, these are sawcer-services,
Correctors of that windy fruit, an^ why
Ex^el not wind without their company?
Wherefore in bread with ^nniseeds (which have
Virtues alike) immixt, they will Physic save.
CHAP. XXXIII.
MUstard is hot and dry, above the third
Degree, by it the br^in and stomack's stirred,
And watty hu^ours in born ^egions dried,
Her Cou^trey-man its (...) virtue tried,
When that it caught her by the nose, did cry,
(A pox of her, a ^ox of ^ewxbury.)
Good sauce for Pork, and ^oose, and Brawn in chief
For Sawsages, and Tri^es, and powdered Beef;
Good for the int^llect, says Avicen,
I do (...) it unto G^tham, then,
But they must drink it fa^ing; which they will
N^^e^ observe, though to gain Solomon's skill:
But yet for humou^s viscous, thick and tough,
The seed of Mu^^ard is as good as snuff:
And ^ulveriz'd, and in vine-blan^h de France
Infused, 'twill make a Tertian Ague dance;
It will expectorate, and further reach,
Even to the Stone (if Pliny ^ightly teach.)
But th^n in vinegar you must i^ lay,
Through Alpine hills these two will make a way,
Salt is alike with Mustards quality
High-priz^d with us, but more in Gallia,
Where it is a sovereign sauce, fit for a King,
A sauce finds meat, and clothes, and every thing;
It takes away fas^idiousness in meat
(I cannot say, that which the French do eat)
Who loath even Salt it self, and heart'ly have
It, since it comes obtruded on a Rate.
Yet it subtiles the taste, and makes it play,
Removing gro^sness from the Uvul^;
Excites and sharpens duller appetite,
Hunger and Salt are sauce, or none is right.
But too much Salt licks up and burns the blood*
Just in the body as it is in food,
Which is exuct, and dry, and juyceless made*
Where that its briny fire does much invade;
As by experience, to their constant grief,
Our Mariners do find it in their Beef,
And Sea provisions, which retu^ns them all
Tro^hies of Salt, sadly Scorbutical.
To those that do in Salt too much delight,
It minorates the seed, bedimms the sight.
I have two F^iends of either Sex, which do
Eat little Salt, or none, yet are friends to,
Of both which persons I can truly tell,
They are of patience most invin^ible:
When out of temper no misch^nce at all
Can put, no* if toward them the Salt should fall.
I know a pretty Pearl such use has got
Of Salt, he would eat (if need) up Madam Lot,
A little chole^ick Spar^, a very fire,
Whom if to make your friend you do desire,
You shall not need a long experience make,
His Bushel's eaten, and you may him take:
Though these two tempers are excessive, know,
A trencher-Salt for Tables we allow.
Rasis says, Vinega^ is dry and cold,
It makes its lovers macilent and old,
A vinegar-fact fellow, as we say,
A Constable on his installing day,
Looks as if in urine he were soused;
Beware night-walkers, you will all be In the Counter.
housed,
It does destroy the bodies noble juice,
Unsucculents the back, and spoils its use;
A help to Quartan Agues; and all such,
Who with black Choler do abound over much,
Which it confirms and fixes, E contrae,
It does disperse, and infirm Choler Rubea:
It gives a pass of gust in diet, mends
The duller juice, and downward grateful send
There are disputes, whether it is hot or cold,
I Am for my Sages, and with them must hold.
Honey is hot and dry (says Isaac)
In degree second, not does virtue lack,
Good for Cacectick persons, whose gross chiles
And evil humors rarely it subtiles,
And makes them remeant, passant through the skin,
Where thousand little doors are to be seen.
If you would know what are those little doors,
Madam, undoubtedly they are the Pores.
The foulness of the putrid blood in veins
It purifies, cleanses those channels stains;
Wherefore let all, whose constitution's cold
And moist, decrepit persons, and the old
Lick Honey, or the drink-compound thereof,
'Twill warm their chilness, and 'twill cure their cough:
But you, my Friends, of choleric tempers, know
Honey like choler is, and turns so:
Live Honey (as we say) and eaten raw,
Is much inflative, rakes the breast and Maw,
Provokes by vomit and by Siege; but supped
In new laid Egg rare salve for lungs corrupt.
What need we longer praise it, when we know
Its Providore, from every flower does blow,
Sucks universal Balm, so in a spoon
You take Gerards divine The Herbal.
Collection.
So that the gleanings of the vigorous Be
Is Iohnson's labors neat Epitome.
Whom would not this glorious juice entice
To taste it, though at loved Ionathan's price?
OILS.
Of Oils the Oil of Olives wears the bays,
Has higher virtues, therefore higher praise:
Pliny the Senior, (whom Vesuvius kills,
And the eructations of those fiery hills,
A sad example, and precaution gives
To all (though never so learned) inquisitives,
Not to be wise, and peep in things too high,
We have our Aetna's in Divinity)
Pardon the length of this Parenthesis,
That Pliny shall declare Oils qualities:
It is all bodies suppler; but the dry
And hide-bound ought it most to magnify;
Vellum-fac'd fellows, living whit-leather,
Eat Genoa Olives, and the Oil together,
Until your parchment bodies give a soul,
Sordid and covetous Trayn-oyl cannot unfoul;
It makes the body strong and vigorous,
(A word of late in wondrous use with us,
But then against the sacred Oil) it drives
Poisons, though double twist by jealous Wives.
It gently lays the torments of the guts,
Cleanses the tripes, and o^es those lower huts:
The headache pains it cures, and mildly swages
The ardor that in burning Feavors rages.
What windy vapors dares in the body stay,
Or come in this aerial Unguents way?
Then if your eyes you would have like Diamonds
Sparkle, (with such rare flame your eyes abounds,
Madam) Oil will them clarify, advance
A handsome face to Cherub's countenance.
The Cerusses are known, and we allow
To you the mellow sleek-stone of the brow;
Such Arts are legal, wot you what Hester
Bestowed in sweets, when for the King she dressed her?
For all our long and still upheld turmoyles,
And all my suffering, I Am for Sovereign Oils.
The Oil of Nuts most vehement and hot,
Let them, who Fistula's in the eyes have got,
Use it from Madam Stepkins hand, or buy
It well compounded by good Surgery.
The Oil of Almonds is more temperate,
It does the breast and lungs cleanse and dilate:
The grated reins and bladder do receive
Huge ease, when we this lenifier give.
Specks in the face it takes away, how so?
When Ladies that use Oil have Specks we know:
The round, the long, the star, the great, the lesser,
And are made Ursa's by their Woman-dresser.
Though Vrsa is a Bear, I mean them none,
Unless it be a Constellation.
The scarrs of Wounds by Oil and Honey mixed
Are plained and levelled though a long time fixed:
Rare remedy in fighting blustering times,
Such as are ours, the more, God knows, our crimes:
This Medicine is most parable, not hard;
Have thou the Morphyes, use it Renegard,
Thou who have ventured much, and bravely dared,
When that thy body is one scarre, as chance
May make it in thy next renowned advance,
Then call for Oil of Nuts my Renigard.
Now like the Squirril, which on Nuts does feed,
We leap from verses to some nobler deed.
FINIS.

