A GENERAL AND COMPLETE LIST MILITARY OF Every Commission-Officer of HORSE and
FOOT Now Commanding His Majesty's Landforces OF ENGLAND: (Excepting the
Un-Regimented Companies.)

AS ALSO The Proper Distinctions of their Cloathings, Badges of Honor, and
Colors of each Troop and Regiment.

The Names of the Chief Officers of the Ordnance, and other Officers belonging
to the Army.

WITH A LIST Of the Royal Band of Gentlemen-Pentioners and Yeomen of the KING'S
Guard of his Body.

Of the Governors, Lt. Governors, and Deputy-Governours, throughout the
Kingdom.

A^ Established at the time of the Revew upon PUTNEY-HEATH, the First of
October, 1684.

As also an ACCOUNT of the said Revew, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. Gain, for Nathan Brooks, ^ Thomas Knapton's, next Door
to the Flying-Horse in Upper Moor-Fields, 1684.

TO THE READER.
FOr fear these Essays of Military Lists, after all the unspeakable Drudgeries
undergone to Collect and digist them into those Methods they are now published
with, should nevertheless in the first place not afford their managing Reader
Drums and Trumpets enough for his Money, nor in the second place afford their
happy Author a rattling round vent enough of the whole Impression for his Pains,
which comes all to one Reckoning: Are you Gentlemen, who had perhaps rather
read Men then Books, without any further cutting upon good Nature, bid most
heartily welcome to make the Meal up with a Treat from Putney-Heath, whose
Camp, and manner of Encamping described by an Eye Witness on the first of
October, 1684, is here over and above served up Gratis; when but pleased to pay
for the Dish you have it in: That way endeavoring rather to give you all your
B^llys-full, if possible, in the stead of some Meagre Advertisement, garnish't
with an hundred small Peccavi's to no purpose, for unavoidable great Faults in
all undertakings of this Nature; indeed of all our standing Dish^^, the most
naus^ous, whose craving sort of Rosemary some few may chan^^ to look at, but
tasted of by no Body.

The major part then of those his Majesty's Forces, not moving from their Posts
of present Duty, of whom these scattering Sheets attempt to give the World some
little light, The remaining part quartered near hand Encamped the first of
October upon Putney-Heath, Officer and Soldier parading there, not in less Gay
and Splendid, then in a Martial Equipage.

The Horse that day consisted of the three Troops of Guards, and of their three
of Granadiers, of the Earl of Oxford's Regiment of Horse-Guards, and the Lord
Churchil's Regiment of Dragoons.

The Foot of two Battalions, formed from the Royal Regiment of Guards and their
Granadiers; of one Battalion from the Cole-stream Regiment of Guards and
Granadiers; of one Battalion from the Earl of Dunbarton's and their Granadiers;
and lastly of one from the Admiral Regiment.

The Horse and Foot imbodied, and drawn in a continued Line, took their proper
Post upon a rising Ground, in length from Right to Left near a Mile and half,
viz. from the Red House near the Bowling-Green, extended cross the Heath, and
fronting to the River.

The Horse at their usual depth made four Squadrons upon the Right Wing, of
which the Troops of Guards made three, and their Granadiers one. The Left Wing
of Horse in the like manner made four Squadrons, whereof my Lord of Oxford's
Regiment formed two, and my Lord Churchil's Dragoons the other. The three
Troops of Guards flanking in that Figure upon the Right of the main Body. My
Lord of Oxford's, and my Lord Churchil's Regiments flanking it on the Left: in
all of Horse eight Squadrons, each consisting of two Hundred.

The Admiral's Battalion, as youngest in the Field, took their Post in the
Center of the Line. The two Battalions of the Royal Regiment of Guards and
Granadiers being drawn upon the Admiral's Right, were immediately Flanck't by
the right Wing of Horse; my Lord Dunbarton's Battalion and Granadiers being
Posted on the Admiral's Left, and upon my Lord Dunbarton's Left was drawn the
Colestream Battalion of Guards and Granadiers, which the Left Wing of Horse
immediately Flanck't. All the Foot at their Order drawn four deep, consisted of
five Battalions, each of eight Companies.

The Colestream, my Lord Dunbarton's, and the Admiral's Battalions successively
Exercised all three by Beat of Drum, the Military Postures of Pike, Sword, and
Musket; every man dexterously discharging their Duties with an exact and
general Readiness, to the great Delight and Satisfaction of their Majesty's and
Royal Highnesses, vouchsafing all the time of Exercise to grace their Arms with
the Honor of their Presence. The other two Battalions of the Royal Regiment
had not fell short of the like Performance, if Illness of Weather, when they
just intended it, had not prevented: The Day proving wet and showry, was a
general Impediment from proceeding at that time to any other Motions, Customary
upon the like Revews. All Decampt sooner than otherwise they would have done.

The total Horse and Foot which then Rendivouz'd, were above four Thousand
advantagiously Trained, and well clad Men. Commanded in the Field for that days
Generalship, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Craven.

ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 31. for differec't, read differenc't. p. 6. l. 20. f. Tho.
Slingsby, r. Sir Tho. Slin^s^y* p. 12. l. 2. f. Laudstream, r. Cauldstream. p.
16. l. 14. f. Ba^ton, r. Payton. Both Author and Printer will mend their Hands,
should Encouragement be given for a Second Edition, and the Un-Regimented
Companies supplied.

A List of the ROYAL BAND of GENTLEMEN-PENTINOERS, by the Right Honorable
THEOPHILUS, Earl of HUNTINGTON, Commanded in Chief.
Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Captain. The Honorable Francis Vilars,
Lieutenant. Sir Tho. Bloodworth, Bar. Standard Bearer. William Thomas, Clerk of
the Cheque.
Gentlemen Pentioners.
Thomas Hales, Sir Tho. ^oe. Knight, Anthony Gaudy, Hugh Teient, Sir Robert
Dacrees, Knight, Roger Conisby, Abraham Clark, John Hubbard, John West, William
Ashton, John Barnard, Walter Baker, George Farington, Edward Courthrop, Charles
Gostwick, Edward Glynn, Sir Gerard Fleetwood, Knight, David Vivian, Thomas
Frances, Charles Cludd, Sir Tho. Knivefton, Baronet, Chistopher Turner, William
Rowley, Edward Mainard, Peter Lock, John Estcourt, Lancelot Lake, Richard
Willis, Thomas Manning, William Morgan, Bernard Turner, Ambrose Sycom, Sir
Theop. Janson, Baronet. John Cooper, Charnock Heron, Abraham Duplex, Henry
Bynn, Thomas Orme, Mil^s Marsh, John Hastings, Richard Child, Gent. Harbinger.
The Royal Band of Gentlemen-Pentioners, consists of Forty Gentlemen besides
Officers; the usual Arms they do Duty with, are gilt Battle-Axes; Their
Standard is St. Georges Cross, in a Field-Argent, with four Bends. The Captains
pay is One Thousand Pound yearly, The Lieutenants Five Hundred Pound,
Standard-bearers Three Hundred and Ten Pound, Clerk of the Cheques One Hundred
and Twenty Pound: To each Gentleman of the Band One Hundred Pound yearly.

A List of the Commission-Officers and Yeomen of his Majesty's Guard of his
Body, commanded by the Right Honorable George, Lord Viscount Grandison.
George, Lord Grandison, Captain. Thomas Howard, Lieutenant. Henry Dutton,
Colt. Ensign.
Exempts
William Houghton, Sir Herbert Whaly, Thomas Orme, Robert Sares, The Honorable
Charles Villars, Clerk of the Cheque.
Yeomen.
Richard Dewel, Yeomen-Ushers. William Sherloc, Yeomen-Ushers. Richard Roiston,
Matthew Leper, Edward Finch, Thomas Skeleton, William Blackford, Thomas Worth,
Daniel Jenings, Richard Bowman, Charles Webb, William Crosier, senior. William
Ford, John Earling, Edw. Brisco, senior, Yeomen-Ushers. William Finch,
Yeomen-Ushers. William Dover, Thomas Nicolas, William Woodrof, John Smith,
William Attlee, Nicholas Hawkins, Daniel Lambert, Ja. Trumble, William Harvey,
junior. Thomas Winsta^ley, Isaac Snelling, John Hebborn, John Millart,
Yeomen-Ushers. Dubble Brook, Yeomen-Ushers. Edward Hargrave, Robert Stone,
Jonas Price, Thomas Banister, James Morgan, John Ferrers, Henry Harwar, John
Lambert, Robert Norman, Philip Willis, Thomas Scott, Richard Palmer, Christo.
Sanders, Yeomen.Ushers. John Sares, Yeomen.Ushers. John Millart, Abraham Story,
John Holmden, Thomas Gilpin, Henry Crow, Joseph Collier, Robert Fowler, John
Ki^ton, Edward Ellis, Jervis Thwaits, Jo. Scorer, John Tendering Jo. Templer.
Yeomen-Ushers. Tho. Nicols, Yeomen-Ushers. Thomas Lambert, John Inge William
Crosier, junior. George Bulloc, William Hobbs, Ambrose Tooth, William Wheatly,
John Beter, James Palmer, John Webster, James Hassel, William Green, Tho.
Bishop, late Yeomen Usher. Nicholas Lane, Robert Thomson, John Franks, Edward
Brisco, junior. William Jones, Joseph Troit, Yeomen-Usher. Anthony Clark,
Thomas Thackam, Thomas Frye, Daniel Coyes, Richard King, Robert Parsons,
Yeomen.Usher. Robert Kidwell, Richard St. Peire, Henry Winchester, Robert
Radford, Eleazer Coats, Will. Harvey, senior, Yeomen-Usher. Thomas Roberts,
Nicholas Caple, William Bastian, William Harrison, Tho. Evans, Yeomen-Usher.
Peter Hickman. Tristram Thomas, Thomas Smith, Henry Meyson, John Brayfield.
Ja. Evans, Roger Jakson, Chamber-keepers. Thomas Coleman, Deputy-Clerk of the
Cheque.
This Guard cosists of one hundred Yeomen, besides Officers; of those, Fifteen
are appointed Sub-altern Officers, or Yeom^n-Ushers, with some additional Pay,
exceeding their fellow-Yeomen, which to each is 30 l. yearly. To a
Yeomen-Usher, 37 l. They wear large-skirted Scarlet Coats, guarded with black
Velvet, badged with a Rose crowned upon their Backs and Breasts; Fifty of them
armed with Ha^onebuziers; Fifty with Partisans. The Captains yearly pay 1000 l.
The Lieutenants 500 l. Ensigns 300 l. Exempts 150 l. Clerk of the Cheque 200 l.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Kings own Troop of
Horse-Guards, and Troops of Granadiers, by his Grace, Christopher Duke of
Albemarle; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, commanded in Chief, as
eldest Colonel of Horse in his Majesty's Kingdom of England.
Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. The honorable
Edward Villars, Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Edmond Ashton,
Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Edward Griffin, Lieutenants,
Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Richard Binns, Lieutenants, Commanding as
Lieutenant Colonels Sir Walter Clarges, Cornet, Commanding as Majors, The Right
Honorable Jo. Ld. Ber^ley,Guidon, Commanding as Majors, Stephen Dyer,
Quartermaster, Commanding as Captain, Lewis Billingsley, Brigadiers,
Commanding as Lieutenants, Robert Nowell, Brigadiers, Commanding as
Lieutenants, John Baynes, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants, Edward S^mms,
Sub Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Tho. W^lford, Sub
Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Jo. Brailsford, Sub
Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. George Nailor, Sub
Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers.
The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop.
Dr. Ja. Gardener, Chaplain. William Chapman, Clerk, Tho. Hobs, Surgeon.
Hugh Fisher, Trumpets. Ben. Ragois, Trumpets. Michael Mear, Trumpets. John
Basset, Trumpets. Robert Mawgridge, Kettle Drum.
Granadiers attending this Troop of Guards.
John Parker, Lieutenants, Tho. Guy, Lieutenants, two Sergants, two Corporals,
Hautbois 4. Drums 2, Private men 64.
This Troop of Guards consists of 200, besides Officers, distinguished by their
Carbine Belts of Velvet, laced with Gold and Silver, by their red Hooses and
Holster-Caps, embroidered with the Royal Cipher and Crown, Coated and Cloaked
in Scarlet, lined with Blew; The Standard Crimson, with the Royal Cipher and
Crown, the Guidon differenced only from the Standard by being rounded and slit
at the end.

The Captains pay of this Troop, per diem, 01 l. 10 s. The Lieutenants 15 s.
The Cornets 14 s. The Guidons 12 s. Quarter Masters 9 s. Brigadiers 7 s.
Sub-brigadiers equal with the Kings pay of a private man, which is daily 4 s.

The Granadiers of this Troop have blew Loops, tufted with Yellow upon Red
Coats, lined Blew, with Granadier Caps, lined the same, and a Blew round mark
on the outside, armed with Bayonets and Harquebuzes. The Lieutenants pay, per
diem, of Granadiers to this Troop, 8 s. Serjents 4 s. Corporals 3 s. Private
men, Hautbois and Drums 2 s. 6 d.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Queen's Troop of his
Majesty's Horse-Guards and Troop of Granadiers, Commanded by the Honorable Sir
Philip Howard.
Sir Philip Howard, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. Sir George Hewyt, Bar.
Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels. Sir John Fenwick, Bar.
Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels. Charles Orby, Cornet,
Commanding as Majors. The Honorable John Darcy, Guidon, Commanding as Majors.
William Upcott, Quartermaster. Commanding as Captain. Gorge Collingwood,
Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. John Staples, Brigadiers, Commanding as
Lieutenants. John Chittam, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. Sir Richard
Brown, Bar. Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. Richard Beale,
Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Richard Barham,
Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. George Howard,
Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Mich. Stadholm,
Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers.
The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop of Guards.
Benj. Barnet, Chaplain, Philip Aires, Clerk, Richard Mills, Chirurg. William
Bounty, Trumpets. William Bull, Trumpets. Thomas Barnwell, Trumpets. Mat.
Shore, Trumpets. Francis Breban, Kettle Drum.
Granadiers Attending this Troop of Guards.
Richard Potter, Lieuts. Robert Dixon, Lieuts. two Serjts. Two Corpor. Four
Hautbois, Two Drums, 64 Private Men.
The Queen's Troop of Horse-Guards has but two Lieutenants, otherwise
consisting of equal number with that of the King's, distinguished by Carbine
Belts of Green Velvet, Laced with Gold, green Hooses, and Holster-Caps,
Embroidered with the same Cipher and Crown, Coated and Cloaked as the King's,
Standard and Guidon the same as the King's.

The Captain's Pay of this Troop, per diem, is 10 s. less than that of the
King's, all the other Officer's Pay alike with the King's Troop, excepting the
Brigadiers, who has but 6 s.

The Granadiers Paid, Clad, and Armed as the King's, differenc't by green
Loops, with yellow Tufts upon their Coats.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Dukes Troop of his
Majesty's Horse-Guards, and Troop of Granadiers, commanded by the Right Honble.
LOUIS, Earl of FEVERSHAM.
Louis, Earl of Feversham, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. Robt. Werden,
Lieuts. Commanding as Lt. Colonels. Theophilus Oglethorp, Lieuts. Commanding as
Lt. Colonels. Philip Darcy, Cornet. Commanding as Majors. Edmund Main, Guidon,
Commanding as Majors. Ferdinand Stanhop, Quartermaster, Commanding as Cpt.
William Springall, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. Ambrose Norton,
Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. George Hastings, Brigadiers, Commanding as
Lieuts. Jenken Morgan, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. Hen. Rimborn,
Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Hen. Griffith,
Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Sam. Harison.
Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Sam. English,
Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers.
The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop, etc.
William Roles, Chaplain, James Bridgeman, Clerk, Gabriel Jones, Chirurg. Jo.
Seignior, Trumpets. Pet. Lefever, Trumpets. Rich. Phillips, Trumpets. Moses
Phillips, Trumpets. Cornet Vanderend, Kettle Drum.
The Granadiers attending this Troop of Guards.
Anthony Heyford, Leuts. John Vaughan, Leuts. two Serjts. two Corpls. four
Hautbois two Drumbs.
The Duke's Troop and Granadiers, the same in Pay and Number with the Queen's,
the Guards only distingush't by their Carbine-Belts, laced with Silver upon
yellow Velvet. Hooses and Holdster-Caps embroidered upon Yellow, with the same
Cipher and Crown as the King's: The Standard and Guidon yellow Damask, with his
Royal Highnesse's Cipher and Coronet.

The Granadiers paid and clad as the King's, differec't by their Coat-Loops of
Yellow upon their Breasts.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of
Horse-Guards, Commanded by the Right Honble. AUBERY, Earl of OXFORD, Knight. of
the most noble Order of the Garter.
Aubery, Earl of Oxford, Colonel. The Honble. Sir Fran. Compton, Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Cornets. Quarter Masters. Captain William Leg
commanding the King's own Troop. Lt. William Wind, Cor. Rowland Selsby, Quar.
Richd. Wise, Capt. Lt. Hen. Cornwell commanding the Colonel's Troop. Lt. Hen.
Cornwell, Cor. Edward Scot, Quar. George Carry, The Major's Troop, commanded by
Lt. Cha. Adderly, Cor. Hen. Norris, Quar. Cha. Duncom* Sir Cha. Windham, Capt.
Lt. Edmund Harris, Cor. David Lloid, Quar. Robert Bourg, Edw. Sandys, Capt. Lt.
Edmund Turner, Cor. Old^^ld, Quar. Vernam, The. Lucy, Capt. Lt. Davenport Lucy,
Cor. Leigh, Quar. Tho. Conisby, Tho. Slingsby, Capt. Lt. John Lehunt, Cor. Edw.
Andrews, Quar. John Tuck, Walter Littleton, Capt. Lt. Phil. Munocks, Cor. Will.
Carew, Quar. Walter Chetwyn,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Regiment.
David Lloid, Adjutant. Syssom, Surgeon.
This Regiment of Horse-Guards consists of eight Troops, each of them having,
besides those Commissioned-Officers above named, three Corporals, two Trumpets,
forty five private Men, distinguished by their Carbine-Belts laced with Gold
upon Buff with a red edging, Hooses and Holdster-Caps with the Royal Cipher,
embroidered upon Blew, Coated and Cloaked Blew, lined Red. The Colonels pay per
diem, as Col. and Capt. 1 l. 14 s. The Majors, as Major and Captain 17 s. A
Captains 11 s. A Leiutenants 10 s. Cornets 9 s. Quarter Masters 6 s. Corporals
03. Trumpets 3. A private man's pay 2 s. 6 d. The King's Troop has only a Kettle
Drum, which none of the other Troops have, with a Standard, Crimson, and the
Imperial Crown embroidered: The Colonel's Colors flies the Royal Cyher,
Crimson: The Major's Gold Streams, Crimson. The first Troop, the Rose Crowned;
The second, a Thistle Crowned; The third, the Flower-Deluces Crowned; The
fourth, the Harp Crowned; The fifth, the Royal Oak, embroidered upon their
Crimson Colors.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the King's own Royal Regiment
of DRAGOONS, Commanded by the Right Honble. JOHN Lord CHURCHIL.
The Right Honble. John Lord Churchil, Col. Edward Ld. Cornbury; Lt. Col. Hugh
Sutherland, Maj.

Capts, Lieuts. Cornets. The Colonels Troop, Commanded by Capt. Lieut. Thomas
Hussy. Thomas Hussy. C. William Hussy. The Lt. Colonels Troop, Commanded by Lt.
Charles Ward. C. Piercy Roche. Alx. Mackenzie, Capt. Lt. Hugh Windham. C. John
Cole. Charles Neatby, Capt. Lt. John Williams. C. George Clifford. John Coye,
Capt. Lt. Charles La Rue. C. Will. Staniford. Tho. Langston, Capt. Lt. Fran.
Langston. C. Tho. Pownel.

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Regiment of Dragoons.
Thomas Crawly, Adjutant, Theobald Churchil, Chaplain, Hen. Hawker, Quart.
Master, Peregrine Yewel Chirurg.
This Royal Regiment of Dragoons consists of six Troops, besides the Officers
abovenamed: each has 1 Quartermaster, 2 Sergeants, 3 Corporals, 2 Hautbois, 2
Drums, and 50 Private Men; Armed with Muskets and Bayonets, Coated and Cloaked
red lined blew; Hooses embroidered with blew and yellow upon red, with the
Royal Cipher; Caps the same, with R. Cipher. The Colonels Pay of Dragoons per
diem, as Col. and Capt. 1 l. 6 s. Lieut. Cols. Pay as Lt. Col. and Capt. 1 l.
Capt. Pay 11 s. Lieut. Pay 6 s. Cornets 5 s. Quart. Mast. 3 s. Serjts. 2. s. 6
d. Corpl's 2 s. Hautbois and Drums 2 s. Private Men 1 s. 6 d. per Diem.

The Colors to each Troop thus distinguished -- The Colonel's, the Royal
Cipher and Crown embroidered upon Crimson: the Lieut. Col. the Rays of the Sun
proper Crowned, issuing out of a Cloud proper, and is a Badge of the Black
Princes. The first Troop has for Colors the top of a Beacon crowned ore with
flames of Fire proper, and is a Badge of Henry V. The second Troop, two
Estreages Feathers crowned, argent; a Badge of Henry VI. The third a Rose and
Pomgranate impaled, leaves and stalk vert. a Badge of Henry VII. The fourth
Troop a Phoenix in flames proper, a Badge of Queen Elizabeth: Each embroidered
upon Crimson.

Capt. John Staples Adjutant, General of the Horse, Peter Smith, Marshal of the
Horse.
A List of the chief Officers of the Ordnance, and other General Officers
belonging to the Army.
The Right Honorable George Lord Dartmouth,
Master General of the Ordnance. Sir Charles Musgrave, Bar. Lieut. General of
the Ordnance. Sir Bern. De Gomi, Surveyer and Ingeneer General of the
Ordinance. Captain Richard Leake, Master-Gunner of England.
The Honorable Charles Bertie, Treasurer of the Ordnance, Sir Edward Sherburn,
Clark of the Ordnance, William B^idges, Esquire; Store-Keeper, -- Gardener, Esquire;
Clerk of the Deliveries.
Other General Officers belonging to the Army.
Charles Fox, Esquire; Play Master General of all the Landforces, The Honorable
Henry Howard, Commissary General of the Musters, David Crawford, Esquire; Deputy
Commissary General of the Musters, To whom belong eight Provincial Commissaries.

William Blathwait, Esquire; Secretary at War, George Clark, Esquire; Judge Advocate,
Col. James Hassel, Scout-Master General, James Pierce, Esquire; Surgeon General,
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of
Foot-Guards, Commanded in chief by his Grace, HENRY, Duke of GRAFTON, Knight of
the most noble Order of the Garter.
The Duke of Grafton, Colonel. John Strode, Lieutenant Colonel. William Eyton,
Major.

Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The honorable Sackville Tuffton, commanding
the King's own Company as Capt. Lt. Gilbert Talbot, Ens. William Seymor, The
Colonel's Company, commanded by Capt. Lt. -- Edward Rouse, Ens. Hen. Bennet,
The Leutenant Colonels Company, commanded by -- Lt. John Headly, Ens. Giles
Spicer, The Major's Company, commanded by -- Sir William Queristan, Bar. Lt.
Ens. Fran. Edwards, Sir Roger Manly, Capt. Lt. Robert Baxter, Ens. Robert
Knott. The honorable John Berckley, Capt. Lt. Edmund Harris, Ens. Tho. Rawly,
Thomas Stradling, Capt. Lt. John Leake, Ens. Jo. Berckley, Ralph Delavall,
Capt. Lt. John George, Ens. Jo. Gibbons, John Skeleton, Capt. Lt. Hen. Colyer,
Ens. Tho. Dring, Edmond Rerersby, Capt. Lt. Stint Duncome, Ens. Jo.
Throgmorton, Knivet Hastings, Capt. Lt. Hen. Sandys, Ens. Edmund Wyndam, Hen.
Saville, Capt. Lt. William Richards. Ens. Hen. Wigmore, William Selwyn, Capt.
Lt. James Hancock, Ens. Oliver St. John, Charles Lloid, Capt. Lt. Corbet Hen,
Ens. William Aston, Tho. Throgmorton, Capt. Lt. Charles Robinson, Ens. William
Cornwallis, Arthur Corbet, Capt. Lt. Mat. Palmer, Ens. Stephen Bellieu, John
Seymour, Capt. Lt. William Chumley, Ens. James Harison, Ferdin. Hastings, Capt.
Lt. David Tailor, Ens. Hen. Hodson, Philip Kirk, Capt. Lt. Gilbert Primrose,
Ens. John Delavalle, Francis Wheeler, Capt. Lt. Richard Woodward, Ens. Charles
Ghost, Lenthal Warcup, Capt. Lt. Andr. Pitcarn, al. Wheeler, Ens. Charles
Wolseley, Charles Proier, Capt. Lt. Duncan Abercromy, Ens. David Eaton, Charles
Midleton, Capt. Lt. William Smith, Ens. (...) ^orister,

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of
Foot-Guards and Granadiers, Commanded by his Grace HENRY, Duke of GRAFTON,
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. Will. Parsons, Capt. Lt. John Byns, Ens.
Richard Dalby, Francis Hawly, Capt. of a Company of Granadiers Lt. Chevalier
De'meziere, Lt. (...) Dolmain,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Royal Regiment of Foot-Guards.
Henry Sands, Adjutant, Chavalier de Meziere, 2 d. Adjutan^, Tho. Jones, Quar.
Mast. and Marshal, Dr. Morris, Chaplain, John Noad, Surgeon, Franckin and
Belemay, Chir. Mates, Edward Skirrum, Drum-Major.
This first Regiment of Foot-Guards has 24 Companies established, two
Sergeants, three Corporals, and two Drums in each, the King's own Company
having a Sergeant more than the other Companies; di^tinguish't by red Coats
lined blew, blew Stockings, blew breeches and white Sashes with blew fringe.
The Pay of all his Majesty's Commission-Offieers of Foot in every Regiment and
Company, alike: That of Private Sentinels, 8 d. per diem; excepting in the two
Regiments of Foot-Guards, which is per diem 10 d.

Attended by a company of Granadiers, armed with Muskets and Bayonets, without
Swords, having besides the Comm^ssion'd Officers, 2 Sergeants, 3 Corporals, and
2 Drums: Upon Caps lined blew, tuf^ed blew and red, their Granadiers bear the
R. Cipher crowned, for their distinction: This Regiment flies St. George's
Cross in a white Field, Viz. The King's own Company, the Standard all Crimson,
Cipher and Crown embroidered with Gold. -- The Colonel's, while, wi^h the red
Cross, the Crown or. -- The Lt. Colonels. the same Cross, with C. R. c^own'd
or. -- The Major's with C. R. and Crown or, with a Blaze crimson. -- The first
Company with the King's Crest, which is a Lion p^ssant gardant, crowned or,
standing on a Crown or. -- II. Comp. a Rose and Crown or. -- III.
Flower-de-luce and Crown or. -- IV. Portcullis and Crown or. -- V. A white Rose
in the Rays of the Sun, and Crown or. VI. Thistle and Crown or. -- VII. Harp
and Crown or. -- VIII. A Dragon passant and Crown. -- IX. A Greyhound passant
argent colored and Crown or. -- X. Sun and Crown. -- XI. Unicorn passant,
argent, armed ungled, and lined and Crown or. -- XII. Antelope, argent, armed,
ungled, and lined or, gorged wi^h a Ducal Crown, and Chain circumflex'd or. --
XIII. A Stag standing at gaze, and Crown or. -- XIV. A Falcon rising argent
within a Fetterlock or, crowned or. -- XV. Rose and Crown or, Stalk and Leaves
vert. -- XVI. A Swan argent, membered and beak or, gorged with a Collar and
Chain circumflex't or. -- XVII. A Falcon argent membred, beak't, bells, and
jesses, and ground, holding in the dexter Foot a Scepter all o^, Crown or. --
XVIII. The Stump of a Tree eraced or, Leaves vert, a Crown or. -- XIX. A Sword
and Scepter in Saltier or, the Blade proper. -- XX. The Royal-Oak and Crown or.
-- Each Colors has a white Field, the Kings own excepted, with a red Cross,
with these Badges in the Center of the Crosses.

A List of all Commission and Staff- Officers in the Cole-Stream, al.
Laud-Stream Regiment of Foot-Guards, Commanded by the Right Honouble. WILLIAM
Earl of CRAVEN.
The Earl of Craven Colonel, Edward Sackvile, Lt. Colonel, John Huitson, Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonels Company commanded by Capt. Lt.
Henry Cope, Ensign George With, The Lt. Colonel's Company commanded by -- Lt.
Edmond Steukly, Ensign Will. Wakefield, The Majors Company, commanded by -- Lt.
Henry Wharton, Ensign John Drake, John Miller, Capt. Lt. Thomas Seymour, Ensign
Adrian Moor, Antho. Markam, Capt. Lt. Robert Wilkins, Ensign Francis Marshal,
James Kendal, Capt. Lt. Will. Gibbons, Ensign Will. Mathews, Wm. Wakelin, Capt.
Lt. Edward Braddoc, Ensign Gamal. Chitwynd, Wm. Cholmely, Capt. Lt. John Clark,
Ensign James Wynd, Cha. Cotton, Capt. Lt. Will. Hewyt, Ensign Char. Wakelyn,
Richard Pope, Capt. Lt. Will. Rigg, Ensign Bozoon Symons, Heneage Finch, Capt.
Lt. Edward Jones, Ensign John Wyberd, Dudly Rupert, Capt. Lt. John Hope, Ensign
Allen Cotton, Jam. Bridgeman, Capt. of a Company of GraGranadiers. Lt. Edw.
Skeleton, Lt. James Ward,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Cole-stream Regiment, etc.
Robert Wilkins, Adjutant, Mat. Ingram, Quartermaster, Dr. John Price,
Chaplain, John Treutbeck, Surgeon, John Brown, Chirurgeon's Mate, Thomas
Goodman, Drum-Major.
This Regiment of Foot-Guards, established as the former, consisting of twelve
Companies, distinguished by red Coats lined green, red Stockings, and red
Breeches, and white Sashes fringed green, attended by a Company of Granadiers,
as the Duke of Grafton's: Their Caps lined green, with green Tassels, for their
distinction: Flies, St. George's Cross, bordered with white in a blew Field.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of Foot and
Granadiers, Gommanded by the Right Honorable GEORGE, Earl of DUNBARTON.
The Earl of Dunbarton, Colonel, Sir James Hacket, Lt. Colonel, Archibald
Duglas, Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's company commanded by Capt. Lt.
James Eastland, Capt. Lt. John Ackmooty, younger Lt. Ens. Charles Arnott, The
Lt. Colonels company commanded by -- Robert Drury, Robert Hacket, younger Lt.
Ens. Alex. Gawn, The Majors company commanded by -- Murdo Mackenzie, James
Law, younger Lt. Ens. Tho. Davison, Patrick Melvin, Capt. John Sterling, Henry
Car, younger Lt. Ens. Pet. Robinson, Robert Duglas, Capt. David Clark, John
Murray, younger Lt. Ens. Adam Bell, Andrew Monro, Capt. Robert Gordon, And.
Rutherford, younger Lt. Ens. Alex. Monro, Robert Lawder, Capt. William Deans,
John Chittam, younger Lt Ens. Roth. Makenzie Archibald Roll^, Capt. John Mouat,
Tho. Ogleby, younger Lt. Ens. Collen Camel, Sir James Moray, Capt. Andrew Scot,
John Straghan, younger Lt Ens. Cha. Moray, Ld. Geo. Hamilton, Capt. Sir John
Johnston, Bar. Jo. Leeds, younger Lt. Ens. Joh. Alexander. James Moncrife,
Capt. George Graham, John Leviston, younger Lt. Ens. John Lundy, Of Granadiers,
Robert Hodges, Capt. James Stuart, George Griffin, younger Lt. Char. Barclay,
Capt. George Stuart, Andrew Barclay, younger Lt. Ens. Wm. Robinson, Charles
Murray, Capt. Walter Murray, Thomas Scot, younger Lt. Ens. Thomas Bruce, John
Ruthen, Capt. Fredrick Hamilton, David Garioch, younger Lt. Ens. M. Mackentoch
John Car, Capt. James Mackcrakin, Ja. Moultray, younger Lt. Ens. Wm. Magil,
Thomas Forbes, Capt. Robert Leviston, Matthew Smelt, younger Lt. Ens. Jo.
Bannerman, John White, Capt. Robert Car, William White, younger Lt. Ens. Ja.
Poor, George Murray, Capt. Adam Cunningham, Wm. Owen, younger Lt. Ens. Jo.
Mackultoch Ld. Geo. Murray, Capt. Wm. Barclay, Dav. Mac Adam, younger Lt. Ens.
Ja. Grant, Alex. Cunningham, Capt. Alex. Person, John Maxwell, younger Lt. Ens.
Geo. Hamilton,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of this Regiment of Foot,
Rotheric Mackenzie, Chaplain, Murdo Mackenzie, Adjutant, J. Broomer, Quar.
Mast. and Mar. Franc. Beaulieu, Surgeon, (...) Chir. Mate, Char. Price,
Drum. Major, One Piper belonging to the Colone'ls Company.
This Regiment of Foot consists of 21 Companies, has 2 Lieutenants to each
Company, 3 Sergeants, 3 Corporals, and 2 Drums established, distinguished by
red Coats lined white, Sashes white, with a white Fringe, Breeches and Stocking
light gray; Granadiers distinguished by Caps lined white, the Lions face proper
crowned: Flys St. Andrews Cross, with Thistle and Crown, circumscribed in the
center, Nemo me impune lacesset.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers, in the Queen's Regiment of Foot,
commanded by the Honble. PIERCY KIRK.
Piercy Kirk, Colonel, Marmaduke Bointon, Lieutenant Colonel, Sir James Lesley,
Major
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company commanded by Capt. Lt.
William Berry, Capt. Lt. Ens. Samuel Atkins, The Lt. Colonels Company,
commanded by -- Lt. George Westcomb, Ens. Mountague, The Major's Company,
commanded by -- Lt. Henry Withers, Ens. John Fairborne. John Giles, Capt. Lt.
Jenken Thomas, Ens. Jo. Mortimore, Thomas St. John, Capt. Lt. William Webster,
Ens. Jo. Synhouse, Brent. Ely, Capt. Lt. John Wingfield, Ens. David Roach,
Henry Row, Capt. Lt. Charles Gerard, Ens. Antho. La Pinitiere, George
Wingfield, Capt. Lt. James Adams, Ens. John Fitzgerald, Thomas Harbor, Capt.
Lt. Richard Law, Ens. Ewald Tusteen, William Mathews, Capt. commanding the
Granad. Lt. Rich. Billin, Lts. of Granad. Lt. George Kirk, Lts. of Granad.

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Queen's Regiment.
William Stauton, Adjutant, William Powny, Quartermaster, Edward Hughs
Chaplain, John Wylye, Surgeon.
The Queens Regiment consists of ten Companies exclusively, besides the
Granadiers, flies a red Cross, bordered white, and Rays as the Admiral's, in a
green Field, with her Majesty's Royal Cipher in the Center.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Lord High Admiral of
England's, His ROYAL HIGHNESS the Duke of YORK and Albany's Marittime Regiment
of Foot, commanded by the Honble. Sir CHARLES LITTLETON.
Sir Charles Littleton, Colonel. Oliver Niclas, Lt. Colonel. Richard Bagett,
Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonels Company commanded by Capt. Lt.
Robert Craford, Capt. Lt. Ens. Philomon Powell, The Lt. Cols. Company commanded
by -- Lt. Edmond Yarbourg, Ens. Antho. Townsend. The Major's Company commanded
by -- Lt. Theophilact Blechenden, Ens. William Person, George Littleton, Capt.
Lt. Edmond Wilson, Ens. Ja. Man, Sir Tho. Cutler, Capt. Lt. Robert Lloid, Ens.
John H^ll, Edw. Not, Capt. L. Fran. Hoblin, Ens. Alex. Erwin, Fran. Ezord,
Capt. Lt. Fra. Butler, Ens. Tho. Man, Edw. Harris, Capt. L^. John Thorn, Ens.
William Somer, Sam. Scudamore, Capt. Lt. George Rook. Ens. Gilbert Simons,
Chichester Wray, Capt. Lt. Hen. Hewys, Ens. George Littleton, Cha. Herbert,
Capt. Lt. Tho. Whaly, Ens. Fra. Ezord, Edmond Plowden, Capt. Lt. William
Oglethorpe. Ens. Jo. Whaley,

State-Major, or the Staff-Officers of the Admiral-Regiment.
Richard Beauvoir, Adjutant, Tobias Legrose Quart-master, Samuel Tatham,
Chirurg. John Tatham, Chirurgmate.
The Admiral's Regiment consists of twelve Companies, without Granadiers,
coated yellow, lined red, flies the red Cross, with Rays of the Sun issuing
from each angle of the Cross or.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Holland Regiment of Foot,
commanded by the Right Honorable JOHN, Earl of MULGRAVE, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter.
John, Earl of Mulgrave, Colonel. Sir Tho. Ogle, Lt. Colonel. James Sterling,
Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company commanded by Capt. Lt.
John Bristow, Capt. Lt. Ens. John King, The Lt. Col. Company, commanded by --
Lt. Hen. Holt, Ens. Jo. Skrimpton, The Major's Company, commanded by -- Lt.
Francis Sterling, Ens. Fra. Rogers. Sir John Berry, Capt. Lt. Fran. Williamson,
Ens. Richard Moore, Hen. Boade, Capt. Lt. Hen. Bayton, Ens. Jo. Meules, Cha.
Manwaring, Capt. Lt. Tho. Sanders, Ens. Ehud Boad, Ewd. Fitz Patrick, Capt. Lt.
Bernard Boutell, Ens. Antho. Alix, Fran. Collingwood. Capt. Lt. Edw. (...),
Ens. Jo. Prideux, Sir William Wheeler, Capt. Lt. Hen. Feilding, Ens. Tho.
Smith, Herbert Throgmorton, Capt. Lt. John Martin, Ens. Mich. Richardson,
Andrew Birch, Capt. Lt. Richard Boulton, Ens. Fra. Foster, Humphry Barington,
Lt. George Pilkinton, Ens. Oliver Luke,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Holland Regiment.
J^rvas Rouse, Adjutant. John Wormal, Quart-mast. and Marshal. Ja. Pierce,
Chirurg (...) Chirurg. Mate
^he Holland Regiment consists of twelve Companies, without Granadiers; Coated
(...), lines with a Flesh Color; flies the Red Cross, bordered White in a
Green ^^^^d.

A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in her Royal Highnesses, the
Duchess of YORK and ALBANYS Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Honble. CHARLES
TRELAWNY.
Charles Trelawny, Colonel. Charles Churchil, Lt. Colonel. Zachariah Tiffen,
Major.
Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company commanded by Capt. Lt.
William Davis, Capt. Lt. Ens. John Bedford, The Lt. Cols. Company commanded by
-- Lt. Gerge Bynn, Ens. William Wharton, The Major's Company commanded by --
Lt. Hen. Paget, Ens. Hen. Tiffin, Hen. Trelawny, Capt. Lt. John Malham, Ens.
Wolfern Cornwall, Charles Fox, Capt. Lt. John Cole, Ens. Peircy Kirk, Edw.
Griffin, Capt. Lt. Stephen Hobson, Ens. Sam. Arnott, Edw. Hastings, Capt. Lt.
Tho. Atkinson, Ens. La Bruce, John Strode, Capt. Lt. Fran. Nicolson, Ens. John
Avery, Edw. Saville, Capt. Lt. Tho. Lucy, Ens. Emmanuel Hobbs, Hayman Rook,
Capt. Lt. John Hedger, Ens. Fra. Wyvitt, Charles Johnson, Capt. of a Company of
Granadiers. Lt. Hen. Davis, Lt. William Ghames,

The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Dutchesses Regiment.
Charles Carole, Adiutant. Sam. Rich, Quartermaster. Henry Muslo, Chirurg.
John Bynn, Chirurg. Mate.
Consists of ten Companies exclusively, besides the Company of Granadiers,
which attends this Regiment; It flies a Red Cross in a Yellow-Field, bordered
White, with Rays, as that of the Admiral's, with her Royal Highnesses Cipher in
the Center.

A List of all Governors, Lieutenant Governors, and Deputy Governors, etc.
Governors. Lt. Governors, and Deputy-Governours. His Grace, Henry, Duke of
New Castle, Governor of Berwick. The Honorable Raph. Widdrington,
Deputy Governor of Berwick. Sir John Fenwick, Baronet, Governor of Holy
Island. The Right Honorable, Edw. Lord Morp^th, Governor of Carlislle. The
Right Honorable Tho. Earl of Plymouth, Governor of the Block-houses, Town and
County of Hull. Captain Lionel Coply, Lieutenant-Governour of the Block-Houses
and Town of Hull. Sir John Reresby, Baronet, Governor of York, and Cliffords
Tower. Sir Tho. Slingsby, Governor of Scarborough Castle. Sir Ewd. Villars,
senior, Governor of Tinmouth Castle. Captain Hen. Miller, Deputy Governor of
Tinmouth Castle. His Grace, the Duke of Beaufort, Grvernour of Chepstow. Peter
Shakerly, Esquire; Governor of Chester Castle. The Right Honorable John, Earl of
Bath, Governor of Plymouth, and St. Nicolas Island. Sir Hugh Piper,
Deputy Governor of Plymouth. The Right Honorable Edward, Earl of
Gainsbourough, Governor of Portsmouth. Major Hen. Slingsby, Deputy Governor
of Portsmouth. The Right Honorable Lord Cambden, Governor of Gosper, near
Portsmouth. The Right Honorable Richard, Lord Arundel of Trerise, Governor of
Pendennis Castle. Sir Robert Holmes, Governor of the Isle of Wight, Cowes,
Sandham-Fort, West-Yarmouth, and Carrisbrook. Sir William Godolphin, Governor
of Scilly Islland, Capt. Godolphin, Depuny Governor of Scilly. The Right
Honorable Christopher Lord Viscount Hatton, Governor of the Isle of Guernsey.
Capt. George Littleton, Deputy Governor of the Isle of Guernsey. The Right
Honorable Thomas Lord German, Governor of Jersy Island. Capt. Henry Boad,
Deputy Governor of Jersy-Island. Captain Henry Holmes, Governor of
Hurst-Castle. Capt. Freeman, Governor of Sandown, Castle. Col. John Strode,
Governor of Dover and Cinque Ports. Sir Thomas Daniel, Governor of one of the
Forts under Dover-Castle. Capt. Rich. Noadward, Governor of another Fort under
Dover Castle. Sir Char. Littleton, Governor of Sheerness. Capt. Robert
Crawford, Deputy Governor of Sherness. Sir Roger Manly, Governor of Languard
Fort. The Honoura^le Sackville Tufton, Governor of Tilbury (...) Gravesend.
Capt. Robert St. Clair, Lt. Governor of Tilbery and Gravesend. Capt. Robert
Minors, Governor of Vpner Castle. Sir Edmund Seymour Bar. Governor of
Dartmouth. The Right Honble. Wm. Lord Allington, Constable. of the Tower. Capt.
Tho. Check, Lieutenant of the Tower. Hia Grace, Henry Duke of Norfolk Governor
and Constable of his Majesty's Castle of Windsor. Capt. Charles Potts, Deputy
Governor of his Majesty's Castle of Windsor.


