Englands Joyful Holiday, or, St. Georges-Day,
holy Honored, being the joyful Solemnity, so long looked for, of the
Coronation of King CHARLES the Second, who was most highly attended by all his
Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Barons, from the Tower, through the City to
Westminster, where he was Crowned on St. Georges Day, being 23. of April:
To the Tune, The King enjoys his own again.
King Charles II

COme brave England, be of good cheer,
For into you I will declare,
Of the to fullest sight that e're was seen,
In the age of either King or Queen;
Of Earls and Lords in glittering gold,
With admiration to behold:
Then let us all rejoice and sing,
For CHARLES the second is Crowned King.
He after twelve Years banishment,
By wicked Traitors strong consent,
Thou^h some endeavored by their wiles,
To keep him from us many miles:
The Lord has Crossed their bad intent;
Let such false hearts therefore repent:
Then let us rejoice, and merrily sing,
For Charles the Second is Crowned our King.
The Duke of York with all his Train,
And England's George don'ot still remain,
But all attend upon his Grace,
Each man according to his place
Shows joy of heart in every thing,
And each man shouts, God save the King.
Then let all true subjects rejoice and sing,
For Charles the second is crowned our King.
The glittering train of Dukes and Earls
In glittering Cold, and costly Pearls,
With knights and Squires, attend we see
Upon his Grace, of Courage free;
And glad they are as all do say,
To live too see this happy day;
With joy of heart they all do sing,
For joy their Masters Crowned King.
The City they no cost do spare
Their Loyalty for too declare
With Pagean^ ^ich, and brave attire,
The bravery makes all admire:
And all the Companies on a row
Which does their great affections (...)
And do rejoice in every thing,
With joy of heart to grace the Ki^^
The Second Part
to the same Tune




What joy of heart, we all express,
For to enjoy such happiness,
As the king upon the Throne to sit,
Who was long banished from us, yet
The Lord has brought him to his Crown,
And Scepter to sway in great renown:
Where he this day is to be seen,
In glorious manner Crowned King.
Let England then rejoice with me,
That we this happy day do see;
For cruelty shall surely scease,
And we again enjoy our Peace:
Let Us strive to keep it in our hand;
And then it will never depart the Land:
Then may we rejoice and merrily sing,
For Charles the second is Crowned King.
Let Booker and Lilly be a shamed,
And all their knowledge much be blamed,
For Writing against the King and Crown,
And Prophesying the Clergy down:
For they we see, false Prophets are,
Though much made use of in the War.
Let us laugh at their folly, and let us sing,
For now his Grace is Crowned our King.
This year of God, let us advance,
Which proves our great deliverance,
From Cruel Government of sword,
Which seldom does regard Gods word,
Or cry of people in distress.
Though near so full of heaviness:
But let us rejoice and merrily sing,
For Royal Charles is Crowned our King.
There Is York and Lancaster does rejoice
Winchester and Worster raise their voice:
Lietchfield, Coventry and Darby Town,
Nottingham and Newark of great renown:
Lincoln and Lecester of high degree,
With Peterborough and Hull all glad to see:
They do clap hands, rejoices and sing,
For joy that Charles is Crowned our King.
Bristow, Bathe and Exeter,
Portsmouth and Plinmouth, seats of War,
Oxford and Cambridge, of great fame,
And many more that I Will not name;
Yet most of them do show great joy,
And sing a loud, Vive Le Roy;
In heart and mind, let all men sing,
For Charles the second is Crowned King
Let all Phanaticks have a care,
And keep out of the Devils snare,
For this great work the Lord has down
In sending us the Gracious Son
Of him whom you with wrath did slay,
For which you have cause to mourn always
But we will rejoice and merrily sing,
For joy that he is now Crowned our King.
God keep him safe from Treachery,
And all his good Nobility,
With happy daves, and a long Reign,
The glorious Gospel to maintain,
That altogether may agree;
Then we joyful times shall see:
Then that they may, let all men sing,
Amen, amen, God save the King.
By me O. G.
London, Printed for Richard Burton at the Horse-shoe in Smithfield.


