Printed for Rohert Hanford at the sign of the Angel in Cornhill*

A TREATISE OF THE ARMS and ENGINES OF WAR, Of Fireworks, Ensigns, and
Military Instruments, both Ancient and Modern; With the Manner they are at
present used, as well in French Armies, as amongst other Nations.

Enriched with many Figures.

Written Originally in French by Lowis de Gaya, Author of the Treatise called
The ART of WAR.

Translated for Public Advantage.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange; 1678.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JONAS MOORE Knight, Surveyor General of His
Majesty's Ordnance and Armories.
Honored Sir,
BE pleased to accept the Patronage of these few Sheets; which as they contain
a Treatise of Arms, etc. can no where more securely shelter themselves than
under the Banner of Your Protection: For being cherished by Your Allowance, the
World may well imagine that there is something more than ordinary comprehended
in them which may merit a serious Reading and a generous Practice; especially
at such a time, as this, for Warlike Preparation.

I must confess the Trust You have, deserves far Nobler Presents of this nature
than what here I make. Nor am I ignorant how far my Presumption has carried me
in this attempt. In excuse whereof, I have only, with Your kind Permission to
plead the Encouragment of Your continual Favors, and Advantagions Obligations
to a Young Beginner; of which should I be once ingratefully forgetful, when the
least Mite of Opportunity offers, I should incur a crime that would deprive me
of one of the chiefest happinesses whereto I aspire; which is to acknowledge my
self Sir

Your most Obedient and most Obliged Servant R. H.

The Contents.
AN Elogy on the Profession of Arms, and the Original of true Nobility. p 1.
The First Book. CHAP. I. Of Sharp-Weapons. SEct. 1. Of the Sword p. 9. Sect. 2.
Of the Shable and Cimeter, p. 12. Sect. 3. Of the Bayonet and Poniard, or
Dagger p. 13. Sect. 4. Of the Espadon or Two-handed Sword, p. 14.
CHAP. II. Of Firearms. SEct. 1. Of the Musket p. 15. Sect. 2. Of the Fusil or
Fire-lock p. 19. Sect. 3, Of the Musket p. 20. Sect. 4. Of the Pistol p. 20.
Sect. 5. Of Carabines p. 21.
Of Staff-Arms. Sect. 1. Of the Pike p.24. Sect. 2. Of Spoutons or Half-Pikes
p.26. Sect. 3. Of the Partisan p.27. Sect. 4. Of the Halbard p.28. Sect. 5. Of
Sythes, Forks, Axes, and Clubs or Maces ibid. Sect. 6. Of the Quarter-staff,
with a Pike at each end p.30.
CHAP. IV. Of the Arms of the Ancients. SEct. 1. Of Swords, Shables, and
Cutlasses p. 31. Sect. 2. Of the Pike p.33. Sect. 3. Of the Lance p.35. Sect.
4. Of the Javelot or Dart p.35. Sect. 5. Of the Sling p.38. Sect. 6. Of Bows
and Arrows p.39. Sect. 7. Of Cross-Bows. p.40.
CHAP. V. Of Defensive Arms. SEct. 1. p.42. Sect. 2. Of the Coat of Mail p.44.
Sect. 3. Of the Buff-Coat p.45. Sect. 4 Of Casks or Head-Pieces p.46. Sect. 5.
Of Cuirasses p.47. Sect. 6. Of Bucklers and Shields p.49.

The Second Book OF Powder and Artificial Fires.
CHAP. I. Of Powder p. 53. CHAP. II. Of a Mine. p. 56. CHAP. III. Of Artificial
Fireworks. SEct. 1. Of the Fuse p.59. Sect. 2. Of the Sulphur Match p.60.
Sect. 3. How to make the Quick Match ibid. Sect. 4. How to prepare the Matter
of Fire-Rockets p. 61. Sect. 5. How to charge Fireballs p.62. Sect. 6. How to
make a Fire-Lance p.62. Sect. 7. How to make Tourteaus, to show Light or Port
Lights p.64. Sect 8. Of Burning Fagots p.64. Sect. 9. Of Fire-Hoops p.65. Sect.
10. How to charge Grenades p.66. Sect. 11. How to make Artificial Fireworks
that burn under Water ibid. Sect. 12. Of Provision for Artificial Fireworks p.
67.
CHAP. IV. Of the Roman Fireworks. p. 68.
The Third Book Of War-Engines. p. 71. CHAP. I. Of the Casting and Framing of
Pieces of Artillery. p. 72. CHAP. II. Of a Canon, its Carriage, its Vtensils
and Service. p. 74. SEct. 1. Of a Canon p.74. Sect. 2. Of the Charge of a Piece
p.76. Sect. 3. How to Level or bring a Gun to pass p. 76. Sect. 4. Of the
Ammunition and Vtensils of a Canon p.77. Sect. 5. Of the Carriage of a Gun p.79.
CHAP. III. Of Pieces of Calibre or Size. SEct. 1. Of the Canon p.80. Sect. 2.
Of the Culverin p.81 Sect. 3. Of the Bastard Canon p.81 Sect. 4. Of the Minion
p.82. Sect. 5. Of the Faucon p.82. Sect. 6. Of the Fauconet p.83. Sect. 7. Of
the Effect and Execution of the Canon p.84. Sect. 8. The way of Nailing up a
Canon p. 85.
CHAP. IV. Of Mortar-Pieces, Arquebusses a Crock, Bombes, Bullets, the Carcass,
etc. p.86. SEct. 1. Of Stone-Guns p.86. Sect. 2. Of the Arquebuss a Crock p.87.
Sect. 3. Of Mortar-Pieces p.87. Sect. 4. Of Bombes p.88. Sect. 5. Of the
Carcass p.90. Sect. 6. Of the Grenades p.91. Sect. 7. Of Hollow Bullets p.92.
Sect. 8. Of Red Bullets p.93. Sect. 9. Of Cartouches p.93.
CHAP V. Of Petards, and of the Way how they are to be used p.94. SEct. 1. Of
Petards p.94. Sect. 2. Of the Arrow and Flying Bridge p. 97. Sect. 3. Of the
way of using and applying a Petard p.98. Sect. 4. Of Tortoises p.101.
CHAP VI. Of the Warlike Engines of the Romans. p.102. SEct. 1. Of Machines or
Engines in General p. 102. Sect. 2. Of the Tortoise or Testudo p.103. Sect. 3.
Of Ladders p.105. Sect. 4. Of Bull-warks p.106. Sect. 5. Of Towers p.107. Sect.
6. Of the Battering Ram p.108. Sect. 7. Of Counter-Engines p.109.

The Fourth Book Of Ensigns, Trumpets, and other Instruments of War, p. 111.
CHAP. I. Of Ensigns p.112. SEct. 1. Of the Oriflamme p.115. Sect. 2. Of the
Goufanon p.118. Sect. 3. Of the Banner and Penon p.118. Sect. 4. Of Banderolls,
Panonceaux, and Faillions p. 119
CHAP. II. Of the Roman Ensigns, p. 121. CHAP. III. Of Trumpets, Drums, and
other Instruments of War; p. 123. CHAP. IV. Of the Instruments of War used by
the Romans, p. 125 A Particular Chapter of the Arms which are at present in use
as well among t^^ French as other Nations p.12^ Of the Arms of the French
Cavalry p.12^ Of the Arms of the French Infantry p.13^ Of the Spanish Cavalry
p.13^ Of the Spanish Foot p.13^ Of the English Forces p.13^ Of the German
Forces p.13^ Of Hungarian Forces p.13^ Of Polonian Troops p.13^ Of the Turkish
Cavalry p.13^ Of the Turkish Infantry p.13^ Of the Persians, Moors, and
Arabians p.13^ Of the Arms of the Ancient French Milit^^^ and first of the
Infantry p.13^ Of the Cavalry p.13^ Of the Cavalry under Henry the Fourth,
(...) Lowis the Thirteenth p.1^^


The Author's Design.
IN the Profession of War there are Three things only requisite, Men, Arms,
and Fortifications. So many able Men has already treated of Fortifications,
that I thought it would be to no purpose to speak on that Subject, unless I
intended to be an Echo, and repeat what others have already said. I have
spoken of Men lately in a Book, which I called, The Art of War; but if I
mistake not, no Man has hitherto treated of Arms. And therefore that these
Three Parts may be complete, I thought fit to publish this little Treatise,
wherein I shall explain as clearly, and in as few words as possibly I can, the
use of all Arms, which are at present to be found in Armies, as well as of
those that were heretofore in use among the Romans.

AN ADVERTISEMENT
FOr the better understanding of all that is said in this Treatise concerning
Arms; you must know (Reader) that the French Pound contains two Marks, the Mark
Eight Ounces, the Ounce Eight Gros or Drams, the Dram three Deniers, and the
Denier Twenty four Grains.

The Fathom contains six Foot, the Foot twelve Inches, and the Inch twelve
Lignes.

The Cubit of the Ancients consisted of two Hands and three Fingers breadth.

The Hand of twelve Fingers breadth, and the Fingers breadth of eight Lignes.

The Talent weighs Threescore Pounds, the Roman Pound contains twelve Ounces,
the Ounce eight Drams, the Dram three Scruples, the Scruple six Siliques, and
the Silique one Grain.

The small Sexterce weighed Twenty four Pounds.

AN ELOGY ON The Profession of Arms, AND THE ORIGINAL OF TRVE NOBILITY.
THe Profession of Arms has in all Ages been the most Honorable and Glorious
of all Professions; and no man in Rome could rise to the Civil Magistracy, who
had not served Ten years in the Wars. By Arms Kingdoms subsist, Justice
flourishes, the Wicked are punished, and the Proud humbled to their Duty; and
from them alone True Nobility derives its Original. Before, all men were born
equal, and the difference of Estates and Offices, made the sole distinction of
Persons.

War in Ancient Times was neither the Refuge of the Wretched, nor the Sanctuary
of the Banished; and the Romans received none but Chosen Men into Service, who
were obliged to put themselves in Equipage, and for the space of Twenty years
serve at their own Expenses, either among the Horse or Foot; and when they had
fulfilled the term of their Service, they received from the Commonwealth
Rewards suitable to the merit of their Actions, either by being promoted to the
most Honorable Charges, or being endowed with Lands and Inheritances in the
Conquered Provinces, where after the Fatigues of War they quietly enjoyed the
Sweetness of Peace. And that the Natives of the Country might not be banished,
but means of subsisting afforded them, they gave them lands to labor, for
payment of a yearly Tribute. Hence have sprung Tenures, Dependancies,
Quit-Rents and Duties, which Vassals owe to their Lords and Superiors.

These new Masters made themselves at first considerable by that Politeness
which was so natural to the Romans, by that way of Living, which puts a
Distinction between those that have Carried Arms and such as have not, and by
the reputation of their brave Exploits, which they had engraven on their
Shields, as a Mark of the Nobility which they had acquired by their Valor. And
from thence we have Scutcheons, and the Name of Esquire or Gentlemen.

All Rewards were not of equal value, and were distributed according to merit,
as I have already said. He who in an Assault first mounted the Wall of a Town,
was honored with a Mural Crown; and on him who had rescued a Roman Citizen,
was conferred a Civick Crown, which was put upon his Head by the Persons own
hands whom he had relieved from danger. Those whose Actions were brave and more
commendable, were likewise more highly rewarded than others, and had allotted
them a larger share of Lands. Such, I say, were of Chiefest Note amongst the
Nobility, as well in respect of their Wealth, as in consideration of those
Glorious Crowns, which they carried on their Scutcheons: And from them are
descended the Illustrious Families of great Lords, who carry Coronets over
their Arms, and who in progress of time have changed their Ancient Crowns into
those which they bear at present, according to the new Dignities wherewith
Sovereigns have been pleased to honor them; as of Duke, Marquess, Earl,
Viscount, and Baron. And though the Quality of Baron be wholly banished from
the Court of France, yet it was the first, and I may say, the only Dignity
that was heretofore in France; as may be seen in the Ancient Chronicles of the
Kingdom, when they speak of Kings accompanied with the Chief Barons, who were
in that time, what the Dukes and Peers of France are at present. This puts me
in mind of an Epistle in Gaulish Verse; which is yearly sung at High Mass in
the Parish Church of St. Stephen of Rheims, on the Twenty sixth of December,
the Feast day of that Saint; which thus begins:

Or ecoutez la passion
De Saint Estienne le Baron, etc.
Now hearken to the passion
Of Saint Stephen the Baron.
The good people of past Ages would have thought themselves wanting in Respect
and Veneration toward the Saints, if they had not qualified them with the Name
of Baron; which was the Noblest Title of the great Lords of their Times. I
thought fit to adduce this instance, to prove the Antiquity of Baronies; but
that I may return to my Subject, I affirm that Arms have not only made Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, and Gentlemen; but that they have also raised to the Throne
Men of a low and despicable Birth.

King David was a Shepherd, as well as Saul his Predecessor. Antipater King of
Macedonia, was the Son of a Jugler; Agathocles King of Syracusa, the Son of a
Potter; Cambyses King of Persia, the Son of a Beggar; King Darius, the Son of a
Carter; King Sibaris had been a Servant in an Inn; and the Ottomans, who at
this day possess the greatest Empire in the World, are descended from Grooms,
or Men that drove Camels. These Examples oblige us to acknowledge, that it is
by Arms alone that Men render themselves worthy of the most Glorious
Employments. So likewise in that Profession is to be learnt that brave and
gentile way of Demeanor, which is found no where but among the Nobility and
Gentry. There, every thing goes by Honor, and without any hopes of Lucre and
Profit. There, Men learn to be generous, liberal and faithful. There is nothing
to be found in the Histories of the greatest Captains, but Acts of Honor and
Virtue. The Valor of Alexander, the Piety of Eneas, the Prudence of Caesar,
the Modesty of Tiberius, the Complaisance of Antonius Pius, the Justice of
Aulus Fulvius, the Clemency of Augustus, the Magnificence of Titus Vespasian,
the Chastity of Scipio Affricanus, and the Integrity of Attilius Regulus; are
sufficient proofs of what I have alleged.

To conclude, I shall repeat what I said in the beginning of this Discourse,
that the profession of Arms has been in all Ages, not only the most glorious
and honorable of Professions; but likewise that which has produced the
greatest men.

These Two Books newly published, are to be sold by Robert Harford at his Shop
at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange.
THe Art of War, and the way that is at present practiced in France. Two Parts.
Wherein the Duties and Functions of all the Officers of Horse and Foot,
Artillery and Provisions, from the General of the Army to the Private Soldier,
are treated of: With the method of Conducting Armies, Encamping, Besieging, and
giving of Battle: As also an account of all Offices and Charges; and the Names
of the Towns, Places, Citadels, Castles and Forts, where the most Christian
King keeps Garrison; with the general and particular terms of War. Written in
French by Lovis de Gaya, an expert Officer of the French Army, and Dedicated to
his most Christian Majesty. Translated for public Satisfaction and Advantage.
In 8^.

The Military Duties of the Officers of Horse, Containing the Exercise of the
Cavalry, according to the present Practice of the imes. With the Motions of
Horse, and the Functions of every Officer, from the Chief Captain, to the
Brigadeer. Written in French, by an Ingeneer in Ordinary to his most Christian
Majesty. And Translated for public Satisfaction and Advantage. In 8^.

A Treatise of ARMS, Of Engines, Artificial Fires, Ensigns; and of all
Military Instruments.
The First Book.
Of the ARMS of A SOLDIER.
CHAP. I.
Of Sharp Weapons.
Sect. 1.
Of the Sword.
THE Sword, whereof the Invention comes to us from Tubal-Cain, the Son of
Lamech and Zilla, is the first of all Weapons, without which a Soldier should
never appear in public; because it serves him for Ornament as well as Defense.
It is not necessary it should be too long, for it becomes thereby cumbersome in
a Battallion; especially during the time of the Motions: nor must it be too
short neither, but of an indifferent length; the Blade must be good, and about
an inch broad The most common length of Blades is two foot and a half and two
inches, and the Handles three inches and a half. All Blades are kept in
Scabberds, made of Wood covered with Cloth or Leather, having a chape at the
end of Iron, Steel, Copper or Silver.

The Sword is carried in a Shoulder Belt of Buff or other Leather, and hangs
down from the right Shoulder upon the left Thigh; in the same manner as was
heretofore in use, according to the report of Virgil.

-- Humero cum apparuit alto balteus. And of Silvius in his Tenth Book.

-- Tergo qua balteus imo
Sinuatur; coxaque sedet munimen utraque.
Nevertheless we find by the words of the Royal Prophet, that the Belts which
we have since called Waste-belts, are more ancient than those we call
Shoulder-belts, when he says, Gird your Sword on your Thigh, etc.

When a man would stand right to his Guard, he ought to keep his Body straight,
bending a little on the left Thigh; his Legs not too far asunder, his Feet on a
strait Line one after another, the Handle of the Sword off of the Haunch, the
point just opposite to the Shoulder, the Arm stretched half out; and the left
Hand as high as the Eye. The Enemies Sword may be put by the line of the Body
by a little motion of the Handle either inward or outward.

Soldiers in a Battle or Attack, do not regularly always observe this Method;
and most part thrust on any way, without troubling themselves much with the
Tierce, Guart, or Feint; but make use of their Swords to attack or to defend
themselves, according to the small talent that God Almighty has given them.

The Figure of a Soldier on his Guard.

Sect. 2.
Of the Shable and Cimeter.
THe Shable is more in use amongst the Horse, than other. Bodies of Men, it is
not altogether so long as the Sword; but to make amends for that, the Blade is
twice so broad and edged on one side; and therefore it is more used for cutting
than thrusting.

The usual length of Shables is two foot and four inches, taking it from the
guard, and two foot and a half and three inches, from the button of the Pommel
to the point.

The Cimeter is a kind of Fauchin, broader and more crooked than the Shable;
used more by the Turks, Persians and Hungarians, than others.

A Soldier on his Guard.
The Espadon or two Handed Sword.

The Shable.

The Cimeter

The Bayonet.

The Poniard.



Sect. 3.
Of the Bayonet and Poniard, or Dagger.
THe Bayonet is much of the same length as the Poniard; it has neither Guard
nor Handle, but only a Haft of Wood Eight or Nine Inches long. The Blade is
Sharp-pointed, and two edged, a foot in length, and a large inch in breadth.

The Bayonet is very useful to Dragoons, Fufiliers, and Soldiers, that are
often commanded out on Parties; because that when they have fired their
Discharges, and want Powder and Shot, they put the Haft of it into the mouth of
the Barrel of their Pieces, and defend themselves therewith as well as with a
Partizan.

The Poniard or Dagger is a little Sword, in length but about Twelve or
Thirteen Inches, which is carried at the Girdle. It is nor long ago since
Duelists fought with Sword and Dagger.

Sect. 4.
Of the Espadon or Two-handed Sword.
THe Espadon is a kind of a Sword, whose Two-edged Blade is very long and
broad, and whereof the Haft, which I dare not call Handle, because it is a foot
and a half long, is made cross-wayes. It cannot be used but with both Hands, in
a Breach or behind a Palissadoe.

I never saw so many Espadons, as among the Hollanders. The Ramparts of all
their Towns were furnished with them, each distant from the other six paces;
with a like number of Clubs or Maces: and indeed to consider such preparatives,
one would have thought their designs had been furious, and that they had had a
great mind to defend themselves stoutly. But there is great appearance, that
they only placed these Arms there to adorn their Parapets.

Swords of all Fashions.

Swords of all Sorts.


The Explication of this Figure.
A, A Stick-Sword, called by the Ancients Sica. B, A Sword for a Rancounter,
after the French mode. C, A Swisser's Sword. D, A Tuck, or long Sword with a
narrow Blade, such as were in use not thirty years ago. E, A Spanish Sword. F,
A Braquemart Fauchin, or short Sword. G, A Hunting Cutlass, with a Handle of
Horn.
CHAP. II.
Of Firearms.
Sect. 1.
Of the Musket.
THe usual Arms of Soldiers, are not only the Sword, Shable, Dagger and
Bayonet, but also the Musket, Fire-lock, Mousqueton, Pistol, and many others:
and the first thing they should learn, is to make the right use of such as
their Officers have given them.

The Musket is a Weapon for Foot, the Barrel of which is three foot and eight
inches long, mounted on a Stock of four foot and eight inches in length. It was
not invented till long after the Canon.

The Bullet of Size contains in diameter eight Lignes and a half (every Ligne a
third part of a Barley Corn) and the charge of Powder should weigh half an
Ounce and a Dram of Magazin Powder.

A Musket carries commonly six score Fathoms, and if it be reinforced, a
hundred and forty, or an hundred and fifty fathoms.

The half of this distance or less, is sufficient for a good Discharge; for it
is by chance if they hit and do execution at the full distance.

The Priming should be of a finer Powder than the Charge, and the Match dry and
hard.

For the Musket may be used double-headed Shot, which are two Bullets fastened
together, by a little piece of Iron, about half an inch long; as may be seen by
the Figure.

To present aright to fire, according to the Rules of exercising of Arms; the
Butt of the Musket must be put to the Breast, half a foot below the Chin; the
left hand under the Stock, or upon the Scouring Stick, if it be in its place;
the right Hand-Thumb, four or five Fingers breadth behind the Breech, and the
other Fingers of the same Hand under the Tricker, to draw and make the Cock
play, when one has a mind to Fire: The Muzzel of the Musket must always be as
high as the Chest of the Body of the Enemy: Skilful Soldiers never aim at the
Head, because that part being too small, the least motion of either of the two
is enough to make the Bullet miss* but when one Fires at the Body, whether the
motion make the Shot rise too high, or fall too low, or decline too much to one
side, the execution is always good, and puts him who has received the Shot out
of condition of Fighting.

Bandeliers are a kind of Portable Magazine, which contains all the Ammunition
necessary to a Soulder.

The usual breadth of their Belt is four inches, and the length four foot. All
Bandeliers are furnished with a dozen of little Flasks, commonly called
Charges, and a little Bag or Purse of Sheeps Leather. The Flasks serve to keep
the Powder, and the Bag or Purse the Bullets.

The Horse make use of Carabin or Mousketon-Belts, in bigness much like that of
the Bandeliers, but without any Charges.

The Arms of a French Soldier and the Posture of a Musketteer, who presents to
Fire.
A, The Musket. B, The Sword. C, The Bandeliers. D, The Soldiers Belt. E, The
Bag or Purse. F, The Flasks or Charges. G, The Match.
The Armature of a Musketeer presenting to fire.
The Musket.

The Fire Lock.

Double headed shot.



An Explication of the Parts of a Musket.
1. The Lock. 2. The Pan. 3. The Cock. 4. The Tricker. 5. The Barrel. 6. The
Breech. 7. The Stock. 8. The Butt. 9. The Scouring-stick.
Sect. 2.
Of the Fusil, or Fire-Lock.
THe Fusils or Firelocks which we at present use in the Army, especially
amongst the Fusiliers and Granadiers, are of the same size, and carry as far as
Muskets.

With a Fire-Lock one may shoot juster than what a Musket, because it is
presented in a quite different way; that is to say, the end of the Butt to the
Shoulder, the side to the Cheek, shutting the left Eye, and aiming with the
other through the Sight-hole, which answers to the little Button on the Muzzel
of the Barrel.

When one would shoot on a level, he must aim straight at the Mark; and if a
Man shoot from a low place to a higher, he is to take his aim four fingers
breadth underneath the Mark.

Firelocks are apter to mis-give than Muskets, through the defect of the
Flints and Springs.

Sect. 3.
Of the Mousqueton.
THe Mousqueton is not so long as the Fusil or Fire-Lock; nor does it by a
third part carry so far, unless the Barrel be screwed and rifled; its usual
Charge is an Ounce of Powder, and it is presented in the same manner as a
Fire-Lock.

Sect. 4.
Of the Pistol.
PIstols are not all of the same length nor size. The usual length of the
Barrels of those which are at present used among the Horse is a Foot, and of
Stock and all a Foot and a half, or thereabouts.

The Bullet sized for the Bore is five Lignes in diameter, the Charge a dram of
Powder; and it will carry forty paces, more or less, according to the goodness
of the Powder.

Pistols are fired with one hand.

Sect. 5.
Of Carabins.
CArabins are a kind of Firearms, which take their Name from those ancient
Soldiers, called Carabins, who commonly made use of them in the Wars. They are
of two kinds, the Common, and the Extraordinary. The Common are those which
were used by the Kings Guards not long ago, and are usually called Carabins
with great Locks; which differ in nothing as to length, size, and carrying,
from Fusils and Mousquetons, but oneIy that they had Wheel-works. The
Extraordinary are those which the French call Arquebusses Guttieres: such as
are those which are still used by all the Arquebusiers, whose little wheel-work
is provided of a double spring for facilitating and speeding the discharge; and
whose Barrel being thicker than that of Common Carabins, can carry blank about
a thousand paces, with the same proportion of Powder as is necessary for a
Fusil; because it is screwed and rifled: that is to say, wrought and crevassed
in the inside from the Muzzel to the Breech, in form of a Screw; and from
thence proceeds the justness of Arquebusses.

All Carabins or Arquebusses have wheel-works, as well those of great as small
Locks, which are bent with a Spanner proportionated to the thickness of the
Axel-tree of the Wheel; upon which, when one intends to fire, he puts down the
Snaphaunce, which in stead of a Flint, ought to be provided with a true
Mine-stone.

Heretofore were used Arquebusses, which fired with a Match, in the same manner
as Muskets; but these Arms are now out of use.

The King commands at present that in every Troop of his Guards be carried
eight rifled or screwed Carabins, with Locks like to those of Fusils,
Mousquetons and Pistols.

Heretofore Wheel-Locks, Arquebusses with Match Locks, Choques, and Carabins,
that bend with a Spanner, were in use; and strangers use them still. It is
true, they are surer than others, but they are far more cumbersome. All sorts
of Arms may be charged, without any other way of Measuring the Powder, than by
the following Rule; Put the Bullet into the hollow of your Hand, and pour
Powder thereon, until it be covered and appear no more. This is the natural
measure of all Small Firearms. I saw in a Gentleman's House of Picardy near St.
Quentin, an Arquebusse or Wind Gun, that was charged with the Wind, whose
Bullet at thirty paces distance pierced a Door two inches thick.

The Armature of a French Trooper.
A, The Buffe Coat with Elk-skin-sleeves. B, The Buffe Belt. C, The Shable. D,
The Scarffe. E, The Carabin-belt of Buff. F, The Holster Pistol. G, The
Mousqueton or Carabin. H, The Boots. I, The Spurs. K, The Spur-leathers.
Of Staffe-Arms.
Sect. 1.
Of the Pike.
THE Pike is a Weapon wherewith Foot defend themselves against Horse in an open
Field.

The Pikes environ the Batallions on all sides, and present the Pike to the The
Armature of a French Trooper.
The Musqueton.

The Pistol.

The Carabine.

The Armature of a Pike man on his Guard.
The Pike.

The half Pike.

The Quarter Staff.

The Halbard.

The Partisan.

height of the Horses Counters, whilst the Musketeers fire. A Horse wounded by
a Shot, is but thereby the more animated, but when he feels himself pricked
with a Pike, all the Spurs in the World cannot make him advance.

This Figure will show the way of Pikes charging to the Horse.

The Armature of Pike-man of the Guards.

The Explication of this Figure.
A, The Helmet, which the French call Pot on Head. B, The Corcelet. C, The
Vambraces. D, The Tassets or Thigh Pieces. E, The Sword. F, The Pike.
All Pikes now adays are of the same length, made of strong Ash, and very
straight; about fourteen or fifteen foot long between the Head and the Foot.
The Head is four inches long, and two and a half broad at the largest place.
The Iron Bands at the Head must be long and strong, otherwise it would be an
easy matter for the Horse to cut off the ends of the Pikes with their Shables.

The French, according to Diodorus, were the first that made use of the Pike;

Jaceunt hastas, quas ipsi lanceas appellant. And from thence the People of the
Chief Province of France, have the Name of Picars; but their Pikes were more
like Spanish Lances than Grecian Pikes, which were twenty four foot long
between the Head and Foot.

Sect. 2.
Of Spontons or Half Pikes.
THe Spontons or Half Pikes, are made of the same Wood as Pikes are, and have
Heads alike; their The Pensioners Halbard A

The Hungarian Partisan. B

The Battle Axe D

Partisans and Halbards according to the Swisse and Ancient Custom. C

Pole Axes E

length is much the same as that of Partisans, and we have the use of them from
the Ancients; who carried Pikes six Cubits long, as Arrianus testifies.

Hastas habebant senum cubitorum. These Arms are much used amongst the
Venetians and the Knights of Malta.

Sect. 3.
Of the Partisan.
A Partisan is an excellent Weapon in a Trench, in a Sally, to force and defend
a Lodging, to mount a Breach; and in many other occasions, where the Pike would
be but cumbersome.

The Staff of a Partisan is much of the bigness of a Pike, and is seven or
eight foot long between the Head and Foot. The Iron Head is a foot in length,
and four inches broad at the largest place; the Exercise of the Partisan
differs in nothing from that of the Pike.

Sect. 4.
Of the Halbard.
THE Halbard is likewise a very convenient Weapon, especially when Men come to
blows. Its Staff is neither so big nor high as that of a Partisan, and the Head
of it both narrower and shorter, but it is armed with little Hooks, which serve
to pull out Fagots, Paniers, and Gabions, and to take hold of any thing, when
one mounts an Assault or Sca-Lado.

Sect. 5.
Of Sythes, Forkes, Axes, and Clubs, or Maces.
SYthes, Forks, and Clubs, are likewise used in a Sally, or in the defense of a
Breach or hindering a Storm. The Sythes are not altogether like those of
Mowers, for their Staff or Handle Clubs or Massues. A

B

The Axe. C

The Forke. D

Sithes. E

is somewhat longer, and the Blades streighter, or bending a little, after the
manner of those which the Trojans used of old.

-- Quo turbine cestum Sauromates, falcemque Getes.

Stat. 11 Achill. The Forks are the same with the common Forks, but they have
little Hooks.

There are two sorts of Clubs: The first is, as it were the Staff of a
Partisan, at the end whereof there is a Wooden Ball of the bigness of an Eight
pound Bullet; stuck full of Iron Pikes a Finger long.

The other has a Boul like to the first, hanging at the end of the Staff by an
Iron Chain, two foot and a half long; and is used as a Flail for Threshing.

In Salleys, or in the defense of a Breach, Axes are likewise used, such as not
long ago were used by the Regiment of Clerambaud, or Sourches, whose Heads are
very broad, an^ their Handles or Staves, longer an^ stronger than those of
Partisans, (...) may be seen in the Figure.

The Turks have another kind o^ Club or Mace of Arms, which the^ carry at the
Pommel of their Saddle to make use of in a Fight, like (...) that which the
Poets bestow on Hercules, called by the Latins, Militaris clava. Maces are no
more in use.

Sect. 6.
Of the Quarter-Staff with a Pike a^ each end.
WE may also reckon among Weapons the Staff, commonly called the Piked
Quarter-staff, and by the French, the Staff with two ends (...) because of the
Pikes of Iron which i^ has at each end: It is made of a very strong and eaven
Wood, somewhat bigger and heavier than the Wood of a Pike, six foot and a half
in length between the Verrils, that keep fast the two pikes of Iron stuck into
the ends of the Staff, which are in length four inches and a half. It is
carried on the Haunch like the Halbard, but handled in a different manner,
because a man may stand to his Guard with it by turning and flourishing it, and
making the half moulinets every way, and in approaches make use either of the
point thereof, or in giving a down right blow therewith.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Arms of the Ancients.
Sect. 1.
Of the Swords, Shables, and Cutlasses.
THe Romans of old made use of short, stiff, sharp-pointed, and two-edged
Spanish Blades.

Polibius says, That the Roman Soldiers carried their Swords on the right
side, and that they only made use of it for thrusting, in distinction from the
Gauls, who used flat-pointed two-edged Swords, only to cut with* Proprium
Gallicani usus pugnare, coesim.

The Medes, Parthians, and Persians, used a kind of Cutlass, which they called
Cinacis, and in English Cimeter. Cateia is a Shable in form of a Sickle, in
great use among the Germans.

Quintus Curtius makes mention of a kind of Sword, which he calls Copidas,
which was a little crooked like to a Sith, wherewith the Ancients cut to pieces
Wild Beasts.

The Knife which the Latins call Cultrum, and the Grecians Machaera, was
properly the Sword which the Priests used in their Sacrifices, to cut up the
Victims; as well as that other which they named Cluna culum, because therewith
they cut the Buttocks of Beasts: they had also a pretty long Iron Knife with an
Ivory Haft, which they called Secespita a Secundo.

Pa-tazonium was a Shable carried by the Tribunes in a Girdle. The Poniard
which the Latins termed Pugio a Pungendo, is a little Sword Thirteen or
fourteen inches long, which was invented in Spain. Pugiunculus is a diminutive
Poniard, which the Spaniards and Catalonians use still to this day.

Sica with the Romans, was a Sword hid in a Staff or Stick, wherewith Men walk,
as most of the Peasants of France do at this time. Lingula was a little Sword
made in the shape of a Tongue. Spatha was likewise a Sword of the Ancients,
whereof Julius Capitolinus speaks, upon occasion of the Emperor Maximinus,
Fecit and spathas argenteas, fecit and aureas. Hence comes the Italian Sword
Spada, and the Spanish Espada.

Sect. 2.
Of the Pike.
THE Hastarii or Roman Pikeman, had Pikes for Arms, which were afterward taken
from them and given to the Triarii, instead of the Pili, which they were wont
to carry. And though their Pikes were not so long as those of the Grecians or
of Soldiers now adays; yet they defended themselves therewith against the
Horse and fraized their Cohortes or Companies with them, as we at present
fraize our Battaillions: Quibus acies velut vallo septa inhorrebat.

They carried likewise Javelins, six Cubits long, which were not armed with
Iron at the Head, but had only a point burnt and hardened in the Fire, as
Arrianus reports. Mucro autem illis ferrrea non erat, sed caput igne duratum
eundem usum dabat. These Pikes were called Hastae Purae, and were used by the
strongest Soldiers.

The Germans carried Pikes, which they called Trameae, with a very short and
narrow Head; but so fine and commodious, that they used to Fight with them at
distance, and near at hand.

The Macedonians carried long Pikes called Sarissae, and from that it is The
Armature of a Roman Soldier of the Triary.
The Armature of a Slinger.
The Lance.

The Sling.

that Quintus Curtius calls the Soldiers of Alexanders Guard Sarissophori.

Sect. 3.
Of the Lance.
THE Lance was a kind of Half-Pike, like to that of our Standards, which was
invented in Spain, and only used among the Horses. It is not a hundred years
ago, since in France we had Troops of Lancers. Polybius says, That these
Lances were useless, because being too slender, they broke to pieces by their
own motion before they could do execution; and left no more in the Hand but a
short Truncheon, which could do no more service.

Sect. 4.
Of the Javelot or Dart.
THe Ancients called every thing that may be thrown, Javelot Jaculum a jaciendo.

The Dart or Pilum was the Weapon which the Romans gave to their Velites or
Skirmishers; it was in length two Cubits, and a fingers breadth in thickness:
the Head of it was of Iron, a foot long, but so thin and sharp-pointed, that
being once thrown, it bowed and became crooked; so that the Enemies could not
use it any more.

They had likewise other Javelots or Darts, with Three Feathers at the lower
end, like to the Arrows and Darts which the Polonians and many others still
use, especially the Moors, who call them Zogayes.

Aelicles was the Ancientest of Darts, a Cubit and a half long, with a double
point, which was tied to the Wrist with a Leather Strap or Cord, to pull it
back with when the blow was given.

Aeganea, was a very light Javelot or Dart.

Ancyle, was a Dart which gave the name of Ancilista, to those that used it.

Ansatae, were Darts thrown by Handles.

Dolones, Were Javelots, which had their name from the Greek word Dolos, which
signifies hurt.

Geum, Was a Javelot wholly of Iron.

Manobarbulus, Was a Javelot or Dart, like to the Leaden Piles, and the
Soldiers that used them were called Manobarbuli.

Materis, Was a Javelot not fully so long as a Lance.

The Pile was a kind of half Pike, about five foot long. The Roman Pile was but
three foot long, with a Head barb'd, like a Serpents Tongue, which weighed nine
ounces.

Romphea, Was the Thracian Javelot.

Runa, Was a Javelot with a very large broad Head.

Spara, Was a very little Dart, called so Aspargendo.

Tragula, Was a Javelot or Screw, with which they drew toward them the enemies
Buckler.

Triphorum, Was a Shaft three Cubits long, which the French call Materas, in
English a Quarrel, and was shot out of a Cross-bow. The Ancients had also other
Javelots or Darts, which they variously named according to their different
Figures; as Sibina, Gesa, Sigimnum, Vrbina, Vervina, Verutum, and Venabulum.
The latter was used by Hunts-men, and Gesa by the Gauls.

Sect. 5.
Of the Sling.
THe Romans had in their Armies Companies of Slingers, whom they called
Funditores a funda, quod ex ea fundantur lapides; because the Sling served to
cast Stones and Bullets of Lead, which at that time did the same execution as
our Mukets do nowadays.

The Sling was made of Thread, larger in the middle than elsewhere, its Figure
was oval, and insensibly diminished; it would cast a Stone or Bullet Six
hundred paces.

The Islanders of Majorca and Minorca, The Cross bow Man of the Ancients.
The Quiver.

Bow and Arrows.

Darts.

were the Inventers of Slings, and the most expert in throwing of Stones; for
they were bred to that Exercise from their Infancy; and the Mothers never gave
their Children any thing to eat but what they had beaten down before. There is
mention made of Slings in Holy Scripture, and David made use of one when, he
Fought against the Giant Goliath.

Sect. 6.
Of Bows and Arrows.
THe use of Bows and Arrows is not in all places abolished. The Turks retain
them still in their Armies, as well as the Affricans, Americans, and most part
of the People of Asia; but none are so skilful as the Tartars, in shooting with
a Bow backwards and forwards. The Wounds made by Arrows are more dangerous and
harder to be cured than those that are made by Musket Bullets, because their
Heads being barbed, it is difficult to pull them out of the Body, without
tearing the parts about the Wound, and danger of breaking the Shaft.

The original of Bows and Arrows is uncertain, some attribute the invention of
them to the Candiots; others to the Scythians and Persians: but there is no
doubt but that the Arabians have been always esteemed the most skilful in the
exercise of the Bow, and those who have used the greatest.

The Goths carried hardly any other Arms but Bows and Arrows; yet the Romans
had no Bow-men in their Armies, but such as came with the Auxiliary Forces.

The Quiver was a little Magazine of Arrows, which the Archers carried on the
left Shoulder.

Sect. 7.
Of Cross-bows.
THE Ancients had two kinds of Cross-bows, the one which shot The Armature of a
Bow man of the Roman Allies.
The Armature of a Roman Centurion.
Darts or Quarrels, and the other which threw Stones: These were called
Balistae, and the other Catapultae.

It would nevertheless seem (according to Appius) that the Catapulta served to
shoot both Darts and Stones; for he says Catapultae turribus impositae and
quae spicula milterent, and quae saxa.

The invention of Cross-bows came from the Sicilians, as Diodorus reports. They
made both great and little Cross-bows: the great were drawn on Wheels, as our
Canon are, and threw Darts three Cubits long. The little ones were carried by
Foot Soldiers, who were called Cross-bow-men, but their Quarrels were not half
so long as the Darts of the other; which were of such a greatness that they
could throw Stones six score pound weight.

There were an other kind of Cross-bows of a middle size, that were carried on
Wagons, and were called Orcubalistae, and Carobalistae.

Others there were which served to throw Artificial Fire, and Darts called
Phalaricae, or Firebrarnds, because they were covered with Sulpher, Pitch, Tar,
and Tow dipped in Oil.

The Scorpion was likewise a kind of Hand-cross-bow, invented by the Grecians,
which they used in Shooting of little Shafts, whose Heads were extremely small
and pointed.

CHAP. V.
Of Defensive Arms.
Sect. 1.
ALL Weapons are both offensive and defensive, because with the same one may
both attack and defend; but there are some Arms which are merely defensive; as
for instance, The Headpiece, termed the Cask or Casket, Morions, Cuirasses,
Corcelets, Gorgets, Vambraces, Tassets, or Thigh-pieces, Knee-pieces,
Guard-reins or Rein-pieces, Gantlets, and round Targets or Bucklers, which were
used in times past, and which are still in use in many remote Countries,
especially among the Turks and Moors.

The Romans armed part of their Cavalry Cap-a-Pie, in imitation of the
Grecians; the French retained the same Custom, and from that comes the name of
Gens-d'arms: That Armor was only good to resist Swords, Stones, Pikes,
Arrows, and Javelots or Darts. The Armor which is made nowadays, is proof
against Musket and Pistol-shot; but none but the Officers carry them on the
most dangerous occasions.

The Head-pieces, and the fore part of Cuirasses, are Musket-proof, and the
other parts Pistol or Carabine-proof; but that such Armor may prove good, it
is needful they be beaten out of cold Iron.

Head Armor has different names, as Cask or Casket, Helmet, Headpiece,
Burgonet or Spanish Marron, Salade, Morion, Cabasset, Pot, Hat, and
Steel-bonnet. Of all these Pieces of Armor some have Visieres, and are
Musket-proof: others are plain and only proof against a Cut or Blow.

The Cuirass is Musket-proof, and heavier than the Breast Plate, the Corslet
which is of the same shape as the Cuirass, serves to defend the noble parts.

The Neck is defended by the Gorget, the Arms by the Vambraces, the
Shoulder-pieces, Fore-arm-pieces, Gossets, and Gantlets; the Thighs and Legs,
by Tassets, Cuissots or Thigh-pieces, Greves, or Shin-pieces, Knee-pieces, and
Supeters or Foot-pieces.

Sect. 2.
Of the Coat of Mail.
THE Coat of Mail, by the Romans called Hamatus Thorax, was a kind of Steel
Jacket; made of little Rings and Links of Mail, interwoven together, wherewith
their Gend'arms defended themselves against Arrows, Darts and Swords.

The Light Horse, in time of Lovis the Eleventh, made Vambraces and Gantlets of
the same, and therewith guarded the void spaces betwixt their Armor.

Though these Jackets be now no more in public use, yet there are some who
still carry them under their Shirts, especially such as are in fear of Fighting
Duels, or of being set upon.

None at this time in France are armed Cap-a-Pie, except the Pikes of the Kings
Regiments of Guards; but their Armor is only proof against a Cut.

Sect. 3.
Of the Buff-Coat.
THough to speak properly, Buff-Coats be but an Apparel of Horsemen, yet we may
reckon them among their defensive Arms, seeing they may easily resist a Sword,
if they be made of a good Skin.

They are of the same use to our Horse, that these hard Skins, whereof they
made Breast-plates or Stomachers, were to the Roman Soldiers; of which Varo
makes mention.

Buffe-Coats are made in form of a Just au Corpse, or Close Bodied Coat, with
four Skirts reaching down to the Knee.

There is no Trooper in the French Army but has his Buffe-Coat, since Harnass
has been laid aside; and from thence comes the name of Light Horse, in
imitation of the Ancient Horse, who never carried Cuirass, but Fought always in
Light-Cloaths; as Polibus says, Antiquit: us equites loricas non habebant, sed
in vest succincta pugnabant.

Sect. 4.
Of Casks or Head-pieces.
THe Romans wore Head-pieces of Brass or Iron, Proof against the Cuts of
Shables; which they delighted to adorn with Feathers and Plumaches of several
Colors, two foot high. The Soldiers thereby appeared half Helmet.

Gorget

Curiasse.

Thigh pieces or Tasset's.

Vambrasse.

Gantelet.

as high again, and struck the enemy with greater fear; as Polibius affirms.
Vir auplo major apparet, and pulchra ea species fit, hostiq formidolosa.

The Generals and principal Officers, wore Head-pieces guilt and set with
precious Stones; the top whereof was adorned with Feathers and rich Plumaches,
which made them conspicuous among the rest.

Cristaque tegit galea aurea rubra. The original of Head-pieces came from the
Lacedaemonians, and Cares was the first that beautified them with Plumaches.

Sect. 5.
Of Cuirasses.
THe Soldiers of the Roman Militia, made to themselves at first Stomachers or
Breast-plates of unwrought Leather; according to Varro de corio crudo
pectoralia faciebant. They had them afterward of Iron or Brass; but these half
Cuirasses were only invented to hinder them from turning their Backs in
Battle. The Generals made use of Corslets of Guilt Leather, which covered them
on all sides. Some wore Coats of Mail, Loricae homatae, like to the Shirts
which are still in use; others had them of Iron or Brass, which I cannot better
compare than to the Shells of Fish. Loricae squammeae; for so Isidorus calls
them. Squammea est lorica, ex laminis aereis vel fereis concatenata in modum
squammarum piscis.

None of all the Roman Infantrie, but the Hastarii, the Principes and Triarii;
were armed with Head-pieces, Cuirasses and Bucklers. The Velites, of whom some
were Slingers, and others Archers, were only lightly armed, that is to say,
with a Buckler and Helmet of Leather.

The Cavalry was divided into the Light Horse; Levis Armatura, and the
Gen-d'armes, who were called, Equites Cataphracti, because they were armed from
Head to Foot; and Pelta.

Parma.

A Round Buckler or Ronache

Sheilds

rode on Barded and Caparissoned Horses, after the manner of the Parthian
Cavalry, whose Armature is by Suidas described in this manner: Lorica parthi
equitis est talis prior ejus pars pectus, and femora, and manus extremas and
crura tegit, posterior tergum and cervicem and totum caput, etc. That is the
true description of our Cuirasses, Head-pieces, Vambraces, Gantlets and Tasses.
Armant autem equum similiter ferro, totum quidem and vsque ad ungulas. In my
opinion they did not do much amiss so to equippe their Horses; because a
Trooper in Armor is no more fit for any thing when once he is dismounted.

Sect. 6.
Of Bucklers and Shields.
THe Shields and Targets which the Ancients carried on the left Arm to defend
and parie blows, in imitation of the Samnites, who invented them, were unequal,
two foot and a half broad, and four foot long; some with Angles, and others of
an Oval Figure; but were all made of Willow or Fig Tree strengthened with the
Nerves and Sinews of an Ox, on which was streatched Linen Cloth, and that
afterward covered with a Bullock or Calf's Hide: the top, middle, and lower
part were guarded with Plates of Iron, to resist the Cuts of Shables, Stones,
and Shafts that were darted or shot with violence.

Ovid in his Metamorphosis tells us, that General Ajax had a Buckler covered
with seven Skins.

-- Clipei dominus septemplicis Ajax. The Grecian Pikes covered themselves with
Rondaches or round Bucklers of Brass, and the Bow-men had only Bucklers made
of Osier.

The Moors make use of Shields of the height of their Bodies, which they
imbellish with warious painting.

The Bucklers which the Ancients called Clipei, differed only from the Shield
in that they were completely round, and therefore the French have given them
the name of Rondach.

The Spaniards and Affricans wore Bucklers of Thongs of Leather, interwoven
together, which they called Caetrae, as Lucan reports.

Illic pugnaces commovit Iberia caetras The Amazonians made use of a Buckler in
form of a Cressant, which they called Pelta. Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina
peltis. Virgil. In the Reign of Numa Pompilius, the Romans used little narrow
and long Shields, which they named Ancylia. Heretofore, such as began the
profession of War, carried only Parmis, or little White Bucklers, without any
imbellishment; until that by some brave action they had signalized themselves;
then were they permitted to use greater, and to adorn them with the marks of
their glorious exploits; from thence we have the Custom of Arms which we
commonly call Scutcheons or Shields a Scuto, because they are in reallity the
Shields or Bucklers of Gentlemen, whereon they usually carry a representation
of the brave Deeds of their Illustrious Progenitors.

The whole Armature of a Roman Soldier weighed no more than a Talent.

The End of the first Book
The Second Book. OF POWDER AND Artificial Fires.
CHAP. 1.
Of Powder.
WE have had the Invention of Gunpowder from China, by means of the
communication that a Monk named Bertoldus, had with the Tartars, in his Travels
in Moscovy, about the year 1380. And therefore the Portugese were never so much
surprised as when upon their accosting these unknown Countries, they saw a
great many Ships equipped and ranked in Bataillia, adorned with Streamers,
Penons, and Ropes of several Colors of Silk; but their surprise augmented when
they heard the Guns Fire: when they expected no such thing. So that it is not
true that the Monk was the first inventer of Gunpowder; he was no more but the
publisher of a Secret which he learnt from the Tartars, and which he had better
kept to himself, without trying an experiment of it, that cost him so dear, and
which buried him in the Furnace which he himself contrived.

The Royal Prophet had reason to say, That we fall commonly into the snares
which we have laid for others; the Authors of pernicious things, which tend
only to the destruction of their fellow Creatures, have always miserably
perished by the very same things whereof they have been the Inventers. We have
besides the example of that poor Monk, the instance likewise of Perillus the
Ingeneer of King Phalaris, who was the first that was burnt in the Brazen Bull
which he had made for the punishment of Malefactors. Arantius Paterculus, was
the first that was put into the Burning Horse which he invented, by the order
of Aemilius Censorinus, Governor of Aegesta in Scicily; and Engueran-de
Marigny, was the first man that was hanged in the Gibbet of Mount-faucon, which
he caused to be erected at the Gates of Paris. History is full of such
examples; but that I may return to my Subject, there is no doubt but that
Powder has been a diabolical invention, the effects whereof are no less
dangerous than terrible, and thunderclaps are not more to be feared.
Nevertheless, all that havoc, all that noise, and all these overturnings, are
only caused by small grains, whereof this is the composition.

The Composition of Gunpowder.
Take eight parts of Saltpeter, one part of Sulphur, one part and a fifth of
Char-cole; pound them well together in a Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, sprinkle
thereon excellent Vinager or Brandy, and then reduce the mass to a powder.

CHAP. II.
Of a Mine.
HAving spoken of Powder, I thought fit next to discourse of its effects, and
of the way how it is to be used for Mines and Artificial Fires.

When there is a design of blowing up the Bastions of a Place besieged, by
means of Mines and Fourneaus, there is first a Gallery made over the Fosse or
Ditch, thereby to communicate Molet's to put at the end of a Torch.
A Fire Arrow

A Wall of Bustion with a Mine.

with the Bastion, to which the Miner is to be set at work. The first thing a
Miner does, is to cover the place where he designs to make his hole, with two
strong Planks, guarded with Plates of Iron to secure himself against every
thing that may be thrown down upon him from the Ramparts. Next he makes his
lodging upon one of the Faces of the Bastion toward the point, three foot
high, and about two foot broad. He digs and chambers, until he reach the
middle or farther into the Wall, to the end the Mine may work the greater
effect; he digs and chambers also to the right and left in the thickness of the
Wall, at least six foot on each side, with the greatest skill he can; and at
the end of each Chamber he shall make a Fourneau or little Oven, according to
the knowledge he has of the strength of the Wall, in each whereof he puts
between two and three hundred weight of Powder in Bags or Barrels, laying it as
dry as he can upon Beds of Straw; afterward he places his Saucissons, which are
a kind of Stockings or Cases of Linen Cloth, an inch in diameter, filled with
Powder, and whereof the end reaches to the Mouth or Entry of the Mine, and
because by these Saucissons the Fire is to be given to the Powder of the
Fourneaus, the Miner should cover them with Tiles or Planks of Wood to save
them from being smothered: Next he is to shut the hole with good pieces of
Wood, well propt and supported, to hinder the flashing out of the Fire, he is
likewise to fasten all with a great many Flints and hard Stones, made in form
of a Swallous-Tail, that they may stick close and not easily give way, when the
Powder shall do its effect* if by chance he meet with countermines, which are
to be found in many Bastions, he must chamber over them, and leave between them
and his Mine a sufficient thickness to keep them from venting, and being made
useless by the countermines.

When a Mine is made in a place where the earth is soft and yielding, the
Ground is to be supported by Planks underpropt with little Posts or Girders, as
fast as the Chambers are wrought.

The Ancients made use of Mines or Subterranean ways, but their design was
very different from ours; they made them only for a passage to go to the Sap,
or to enter Towns, when our Mines are intended to bow up and overturn the face
of the Bastion.

CHAP. III.
Of Artifical Fireworks.
Sect. 1.
Of the Fuse.
THe Fuses that are made for Petards, Bombes, hollow Bullets and Granado's,
ought to be slow, otherwise these Pieces would do their effects before the
time. This is the manner of the composition of Fuses. Take three parts of
Powder: six of Sulphur, and nine of Saltpeter, beat them apart into a subtle
Powder, then mingle them altogether with a small Stick in a Platter or Charger,
pouring thereon by degrees the Oil of Peter, until all be made into a Paste;
let it be dried in the shade, and the Fuses charged therewith.

Sect. 2.
Of the Sulphur Match.
THe Sulphur Match is no more but Cotton made into Wieks, which are first
steeped in Brandy, and then in molten Sulphur, and afterward dried in the shade.

Sect. 3.
How to make the Quick-match.
TAke half a quartern of Powder, a quartern of Saltpeter, two ounces of
Brandy, half a septier or the fourth part of a French pint of Vinegar, and a
French pint of Urine, melt all these together, and when they are dissolved, put
therein Cotton drawn out into gross Threads: when the Cotton has drank up all
the warm Matter, take it out whilst it is moist, and role it up into little
Matches or Cords two, three, or four foot long, with the hand upon a Table
besprinkled with the dust of fine Powder; then stretch them out to dry in the
shade; and keep them in a dry place: that Quick-match is very violent.

Sect. 4.
How to prepare the matter of Fire-Rockets.
TAke one part of Common Sulphur, melt it in an Earthen Pot, when it is
dissolved put thereunto half a part of gross Powder very dry, three fourth
parts of a part of Saltpeter, and half a fourth part of the Powder of
Char-cole; mingle all these materials together leisurely, and when they are
well mingled, pour them on the Floor, and this is the matter of Fire-Rockets.

Sect. 5.
How to charge Fireballs.
WHen one has a mind to charge Bombes, hollow Bullets, Fire-pots, and all sorts
of Fireballs; let him take one part of the matter of Fire-rockets, one part of
Saltpeter, the eight part of a part of Camphire, and as much fine Powdet,
mingled therewith with the hand, and put all into a hollow Bullet with quick
Match.

Sect. 6.
How to make a Fire-Lance.
TAke a piece of light Wood three foot and a half or four foot long, bore it
from one end to the other, and let the bore be an inch in diameter; make the
Wood very smooth, both in the inside and outside, which ought to be an inch
thick in all parts: Place into one of the ends a half Pike, which must enter
half a foot into the Trunck, and be very well fastened. The Trunck of the Lance
must be wooped round with strong Pack-thread, well waxed with Rosin and melted
Wax to defend it against Water. The proportion of the mixture of the Powders is
twelve parts of Saltpeter, six of Sulphur, six of Canon-powder, six of the
dust of Lead, two of Glass beaten but indefferently small, two of Quicksilver,
and one of Salarmoniac; when all these Materials have been beaten apart, they
are to be mingled together, and made into a Paste, with the Oil of Peter rather
hard than soft: Put afterward Hards into that Composition, and incorporate
them therewith, and make thereof Pellets, or small Balls suited to the bigness
of the bore of the Lance, which aro to be dried and tied up with fine Wire. To
charge the Lance, put into the bottom of the Trunck a charge of beaten Powder;
without ramming it, but very little; over that put a Pellet, with a little of
the Composition, renew that until the Wood be full, still increasing the
Charges of the Powder; so that the last Lay contain two Charges. Fire is to be
set to this Lance, with a quick Match at the mouth.

Sect. 7.
How to make Tourteaus to show Light, or Port-Lights.
TAke twelve pounds of black Pitch, six pounds of Suet, six pounds of Linseed
Oil, six pounds of Colophonia, and two pounds of Turpentine, in which steep
Arquebush Match until it have drank up all the Matter, and be incorporated
therewith, then make it in Tourteaus.

Sect. 8.
Of Burning Fagots.
TAke Fagots and rub them with the matter of the Fire-rockets, or otherways
with Turpentine, or steep them if you please in melted Pitch; afterward put
Fire to them, they not only give light in the Ditches, but serve likewise to
burn the Galleries, that the Enemies may have made there.

To make stuffed Fagots for burning the Cross Works, take Fagots steeped in
Liquid Pitch, and stuff them with Grenades; let them be lighted and thrown
down from the Ramparts upon the Galleries, and the Grenades take Fire
instantly, and give such claps on all hands as suffer not any man to come near
to quench the Fire.

Sect. 9.
Of Fire-Hoops.
FIre-hoops are very proper for the defense of a Breach, by rolling them down
upon the Enemies when they mount the Assault. This is the way of making them,
which I have learnt of a very skilful Artist.

Take three large Hoops, tie them together, furnish them with Artificial Fires,
and with a dozen and half of Common Grenades, which you are to tie to the
inside of the Hoops, with good Wire, that those which play first may not break
off the others; put Fire to the Wildfire, just as you role down the Hoop, the
Grenades will take Fire of themselves and do cruel execution.

Sect. 10.
How to charge Grenades.
TAke a pound of Saltpeter, ten ounces of Sulphur, six ounces of fine
Gunpowder; pound them together, with two or three spoonfulls of Brandy, and a
little Camphire; and Grenades that are so made are excellent.

Sect. 11.
How to make Artificial Fireworks, that burn under Water.
TAke Tar, Sulphur, Camphire, Colophonia, Turpentine, Rosin, Quicklime,
Lintseed Oil, of each a pound, incorporate them together with a French pint of
Brandy, and half a Septier of Aqua Fortis; put them into a Barrel, to which add
if you please, charged Grenades, Pommels of Swords, Pistol-Barrels, charged
with Powder and Shot; set Fire to all at the Bung-hole, with a slow fuse; throw
that Engine upon what you please, you will see it burn, even under water, and
no man dares approach it to quench the Fire. The Carcasses which have been
lately invented produce the same effect.

Sect. 12.
Of Provision for Artificial Fireworks.
THe Arsenals and Magazines of Frontier places, should not only be provided of
Arms and necessary Instruments for the defense and attacking of Towns, but
likewise of all Ingredients fit for the Composition of Fireworks, and
therefore Provision should be made of Saltpeter, Charcole, Camphire, Sulphur,
Pine Rosin, Oil of Peter, Lintseed Oil, Oil of Aspick, Tar, Venice Turpentine,
Aliquitran of Spain, Black Pitch, Grecian Pitch, or Colophonia, Spanish Pitch,
Wax, Tallow, Varnish in Grain, Mastick, Salarmoniac, Common Salt, Quicksilver,
Vitriol, Brandy, Aqua Fortis, Vinegar, Frankincense, Dust of Lead, pounded
Glass, of all sorts of fat and dry Woods, Hemp, Ship-Pitch, Burning Balls,
Granado's-Burning or Fire-Hoops, Lances and Fire-Trunks.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Roman Fireworks.
THe Romans, as well as We, made use of Fireworks, and amongst others of those
they called Malleoloi, which were Arrows of Canes, encompassed with
Pitched-Tow, to those they put Fire, and instantly threw them against the
Engines of the Enemies, which they quickly burnt, unless the Fire was put out
with Dust, there being no other way to quench it; and our Fire-Lances or Trunks
do very much resemble them both in shape and operation. They were besides
accustomed to fill Earthen Pots with Pitch, Sulphur and Tow, to which having
set Fire, they threw them with Slings into besieged places: The flame of these
spread on all hands and consumed every thing it met with.

They made use also of Torches of Rosin, at the end whereof they had
shard-pointed Iron-Heads, like to the Rowels of Spurs, which fastened in the
Engines, that the Fire of the Torches might the more easily consume them.
Infixae inhaerentesque Machinis facile eas concremabant.

Besides the Fireworks which they shot out of Cross-Bows, they likewise threw
upon those who mounted an Assault, Boyling-hot Oil, Pitch, Melted Lead, Hot
Water, Godrons or Ship-Pitch, Lighted Torches, and several other burning
materials, as Caesar affirms. Picem re liquasque res, quibus ignis excitari
potest fundabant.

The Third Book OF VVar-Engines.
AMongst War-Engines, we reckon all Pieces that serve to overthrow and ruin
the Enemies Works, and facilitate the taking of their Places. It is my design
to speak of every Piece particularly; yet I have thought that I should not
swerve much from my Subject, if I began this third Book by a Chapter of the
Casting and Framing of Pieces of Artillery.

CHAP. I.
Of the Casting and Framing of Pieces of Artillery.
IN casting of Pieces of Artillery, there is commonly allowed for every hundred
weight of fine Copper, Twenty pound of Metal; by Metal I understand Bell-Metal.

In defect of this Metal the finest Tin is used; and then for every hundred
weight of fine Copper, there must Ten pound of the best Tin be allowed; or
otherwise Ten pound of Lattin, and Eight of the finest Tin; but because the
Casting of Pieces cannot be without some loss; for every Six pounds of Metal,
there is a pound allowed in overplus.

Founders should have a special care of the preparing and mixing of the Metals,
as well as of the internal smoothness and neatness of the Pieces, and therefore
they ought to choose the most proper Materials, and take heed that the Clay of
the Moulds be good, well beaten and wrought as they ought to be with Flocks and
Hair, that the Moulds and all that the Piece is cast upon, be well greased with
Tallow, well bound and banded with Iron, well baked and prepared, well placed
and laid, that the Tronions be so exactly set, that the Piece may be almost in
an equal balance, weighing as much in the Chase as in the charged Cilinder and
Breech; so that a single Man may easily either raise or let her down in her
Carriage.

A Piece must be always strong at the place of the Tronions, because there is
the greatest stress, and the beginning of motion.

A Piece must be well repaired, tried, and proved before she be mounted on her
Carriage; and care must be had that there be no Cracks, Flaws, Crevasses, nor
Honey-combs in her Cylender or Chase, which commonly happens when the Metal is
run too cold, when the Mould is not well tempered, or when the Tin is not well
mingled and incorporated as it ought to be.

CHAP. II.
Of a Canon, its Carriage, its Vtensils and Service.
Sect. 1.
Of a Canon.
THere are six sizes of Artillery, to wit, The Canon, the Culverin, the
Bastard, the Minion, the Faucon, and the Fauconet. I intend to speak
particularly of each Piece, and to explain their Size, their Range, or
Carrying, their Length and Weight; but I judged it not amiss first to give a
representation of a Canon, and its Carriage, with an explication of theirs
parts both internal and external.

The Coin.

The Linstock

The Rammer.

The Ladle.

The Sponge.

The Wheel.



The Explication of this Figure.
AB, The diameter of the Bore or Mouth of a Canon is six inches and two lignes.
CD, The thickness of the Sides and Metal, two inches. EG, The thickness of the
Metal at the Breech, six inches. EB, The whole Chase nine foot long, and the
Cylinder all of the same largeness. RS, The Tronions six inches in diameter. K,
The Murrion or Moulding of the Muzzel. NA, The Chase of the Gun five foot and a
half long. NX, The Chamber or charged Cylinder in length four foot and a half
and three lignes. L, The Base Ring. EX, The Breech. TT, The Cornish Ring. ee,
The Reinforce Ring, distant from the Mouth four foot and a half, and from the
Trunions half a foot.. I, The Touchhole.
Sect. 2.
Of the Charge of a Piece.
THe Powder for the Charge of any Piece whatsoever, is a third part of the
weight of the Bullet, and the Ladle of each Piece ought to be made in such a
manner, that it contain exactly the quantity of Powder that is necessary for
the Charge. A Piece that has just fired should never be charged again, until
it be first cooled with Water, which does as well as Vinegar, which was
heretofore used, and which is at present thought fitter for Sallades.

Sect. 3.
How to level, or bring a Gun to pass.
EVery Piece in a Battery must have its necessary Utensils, its Magazine, Men
to traverse and serve it, and a Gunner to level it, guiding his sight from the
Breech to the Muzzel, which he causes to be raised or made lower, according as
he judges convenient, by advancing or drawing back the Coins that are under the
Breech.

Sect. 4.
Of the Ammunition and Vtensils of a Canon.
WHen Pieces of Artillery go into the Field, they are always attended with
Wagons which carry their Ammunition.

Wagons drawn by four Horses carry each a thousand or twelve hundred weight;
one Wagon carries Thirty three Canon Bullets, there are therefore required six
Wagons and twenty four Horses for the Carriage of the Ammunition that a Canon
may spend in a day, which is a hundred Bullets, and two thousand four hundred
weight of Powder.

A Canon must likewise have its Ropes and Tackling, a Cable fifteen fadom long,
four inches and a half about, threescore ten pound in weight, and other smaller
Ropes and Tackling which are known to all Artists, and those that belong to the
Artillery.

The Utensils belonging to Pieces, are the Sponge, which is a long Staff, the
end whereof is covered with Wool, and serves to cool the Guns; an Iron Ladle
to put the powder into the Piece, the Rammer to ram down the Charge, and
Leavers or Handspakes to re-place the Gun into the Port-holes or Gaps after she
has fired.

The Linkstock, which is a Staff of the length of a Cane, the end whereof is
furnished with a kind of double Musket-lock; wherein is put a Match lighted at
both ends.

The Coins or Quoins, which are properly great Wedges of Wood, with a peg or
pin that serves them for an handle to thrust them forward or pull them back,
according as the Gunner shall direct. The Figure will represent all more
intelligibly.

Sect. 5.
Of the Carriage of a Gun.
THe Carriage of a Canon consists of two sides, in length fourteen foot and a
half, half a foot thick, and a foot and eight inches broad, the Carriage in the
Timber toward the head, is thirteen inches broad, and at the end eighteen.

The Axel-tree is seven foot long, and the Wheels, if they be shod, are five
foot high.

A A, The Sides of the Carriage. B B, The Length of the Carriage. C C, The Body
of the Carriage. D, The Axel-tree. E E, The Drought-Hooks. F F, The
Cape-squares. G G, The Iron Bands at the end of the Carriage. H H, The Ends of
the Axel-tree. I, The Wheel of the Carriage.
CHAP. III.
Of Pieces of Calibre or Size.
Sect. 1.
Of the Canon.
THe Canon of France is in length about ten foot, its Carriage fourteen, and
being mounted on its Carriage nineteen. The breadth on the Axel-tree is seven
foot, its Metal weighs Four thousand eight hundred weight, the Bullet thereof
is six inches in diameter, and weighs thirty three pound and a third part; it
carries blank about seven hundred common paces, three foot a pace, or three
hundred and fifty fathom. The same piece may be fired an hundred times in one
day.

The Bed of a Canon ought to be fifteen foot broad, and twenty in length, for
its recoiling; for that end there is usually made a strong Floor of good Oaken
Boards, which sloaps a little toward the Parapet, that the Canon may not
recoil too much, and that it may be the more easily again traversed into its
place.

Sect. 2.
Of the Culverin.
THe Culverin is a foot longer than the Canon, and being mounted on its
Carriage, is nineteen foot long, and on the Axel-tree seven foot broad. The
weight of its Metal is Three thousand seven hundred weight, the Bullet of it is
four inches and ten lignes in diameter, and weighs sixteen pound and a half.
Its reach is three hundred and fifty fathom, and may be fired an hundred times
a day.

Sect. 3.
Of the Bastard Canon.
THe Bastard is nine foot long, mounted on its Carriage sixteen, and on the
Axel-tree six foot broad; it weighs two thousand five hundred weight; its
Bullet is three inches and eight lignes in diameter, and weighs seven pound and
a half: It carries about a thousand paces, and may be in one day fired an
hundred and twenty five times.

Sect. 4.
Of the Minion.
THe Minion is eight foot in length, mounted on its Carriage sixteen, and six
foot in breadth; the Bullet is in diameter three inches and three lignes, and
weighs two pounds three quarters: it carries not so far as the Bastard, but may
be fired in one day and hundred and fifty times.

Sect. 5.
Of the Faucon.
THe Faucon is near seven foot long, on its Carriage eleven, and five and a
half broad. It weighs eight hundred weight. The Bullet of it is two inches and
ten lignes in diameter, and weighs a pound and a half; it may be fired in one
day an hundred and fourscore times.

Sect. 6.
Of the Fauconet.
THe Fauconet is near five foot long, mounted on its Carriage nine and a half,
and four foot and a half in breadth. The Metal thereof weighs seven hundred and
forty weight. Its Bullet is an inch and ten lignes in diameter, and weighs
three quarters of a pound and a half. It carries two hundred and fifty fathom,
and in one day may be fired two hundred times.

Fauconets are commonly planted in low places, or on the Flancks of Bastions,
for scouring the Ditches and ruining the Galleries. A low place whereon are two
Canons planted, is commonly six fathom square.

Sect. 7.
The Effect and Execution of the Canon.
THe Pieces of Artillery which are most frequently used to ruin and demolish
the Works, are such as carry Shot from thirty to forty five pound weight.

A Canon Shot at two hundred paces, or a hundred fathom distance, may pierce
between fifteen and seventeen foot into ground that is but indifferently
settled, ten or twelve foot into ground long settled and well fastened; two or
three and twenty foot into sand or loose ground; and a Canon fired to purpose
against a Groundwork, within the distance that I have been speaking of, will
ruin more than can be repaired with fifty Baskets full of Earth.

The force of a Canon Shot from low to high, or from high to low, or on a
level, is equal, as to the Canon; but in respect of the Body which receives the
Shot, that which is fired from a low ground to a higher, shakes and over-turns
more.

Sect. 8.
The Way of Nailing up a Canon.
BEsieged make sometimes Salleys out to Nail up the Canon, and attempt the
Batteries; and whilst some throw down the Parapets, others break or burn the
Carriages, some drive in a Nail of Steel which is hacked and notched, and break
it in the Touch-holes of the Pieces, which afterward are good for nothing but
to be cast again.

CHAP. IV.
Of Mortar-Pieces, Arquebusses a Crock, Bombes, Bullets, the Carcass, etc.
Sect. 1.
Of Stone Guns.
STone Guns are for most part of Iron, much of the shape of Mortar-pieces that
shoot Bombes. They carry not far, and therefore are not used but in fortified
places, to incommode the Besiegers when they make their approaches; the powder
for the Charge is regulated according to the number of stones and pieces of
Iron that are put into them; and they are commonly filled up to the Mouth.

Sect. 2.
Of the Arquebuss a Crock.
THe Arquebuss a Crock is made of Iron, in form of a great Musket. It may be
fired three hundred times a day; which comes to five and twenty shot an hour.
The Bullet of it weighs three ounces, and the Charge of Powder an ounce and a
half.

Sect. 3.
Of Mortar Pieces.
MOrtar-Pieces are of Iron or of Cast Metal, and serve to shoot Bombes, they
are not so long as Stone-Guns, and their Bore is wider or narrower, according
to the bigness of the Bombes which they are to contain; their Carriages have no
Wheels, and are quite otherwise shaped than those of a Canon; as may be seen
in the Figure.

Sect. 4.
Of Bombes.
BOmbes are of a late Invention, and were never used in France before the year
1635 at the Siege of Dole. They are made all of Iron, and are hollow, with two
handles to carry them by; but they are not all of the same size, nor of the
same shape: some are round and others long. The first are called Bombes and the
other Fire-pots. They are filled with Fireworks and Powder, and then are
stopped with a Bung or Stopple well closed; in the middle of which is left a
hole to apply the Fuse to.

When Bombes are to be shot, a convenient ground is chosen, not too far distant
from the place which is intended to be galled; and there, a Platform is
erected, which is provided with Plancks of Timber, on which the Mortar-pieces
are planted.

Before a Bombe be put into the Mortar-piece, there is thrown into the bottom
of it a Charge of Powder proportioned to the weight of the Bombe, which is laid
above the Bunghole aloft.

So soon as the Mortar-piece is charged, the Artist takes his heights and
measures, that the Bombe may directly fall into the place that he intends; that
is to say, he gives less or more elevation to his Mortar-piece, according as he
is near or distant from the place and stops it either with a Coin, or with an
Iron Pin, which he thrusts cross the Carriage; that being done, he sets fire to
the Fuse of the Bombe, and then to the Powder of the Mortar-piece, which forces
out the Bombe and carries it up in the Air: when it is come to its full reach,
it falls and breaks in a thousand pieces. The shivers and pieces of it break
and bruise every thing they meet with, and the Fireworks that are within it,
set fire in all places where it chances to fall. Nothing gives greater terror
to the Towns-people of a Besieged Town, than Bombes; and the ravage that there
they do is so extraordinary, and so gall Men, Women, and Children, that they
know not where to be in safety.

Sect. 5.
Of the Carcass.
THe Carcass is a Warlike Engine of very late Invention, or rather it is a late
Imitation of these Burning Barrels, that keep fire under water; whereof I have
spoken before, in the Book of Powder and Chapter of Artificial Fire or
Fireworks, and which takes its name from the Figure, because it is made of two
hoops of Iron two inches broad, and two lignes thick, crossed oval*wayes, and
is filled with a Bag of Pitched Canvas, stuffed with Grenades, and ends of
Musket Barrels charged with small Iron shot.

Carcasses are shot out of Mortar-pieces, in the same manner as Bombes, and the
Fire they make lasts above half an hour, no body daring to put it out.

Sect. 6.
Of the Granadoe.
THere are Grenades of all sizes, but those which are used by our Granadiers
are all almost alike, and are commonly two inches and a half and two lignes in
diameter. They are charged with Powder within a finger of the Hole, the rest is
filled with hard pressed Tow, and then the Hole is stopped with a Bung of Wood
made very close; in the middle whereof is left a little hole or vent, through
which is put a Fuse or Wildfire of Fine Powder mingled with Aqua vitae or
Brandy. Grenades are thrown with the hand, and must not be held long after
they are fired. They are commonly used to drive Enemies from Trenches, in a
Covered Way and in a Lodging.

The Grenades break so soon as the Train is spent, and their shivers and
pieces wound all they hit.

Sect. 7.
Of Hollow Bullets.
WE have at present long and hollow Bullets, which are filled with Powder, and
put into Guns as the others are; all the difference betwixt them is, that they
work a double effect; they perform in the first place that which Plain Bullets
might do, and besides they burst and break in the hole that they have made,
either in a Wall or in a Ground, and blow up as much earth or as many stones as
a small Fourneau might; and in this manner they are charged: When these Bullets
are filled with Powder, their Vent or opening is stopped with a Bung, wherein
is left a passage for a Fuse; to which afterward is put a Sulpher Match, by
which the fire of the Gun is communicated to the Train of the hollow Bullet at
the same time that it is forced out of the Piece.

Sect. 8.
Of Red Bullets.
OTher Bullets are likewise made use of, which the French call Red Bullets,
because they are made red hot, before they are put into the Canon. Their effect
is to burn what they meet with, but that succeeds not always.

Sect. 9.
Of Cartouches.
CArtouches may be called Boxes of White Lattin, half a foot deep, and sized to
the Bore of the Piece, which are filled with great Musket Bullets, that scatter
as they come out and spread abroad on all hands.

Canons are sometimes charged with Nails, Pieces of Old Iron, and Chains with
Bullets fastened to their ends.

Canons charged with Cartouches carry not so far, as when they are charged with
Bullets; but they do greater havoc, especially in Approaches.

CHAP. V.
Of Petards, and of the Way how they are to be used.
Sect. 1.
Of Petards.
THE Petard is a kind of Fire-pot, made of Red Copper, with a tenth part of
Brass, which is filled with powder, and is applied to the Gates of Places upon
a Surprise, to break them and throw them back; as may be seen in the Figure.

The Petard of a Bridge ought to be twelve inches long, and without the Breech
seven inches and a half wide, and within five. The Metal at the

Bombes.

a Mortar Piece.

Hollow Bullet.

Grenade.

Petard.

Carcass.

Cartouche.

Chain Bullets.



Breech ought to be fifteen lignes thick, and six at the Muzzel, without
reckoning the Murrion or Moulding; it has ten inches in Bore at the Mouth,
three Handles, and the Fuse joining to the Breech. The Metal of it weighs from
threescore to threescore and ten pound weight, and is charged with five or six
pound of Powder.

Petards of Gates with Cross-bars, ought to be nine inches long, five lignes
thick at the Muzzel, and an inch at the Breech; having seven inches in Bore,
six without the Breech and four within; it weighs forty pound weight, and its
Charge is from three to four pound of Powder.

The Petard for Gates with Plain Bars or Palissadoes, ought to be seven inches
long, at the Muzzel four lignes thick, and at the Breech nine* the Mouth four
inches wide, without the Breech three inches and a half, and within two; it
weighs about fifteen pound weight, and from one pound and a half to two pound
of Powder, is the Charge of it.

Between the Petard and Bridge is put a Madrier or Plank of Wood a foot and a
half broad, two foot long, and three inches thick; when the Wood is not strong,
it is covered with Plates of Iron laid on the one side Cross-wayes, and on the
other in length.

Petards are to be charged with the finest Powder that can be had, knocked hard
down into the Petard, which must be stopped with a Wooden Trencher or Wooden
Roler an inch thick; which must be exactly applied, and whereon a little Wax
is to be melted for stopping the chinks, and hindering the water to enter.

A Petard is charged within three fingers of the Mouth, the rest is filled up
with Tow pressed very hard; afterward a Canvas Cloth is put before the Mouth of
the Petard, which is to be tied very fast with a cord about the Muzzel, least
the Charge drop out.

The Fuse ought to be slow, that the Petardier may have time to withdraw a
Flying Bridge.

a Crow's foot or Casting Caltrop.

a Turn Pike.

a Percullis.

a Battering Ram.

before the Petard plays. The manner of the composition of the Fuse is to be
found in the Chapter of Fireworks, Book 2. Chap. 3. Sect. 1.

Sect. 2.
Of the Arrow and Flying-Bridge.
PEtards are applied to a Bridge with an Arrow made in the manner following:

The Arrow ought to have a weight or counterpoise behind, it is mounted on two
Wheels three foot and a half high, and two foot and a half thick. The point of
the Arrow should be at least a foot wide, that it may contain the Petard.

The Arrow is composed of three Planks twenty six foot in length, each Plank
made up of four Pieces, which are fastened together with Iron Rings, and are
taken a sunder that they may be portable, and are joined again with an Iron
Pin. These three Planks are made fast together by Bars an inch thick, two
inches broad, and a foot distant from one another. On one of the Planks is made
a hollow Crany to lay a Train in, to give Fire to the Petard.

The Flying or Roling Bridge is made in the same manner as the Arrow, except
that it is as broad at one end as at the other, and that it is covered with
Planks; as may be seen by the Figure.

Sect. 3.
The Way of Using and Applying a Petard.
WHen there is a design to petard a Gate; the Situation of it is first to be
viewed, and when a day is pitched upon for the execution, the Petards,
Instruments and necessary Utensils are loaded on Mules; Detachments are made,
and every one is ordered what to do; all things being well disposed, they march
out in good order about the evening, that by midnight they may arrive in the
neighborhood of the place which is intended to be surprised. The Mules are
unloaded half a quarter of a league from the Gate, and every one takes hold of
the Tools whereof they are to make use. The Petardier makes him that carries
the Madrier march first; afterward he calls three for the Petard, two to carry
it, and the third to help, if need be. If the Petard be fastened to the
Madrier, the four ease one another two and two by turns, and the two who carry
not the Petard, have each of them a Smiths great Hammer: after them the
Petardier commands two others to march, carrying each of them a great Hatchet;
then another with a Goats-foot (or Fearn) another with a dark Lanthorn, another
with three or four Pieces of lighted Match; and another with a Turrel or good
Nails, and a Club, so that every Petard to be rightly served, requires at least
ten men.

When a Petard is to be applied to a Drawbridge, the Petardier makes the
Flying-Bridge march first, or the Arrow with seven or eight Men, as well to
carry as to push them. Next he makes the Madrier and the Petard advance in the
same order as I have said before; after follow those who carry the Ladders, and
the floor of Planks, to be thrown upon the Breach which the Petard may have
made, who are followed by those who carry the Hammers, Hatchets, Pinsers, and
other Instruments to pull out the Bars, and cut the Chains. There is need
rather of too many Instruments, than that any one should be wanting; and when
the Petardier asks any thing, he that carries it should be ready at hand to
give it without making the least noise.

All things being thus disposed, the Petardier covers himself with a round
Buckler, or some Planks made on purpose to secure him from Musket Shot, or
Fireworks that may be thrown upon him; he applies his Petard, commands those
that are to fall on to be in readiness, sets Fire to the Fuse, and with-draws
whilst the Petard is playing; so soon as a Breach is made, those that are
commanded for the first brush, enter the place, and force all that resists
them; they who are to back them, do as much, and so successively do all who
have any thing to put in execution.

Sect. 4.
Of Tortoises.
WHen a Bridge joins ill to a Wall, it may be beaten down without a Petard,
with a Brazen Tortoise placed between the Wall and the Bridge, which by its
shivers and pieces breaks it. This is the way of making it: Take two shells of
Brass five inches deep, a foot wide, and two inches thick; place the one upon
the other, and fill them with powder, putting thereto a Fuse.

We may reckon among our Engines of War, the Herses, Sarrasins, or Cataracts,
and the Orgues, which are great Pieces of Hanging Wood, and are let fall down
through holes, when there is any fear of a Surprise, or of the effort of a
Petard.

Turn-pikes, which are Beam stuck full of sharp-pointed Piles, which roles upon
a Pivot to stop a Passage.

The Crow-foot, or Casting Caltrop, are Iron Pricks, made in such manner, that
what way soever they be turned they have always the point upwards.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Warlike Engines of the Romans.
Sect. 1.
Of Machines or Engines in general.
WE call all things Engines, whereof the Art and Contrivance surpasses the
matter, Materiam superabat opus, says Ovid. From thence comes the Name of
Ingeneer. The Ancients called all things that serve to attaque or defend
places, Warlike Engines; so does Moses call them in the 20th Chapter of
Deuteronomy, the last Verse. Only those Trees which thou know are not for
meat, those shall thou destroy and cut down, and make Forts against the City
that makes War with thee, until thou subdue it. All these ancient Engines were
only made of Wood pieced together and made fast with Iron; which were placed
upon the Turrets and Corners of the Walls, to throw Darts and Stones of an
extraordinary bigness: Others there were only for beating down of Walls, and
others for Mounting an Assault, and for a Scalado.

Sect. 2.
Of the Tortoise or Testudo.
THe Tortoise of the Ancient Gauls which the Romans used, and called Testudo,
was nothing else but the crouding together of many Soldiers, who covered
themselves on the Head and Sides with a great many Bucklers. The former Ranks
carried them higher than the following in manner of the Tiles of a House; that
so whatever might be thrown upon them from the Walls, might not stick, but more
easily slide to the ground. Homer speaks of these Tortoises in this manner:

Scutum scuto haeret, galeae galea, atque vir viro. They made use of that
Invention for Scaling of Walls, by mounting one upon another; as Titus
Liviusdescribes it. Testudine parti muri ad mota, cum armati spuerstantes
subissent propugnatoribus, muri fastigio altitudinis aequabantur. Tacitus calls
that Engine a reiterated Tortoise. Super iteratum testudinem scandentes.

They not only made use of these Tortoises in attacking of Places, but also in
Battles; breaking through the Legions of the Enemy.

All these Tortoises were not in this manner composed of Men and Bucklers; they
had besides certain Sheds of Wood twenty five foot square, and covered with a
Shelving Roof, which they called Tortoises, whereof some served to cover the
Lodgings, others to shelter the Workmen against Stones and Arrows from the
Town, and others to hang the Battering-Ram, and cover those who were to swing
it; these were called Testudines Arictariae.

Sect. 3.
Of Ladders.
THe Romans had Ladders of all Fashions, which were always two foot higher
than the Walls they intended to scale. Some folded, and could with little
inconvenience be carried any whither; these were called Scalae compactiles.
Others were called Reticulatae aut Stupeae, because they were made with Cords
provided at the ends with strong Hooks, to fasten them with to the Walls. They
had others that opened and shut in manner of Zizack. And others at the end of
which was a kind of a little Watch-House; whereinto they put some body to spy
what was doing on the Ramparts.

They had besides another kind of Ladder, which they termed Rolling Ladders; at
the end of which were Bridges: and others which they called Sambucae, which
were carried in Boats, to scale Walls that were encompassed with Water.

Sect. 4.
Of Bulwarks.
WHen the Romans intended to attaque a place they caused Bulwarks to be raised
round the Walls, which were in height twenty four foot, and in breadth three
hundred; upon which they built Towers of VVood armed with Iron on all sides;
which commanded the Ramparts, and from which the Besiegers threw upon the
People of the Town Stones, Darts, Artificial Fire, that they might thereby
facilitate the approach of the Battering Rams and other Engines for taking of
Places.

Sect. 5.
Of Towers.
THe Towers which were used by the Romans in the attacking of Places, went on
Wheels, were very high, and on all sides covered with Plates of Iron, which
rendered them more weighty, more difficult to be overthrown, and less obnoxious
to the danger of Fire. These Towers were invented by one Diades a Soldier
under Alexander the Great; they had also other Towers which carried Bridges and
Battering Rams. Caesar caused to be built before Marseillis Towers of Masons
Work five foot thick, and near the Towers of the Enemies, from whence he might
incommode them, he caused moveable Roofs to be made for them, from which hung
Skreens made of Cables or other Ship-ropes, behind which the Workmen might
under covert labor in the raising of the Towers.

Sect. 6.
Of the Battering Ram.
THe original of Battering Rams which Paulus Diaconus calls, Exterminatorium
Iustrumentum, is very Ancient; some attribute the invention of them to the
Greeks, and others to the Carthaginians. However it be, they performed in those
days what our Canon and Mines do at present, seeing the only use they were put
to was to beat down the Walls of Towns which they intended to take.

The Battering Ram was made of a large Tree, like to the Mast of a Ship, which
was in length six and twenty cubits, and five hand breadths in diameter, and
within six cubits of the head was guarded with Iron Rings; the head was of a
knotty Wood covered with Iron, and represented the Head of a Ram with Horns,
and therefore the name of Battering Ram was given to that Engine. The Battering
Ram hung betwixt great Beams of Wood, by Massive Iron Chains, and required a
hundred men to swing and push it violently against the Walls. Repulsus magna
virorum manu; says Flavius, The shape of it may be seen in the Figure.

Sect. 7.
Of Counter-Engines.
TO hinder Assaults and Storms, the besieged made use of huge Stones, Wheels,
Wagons with four Wheels filled with weighty Matters, Columns, Cylinders,
Millstones, Tuns, and Artificial Fire, which they threw upon the Besiegers and
their Engines, with purpose to break them, or to reduce them to Ashes. They
hindered the effects of the Battering Rams, by opposing to them Packs of Wool,
or by catching hold of them with Snares, or Iron Engines made in form of
Pinsers, which they called Woolves, meaning that such Woolves could catch the
Ram, because with these Engines they drew the Battering Rams up, or broke them
in the middle.

The End of the Third Book.
The Fourth Book OF ENSIGNS, TRUMPETS, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS OF WAR.
IT may perhaps seem strange, that I have comprehended in one and the same
Book, and under one sole Title, Ensings, Trumpets, and other Instruments of
War, considering the small Analogy they have to one another. I frankly confess,
that as to the Form there is none at all; but as to the Use and Property, I
maintain there is a great deal. We call that a Sign whichmarks any thing to us,
Signum a significatione. Now Ensigns have only been so called because they
signified to Soldiers their Camps, Marches, their Fields of Batrel, and the
Places of their gathering together and rallying. Are not Drums and Trumpets the
signs of notice and advertisement? Do not the different Sounds of both the one
and other signify the different Commands which the Soldiers are to put in
Execution, As to take Arms, come to their Colors, draw out into the Field,
Charge, Retreat, and many other things which they understand by the sound of
those Instruments: and therefore I thought it unnecessary to separate them from
Colors, Standards, Ensigns and Guidons; whereof I shall trea^ in the
following Chapters.

CHAP. I.
Of Ensigns.
THe Trojans were the first that made use of Ensigns in their Armies, that they
might accustom Young Soldiers to know their Companies, and facilitate their
Rallying, when they happened to be in a Fight. Vt tyrones assuescerent signa
sequi, and in acie cognoscere ordines suos. Says Livie.

The Ancients in the beginning had no other Ensigns but Bundles of Hay which
they fastened on long Poles: from whence comes the word Manipule, a Manipulis
Foeni, by the report of Ovid.

Pertica suspensos portabat longa maniplos,
Vnde maniplaris nomina miles habet.
But the mode of the Rustic and Wild Ancients lasted not long, the Roman
Custom came in place of it; and then succeeded ours which we at present carry,
and which are different from the former; both in form and matter. We give them
several names according to their various shapes: to wit, Colors, Standards,
Ensigns, and Guidons.

The Foot carry Colors, which are of Taffata, an Ell and a half square,
fastened to a half Pike eight or nine foot long.

Every Regiment has a particular Color to it self, except the Crosses and the
Colonels Colors, which are always White, because White is the Color of
France, as the Black Eagles show us the Color of the Empire; the Red that of
Spain, and the Orange that of Holland.

The Horse carry Ensigns, Guidons, and Standards.

The first two are for the Troops of the Gens-d'arms.

Ensigns are above a foot and a half square, and are made of Stuff embroidered
with Gold and Silver, adorned with Ciphers and Devises, and fastened to a Lance
eight or nine foot long.

Guidons are longer than broad, of a Stuff like to that of Ensigns, divided in
two points at the end, which are made a little round; their Lances are eight or
nine foot long.

Standards are for the Troops of the Light Horse, but a foot and a half square,
and of a stuff embroidered, furnished with the Arms and Devises of the Masters
de Camp of the Regiments, and their Lances a like to those of Ensigns and
Guidons. The Figures will more easily give you the meaning of what I say.

Sect. 1.
Of the Oriflamme.
THE Royal Banner of France, to which the Flames of Gold, wherewith it was
bespangled, have given the name of Oriflamme, was properly the Ensign General
of the Kingdom, which never came out of the Church of St. Denis, where it lay
in Custody; but when the Kings marched out to the Wars: It was made of a Red
Stuff, about two foot long, pointed and cloven, like the Banderolle or Penon of
a Ship, which was fastened to a Lance, in the manner of the Banners of the
Church.

It was left off to be carried in the Reign of Charles the Seventh; and since
that time, the Oriflamme-bearer, which was one of the Chief Officers of the
Kingdom, has remained extinct.

He that wrote the Life of Lowis the Young, distinguishes the Royal Banner,
from the Banner of St. Denis; when he says, That Geoffry of Ranconay, one of
the noblest Barons of Poictou, carried the Kings Banner, which according to
custom came after that of St. Denis, which was commonly called Oriflamme. They
who make a distinction between these two Banners, call the Kings Oriflor,
Oriflour, Oriflamme, Karlir, and make it of Azure Taffeta, spangled with Golden
Flowers de Luce. It is the common opinion that it was presented to Charlemain
by Pope Leo the Third, when he made him Protector and Defender of the Church of
Saint Peter.

Guidon

Enseigne

Colors

Standard

Gonfanon or Standard of the Church

Oriflame, or the Royal Banner of St. Denis.



Sect. 2.
Of the Gonfanon.
THe Gonfanon is in the Church, what the Oriflamme was heretofore in France,
and the Office of great Gonfanonier, is one of the most honorable charges of
the Ecclesiastic State.

The Color of the Gonfanon is Red, and differs not in shape from the Banners
of the Ancient Cavalry, but that it is cloven into three ends a little rounded.

Most Kingdoms have their Ensigns or Standards General in imitation of the
Romans, who had the Banner of the Consul, or of the General of the Army, which
they called Labrum, of a Purple Colored Stuff, enriched with Fringes of Gold
and precious Stones.

Sect. 3.
Of the Banner and Penon.
THe difference between the Banner and Penon was, that the Banner was square,
fastened to a Lance like Colors and Cornets; and the Penon had a long Tail,
which might be easily made a Banner, by cutting off the Tail. From these Penons
is derived the name of Penonages, which has been given to the Companies of the
Quarters of the City of Lions, whose Captains are called Captains Penons. In
England the Penon of St. George was the chief Banner of the Kingdom.

Every Lord carried his Arms in his Banner, or in his Penon; but none but Lords
Banerets, were suffered to carry a Banner to the Wars. When a Lord having for
many years carried Arms, had Estate enough to entertain a Troop of Gentlemen to
accompany a Banner, he was allowed to raise a Banner; for that end he carried
at the first Battle where he was, a Penon of his Arms, and presented himself
before the Constable, or him who commanded the Army for the Prince; from whom
he asked leave to carry a Banner; and that being granted him, he took the
Heralds at Arms Witnesses of it, who cut off the Tail of his Penon, and made a
Banner thereof.

Princes, Mareshals, and Barons, had their Banners having their Coats of Arms
quartered on them, carried before them by Squires, to assemble their Men about
them in day of Battle.

Sect. 4.
Of Banderolles, Pannonceaux, and Faillions.
THe Banderoll was a kind of little Banner; carried by Knights in Turnements,
with which they made the sign of the Cross, when they entered the Lists, before
they began to Fight; as Oliver de la March reports in the Eighteen Chapter of
his Memoires. When the King gives Holy Bread, the Swisses and Officers that
serve at these Ceremonies, carry these Banderolls with the Kings Arms quartered
on them.

Panronceaux were little Pennons, wherewith Ships, the Tops of Towers, and the
Houses of Gentlemen of Quality, were beautified.

The Faillion, is a kind of Standard made use of in the Army, for assembling
the Baggage, and every Regiment ought to have one of its Color, which conducts
the Baggage to the Faillion General.

S. P. Q. R.

The Ensign of the Roman Horse.

The Ensign of the Manipule.

The Ensign of the Roman Legion.



CHAP. II.
Of the Roman Ensigns.
THE Romans had one kind of Ensigns for foot, and another for Horse. Every
Legion had its Ensign General, which was the Roman Eagle, as we have a
Colonels Colors in every Regiment of foot, which is always of White Taffeta;
besides that the Manipules or Companies had their particular Ensigns, which
were silvered Pikes, at whose end was a little piece of Wood laid a thwart, in
form of a Cross, with little Globes fastened down along to the Pikes, on which
was the Names of the Emperors, as Suetonius reports.

Artabanus transgressus Euphratem aquilas and Romana, Caesarumque imagines
adoravitsigna. The Armies were reckoned by Eagles; as Hirtius says. Erat
Pompeii acies tredecem aquilis constituta. To intimate that the Army of Pompey
was composed of thirteen Legions. We have retained the same way of expressing
the number of the Horse, which we have in our Armies; for instance we say, The
King has detached or sent into the Field, two hundred Cornets, to signify two
hundred Troops.

The Ensigns of the Cavalry were of a shape different from those of the
Infantry. The Romans named them Vexilla, which to speak properly were little
square Sails, almost of the bigness of our Standards, which were carried
hanging at a Pike, like to the Banners of our Churches. These Sails were for
most part of a Purple Stuff embroidered, whereon were set in Golden Letters,
the Names of their Emperors, or of their Commanders.

Aurea clarum not a nomen ducum vexillis praescriptum feriunt. The same is in
use amongst our Horse, whereof most part of the Masters de Camp cause their
Arms or Devises to be put upon the Standards of the Troops of their Regiments.

The Persians had Eagles for Ensigns, and the Ancient Germans carried the
Figures of Wild Beasts.

CHAP. III.
Of Trumpets, Drums, and other Instruments of War.
THE Instruments of Military Symphony are not only proper to give the
Soldiers the signal of what they are to do; but likewise to animate them to
Fight after the manner of the Lacedaemonians. The Cavalry make use of Trumpets
and Kettle Drums.

The Trumpet is an Instrument of Brass doubly crooked, which Heginus says, was
invented by Thireime Son of Hercules. This definition Vegetius gives of it:
Buccina quae in semetipso aereo circulo reflectitur. Ovid in this manner
describes it to us.

-- Cava buccina sumitur illi,
Tortilis in latium quae turbine cresct ab imo.
There is no Troop of our Gend'arms, nor Light Horse, which has not at least
one Trumpet, to sound to Boots and Saddle, to the Standard, to Horse, the
Charge, the Challenge, and the Retreat.

Kettle-Drums are two Brazen Vessels, round at the bottom, and covered above
with Goat-Skin, which is made to sound by beating on it with Sticks.

Kettle-Drums were more in use among the Germans and Spaniards, than among the
French, who heretofore never carried any but when they won them from their
Enemies. That Ancient formality is now out of date, and the King bestows them
on whom he thinks fit; especially on the Troops of his Household.

Drums, Fifes, Bagpipes and Hautbois, are for Foot, Musketeers, Dragoons,
Fusiliers, and Horse-grandaiers. Drums are made of a Chestnut Wood, hollow and
covered at both ends with Skins of Parchment, which are braced with Cords, and
with Snares underneath. These Instruments serve to beat the Reveilly, the
General, the Call, the March, the Charge, the Parley, the Retreat, the Banks or
Proclamations, and all the Commands. The Invention of them is not late; as may
be seen in the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Instruments of War used by the Romans.
THE Instruments of the Roman Militia, whereof they made use to signify all
the Orders to the Soldiers, were Trumpets, Horns, Cornets, and Hautbois, as
well for Horse as Foot; and the Legions, Cohortes and Manipules, had each their
several Instruments. Cohortium, turmarum, and legionum tubicines simul omnes
canere jubet; says Salust. Though Drums and Kettle-Drums were not in use among
the Romans, yet other Nations, and especially the Indians, used them. Indi
tympana suo more pulsantes. Curtius lib. 8. and Suidas, Tubis Indi non utuntur,
sed pro iis sunt flagella and tympana horribilem quendam bombum emittentia.

The Parthians made use of them also, but in all appearance (according to the
Description that we have of them in Suidas and Plutarch) the Instruments of
these People were rather Kettle-Drums than Drums, because they were made of
Plam-tree Wood, hollow and filled with little Brazen Bells, the mouth whereof
was covered with a Bulls-hide. Isidorus defines the word ( tympanum) in these
terms: Tympanum est pellis vel corium ligno ex una part extensum. And that is
the very shape and figure of our Kettle-Drums.

He describes also another Instrument which he calls Symphony, which can be
nothing else but our Drums. Symphonia, says he, vulgo appellatur lignum cavum
ex utraque part pelle extensa, quam virgulis hinc and inde musici feriunt.
That Instrument resembles the little Tabers or Drums which the Turks carry
before them, and which they beat on both sides with Sticks. However it be,
there is no doubt but that the Invention of Drums is as Ancient as that of
Trumpets: I build not only on the Authority of profane History, but on the
Testimony of the Royal Prophet, who says, Let them praise his Name with the
Flute; let them sing praises to him with the Timbrel and Harp, Psalm. 149.
Praise him Timbrel and Flute, etc. Psalm. 150.

A particular Chapter of the Arms which are at present in use, as well among
the French as other Nations.
SInce Gunpowder has been invented, there is no People in Europe but makes
use of Firearms, to which they have given several names, according to their
different shapes, as Muskets, Arquebusses with Match-Lock, Arquebusses with
Wheel-Lock, Carabines, Choques, Pistols with Wheel-Locks, Holster or Pocket
Pistols, Musketons, and Fusils or Firelocks; as the Ancients changed the names
of their Shields, Pikes, Swords, and Darts, according to the diverse alterations
that happened, either in the form or matter: for instance, They called A^lides
a kind of Ancient Dart, which they carried tied to the Wrist with a long Strap
or Thong, that thereby they might more easily draw it back when they wounded
any therewith; and they called Gevum a Dart that was entirely of Iron:
Nevertheless these Arms were still Darts: as Muskets, Musketons, Carabins,
Choques, and Fusils or Firelocks, are all of them kinds of Arquebusse of
different lengths; of which some fire with a Match, others with a Flint, and
others with the Wheel. Arms with Wheels are now no in use in use in France, the
King has not long ago taken them from the Gardes du corpse, and given them
Musketons; and at present in the Wars, are only used the Musket, Fire-lock,
Musketon, and Pistol; as may be seen in the sequel of this Chapter.

The Arms of the French Cavalry.
The Kings Guards du Corpse, the Gens-d'Armes, Light Horse, Cravats, the Troops
of Light Horse, are armed with Shables, Musketons, Snap-lock Pistols; and for
Instruments of War, have Trumpets and Kettle-Drums. The Guards du Corpse carry
Ensigns, the Gens-d' Arms Ensigns and Guidons, and the Light Horse Standards.

The Kings Musketeers, who fight sometime on Foot, and sometime on Horseback
(like the Dragoons of Alexander called Dimachae) have for Arms the Half-Shable,
the Bandeliers, the Musket and Pistols; and for Instruments, Drums, and
Haut-bois, with an Ensign and Guidon; and when they are on Foot the Officers
march with the Sword, the Pike, and the Gorget; the Ensign with the Colors,
and the Quarter Masters with the Halbard.

The Dragoons who fight on Foot and on Horseback, have for Arms the Sword, the
Fire-lock, and the Bayonet; for Ensign the Standard somewhat larger than that
of the Light Horse, and for Instruments of War, Drums, Bag-pipes, and Hautbois:
And when they march on foot, the Officers carry the Partisan, and the Sergeants
the Halberd. None of the Cavalry but the Officers and the Troopers of the
Regiment of the Kings Cuirassiers, now carry Cuirasses.

The Horse-Granadiers of the Kings Household, have for Arms the Cimeter, the
Battle-Axe, the Fire-lock, and the Pouch or Budget filled with Grenades; and
for Instruments Drums and Haut-bois.

The Arms of the French Infantry.
The Arms of the Officers of Foot, are the Sword, the Pike, and the Gorget. The
Arms of the Sergeants, the Sword and the Halberd; and of the Soldiers, the
Sword, the Bandelier, the Musket, and the Pike. The Instruments are Drums,
Fifes, and Haut-bois.

The Pikes of the Kings Guards carry the Burgonet, Corslet, Vambraces, and
Tassets, or Thigh Pieces.

The Granadiers have for Arms the Sword and Fire-lock, with a Budget stuffed
with Grenades, and a little Battle-Axe; and the Officers the Partisan and
Gorget.

The Fusiliers have for Arms the Sword, the Bayonet, and Fusil or Fire-lock,
and the Officers the Pike and Gorget.

The Suissers have no need of Horse, because they live in a hilly Country; and
therefore they make only use of the Sword with a great Branched Hilt, the
Bandeliers, Musket, Halbard, and Partisan, and carry hardly any Pikes, but when
they serve Foreign Princes. Their Instruments of War are Drums and Fifes; and
their Officers carry the Pike and Gorget.

The Pikes in the Suisse-guards are armed with Murrions, Gorget, Corslets,
Vambraces and Tassets; and the Officers with the Pike, Gorget, Cuirasse,
Tassets, and no more.

The Spanish Cavalry.
The Spanish Horse have for Arms the Shable, Pistol, and Musketon, or Choque;
for Ensign the Standard, and for Instruments, Trumpets and Kettle-Drums.

They have also some Troops of Lancers armed Cap-a-pied, which they have
retained for ostentation and to serve near the Kings Person. They have also
Troops of Dragoons armed in the same manner as ours are.

The Spanish Foot.
The Foot have for Arms the Sword, with a Hilt so extremely wide and deep, that
it might very well serve for a Drinking Cup; Bandeliers which are none of the
largest, the Musket as heavy again as ours, and of a bigger size, which they
cannot fire without leaning it on a Rest; and the Pike longer and bigger than
ours: and for Instruments, Drums and Fifes.

The Officers carry no Gorgets, but only the Pike, and the Sergeants the
Halbard.

The Officers of the Regiments of Guards, mount the Kings Guard on Horseback,
armed cap-a-pied, with a Rondache or Round Buckler on the Left Arm.

English Forces.
The English Cavalry have for Arms the Shable, Musketon, or Carabin and Pistol:
And the Infantry the Musket and Pike. The Foot make but little use of their
Swords; for when they have discharged, they fall on with the Buts of their
Muskets. The Officers carry the Sword, Pike, and Gorget, and the Sergeants the
Halbard and Partisan.

German Forces.
The German Horse have for Arms the Shable, Carabine, and Wheel-lock Pistol,
with a Shable hanging at the Pommel of their Saddles; some of their Troopers
are armed with Cuirasses and Head-pieces. The Foot carry the Sword, Musket,
Espadon, or two-handed Sword, and the Pike. The Officers make use of Swords,
Pikes, and Gorgets, and some of Partisans or Half-pikes.

Hungarian Forces.
The Hungarians, besides Firearms, carry likewise Shables, Battle Axes,
Partisans, Half-pikes, etc.

Polonian Troops.
The Polonians use Firearms, Pikes, Partisans, the Axes (whereof we have
spoken in the First Chapter of Staff-Arms, the Fifth Sect. of the First Book)
and Darts or Javelots.

Turkish Cavalry.
The Turkish Cavalry have no other Arms but the Damask Shable, and some of them
carry Clubs or Maces at the Pommel of the Saddle. They have some Troops of
Lancers, whom they call Foolhardy; these make use of Shables, Lances and
Bucklers: their Ensigns are small Guidons which they carry tied on their Backs.

Turkish Infantry.
The Infantry carry Shables, long Knives at their Girdle, great Muskets, Bows,
Arrows, and Darts, and their Instruments are little Tabors or Drums; on both
sides of which they beat: Haut-bois, Bag-pipes, and Musical Cornets.

Persians, Moors, and Arabians.
The Persians, Moors, and Arabians, besides Firearms, make use of Zagayes,
Arrows and Darts; and most part of the People who have been lately discovered,
used no other Arms, but Arrows, Darts, and Half-Pikes.

Of the Arms of the Ancient French Militia.
Infantry.
THE Regiments of French Infantry were divided into Companies of Arquebussiers,
Musketons and Pikes.

The Companies of Arquebussiers consisted of three hundred men a piece, whereof
fifty were armed with the Breast Plate, Murrion that was proof, with Sleeves of
Mail, the Sword hanging at the Girdle and Halbards; fifty were armed with
Swords, Muskets, Bandeliers, and Musket Rests, and two hundred were armed with
Swords, Match-lock Arquebusses, and a Case, such as Huntsmen carry, the Charge
whereof held half an Ounce of Powder. The Captains of the Arquebussiers,
mounting the Guard, or passing before the King or the General at a Muster,
carried the Arquebuss, the Case and Murrion, with a great Plume of Feathers.
The Pikemen were armed with Swords, Pikes eighteen foot long, Murrions,
Corslets, Vambraces, and Tassets; and the Captains were armed with complete
Armor, a Pike and Murrion after the Milanese-fashion, adorned with Feathers,
and caused their Lackeys carry Rondaches or Round Bucklers before them. The
Lieutenants and Ensigns Arms were the same with the Arms of the Captains, and
the Sergeants carried the Cuirasse Proof, with Sleeves of Mail, the Plain
Murrion, and the Halbards without Swords.

Cavalry.
From the Reign of Lowis the Eleventh, to the time of Henry the Second, the
Cavalry was divided into Men of Arms, Light Horse, Argolets and Estradiots or
Albanian Horsemen.

The Men of Arms had for Armature the Corslet with the Breast Plate, the
Cuirasse with Tassets, the Gorget of Mail, Supeters, whole Greaves, Tasses,
Gantlets, Helmet with Banners, Arm-pieces, Gossets, Poldrons, all guarded with
Mail in the void spaces or Intervals. Their Horses were barded and caparisoned,
with the Crannet and Frontstall. For Offensive Arms they had, the Sword by the
side, the Tuck at one side of the Pommel of the Saddle, and the Battle-Axe at
the other, a long and great Lance in hand; a Cassock which they called the
Soldiers Coat, which was of the Color of their Ensign, and Guidon of the
Troop, and bigger than that of the Light Horse.

The Light Horse were armed with Gorgets, Corslet with Tassets below the Knee,
Gantlets, Arm-pieces, great Shoulder-pieces, Head-pieces, with open Visers, and
the Cassock of the Color of the Standard. And for Offensive Arms, a large
broad Sword by the side, the Battle-Axe at the Pommel of the Saddle, and the
Lance in hand.

The Estradiots were armed in the same manner as the Light Horse, and and
instead of Arm-pieces and Gantlets, had Sleeves and Gloves of Mail, a broad
Sword by the side, the Battle-Axe at the Pommel of the Saddle, and the Zagaye
in hand, which they called Arzegaye, ten or twelve foot long, and headed with
Iron at the two ends. Their Coat over their Arms was short, and instead of a
Cornet, they had a great Banderoll hanging at the end of a Lance.

The Argolets were armed in the same way as the Estradiots, except the Head;
which they covercd with a Cabasset or Casket, that hindered them not to take
aim: Their offensive Arms were the Sword by the Side, the Battle-Axe at the
left side of the Pommel of the Saddle, and at the right an Arquebuss two foot
and a half long, in a Case of Tanned Leather, over their Arms a short Coat,
like to that of the Estradiots, and a long Banderoll (as they had) to rally by.

The Cavalry under Henry the Fourth, and Lowis the Thirteenth.
IN the Reigns of Henry the Fourth and Lowis the Thirteenth, the Cavalry were
divided into Gens-d'armes, Light Horse and Carabins.

The Gens-d'armes were armed with complete Armor, and carried Greaves and
Knee-pieces under or over the Boots, the Cuirasse Carabin-proof before and
behind; and instead of a Lance an Escopette or Petronel, which carried five
hundred paces; the Holster Pistols charged with a Slugg of Steel, a long and
stiff Tuck without an edge. Their Horses were armed with the Frontstall and
Petrel.

The Light Horse were armed with complete Armor, a Cuirass, that was proof,
and the rest but slight; they carried the Pistol at the Pommel of the Saddle,
under the Bridle-hand, and on the other side the Salade or Headpiece.

The Carabins had for Arms a Cuirass voided and cut in the Right Shoulder, that
they might the better present and take aim; a Gantlet reaching the Elbow for
the Bridlehand, a Casket on Head: and for Defensive Arms, a long Sword, a long
Escopett or Carabin, three foot and a half in length, a Pistol at the Pommel of
the Saddle, and two Cartouches, after the manner of the Reistres.

The Word ( Carabin) comes from the Spanish Word Cara* which signifies the
Visage or Face, and the Latin Word Binus, which signifies double; as if one
should say, Men of double Faces, because of their way of fighting. Sometimes
flying, and sometimes facing about.

We have changed the Carabins into Soldiers that fight, both on Foot and
Horse, whom we have called Dragoons, in imitation of the Dimachae of Alexander
the Great; which Name comes from the Greek Word Dimas, that signifies terror
and fear; because they carried Dragons for their Ensigns.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Robert Harford at the sign of the Angel in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange.
1. MAre Clasum, or the Right Dominion and Owner-ship of our British Seas, in
Two Books, by John Seldom Esquire; in folio.

2. A New Description of the Country of Surinam, in 40.

3. The History of the Turkish Wars, in Hungaria, Transylvania, Austria,
Silvesia, and other Provinces of the German Empire, from the first Invasion of
Annirath the Se-Second, 1432; to which is added a short Discourse of the State
and Government of the said Provinces in 80.

4. The Sage Senator, or a Discourse on the Wisdom of such as are called to
public Employments for their Country, prescribing a Method to discharge a
public Trust. in 80.

5. The History of Portugal, Describing the said Country, with the Customs and
Uses among them. in 80.

6. An Historical Essay, Endeavoring a Probability that the Language of the
Empire of China is the Primitive Language. In 8.

And also you may there have all sorts of Paper and Paper Books, and the best
Ink for Records,


