THE EYE and WHEEL OF Providence: OR A TREATISE, Proving that there is a divine
Providence; Showing also what it is, and what be the parts thereof; together
with the extent of it to the Heavens, to the Seas, to the Earth, and all things
therein: especially to Man, and all things that concern him. Some Queries
touching Providence resolved; the Objections against Providence answered; the
Consectaries of this Doctrine, together with the Uses thereof gathered.

By W. Gearing Minister of the Gospel.

Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur, and quae putatur poena medicina est.
Hieron. sup. Ezekiel. LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers in
Fleetstreet, 1662.

To the Right Honorable George Lord Booth Baron of Delamere, and to the Noble
and Virtuous Lady his Wife.
Right Honorable:
I Suppose it was the design of God to show unto Jacob in his Vision of the
Ladder, that special care his wise providence took of him; Genesis 28.
that Ladder being a most lively draught of Gods faithful conduct concerning
Jacob, and of the universal government of the world which is in the hands of
God: infinite are the bounds and limits of this Empire; his Scepter extending
it self both over the Heavens and over all the earth. The two sides of the
Ladder (as one says) represent power and sweetness, Cause. Hist. sacr.
which are as the two hands of the divine providence, which by diverse steps
goes mounting from earth to Heaven, and thence descends to the earth again,
acting and walking a thousand ways at once, through which the world is
insensibly led to the periods appointed to it. God rests himself on the top
of this Ladder, and from thence sends forth his holy Angels, Greg. Moral.
which are (as Gregory says) the Ministers of divine providence, and sent
forth to minister for them that are the heirs of salvation.

God continues this great world by a continual vicissitude, the day changing
into night, the spring into summer, summer into harvest, harvest into winter,
winter into the spring: one day is not in every point like another; some hot,
some cold, some wet, some dry, some clear and Sun-shiny, some dark and gloomy;
that gives a great beauty to the Universe. Even so it is with Man, who being
an Epitome of the great world, is always ebbing and flowing into a perpetual
diversity of motions; sometime lifted up in hopes, by and by cast down in
fears, sometime on the Mount of prosperity, and straightway in the Valley of
Bochim. Tunc est tentatio finienda quando finitur and pugna, and tunc finienda
est pugna, quando post hanc vitam succedit pugnae secura victoria. Pr^sper. l.
5. de cont. vitae.
The life of man (says Prosper) is a War without truce, neither is peace to be
expected long but in the Tomb. Never a one of man's days are like another of
them, to teach us to have our hearts unchangeable in the great inequalities and
accidents that befall us; and though all things are full of turning and
variation about us, yet should we remain immovable, earnestly breathing and
longing after God. Let the Ship run out East or West, North or South; and let
the Wind blow where and when it lists, yet the Needle will still look toward
the Pole: so let things go how they will; let the soul be glad or sad, in joy
or heaviness, in light or darknss, in temptation or repose; let the Sun scorch,
or the dew cool, the drought or the frost consume; yet the point of our heart
[our spirit] and our will (which is our needle) must continually turn and look
to God our only sovereign good; Romans 8.38.
and if once we firmly resolve never to forsake God and his ways; and that
neither tribulation, nor distress, (such straits wherein Christians may be shut
up, that they can see no issue out of it) nor persecution, nor famine, nor
nakedness, nor perils and dangers occasioned by these, nor sword, nor fire, nor
any other instrument of cruelty, nor death that is so dreadful to nature, nor
life which many times is more dangerous to the people of God than death, [life]
that is attended with so many cares and casualties, and makes men for the
preservation thereof to forget their latter end; no nor Angels, nor
principalities and powers, not evil Angels, nor spiritual wickednesses in high
places, no nor good Angels, (...), are put to signify Magistrates. Luke 12.11.
Luke 20.20. Tit. 3.1. But (...), do promiscuously signify either good Angels,
Col. 1.16. and 2.20. Ephesians. 1.21. or evil Angels, 1 Cor. 15.24. Ephesians 6.12.
(if they should go about to hinder our salvation) shall separate us from the
love that is founded in Christ; this will serve as a counterpoize to hold our
hearts in a holy tranquillity, among all the unequal motions of this life; in
all these things we shall do more than conquer, not only overcome, but take the
spoils of them, and reap advantage by them.

Gods providence is a Sun that penetrateth every where, and is always in his
high noon, the motions whereof though they seem oblique, go always strait, and
will (sooner or later) bring the people of God to their desired Haven, taking
them by the hand, and leading them in all their pilgrimages, and both
frequently and insensibly diverting them from the abysses, into which the pride
and malice of their enemies would have often hurried them, who shall at last be
driven to confess, that innocence and truth are so dear to God, that whosoever
shall offend them, shall find Heaven arming it self in their defense, and that
the Almighty God has invisible bands, which the stoutest opposers of his
providence cannot break, and that divine vengeance which is inexorable, will
(first or last) inflict on them the punishments they have deserved, that it may
appear that God in his government of the world, has respect to the poorest
Christian, and meanest Artizan, (who no less enjoys this munificence of his
bountiful Creator) than the highest Prince or greatest Potentate in the world.

Thrice happy are they that live under the favor of divine providence; every
footstep thereof is a speaking to them in particular, that God will never leave
them nor forsake them. Great peace may the soul have, when God is the primum
mobile, and first mover of all his actions: what comfort may he take, when he
considers that he walks in the way his uncreated wisdom has marked out
for him with his own hand? this consideration well digested, is sufficient
(when things at any time seem to go cross to our desires, and Gods providence
seem also to contradict his promises) to banish from us those disquiets and
discontents, which extort from us that acquiescence and confidence, which we
ought at all times to have in God, and to make us to resign our hopes, our
joys, our desires, our designs and interests into the bosom of his
providence. How indulgent is God to his children? He spreads abroad his wings
like the Eagle, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12
stretches them out to cover each of his young ones, who are kept as it were
in a nest: none are so safely kept as Gods ltttle ones, who have a nest under
them, and a God over them. All Gods benefits are for their good, every feather
in his wings helps to cover them, his wings reach to the ends of the earth;
be a Christian then where he will, God has a wing of grace or a feather of
mercy to reach him: and therefore when at any time we feel the touches of that
wise hand that manageth our greatest affairs; this may comfort us, that he will
lay no more upon us, than he will give us a way out of, seeing he lays them
on us not as an angry Judge, but as a loving Father; Tam pius nemo; tam pater
nemo. Tertul.
none so much affectionate as he, none so much a Father as he, says
Tertullian. When it raineth, we cannot see the end why God sends it through
the thick Cloud, but when the storm cease, we perceive presently that it has
been profitable, and done good to the earth: so while Gods hand is upon us, we
often see not the benefit of it, but afterward we feel it to our comfort, Psalm.
119.71. The Saints are beautiful in the fire of afflictions: In the dark night
of afflictions many glorious lights appear, which lie hidden in the Sunshine
of prosperity, says Lactantius.

Many men deal with God as Joab did with Absalom, who being often sent for,
refused to come; at length when Absalom has caused his barley fields to be set
on fire by his servants, then he comes to him, 2 Samuel 14.30. So many times
when we are in prosperity, God cannot be acquainted with us, nor are we at
leisure to serve him, De nido peccati rostro flagelli percutit. Hieron.
but when he rouzeth us out of the nest of sin by the bill of afflictions, as
Hierom speaks, then we run unto him, and call upon him. God hovers none in
this evil nest, nor nourishes any in their sins; if we expect comfort from
him, we must be carried on his wings from this pit of corruption. When we are
naked, God brings us into the nest of afflictions, to warm and ripen us there,
and to feather the wings of our prayers, that we may soar aloft, and fly to the
Throne of his grace. -- Therefore when men at any time are the instruments of
our sufferings, let us not consider whether we have deserved thus to be dealt
with by them, no^ meditate on revenge, thinking how t^ pay them again in their
own coin but let us look (not after the stone* but to the hurler, not to the
staff, bu^ to the striker; considering that t^ make opposition against God,
were but to strive against the stream; a^ he did that threw fetters into the
Sea, to make it his prisoner, or as another (as wise as the former) that went
out with a bag to catch the wind. It is great wickedness and extreme folly,
with Job's wife to think we should bless God in prosperity, and blaspheme him
in adversity; this were intolerable ingratitude in the highest degree, and with
the Persians, to worship the rising Sun in the morning for a God, and to curse
him at night (being ready to go down) for a Devil, forgetting the benefit they
had of his former presence, and not considering the benefit they should reap at
his next appearing. Just so do many men, they neither look backwards to Gods
bypast benefits, nor yet forward to his future favors, but like Beasts look
only downwards upon their present estate, never praising God for the benefits
they have received, nor praying to him for such as they want, and yet may
receive.

Afflictions be the beaten path and road that lead to Heaven, trodden and
trackt by all the holy Patriarcks and Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, that have
gone before us, and that must bet rodden by all the Saints and professors that
must come after us; therefore we must not look for a peculiar estate above all
our brethren, but seeing it is the lot and portion of all Gods children, we
must prepare our selves to bear our parts with patience. That gold must be much
beaten and filed, and tried in the fire, that must bear the image of the King:
the Church is Gods image, which being decayed by Adam, is to be renewed by our
conformity to Christ. Bernard says, Christ our Head was crowned with thorns,
his members must not think to crown themselves with Rose-buds.

And now Right Honorable, I here humbly present unto you this Treatise of
Providence, who have observed the various operations of divine providence, and
have seen the flux and reflux of a thousand accidents in these our days: and
certainly! God cannot conceal his thoughts, designs, and loving kindness, from
those that observe his doings, who admire his sage providence, and the
miraculous conduct of his designs. The best improvement of all occurrences, is
to consider all things spiritually, turning them to spiritual ends and uses:
the living Christian lays things to his heart; his searching spirit (like the
Chymick pots) can refine all that is cast into it; knowing that all things
whatsoever; all accidents and events fall directly, and as it were
perpendicularly under the counsel of Gods providence; to the guidance whereof
I leave you, praying that the Lord who blessed the house of Obed-Edom, for
lodging the Ark of his Covenant, will bless you with all spiritual blessings
in heavenly things in Christ. Thus committing your Estates to the protection of
the Highest; my labors to your favorable censures, and my self to your
commands, I am

My Lord, and Madam, Your Honors in all Gospel services, W. Gearing.
May 26. 1662.
INDEX RERVM.
CHap. 1. Text Ioh. 5.17. opened; an Introduction to the Work; a Doctrine
raised. Chap. 2. Quest. Whether there be a divine providence? proved by six
Arguments. Argum. 1. Chap. 3. Argum. 2. Chap. 4. Argum. 3. Argum. 4. Chap 5.
Argum. 5. Argum. 6. Chap. 6. The definition of providence; the parts of it.
Chap. 7. Of Gods general providence. Chap. 8. Of Gods particular providence;
of the extent of it to the Heavens, to the Sun and Moon. Chap. 9. Of the
Eclipses: a large discourse on the miraculous Eclipse that happened at the death
of Christ. Chap. 10. Of the extent of providence to the Stars; of their order,
variety, and use; how they are for signs and seasons, and for days and years:
a discourse on the Star that led the Wise men to Christ. Chap. 11. Of Gods
providence to be seen in the winds, and in the blowing of them: an Objection
answered. Chap. 12. Of Gods providence to the Birds of the Air, and in
particular to the young Ravens, the Ostriches young ones, and the little
Sparrows. Chap. 13. Of Gods providence to be seen in the Seas, in the nature of
them: an Objection answered: of the saltness of the Sea, and the reasons
thereof; of the bounds of the Sea; of the Fishes of the Sea; of their
multiplication; of the several sorts of Fishes that are taken in every Month;
of their provision; an Objection answered. Chap. 14. Of the extent of
providence to the earth, and to the things that are in it: of the form and
figure of the earth; of the stability and situation of the earth, how it
stands in the water and out of the water; five branches of comfort to Gods
people, drawn from the earths stability, to prove the stability of the Church
of Christ. Chap. 15. That providence is visible in Herbs, Plants, and Trees,
that grow out of the earth: of the variety of Herbs and Plants brought forth in
every Month: of the Lillies of the field. Chap. 16. Of the extent of
providence to the Beasts of the earth: of a special providence in providing
for Lions, and other Beasts of prey. Chap. 17. How the calling and labors of
the Husbandman are directly subordinate to Gods providence. Chap. 18. Of the
special providence of God toward Men: how God over-ruleth the hearts and wills
of men, yea of the greatest Kings and Princes; and how the actions of men are
swayed by Gods providence; of Gods providence about things contingent; a
discourse upon Lots. Chap. 19. How the steps and goings of men are ordered by
Gods providence: a discourse on the journey of the Wise men, that came from the
East to Jerusalem at the birth of Christ: some Objections answered. Chap. 20.
How the good actions of men are under divine providence. Chap. 21. How the evil
actions of men are governed by Gods providence: of Gods ends, Satan's ends, and
sinners ends, in one and the same action. Chap. 22. How Gods providence
reaches the habitations and dwellings of men. Chap. 23. Of Gods providence
concerning Marriage, and in bringing man and wife together. Chap. 24. Sect. 1.
Of the special providence of God toward the godly in afflicting them: an
Objection answered; Gods ends in afflicting them. Sect. 2. Of Gods providence
in preserving his people in afflictions. Sect. 3. Of Gods delivering his people
out of afflictions: of the diverse ways God uses in their deliverance, and how
they are more than conquerours in afflictions, showed in five things. Sect. 4.
Of Gods providence in bringing about the salvation of his people.
Chap. 25. How Gods providence reaches the wicked. Sect. 1. Of his suffering
the wicked to rage against his people: a Question, Whither a Christian may fly
in time of persecution, answered. Sect. 2. Of Gods restraining the rage of the
wicked, showed in diverse particulars. Sect. 3. Of the dreadful executions God
does sometimes lay on wicked men; many notable examples of Gods heavy
judgments upon persecutors.
Chap. 26. Quest. 1. How God governs all things; whether immediately by
himself, or mediately by second causes, answered in two Theses: an Objection
answered. Chap. 27. Quest. 2. Whether Gods providence be immutable, answered
affirm. Sect. 1. Sect. 2. Sect. 3. An Object. against the immutability of Gods
providence, answered: how God is said to repent, etc.
Chap. 28. Diverse Objections against this doctrine of Providence, answered.
Object. 1. answered. Chap. 29. Object. 2. answered in five things. Chap. 30.
Object. 3. Object. 4. answered. Chap. 31. Diverse Corollaries drawn from this
doctrine of Providence. Corol. 1. Corol. 2. Corol. 3. Chap. 32. Corol. 4.
Corol. 5. Chap. 33. Corol. 6. Corol. 7. Chap. 34. Profitable Instructions
arising from this doctrine of Providence. Instruct. 1. Chap. 35. Instruct. 2.
Chap. 36. Instruct. 3. Chap. 37. Instruct. 4. Chap. 38. Instruct. 5. Chap. 39.
Instruct. 6. Chap. 40. Instruct. 7. Chap. 41. Instruct. 8. Chap. 42. The
Conclusion, consolatory to the Church of Christ.
The Authors cited in this Treatise.
A
ABen Ezra. Aelian. not. Hist. Ainsworth. Ambrosius. Alstedius. Antoninus.
Aquila. Athanasius. Aulus Gellius. Aquinas. Ausonius. Augustinus. Arias
Montanus. Aristotle. Aratus. Aretius.
B
Bp Babington. Sr Ri. Barckley. Basilius. Bastingius. Beda. Ben. Gorion. D.
Bernard. R. Bern. on Ruth. Benefield. Beza. Bodinus de Republ. Boethius de
consol. D. Boys. Bucan. loc. com. Bullinger. Bucer. D. Bright. Brathwait.
C
Callistratus. Calvinus. Camden. Britan. Causinus. Cassiodorus. Cebes Theban.
Caelius Rhodig. Carrion. Chron. Caryl. Chald. Chemnitius. Clapham. Cant.
Clapham. Manual. Clemens Alexand. Chrysippus. Cratippus. Cicero. Cotton.
Caesar. Comment. Chrysostom. Cyprian. Com. Relig. Galliae. M. Coverdale.
Crompton.
D
Damascen. De Dieu. Diodati. Discip. de Temp. Dorotheus. Dearing. Dyonis.
Aereop. Didacus Stella. Danaeus. Diodor. Sicul. Drexelius.
E
Egesippus. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Euripides. Euthymius. Expl. ver. Relig.
F
Frytschius. Franzius. Ferus. Flac. Illyric. Fox Act and Mon. Fenner. Catech.
Th. Fuller.
G
Genev. transl. Gualter. Greg. Magn. Greg. Nyssen. Lud. Granat. Greenhaw.
Goulart. Gossen.
H
Hagius. Hesychius. Hist. Sinarum. Herodotus. Hebr. Hieronymus. Hedf. Sphinx.
Holcot. Hooker. Eccl. Pol. Hist. novi orbis. Homerus. Hyperius. Hesiod.
Hilarious. Horatius.
I
Ital. Annot. Josph. Antiqu. BP Iuell. Iul. Scalig. Junius. Isidorus. Just.
Mart. Iuvenal. Sat.
K
Keckerman. Bp. King.
L
Lactantius. Levin. Lemn. Livius. Lorinus. Lumb. Sent. Luther. Lyps. de constable.
Lyra. Lyranus. Lucanus.
M
Marcellinus. Macchiavel. Menochius. Maimony. Morney. Mayer. Pet Mart. Moors
Antidot. Munst. Cosmog. Minut. Faelix. Geo. More's Demonstr.
N
Gr. Nazianzen. Niceph. Gregor. Ios. Nancler.
O
Origin. Ovid. Otho Casman. Orpheus.
P
Pacuvius. Pareus. Paulus Aemil. Philo Jud. Pompon. laetus. Petrarch. Pemble.
Pineda. Pet. du Moulin. Perkins. Plin. Not. Hist. Prideaux. Pier. Hierogl.
Polan. Synt. Procopius. Prosper. Perrerius. Plutarch. Pythagoras. Publ. Mimus.
Dr Preston.
Q
Quintillian. Quint. Curt.
R
Rab. Sol. Iarch. Remigius. Rest. fren estat. Rolloc. Rutherford.
S
Salvian. Senault. Bp Sanderson. Seneca. Septuagint. Solinus. Strabo.
Scultetus. Stock. Suetonius. Sutton. Symmachus. Synesius. Socinus. Struther.
Symson. Synops. purior. theol.
T
Tacitus. Dr Tailor. Tertullian. Theophilact. Theodoret. Tremellius. Talmud.
Thucyd. hist. Turnbull.
V
Vatablus. Verron. Phys. Virgil. Vrsinus.
W
R. Walker. Weems. Willet. Wilkins. Wolfius. Woodward.
X
Xenophon.
Z
Zanchius. Zegedin.
THE Eye and Wheel OF PROVIDENCE.
Joh. 5.17. But Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto, and I work.
Chap. 1. The Text opened, an Introduction to this Work.
THe words are an answer to the Jews that persecuted our Savior, and sought to
slay him, for healing one on the Sabbath Day, that had been diseased thirty
eight years. Christ pleads with them in the defense of his fact, to let them
see, and the world know, that he had done nothing but what was lawful and
justifiable. He might have told them; what though it were unlawful upon the
Sabbath Day to do any servile work, except with limitation about the Sacrifices
in the Temple, Mat. 12.5, 6. yet it is lawful to cure as I do; for I use no
work, but do all by my Word; now it was ever held lawful to speak on the
Sabbath Day. But by his answer he fully instructs us in the doctrine of the
Sabbath: they might have remembered that he was Lawmakers and Lord of the
Sabbath, and therefore not tied by the Law: for though it be a Question in
policy, whether the Law made or the Lawmakers be the greater; yet it is no
Question in Divinity, but that the Lawgiver is above the Law; for he does not
command and enjoin things, because they be good as men do; but his willing of
them, alters the nature of them, and makes them good. The ground of the Jews
opinion was, Cessavit ab opere sine labor solo nutu.
God the Father ^ested on the seventh day from all ^is work which he had made,
Genesis ^.2. this Christ denies not, but ex^licateth the meaning thereof. It is
^rue! my Father rested the seventh ^ay from all his work, and yet he works
hitherto; that is, he ceased from his former work, without la^our, with a word
or a beck, without the least difficulty: or as Aqui^as Aquinas ad loc.
well notes; he rested the seventh day, a novis Creaturis condendis, from
making any new Creatures; yet he works hitherto, Creaturas ^n esse
conservando, by preserving his Creatures in their being: or thus; he rested the
seventh day from making any new world, or from any new kinds of Creatures. This
rest of God is not an absolute rest from doing any thing at all, (for such a
^est contradicts the nature of God) ^ont is a respective rest, and a ceasing
to do any work of any kind of those his six days works, in which the Heavens
and the Earth, and all the Hosts of them were fully furnished and finished. But
God the Father works hitherto.]

Mio padre opera infin ad hora, and ancora io opero. Ital.
1. In governing the created World, and Kingdom of nature, according to the
enacted Laws thereof.

2. By setting up in the Kingdom of nature a Kingdom of Grace. And

3. By means of the Laws of both duly administered, to promote both finally to
a state of glory. So that God is not idle in his Sabbath or resting day, Ut
Filium Creatorem, non Creaturam intelligeres, non attulit Creaturae operantis
exemplum sed Patris. Chrysostom. ad loc. Loquitur Christus de admirandis
operibus, quibus divina potentia and bonitas hic omni tempore patefit. Hyper.
Method. Theol l. 1.
that has so much sacred and holy work to do, about the doing whereof our
Savior says here, My Father works hitherto.

And I work;

That is, as my Father works in the daily governing, preserving, and
sustentation of all his Creatures; even so I (that am his Son) having power and
example from him, to work those things that are conducing to the good of
mankind, am not let by the observation of the Sabbath, to do that work which
my Father has commanded, (for Christ speaks here of those admirable works, in
which the power and wisdom of God are manifest at all times) if therefore the
Father by preserving, governing, upholding, Commendat hic locus divinam nobis
providentiam, and Patris and Filii eandem esse potestatem, and operationem,
quod viz divinam attinet naturam. Bulling. ad loc. Non intelligendum est de
similitudine, sed de paritate aut conjunctione operationis Patris cum Filio;
nequis eorum actiones dividat. Greg. Nazianz. ad loc. Deus finito illo opere
Creationis spacio sex dierum, cessavit quidem ab opere Creationis die septimo,
verum ab opere administrationis and gubernationis, jam inde a condito mundo
nullo unquam die cessavit, ne illo quidem Sabbathi, in quo tum primum cessavit
ab opere Creationis, neque enim adhuc cessat: continuo enim ac indesinenter res
a se creatas tuetur ac sustinet. Rolloc. ad loc.
and blessing all things which he has made, does not break the rest of the
Sabbath; neither do I violate the Sabbath, in healing this impotent man on the
Sabbath Day.

My Father works hitherto, and I work.

Hence I shall take occasion to speak something on the Doctrine of Providence,
and lay down this point of Instruction.

Doctr. That the Providence of God is always in operation.

My Father works hitherto, etc.] God having finished that work of Creation in
the space of six days, rested from that work on the seventh day; but from the
work of his providence, and governing the things he has made, he never rested
one day from the Creation of the World. In six days the Creation of the World
was finished, but the government thereof is perpetual, and God continually
works in preserving and maintaining the order thereof, even as the Apostle
says; In him we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. I shall not speak
of the providence of God as it is potentiall and immanent, but as it is actual
and transient, as it is the execution of his Decree in governing the World.

Chap. 2. That there is a providence, proved by diverse Arguments.
Argument 1.




There is a God, therefore there is a Providence. In a Ship there is a
Governor; among Soldiers a General; in the Heavens a Sun; in a Kingdom a
Law; Non negans Essentiam, sed Providentiam Dei. Aquin. in Psalm. 14. Cicero.
Tuscul. quaest. 1. Zanch. lib. de tribus Elohim.
and in the World a God; and it is all one upon the point to say there is no
God, as to deny the providence of God. The fool has said in his heart there is
no God, Psalm. 14.1. not with his mouth, for shame or fear, says Aquinas, but
in his heart, viz. by his evil deeds and wicked life, he declares that he is
more than half persuaded that there is no God; or if he does acknowledge the
essence of God, yet he denies the providence of God. The wicked man's heart
denies the essence and being of God, and his life denies the providence of
God: and indeed his life is as far from God as his heart. But the common
consent of all Nations proves that there is a God: and Zanchy showing the
vanities and varieties of opinions concerning God, affirms that there was no
Creature so vile and base, but vain men (wanting the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and being destitute of the Spirit of God to guide them) would rather
make any thing their God, than have no God. Now then much more we that are
instructed not only by the light of nature, but also by the light of the
Scriptures that there is a God, must needs confess that there is a Divine
Providence.

There are three special properties of God, that manifest his Providence; The
Sovereignty of God. The Goodness of God. The Righteousness of God.


1. The Omnipotency of God shows his power is absolute, and so he can do all
things without exception; of which power John Baptist speaks, going about to
throw down the carnal confidence of the Pharisees, I tell you that God is able
out of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham, Mat. 3.9. If he would,
he could turn stones into men, and these men into believers: but omnipotency
and sovereignty thus differ: Rutherf. infl^ences of Grace. c. 7.
omnipotency looks simply to effects physically, what the Lord can do: he can
create many worlds; but his sovereignty is, that he may do what he will, and de
jure do all things, and not give account of his matters to any one, Job 33.13.
as Elihu speaks; by his sovereignty he does what he pleases, and none can
say, What do thou? Job 9.12. Thus sometimes he takes away health from some,
life from others: sickness comes and goes at the command of God, it is not
the fogs and vapors of the Air can cause such great and epidemicall diseases,
as sometimes are spread over City and Country, nor yet the influences of the
Stars as Astrologers tell us, and if there be any influences of constellations,
it is the Lord that by his Providence orders these constellations, making
them to meet in such and such conjunctions, so that if health be taken away
from any person or people, it is the Lord that takes it away; and if God
snatch any man out of the world; Si rapuerit hominem e mundo. August.
if he stop thy breath, and deliver thee up to death, who can hinder him, says
Austin. Thus sometimes he takes away the spirits and courage of men, that
though they have opportunities of doing this or that, yet their hearts shall
fail them, they shall not be able to effect it; therefore he is said to cut off
the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76. ult. that their heart shall melt, their
spirits faint, and their hands be feeble. God has as well a Bow to strike afar
off, and set in young Gallants, that seem to themelves lusty and strong, Bp
King.
and in the course of nature far from their ends, as a Sword to strike at hand,
and cut down old user, that are even ready to drop into deaths mouth, and seem
to have one foot in their graves; as one has wittily noted. Nay admit we live
as long as in course of nature we can; yet as the longest day has night
attending it, so death ever succeeds the longest life; even Methuselahs last
Epitaph was, Mortuus est, he died, Genesis 5.27. Sometime God shoots over and
beyond us, at Princes and Nobles, and great Personages; sometime below us, at
poor people of the lowest rank; sometime on the right hand he hits our friends,
and sometimes on the left hand our enemies, but at last the dart will light
upon our selves. Yea, he has diverse ways to bring men to their ends: some are
drowned with Pharaoh and his Princes in the Sea: some go to the Gallows, as
Haman: some have their bones burnt into Lime, as the King of Edom: some are
swallowed up of the earth, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: some are eaten of
Dogs, as Jesabell: some of Worms, as Herod: some perish by famine, as diverse in
Samaria: some by pestilence, as seventy thousand in David's days: some by the
sword, as in the time of the Wars: one cries out of his head with the
Shunamites Son, 2 King. 4.19. another of his feet with Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. one
has the Gout, another the Stone, another the Palsy, another the Dropsy; some
die suddenly, others leisurely, by long lingering languishing sickness, but all
meet in the grave: for as it was said, 1 King. 19.17. that he that escaped the
sword of Hazael, Jehu should slay, and he that escaped the sword of Jehu,
should be slain by Elisha: so he that escapes death by one disease, shall
first or last die by another, as it is said, Jer. 48.44. God may take away from
us what he pleases, without crossing his justice, for he is righteous in all
his ways: and without crossing his mercy and goodness, which is not due to
any: he has mercy on whom he will, and therefore may take away what he will
from any: and without crossing his truth, for the p^omises by which he engages
to us in these externals are conditional; and who can say he has so exactly
performed his conditions, that God can take nothing from him without breach of
promise?
He that flees from the fear shall fall into a pit, and he that escapes the
pit shall be taken in a snare: or as a man that flees from a Lion and meets
with a Bear, or getting into an house and leaning to a wall, and a Serpent
biteth him, Amos 5.19. Thus God to show his sovereignty in the course of his
Providence, takes away wealth and riches from some, and gives it unto others:
God has taken away the Cattle of your Father, and given them to me, says
Jacob to Labans sons, Genesis 31.9. Sometimes he gives wealth to and takes it away
from the same person, as Job confesses, Job 1.21. Sometimes he gives rains
and showers, and fruitful seasons, Act. 14.17. and at other times he
withholds the rain, causing it to rain upon one City and not upon another,
Amos 4. The Lord likewise sets up and pulls down, he advances and
abaseth: promotion comes not from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
North, nor from the South, but God is the Judge; he puts down one, and
sets up another, Psalm. 75, 6, 7. all which are notable declarations of Gods
Providence.

2. Gods goodness does further manifest his Providence: the Lord is truly good,
and the chiefest good, and no evil (as evil) comes from him; his goodness is
like an Ocean, you read of the riches of his goodness, Romans 2.4. the whole
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, says the Psalmist, and that which
is most good is most communicative; the Lord is good, and does good unto all,
Eccl. 9.2.
causing his Sun to shine on the evil and the good, and his rain to fall upon
the just and the unjust. These common outward blessings are often bestowed
indifferently upon all alike, good and bad, just and unjust; and the reason is,
because God is a common Father to them all; and therefore as every Father will
bestow some things upon all his children, though he reserve the inheritance for
one, as Abraham for Isaac, Genesis 25.6.
giving other meaner gifts to the rest: so God reserveth spiritual and
heavenly blessings, and Heaven it self for the Elect only, but outward earthly
blessings he usually bestows upon all; as a learned man upon that place, De
Dieu in Act. 17. The times obey, the Elements serve, the Corn abundantly
grows, the fruits of the Vine do ripen in season, the Trees abound with
apples, the Woods spring, the Meadows flourish as well to the use of the
sinful, as to the good. Cypr. de bono patient. Dionys. de divin. nominib.
Act. 17.30. [the times of this ignorance God winked at] says, that the Greek
word [(...)] is usually from the Hebrew translated by the Septuagint, to hide
ones self from; and so that being the meaning of the word [(...)] here, it
stands in opposition to the following words. God then hid himself from the
Nations, hid the means of grace from them, but now in the times of the Gospel
does more open and declare himself to the Nations, commanding every man every
where to repent; and yet even then when he suffered all Nations to walk in
their own ways, he nevertheless left not himself without witness, in that he
did good, giving them rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with food and gladness, as Paul and Barnabas told the men of Lystra,
Act. 14.16, 17. One says, That the chief title that God gives to himself, is
Bonitas goodness, because it is the property of all good things to communicate
themselves to others, therefore most agreeable to God, who raineth down all his
blessings upon us, and that therefore all other names of God, are but
commentaries and expositions of this name.

3. Jus comes Jovis. Ambros. in Romans 3.
The righteousness of God is also a demonstration of Gods Providence: Ambrose
calls the mercy of God the justice of God, because he says, God declares
himself righteous by performing his promises, Isa. 53.11, 22. and God in his
works of justice uses mercy, Prove. 3.12. Heb. 12.6. but the justice of God is
more manifested in his judgments. The Lord is known by the judgments which he
executes, Romans 9 16. i. e. known to be just and righteous. We read, Rev. 16.4,
5. that the third of the seven Angels pours out his vial upon the fountains,
and rivers of waters, that is, upon a part of Antichrists followers, and those
that are figured by the fountains of water, are thought to be the teachers of
that corrupt Church; and the Text says, they became blood, that is, their
blood was shed; an there is a notable declaration of the righteousness of God,
by the Angel of the waters, Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, A wise
Heathen said, (...). All that God does is full of providence, and he can do
nothing that is unjust. Antonin. l. 2.. 2.
and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus: and ver. 6. for they
have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to
drink, for they are worthy: and ver. 8. another succeeds him; Even so O Lord,
true and righteous are thy judgments: true] because thou have laid on them no
more than thou threatnedst before; and righteous] because done according to
their desert: and Rev. 19.11, 12. Christ is mounted on his white Horse, and
described very gloriously; here is a description full of terror and Majesty,
and his execution is so dreadful, that there is a solemn invitation to a
strange Feast, ver. 17, 18. to eat the flesh of Kings and Captains, and of
mighty men, and the flesh of Horses, and them that sit on them, and the flesh
of all men, both free and bond, both small and great. By the flesh of these, I
conceive, is meant the spoil of the Antichristian party, when this great
Battle shall be fought in Armageddon: but how this is ^^^^^ged, appears in
the latter part of ver. 11. it is said, He that sat upon the white Horse is
called faithful and true, and in righteousness does he judge and make War.
It is one of the hardest things in the world to manage the Sword-military,
according to the rule of justice: soldiers use to put all to the Sword that
stand in their way, plundering both friend and foe; but Christ acts the part
of a valiant Warrior, and of a just Judge; in righteousness does he judge and
make War. It is said, Psalm. 97.2. that clouds and darkness are round about
him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne. Ver. 33. A
fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about. When fire is
kindled in Gods anger, as fire inkindled in a thicket of thorns, spreading it
self every way, flying from bush to bush, yet does it not burn at random, but
breaks our from the Throne of God, which is founded on righteousness, or
composed of righteousness. Men in their anger are usually transported with
violent passions, and are very irregular; but when (...) is incensed by the
worst of (...) enemies, he acts regularly; his Throne is upon judgment and
righteousness, and Heaven and earth, Angels and men, are witnesses thereof.
Ver. 6. The Heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his
glory. Now these terrible actings of God in righteousness, are great proofs of
his providence.

CHAP. III. Argum. 2.
Adam that the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.
the which promise was fulfilled and made good in Christ, four thousand years
after it was made. He promised Abraham that though his seed should sojourn in a
strange Land four hundred and thirty years, yet he would at length bring them
into the Land of promise, and the lot of their inheritance, which promise he
performed at the time appointed, viz. in the days of Joshua; and in the
performance of this promise, Gods providence manifestly appeared, and many
ways manifested it self.

1. In the preservation of Isaac, whom his Father was commanded to offer up for
a burnt-offering upon Mount Moriah, Genesis 22. As Abraham had already stretched
out his hand, and was ready to dart the thunderbolt God had put into his hand,
he who commanded Abraham to strike, stays his blow, and the Altar of Moriah
which was to be the Scaffold of death, became the Theater of life, Causin.
hist. sac. l. 2.
and his Pile (as one has well noted) served but to make a Bonfire of joy, and
a triumph of the fidelity which Abraham and Isaac testified unto God.

2. By sending Joseph into Egypt, to provide for his Father Jacob, and his
Family during the famine. I doubt not but Jacob thought God would provide for
the preservation of himself and his Family; but how far was it from his
thoughts, that Joseph should be the instrument of their preservation, whom he
thought long before to have been a prey to so me cruel Beast. Therefore when
Joseph makes himself known to his Brethren, he tells them, God sent me before
you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great
deliverance; so now it was not you that sent me hither but God, Genesis 45.7, 8.
Gregory glosseth upon the Story of Joseph thus; Divino judicio quod declinare
conati sunt, renitendo servierunt: ideo venditus est a fratribus Joseph ne
adoraretur, sed ideo est adoratus quia venditus: sic divinum consilium dum
devitatur, impletur; sic humana sapientia dum reluctatur, comprehenditur. Greg.
God so ordered it by his providence, that what his Brethren sought to decline,
they were constrained to promote, even by their resisting of it. Joseph was
therefore sold by his Brethren, that they might not adore him, and yet he was
therefore worshipped because he was sold, and they forced to render him duties,
as to their Sovereign, not knowing him that was now over their heads, and whom
they would have trodden under their feet. Joseph takes not up the government of
Egypt, until he has been used like a Beast, and sold as a slave, even by
those who must one day be his captives and vassals, and he must go out of a
Dungeon to the Court, and of a Shepherd become Viceroy of Egypt. Even so the
divine counsel is accomplished in being opposed; so humane policy is defeated,
while men seek to promote it.

3. In preserving Moses from drowning, contrary to the Kings cruel
Commandment. His Mother having hid him three months, and being no longer able
to conceal him, she devises for him a little Ark made of Reeds, and dawbed it
with slime and pitch, putting the Child in it, and setting it among the
Bullrushes by the River side, appointing her Daughter (the Child's Sister) to
watch the same, committing the Child to the providence of God, whom she could
not preserve from a bloody Tyrant, depending upon God for the safety of her
Child. The Child thus placed by the Bank of Nilus, while the prudent Mother
looks with horror on the Tomb of her Son, and her eldest Daughter stands as
a Sentinel, to see what would become of her little Brother, Babingt. Notes in
Exodus 2.
Gods providence so ordered it, that this cruel Pharaohs Daughter, called of
some Thermutis, comes down that way to wash her self in the River, who
descending on the Bank of the River, perceived the Cradle wherein little Moses
was; at the same time, an happy curiosity incited her to send one of her Maids
to see what it was, who brought to her Lady the little Vessel, in which was
enclosed the honor and prosperity of the people of Israel: the poor Babe
weeping upon her, begged by tears (as well as it could) some pity against the
cruel Edict of her bloody Father. The Sister of this found Infant, who looked
for nothing less than such an encounter, asked if she should fetch a Nurse for
him among the Hebrew women, (the Child utterly refusing (as Stories say) to
suck an Egyptian woman then present) she willingly consents; the Maid
instantly brings the Mother of the Child, to whom Pharaohs Daughter gave the
charge of nursing up this Infant: in Pharaohs Court he afterward continues,
(being called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter) as Stephen witnesses, till he was
forty years old; Act. 7.23.
at which time God put it into his heart to leave the Kings Court, that so he
might become a leader and Captain to the people of God: that he was appointed
by God to deliver the people of Israel out of their miserable servitude, he
knew not, till God revealed it, which seems to be at the age
beforementioned. One might think that Moses had been in the most likely
capacity of delivering his Brethren, when he was styled the Son of Pharaohs
Daughter, and was, as Philo the Jew notes, adopted as the next heir of the
Crown, Philo Judaeus in vit. Mos.
and after his adoption, could expect nothing but a Crown and Scepter: yet here
behold a stratagem of divine providence; Moses must depart out of Egypt, and
leave the Court of Pharaoh, having no other but poverty and miseries for his
companions; he must become a fugitive in the Land of Midian, where he
exercises the employment of a Shepherd for forty years together; then God
delivers his people by the hands of Moses a poor Shepherd, when Moses the
great favorite in Pharaohs Court could not do it. In a word! all the promises
and prophesies concerning Christ's conception, birth, life, death, were all in
due time accomplished, both for matter and manner, substance and circumstance;
as also the threatenings of Christ against the Jews, the destruction of their
City and Temple, which plainly prove the Providence of God.

CHAP. IV. Argum. 3. Argum. 4.
viz. Families and private Houses, Towns and Incorporations, Cities, Countries,
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, wherein some govern, and others are governed. A
Kingdom or Commonwealth is a lawful government of many Families, and of those
things which unto them in common belongs, with a puissant Sovereignty; so is
a Family the right government of many persons, and of such things as are unto
them proper, under the rule and command of one and the same Head of the Family,
Bodin. de Repub. l. 1. c. 2.
as a famous Lawyer and Statesman has well noted. Now this could not be
without a divine Providence, so ordering and disposing matters, overruling
men's minds, setting and keeping some in Authority to rule, and others in awe
and subjection to be ruled. This some of the Heathen by the Moonlight of
nature have been able to discern and confess, that Commonwealths were governed
much more by a divine hand and assistance, Deorum open and auxilio, multo magis
quam hominum open and consilio Respublicae gubernantur. Cicero pro Rabirio.
than by the endeavors, labors, and counsels of men: therefore even some of
them held that man an Atheist, that should deny Providence, as well as deny a
Deity. -- Now this is a most certain truth; for in all States there be some
loose lewd fellows, that had rather all to go at six and sevens, as they say,
viz. in a confused course and disorderly fashion, than submit themselves to
live in a well-setled and established Government; and yet even these the
Providence of God so represseth, as that either for shame or fear, or some
other thing, they ordinarily break not out to be extraordinarily and
notoriously outrageous. In a word! it is he that preserves Rulers and
Governors, and puts it into their heads and hearts to make good Laws, and
take order that they may be kept being made, as he tells us, Prove. 8.15. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. God sets his eternal Law before their
eyes, as being of principal force and moment, to breed in religious minds a
high estimation thereof; and there can be no doubt (as a learned man has
observed) but that Laws apparently good, Hooker. Ecclesiast. polit. l. 1.
are (as it were) things copied out of the very tables of that high everlasting
Law: not as if men did behold that Book, and accordingly frame their Laws, but
because it works in them, discovering and (as it were) reading it self to the
world by them, when the Laws which they make are just and righteous.

Furthermore, the Providence of God is evident, by the long continuance of this
or that very form of Government through many ages: as of a Monarchy with the
Assyrians and Egyptians, with England and France, etc. of an Aristocracy with
the Venetians, and the like. For though man's wisdom and policy have some
stroke in point of Government; yet notwithstanding if we consider the
multitudes of wicked men, and the mischiefs that may proceed from without, and
what mutabilities are incident to humane affairs, it might seem impossible that
any State should so long subsist, were it not upheld by a divine power and
Providence. Which is also further manifest, where it pleases God to change the
form of a Government; for even to those men whom he makes use of as
instruments for the effecting of that matter, those things which man's wisdom
is not able to fathom, do succeed more beyond their desires and wishes, than
the diversity of humane casualties ordinarily does permit: the great
correspondence of events, and concurrence of things to a certain end, is an
Argument that there is an all-guiding Providence. Now as a Ship though never so
well built and tackled, cannot long brook the Sea without a skillful Pilot; no
more could the world it self, nor any form of Government in it long continue,
unless it were guided, maintained, and governed by the great Creator of all
things.

Paul tells us that the very Gentiles had their consciences accusing or
excusing them, according as they had done either good or evil, Romans 2.15. So
Suetonius writes of Caligula, that monster of men, Sueton. in Calig. Plures
sunt quos timor corrigit, quam quos amor dirigit. Aug.
that when it thundered or lightened, he would get himself into some Cellar or
deep Vault, thinking (it seems) to hide himself from the vengeance of God,
which (his guilty conscience told him) did pursue him. Now if man's own
conscience accuse him, shall not God much more, who is greater than it, and
made it? conscience condemns many men not only in respect of some particular
actions that have been done by them, as David in the matter of Vriah, and
numbering of the people, and Peter about the denial of his Master, which made
him weep bitterly; but sometimes it does condemn a man in respect of his
general estate; it may condemn him in respect of his final and eternal
estate, whereupon follows a dreadful expectation of judgment, Heb. 10.27.
as when a Malefactor is arraigned and condemned, he then expects the day of
execution.

Sometimes also fear has forced prayers from Infidels in time of their
distress, and thereby have they acknowledged a divine Providence governing all
things. So we read of those heathenish Mariners, Jon. 1. when there was a great
tempest in the Sea, they were afraid, and cried every man to his God: The
Mariners under a false Religion understood that something was to be feared,
^^autae sub errore religionis, intellexerunt aliquid esse verendum. Hieron.
Divinum aliquod and singular judicium. Tremell. in Jon. 1. Pessimus in dubiis
augur timor. Petrarc. de remed. utr. sort. Lyra ex Rab. ^olom.
says Hierom. Thus the Athenians in time of a great plague, (as some Authors
tell us) set up an Altar with this Inscription, ignoto Dee, to the unknown God,
Act. 17.23. and Tremellius says of these Mariners here, that they knew it to
be some divine and singular judgment, because it was so sudden and violent;
therefore they fear and fall to their prayers. So Ovid in the like case, and in
the like danger; Dii maris and Coeli, quid enim nisi vota supersunt? Ovid. Fear
makes men formal, and do some outward devotions; and even natural and servile
fear may sometimes serve as an Aul, Needle, or Bristle to bring in filial
fear. An Angel with a drawn Sword makes even Balaams Ass to startle; and this
strange tempest makes these rude fellows full of devotion. These Infidels were
of diverse Nations, and diverse Religions, as Lyra notes out of the Rabbis,
because they call every man upon the God of his Country.

CHAP. V. Argum. 5. Argum. 6.
Tacitus tells us, Tacitus. Caesar's Comment.
that the Magistrate commands nothing in Germany, but with the Sword in his
hand: and Caesar says, that the Germans made little account of any thing but
war and hunting: and Solinus says, The Scythians did stick a Sword into the
ground, Solinus.
the which they worshipped, placing the end of all their actions, Laws,
Religions and judgments, in their force and Arms; and whether we have not had
many of these men's Religion of late among us, let any indifferent person judge.
The natural disposition of the Northern Nations, is quite contrary to them of
the South, and the people of the middle Nations to both. The Northern Nations
are laborious and exercised in Manual Arts; the greatest Lawmakers,
Statesmen, eloquent Orators, Poets and Historiographers, are in a manner all
of the middle Nations. The Southern people are full of sagacity, and subtle
searchers in occult Sciences to instruct others; the Egyptians, Chaldeans and
Arabians, (those Southern people) have brought to light the hidden Sciences,
both Natural and Mathematical. This may be spoken for the general qualities
of people of all Countries; but as for the particular, there are in all places
and in all Countries men of all humors, as Bodinus notes: and we may see in
every Country, Bodin de Republ. l. 5. c. 1.
how wisely God in his Providence has tempered the societies of men. All are
not of one disposition: some are hot and fiery, sudden, rash and violent in
their actions and motions; others are more solid, of riper wits, and more
deliberate in their doings: some again are very dull, and of blockish
stupidity; others are very quick, and full of agility: some need the bridle,
and some the spur. If all men were hot and heady, the world would soon be in a
flame; if all were dull and heavy, it would lie flat and dead. Stirring wits,
says one, like working Barm, Struth. observe. Cent. 1.
put the drowsiness of the simple to working, and the slowness of the other
tempereth their forwardness, and both these extremes are brought to the golden
mean. It Is worth while to mark this disposition, and Gods Providence bringing
all to a right temper and good end; and wise men have observed, that great and
noble spirits have least passions, and that the lowest and basest spirits are
most subject to passion. If Princes power were in the hands of rural Peasants,
or the passions of private men in Princes, the world would soon totter; but
Gods Providence has wisely severed them, that power without passion may be
beneficial, and passions without power may be harmless.

we shall see the truth hereof abundantly. Nebuchadnezzar that lofty Prince
would mount up to Heaven, and set his Throne among the Stars, and God tumbleth
him down, making him to eat grass with the Oxen, Dan 4 34, 35.
and for diverse years to lead a life in bruitishness; and when his
understanding and di^^ity is restored to him, he acknowledges Gods Providence
and his Sovereignty over him. Belshazzar in the midst of great feasting and
jollity, hears the great Clock strike his hour, and sees a man's hand in the
Wall, drawing a dreadful sentence against him. Caesar is massacred in the
midst of the Senate; and Valerian the Roman Emperor, becomes a footstep for
Sapor King of Persia to mount on Horseback: the proud Bajazet is carried about
in a Cage by Tamerlane. Munst. Cosm. in Germ. p. 299
We read likewise of Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, a valiant Prince,
that after victory gotten by him in fifty two pitched Battles, he was deposed in
his old age, and brought to that necessity, that he made suit to be a
Prebendary in the Church of Spire which he had built, which was denied him;
whereupon it is said, he brake forth into those words of lamenting Job, Have
pity upon me O my friends, for the hand of God has touched me. And Procopius
tells us of Geliver Prince of the Vandals, brought to that misery, Pr^cop. de
bello Gothico.
that he wrote to a Friend of his, to send him a Harp, a Sponge, and a Loaf; a
Harp for his solace, a Sponge to dry up his tears, and a Loaf to staunch his
hunger. Sr Rich. Barckl. de summo bono. One says of unstable fortune, as it is
commonly called, Hos premit, hosque levat, hos dejicit, erigit illos. Cogit and
in varios homines descendere casus. Heidfield. Sphinx. Philos.
Sesostris that proud King was aptly taught the uncertainty of earthly
enjoyments, by the example of four Kings, whom (when he had taken them
prisoners) he caused to draw him in a Chariot; in which action one of the Kings
turned his face always backward, and being demanded the cause, he answered, as
he beheld the Wheels of the Chariot, the same that was on high did on a sudden
come down below, and thereby he called to mind the unstable condition of men,
which answer caused Sesostris to use them more mildly and courteously
aftrewards. In this world we have no certain nor sure estate, no abiding City
in a perishing world: though the earth be so established by Gods Word, that it
abides for ever, yet all things on the face thereof do evanish by changes. A
serious and frequent meditation of change, is a good way to make our estate
certain.

CHAP. VI. The definition of Providence; the parts of it.
THus having proved that there is a Providence, I shall in the next place show
what it is, and what be the parts thereof.

Definit. of Provid. (...). Greg Nyssen. lib de Provident.
Providence is Gods wise, perpetual, and unchangeable disposing and governing
of all things that are, or come to pass, as well in the Heavens as in the
earth, and not only those things that concern man, but also those things that
are put below him. As God made all things wonderfully at the first, so with no
less admiration does he govern, sustain, and take the care of them even to this
day: My Father works hitherto, etc. The eyes of all wait upon thee, or look
unto thee, says the Psalmist, and thou give them their meat in due season,
thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, Psalm.
145.15, 16. It is a most absurd thing, Theod. in 10. Sermon. de Prove. Providentia
est perpetuum and immutabile rerum universarum regnum and administratio.
Szegedin. loc. com. de Provid.
says Theodoret, to say that God created all things, but that he has no care
of the things which he has made, and that his Creature as a Boat destitute of
a Steersman, is with contrary winds tossed to and fro, and knocked and cracked
upon shelves and rocks. God is a great Householder, all Creatures are in his
Family, and there is no Creature in this great Family neglected: the little Ant
and the creeping Worm, have their allowance of God as well as man; he never
gave life to any Creature, but he allows a convenient maintenance for it: he
made all things by his Word, and by his Word and blessing in the means of their
life are they upheld.

Now the Providence of God is composed of three heads; Knowledge, Disposition
and Government.


1. Knowledge: he sees and considers all things; his Science is infinite and
incomprehensible; he most distinctly beholds all things which have been, are,
shall be, and may be in their proper essence, which is the efficient, final,
exemplar and fundamental cause of them. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth, 2 Chronicles. 16 9. which knowledge of his thus in Verse
expresses Homer: -- The Suns clear light,
Homer.
Which neer'theless to pierce
The earths entrals has no might.
Nor Sea with his weak rays,
But the worlds Creator great
All things survayes
From forth his dwelling Seat.
Earths Mass does not withstand
Nor dark night letts, but he
Things present and to come,
And past at once does see.
Hereof it is called by the Grecians (...), Basting. Catec. de Provident.
that is a power whereby things are foreknown, and (...), whereby the same are
foreordained and ruled, as one notes: God knows all things simply together
by one act, and not successively, Heb. 4.13. Mat. 7.23. God is simplex actus,
and as he most perfectly knows himself, 1 Cor. 1.10. so also he knows all
other things besides himself, Genesis 1.31. Romans 11.36. This is called by
Aristotle and Anaxagoras, intellectus purus. (...) ab a privativa, and (...)
fugio, quia illam nihil fugit. Chrysip.
In this respect did Chrysippus call providence (...), ignorant of nothing. God
has not only a general and common, but a proper and peculiar, yea (and that)
a perfect knowledge of every thing, and by this distinct knowledge he knows
singular things to come, even contingent; for to him their first cause they are
necessary, though in respect of second causes contingent. The eyes of the Lord
are in every place, beholding the evil and the good; and if it were not so, God
would have only the bare title of governing the world, and the thing it self
should belong to second causes; even as among men, many things are done in the
names of Kings and Princes, and said to be done by their command, when in the
mean time, what they are, and how they are managed, because done by their
Ministers, they scarce at all know or understand.

2. The second head of Providence is disposition, which ordains the connection
of parts, and makes one correspondent with the other. Saul in seeking his
Fathers Asses had no expectation of a Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9.3. he by the advice of
his servant goes to Samuel to enquire about the Asses, but it is said; the Lord
sent him thither; God so disposing of it by his Providence. The Lord had told
Samuel a day before in his ear, saying, To morrow I will send thee a man out of
the Land of Benjamin, and thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people
Israel. Ver. 16. So the Lord says of the King of Assyria; I will send him
against an hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give
him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down as
the mire of the streets: howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart
think so, Isa. 6.7. But most remarkable is that Providence of God, in
disposing of all things according to the prayer of Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.
bringing forth and showing him the Damsel that was to be a Wife to his
Masters Son, by the same token which he had expressly desired; which was this,
that if the Damsel that he desired to draw a pitcher of water for him, should
answer, saying, I will, and I will give thy Camels drink also, then that should
be she whom God had appointed for Isaacs Wife, and so it came to pass. Gods
wise disposition is such, says Causin, Causin. de Provident.
that all the whole Universe in all its parts, is ruled like a paper with
Music lines, Synesius Hymn. 4.
which made Synesins say, The world was the Harp of God, and the diverse orders
of nature were the strings of it. All things are overruled and swayed by the
great arm of Providence: he orders, directs, and disposes of all things to
the ends that he has appointed them, viz. his own glory, and the good of his
Elect.

3. The third head of Providence is Government: he governs all things
according to the counsel of his own will. God is not confined by any external
Law, nor straightened by the course of nature; he acts with great freedom and
sovereignty. Now I argue thus: if the world and all things therein be not
governed by God, either it is not governed at all, or it is governed by some
other, or else it governs it self.

1. It cannot be, that there can be no government of the world, because the
constant order and vicissitude in nature and natural things, the mutual
intercourse and interchangeable succession of day and night, winter and summer,
heat and cold, and a thousand such like, proves the contrary: of all which,
and their like, Clem. Alex. Stromat.
Clemens of Alexandria says, It were a most wicked thing not to think them
effects of Gods Providence. When all things are created of nothing, and many
things are compounded of contraries, and by a natural enmity seek the ruin of
one another, none but God can preserve them, for who else is able to govern so
great a Mass but an infinite power? Stock. on Mal. 3.


2. It cannot be governed by any other but by God himself: for if there were
another to govern the world, he must be either superior or inferior to God;
if superior, then God were not God, but he is called a great God, and a great
King above all Gods, Psalm. 95.3. In his hand are all the deep places of the
earth, the strength of the hills is his also; the sea is his and he made it, and
his hands formed the dry land. Ver. 4. He is called the most high God, and said
to be higher than the highest, therefore there is none above him, none equal
unto him: and if he were inferior to God, then could he not be sufficient to
govern the world, because no less than an Almighty power is required to the
government thereof.

3. If the world be not governed by God, either he does not know how to govern
it, or is not able to bear the weight thereof, and to go through with the
management of that work, or is not willing to undertake so great an employment
upon him: Deus liberrimum agens, qui a nemine cogitur ad hanc rerum omnium
administrationem. Polan. Syntag. de Provid.
but God is omniscient, and therefore he well understands rationem
administrandi, how to govern the world, and that in the best manner: he is
likewise omnipotent, and therefore able to bear the government thereof upon his
shoulders, and to manage it exactly and powerfully, because he is at no labor
in the execution of his will and pleasure, but whatsoever he wills, that also
he effects with ease: he is likewise summum bonum, the chiefest good, and
therefore he willingly undertaketh this work; he is a most free Agent, and is
compelled by none to the government of the world; the manner of his governing
is very good, because he always does well; yea even when instruments do evil,
as Joseph tells his Brethren; As for you, ye meant evil against me, but God
meant it unto good, Genesis 50.20.

If God made the world, then was he without the world, and has wisdom and
ability enough to govern it: the knowledge of all objects in the world causes
no weariness in God, because all therein is finite, Sic mundum regi a Deo
dicimus, ut a rectore provinciam cujus apparitores nemo socios esse in regenda
provincia dixerit, quamvis illorum ministeriores geratur: and hi tamen possunt
aliquid praeter jussa rectoris, per ipsius ignorantiam, quae est conditionis
humanae. Ille aurem praeses mundi, and rector universi qui scit omnia, cujus
divinis oculis nihil septum est, solus habet rerum omnium cum filio suo
potestatem, nec est Angelis quicquam nisi parendi necessitas. Lactant. l. 2. c.
17. Si Deus fecit mundum, fuit ergo fine mundo: si regit, non utique sicut men's
corpus regit, sed tanquam dominus domum, navimque gubernator, auriga currum;
nec tamen misti sunt iis rebus quas regunt. Lactant. l. 7. de divino praemio.
c. 3.
but his knowledge is as his essence is, infinite: he governs the world not
as the mind the body, but as a Master governs his house, as the Stern-man
governs his Ship, a Charret-man his Chariot, who are not mixed with the things
governed by them. And as God governs all things, so he does nothing obiter,
rashly or inconsiderately: he is well advised in every thing that he does, else
it might be thought that all things came to pass by chance and fortune, and so
the Providence of God should no way differ from them. We are rash and heady,
and many times carried on with more passion than reason, and no corruption
transporteth us so far as violent passions; but whatsoever the Lord does in his
government, he does it with exact judgment.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods General Providence.
FUrthermore, for our better understanding of this point of the Providence of
God, we must note, that it is of two sorts; General, Particular.


Deus noster ab universitate omnium rerum, nec munus dignantissimae visionis
avertit, nec regimen suae providentiae tollit, nec indulgentiam benignissimae
pietatis ausert. Salvian de gubernat. Dei. l. 2.
1. Gods general Providence, which extends it self to all the Creatures of
the world, and is manifested by his giving life and breath unto all living
Creatures, ( for in him we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17.25, 28.) and
by upholding all things by his powerful Word, Heb. 1.3. The Providence of God
extends it self to all things, (whether of a superior or inferior nature)
to all things in general, as well as to this or that particular thing; as well
to corruptible and contingent things, as to things incorruptible and necessary;
as well to things weak and vile, as to those things that are of a more
excellent nature. God does not take away the government of his Providence from
the generality of all his Creatures, says Salvian. It is God that works all
in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. Of him, and for him, and through him are all things, Romans
11.36. All things are of God, as of the first efficient cause; by God, as the
conserving cause; for God, as in the end. So Aquinas, A seipso nullo movente,
per seipsum nullo adjuvante, propter seipsum nullo communicante. Calvin in Romans
11.
or as Calvin, All things are of him, no other moving; through him, none
helping; for him, no other partaking of glory with him: the one determines
whence we have our being and well-being, whence comes our life, and that which
maintains it; and the other, to whom we must offer up the sacrifice of praise
for all.

Gods general Providence orders and disposes all the Creatures of the
world, to those purposes that he in his wisdom has appointed them; whereof we
have a plain and evident testimony, Genesis 7.2, 3. where notwithstanding God
would destroy the world by a flood of waters, to purge it of those sinful and
impure Inhabitants, yet he appointed the Ark to preserve couples of all kinds
of Creatures; yea sevens of all clean Beasts and Fowls, that there might be
three pair for increase, and an odd one for sacrifice. Thus God is said to be
the Savior of all men, because he preserves all men from temporal
destruction, whereinto they would suddenly fall, were they not protected by his
Providence. And so he is said to preserve both man and beast, that is, by his
daily Providence he preserves them in life and being, Psalm. 36.6. Thou have
made Heaven and earth, and all things that are therein, the Seas and all that
are in them, and thou preservest them all, Nehem. 9.6. And therefore he has
bid us to come to him, and commence our suits unto him every day for such
things as we stand in need of, as confidently and boldly as any Child may go to
his Father, to beg meat, drink and apparel, or any thing that is needful and
necessary unto him. He is not like a careless Builder, who having made a House,
and being paid for his work, leaves it to the wind and weather, not caring
whether it stand or fall: or like a Ship-Carpenter, who having finished a Ship,
and taken his money, cares not whether she sink or swim; but he is (as St
Peter calls him) a faithful Creator, who has a care of all his Creatures,
especially of the special. All Creatures wait upon him, that he may give them
their meat in due season; that thou give them, they gather, Psalm. 145.15, 16.
says the Psalmist, thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good, Psalm.
104.27, 28. Christ has therefore bid us all ask of our heavenly Father bread,
which is frequently in Scripture put for all manner of provision, for the
maintenance of this life. So Joseph is said to have nourished his Father and
his Brethren, and all his Fathers household with bread, Gen 47.12. And of our
Savior it is said, he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on a
Sabbath Day to eat bread, Luke 14.1. that is, to a Feast or Banquet. So God
bids us ask bread, that is, all temporal blessings for the maintenance of this
life, whereby we may the more freely give our selves to the service of God: and
as we are bid to ask bread, so for the manner of it, it is our daily bread, as
we ordinarily read; bread for our necessity, as Junius. Junius in Orat. Domin.
Some say, (...), comes of (...) and (...), that is, such as may be added to
our substances, and nourish our bodies. Theophilact and Basil say, Theoph.
Basil.
it is understood of such bread or food, as is most agreeable to every man's
nature and constitution; or else it may come of (...), which signifies
advenire, to teach us, it is adventitius, not proprius, and must daily be
ministered to us, for the maintenance of our life: and it is likely that bread is
rather named, Mat. 6.11. than any thing else, both for the commonness of it in
all places, and for the agreement it has with all men's bodies; for that is
still one thing, as Genesis 21.14. it is said that Abraham gave Hagar bread and
water, when he turned her away for her sawciness with her Mistress: and Psalm.
104.15. bread is said to strengthen the heart of man. Hereby our Savior
teaches us therefore to yield our selves wholly to the care and tuition of
God, and commit our selves wholly to his Providence, who will supply all our
wants, and give whatsoever things are necessary for our sustentation.

CHAP. VIII. Of Gods particular Providence; of the extent of it to the Heavens;
to the Sun and Moon.
IN the next place I shall treat of Gods particular Providence, which shows
it self in particular things, and toward particular persons. The Lord in the
Creation of the world acted like a King, giving Laws to all his Creatures: that
which we call the nature of the Creatures, was Gods Law that he gave unto them;
this nature was the rule whereby he appointed them to act and work. And as he
made variety of Creatures, so he gave them diverse Laws; their different natures
are the several Laws whereby God rules and governs them. The reason why the
Trees and Plants spring from such a small Kernel or seed, and some of them
bring forth one kind of fruit, some another; the cause why the Fowls, Fishes
and Beasts, have their several Elements wherein they live, and sport
themselves, and bring forth their young, and provide for them, being ignorant
of what they do; the reason is, because God has given these Creatures such a
Law, by which they act and move, which is a notable manifestation of Gods
Providence. They are in a great error, that say this Providence is extended
unto universal things only, and not to particulars; for if they will have God
to be ignorant of particular things, as some atheistically have professed then
verily God could not understand himself, neither should he be infinite in
knowledge, (as I have showed him to be before) if his Providence were not
extended to every thing. Now if God have a certain knowledge of every
particular thing, why can he not then also take the care of them? especially
since particulars, (as they are particulars) are appointed for some certain
end, Explan. verae Relig. l. 1.. 10.
as well in special as in general: and the very entities or common essences
of things which are preserved by God, the same cannot subsist but in their
singulars, as one observes; so that if these singulars (being left by divine
providence) do come to ruin, then likewise may these general essences also.

Let us consider the extent of this particular Providence to the Heavens, to
the Sea, the Earth, and all Creatures that are therein. And

1. For the Heavens. We read not only of a Covenant made with day and night, (a
Covenant as between King and Subject) but also of the Ordinances of Heaven and
earth which he has appointed, Jer. 33.25. On the second day of the Creation,
God raised up the Firmament like a Circle of Brass, or rather like a Globe of
Gold and Azure, which served to divide the seven Orbs of the Empyreall Heaven;
Causin. hist. sac. l. 1.
now it was in the midst of the Waters, that this admirable work was formed:
whether they were necessary to temper the rays and orders of the Stars, or
that the course and revolutions of a moving body, would be more even and free
in an Element so pure, and so pliable to all sorts of motions, or for what
other reason it were, the Learned have not determined. Now as we may have cause
to admire the Almighty power of God, in stretching out this huge spacious body
of the Heavens, stretching out the Heavens like a Curtain, as the Psalmist
speaks; Psalm. 104.2. then may we also exceedingly admire at the Providence of
God, in that the Heavens should be carried about, compassing the rest of the
world every day for thousands of years together, and yet hold on in one tract,
and keep one way, and never go out of it; this fully shows the continual
Providence of God: the Lord carries about the Wheels of Heaven in a continual
motion, still holding them to their diurnall task.

2. Let us look further to the Sun in the Heavens. The Sun arises every
morning; this great Eye of Heaven opens his eyelids every morning, The Sun
is the image of the Sovereign King, the heart of nature, it daily speaks to
us out of the gates of the East, with as many tongues as it has rays. Causin.
twinkling and moving continually: no sooner does he peep above the Horizon,
but he sends forth his rays and beams and streams of light, which the Poets
call the wings of the morning. The beams of the Sun are called wings, partly
because of its swift disparckling of them, and partly, because it spreads its
light in its rising like wings, whence Homer called the Sun (...), the
golden-haired Sun; and the Scripture speaks of the wings of the morning, Psalm.
139.9. If I take the wings of the morning, etc. and of the morning spread upon
the mountains, Joel 2.2. The benefits that we enjoy by the Sun are very many,
and principally these:

1. Light: how comfortable is it to see the light, and to walk by it. Truly the
light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun,
Eccl. 11 7. Thus he may be called the Torch, Candle, or universal eye of the
world.

2. Heat: the beams thereof have a wonderful and universal efficacy; there is
nothing hid from the heat thereof, Psalm. 19.6. These beams are of a searching
nature; great are the influences of the Sun; he arises with healing in his
wings. The beams of the Sun do warm, refresh, quicken and cherish all things,
dries up cold moistures that are noxious to the Creatures, excites and quickens
Plants, Beasts, and Men in the Springtime, and reviveth all that seemed well
nigh dead in the Winter. We read of precious things brought forth by the Sun,
Deuteronomy. 33.14. Perkins on Mat. 5.
now in regard hereof some call it the universal fire of the world.

Sol in media quidem fere coelorum altitudine suam ex Dei iustituto obtinuit
regionem.
3. Distinction of times; and so it may be called the great Clock or Calendar of
the world. The Sun arises, and the Sun also goes down, says Solomon, and
hasteneth to the place where he arose, Eccl. 1.5. In the Heavens God has set a
Tabernacle for the Sun, Arias Montan. ad Psalm. 19.
Psalm. 19.4, 5. Arias Montanus says, that the region of the Sun is almost in
the middle height of the Heavens, and there it is as in a flitting habitation,
because it never stays in one place, but is as a Bridegroom coming out of his
chamber, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Basil calls the Sun a solitary creature, because it
shines alone, obscuring all other lights with his clearness. Basil. Hexam.
Homil. 6.
and rejoices as a strong man to run his race. The Sun when he arises is
gloriously adorned with shining rays, and seems like a Bridegroom to be very
cheerful, with all celerity performing his course; even as a Giant that
runs for a prize. The Sun in the Hebrew is called Shemesh, that is, a
Minister or Servant, being a common servant to the whole world. Mathematitians
considering the greatness of the Sun (being as they say an hundred and sixty
times bigger than the earth) wonder that he burns not the earth to ashes; but
herein appears the wisdom of divine Providence, so to place the Sun in the
Heavens, viz. in the middle space, so as it shall not scorch the earth; and
albeit it be at an unspeakable distance from us, yet does it cast out his
influences downward, (quite contrary to the nature of light or fire) unto the
lowest of Creatures. Thus Chrysostom discourses upon this Subject: This great
light thus does, as if the great Creator thereof had charged it thus to do:
Send forth thy light against the nature of the same; Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
Homil. 9. Cor coeli est Sol, uti cor nostrum est Sol corporis: sicut cor est in
medio corporis humani, ita Sol quantitate maximus, luce plenissimus, action
efficacissimus, in medio coeli positus est. Alsted. Theolog. Natural part 2.
cast thy beams down toward man, to guide and direct him there; do so, for,
for him thou wast made; his candle cannot do so, it is against its nature,
whose flame tends upward; but so shall thou do, that thou may serve man for
whom thou wast made; thy light shall tend downward. Besides, the Sun never goes
out of his way, yet is in continual motion: there is a diversity in every day
of the year, yet notwithstanding if we compare one thing with another through
the whole year, we shall see it is constant in its motion; and when it has
touched those limits which we call tropicks, it is retrograde, and turns back
again: and though the Sun rise at one point of the Sky to day, and at another a
few days after, and likewise do set, yet at the end of the year, he returns
again, to follow the same trace which he has continued ever since the Creation
of the world, except once in Joshuaes days. This is that great light which God
made to rule the day.

3. From the Sun I shall proceed to speak of the Moon, Luna a Phaenicibus
coelestis regina appellata est, and est humorum domina and oeconoma. The Moon
is called a great light, not because it is greater than the other Stars, for
there are many bigger than the Moon; they seem little to us because of their
distance from us. Calvin.
which runs a much shorter compass than the Sun, whereby it appears, that
she is in the midst between the earth and the Sun. This is that other great
light, made by God to rule the night, Genesis 1.16. called by the Phaenicians the
Queen of Heaven; by others the Wife of the Sun, for the Moon is the last
receptacle of all the influences and virtues, that go forth from the Sun into
other Stars, which afterward she communicates to the earth, and here the
wisdom of God is admirable; for therefore is the sphere of the Moon placed in
the lowest place of the heavenly bodies, and in the highest of the elementary
bodies: and albeit the benefits of the Sun seem to be more apparent, because it
makes notable mutations of times, of Summer and Winter, and with his heat
cherishes and makes the earth fruitful, nourishes Plants and living
Creatures; yet the Moon also is very beneficial to man, because it nourishes
and governs the humors, for the life of Plants and Animals arises from the
mixture of heat and moisture, and is nourished by a due temperament of both.
The Moon is a celestial Calendar, for most Nations in times past used Lunar
months, describing their Months, Festival days, and times appointed for
public meetings and debates by the Moon: and for this cause David says, Psalm.
104.19. that God has appointed the Moon for seasons. The Hebrews reckoned
their Months from one new Moon to another, whence from the newness thereof, A
novitate ejus mensis Chodes dicitur, quasi dicas, nova Luna. Flac. Illyr.
Clavis Script.
the Moon was called Chodes, which is as much as to say, the new Moon: and here
the wisdom of divine Providence is much to be observed, that this Planet the
most familiar with the earth, appointed by God for the remedy of nocturnall
darkness, should outgo the admiration of all the rest. She with her manifold
windings and turnings into diverse shapes, has much troubled the wits of the
spectators, fretting and fuming, that of this Star, being the nearest of all,
they should be most ignorant, growing as it does, or else waining evermore: one
while bended pointwise into tips of horns, another while divided just in the
half, and anon again in compass round: sometime shining all night long, and
other-while late it is ere she rises: one while big and full, and another
while little or nothing to be seen, as every man's experience makes evident.
Plin. Natural. Hist. l. 2. c. 9.
And Pliny says, that the Moon being next to the Center, (and therefore of
least compass) performs the same course and circuit in twenty seven days,
and one third part of a day, which Saturn the highest Planet runs in thirty
years: after this, making conjunction with the Sun two days, forth she goes,
and by the thirtieth day at the most returns to the same point and ministry
again, wherein is to be seen much of the Providence of God.

CHAP. IX. Of the Eclipses; a large discourse on the miraculous Eclipse that
happened at the death of Christ.
IN the next place we may observe the operation of Gods Providence, in the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, for every year both Planets are eclipsed at
certain days and hours under the earth. Pliny observes, Plin. Natural. Hist.
l. 2. c. 13.
that all Eclipses in two hundred and twenty two months have their
revolutions, and return to their former points. Although Eclipses arise from
natural causes, yet is it contrary to the property of the lights of Heaven,
whose nature and office is to shine; therefore when their light is obscured,
they are in a suffering condition: whence Eclipses are called by Heathens, --
Defectus Solis, lunaeque labores. When the Sun is obscured, all the Stars and
Creatures which receive their strength from the Sun, do as it were suffer
together with him. The examples of all ages do testify, that great mutations,
drought, inundations, pestilences, wars, and great destructions have followed
immediately after great Eclipses. At the death of our Savior there was a great
Eclipse of the Sun, there being darkness over all the earth till the ninth
hour, Luke 23.44, 45. The Sun, the eye of the world, (as the Poets call him)
was darkened, but how he was darkened, and how this Eclipse was occasioned,
there is the difficulty; and that it was not natural but miraculous, all
Interpreters new and old consent and agree: for it is concluded by Divines,
Philosophers and Astronomers, that there cannot be a natural Eclipse of the
Sun, but in the new Moon, when those two Planets may be in conjunction, and so
the body of the Moon interposed between the Sun and the earth: but this was at
the full Moon, for it was the day before the Jews Passover, which ever was
celebrated the fourteenth day of the Month Nisan, or the first full Moon after
the Vernall Equinoctial. -- Besides, there could not have been darkness of so
long continuance by that means, but the Sun would have recovered his light
sooner, by reason that he is by many hundred degrees bigger than the Moon.
Solis eclipsis non potest esse universalis. Lyra. Istae tenebrae fuerunt factae
per retractionean radiorum Solis virtute divina. Hieron. Per interpositionem
nubium densarum. Origin. Dionys. Aereop. Epist. ad Polycarp.
And Lyra says, that an Eclipse of the Sun cannot be universal. And Hierom
says, that darkness happened through the retraction of the Sunbeams by a divine
power. And Origin says, it was by the interposition of a thick Cloud. And
Dionysius the Aereopagite in an Epistle to Polycarpus, (whereto Nicholas Lyra
gives much credit, which Mr Beza thinks to be counterfeit) says, that being
at that time in Egypt, where the air is wondrous thin, and there be seldom
any clouds or rain, (but the Land is watered and made fruitful, by the
overflowing of the River Nilus) he saw in a miraculous and prodigious manner,
the Moon coming out of the East, (being by course of nature in another
Hemisphere and Horizon, viz. full South with their Antipodes) and about noon
interposing it self between the Sun and the earth, and there continuing by the
space of three hours, and then returning again to the East; whereupon it is
said, he cried out, Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissolvitur.
Either the God of nature is now suffering some impediment, and is by a greater
than himself hindered, or (if that be impossible) he has determined to make a
present dissolution of the world. The course of nature was altered, when the
God of nature suffered.

Now for the largeness and extent of this darkness in regard of place, diverse
are of diverse opinions. Some think that this was universal, and over all the
world, because St. Luke says, there was darkness over all the earth: of this
opinion was Tertullian among the Ancients, as Beza notes, Beza in Annot. sup.
Marc. 15.35. Gualt. in Luc. 23.
and Gualter in his Commentary upon these words. But Lyra, Calvin, Beza,
Perkins, and diverse others, be of another judgment, sc. that this darkness was
in the Land of Jury only, or at least, but in some few neighboring and near
adjoining Countries. Hereof they give diverse conjecturall Reasons.

Because Lyra says, there cannot be a general or universal Eclipse of the
Sun over all the world at once, as aforesaid; but being miraculous it might:
therefore not to insist upon that.

2. Calvin, Beza, and Mr Perkins affirm, that if it had been universal, it is
not unlikely, but that all Historians of those tintes both Greek and Latin
would have mentioned it, but many (they say) say nothing of it, and but some
few speak of it.

3. Also they say, It had been less miraculous and prodigious, and not so
likely to portend the ruin of the Jews, if it had been common to others as
well as to them; but to be appropriate and peculiar to them only, might well be
thought fatal. Beza says likewise, It Is the more probable opinion, because it
has more resemblance to a miracle of the like nature, Exodus 10. where it is
said, that by the space of three days there was gross and palpable darkness
over the whole Land of Egypt, but light in the Land of Goshen, where the
children of Israel dwelt. So here for the space of three hours there was
darkness over the Land of Juda, but light over all the world besides.

If the words of the Text be alleged, viz. that there was darkness over all
the earth;

terram, pro regione, the Earth or Land put for the Land of Canaan only, as
Mat. 9.26. Luke 4.25. as for the Epistle of Dionysius beforementioned, it is
counterfeit, and therefore of no credit, but may be a fabulous fiction.

2. It might signify portend, and admonish them of the great judgment of God,
shortly to ensue upon that Nation, viz. that as when Christ suffered, there was
darkness over the Land of Jury only, whereas all the world besides enjoyed the
benefit of the light of the Sun; so shortly after spiritual darkness and
blindness of mind was to surprise and seize on that Nation, because they
refused the light that shined among them, and was offered to them: whereas unto
all other Nations the Sun of righteousness more clearly shined in the preaching
of the Gospel, Mal. 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 3.14, etc.

3. This miraculous Eclipse of the Sun confuteth the folly of the Jews, and
declares them to be much deceived in thinking and saying Christ was a
deceiver, who was no less than the Lord of glory, the Messiah and Savior of
the world; and this appeared, in that all the Creatures did him homage, and
suffered together with their Creator.

4. It shows the horribleness and heinous nature of sin, so provoking God to
anger, as at the punishment thereof, he even seems to turn the whole course of
nature topsie-turvy, or upside down. Also it may admonish us, that the price of
our redemption was no trifle or small matter, it costing no less, than if the
Sun should have fallen from Heaven to earth. A wise Captain or Householder will
not easily be induced to alter the course and order of his government in his
Camp or Family: much less will God alter his government of the world,
notwithstanding now he did, even disordering (as it were) the whole order of
nature, to set our disorders to rights again.

CHAP. X. Of the extent of Providence to the Stars; of their order, variety and
use; how they are for signs and for seasons, and for days and years; a
discourse on the Star that led the Wise men to Christ.
FRom the Sun and Moon let us proceed to the Stars, Stellae sunt corpora and
luminaria coelestia, verbo Dei in Firmamento collocara, ad illuminandam totam
machinam sublunarem. Alsted. Theol. Natural. part. 2. c. 6.
which God has made also to rule the night, Psalm. 136.6. wherein Gods
Providence will much appear. They are celestial and shining bodies, called
Stars of light, Psalm. 148.3. they were all made at the first immediately by God
himself, they are placed likewise in their several orbs. Philosophers say,
that the Stars are nothing but the thicker part of all the Heavens, made in the
Heavens, and of the matter of the Heavens. God likewise has set and placed
them in the Heavens in a most beautiful order: of these some are fixed, some
are wandering Stars or Planets; they difer one from another in glory, 1 Cor.
15.41. they are innumerable; God alone knows the number of them, and calls
them all by names, Psalm. 147.4. Some of the Stars or Constellations have names
in Scripture, Ainsworth in Genesis 1. Ursa major or Acturus, are seven Stars near
the North Pole, called of some Charles wain.
as Mazzaroth (or Mazzaloth) Arctururs, Orion, Pleiades, Job 38.31, 32. Job
9.9. Amos. 5.8. Ainsworth says, They may well be Englished water-Stars,
winter-Stars, thunder-Stars, and the like. The Stars have their courses,
periods and revolutions, taking the tracks and ways, which were traced out to
them from East to West at their Creation, from that time they have cast their
favorable aspects, and their influences have fallen upon the earth, Ut Sol
maximus est omnium syderum, ita minimus est Mercurius, and post eum Luna: Soli
propemodum par videtur nobis, quod citima and vicinissima terrae sit. Perrer.
in Genesis 1.
observing inviolably and with great respect the Orders and Laws of their
Creation. As the Sun is the Prince of all the heavenly lights, and the greatest
of the Stars, so Mercury is the least, and after him the Moon: though she seem
to us of equal bigness with the Sun, yet is she not so, but seems great unto
us, because she is nearest to the earth. God has still continued an order
among them ever since the Creation, and that notwithstanding all the changes
that have happened in the mean while, men may perceive, that all things have
been so well disposed, that the world has still been preserved in his right
state; and it is impossible, that this orderlinesse which we see among them,
should come either of the Stars themselves, or of any other moving cause, than
of the hand of that God which governs all things by his wise Providence.

The Stars are for diverse uses: God has set them for signs and seasons, and
for days and years, Genesis 1.14. They are for a twofold sign:

1. Natural and ordinary, they show by their rising and setting, and by their
Eclipses, heat and cold, drought and moisture, storms and tempests, fair and
pleasant weather.

2. They are sometimes signs extraordinary to show Gods judgments, and the
great alterations that he will bring on the world: Sometime they signify
extraordinary blessings: Matthew. 2.2.
Of this nature was that Star that appeared to the Wisemen when Christ was
borne, which they call Christ's Star.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, How they came to know it to be Christ's Star,
and pointed out the place of his Nativity, and would at last conduct and direct
them to him?

Answ. 1. Some say, there was an Apocriphal tradition fathered upon Seth, which
foretold at the Nativity of the Messiah, such a Star should appear, and such
presents be offered unto him.

2. Others say, That these Magi being of the posterity of Balaam, of whom we
read, Numb. 22. and Chap. 23, and 24. had their light from his prophecy, Numb.
24.17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, etc. whereupon (say they) twelve
of them by turns watched continually upon the top of an high Mountain, and
prayed, that God would reveal unto them that Star, which (they say) he did that
very night that Christ was born; and upon the sight thereof, they presently
addressed themselves for their journey to Jerusalem.

3. Others think, that they had the hint thereof out of Dan. 2. or (at least)
from some other Prophecies which were in those times translated into Greek, and
extant in many places among the Gentiles; and this seems a probable conceit,
because they go to Jerusalem to be further instructed: all do agree, that it
was none of the Stars made in the beginning, Genesis 1.16. for these have numbers
and names, Isa. 48.26. and doubtless most of them were well known to these
Magi: but it seems by their relation that this Star was never seen before, as
is also manifested by its perpendicular motion, moving from North to South,
contrary to the motion of other Stars that move from East to West: else when
they went from Jerusalem, it could not have directly pointed out the house at
Bethlehem where the holy Child Jesus and his Mother lay; for Bethlehem stands
thirty miles south from Jerusalem, as the Learned do observe. Augustine says,
It was a new Star created by God to point out the place of his Sons Birth, Haec
stella magnifica Coeli lingua. August.
calling this Star the wonderful tongue of Heaven.

4. Others say, It was an Angel, appearing not in the nature, but form, fashion
and figure of a Star; and therefore called so: And why might not an Angel as
well appear to these Wise men of Persia, as to the shepherds of Bethlehem? And
why might they not as well be taught from Heaven how to set forth and undertake
this journey, as they are which way to return home again, when they have
dispatched and finished it? Mat. 2.12.

5. Nay, some go further, and say, that it was the holy Ghost himself, who as
he appeared in the likeness of a Dove at Christ's Baptism, Luke 3. so say
they, He appeared in the likeness of a Star at his Birth. In a word; as the
cloudy and fiery pillar went before the Israelites, and left them not till it
brought them to Canaan the promised Land: so this Star, Angel, or Meteor (or
whatsoever it were) in the likeness of a Star, left not these men till it
brought them to Christ the promised Lord. Magnum aliquod in parvo latere.
August. Sermon. 7. de Epith.
For as Austin tells us, This certainly told them, that no mean guest lay in
that poor house at Bethlehem, but one that was no less than a King, and far
greater than any mortal man.

2. As the Stars are for signs, so likewise they are for seasons: they serve to
give times to every employment, as to the Physician, Though the motion of the
stars through the Equator, were much more simple, yet they move by an oblique
circle, to the end, the benefit of their benign aspects might be communicated
tomore parts of the earth. Ex plan. Ver. relig.
to the Mariner, to the Husbandman, showing him when to set, sow, plant, etc.
to the Mathematician: They serve for the bringing about the Spring, the Summer,
the Harvest and Winter, Genes. 8.22. Arcturus rises in September, and
begins Autumn; Orion arises in December, and begins Winter, and brings
rain; Pleiades arise in the Spring, the Dogstar and others arise in the Summer:
And although the Stars have their seasons to mount above us, and likewise to
go down again out of our sight; yet does it not happen at all adventure, but by
the Providence of God so disposing it; and though he has given them their
influences from Heaven, yet do they not any thing of their own peculiar motion,
but God has still the guiding and overruling of them.

Tantum officium habent significandi res futuras, non autem vim fatandi, ac
necessitatem inferendi. Zanch. de luminar. Coeli.
3. The Stars are for days and years; they serve for the dividing the day
from the night, and the light from the darkness: the Sun being the fountain
of light, measures the days by four and twenty hours, and the years by
returning from one point to the end of the other: They serve likewise for
political observations, as the computation of days, weeks, months and years,
and the celebration of Festivals among the Jews; they signify things to come;
but predictions from the Stars, and the discovering of secrets are false and
uncertain.

CHAP. XI. Of Gods Providence to be seen in the Winds and in the blowing of
them: An Objection answered.
Plin. Not Hist. lib. 2. cap. 8.
IN the next place, I shall show how God's Providence is much to be seen in the
Air, which fills up this vast and empty place which we see above us, and also
fills those crannies in the Earth, which are not to be seen by us; yea the
very fishes of the Sea (though we perceive not their breathing) do die without
it: the Air invironeth the whole Earth, and all living Creatures receive the
benefit of it, it is a vital element, heavier than fire, lighter than Earth and
Water, the cause of sounds and breathing, capable of heat, cold, dryness and
moisture; having no light of it self, but from the fire, distinguished into
three Regions, viz. the upper, the middle, and the lower. The Air is the
Kingdom of the winds, there the winds have their circuit, but where their
treasure is we cannot understand: God brings the wind out of his treasuries
when he pleases, Psalm. 136.7. and he makes use of the holy Angels as his
treasurers, in raising, directing and withholding the winds, as may be
collected from Revel. 7. Hagius de Ventis.
The Wind is a hot and dry exhalation, elevated by the Sunne-beams to the
middle region of the Air, by reason of the coldness whereof it is driven
downwards again, and repelled by the Clouds unto the lowest region, which it
fanneth up and down, lest the Air should be corrupted by too much stillnesse:
Weems Natural and moral observat.
The Wind is an exhalation more gross than the pure and subtle Air, but more
subtle than the gross exhalations that come out of the Earth, says a Learned
man; therefore the Wind for the subtilty of it, Ventus quod sit vehemens and
violentus. Frytsch. de metaeoris.
ascends upwards, but the weight of it carries it down from the pure and
clear Region of the Air, yet can it not descend to the Earth by reason of the
thick vapors which arise out of the Earth continually. Great is the force and
power of the Winds, that they throw down houses, and pluck up Trees by the
roots; The same Wind, which now shakes the leaf, and makes the feather to
move, being charged against a Mountain, would have turned it up from the
foundation; and the same strength that blows up the dust, Dearing in Heb. 1.
Lect. 2. Ventus est exhalatio five flatus aerem valde agitans and commovens.
Keckerm. Syst. Physic. l. 6. c. 7.
if it came against the Earth, would shake the bottom of it, says a judicious
Divine: The Wind sometimes troubles Heaven and Earth, and disturbeth the Sea.

They that are cunning in the Seacard know there are four cardinal or chief
Winds; these are spoken of, Ezekiel. 37.9. Mat. 24.31. and that these have their
subordinate collateral side-winds belonging to each of them in their several
quarters, they say seven apiece, and so there be thirty two in all: Some of
them we have specified, Acts 27. in the Description of the Tempest that befell
St Paul and his companions in their Sea journey toward Rome: Now the Lord
raises the Winds, and sends them forth at his pleasure: He walks upon the
wings of the wind, Psalm. 104.3. A wind came from the Lord and brought an
innumerable company of Quails into the tents of the Israelites, Numb. 11.31.
Jonah 1.4, 5.
So the Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea, so that the Ship wherein Jonah
was, was like to be broken. And Jonah 4.8. it is said, That after the worm had
smitten Jonahs gourd, that when the Sun arose, God prepared a vehement
Eastwind, and the Sun beat on the head of Jonah that he fainted, etc.

Object. But it may be said, That the Eastwind is commonly rough and
boisterous, as appears, Exodus 14.21. where it is said, That the Lord by a
strong Eastwind drove back the red Sea, and made it to forsake his wonted
chanel, to yield passage to his people out of Egypt: So it is said, The Lord
breaks the ships of Tarshish with an Eastwind, Psalm. 48.7. one might think
that this Eastwind which God prepared against Jonah should have cooled the Air,
or abated and assuaged the heat of the Sun.

Resp. This Wind was not Coecias the North-east wind, which is indeed
boisterous and blows very cold; but Subsolanus, the South-east wind, which is
a hot and dry wind: therefore Tremellius tells us, Tremel. ad loc.
it is called Eurus silens, a quiet or silent East Wind, to distinguish it from
the other; and so it is in the Margin of our Bibles of the last Translation. If
it be further urged, that the Text says, It was a vehement East Wind: I answer
again, That that might be as well in regard of the ferventnesse and soultry
heat thereof, Ventus calidus and urens. Hieron. ad loc. apud Lyram.
as of the highness and loudness thereof, or noise it made; and so Hierom
tells us, it was a hot and burning wind, as Lyra notes; such a wind as did not
cool the Air, but the more warm it, being as a wagon or chariot to carry the
heat of the Sun, whereupon it attended the more forcibly forth-right to the
object; and that the East Wind blasteth (besides our daily experience) the
Scriptures testify unto us, Genesis 41.6. where it is said, that Pharaoh in his
dream saw seven thin ears of corn blasted with the East Wind. Ezekiel. 19.12. Hos.
13.15. Hence we learn that not Aeolus or Neptune, Jupiter or Mars, or any of
the Idols and feigned gods of the Heathen, but Jehovah Elohim the Lord God of
Israel, he that made Heaven and Earth, Sea and all things; he stirs up
winds, Exodus 10.13, 19.
storms and tempests at his pleasure, Psalm. 29.3. Exodus 9.23. God caused an
East Wind to bring Locusts upon the Land of Egypt, and a West-wind to remove
them; He makes the South Wind to bring heat, and the North Wind to purge the
Air, and drive away rain. Winds come not by chance or Fortune, nor altogether
from natural causes, howbeit God works by them; he is the great Lord
Treasurer of the winds, he sends them forth, or shuts them up at his
pleasure. Nay Witches and Wizards, and the Devil himself cannot raise a storm,
but by leave, as appears, Job 1. The wind and storms have a Law by which they
move; there is not a storm so impetuous, but it is directed by a Law, Psalm.
148.7, 8. Why does the Psalmist call forth those creatures to praise the Lord,
but to teach men that they do observe the Law that their great King and
Lawgiver has given them to observe? He has made a Decree which shall not
pass, or shall not be transgressed, as in the original; Fire, hail, snow and
vapors, and stormy winds are said to fulfill his Word: the wind and the Sea
were calm at our Saviors command, when he said, Peace and be still; insomuch
as the Mariners cried out, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and
the sea obey him? Mark 4.39, 41.

CHAP. XII. Gods Providence to the Birds of the Air, and in particular, to the
young Ravens, the Ostriches young ones, and the little Sparrows.
I Shall now treat of God's Providence with relation to the Birds of the Air,
Beza Ver. Transl. and Genev. in Mat. 6.26.
which Beza and the old translation read volucres or volatilia Coeli, so does
the Geneva translation also on Mat. 6. Gods providing for the Fowls is
propounded as an argument to dissuade from carking cares: Behold the fowls of
the Air, says our Savior, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Luke mentions one
particular kind, viz. the Ravens, Luke 12.24. Consider the Ravens, for they sow
not, neither do they reap, which neither have storehouse nor barn, Aves fine
patrimonio vivunt. Minut. Fael.
and God feeds them; The Birds live without a patrimony, says Minutius
Faelix: The inference our Savior would have his children draw from thence is,
That God will much more feed them. Oh be thou (says Chrysostom) as secure as
the Birds are, Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Homil. 12.
that thy heavenly Father will feed thee too.

It is conceived that our Savior speaks of this kind of Fowl, because of all
other Birds the young Ravens are most helpless; and therefore the Kingly
Prophet specifieth them in particular, Psalm. 147.9. for having in the 8th verse
observed Gods provident care for all his creatures, saying, He covers the
Heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth; he makes the grass to
grow upon the mountains; he adds, And to the young Ravens when they cry. The
like you have expressed Job 38.41. He provideth for the Raven his food, when
his young ones cry unto God, (...). Aristot.
they wander for lack of meat. The Raven is noted by Naturalists to be (...),
without natural affection, not using that care and diligence in providing for
her young, Plin. Not. hist. l. 10. c. 12.
as is seen in other Birds. Diverse Authors do affirm, That these Birds are very
greedy, and do scarce abide two together in barren places, but many of them
will be together in cornfieldsd, and fruitful places; for they quickly drive
their young ones out of their nest, yea out of the Region where they are,
Aelian. Not. hist.
so that they are compelled to wander being forsaken of their Dams, and seek
their meat lamenting and casting out their sorrows: Now the Ravens are then
said to cry to God, Franz. Animal. hist. sacr.
not that they cry in faith or understanding, but that they cry for want of
food and means to help themselves; their crying is their praying, the roaring
of the hungry Lions, and the crying of the Ravens is their seeking meat of God:
they know not God, but confusedly utter their desires to him; yet then when the
Ravens fly abroad to seek their prey, and leave their young ones half starved,
and no body provideth for them; now God feeds them, either by giving them
worms to jobb at, or by some other secret means, as Calvin Calvin Sermon. in Job
38.
thinks; and seeing this Bird is so voracious, God's Providence is the more
admirable in providing for them. We read that Noah sent out a Raven and a Dove
out of the Ark after the waters began to be assuaged; the Dove finding no rest
for the sole of her foot returned unto him into to the Ark, Hesychius notes in
the Raven want of natural affection, in that being sent out of the Ark he
returns not again, as having no affection to the place where he had made his
nest. Willet on Levit. 11. As the Ravens neglect their young ones, so the young
ones again do neglect the old, and sometime set upon them when they are not
able to resist. Aelian. hist. not. l. 3. c. 43.
but the Raven (which he first sent forth) returned not to him again, but went
to and fro seeking after his prey to satisfy his devouring nature, Genesis 8.7.
yet even then God provided for him, before the waters were abated from off the
face of the ground: Yea such was the providence of God toward Elijah the
Prophet in a time of great scarcity, that the Lord commanded the Ravens (those
greedy Fowls) to feed him by the Brook Cherith that is before Jordan, And the
Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the
evening, and he drank of the brook, 1 King. 17.6.

From the Ravens let us proceed to the consideration of God's providence
toward the Ostriches young ones; the Ostriches neglect of her eggs is
excellently described, Job 39.14, 15, 16, 17. She leaves her eggs in the
earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, or that the wild beast may break them: she is hardened against her young
ones, as though they were not hers, her labor is in vain, without fear,
because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding. The Ostrich is called Struthio camelus, being partly like a
Camel in his long legs and feet, partly like a Sparrow in his head and bill,
though much greater. Vatablus. Lorinus.
This Bird-beast is very nimble (for it is half a Bird of the Air, and half a
Beast of the earth) and she has such a weighty body, as she cannot mount up to
fly aloft, yet makes such speed as she cannot be outgone: no man is able to
overtake her, and what with her half-leaping upon her clees, and what with her
half-flying with her wings, she passes all the swiftness that can be in
Horses, or in any other Beast; and the same swiftness is matched with policy,
so as those Birds being cloven-footed, they gather up stones as they run, and
cast them backward at such as pursue them: therefore the Ostrich is said to
scorn the Horse and his rider: Yet notwithstanding, they sit not upon their
eggs, but abiding in hot Countries, as Arabia, Africa, and Ethiopia, they hide
them in the sand, and leave them, and the Sun giving warmth to them, does by
that means hatch them; the Hens of them are so foolish, that they forget their
own eggs, and their Chicken that should come of them, and this comes to pass
by God's providence; The particular frames of the bodies of Birds and Fowls,
are palpable signs of divine providence, and the gizzern they have, which is a
supply for their want of teeth; as also their having no paps as beasts have,
their young ones being nourished so long in the shell, that they are presently
fit to be fed by the old ones; these things plainly show the providence of God.
Moors Antid. against Atheism, chap. 11.
for should they sit upon them with the weight and heaviness of their bodies,
they would break them all in pieces: thus God takes care both for their
propagation and preservation, and provideth for them, till they are able to get
provision for themselves.

Neither does God's Providence extend it sel^ to great Fowls only and Birds of
value, but to such also as are of least esteem, even to the little Sparrows,
who (notwithstanding they are so lascivious as the Males are reputed to be) and
so apt to spoil Corn and other Commodities, as all men desire to destroy them,
and being dead will give little for them, ( Five of them being sold for an
halfpenny, Luke 12.6.) yet not one of them is forgotten before God: And as St
Matthew has it, Not one of them falls to the ground without our heavenly
Father, Matthew. 10.29. that is, without his knowledge, approbation and
appointment: For so Demosthenes observes, it was a usual speech among the
Greeks: Such and such things (says he) were not done without the people of
Athens, that is, without their authority and approbation.

CHAP. XIII. Of God's Providence to be seen in the Seas: in the Nature of them.
An Objection answered. Of the saltness of the Sea, and the Reasons thereof. Of
the bounds of the Sea: of the Fishes of the Sea, of their multiplication, of
the several sorts of Fishes taken in every month: Of their provision. An
Objection answered.
FRom the Heavens I shall descend to the Sea, and therein Gods Providence is
very remarkable: The Sea is a gathering together of many waters, Genesis 1.10. it
is the common receptacle of floods and Rivers; and as the Liver in the body by
the veins sends blood to the whole parts of the body, so does the Sea send
water to all the parts of the earth. Solomon tells us, That all waters come
from the sea, Eccles. 1.7. He compasses the whole earth as with a girdle, and
bedeweth the world with his pleasing streams. In the depth of the earth there
be many concavities which breed winds, Weems observe. nature. and moral.
these winds lift up the waters, the waters again press down the winds, which
being thus pressed down, seek a passage through the earth, making a way for the
Sea to run through the veins thereof; and because of the continual strife
between the Sea and the winds, therefore the water in springs and fountains
never fails, and coming back to the fountains, then they run back again to
the Sea. Aristotle's opinion will not hold here, who says. That the water
contendeth to run to the lowest place; and if the waters should have this
vicissitude of course from the fountains to the Sea, from the Sea to the
fountains, then the same place should be both higher and lower, than it self:
but some parts of the Sea are lower than the fountains, and into them the
fountains send forth their streams to run. Other parts of the Sea are higher
than the fountains, especially in great storms and tempests, which mount up the
waves of the Sea to Heaven, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 107 25, 26. and
they by secret channels send forth springs of water to supply the fountains,
Cotton Exposit. in Eccles. 1.7.
as a Learned Divine has well noted.

This is further noted by Strabo, Strabo.
concerning the situation of the waters, which if we consider the quality of
their matter, ought to be placed in the middle between the earth and the Air,
whereas the same are now included and dispersed within the earth, to the end
they might be no hindrance either to the fruitfulness of the ground, or to the
life of man; neither are all things ordained only for their proper ends, but
also for the good and benefit of the whole Universe, as appears particularly
in the water, which against its own proper nature is moved upward, that there
should be no gaping vacuity in the world, which is so composed, that the parts
thereof do mutually uphold one another.

If all waters come from the Sea, how is it then that the waters in Rivers are
sweet and fresh, and that the waters in the Sea are salt?

Resp.
That the earth through the veins whereof the waters pass to the fountains, does
percolate and strain the Salt out of it, and so those waters by reason of the
length of their course, and their distance from the Sea, lose their saltness,
therefore some fountains of water are salt as the Sea, that are nearest to the
Sea, the pores of the earth being more open between the Sea and them, which
also is the cause of the flux and reflux of some of them. God has made the Sea
salt by the fervent heat of the Sun, which sucks out the sweet and thin
substance thereof, and this being easily drawn up, all the tarter and grosser
parts thereof remain behind. Hence it is, as Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c.
100.
notes, that the deep water toward the bottom is sweeter, and less brackish,
than that which is above in the top; and surely this is a better reason of that
unpleasant taste that it has, than that the Sea should be a sweat continually
issuing out of the earth The learned have observed, that God has made the Sea
salt for diverse necessary uses:

1. To keep it from putrefaction, which is not necessary in Rivers, because of
their continual running, as also because of the celerity of their motion.

2. Salt waters agree best to the nature of those great Fishes, (being both
hotter and grosser) that are bred and nourished in it, which is not so
necessary to the Rivers breeding smaller Fishes It is likewise an evident
Argument of Gods Providence, that the Ocean being higher than the Land, does
not overflow his Banks. Astronomers and natural Philosophers can give no
substantial reason hereof; but out of the Scriptures we may answer in a word,
that Gods Decree has bounded and barred it in: all the wild Beasts of the
world might more easily be tamed than the Sea, yet God rules and over-ruleth
it in a most wonderful manner; he has shut up the Sea with doors when it
brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb; he made the Cloud the garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it; he established his Decree
upon it, and said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed, Job 38.8, 9, 10. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, that
have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree that it
cannot pass, and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not
prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over it, Jer. 5.22.
Chrysostom says, (...). Chrysostom. in Cor. Homil. 4. (...) Basil. Hexam.
Homil. 4.
The Lord has walled about the Sea with the sand, with a very weak thing does
he bridle the rage of it, even with the sand, which a poor weak silly worm can
creep over. The Lord sits upon the floods, and orders them, and though they
roar and lift up their waves, yet the Lord on high is mightier than the mighty
waves of the Sea, Psalm. 93.3, 4. The Sea is in the hand of God, as a little
Babe is in the womb of his Mother, so that the Child lies not more still in
his Mothers womb, than does the Sea within his bounds; and though it make a
great noise, and be tossed with winds and tempests, and swell and threaten to
overwhelm the earth, yet cannot it get over its bounds. Likewise God uses the
mists and clouds to restrain the Sea, that it shall not pass out of its limits,
as swaddling bands are to keep in a young Babe, who would fain pull out his arms
and legs to make sport, but he is so held in with his swaddling clothes, that
he is forced there to abide as a prisoner. Calvin in Job. 38.
The mists and clouds are nothing but vapors engendered in the air; and herein
Gods Providence appears, for as soon as a mist arises, by and by the Sea
becomes calm, though before tempestuous, and thus they get the upper hand of
the Sea: thus God restrains the Sea from swallowing us up, tying up the Sea,
even as a little Infant that is tied in swaddling clouts. When mention is made
of the flood that once drowned the whole earth except eight persons, it is
said, Genesis 7.11. that all the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and
the windows or floudgates of Heaven were opened, so as the waters were not
restrained but let loose: by that dreadful judgment of the deluge, God showed
us (as in a mirror) that which should have been continually upon the earth,
had not he miraculously restrained the waters.

Woodw. Child's patrim. Seafaring men are neither inter vivos, nec inter
mortuos: they are between the living and the dead.
Consider we further Gods Providence in the Ship that saileth upon the Sea,
which reeleth to and fro upon the waters like a drunken man: sometimes it is
carried down into the great deep, then mounteth up again, and is carried sat
to his harbor. Gods work is as admirable in steering and conducting this
sinking tottering Vessel, (whose passengers are in deaths door often) to their
desired Haven, as it is in those Creatures that live in the Ocean, their proper
Element. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great
waters, these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, Psalm.
107.23, 24.

The Psalmist having said that the earth is full of the riches of God, says
further, so is this great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, etc. there go the Ships; there is that Leviathan whom thou have
made to play therein; these wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their
meat in due season; that thou give them, they gather, thou openest thy hand,
they are filled with good, Psalm. 104.24, 25, 26, 27. From the little Anchoie to
the great Whale, Apua.
Gods Providence is wonderful. By reason of the great multitude and diversity
of Fishes that are there to be seen, even many Heathens were constrained to
say, that whereas men saw many miracles upon the Land, the Sea was the true
storehouse of the wonders of nature. Is it not almost an incredible thing, that
so great a Creature as the Whale should live in the water? for in all
probability he should come forth to prey upon the Land, and there should not be
food to suffice him in the water.

The fruitfulness of the Fishes in the Sea proceeds from Gods special
blessing; for when the waters brought forth the Fishes abundantly after their
kind, God blessed them, saying, be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters
in the Seas, Genesis 1.21, 22. for being in a moist element, they do most easily
conceive, Plutarc. l. 5. Sympos. quaest. 10.
by reason of the abundance of humor, which is greater in the female Fishes
than in the males, and therefore the female kind of Fishes are bigger commonly
than the males. Some kind of Fishes bring forth twice in a year, some three
times, some six times in a year, and that in great abundance: the most wise
Creator would have them thus fruitful, partly by reason of the vastness of the
Element which they must replenish, viz. the water, which is far greater, and
more spacious than the earth, which (besides animals) is stuffed with vegetables;
and partly, that there might be variety and plenty of them for man to feed upon
Ambrose says, Ambros. Hexam. l. 5. c. 10.
that Fishes by infinite numbers, out of many places, from sundry creeks of the
Sea, with a joint flote as it were, make toward the blasts of the North Wind,
and by a certain instinct of nature hasten into that Sea of the Northern parts,
so that a man that saw the manner of them, would say a certain tide were coming
down from the current, they rush so forwards, and cut the waves as they pass
with a violent power through Propontis into Pontus Euxinus. And Alsted says,
Alsted. Theol. Natural. part. 2.
there are often such multitudes of Fishes in the Northern Sea, that Ships are
stopped by them. And Camden makes mention of one sort of Fishes, viz. Herrings,
Cambden's Britan. descript. of Yorkshire.
which in some ages past kept as it were their station only about Norway, but
now in our time, not without the divine Providence, (as he well notes) do swim
yearly round about this Isle of Britain by skulls in very great numbers: about
Midsummer they shoal out of the deep and vast Northern Sea, to the coasts of
Scotland, hence come they to the English East coast, and from the midst of
August to November, is the best and most plentiful taking of them. Besides we
read in holy Writ, that when Peter let down his Net into the Sea at Christ's
word, they enclosed a great multitude of Fishes, and their Net brake, but they
lost not the Fishes, but by the help of their fellows that were in the other
Ships, they brought off so many Fishes to shore, as were even ready to sink two
Ships: and the phrase of breaking in Scripture, sometime signifies abundance,
as Prove. 3.9, 10. where Solomon pronouncing a blessing upon such as shall
bestow their goods on pious uses, says thus, Honor God with thy substance,
and with the first fruits of all thy increase, so shall thy barns be filled
with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine; that is, thou shall
not need to fear to be brought to beggary, but it shall procure thee an
abundant blessing.

And here the providence of God is further manifested, that at certain times
certain kinds of Fishes do enter in or go out of the Sea; and that which is yet
more wonderful, new sorts of Fishes are taken almost in every Month,
especially in places near the Sea-cost; and herein Gods goodness appears,
that such multitudes of Fishes of several kinds should draw near to the
Sea-shores, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 9. c. 12.
and in many Months be taken for the use of man; and more admirable it is,
that those creatures that live and breed in the water, be not all covered and
clad alike: For as Pliny notes; some have a skin over them, and the same
hairy, as the Seals: others but a bare skin, as the Dolphins: some have a shell
like a bark, as the Tortoises, and in others the shell is as hard as a flint,
and such be the Oysters, Muscles, Cockles, and Winckles: some be covered over
with crusts or hard pills, as the Locusts: others have sharp prickles: some be
scaled, as the ordinary Fishes: others be rough-coated, as the Soals: some have
a tender and soft skin, as the Lampreys: others none at all, as the
Porcontrell. Of these we may say with the Psalmist, O Lord, how manifold are
thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 104.24.

Moreover! God's providence is remarkable in sustaining and feeding such
multitudes of Fishes, as are in the vast Ocean: some feed upon earth, some on
mud and slime: others feed on sea-grasse or sea-weed: some will eat herbs and
roots, and others will feed upon flesh when they meet with it, and all of them
are exceedingly refreshed with soft rain and gentle showrs that fall upon the
Sea; by the showrs of rain that fall upon the Ocean St Austine stops the mouths
of those Atheistical Epicures that disputed against Gods providence: August.
Comment. in Psalm.
one Argument they brought was, what reason could there be that it should rain
on the Sea, which needs no water, where there is a confluence of all waters,
and at the same time the earth is parched and gapeth for want of rain, and gets
it not, where then is providence? Poor creatures, says he, that cannot see the
end of things; so blind they are: Are there not Fishes living in the Sea for
God to nourish? Oh how do they leap, sport and play, and rejoice at the sweet
rain; they can suck the sweet water out of the salt Sea; Here then is the
reason, says he, why it raineth upon the Sea, where is no want of water, and
it raineth not upon the earth that thirsts for it, even for the punishment of
man's ingratitude and wickedness.

And here one thing more may be observed as to Gods providence concerning the
Fishes of the Sea; in that the Fishes were spared in the deluge from
destruction, as reserved in their own Ark and element, when all creatures
besides except those that were in Noah's Ark were utterly destroyed from the
face of the earth; Clapham Manual. Bibl. doctr.
and under the Law the Ceremonial Sacrifices, especially, the matter of the
Burnt-offering was flesh with its adjuncts, as the flesh of Beasts and Birds,
but of Fish ^ever; which was reserved for man's ordinary use* no one kind of
them being appointed for ceremonial service; as a Learned man has well noted.
But why God would not that any Fish should sacramentally die, I know not,
excepting for that earth had sinned, and earth must satisfy; and Fish is not
of the earth as Beasts and Birds are, but substantially of the waters: That any
corporeal substance should not be of the earth, Philosophy cannot admit; as for
the waters bringing forth Fish and Fowls in Genesis 1. it is understood as of the
womb bringing forth, but materially derived from the earth under; yet some
Chemists would have water the original element of all. But of this
overcurious Question only by the way.

CHAP. XIV. Of the extent of Providence to the Earth: Of the form and figure of
the Earth: Of the stability and situation of the Earth, how it stands in the
water, and out of the water. (...) branches of comfort to Gods people, drawn
from the Earths stability, to prove the stability of the Church of Christ.
I Shall in the next place speak of the Providence of God with relation to the
Earth, and to the things that are in it, grow out of it, and that live upon the
face thereof.

(...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Sermon. 1.
I shall treat first of the Earth it self; which, says Chrysostom, is our
Country, our Mother, our Nurse, our Table, our Grave; which is the footstool
for the soles of Christ's feet, Mat. 5.35. the office-house of sin, Isa.
24.5. Satan's walk, Job 2.2. the poor heritage of the sons of men ( The Heaven
even the Heavens are the Lord's, but the Earth has he given to the children of
men, Psalm. 115.16.) The slaughterhouse or shambles of the Saints; the blood of
the Martyrs, of the Prophets and of Saints was shed upon the earth, Rutherf.
Christ's dying.
as a judicious Divine has noted, Revel. 18.24. The first Doomsday, says he,
fell upon the earth for man's sin, Genes. 3.17. Cursed shall the earth be for
thy sake; the last Doomsday is approaching, when this clay-stage shall be
removed; the earth and the works therein, the house and all the furniture of it
shall be burnt with fire, 2 Pet. 3.10.

1. Now here let us consider the figure of the Earth: the form and figure of
the Earth is round or circular, as the Globe represents to us; for the Earth
and the Sea make but one Globe, and is called the Center of the world: which
proves that there are Antipodes (which so posed many of the Fathers) that is,
a people that dwell on the other side of the Globe; Struth observe. Cent. 2.
although Pope Zechary did excommunicate Bishop Virgilius in the eighth Age,
because he maintained there were Antipodes; but when it was discovered, Pope
Alexander the sixth found it within St Peter's jurisdiction, adjudging the right
of it to him who had most strength to conquer it; and the Pope's pretended
omnipotency divided that which his omniscience could not discover: the
roundnesse of the Earth, as also the parts thereof, shut up as it were in the
bosom of the Heavens, and disposed with a mavelous order, do expressly declare
a divine providence: When the Heavens are whirled about with a swift and
perpetual motion, that the Earth should hang like a round ball in the Air upon
nothing, as is expressed, Job 26.7. Non quid, (...). Belimah a Balam
constringere. Chald.
that is, having nothing to support it, that during many thousand years
continuance this great frame of the Earth is not shaken out of joint,
notwithstanding all the confusions of the world in all Ages; this is a great
argument of God's providence: God comprehends the dust of the Earth in a
measure, he weighs the mountains in scales, Tribus digitis appendit. Hieron.
and the hills in a balance, Isa. 40.12. Hierome renders it; The Lord sustaineth
it with his three fingers; as we weigh the least things in the balance: So the
Lord takes the weight of the Earth, and makes this hill to counterpoise that,
and from this equal distribution of the parts, settling one against another; he
settled the Earth in the midst that it is not moved; and lest it should fall no
way but to the Center, he made it firm in the lowest parts, and lest one part
should fall on another, he provided that the hills should be poised one against
another, Weems observat. Nature. and Moral.
as a Learned man has noted. The Earth after many thousand years continuance
stands fast fixed in the same place where God first seated it. One generation
passes, and another comes, but the Earth abides for ever, Eccles. 1.4. (...)
Super seeds suas. Symmach. Gnal. Mecunnath^ super bases suas, Aquila. (...)
vertit.
The Earth has worn out many Ages and generations of men, it self remaining
unmovable, continuing where it was fixed, and though there have fallen out some
particular earthquakes here and there, yet the whole Earth was never shaken
with an earthquake, for the nature of the Center is to be immovable. He has
laid the foundations of the Earth that it should not be removed for ever, Psalm.
104.5. or he has settled it upon its bases. Thou have established the Earth,
and it abides; they continue this day, that is, the Heavens and the Earth
according to thine Ordinance, Psalm 119.90, 91.

2. Now to speak more particularly, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 12. Super maria
and flumina significat. Juxta ut Psalm 137.1. Super flumina Babylonis illic
sedimus. Cassiodor. Lyranus.
the Psalmist tells us, The Earth is the Lords with the fullness thereof, the
wo^ld and they that dwell therein. If you ask quo jure, by what right? The
Prophet answers, or gives a reason of it; He has founded it upon the Seas,
and established it upon the floods, Psalm. 24.1, 2. What finite understanding,
says Chrysostom, can comprehend this? When men lay a foundation; they dig
deep, and if they meet with water in their way they go yet deeper, till they
see the spring dried up, else they will lay no foundation, for a foundation
upon water makes a building unstable, and tottering, it cannot be a fixed
dwelling; it is against the nature of water to bear up so heavy a body; it is
against the nature of the earth to have its basis upon such a foundation: Why
do thou wonder, O man, says the same Father, for into what creature soever
thou will pry into, thou will find an unlimited and boundless power, much more
then in bearing up this massy body. The Apostle Peter tells us, That the Earth
stands in the water, and out of the water, and yet remains firm and fixed,
2 Peter 3.5.

1. In the water; not floating and swimming in the water, Ut intelligatur,
egere terram ad firmam quandam compactionem permixtione aquae, sine qua in
pulveres redigeretur, sicut absque sanguinis per venas sparsi humore corpus
exaresceret ac dissolvetur. Lorinter. Densior his tellus elementaque grandia
traxit. Et pressa est gravitate sui? circumfluus humor Ovid. Metam. 1. Ultima
possedit, solidumque coercuit orbem.
Terra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa.
Aere sublimi tam grave pendet onus.
Cum te pendenti reputas insistere terrae
Nonne vel hinc clare conspicis esse Deum?
Heidfield. Sphynx Philos. cap. 7. de Terra.

as some have dreamed, even as a Ship does in the Sea; which opinion Thales
Milesius held, as Aristotle shows; hence they collected, That there were none
that lived in another Hemisphere: but the Earth stands in the waters, and is
encompassed round about with the Seas, and interlaced with abundance of Rivers,
as so many veins running through it.

2. Out of the water; a great part of it being dry Land, which remains
settled, though it be contrary to the natural place and situation of the earth
and water; for the natural part of the Earth is to be lowest of all the
Elements, as it is the heaviest of all, and the water to encompasse the Earth,
and to cover the Earth every where, not to leave one inch of dry ground, as the
Air does to this day, close the whole Earth and water, and compass both: the
first and second days of the Creation, the Earth was all covered with the
water; but the third day the Lord commanded the waters to retire, and the dry
Land to appear, and the Earth to be made bare for the use of those creatures
the Lord would create and plant upon it.

Now here was a mighty work of God, and that the Earth remains still standing
in the water and out of the water is a clear argument of God's Providence in
governing the world: 'Twas a great work that God did in Noah's days in
drowning the Earth with a flood; yet may we not imagine it to be a greater work
of God to cause the waters to retire and uncover the Earth? Vain was the fancy
of Archimedes who offered to move the whole earth if he had a place besides it
to stand upon.
God does a greater work every day in holding back the water from drowning the
Earth, than he did once in drowning it with water; for it is the natural course
of waters still to be flowing. This daily work of God in keeping the waters
from covering the Earth, is by a strong hand keeping the waters under lock and
key, abridging them of their natural liberty, keeping the water within its
bounds, so that the Earth stands as it did, in the water, yet out of the
water.

Now if the stability of the Earth be an argument of God's Providence (for the
pillars of the Earth are nothing else but the strength and power of God
upholding and preserving it) then may we assure our selves of the stability and
firm foundation of the Church, and all the true members thereof; The righteous
are an everlasting foundation; they shall stand fast like Mount Sion, which
cannot be removed, Psalm. 125.1. For

1. The world is established for a time by the power of that God that governs
the world by his Providence; but Mount Zion the Church abides for ever.

2. Terra ipsa proprie per se stat, and fundata est super nihilum, nec aliae
columnae ejus, quas confirmavit Deus, quam vis ac potentia Dei eam continens,
conservansque. Damascen. Solius Christi est haec victoria, hic tuti
consistemus. Ferus in Mat.
God establishes the world for a time, because he sees his own workmanship in
it, but he will uphold his Church for ever, because he sees his own Image in
it.

3. The world shall be so far from ruining the Church, that the Church shall
be glorious, when the world shall be destroyed, and turned into ashes.

4. The Earth of it self hangs upon nothing, but the Church is built upon the
Rock Jesus Christ; therefore the gates of Hell (all infernal power and policy)
shall not prevail against it; The foundation of the world is no better (at the
best) than the foundation of the house that is built upon the sand; for as the
sand is slippery, and will not be made hold together, cannot be consolidated,
so are all foundations beside Christ, as Hierome says, between the houses
built upon the sand and the Rock, there can be no solid enduring mixture, no
more than there could be in the feet of iron and clay in the feet of
Nebuchadnezzar's Image.

5. In the Earth's establishment, the wisdom and power of God are manifested;
but we have the Word, Promise and Oath of God for the establishment of the
Church, and therein also both his Wisdom, Power and Mercy do appear:
Therefore the Church shall stand when the world shall fall: When we see violent
storms and tempests, we do not presently fear the dissolution of the world, and
why should the violent concussions that have been for many years past among us,
make us to fear the Churches dissolution, which has a more firm foundation
than the world?

CHAP. XV. That Providence is visible in Herbs, Plants and Trees growing in the
Earth. Of the variety of Herbs and Plants brought forth in every Month. Of the
Lillies of the field.
IT will not now be unnecessary to show how the Providence of God discovers
it self in Herbs, Zanch. de operibus Dei.
and Plants, and Trees, which grow in the Earth. Some Herbs comfort and help
the brain; some the eyes; some the liver; some the heart; some one part,
Babingt. in Exodus
some another with most rare and sovereign qualities given them of God for this
end; which consideration made many worthy persons to speak and write of them
with delight; yea they spared not to climb up to the top of high Mountains,
Herbs and Trees spring in such places as are agreeable with their natures, and
where they cannot easily wither, as long as nature is able to preserve them;
for some spring in the plain fields, some grow on Rocks, some on high
Mountains, some in barren sand, which in better ground would wither away.
Boethius de consol. lib. 3.
and to Rocks unaccessible, to travel through unpeopled Deserts, to search
every vein and corner of the earth, and all to find and know the virtues of
Herbs. Mithridates King of Pontus for his great skill in Herbs, and his
Antidote against all poison, (called after his name Mithridate) is become
famous in all Books of Learning. Marcus Valerius Corvinus a famous Roman did so
delight in the study of Herbs, that he withdrew himself into the Country,
where he might wholly (as it were) dwell in his Garden: But I need not speak of
these, whenas the Scripture speaks of Solomon, how he wrote of all Trees from
the Cedar which is in Lebanon to the Hyssop that springs out of the wall,
that is from the chiefest to the meanest plant.

And here the wisdom of divine Providence does further appear, in that the
earth brings forth several sorts of Herbs and Plants, as it were every Month,
Franz. Animal. Histor. sacr.
as the Learned do observe. In January, Black-Ellebore, or Bears-foot
springs forth. In February, the Herb Chamaelea, an Herb having leaves like
Olives, and Tussilage or Coughwort. In March, the Herb Hyacinthus, or
Crowestoe, and the yellow-Lilly and the Violet. In April, Gooseberries and
Crowgarlick. In May, Cinquefoil, Sorrel, Celandine, Thistles, Fumitory,
Plantane, the Tulip and the Flower-deluce. In June, Marshmallows,
Garden-mallows and Holyhocks, Endive, Fennel and Cammomill. In July,
Elicampane, Faenegreek, the Gourd, Heart-wort, Wild-marjoram, and Vervin. In
August, Heath, or sweet-Broom, Southern-wood and Wild-betony. In September, the
Ivy. In October, Saffron. All these are great signs of the most singular
providence of God; whence it is that David praises God in these words, Thou
make the earth soft with showrs, thou blessest the springing thereof, thou
crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness, Psalm. 65.10,
11. St ruth. observe. C ent. 2.
The earth (says a judicious Divine) sends her juice to her surface to be
our nourishment; If a man would eat earth, or suck the sap of it, it would not
feed him; but God changes that sap to be our convenient food; Herbs, Trees and
Seeds cast into the earth, draw it out, and turn it to our Nature.

Our Savior having dissuaded his Disciples from carking care for food, forbids
the same for apparel, Mat. 6.28. Assuring them, that if their heavenly Father
did extend his fatherly care even to the grass of the earth and Lillies of the
field, much more will he have regard to them which are much better than those
things: The words be very emphatical: Consider the Lillies of the field how
they grow, they toil not, The Lilly is called of the Hebrews Soshan, the flower
of six, because of his six leaves. Aben-Ezra. in Shirhash.
nor do they spin, and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his royalty was
not like one of these, verse. 29, 30. He bids us consider the Lillies, yea the
field-Lillies, which no body medleth with, (for the Garden-Lillies perhaps
might be watered and helped by the Art and industry of man) but even the
Lillies of the field which seem dead in the Winter, and are in the Spring
quickened, and so decked in such fresh colors, although neither themselves, nor
any body else confer or bestow any labor hereabout, as that they surpass
King Solomon, who surpassed all other Kings; yea, even when he would show
himself in his greatest bravery. For questionless; there is no Cambrick or Lawn
so white as the Lilly, nor any Purple so fair as the Violet, nor any Scarlet
and Crimson like the Gilli-flower.

There are Trees also as well as Herbs and Plants, Significantur cae, quae
proveniunt absque cultura hominum, ut sunt abies, Cedrus, Pinaster, and
fimiles, quae non solum sponte proveniunt, sed ne cultum quidem patiuntur,
cultuque deteriora redduntur. Heidfeld. Sphynx. Philosoph. cap. 8. Certo
tempore, viz. verno succus redit in arbores tempore hyberno ferme enactas;
Annon hinc colligis miram providentiae rationem? Alsted. Theol. Nature. part. 2.
that are demonstrations of Gods Providence; the Scripture speaks of the
Trees of Jehovah that are full of sap, Psalm. 104.16. The Trees take but a
little room in the earth, but spread their branches in the air to take
influence from Heaven and Air to bring forth fruit unto man. Some think that
those Trees of the Lord mentioned by the Psalmist, are the Firre-tree, the
Cedar, a wild Pine Tree, and the like, which grow without the Husbandry of man,
and will not endure any trimming and manuring from the hand of man, but are the
worse for it. And here the Providence of God is admirable, that in Spring time
the sap returns into the Trees that were almost dead in the Winter time, out
of which spring both leaves and fruits; the sap whereof is both given,
nourished and boiled by the Sun. There are likewise Trees to be found which
having venomous roots on one side, yield a remedy on the other. Histor.
Sinarum. part. 4.

CHAP. XVI. Of the extent of Providence to the Beasts of the earth; of a
special Providence in providing for Lions, and other Beasts of prey.
I Now proceed to speak of Gods Providence, Iddio riguardo egli propriamente ai
buoi quando ci detre quesia leg? Imperoche altrimenti la providentia di Dio
abbraccia ancora ogni minima cosa come. 1 Timothy 4.13. Ital. Annot. in 1 Cor. 9.9.
extended to the Beasts that live upon the earth. Ask now the Beasts, and they
shall teach thee, says Job, that is, they shall teach thee that there is a
Providence; who knows not in all these that the hand of the Lord has wrought
this? in whose hand is the soul of every living thing, Job 12.7, 10. For what
reason can be rendered, that Beasts (as well as Fowls) know their appointed
times, and keep the same course and order every year, but because God has
given them a kind of natural instinct, whereof all the Philosophers in the
world are not able to render a reason. Gods Providence is seen in providing
food for the Beasts; he is said to take the care of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9. He
prepares rain for the earth, he makes grass to grow upon the mountains, he
gives to the Beast his food, Psalm. 147.8, 9. Every Beast of the Forest, says
he, is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand hills, I know all the Fowls of the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine; or as the Hebrew has it,
they are with me; they are under my care and provision, Psalm. 50.9, 10. He
sends the springs into the vallyes, which run among the hills, they give
drink to every Beast of the field, the wild Asses quench their thirst; he
causes the grass to grow for the Cattle, and herb for the service of man,
that he may bring forth food out of the earth: the high hills are a refuge for
the Goats, and the rocks for the Conies, Psalm. 104.10, 11, 14, 18. O Lord thou
preservest man and beast, says David, Psalm. 36.6. and here the singular
Providence of God is to be observed, even in the Birds of the Wood, and the
wild Beasts. Now on the contrary, although in our Stalls, Stables and Folds,
both we our selves, and our Children and Servants, I no sooner set my foot on
the earth, but there I see the sheep feeding, here the horse and ox plowing,
there the sheep gives us her lambs, and her wool, here the cow giving her calf
and her milk, here I see an hedge, and as much care to keep it strong, as there
was to plant the field with any of these, there I see Behemoth Beasts, so
called for her greatness, viz. the Elephant. Woodward. Child's patrim.
do take great care of our Horses, Sheep, Kine, and other Creatures that we
keep about us, yet with how much difficulty these Creatures are brought up, it
is evident: many Lambs are lost, many Calves die, yea their Dams do die with
diseases, notwithstanding all our wisdom, care and diligence. But the Birds of
the Wood, the Fishes in the Waters, and the wild Beasts, are destitute of all
this help and succor; yet they multiply much better, are better propagated,
are not afflicted with such diseases as those Creatures are, which man's care
and diligence is most exercised about, because their generation, birth and
growing up, depends wholly upon the care and Providence of God.

And here it is admirable to consider how God makes provision for Lions,
Bears, Tigres, Elephants, and all other wild Beasts, which are many in number,
and of diverse kinds, else they would soon destroy the Inhabitants of the Earth:
the young Lions are said to roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
God, Psalm. 104.21. the roaring of the Lions is their seeking and praying to
him; the noise that the Beasts make in their necessity, is their natural
desire of help, which they cannot better express: they know not God; they
confusedly utter their desires unto him: their spirits (as one well notes) are
not material, Struth. observe. Cent. 2. Some have obs^rve^ that the Bea^ (those
Beasts of prey) when the ground is covered with snow, (...) live by sucking of
their feet, whence they draw nourishment to themselves.
arising of their temperature and humors; it can apprehend no eternal thing,
but is only moved with the sense of their own wants. The Lord satisfies these
ravenous Creatures, notwithstanding they have great need of nourishment, and
therewithal the world is preserved in its state. Though all the Beasts of the
Forest do creep forth in the night, and the young Lions roar after their prey,
yet when the Sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their Dens, and man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the
evening, Psalm. 104.20, 21, 22, 23. The light of the Sun drives away the wild
Beasts to their Dens, that men may have liberty to go about their business: It
is a great gain to us, that savage Beasts are not subdued to us as other Beasts
are; what profit would it be if we could tame Lions and Libbards? it were but
to make us more proud and arrogant, therefore Gods providence has exempted
these from our power; those has he made tame that are most profitable to us.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 8.
for if God should not shut up the wild Beasts after that manner, and give men
the Earth to labor and traffic in, we should scarce have a corner to put our
heads in, and if God did not feed the young Lions, who do often lack and suffer
hunger, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 34.10. and sometimes are three days
together without meat, as Naturalists tell us, they would make havoc of all
men, and soon rid all from off the face of the earth.

And here we may take notice, that the Lord in choosing Earth-Creatures for
sacrifice under the Law, he chooses out not only such as could most readily be
acquired, but also such as might most safely be handled: he might have required
his people to have presented Lions, Bears, Leopards, (as Daniel saw the
Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, and Greeks to be no better; and as Saint John saw
the Romans to be all of them Beasts jointly, so by nature we are all no better
conditioned, Claphams manual bibl. doct.
as one observes) which the Persians well understood, who once in a year kept
a Festival day, called, The death of Vices, in which day they practiced the
killing and destroying of all sorts of Serpents. But as God would not charge
Israel with animals, either hardly or dangerously to be acquired, so by the
tamer kind of Creatures, he would teach us more commendable qualities.

And in this Chapter let me show how Gods Providence is to be observed in the
Mole, that little Creature, whose dwelling is in the Earth, where nothing is to
be seen; therefore nature has so obscurely fitted her with eyes, that
Naturalists can scarce agree whether she have any sight at all or no; but for
amends, she is very quick of hearing, as one has well observed: Moors Antidote
against Atheism.
by her short tail and legs, but broad fore-feet armed with sharp claws, she
swiftly works her self under ground, and makes her way apace into the Earth;
therefore her legs be short, that she need dig no more than will merely serve
the thickness of her body, and her fore-feet are broad, by which she rids away
much earth at once; her tail is very small, because she runs not upon the
ground after the fashion of the Rat or Mouse, Quatuor ex puris vitam ducunt
elementis; Chameleon, Talpa, and Maris Halec, and Salamandra. Halec unda fovet,
ignis pascit Salamandram: Talpam terra nutrit, sed aer quoque Chameleontem.
Hiedf. Sphinx. c. 9.
though she be not much unlike them, but her habitation is under ground, and
the Earth also is her nutriment.

CHAP. XVII. How the calling and labors of the Husbandman are directly
subordinate to Gods Providence.
IT will not now be impertinent to show how the calling and labors of the
Husbandman in tilling the ground, and sowing his seed in the furrows of the
earth, are directly subordinate to the Providence of God. For albeit all
callings be subordinate to God, yet the subordination of them, and the blessing
of God is not so visible in any profession of men, as in the trade of
Husbandry. For after the Husbandman has opened and broken up the clods of the
ground, and cast in his seed, Ore gero gladium, matrisque 1. in pectore condo
Ut mox quae nunc sunt mortua 2. viva colas Dux meus a tergo 3. est caudamque
trahens 4. retrahensque: Hasta 5. non me ur ea verberet art alios. Aratrum.
Jul. Scalig. 1. Terrae. 2. Fruges. 3. Ut^ducis praeire solent. 4. Stivam. 5.
Stimulo.
Unicuique semini corpus dat Deus quomodo voluerit, and unicuique semini
proprium corpus. Hyper. Method. theol. de provid.
the principal Wheat, and the appointed Barley, and the Rye in their place, he
lies down, and takes his rest, and night and day it springs up he knows
not how; for the earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the blade, then
the ear, after that the full Corn in the ear, Mark 4.27, 28. Though the
Husbandman go forth weeping with his seed-basket, yet he comes again
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psa. 126.6. I have heard of a godly
man, that whenever he broke up his ground, and cast his seed into the earth,
he sought God with tears for a blessing upon his labor; a neighbor of his
observing that he had always a good crop, when as his own corn was blasted,
asked him one day, What the reason was, he should always fare better than his
neighbors; he told him for his part he thought his ground and skill to be as
good as his, and that he took as much pains in manuring his ground as he did:
To whom the other replied: O Neighbor, I water my seed before I fow it: That
is a piece of Husbandry, said the other, that I never heard of before: Truly,
said he again, I water my seed with tears, and go forth weeping, and God has
made me to rejoice in time of Harvest. Rutherf. Influences.
The Husbandman has no command of Winds, of Rain, of Clouds, of Summer Sun,
yet may he dress, labor, and fit and prepare his ground to lie under the
seasonable iufluences, of the Sun, Rain, Dew, and such impressions of the
Heavens, and the Clouds, as the Lord of Nature shall afford, as a judicious
Divine has said. God has promised that he will hear the Heavens, and they
shall bear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the corn and the wine, and they
shall hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.21. The Heavens are said to hear the Earth, when
they send down their heat and rain to refresh and moisten the Earth. Now when
the Heavens hear the Earth, the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of
the Earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive the early and the
latter rain, Jam. 5.7. The former rain in Scripture is called [Moreh] pluvia,
and the later rain [Malcosh] pluvia serotina: (...)
The first rain fell after their sowing of corn, that it might take rooting in
the Earth; the latter rain was a little before the Harvest that the ear might
be full. Twice in a year there fell before of rain in Israel, Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 11.
in the beginning of September, or Nisan, and half a year after, in the Month
Abib or March, which ecclesiastically began the year unto Israel; whereupon it
is called the latter rain in the first Month, In the Canary Island called
Ferro, when it is scorcht with drought, there is found a huge Tree, every leaf
whereof distilleth water, and all render it in such abundance, that it
suffices both men and their flocks. Causin. holy Court.
Joel 2.23. the former rain among us, is that rain which falls immediately after
seed-time, whereby the rain is beaten into the bosom and bowels of the Earth,
there to be covered, that it may have some root and fastening in the heart of
the Earth; the latter rain is that which falls immediately before the Harvest,
which makes the Corn swell, increase and grow more weighty; for these the
Husbandman waits, depending upon the Providence of God; and then the Earth
hears the corn and wine when it is labored and manured by the Husbandman;
and when the Earth is refreshed with the influences of Heaven, it is said to be
married, Isa. 62.4. Veartzecha tibbagnel. Terra moritur, cum non colitur, and
producit fructus. Weems. Mirabilior est grani in terra multiplicatio, quam illa
quinque panum. August. Tract. ^4. in Johan. Quicquid mirabile fuit in mundo,
profecto minus est quam totus hic mundus. Quamvis itaque miracula visibilium
naturarum videndi assiduirate vilescunt, tamen cum ea sapienter intuemur
inusitatissimis rarissimisque majora sunt. Aug. lib. 5. de civit. Dei, cap. 12.
And when the ground is not tilled and sown, it is said to die, Genes. 47.19.
The Egyptians in a time of famine said to Joseph, Wherefore shall we die
before thine eyes both we and our Land? Now it is the Providence and blessing
of God that makes the Earth fruitful: How did he bless the seed sown by
Isaac, when it sprang up to an hundredfold? Genes. 26.12. the seed sown
endures all blasts, is sometime bound and imprisoned in the Earth with hard
frost, sometime covered with deep snow, sometime drenched, yea even drowned
with rain; sometime scorcht with the Sun, and blown and blasted with the
winds, and yet it outstandeth all storms and fructifieth exceedingly. St
Augustine meditating upon that miracle in the Gospel, the multiplying of the
Loaves observes, That there are great wonders in things natural, though little
observed by us: Christ's followers wondered to see the Loaves multiply while
they were eating, to see bread increase upon the Table, and grow between the
teeth of the eaters; this was very stupendous; but there is as great a miracle
wrought every year, and few there are that take notice of it; that is, when
corn cast into the ground multiplieth and springs up to thirty, sixty, or to an
hundredfold; it is (says he) a greater miracle for corn to multiply in the
Earth, than for loaves to multiply upon the Table; and he concludes in like
manner, in one of his books of the City of God; Whatsoever is wonderful in the
world, is not so wonderful as the world: All the common works of Nature are
very admirable; the bringing an Infant alive from the womb, as well as the
raising a man from the dead; The budding of a Tree every Spring, as well as the
budding of Aaron's Rod; as a judicious Divine has noted. Caryl Exposit. on Job.
The Husbandman's calling which depends so much on God's Providence, is the
most ancient calling in the world; he is the first man that seems to be
wanting: There was not a man to till the ground, Genes. 2.5. The Lord put Adam
upon this employment before his fall, verse. 15. It is a calling very
delightful. Uzziah (though a King) delighted much in Husbandry, 2 Chro. 26.10.
of whom it is said, That he had much cattle both in the low Countries and in
the plains, husbandmen also and vinedressers in the mountains, and in Carmel,
for he loved husbandry. It is no disparagement to the greatest to exercise
themselves in such a way. Pliny likewise tells us, That Husbandry is a
Prince-like profession; Plin. Not. hist. l. 18. c. 3.
he tells us of C. Attilius Serranus when the honorable dignity of Consulship
was presented unto him with commission to conduct the Roman Army, that he was
found sowing his own field, and planting Trees, whereupon he took that surname
Serranus: The like he repoteth of Quintius Cincinnatus, who was in his proper
person ploughing a piece of ground of his own containing four Acres, which were
therefore called Prata Quintiana, i. e. Quintius his meadows, when a messenger
of the Roman Senate brought unto him the Letters Patent of his Dictatorship;
he tells us likewise that many Kings and noble Persons have studied Husbandry;
as Hiero, Philometor, Attalus and Archelaus; and also Martial Captains, as
Xenophon and Mago the Carthaginian.

Besides; Husbandry is a very profitable calling. The profit of the earth is
for all, says Soloman; the King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5.9.
The Earth yields much profit to all, even from the King to the poorest
subject. And herein much of Gods Providence is visible. For,

1. God instructs the Husbandman in his calling, he instructs him to
discretion, and does teach him, he teaches him the fittest time to plough and
sow, and what sort of seed to cast into the earth, Isaiah 28.26.

2. God so provideth as most convenient, that the Earth which is our common
Mother that bred us, should also feed and nourish us, till we return to it
again. The very Heathen by the Moonshine of Nature, saw that the blessing of
Husbandry depends on God's Providence; therefore in the Morning when they
went to plough, they laid one of their hands upon the stilt of the Plough, and
lifted up the other hand to Ceres, whom they worshipped as the Goddess of
Corn; Weems Christ. Synagogue.
How will these men (says a Learned man, rise up in judgment against those
among us, who are more brutish than the Heathen, that break up the ground as if
they were fungi, mushromps sprung out of the Earth, that arise by sudden
showers falling by great drops in the heat of Summer. These Terrae filij, whose
names are written in the Earth, Jer. 17.13. who only mind earthly things, look
no higher than the Oxen they plough the ground withal, never looking to him
who visits the Earth, and waters it, and blesses the springing thereof,
preparing he Corn which he has so provided for it, Psalm. 65.9.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the special Providence of God toward Men. How God overruleth
the hearts and wills of men; yea of the greatest Kings and Princes; and how the
Actions of men are swayed by the Providence of God. Of Gods Providence about
things contingent. A Discourse about Lots.
NOw it will be necessary that I speak of the special Providence of God toward
Men. There is not a man that either is conceived, or born, or lives, or
moves, or stands, or falls, or dies, but by the will and appointment of
God. It is from the Providence of God that the hairs of our head are all
numbered. God keeps account of the baser parts of our bodies, which indeed be
not parts, but superfluous excrements, Pili non facio, Ne Pilo quidem melius.
Wilkins Beauty of Providence.
which are cut off, and cast away. The hairs of our head (as one says) are
contemptible even to a Proverb, and yet these with God are inter numerata,
among those things whereof he takes an exact account. Gods Providence so
ordered it, Capilli hominibus ad depellendum a cerebro frigus, and contra illud
muniendum dati sunt. Scal. Exerc. 177. Quid timebo damna membrorum, quando
securitatem accipio capillorum? Aug. Sermon. de Mart. Qui sum curator, and
numerata habeo etiam minutissima, distribuo unicuique quod suae mensurae
congruit. Theophylact. ad Luc. 12.
that not an hair of the heads of any of the three children that were cast into
Nebuchadnezzars fiery oven, was singed, Dan. 3.27. What does God take care of
the hairs of our head, and are they all numbered? as out Savior says, Mat.
10.30. What then shall I fear, says Austin? Surely I that have security for
the hairs of my head, will not fear the loss of any member I have: Yet if it
shall please God to smite me in any member I have, in an arm, or leg, or in
all, so that I be as if all my bones were out of joint, I shall ever
acknowledge the hand of God and his particular providence; What is of less
value than the hairs of a man's head; yet not an hair of our heads shall perish,
but as the Lord pleases, Luke 21.18.

As all men, so all of man are within the compass of Gods Providence. But to
speak particularly,

1. The hearts and wills of men: The Kings heart, says Solomon, is in the hand
of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it whithersoever he will, Prove.
21.1. Some men are Masters of others, that are not Masters of their own wills;
the Lord leads the wills of the greatest Potentates, even as the Rivers of
waters are led by their Channels or Watercourse: Nay, even in voluntary
actions, wherein man has free will to choose or refuse, the providence of God
overruleth them: the Prophet confesses as much, Ier. 10.23. saying, O Lord, I
know the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct
his steps; it is not improbable, that the Prophet spoke this upon the
alteration of Nebuchadnezzars purpose, who having determined to go against the
Ammonites and Mo^bites, turns himself suddenly against Jerusalem, but not
without the direction and appointment of God, Ier. 9.11. and though God forces
not, nor offers violence to man's will, yet he orders, disposes, directs
and turns it as he pleases, like the Rivers of waters; for his will is the
Prima causa, and principium motus in all actions, as St Paul tells the
Athenians out of their own Authors; In him we live, move, and have our being,
Act. 17.28.

2. Some go to Sea, and sail to India poor, yet they return from thence rich
with Indian gold, far beside their intention: An ign rant man goes to Athens
not purposing to be^ome learned: Yet providence so disposes, that he falls in
love with learning: and returns from thence a learned man. Rutherfords
Influences.
All the actions of men are swayed by the Providence of God.

1. Things contingent and merely casual in respect of us, as Exodus 21.13. where
it is said, that when one man killed another u^aw^res, yet God offered him into
his hand, because he intended or meant him no harm; God also provided him a
rescue in one of the Cities of refuge. If any thing could come to pass without
Gods Providence, then most likely those things that are contingent and merely
accidental in regard of us: But these things do not, as appears in the
casting of Lots; which is called by the Poets, Coeca and improvisa sors, the
Lot is cast into the l^p, but the whole disposition thereof is from the Lord,
Pro. 16.33.

For the use of Lots and custom of casting or drawing of them, Tacit. l. 19.
it is of great antiquity, both among Jews and Gentiles: The Egyptians did by
Lot divide to every mean what fields he should till, and the Roman Magistrates
to prevent ambition, assigned praefectureships and Legations by Lot. Ezekiel
speaks of the King of Babylons casting Lots, Ezekiel 21.19. The Soldiers
cast Lots for Christ's garment.

Definit of a Lot. August. in Psalm. 30.
For the definition of a Lot, you may receive it from St Augustine, who says,
that Sors non est aliquid mali, sed res est in dubitatione humana divinam
indicans voluntatem. A Lot is not any evil thing, but it is a matter of humane
doubt, showing the will of God, or the casting of a thing doubtful upon a
casual event, leaving the decision and determination thereof wholly to Gods
providence. The matter of Lots was diverse; Petrus Greg. in tit. elect. The
Hebrew word Goral seems to be derived of (...), signifying miscere lites, to
move strife, and the negative particle [lo] which is not; so then a Lot ends
strife. Of the Hebrew word Goral seems to be derived the Greek (...), by
transposing of the letters. (...), Lapillus, Calculus, which he that gave his
voice, put into a Box, either in the affirmative or negative part. Thucyae
hist. l. 1.
the most ancient used beams either black or white, letters of the Alphabet, or
little Globes, which were either gilded or silvered, as among the Venetians,
or done over with wool, as among the Germans. The occasions whereupon they were
used were diverse, but the main end and use of them was to stint strife, and
cause contention to cease, when in doubtful and difficult cases men referred
the determining of the matter to God, and made him the Umpire. The Lot, says
Solomon, causes contention to cease, and parts between the mighty, Prove.
18.18. and a strife is in serious matters properly, and of weight, not in light
and ludicrous things, Willet in Lev. They were sometime used in dividing of
inheritances, and that by the appointment of God, Numb. 26.55, 56. For although
Eleazar the High Priest, Joshua the Governor, and twelve Princes of the Tribes
(appointed of God, Numb. 34.17, 18.) were to divide the Land, yet to cut off
all contention, and to show the providence and disposition of God according to
the counsel of his will, he commanded Lots to be cast. There was a divine
virtue president in this office, says Origin, which directed Joshua in
dividing of the inheritance to the people; and by reason of dividing the Land
by Lot, the Scripture calls inheritances by the name of Lot, as Judah said to
Simeon his Brother, Judge. 1.3. Come up with me into my Lot: so in the Greek
(...) a Lot, and (...), a division by Lot, is the common name of an
inheritance, Act. 8.21. Origin Homil. 23. in Josh.
Ephesians. 1.13. whereof Origin thus speaks, I did search whether the name of Lot
were used in the New Testament, and I found Paul thus writing to the Ephesians,
In whom, (...), we were chosen as by lot, Ephesians. 1.11. being predestinate: and to
the Colossians, Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet, (...), for
the part of the lot of the Saints, Col. 1.12. Paul applies that casting of
lots, whereby the inheritance of Canaan was divided to the Israelites, to the
sorting and partaking of the heavenly inheritance in Christ.

Wolf. Comment. in Nehe.
It was an old custom among the Heathen, to use lots in the choice of
Magistrates; and among the Jews, Saul was by lots taken to be a King. Homer
says, Homer Iliad. 7.
it was the advice Nestor gave to the nine Worthies of Greece, being every one
ready enough to accept of Hectors challenge, to put the matter upon a lottery,
and the lot being put into Agamemnons lap, it fell to Ajax his share. Live.
Hist. l. 2.
Thus Livy says of one Appius a Roman-Generall, that for a mutiny among his
Soldiers, he tithed them, and condemned the tenth man to the block; the trial
was to be made by lots. So Josephus says, that among the Jews, Joseph. de
bello Judaico. l. 3. c. 14.
in a case of extremity, they cast lots who should be killed first. Yea we find
that lots have been cast for the choice of Ecclesiastical Officers too, not
only among Pagans and Paynims, but even Christian, and that in the purest times
of the primitive Church, even by the Apostles themselves, as in the choosing of
Matthias into the room of Judas, Act. 1. Beda Comment. in Act. A^uin. sum. 2a
2 ae. quaest. 95. Quantum mihi videtur, qui maneant, and qui fugiant, sort
legendi sunt. Aug.
Some think this course should now cease, because this was before the Holy
Ghost was fallen on them at Pentecost, Act. 2. and because afterward they
chose them seven Deacons, not by lots, but by voices, Act. 6. But Austin is of
another mind, and says, That if two or more of equal gifts and graces stand
for a preferment in the Church, so as it may be uncertain who may do most good
in it, it may be decided by lot. Item, if two Ministers in a Town be pursued
and persecured, to preserve one for the good of the Church in time to come, and
that one may stay and discharge the duty for the time present, they may try it
by a lot who shall fly, and who shall stand to it. Also if two or three needy
persons come to one for relief, who is not able to relieve them all, he may try
by a lot, whom he shall give his money to, and who shall go without it.

Si necessitate aliqua compulsi Deum putent sortibus exemplo Apostolorum esse
consulendum. Beda.
Now in the use of lots, to make it lawful, these Cautions are requisite:

1. That it be not done ordinarily, but only in matters of difficulty, and a
last refuge in cases of necessity and importance; for even great men will not
be troubled with slight matters; none but great matters were brought to Moses,
Exodus 18.22. and is must not be neither, but when the wit of man is at a non
plus, and cannot detect nor determine

2. It must not be done rashly but reverently, as in the choice of Matthias;
the Brethren were assembled, and their Prayers put up to God, for his direction
in that business.

3. The Scriptures nor any part of them must be abused therein, this is no
better than Sorcery, and in such discoveries the Devil is the agent for his own
advantage.

4. The ends must be Gods glory, the good of the Church or Commonwealth, by
electing the fittest to bear Offices, and for the maintenance of Justice, and
stinting of strife, which otherwise might be endless.

5. It must be free from impiety and Idolatry, Aretij Problem.
not expecting the event from Fortune, nor yet from the Stars, least of all
from the Devil, but we must only depend upon the providence of God to dispose
all at his pleasure.

CHAP. XIX. How the steps and goings of Men are ordered by Gods Providence. A
large Discourse on the journey of the Wise men that came from the East to
Jerusalem at the birth of Christ. Some Objections answered.
2. IN the next place I shall show how the steps and goings of Men are ordered
and guided by Gods Providence: Man's going are of the Lord, says Solomon, Prove.
20.24. And David says, The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm.
37.23. And here we may observe the great Providence of God in guiding the Wise
men that came from the East to Jerusalem at the Birth of Christ, in the days
of Herod the King; wherein we may consider, 1. Who, or what they be that came.
2. Whence they came. 3. Whither, or to what place they came. 4. Wherefore they
came. 5. What moved them to come, or conducted them along.


1. Who or what they be that came. St Matthew says, They were Wise men;
concerning which diverse think diversely: 1. Some say, they were Maiefici and
incantatores, Inchanters and Southsayers; so Austin, Hierom, Martyr, as
Chemnitius notes; and so the word is used and taken in diverse places of
Scripture, Chemnit. Harmon Evang. Magi genus sapientum and doctorum habebantur
in Persis, nec quisquam Rex Persarum esse potest, qui non ante Magorum
disciplinam scientiamque perceperint. Cicer. l. 1. de divinat.
as Dan. 2.2. Acts 8.9. Acts 13.8. But, 2. Others are better conceited of them,
and think they were not only great men, but also might be good men in their
kind, and they say they were in great esteem among the Medes and Persians, and
Counselors of the State, and that out of them they chose their Kings. And
Strabo says, That these Magi among the Persians, were such as the
Gymnosophists among the Indians, the Chaldeans among the Romans, and Moses
himself among the Hebrews, such as gave excellent documents and instructions to
their Disciples; and it is probable enough, that when the Persian Monarchy was
translated to the Grecians, they also fell from following the Court to follow
their studies, and betook themselves, some to Philosophy, some to Astronomy,
some to Divinity. Non a Magica art, sed a magnitudine scientiae. Lyra. Dr
Boys. Herodot. Strabo. Just. Martyr.
Yea Lyra says, They were called Magi, not from the Art Magic, but from the
greatness of their knowledge. And Dr Boys says, That Magus was in those days
a more honorable title than Magnus.

2. The second thing is, Whence they came, viz. ab orient, from the East;
whither, from Media, as Herodotus thinks, or Persia, as Strabo, or Arabia
deserta, as Justin Martyr, I will neither dispute, nor determine, but content
my self with what the Evangelist lays down, viz. That they came out of the
East. These Wise men out of the East, and Pilate out of the West confessing
Christ, do confute and condemn the Jews denying him; yea they are a plain type
and testimony of the calling of the Gentiles, and casting off the Jews, as Mat.
8.11, 12. Mat. 21.33. ad f^nem. Acts 13.46. This confuteth the Friarly fable,
and Popish tale, that these should be three Kings of Colen, Melchior, Jaspar
and Balthazar; whereas Colen is not in the East, but in the West.

Object. But they say not that they lived there, but only came and died, and
were buried there, and that one of them came from Colen, the second from
Tharsis, the third from certain Islands, and all met at one instant before the
gates of Jerusalem.

Resp. Believe it he that will: for my part I say with Hierom, Quod de
Scripturis authoritatem non habet pari facilitate rejicitur qua accipitur; that
which has not its authority from the Scriptures, is as easily rejected as
received; Et ideo quod ibi non lego non credo, and what I do not read there I
do not believe.

Object. But they have Scripture for it, Psalm. 72.9, 10, 11. The Kings of
Tarshish and the Isles shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall
offer gifts, etc.

Resp. The place proves nothing but the calling of the Gentiles, and the
submission of all Kings and Countries to the Scepter of Christ, as the common
consent of Interpreters carry it, yea the situation of the places plainly
prove it could not be a particular Prophecy and Prediction of these persons,
for Sheba is not East, but South from Jerusalem, Matthew. 12.42

3. Consider we the place whither they came, viz. to Jerusalem, and diverse
reasons may be rendered of their coming thither.

1. This was the Metropolis and royal City; and therefore they might easily
suppose that here they were most likely to hear news of this new King. Besides,
this being the place appointed for Sacrifices, and they purposing to offer unto
him, thought here it must be done. In a word, thither the Star directed them,
and therefore thither they came.

2. Perhaps they might have heard that here was the Law, and the Prophets, and
Oracles of God kept, and here were the Colleges of the Scribes who were to
expound and interpret them.

3. It might please God to cause the Star to bring them first thither, that
by their diligence he might condemn the Jews negligence and sluggishnesse;
Veritas illuxit magis infidelitas obcoecavit Magistros: and carnalis Israel non
intelligit quod legit, nec vidit quod ostendit, and utitur paginis quarum non
credit eloquiis. Aug. Sermon. 6. de Epiph. Illuminatio Magorum Gentilium magnum
testimonium coecitatis Judaeorum. Gregor.
they coming to seek in a strange Country, him whom they would not acknowledge
in their own; therefore the truth enlightened these Magi, when infidelity
blinded their instructors: The carnal Israel does not understand what he
reads, nor see what he shows, turning over those pages whose words written
in them he believes not; God making the Jews but as it were the
Library-keepers for the Gentiles; and so Austin compares them to posts with a
hand, or marks in the highway directing others, but not moving or stirring
themselves. And Gregory has a like saying, The illumination of those Gentiles
is a great testimony of the Jews blindness; of whom St John says, He came to
his own, but his own received him not, Joh. 1.11.

Object. But some body may say perhaps, That these wise men were none of the
wisest to go to Jerusalem to acquaint Herod with such a message; they might
easily conceive they should be but unwelcome guests to him, bringing news of
the birth of a new King.

Christus firmabat quos attrahebat, and ideo non timebant Regem praesentem, dum
considerabant Regem futurum. Chrysostom.
Resp. Chrysostom answers this Objection, saying, Christ strengthened those
whom he drew thither; and therefore they feared not the King that was present,
while they considered of the King that was to come. He says also, That they
showed themselves prepared and provided for Martyrdom, and to suffer for
Christ, even before they had so much as seen him.

4. Consider we wherefore they came, it was to seek Christ, that they might
worship him. They were (doubtless) very much discouraged, when they found him
not in Jerusalem, but Gods Providence much appears in bringing them thither.

1. By letting them understand by the answer of Herod from the Scribes out of
the Prophet Michah, that they had not lost their labor, but should at
Bethlehem find him whom they sought.

2. By showing them the Star again, which appeared not all the while they
were at Jerusalem, which leads them directly to the house where the Babe lay;
and being come thither, they are presently admitted into his presence, do their
duties and present their gifts unto him, as the manner of the Persians was to
approach to their Princes, and surely they offered him the best things and
choicest commodities that their country afforded, as Genesis 43.11. 1 Reg. 10.2.
This may be collected from the phrase used, viz. the opening of their
treasures, as Deuteronomy. 28.12. Psalm. 17.14. not profering to him, or presenting him
with what came next to hand, but with the most costly commodities they could
come by, or their Countries would yield; Si solum aurum obtulissent, videri
possent voluisse matris paupertati subvenire; sed quia addunt thus and myrrham,
aliquid certe subest mysterii. Bern.
and Persia not being far from Arabia Foelix, might have the best and purest
gold, as also frankincense and myrrh. Some think it pleased God to send these
Magi to offer these gifts to furnish Joseph and Mary for provision to fly into
Egypt, and means to sustain themselves and the Child there; they bring gold
to supply Mary's necessities; frankincense to sweeten the stable, and myrrh to
comfort the new born Babe.

5. What moved them to come, or conducted them along, viz. a strange Star
which they had seen in their own Country. But of this I have already spoken at
large, Chap. 10. and therefore shall say no more touching it here. How long
these Magi stayed with Mary, the Scripture is silent; but it is very probable,
that being come so far, they would learn as much as they might about the
Conception and Birth of the Babe; especially being praeadmonished by Herod so
to do, and which surely they did accordingly, not doubting, but that the news
would be very grateful to him; but behold the providence of God herein; the
very night before this return, they are admonished to shape their course
another way, because Herod meant no good, but hurt to the Child, which dream of
theirs might further admonish them, that this was to be some extraordinary
Child, as also by thus providing for him and them, that Herod might neither
lay hands, nor so much as set his eyes at all upon him, or any more upon them,
manifesting to them what a faithful keeper he is of his faithful ones.
Whither they had this notice immediately by an Oracle from God, as Hebr. 8.5.
Luke 2.26. or mediately by some Angel, as Acts 10.3. Scientia ista vel ad
Evangelium concessa fuit, ut Christo edito nemo exinde nativitatem alicujus de
Coelo interpretetur: ideo jussi sunt ire in sua, sed alia non qua venerunt via,
i. e. ne in pristina secta incederent. Post Evangelium nusquam invenies
Chaldaeos, aut Incantatores, aut Magos, nisi punitos: Non potest Regna Coelorum
sperare, cujus digitus aut radius abutitur Coelo. Tertul. Scultet. part. 1. c.
35.
it is no great matter. Tertullian by their being admonished to return another
way, says, They were enjoined to give over the study and practice of those
unlawful Arts, which he says, were no more permitted, but always punished
under the Gospel.

CHAP. XX. How the good Actions of Men are under Divine Providence.
Omne bonum nostrum vel vel Deus ipse vel ab ipso est.
3. I Shall in the third place show, how the good Actions of Men are under
Divine Providence; as we can do no good thing without Gods assistance, so
neither can any good thing be done without his Providence; All the good that we
have is either God or from God himself; there is no good thing but it is the
gift of God, and comes from the grace of God; in us, that is in our flesh
there dwells no good thing, Romans 7. Gods Providence about good actions
appears,

1. In giving to some men greater ability to do good than to others; indeed no
man is born or lives to himself, but is bound to endeavor by all lawful
means to promote and procure the common public good of those among whom he
lives. God in his wise Providence has given to diverse men diverse gifts of the
Spirit, all which are bestowed to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. God has also
given great estates to others, that they might be liberal to those that are in
want. Necessitatibus fratrum quantum possumus dare debemus, plus interdum quam
possumus.
God will have the rich to be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.17. a thousand
Candles may be lighted by one; so a good man communicates to all that have
need of him; he had rather (like the poor widow) be in want himself, than in
any thing be wanting in contribution to the Lords Temple, Luke 21.2, 3, 4. he
will communicate abundantly the things God has lent him, as Obadiah, 1 Kings
18.13. Doreas or Tabitha, Acts 9.36-39. Job 31.20. And Solomon's Houswife, Prove.
31.20. God requires we should do good according to our ability, so as we
disable not our selves of ever doing good more, as some that have spent all in
a year, as though they did in diem vivere: but we must so begin as we may hold
out, Psalm. 92.12, 13. Psalm. 112.15. Prove. 21.20. A good man does all the good
that he can, and hinders all the evil that he can within the compass of his
calling.

2. In giving men not only ability, but also hearts to do good: it is better to
have an heart to do good than simply to have ability to do good. Affectus
imponit nomen operi: danda beneficia non foeneranda. Lactant. It is credibly
reported of Mr Thomas Sutton the founder of that eminent Hospital commonly
known by his name, that he often repaired into a private Garden, where he
powered forth his prayers to God, and among other passages was frequently
overheard to pray thus: Lord, thou have given me a large estate, give me also a
heart to make a good use thereof. T. Fuller Church History of Britain.
Ambrose tells us, That well-doing must proceed from welwilling; for such as
thine Affection is, such is thine Action: Beneficentia and Benevolentia must
go together; we must do good freely, and not play the hucksters in doing good;
the exercise hereof may be enforced from the nature of love, which is not
confined to it self, but is reached unto others, as Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 13.5.
saying, Love seeks not her own, that is, not only or principally her own
private, neglecting the common public good. Many have neither hearts nor hands
to do good, their tongues being as a sharp rasor to condemn it in others; What
is this but to murmur against Gods Providence, when they have great cause to be
thankful to him for the good that is done, though by others? But whosoever are
employed of God in any good work, let them know that promoters of public good
are Sacrifices of common hatred: It is a kind of Martyrdom to be hated and
injuried for seeking to do good; but when we are assured that God's Providence
has employed us, that we are in God's work, that we have his assistance or the
assurance of his acceptance, we shall find these to be sufficient to
counterpoise the reproaches and contradictions of evil men: It is best
therefore to serve God cheerfully in any thing wherein he imployeth us, and to
do all the good we can, during the short time of our abode in this earthly
Tabernacle. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, etc.
Eccles. 9.10.

3. In giving us opportunities of doing good. As God gives to some men riches,
so he gives them objects to look upon. The rich and poor meet together; the
Lord is the maker of them all, Prove. 22.2. God gives a man riches, and gives
him occasions to make use of them, so ordering it in his Providence, that the
poor should meet the rich, that he should have occasion to use his riches: The
Lord is the maker of both; He makes one rich, another poor, that the poor man
may be the object of the rich man's mercy; God hereby gives him occasion to do
it, and if they do it not, they sin against the bounty of God; because God
gives them more than others; and they sin against the Providence of God, in
not taking occasion to improve what the Lord gives them.

Say not thou to thy neighbor in necessity, Come again to morrow, and I will
give thee, when thou have it by thee, Prove. 3.28. Give to him that asks, and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away, says our Savior, Mat.
5.42.

Object. But some will be ready to say; If we do so, we shall soon draw the
fountain dry, and have neither for our selves, them, nor any body else.

Resp. The words must be understood of reasonable requests, fit for them to
make, and us to grant, as 2 Cor. 8.12. Non dixit Christus omne quod perit, da
ei, sed omni petenti da sinc discrimine. Ferus. Si non habes panem prompruarii,
da sanctuarii: Bis dat qui cito dat. Seneca. Grave verbum est, Rogo.
otherwise we must show the unreasonablenesse thereof, and instruct them
better. Christ does not say, Give every thing he asks to suffice him; but to
every one that asks, without making a difference, according to thy ability
relieve his necessity, Aut opibus aut opera, aut auxilio, aut consilio; if thou
want coin, give good counsel, such as thou have give, as Peter to the
impotent man, Acts 3.6. sometimes we must give before we are asked: Blessed is
he that cons^dereth the poor and needy, Psalm. 41. that is, that looks out
objects for his charity, that looks after those families that cannot maintain
themselves by their labors, that deferreth not to give to those that are in
need; He that gives willingly gives speedily; he gives twice that gives
quickly, says Seneca. When God's Providence gives thee an opportunity of
doing good, close with it presently, put it not off till to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth.

CHAP. XXI. How God governs the evil Actions of Men by his Providence. Of
Gods ends, Satan's ends, and Sinners end in one and the same Action.
4. IN the fourth place, I shall show how God governs the most sinful
actions of Men by his Providence; all things are governed by Divine Providence,
therefore the most sinful actions of the wicked: Yet are we to understand,
that God is most just and righteous, that loves righteousness and hates
wickedness, Psalm. 45.7. And that every man when he is tempted being enticed is
drawn away of his own lust, Jam. 1.12, 13. and his destruction is of himself,
Hos. 13.9. But the Scriptures frequently use such phrases of speech from whence
wicked wretches take occasion to make God the author of sin, as a Learned
man has well noted: Pet. du Moulin. Buckler of Faith.
As for instance; it is said, That the sons of Eli hearkened not unto their
father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2.25. and 1 King. 25.10. an
evil spirit came before the Lord, and offered to be a lying spirit in the mouth
of all Ahab's Prophets, to whom God says, Thou shall persuade them, and
prevail also, go forth and do so. And 2 Samuel 16. Shimei curses David
bitterly, whereupon David says, Let him alone, because the Lord has bid him
curse David. And Peter speaking of the conspiracy of the Jews, of Herod, and
of Pontius Pilate against Christ, says, They gathered themselves together to
do whatsoever thy hand and counsel had determined before should be done, Act.
4.28. So though the sons of Jacob by a wicked conspiracy sold their brother to
be carried into Egypt; yet he tells them, Genes. 45.8. Providere Deum peccata,
quo sensu providere est procurare, dictu nefas asserimus. At de peccatis Deum
providere, dici non solum posse, sed etiam debere, non dubitandum praevidet
enim peccara, and permittere vult, and praevisa ordinat, ad bonum aliquod vel
universale, vel particulare, sive ad sotentionem miserleordiae suae sive
justitiae, etc. de iisdem provider^ recte dicitur. Synops purior. Theolog.
Disput. 11.
It was not you that sent me hither but God.

1. But to this I shall answer, first, That God is the author of every action,
as it is an action, by giving unto sinners even common assistance, without
which the least sin could never be committed. Man acts (even in sinful
actions) as he is Gods creature, upheld and maintained by him; In him we live,
move and have our being; but he sins by reason of the corruption of his
nature, having no free will to any thing that is good since the fall of Adam,
but free will and full power to that which is evil.

2. When God withholdeth or suspendeth that power from sinners by which they
might avoid that which is evil. Thus when God departs from Saul, withdrawing
the common aid of his Spirit, then an evil spirit vexes him, and he grows
worse and worse. The degenerate nature of man (which one terms sins Coach)
does then run which way the Devil drives, Claph^m in Cantic.
as Wheels and Axel-tree, till Jesus Christ free our Chariot-nature from the
power of hell, and withal join himself by his own spirit to our nature, that
so with Ezekiels. Chariot it may go forth and return according to the conduct
of his holy Spirit.

3. When God permits and suffers men to go on long in a course of sin, and does
not restrain them; for if it pleased him, he could hinder men from doing evil.
Now the will of God is twofold, An approving Will, A permitting Will.


1. An approving Will, whereby he decrees the actions of all good men.

2. A permitting Will, whereby he decrees not to work any evil, but only
permit it to be wrought.

The actions of men are either good or evil; God wills good actions by his
approving will. Evil actions may come under a double consideration.

1. In regard of the entity and being of them, so God decrees them by his
permitting will, for no sin could be without his permission, Act. 17.18.

2. In regard of the evil adjunct and vitiosity of them, Et potentius and
melius est, bonum ex malo elicere, quam esse mala, non sinere. August. Bonum
est mala esse vel fieri, alioquin sum bonus non permitteret ea fieri.
Lombard. Sent. lib. 1. distinct. 46.
and so they proceed not from God, but from the corrupt will of man, as a
deficient cause. We may consider the sins of men, as they are evil, and so God
is not the author of them, but as they may be reduced to some good, as the
manifestation of his own glory, etc. and so he suffers evil to be committed,
being able to bring good out of evil, as water out of a flinty Rock; for though
evil be not good, yet out of evil God can bring good. It is better and more
powerful, says Austin, to draw and bring good out of evil, than not at all to
suffer evil to be; out of the greatest evil God can produce the greatest good.
So then God is the Author of every action, but not of the deformity, enormity,
and obliquity of the action; as the Planets are moved by a direct motion by the
primum mobile, the obliquity of their motion, is a sua natura. The Sun makes
the Earth hard, the Wax soft, flowers to smell sweetly, dead Carrion to stink
noisomly; so then the diversity of effects proceeds not from the nature of
the cause, but of the things wrought upon, and God moves and rules things
according to their natures. Multa sine voluntate Dei geruntur, nihil sine
providentia, providentia est quae dispensat and providet, voluntas quae vult
and non vult aliquid. Origin.
To explain this point by an instance or two: In the selling Joseph into
Egypt, Joseph's brethren were agents, and God was an agent, and had an hand in
the business, but their ends were diverse: they sold him to be rid of him,
because they thought their father loved him better than themselves, and because
they thought so to falsify his dreams, that he might not rule over them; but
God's end was to provide succor and shelter for their father and themselves,
and all their families, Genesis 50.20. Item, in the temptations and afflictions of
Job, the Devil was an agent, the Chaldeans, and the Sabeans agents, God an
agent, and all these had their several ends: The Devils end was to have made
Job forsake God, that so he might have fallen to his share, the Sabeans and
Chaldeans end were to impoverish him, and enrich themselves; and God's end was
to prove the Devil a liar, and to manifest and declare the faith and patience
of Job, and make him famous for the same to the whole world.

In the diverse and sundry captivities of the children of Israel by the
Caldeans, Babylonians, Assyrians, and lastly in their final ruin by the
Romans, their enemies had their ends, and God had his. The ends that the
Caldeans, Assyrians, Babylonians, and Romans aimed at, was their own pride and
ambition, and the enlargement of their Territories and Dominions, but Gods end
was the punishment of them to admonish others, and to fulfill the prophesies
and predictions thereof. To be brief: in the death of Christ, the Devil had his
end, Judas his end, the Scribes and Pharisees their end, the Jews theirs, God
his end: the Devils end was to make so many murderers, and guilty of shedding
innocent blood; Judas his end was covetousness to get thirty pieces of silver;
the Scribes and Pharisees end was envy and malice, because they thought he
eclipsed their glory; Pilates end was partly to please the people, but
principally not to displease the Emperor; the Jews end was hatred and malice,
because he reproved their sins; but Gods end was to fulfill the Prophesies, and
to bring to pass the salvation of mankind, by that means which he had
appointed. Shimei by cursing would show his hatred of David, but God would make
known the patience of David, Deus and homo idem faciunt, Deus pro aequitate
laudatur, homo pro iniquitate damnatur. Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vincent. Non fit
absque Dei voluntate quod fit contra ejus voluntatem, efficit bona, permittit
mala, dirigit universa. Res mala non habet causam efficientem, sed deficientem.
Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 12. c. 7.
which was good. Austin shows, how God and man may will the same thing, and
God in willing it does well, and yet man sins in willing the same thing. The
Father of an ungracious child is sick, God will have him to die in his just
judgment, the Son desires the death of his father, that he may the sooner
come to his inheritance: God wills it justly, the son wickedly. And says he
further, God and man do the same thing, God is praised for equity, and man is
condemned for his iniquity. When God the Father delivered his Son, and Christ
delivered his own body, and Judas his Master, why in this delivery is God just
and man sinful, but only in all one thing which they did, there is not all one
cause for which they did it? Great are the works of the Lord, being sought out
according to all his wills, insomuch that by a mavelous and unspeakable
manner, that is not beside his will, which yet is done against his will,
because it should not be done if he did not suffer it: he does that which is
good, permits that which is evil, directs both good and evil. Although God
does order and govern sins that be done, yet he is not properly the efficient
cause of sin; therefore Austin again says well, An evil thing has not a cause
efficient but deficient, as the corruption of judgment, and the perverseness
of the will of man. I might show through the whole current of the Scriptures,
how God at his pleasure orders the actions of evil men and Devils, to the
bringing to pass whatsoever he will have done: he makes the hard dealing of
Laban turn to the benefit of Jacob, Genesis 31. he turns the cruelty of Jacobs
sons to the advancement of Joseph, Genesis 39. and Chap. 41. the Egyptians
oppressions to the increasing of the Israelites, In the same thing there is
virtue both to kill and cure, as in Achilles spear.

The Flies Cantharides having their bodies applied to any parts of our bodies
exulcerate the same, and especially the bladder: and the wings applied to the
same place help what the body hurts. The Scorpion and Vipers dissected and
applied to the wounds, heal what the sting of the one and biting of the other
hand hurt. Dr Bright. Tract. de Melanchol.


Exodus 1.12. the persecution of Saul to the benefit of David; the hatred of the
Caldeans to the exaltation of Daniel, Dan. 6. the envy of Haman to the
preferment of Mordecai, and the delivery of the Jews; the contempt of the
Pharisees to the admission of the Publicans; the persecution of the Apostles
among the Jews to the calling of the Gentiles. And to this I may add, that not
only the sinful actions of other men, but even the Saints own sins, through
Gods wise disposing providence, are turned to their benefit, as of Serpents
flesh Triacle is made, which is a preservative against poison; so the evils and
sins of the faithful are turned finally to their good. When we grow dull, he
quickens us; we wax proud, he humbles us; we abuse his creatures, he takes
them from us, dealing with our vices and sins, as a good Gardener with the
weeds that would overrun his ground, pulling them up, and pruning his trees to
bear good fruit.

CHAP. XXII. How Gods providence reaches the habitations and dwellings of Men.
5. IT will not now be unmeet to show, how Gods providence reaches the
habitations and dwellings of men. God knew the City called Damascus, and the
Street therein called strait; he knew the house of Simon the Tanner at Joppa;
Christ knew the upper room in that house, where he intended to eat the
Passover with his Disciples. Omnia non ^olum a Deo permissa, sed etiam
immissa. Lypsius de constant.
All men's habitations and dwellings are appointed by God; he appoints to
every man his proper place, and says, Dwell thou here. Some plot to dwell in
this place, some in that, and God sends them into other places and Countries
to dwell: some are appointed to dwell in hungry and barren places, and others
in delectable, pleasant, well-watered, and fruitful places: some have very
convenient dwellings for their more comfortable enjoyment of Gods Ordinances;
as it is said of Justus, Migrat in aliam domum proculdubio Gentilis hominis, ut
etiam nomen Romanum indicat, quo tanto commodius posset cum Gentilibus agere,
eosque docere occasion hospitis and hospitii. Flac. Illyr. in Act. 18.
that his house joined hard to the Synagogue, Act. 18.7. and it is very
probable, that the house of Anna the Prophetess was very near to the Temple in
Jerusalem, for it is said, that she was a widow of about fourscore and four
years, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity, and that she
departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night
and day, Luke 2.36, 37. She was of a great age when she utters her prophecy
concering Christ, in all likelihood, about an hundred years old at this time;
for it is not likely she married before fifteen years of age, she lived with her
husband seven, a widow eighty four years; wherein we have a rare example of
chastity and constancy, for a young noble woman in the flower of her age, about
some two and twenty years old, to lose her husband, and to content her self to
live a widow so long in one place, with such singular commendation. Now whereas
it is said, that she departed not from the Temple, etc. it is not meant that
she never went out of the Temple (but should lodge there as a Nun or
Cloysterer) so much cannot be gathered, Supervenire autem non potuit, si
nonquam discessisset. Gualt. ad loc.
but the contrary, because it is said verse. 38. that she came upon Joseph and
Mary at the same instant that they brought up Jesus to the Temple; but such was
her devotion, as she was seldom absent thence, she abode there for the most
part, giving her self to the service of God by the exercises of fasting night
and day, that is at all times, or very frequently.

God sometime sends a man to dwell in such a place to convert some of the
inhabitants thereof. It is conceived that David dwelling a while at Gath,
Fenner's Catechism.
converted Ittai the Gittite to the faith, 2 Samuel 15.19. and that Abraham
dwelling or sojourning among the Canaanites, by his godly persuasions preaching
to them, and conversing with them, made many forsake their Idolatry, and
embrace the true worship of the true God. There is no man has a spot of
ground, or never to small a cottage to dwell in, but he has it at the hand of
God; and it is a singular providence of God that we can dwell in safety, and
that our habitations, dwelling houses and possessions are not laid waste, when
we consider the greatness of our sins, which are able to make desolate the
most goodly Edifices, and most stately Palaces. God threatened to send a fire
into the house of Hazael, that should devour the palaces of Benhadad, Amos 1.4.
God depriveth men of a great blessing, when he takes their dwelling houses from
them. God has many ways to remove men from their houses and homes. David
through fear of Absalom was forced to fly from his house in Jerusalem.
Manasseh was forced out of his house and Kingdom into a prison; others by
riotousnesse and unthriftinesse cast themselves out of their habitations; some
wilfully (like the Prodigal) leave their Father's house, Luke 15. Some go into
a strange Country, and never return again to their own native Country. Shebna
the treasurer promised himself a settled habitation, and made himself a
Sepulcher, yet the Lord threatens to drive him out, Isa. 22.15. God commands
the Prophet to say unto Shebna; What have thou here, and whom have thou here,
that thou have hewed thee out a Sepulcher here, as he that ^heweth out a
Sepulcher on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself on a rock?
Sometime the fear of bodily wants makes men leave their home, their native
soil, their friends and kindred to go into a strange Country, so forcible is
nature for the preservation of corporal life, which man so much esteems. Thus
in a time of famine in the Land, Elimelech, his wife, and his two sons went
from Bethlehem-judah to sojourn in the Land of Moab; Ruth 1.
all this came to pass by the Providence of God, that has all things at his
disposing, that no man may think himself securely settled; which consideration
should much humble men when they are driven out from their habitations, or
their dwelling houses are taken from them; and when they peaceably enjoy them,
to stir them up to use them to the furtherance of God's glory, and day by day
to praise God for the comfortable use we have of them. If God call any of us to
dwell in such a place, where he has given us great possessions, rich
inheritances, fair houses, pleasant gardens, Orchyards, store of cattle, etc.
Let us say of them, these has the most High divided to me: He divided to the
Nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the
beunds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy.
32.8. It becomes every one to do good in that place where the Providence of
God has cast him. At the espousals of Boaz and Ruth, the Elders and
Inhabitants of Bethlehem pray, that he might do worthily in Ephratah, and be
famous in Israel, Ruth 4.11, 12. Bethlehem was the place of Boaz his dwelling,
here lay his Estate and Inheritance; there must every good man labor to do
much good in the place where God has seated him, either by course of
inheritance, or by any other honest and lawful means of possession. It is
noted of our Savior, That he first executed his Ministry where he had been
brought up, Luke 4.16. They are much too blame that forsake their own houses
and get houses in desolate places where none can find them. God for this even
threatens, That many houses great and fair should be desolate without an
inhabitant, Isa. 5.9. Men bring that judgment upon themselves to run away
from the houses which God has called them to dwell in, leaving Ziim and Ohim
to lodge, Ostriches and Satyrs to dwell there.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Gods Providence concerning Marriage; and in bringing Man and
Wife together. Some Objections answered.
6. ORder may require that I speak something of God's Providence touching
Marriage. God having finished his works, and furnished the world with all kind
of creatures, and set Adam to be Lord and Ruler over them, Genes. 1.26. and put
him in Paradise a place of all delight, yet in his wisdom saw that there was
something wanting to him (for the time to come) as Zanchy says, viz. a meet
mate and comfortable companion, which could not be found among all the
Creatures; the Angels being too high for him, and wanting bodies; and all other
Creatures too low and base for him, and wanting reasonable souls; therefore he
resolves, that some course must speedily be taken, whereby such a supply might
be made as nothing might be wanting to him, Aut ad esse, aut ad been esse,
either to his being or well-being; and to this purpose, he consulteth or
deliberateth about the business; The Lord God said, It is not good that the
man should be alone, etc. Genes. 2.18. That this consultation was not with the
Angels, Lombard. l. 2. distinct. 16.
the master of the Sentences proves; affirming, That God and they had not the
same Image, and therefore God did not speak to them. Pet. Martyr. loc. com. 12.
p. 89.
Peter Martyr likewise speaking of the Creation of the Angels, gives this as a
reason, why there is nothing particularly said thereof, lest they might have
been imagined to have been joined in commission with God, and to have helped
him in the making of other creatures, and so might have been worshipped, and
Idolatry committed; nor could he speak to, or consult with the Elements, for
they were livelesse and senseless creatures, and mere passive principles; nor
did he speak of himself (being but one) in the plural number, Junius and
Tremel. in Genesis 1.
more magnatum, after the manner of great men; for that custom (as the Learned
have observed) was not so ancient, as to be begun by the Ancient of days. In a
word, it is an undoubted truth, that the consultation was held by the three
Persons of the Trinity; and it were no hard matter to prove out of the two
Hebrew words [Jehovah Elohim] the one of the singular number, the other of the
plural, an Unity of Essence, and a plurality of Persons in the Godhead, or
Divine Nature.

In the consultation we may observe,

1. A Declaration of something that God saw to be wanting to Adam before Eve
was made, in these words, It is not good that the man should be alone.

2. A Determination to make a supply of it, by making an help meet for him.

Object. 1. But God here, and the Apostle Paul seem not to agree; for God
says, It is not good for man to be alone; and Paul says; It were good for a
man not to touch a woman, that is to be alone, and not to marry, if he can
contain.

Resp. Some answer, That God in Genesis 2. spoke Lyra and Bucan. loc. com.
of mankind which was then in Adam, that it was not good to be alone for them,
how should there be procreation and a preservation of the Species; but Paul of
particular persons having the gift of continency: So that God might speak de
bono publico and specifico, and Paul, de bono privato and individuali. But the
sounder answer is to distinguish of the times, wherein both speeches were
uttered, and then we shall see both true, and no contradiction between them.
God spoke in Genesis of a woman in her first estate by creation, and so she was
a part of man's perfection, who was but half himself, till he had her; but Paul
speaks of men and women in the state of corruption, wherein by reason of sin
many inconveniences follow married persons; at first in time of man's
innocence, it was absolutely and simply good for man to marry, that by this
means he might have children, and also have a companion and comforter; but now
sin has so infected all estates, as that which was simply good is become
indifferent; yea sowr-sweet, it has as much gall as honey in it, yea it has
rather more than less inconveniences than single life: for in the 28th verse of
this Chapter, he says, That such, i. e. married persons shall have troubles in
the flesh; not that unmarried persons shall escape, and have none, but because
comparatively married persons shall have most, and be tied to some
discommodities from which the other may be free. Ambrose says, Bona sunt
vincula nuptiarum, sed vincula bonum est conjugium sed ramen jugum. Ambros.
The bonds of Wedlock are good; yet they are bonds still; matrimony is good,
but yet it is a yoke.

Object. 2. Paul says, It were good for a man not to touch a woman; therefore
says Hierom, It is evil to touch a woman, for good and evil are contrary one
to another.

Resp. Our Apostle does not use a word contrary to evil, as it is a vice,
Paulus modeste deterreta nuptiis, non tanquam a remala, sed tanquam ab onerosa
and molesta; aliud est admittere carnis turpitudinem, aliud habere carnis
tribulationem, illud est criminis facere, hoc laboris pati. August.
but as it is an inconvenience, as Bishop Juell well observes out of Austin.
Paul in a modest manner withdraws men from marriage, not as from a thing evil
and unlawful, but as from a thing troublesome and burdensome. It Is one thing to
commit filthiness of the flesh, and another thing to endure or abide trouble
in the flesh; the one is to commit a fault, the other is to suffer a
punishment: The Spirit of God notes to us a singular commendation of Anna the
daughter of Phanuel, that she lived well a maid, a wife, and a widow, to
signify, that neither virginity, marriage, nor widowhood in themselves, are
either pleasing or displeasing to God, they being all appointed by him, yea
allowed and approved of him. We are all born single; and have liberty so to
continue. Marriage is God's ordinance; and all may use it that please. God also
is the Author of widowhood by taking away husbands or wives; therefore in it
self it is neither simply good to live single, nor simply evil to marry.

There were some things wherein man needed the help of woman, even in the state
of innocence before his fall, viz. to be his companion, as also to bring forth
and bring up children, and to increase the world, and increase the Species.
These ends remain still; for this is the only means God has appointed to fill
the earth with inhabitants, and Heaven with Saints. And we read Genes. 24. ult.
That Isaac went in to Rebekah his wife, and was comforted after the death of
his mother. Now besides these two ancient ends before the fall, there be two
other ends that God has appointed since the fall.

1. The chief and principal, a remedy against incontinency, 1 Cor. 7.1. To
avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and every woman her own
husband, says the Apostle; The reason hereof he gives, verse. 9. Because it is
better to marry than to burn. Marriage is honorable among all men, Heb. 13.4.
Yea its lawful for Ministers to marry, notwithstanding what the Papists say to
the contrary. We read that the Priests and the Prophets in the Old Testament
were married, as Moses, Aaron, Samuel, Isaiah, and Zachariah the father of John
Baptist in the New; yea even Peter himself was married; for it is said Mat.
8.14. That his wives mother was sick of a fever. And Philip both an Evangelist
and a Deacon had four daughters, Act. 21.8. and that Ministers may have wives,
its plain, 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife:
that it was ancient for Pastors to marry, appears by a saying of Polycrates
son of Gregory Nazianzen, who affirmed that he was the eighth Bishop of Ephesus
that had succeeded without intermission, ex majoribus Episcopis; and in
Austin's time there was a Decree of the third Council of Carthage, That Bishops
and Ministers children might not marry with any Infidel, Heretic, or
Schismatic.

2. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 25. Bucan. loc. com. 12. An. 421.
God has made woman to be a helper to man, viz. to help him bear about the
troubles of this world, and manage his temporal estate, by ordering and
disposing wisely such things as belong to her charge; whereof Solomon speaks,
Prove. 14.1. Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish plucketh it
down with her hand: And Prove. 31.11. he says, She must be such a one as the
heart of her husband may safely trust to, so that he shall have no need of
spoil; one that will do him good and not evil all the days of his life.

Now it is God that by a special Providence brings man and wife together.
Memorable is that Providence of God upon the prayer of Abraham's servant, to
show him the Damsel that was to be a wife to his Master's son. Genesis 24.
And when Isaac went out into the field in the evening of the day to pray and
to meditate, Gods Providence so ordered it, he should there meet with Rebekah,
where he went to meet and converse with God, He lifted up his eyes, and saw the
Camels coming. Moses flying from the Court of Pharaoh into the Land of Midian;
being weary with traveling, not knowing whither to go, he is constrained to
repose himself near a Well, expecting like a flower scorcht with the Sun,
some gentle gale of wind, and some drop of dew from the hand and bosom of
Divine Providence: As he was in this expectation, he saw seven daughters of the
Prince of Midian coming to water their flocks: Exodus 2.
But when these illustrious Shepherdesses had drawn water for this end; some
Shepherds that followed them drove them away, taking some of it to water their
own flocks; Moses not being able to endure such an indignity, took upon himself
the just quarrel of these Virgins, and having chased away these presumptuous
persons, he himself drew water out of this Well, and watered their flock, which
was the occasion that Revel their Father (being advertised of what had passed)
sent for him, and married him to one of his daughters named Zipporah, who bare
unto him two sons. God's Providence is seen in bringing every man his mate,
though they live never so far asunder; this being well considered will
comfort them against all troubles and hindrances that shall by any means be
raised up against them. A godly Divine observes, Greenham's Treatise of
Contract.
That it is Satan's work to bring men and women to doubt of this, and when once
they yield to it, what strife and trouble does he work betwixt them? For whence
arises that impatience of spirit, that we see to be in many, that murmuring,
chiding, cursed speeches, and much unquietness, does it not come of this,
because they have not a reverend persuasion, that the Lord in his Providence,
as by his own hand, joined them in that near bond and conjunction together? It
were well our Savior were invited to all weddings, as he was to Cana in
Galilee, the wine of true comforts and blessings should never then be wanting.
Christ honored that first ordinance of God with his presence, and his first
miracle.

CHAP. XXIV.
Sect. 1. Of the special Providence of God toward the godly in afflicting them.
An Objection answered. God's ends in afflicting them.
I Shall now treat of the special Providence of God toward the godly, and also
show how it reaches the wicked: First,

Toward the Godly.

1. In afflicting them; he is said in Scripture to send affliction to his
people; all afflictions, [either inward] as passions of the mind, grief of
heart, and sorrow of spirit; [or outward] as diseases, sicknesses, pains of the
body, come from God, and are inflicted by him. David confesses, Psalm. 32.4.
saying, That Gods hand lay heavy upon him day and night. Yea God himself tells
us as much, Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and
create evil, that is, the evil of punishment: Shall there be evil in a City,
and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. Affliction springs not out of the
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground, says Eliphaz, Job 5.6.
This form of speaking is proverbial, Proverbialis quaedam sententia est qua
tollat easum asseratque divinam erga res humanas and impiorum supplicium
providentiam. Pineda ad loc.
as the Learned note, and frequently used in those times when they would remove
Chance or Fortune (as men commonly say) or deny any event to be without a
certain directive power, they spoke in this language; This sprang not out of
the dust, nor came from the ground. We must not therefore stay upon the second
causes, as the common corrupt custom of the world is, blaming themselves for
oversight, and want of good heed taking, and in other cases blaming the
falsnesse of friends, and want of seasonable supplies, and sometimes crying out
of the unseasonablenesse of the weather, and times causing infection in the
air, and putrefying the blood, etc. But as Cratippus was wont to say, Fata per
causas agunt, and populi peccata evertunt imperia. Cratippus.
That the destinies do act by causes, and Empires are overthrown by the sins of
the people: So it is not the influences of the Heavens, nor the positions of the
Stars, nor the unseasonablenesse of the weather, or the like, that be the
causes of sore diseases at any time among us; but the just hand of God that
punishes our strange sins with strange sicknesses.

These have their places it cannot be denied, but there is an hand that
overrules them, whereat we must look, and which we must confess and
acknowledge: Else shall we be like those of whom God complains by his
Prophets, Isa. 1.5. Isa. 9.13. Jer. 5.3. This is as if one that were wounded
should fret and chafe at the spear, dart, sword, bullet, or arrow that hit and
hurt him, but never to regard the striker, nor yet apply any medicine to the
hurt-place; this must needs be extreme folly. Thus did not David accuse Shimei
for railing upon him, but acknowledges the hand of God stirring him up, and
setting him a work, 2 Samuel 16.11. and holy Job knew as much; therefore he does
not cry out upon the Sabeans for taking away his Oxen and Asses, nor blame the
Chaldeans for carrying away his Camels; no, nor the Devil himself for raising
the winds, and hurling down the house upon his children, but he confesses the
just hand of God in it all. The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, Job 1.21.
And so in all afflictions we should do, as Nazianzen tells us he did, A te
Domine percussus, ad te respicio. Nazianz.
viz. go to God, and say to him, Lord, I am smitten of thee, and to thee do I
look, And so the Prophet calls upon us, Come let us return to the Lord, for he
has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos.
6.1.

Object. But some body perhaps may say, Is it not very strange that we should
therefore come to God, because he has smitten and afflicted us? Does not
Reason teach reasonable creatures, and even Nature it self all creatures to
seek their preservation, and avoid all things that may any way tend to their
destruction, as tearing and smiting may seem to do? When Adam perceived that
God was angry with him, he ran away, and hid himself among the bushes, Genes.
3. and we may observe, that even horses, dogs, and other unreasonable creatures
are easily brought to come to such as feed them and make much of them, but they
will fly and run away from such as beat them: therefore it may seem that
afflictions should rather drive us from God, than draw us to him.

Resp. 1. I cannot deny, but must grant these things to be thus in Nature and
Reason; and therefore we must also know, that the Prophet here being endued
with Gods Spirit, speaks Metaphysice, above the reach of natural reason; for
these things come not to pass, Vi tribulationis, by the force of afflictions,
which have no power in their own nature, but virtute tribulantis, by the
strength of him that afflicts, who makes afflictions thus powerful by his
grace, and who being infinite in power can produce contrary effects by contrary
causes, as he brought light out of darkness, Genes. 1.3. Water out of a flinty
rock, Exodus 17.6. Wisdom out of foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. Yea life out of death:
for out of Christ's death came our spiritual, yea eternal life; for by his blood
he saves his children from spiritual and eternal death; as the old Pelican by
his blood saves her young from natural death.

2. Or we may answer, that howbeit the Argument be not good in sensu diviso,
yet it is in sensu composito, taking all together. As therefore men go not to
the Physician, or take not physic to make them sick, and yet are content by
his direction to take physic, though it does make them sick for the time
present, to the end they may recover, and be the more healthy for the time to
come: so the Prophet persuades not the people to come and return to him,
barely because he had torn and broken them, so likewise he would heal and bind
them up again. In a word! he wills them to consider and look upon God, not as
an angry Judge, punishing them in his justice and displeasure for their
destruction, but as a loving Father, correcting and chastening them in his
mercy, for their amendment and their profit. For

1. Afflictions to the godly are an eyesalve, to make them see and acknowledge
their sins, as to Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 42.21. Tribulation enlarges the
understanding, making men to see into themselves. Prosperity so blinds men
that they cannot know their own estate. A man under the cross does better
understand the frailty of his body, the uncertainty of his life, and does
evidently perceive his manifold infirmities; he learneth what little progress
he has made in the ways of godliness; he knows his interest in God; he
knows the strength of his faith, and is not ignorant of Satan's devices; he
sees Gods infinite power, by which he is able in our extreme necessities to
give relief and comfort; he sees the unalterable truth of God, whereby he
performs all his promises and threatenings; hereby he sees the unmeasurable
goodness of God, by which he suffers us not to be overwhelmed with all
miseries at once; hereby also we see the wonderful providence of God, by which
he governs all things, converting all our sufferings into instruments of our
salvation; therefore, says one, Didac. stella de contempt. mundi. c. 31.
does God give to thee tribulation, that thou may know him, since when thou
prosperest, thou art not willing to be acquainted with him. A medicine for the
eyes first smarteth, and paineth the eye till it water, but after that it
makes the eye more clear, and the sight more piercing: so all afflictions at
the first are bitter and grievous to a man, but then afterward they clear a
man's judgment, and thenceforth he is more wise and wary: tribulation brings
a man to experience, and experience makes a man more wise. The rod and
correction give understanding, Ecclus. 34.19.
says the son of Syrach.

2. Sometime afflictions are as bridles to restrain Gods people, and keep them
within compass: Before I was afflicted I went astray, says David, Psalm.
119.67. but now I have kept thy Word. Caelius Rhodig. Histor. Natura. l. 4.
Caelius Rhodiginus in his Natural History, reports of Polemus, that was a
Schoolmaster in Egypt, that he was a man of that light constitution, that when
he went abroad, he was fain to hang plummets to his legs, for fear lest the
wind would blow him away: row it pleases God many times to clap upon the legs
of his servants, the plummets and heavy weights of afflictions, that they may
not be swallowed up, and blown away with prosperity.

3. They teach us Gods statutes, Psalm. 119.71. (...), Gods corrections are man's
instructions; they breed the fear and love of God, not only in those that
suffer them, but also in others. Seeing therefore no affliction comes by
chance, but is sent by God, therefore we must bear them patiently, and undergo
them without repining: thus did old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It Is the Lord let him do
what seems him good: so David tells us, that this consideration locked up his
lips, and tied up his tongue, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth,
because thou did it: Item 2 Samuel 15.26. If the Lord say, I have no delight in
thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto him: So Ezekiah,
Isa. 38.15. and 39.8. Yea this very thing gave comfort to our Savior Christ,
Job. 18.11. where he persuades Peter to patience, and keeping of the peace,
bidding him put up, and make no more ado; for, says he, the Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Thus like good children, we must be
content to kiss the rod, and the hand that has scourged us, considering that
it is not the hand of a destroying enemy, Non manus hostis perimentis, sed
patris corrigentis.
but of a correcting Father, and that though afflictions be sharp arrows, yet
they be shot by a gentle hand.

Sect. 2. Of Gods providence in preserving his people in afflictions.
2. GOds providence is further seen, not only in afflicting the godly, but also
in preserving them in afflictions: Thou art my hiding place, says David, thou
shall preserve me from trouble, Psalm. 32.7. he alludeth to such creatures as
are pursued, The Church is Gods Ship which may be tossed with waves, but never
drowned; it is like the Bush, Exodus 3. ever burning, but never consumed.
Admirable was Gods providence to the Infant King Michridates, involved in
lightning flashes, sl^eping in his cradle, the flames consuming his clothes,
not touching his body at all. Cause. holy Court. part 1.
and seek shelter and succor, as the Lion and Bear in their dens, the Foxes in
their holes, the Conies in their burrows, Chickens under the wings of their
dams, Doves to the holes of the rock; yea God is a surer refuge and rock of
defense, and safer shelter than any of these; for they may be fet and ferreted
out; or a Ship in the Haven may either be taken by another that may follow her
or be fired, or the like, but they that are under Gods protecting providence,
cannot be pulled from him, Joh. 10.28, 29. his succor is a better shelter than
a Castle, walled City, or Town of war. Thus David prays for protection, to
be hid and covered under Gods wings, as under a shield, target or buckler,
Psalm. 17.8, 9. or as Birds defend their young ones, both against the injury of
the air, and their enemies, under their wings. Now we may assure our selves,
the Prophets prayer had ground from Gods promise, Psalm. 91.3, 4. and Psalm.
119.114. Thou art my hiding place, and my shield, I hope in thy Word. I have
read of a Gentleman, that being on a time in bed in an Inn, and one that had
been his servant lodging near unto him, and coming at midnight to have
murdered him, the Master was dreaming at that instant, that the bed whereon he
lay was all on fire, whereat starting up, and crying to God for help, the
murderer was so affrighted, In the Earthquake of Apulia, that happened July
1627, when ten thousand persons were taken out of the world in the City of S.
Severia, it is wonderful that a great Bell fell so fitly over a child, that it
enclosed him, doing no hurt, made a bulwark for him against any other danger.
that he desisted from his purpose, craved pardon for the attempt, and
presently revealed to him who they were that set him on work. When the poor
Israelites are encompassed with the Sea, the mountains, and their enemies, they
have Gods promise of protection: so when Athaliah slew all the males of the
bloud-royall, the Lord preserves Joash, 2 Chronicles. 22.11. to make good his
promise to David, 1 Samuel 7.12. and 1 King. 2.4. 2 Chronicles. 23.3. This admonishes
and shows us whereto take shelter in troublesome times, viz. under the
covering of Gods wings, and then we may say that Gods protection and assistance
is the safest rock of refuge; this is a surer shelter than either woods or
caves, or holes or dens under ground, 1 Samuel 22.15. 1 Samuel 23.5, 6, 11, 12, 13,
14. As men in a storm repair to a tree or house, and beasts and fowls pursued,
to their holes, so must we in time of affliction fly to God, who is a present
and strong refuge in time of trouble, Psalm. 46.1. therefore howbeit the godly
be not exempted from trouble, yet they are often protected and preserved in
trouble, as Noah in the Ark, and the three children in a fiery furnace. Put not
your trust in Princes, says David, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help, Psalm. 146.3. St Austin has an excellent speech to the same purpose;
Tanta tamen hujus seculi incerta sunt, and ita potentum ruinae quoridianae
crebrescunt: ut cum ad tale refugium confugeris, plus ibi timere incipias. Aug.
in Psalm. 45.
Some places of refuge there are, says he, whereunto if a man fly, he is in
worse case than he was before: as for instance, Thou retainest to some great
man in the world, thereby to make him thy friend, and thou supposest thy self
secure, and yet for all that there are such uncertainties in the world, and the
falls of great men are so common, that when thou have gotten thee such a
refuge, thou have a great deal more cause to fear than thou had before: but
they are not only secure but blessed, that put their trust in God, Psalm. 2. ult.

Sect. 3. Of Gods delivering his people out of afflictions; of the diverse ways
God uses in their deliverance; and how they are more than conquerours in
afflictions, showed in five things.
When Godfrey of Bovillon besieged Jerusalem, the Sultan having taught Pigeons
to carry messages, dispatched one of them with a letter which she bare under
her wings, to give advice to the besieged, but by providence a Hawk seizing on
her over the Christian army, took her, and made her to let fall what she
carried to inform ours of the enemies designs. Paul. Aemil. l. 4.
NOw as God does by his providence preserve his people in afflictions, so he
does deliver them out of afflictions: Thou have enlarged me, or set me at
liberty, when I was in distress, says David, Psalm. 4.1. He shall pluck my
feet out of the net, says he, Psalm. 25.14. Our soul is escaped as a bird out
of the snare of the fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are escaped, Psalm.
124.7. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out
of them all, Psalm. 34.19. As God is the author of afflictions, so he is the
moderatour and remover of them, He casts down, and he comfort, 1 Samuel 2.6,
7. After two days, says the Prophet, he will revive us, and the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.1, 2. Though God
afflict and correct his children for a time, yet he will find a time likewise
to comfort and deliver them. Those words of the Prophet are by diverse diversely
expounded.

1. The opinion of the Jewish Rabbines.
Some of the Jews by the first day understand the time that the old Israelites
their fathers were in bondage in Egypt, whereof we may read at large in the
eleven first Chapters of Exodus, and by the second day their captivity in
Babylon and Assyria, the one whereof, viz. the carrying of Israel into Assyria
happened in the ninth year of Hoshea son of Elah King of Israel, who is taken
with his people and carried away by Salmanesar, 2 Kings 17.6. The other in the
eleventh year of Zedekiah King of Judah, who likewise was taken, and carried
away with his people by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon, 2 King. 25. in which
captivities the poor people seemed destitute and desolate like dead men,
buried, and quite forgotten; but the third day say they, the Messiah shall
deliver them, and restore them to their former or greater glory: But we
Christians know, that though Christ were a King, yet his Kingdom was not of
this world, as he told Pilate, Joh. 18.36. and that the deliverances he
bestows on his people are not temporal for the most part. This Jewish conceit
therefore is more subtle than sound, more witty than weighty.

2. Others by the first day understand the time after the building of Solomon's
Temple, during which they often sustained many troubles, being sometime
besieged by their enemies by foreign wars, and sometime falling soul among
themselves by civil differences and dissentions, and at last they are carried
captive in Babylon. By the second day they understand the time of their return
from Babylon by commission from King Cyrus under the conduct of Zerubbabel,
Ezra 1. and after the building of their second Temple, during which time they
endured many hot assaults and bitter battails, and at last have their City
taken, and Temple utterly ruinated and destroyed by the Romans: And by the
third day they understand the deliverance that the Messiah should bestow upon
them, which if they would expound of a spiritual deliverance of all the
faithful among them from the service of sin and Satan, we would go with them;
but because they dream or rather dote of a temporal deliverance which shall
never be, leaving God's word we must leave them.

3. Others by these two days understand a short time, Brevi redinte grabit
nos. Tremel. ad loc
a certain time being put for an uncertain: So David tells us, His anger
endures but for a moment, but in his favor is life; weeping or heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning, Psalm. 30.5.

4. Most of the Ancients make it a plain Prophecy and Prediction of Christ's
Passion and Resurrection, or of his twofold Estates, viz. of Humiliation on
Earth, and Glorification in Heaven, Doroth. Episco. Tyr. in vit. Os^. Prophet.
as Dorotheus an old Bishop of Tyrus, who lived in the days of Constantine the
Great, in his Epitome of the Life and Death of this Prophet tells us. So
likewise Bernard applies this place of this Prophet to Christ and his members,
affirming, That as he had, so they must have their three several days.

Bern. Sermon. in Resur. Christ.
1. The first was, Dies crucis in mundo, the day of his Cross in the world.

2. The second, Dies quietis in Sepulchro, his resting day in the grave.

3. The third, Dies Gloriae in Coelo, the day of his Glory in Heaven.

Or, to put the two days together, as the Prophet does, the two days or whole
time of his life was a Tragedy of trouble; then the third day he rested in
peace for a little space, and then rose to eternal glory. Thus diverse of our
Modern Writers affirm these things to belong to Christ, Luther. and Zanch. ad
loc.
Praecipue and principaliter, chiefly and principally, because they had in him
perfectum complementum: and yet they may be referred to all Christians, because
they likewise be verified of them; who shall have their two days of trouble
here in this life, as Matthew. 16.24. Luke 9.23. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Heb.
12.6. Then a time of ease and rest at the end of the second day, when death
comes, Revel. 14.13. and a joyful resurrection to eternal glory the third
day, viz. at the end of the world, when the Saints shall be delivered from all
their troubles: But the deliverances God vouchsafes to his Saints in this life
are diverse.

1. Sometime he delivers them immediately by his own powerful hand and
stretched out arm, without either Angel or man, as he delivered Israel from
Pharaoh and his host. Mr Fox tells us of one George Crow, Fox. Act. and Monum.
p. 1805.
who being in danger at Sea, cast out whatsoever he had, reserving his
Testament, with which he was taken up and miraculously saved; thus God
preserved Paul from receiving any harm by the Viper that fastened upon his hand
in the Isle Melita or Malta, which he shook off into the fire, to the amazement
of the barbarous inhabitants, who looked when he should suddenly swell and fall
down dead, Acts 28.5. Calvin observes, Calvin. in Act. 28.
that this Viper came not by chance upon Paul's hand, but was directed by a
secret Divine Providence, to innoble Paul as a Prophet of God upon the Land, as
before upon the Sea, that his own company might be the more moved, and there
might be an occasion given for the Gospel to shine even among these Barbarians
upon whom the sight of this miracle had a great influence: for when they saw
the Viper hang on Paul's hand, they said among themselves, No doubt, this man
is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers
not to live. The word translated [vengeance] is (...), Mayer. ad loc. Hesiod
says (...) was the daughter of Jupiter and Themis, others of Astreas and
Aurora. Hesiod. in Ergis. Orpheis made two Hymns to the honor of Dichis and
Dicai a son, and offered Frankincense; the Astrologers, and especially Aratus
describe her to be a Virgin placed in Heaven with a shining spear, and call her
Astrea. Aratus in Phoenomo.
whereby they understood a certain Goddess whom they called by this name;
whereas they condemned Paul by this event, it appears to be ingraffed in
nature, that notorious wicked men are subject to divine vengeance, though they
escape for a time. They feigned that revenge sat upon Jupiter's Throne, which
they called (...).

2. Sometime he delivers them by the means of Angels or men, or other helps,
as he delivered Hezekiah from Sennacheribs Army by an Angel, 2 Reg. 19. So he
sent an Angel to shut the mouths of the Lions that they might not devour Daniel
in their Den, Dan. 6.22. So an Angel delivered Peter out of Herod's prison, Acts
12.7. or if he afford us not the aid of Angels, then men like unto our selves
shall serve our turns: Thus he moved Ebedmelech the Ethiopian to save the
Prophet Jeremiah from starving, or being choked, Jer. 38.
or poisoned in the dungeon; and Pharaohs daughter to pity Moses, and save him
from drowning. Thus he taught Noah to make an Ark to save himself and his
Family. Thus he provided boords, planks and broken pieces of the ship
sufficient to carry Paul and his company to shore, Acts 27.

3. Sometime God delivers his people openly and visibly, that all the world
may take notice of it, as he dealt with the three children, Dan. 3. and Daniel
himself, Dan. 6. Sometime secretly, spiritually, and invisibly, as with such
Martyrs, whom though he suffer outwardly to perish, and be food for the sword,
yet inwardly he preserves them; so that though they be slain, yet they perish
not, but are crowned in secret, In occulto coronari. August. Christi milites
caedi possunt vinci nequeunt.
as Austin speaks, verifying the saying of the Ancients; Christ's soldiers
may be killed, but cannot be overcome; so that they may say with the Apostle,
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4. Or
if we speak of the whole Church and body of believers, than Michael and his
Angels do ever overcome the Dragon and his company; yea the Apostle says, That
in all tribulations and afflictions they are more than conquerors, Romans 8.37.
For

1. The bare Conqueror before the victory is in great danger, full of fears
and doubts concerning the issue of the battle, but Gods children before the
victory are fortified with sweet and strong consolations of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
1.5.
whereby they are assured of the victory, and enabled to overcome all
oppositions.

2. Sole victors do sometime lose more at a battle, then they gain by a
conquest: but the victorious Christian wins a thousand times more than he can
lose in the fight, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18
he sometimes loses temporals, but always gains eternals, Rev. 21.7.

3. Conquerours being wounded in the battle survive not often to ride in
triumph, and enjoy the benefit of their victory; but these after the end of
their fight do wear a triumphant crown of glory.

4. The Saints do more than conquer, in that while they suffer bodily, they
triumph spiritually; and others are converted and overcome by them, while they
seem to be overcome by others; Sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
The blood of the Martyrs being the seed of the Church; their patience is
invincible; yea while they are overcome of persecutours and cruel enemies,
Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, vincit Qui patitur si vis vincere disce
pati. Seneca.
they overcome greater enemies, viz. by denying their own passions. The more
they suffer, the greater conquerours they are, as the Martyrs were most
victorious, whose triumphing faith made them flammis ipsis illustricres,
brighter than those flames that burnt their bodies to ashes.

5. The Saints do overcome over and above, in that they conquer by a kind of
ease; when others use their wits and weapons, perplex themselves, and are often
at their wits end, turning every stone to help themselves, the Saints win
Heaven, vanquish their enemies, and standing still, behold the salvation of God.

Sect. 4. Of Gods Providence in bringing about the Salvation of his People.
THe Apostle tells us, That all things work together for good to them that
love God; Romans 8.28.
not divisim, but conjunctim, because God works in all things, and
over-ruleth all things in all their working: There are many strange acts of
God's Providence in promoting the work of his people's salvation. As Rahab
keeping a victualing house, received those two Spies into her house, whereby
she was preserved when Jericho was destroyed, and was afterward received into
the Church, and married to Salmon one of the Princes of the Tribe of Judah, of
whom came David and Christ according to the flesh. How admirable was God's
Providence toward Ruth the Moabitess? Ruth 2.12.
when her husband was dead, she puts her self under the wing of the God of
Israel. How wonderfully did God's Providence work for the salvation of the
Jailer, when he sent him two such prisoners as Paul and Silas, to shake the
prison with an earthquake, and cause the doors to fly open, and every ones
bands to be loosed, and then strike his heart with fear upon the apprehension
of their escape, and immediately to throw himself down at their feet, crying
out unto them, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?

If the people of God consult their own experiences, they will see Gods
Providence admirable to them in this regard: If they consider the means of
grace to them, or them to the means, public or private, how God brought them
to live in such a place, planted them under such a Minister; how the Lord has
come in upon upon their spirits in the use of means, how God brought to their
minds some notable passages of Scripture, which the Spirit of God set on with
power upon their hearts; how God has ordered some sudden accidents befalling
others, to work much good upon them. Flac. Illir. Cat. Test. verit. 2 Cor. 1.6.
(Thus Waldo was startled by seeing a man falling down dead before him, which
accident made him study the Scriptures, by which he was converted.) How both
the afflictions and comforts of other of Gods children are for their
consolation and salvation: How God has ordered crosses and afflictions to them
with which he has frequently visited them: How he has carried them through
temptations; what slips and infirmities he has past by, how their very falls
and temptations have been an occasion of their better establishment, and a
cause of discovery of more clear light unto them, bringing them nearer to God,
into a more close communion with him, making him more humble and poor in
spirit, to strive to cleave more strongly to God, and to take more ample
content and satisfaction in him. Did they seriously observe by what steps and
gradations God has carried on his work with them, they may find much matter of
admiration. If the Lord's ways were not above ours, as the Heavens are above
the Earth, how were it possible that poor souls could get over so many
stumbling blocks and snares that they meet with in the way of their salvation,
were it not for the safe conduct of his wise providence, whose name is
Wonderful, Counselor, they would stumble and fall, and never rise again.
There are many wonders of God in the work of creating and governing the world,
which are very observable; but these high Acts of Divine Providence in bringing
his sons and daughters to salvation and glory, do far surmount them all. If
there were a History of all Gods various workings of Providence compiled; and
if all the methods and experiences of the faithful were called for, touching
Gods dispensations toward them, and his dealing with them, they would amaze the
Reader thereof, and no History in the world would be found comparable unto it.

What wonderful alterations has God made in these later times in many
Kingdoms and Commonwealths? What mighty Cedars has he thrown down to make way
for the passage of the Gospel, and to further the welfare of Zion, adding them
to the Church that are elected to eternal salvation? How does God overruled all
Tyrants and Torments that none shall infringe their title to that incorruptible
and undefiled Inheritance reserved in Heaven for them? God never manifested
such a wonderful Providence, as he did in sending his Son into the world in
the days of Herod the King; when Israel the people of God were the vassals of
the Roman Empire, servants to Herod, who was a servant to Augustus the Roman
Emperor: I say, to Herod an Edomite, whom God had ordained to be a servant to
Jacob. God never did such a glorious work for the salvation of his people in
the days of Solomon, when the Jews were in the height of their glory, as now
he did in the days of Herod, when they were in their basest servitude. It is
true, Earthworms do only mind earthly things, as if the outward state of a
Kingdom or Commonwealth were the only thing to be looked at; but the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who has all things in his hand, esteems it but as a poor
low thing to this, viz. the bringing about the salvation of his people.

CHAP. XXV.
Sect. 1. How Gods Providence reaches the Wicked. Of his suffering the wicked
to rage against his People. A Question, Whether a Christian may fly in time of
persecution resolved?
HAving spoken of the special Providence of God toward the Godly; I shall show
how it reaches the wicked and ungodly.

1. Gods Providence is to be observed in suffering the wicked to rage against
the people of God. The Gentiles are said to rage against Christ and his
Kingdom, and God sits in Heaven, and laugheth them to scorn, Psalm. 2.1, -- 4.
The word here translated [rage] sometime signifies to run together, and
because in such a concourse there is a great noise, therefore is it translated
[rage] and so it may very fitly be said of the multitude, Turba turbulenta.
for the multitude is turbulent. The Lord for a time lets loose the wicked,
lays the reins in their necks, giving them leave to revel, during which time
they are very active, and do what mischief they may, and when at any time they
do not openly break forth, it is not for want of malice, but for want of power.
Wicked men are the Devils bandogs and mastiffs to hunt Christ's sheep, and
persecute his people, when God permits them by his providence. Pharaoh
requires the Israelites Midwives to destroy the male children of the Hebrews.
Saul persecuteth innocent David. Sennacherib causlesly makes war upon
Hezekiah. The wicked hate the godly, therefore they persecute them; They are
not of the world, therefore the world hates them, John 15.19, 21. Cain slew
his brother, because his own works were evil, and his brothers good, 1 John
3.12. And David says, They that render evil for good are mine adversaries,
because I follow the thing that is good, Psalm. 38.20. When Christ steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem, he sent messengers before his face, who went
and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him, but they
did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem,
Luke 9.51, 52, 53. The great reason of their rudeness was, because he was a
Jew. Now the Jews and they were affected either to the other, John 4.9. as the
Egyptians and Israelites, Ita oculi loqui dicuntur, quia saepenumero innuunt
quod dictum volumus. Ita facies ire dicitur, quia saepe prae se sert quo iter
destinatum est.
Genesis 43. Tremellius tells us, That howsoever the Samaritans hated the Jews
always, and for diverse causes, and therefore would have nothing to do with
them; yet now especially, they hate Christ and his company, because they
perceive him to be going up to Jerusalem, to keep the great Passover, and
therefore contemned their Temple built at Mount Gerizim by Sanballat a
Governor of King Darius, Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 7. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
in favor of one Manasses a Kinsman of his, whom (being deposed from his
office in Jerusalem for some misdemeanors) he made Priest there, as good
Authors do affirm. Hence we see, That there is no greater hatred than arises
from diversity of Religions, as appears in the woman of Samaria, John 4. to
our Savior; for he no sooner asked of her a little water, but she calls him
Jew. And here our Savior does not send to this village, that all the principal
people therein should come forth to meet him, but only desires to have lodging
and other necessary provision for himself and his company for their journey,
which they refuse to afford him.

Quest. Here I shall propound a Question, viz. Whether it may be lawful for a
Christian to fly in time of persecution to escape the rage and fury of
persecutors?

Resp. I answer, that he may in some cases, and at some times; and at other he
may no; as namely when God may be more glorified by his flight, then by his
abiding by it, as when by thus doing he may reserve himself for a greater Good.
Nor is it in such a case any argument of pusillanimity and cowardice to fear
and fly: The saying is, That soldier that runs away may turn again and
fight, but he that keeps his rank, and is killed depriveth himself utterly of
that hope. Much in such a case, Aristippus once being at Sea in a tempest, and
seeming affrighted (as all men and all creatures naturally fear their
destruction) a certain rude fellow that was with him in the Ship said; You
Philosophers teach that death ought not to be feared, how comes it then to
pass, that thou being a learned Philosopher fear death more than I that am
a plain fellow? To whom the Philosopher said, It Is true, indeed I teach that
Death is not to be feared, nor would I fear it in some cases, viz. to do my
Country service; but I fear in this sort to lose my life, and so deprive my
self of all opportunity of ever doing my Country any more good. There Is some
cause why I should fear more than thou, because I shall lose more than thou,
for my life is more worth than thine; I must lose the life of a Philosopher,
thou but of a base companion.

That it is lawful at sometime to fly in time of persecution, our Savior makes
most evident, Mat. 10.23. bidding his Disciples, if they were persecuted in one
City, to fly unto another: he does not appoint them to fly in time of danger,
because he could not save them in the midst of dangers, for he gave a taste of
this at the time of his apprehension; but he instructs man's frailty not to
tempt God, when there is a way open for him to escape, says Austin. Aug.
contra Faust. l. 82. c. 36. Hilar. Can. 10.
He bids them to fly from one place to another, says Hilary, because the
preaching of the Gospel being driven from Judea, should pass into Grecia, and
from Grecia to all the rest of the Gentiles, and so all Nations should believe
at the preaching of the Apostles. -- Christ himself diverse times conveyed
himself from the Jews, when they would have wronged him: when Herod sought him
to have put him to death, Remigius says, this precept of flying belongs to
the weak, for whom it is better to fly, than in the midst of torments, to deny
the Christian Religion.
he would not be found, Mat. 2. when the Jews would have stoned him, he
conveyed himself from them, Joh. 8. and when they had him in their hands, and
carried him up an hill to throw him down headlong, yet he passes through the
midst of them, and they cannot hold or hurt him, Luke 4.29, 30. he made an
escape, not because he would not suffer, Voluntary passus est Christus, non
enim passionem fugit, sed patiendi tempus expectat.
but because he would not suffer yet, his hour and time was not yet come; nor
had he yet accomplished that whereunto he was appointed: and this he did,
either by blinding their eyes that they might not see him, or binding their
hands that they could not touch him. When the Jews laid wait to take Paul, he
is contented to make an escape, by being let down at a window over a wall in a
basket, Act. 9.25. because the time was not yet come, that he should by
shedding his blood glorify God: but when Agabus tells him that the Jews would
bind him and imprison him, (and therefore his friends dissuade him from going
up to Jerusalem) he wills them to quiet themselves, and not trouble him, for
he was resolved and ready not only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, or any
other place, for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. The truth is, when men
in likelihood may more glorify God, and benefit their brethren by flying than
dying, they may provide for themselves by that means, else not: as that worthy
Martyr our own Countreyman, Dr Rowland Tailor sometime said, (being asked his
judgment of diverse that fled for Religion, in the persecution in Queen Mary's
days) his answer was, that he approved their fact, and thought they did both
wisely and godlily, and then being asked, why himself would not accompany them,
gave this answer, that their cases were not like, for they were young men, and
likely enough to live and return to do good service to God and his Church, when
it should please him to send more calm and peaceable times; but for his own
part, he was old, spent, and unfit for travel, being likely to die in the
Journey, and therefore now or never was his time to glorify God by dying and
frying; Fox's Martyrol.
and this resolution he put in execution, and by being burnt for the truth,
lighted such a candle on earth, as (doubtless) lighted many others the way to
Heaven. Danaeus says, Danaeus Epist. Genevens ante August. de haeresib.
that the burning of his Master Burgius at Paris An. 1559, kindled in him a
greater love to Religion, causing him to leave the study of the Civil Law, and
to give himself wholly to Theology.

Sect. 2. Of Gods restraining the rage of the wicked, showed in diverse
particulars.
2. IN the second place, Let the rage of Tyrants be never so great, they shall
not prevent Gods purpose, nor hurt the godly, till they have done that whereto
they are appointed.
Gods providence is manifest in restraining the wicked from the execution of
their rage, and malice against the people of God. Wicked men of themselves are
very wilful and obstinate sinners, and will not be reclaimed by fair means and
gentle persuasions, and therefore the Lord can and does often compel them as
with bit and bridle, he will restrain them from and constrain them to
whatsoever he pleases, Lev. 26.27, 28. and Prove. 26.3. Solomon tells us, that
a whip is for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fools back.
Now God has many bridles, the choice whereof he may take, and make use of at
his pleasure; as

1. His own will, which none is able to resist.

2. The Law of God, which oftentimes restrains and keeps in some order the
most headstrong sinners.

1. By setting before them the unprofitableness and incommodiousness of such or
such a sin: thus Joseph's brethren were hindered from killing him upon this
consideration, Genesis 37.26, 27. Judah said to his brethren, What profit is it if
we stay our brother, and conceal his blood? therefore they sell him to the
Ishmaelites.

2. By affrighting the sinner with the danger that attends the committing of
such or such a sin: God sometimes cools the purposes of sinners by his Law,
terrifying them with the thoughts of death and judgment, and of Hell Torments,
and of the great account which they must shortly make, at the Bar of the Judge
of the whole world.

3. Sometime by setting before them the impossibility or difficulty of
committing such or such a sin: by this consideration the Scribes and Pharisees
were often hindered from laying violent hands upon Christ, Mat. 21.42.

4. Sometimes he lays a secret restraint upon men's spirits, as upon the
Canaanites, not to pursue the sons of Jacob, after the horrid murder done by
Simeon and Levi upon the Shechemites: the like restraint was upon the Popish
Party, when Pope Pius the fourth moved the King of Spain, the King of France,
and the Duke of Savoy, to make War against Geneva.

5. By his powerful hand upon men, as by his ten plagues upon Pharaoh: so the
Lord says to Sennacherib, I will put my book into thy nostrils, and my bridle
into thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came,
because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into my ears, 2 Reg.
19.28. a bridle suffers the Horse to breath, but not to bite. So he threatens
Pharaoh King of Egypt, Ezekiel. 29.4. and Gog and Magog, the chief Princes of
Mesech and Tubal, Ezekiel. 38.1, 2. such bridles are ofttimes sicknesses,
imprisonments, banishment, and whatsoever whereby sinners are restrained of
their wills, and constrained to submit to the will of God. It Is reported of the
Numidians, that they were such excellent Horsemen, that they could ride without
bridles, whom some Authors call infraenos and gentem nesciam fraeni. Virgil.
Aeneid. 4. Auson. in great. Act. Symson. in Psalm 32.
This then is a shame for those that profess themselves Christians, to be like
a Horse, whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, Psalm. 32.9. It
suffices a good natured child to see the rod, though he never feel it; and
it is great wisdom for us to be reclaimed by the rod of Gods mouth, that so we
may not feel the rod of his hand. In a word, the very Philosophers could say,
Liberalis animus dicitur non trahitur.
A liberal mind is led not drawn; and the Scriptures tell us, that of all
Sacrifices free will offerings were best accepted.

Sect. 3. Of the terrible executions God does sometimes on wicked men; many
notable Examples of Gods dreadful Judgment on persecutors.
3. GOD's Providence is wonderful sometime in doing dreadful executions upon
wicked men, and the Enemies of his Church and Kingdom. Such as are dreadful,

1. In their kind, as when the Sea overwhelmed Pharaoh and his host, that for
many years had tyrannized over the people of God: And the earth swallowed up
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and a fire brake forth, and consumed an hundred and
fifty men that offered incense.

2. Dreadful for the manner of them, as it was in the case of Haman; he that
before had abundance of Honor, Favor, Riches, did now boast of a new
addition, telling his wife and friends, that he was invited by the Queen to a
banquet, and having by their advice erected a Gibbet for Mordecai's
destruction, when on the morning he went with a petition for his life, he was
forced by the King to be Mordecai's Lacquey, and when he came to the banquet,
he was immediately condemned to be hanged upon the same Gibbet. So Herod, when
he was applauded as a God, was immediately smitten by an Angel, and devoured by
worms. Pharaoh causes the male-children of the Israelites to be drowned in the
River Nilus, and is himself drowned in the Sea, Look upon Domitian, Decius,
Dioclesian, Julian, Herod, Antiochus, and many such like Princes persecuting
the Church; all of them have miscarried by some fearful death or other.
Gossens Trumpet of War.
Exodus 14. Saul that persecuteth guiltless David, kills himself, and
becomes his own Executioner, 1 Samuel 24. Sennacherib, that in a mere humor
made war against Hezekiah, is brought to an unnatural and untimely death by his
own children, 2 Kings 19. Histories tell us of the Emperor Domitian (that
persecuted John the Evangelist) that he was slain in his Chamber by his own
servants, and not without the consent of his own servants, and not without the
consent of his own wife Domitia, as Suetonius tells us. Sueton. in Domit.
Likewise Nero, who devised all the tricks that the Devil could furnish him
with to persecute the Christians, Great were the Emperors of Rome, and the
Tyrants of Greece, but as wicked as they were great; and of the Romans thirty
were slain by those in whom they reposed most trust being servants, soldiers,
wives or children unto them, and four being fearful of their enemies, or weary
of their own lives, became self-murtherers. So of all the Tyrants of Greece
three only left their Progeny heirs of their Tyranny. More's Demonst.
and make them odious to the State, and set the City of Rome on fire, and laid
the blame of it upon them, at length seeing himself hated of all men, slew
himself. And in Trajan's time, who also made cruel Decrees against the
Christians, his Palace was burnt, Tiber overflowed, the plague and famine
wasted much of his people. The like may be said of M. Antonius Verus, and of
Lucius Septimus Severus, who being driven out of his Empire by civil wars, and
dying at York, uttered this desperate speech, Omnia fui, and nihil mihi
prodest. I have gone through all estates and conditions, but nothing does me any
good at all. We read likewise of Julius Maximinus, who having made a Decree
against the Christians, and being in the Act persecuting them, perished in an
insurrection and mutiny of his soldiers who hated him, and for his cruelty
killed not only himself, but his son also, crying out, There should not a Whelp
escape of so bad a breed. Item, Decius the Emperor, a great Persecutor of the
Christians, had his body swallowed up of a Quicksand or Quag-mire. Likewise
Lycius Valerianus who being taken captive by Sapor King of Persia, was a long
time used as his Stirrup to help him to Horseback, and at last growing weak
and unserviceable for that purpose, had his skin flawed over his ears. Likewise
Valerius Aurelianus, who was first admonished with a thunderbolt falling
between his legs, and not making a right use of it, but persisting in his
persecutions, trod in Nero's steps, and was his own Executioner. The
Ecclesiastical History is stored with such miraculous destructions of
Heretics, Restorer of the French estate, page 38.
among which Arius is notable: for even when he thought himself most assured,
and as it were to have set his foot on the throat of that good Pastor
Alexander his Adversary, he burst in sunder, and his bowels fell out at the
same Alexanders prayer. The consideration of these tragical ends upon these
enemies of the Church, may make us say with the Psalmist, The righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the
wicked; so that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless there is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.10, 11. Heaven,
Earth and Sea, says one, (...). Niceph. Gregor. l. 7
do fight against a wicked man, as a fugitive from Providence, and a disturber
of justice.

3. In respect of the measure of them: Reward Babylon, as she has rewarded
you, and double unto her double according to her works; in the cup which she
has filled, fill to her double, Revel. 18.6. By this it appears, that
whereas other Princes rule in the midst of their Subjects, the Lord rules in
the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110.2. And this makes much for the comfort of
the people of God, that the Lord in his severest judgments executed upon his
enemies, is always mindful of his love and mercy toward them. The Lord does
on purpose sink the vessels of wrath, that he may waft over and safely
transport the vessels of mercy to the haven; he usually makes way for the
saving his children by the ruin of his enemies. The Lord is known by the
judgments which he executes; the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands: Higgaion Selah, Psa. 9.16. Rem valde medirandam. Junius ad loc.
The wonderful events which the superstitious attribute to Saints and Idols,
the Politicians to their plots; some to their own worth; others to the means
and extraordinary concurrence of second causes, and the ignorant to Chance and
Fortune, the Penmen of the holy Scriptures do ever ascribe to the Lord; they
held it their best analyticks, to resolve all such effects into their first
principle, Dr Prideaux Lect. in Psalm. 9.16.
as a learned Divine of ours has well noted.

CHAP. XXVI. Quest. 1. How God governs all things; whether immediately by
himself, or mediately by second causes, answered in two Theses. An Objection
answered.
Quest. 1. IT will not now be impertinent to enquire, How God governs all
things, viz. whether immediately by himself, or mediately by second causes.

Resp. I answer, That God disposes of his Decrees both in regard of his
foreknowledge and purpose immediately by himself, and so takes care of all
things, but concerning the execution of this Decree, ordinarily he does it by
means. So then, for resolving this doubt, we must consider two Theses or
Positions.

The first is, These. 1. Mornay Trunesse of Christ. Relig.
That Providence in God is immediately from God, in respect whereof the ancient
Philosophers (led only by the Moonlight of Nature) called the Godhead it self
(...), or (...), that is, God or Providence, because the one cannot be imagined
without the other, therefore he governs and takes care for all things
immediately in himself, and without means. God immediately by himself works
all in all, and governs all things by a certain general influx (which some
call the general power of God) by which every creature being preserved and
moved by God, acts and works according to its own nature: thus the Sun
shines, fire warmeth, the Heavens are in continual motion, living creatures
generate and bring forth: Men have understanding, and make choice of this,
refuse that, they speak, move, act, etc. In him we live, move, and have our
being; and by him all things are moved; in him do they consist; he supporteth
all things by the words of his power.

These. 2.
The second Position is, That God executes this Decree, and governs some time.

Greg. Nazianzen calls those works of God, quae supra leges naturae ac
facultarum hominum facit (...). Dei potentias, quas nos mentis intelligentia
nunquam consequi possumus.
1. Without means: that we may know he is not by necessity tied to them, but at
pleasure freely uses them, and that he can at his pleasure effect his purpose
without them, and that his children may not distrust, nor be too much cast down
when they want them, and that men may think God is not idle, and that nothing
falls out by Fortune, as they say; Thus the Lord raineth down Manna from
Heaven, enough to suffice the whole Camp of Israel, that the people should go
out and gather that which is sufficient for every day, Exodus 16.4. If the
fields should fail, and the whole Earth grow barren, yet can the Lord nourish
his people, and send food to nourish those that trust in him. God is not tied
to ordinary means, nor our maintenance to the fruits of the Earth; he finds
meat for the Ravens, and they bring bread and flesh morning and evening to the
Prophet Elijah by the brook Cherith, 1 Reg. 17.5. and this was done by God's
command; I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee there, verse. 4. So when he
fled from Jezabel, an Angel provideth a Cake for him baken upon the coals, and
a cruse of water at his head, and he did eat and drink, and went in the
strength of that meat forty days and forty nights, unto Horeb the Mount of
God, 1 Reg. 19.8. A little oil shall continue running, till many vessels be
full when he pleases, 2 Reg. 4.4. To this purpose our Savior propounds a
Question to his Disciples, When I sent you forth without purse, and scrip, and
shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said nothing, Luke 22.35. They that are at
God's finding find no inconveniences therein, but by his blessing he makes
what ever he gives them (be it little or much) sufficient for them.

2. God ordinarily in his government of the world works by means; I say
ordinarily, because extraordinarily sometime he works without means,
sometimes against means. God uses the Ministry of second causes both natural
and voluntary, either men or Angels, Pemble de provident.
which are the most excellent Instruments of providence in governing the world.
Though the Decree of God be unchangeable, yet means must be used. God will have
what he purposes effected, even by his enemies against themselves. He causes
Pharaoh's daughter to bring up Moses to deliver his people from their bondage.
God provideth a friend for his Prophets to feed them with bread and water by
fifties in a Cave; he raises up an Obadiah in the Court of wicked Ahab; as in
Pharaoh's Court he had a Joseph to provide for Jacob and his family in a time
of famine. God provideth a fish to set Jonah safe on the shore. Those means
which God has appointed (if rightly used by us) shall be sufficient for us,
however they seem to us, though Abana and Pharpar be better than the River of
Jordan, 2 Reg 5.14.
yet Jordan shall do the deed, if God by his Prophet speak the word.

Object. But are not the Godly subject to many outward wants as well as the
wicked; and does not the Wise man tell us, That all these things come alike to
all, both to the good and the bad?

Resp. Misery sits not so heavy upon the Godly, as upon the ungodly. Man is
better than the fowls; 1. In respect of kind. 2. In respect of gifts above
them, natural, supernatural. 3. In respect of his rule and sovereignty over
them. 4. In respect of his use and end above them.
Dr Th. Tailor Sermon. on Mat. 6.26.
Moses his face did shine in his fasting day; and Daniel and the three children
having lived ten days upon pulse and water, appeared fairer in their
countenances, and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the
portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1.15. Besides, God will help his people in
their greatest extremities, as he did the sons of Jacob, when they gazed one
upon another. God will either supply his peoples wants, or take them away
before the sharpness of extremity comes. It is rare to see the godly fall
into those pinching wants that the wicked meet with. Therefore David says from
his own experience, He never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
bread, Psalm. 37.25. He that gives to beasts their food, will not suffer his
children to starve: He that provideth meat for the fowls, will much more
provide for his own children, Mat. 6.26. And if Gods children want this or
that, yet shall they want nothing that is good for them, Psalm 34.10.

CHAP. XXVII.
Sect. 1. Quest 2. Whether Gods Providence be immutable, answered,
affirmatively.
Whether Gods Providence be immutatable and unchangeable?

I answer affirmative, that it is, Resp. Deus decrevit, quis dissolvet?
for God and all his Decrees are unchangable, Malac. 3.6. I am God and change
not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not consumed. My counsel shall stand, and
I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 26.10. With God there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. it is a metaphor that seems to be taken from
the Sun, who is sometimes nearer to the Earth, and sometime farther from the
Earth, who sometime sets a larger course, and sometime a shorter cut; yea who
sometime shines out clearly, and sometime hides himself under a cloud, and
according to the diversities of his aspects and influences, Tempus ab aevo esse
jubes, stabilisque manens das cuncta maneri. Boet. de consolat. Philos. l. 3.
he affects well or ill these sublunary and inferior bodies. But God is
capable of no such alterations, whether we consider his Nature, his essential
Properties, or his Will. In regard of them all he is Semper idem, always the
same his [is, was, and will be] is all one; he is the same at this present that
he was at the beginning, and will be the same for ever that he is at this
instant, and this must needs be so: For being a simple entire Essence void of
all mixture and composition, he is free from those qualities that accompany
compounded bodies, viz. generation, corruption, augmencation, diminution, and
all manner of alteration -- and for the immutability of his Will, he tells us,
Transibunt Coeli, i. e. in melius mutabuntur. Hieron. in Psalm. 102. Et erunt
Caeli novi non substantia sed qu^litacibus renovati. Aug.
That as he has purposed it shall stand, and as he has consulted it shall
come to pass, Jer. 14.24. And our Savior says, Till Heaven and Earth pass
away, one jot and tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fullfilled, Matthew. 5.18. whereby our Savior Christ does not mean that either
Heaven and Earth shall one day be destroyed [in regard] of their substance by
fire, any more than they were by water, 2 Pet. 3.6. Romans 8.21. nor yet then
when they be changed in regard of their qualities, when there shall be new
Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells righteousness; that is, I suppose, when
God shall alter and change the state of his Church, as it shall seem to dwell
in a new world; that then there shall be a dissolution or alteration of the
moral Law. It Is certain, that the use of Arts and tongues, interpretations,
expositions, and all knowledge of the Law, and other things gotten by these
means, shall then cease and have an end. For when that which it perfect is
come, that which is unperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13.8, 10. but for the
substance of the moral Law it is indissoluble, immutable and unalterable; and
sooner shall the frame and fabric of Heaven and Earth fail, and the world
become a second Chaos, then it be destroyed: The grass withers, the flower
fades, but the word of the Lord endures for ever.

Object. Is the will of God unchangeable: may it not be said, that under the
Law God would be worshipped by Ceremonies, and under the Gospel he will not so
be worshipped, therefore the will of God is changed?

Mutatio rerum seu effectuum non valet ad mutationem causarum variis temporibus
mutantur opera Agricolae, and non ideo mutatur ipsa Ars agriculturae. August.
Resp. I answer, That the change of things or effects makes nothing to the
change of causes. An Husbandman at one time uses one piece of Husbandry,
another while he uses another; sometime tilling, sometime sowing, sometime
dunging, and sometime reaping; at several times the works of the Husbandman are
changed, and yet the Art of Husbandry it self is not changed. God does not now
under the Gospel govern his Church in the same manner as he did under the Law,
in the Churches infancy, then he allured them with temporal promises, whereby
notwithstanding were signified spiritual and eternal: Yet no alteration in God,
but he deals like a wise Father, who uses one manner of Discipline to his
children being young and tender, and another manner of carriage being grown up,
yet his love and mind is still one and the same toward them.

Sect. 2.
IN respect of the first cause, all things come to pass by an immutable
necessity, but in respect of second causes some things come to pass
necessarily, others contingently: That is necessary that must be thus and thus,
and cannot be otherwise than it is; that which is contingent, is that which
before it is done, may be done, or not be done, or at least after this or that
manner. Necessity is either from an internal principle, and the nature and form
of the thing; as the Sun necessarily shines, the fire necessarily burns,
every living creature dies and is dissolved. A man is a reasonable creature,
and a man not regenerate sins: For this he has from Nature depraved and
corrupted -- or else Necessity is from some external, Necessitas est modus
agendi ordinatus in rebus naturalibus. Verron. Physic. l. 1. c. 5.
inevitable, impulsive cause; as the Elect cannot perish; but the cause is not
in themselves, but in Gods purpose, which appointed Christ to be their Savior.
So Christ was necessarily to die at the age he died, not by necessity of
Nature, for he might have lived many years longer, but by necessity of God's
Decree; yea and also that he should die the death he did die. Sometime
necessity arises from both together; as that the Sun shines is from its own
nature, and that the light makes the day is also from the Decree and
appointment of God.

That the Reprobate shall be damned, arises partly from the nature of sin
that makes them liable to death, and partly from the Decree of God appointing
them to destruction.

Again, Causes are some definite, and appointed to set purposes, and some
indefinite and free, and [both] in diverse respects. So Judas in Gods Decree was
the definite and appointed cause to betray Christ, in his own indefinite; he
might either have done it, Cyrus naturaliter erat causa indefinita ad
liberandum vel non liberandum populum Judaicum sed definita in decreto Dei,
voluntas Judae (moderante divina providentia) fuit a Satana inclinata sed non
impulsa.
or not have done it. So Cyrus naturaliter was an indefinite cause, either to
deliver or not deliver the people of the Jews; but definite in the Decree of
God: So Judas naturally, not necessarily, but freely betrayeth Christ; but in
respect of God's Decree he betrayed him necessarily, neither could he avoid the
betraying of him, yet not by compulsion, but freely and voluntarily. In respect
of the second cause, Adam sinned freely and contingently, in respect of the
first cause he sinned necessarily. So when the Romans besieged Jerusalem, in
respect of them it was contingent and arbitrary, and free whether they would
destroy it or not, but in Gods Decree necessary that they must destroy it.

Sect. 3. An Objection against the immutability of Gods Providence answered;
How God is said to repent, etc.
IF Gods Providence be immutable, Quomodo paenitentia cadat in eum, qui sua
praescientia regit universa. Theodoret.
how is it then said that he repented him of the evil denounced against
Nineveh, and did it not? Jon. 3.10. This seems a harsh phrase and strange
speech, that God should repent and change his mind who is immutable; the
strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent, 1 Samuel 15.19. for he is not as a
man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should repent; how then
can repentance be attributed to him, who by his foreknowledge governs all
things? yet that he may (at least) seem to repent, this place proves, and Genesis
6.6. Moses tells us, that when God saw that the whole frame of man's heart was
altogether evil, and that continually, it even repented him that he had made
man upon the earth, and grieved him at the heart: and so concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 15.11.
God tells Samuel, that it repented him that he had made him King

The Learned say: Resp, Haec habet omnia Deus per effectum, non per naturam
Bernard.
That these affections of anger and grief, sorrow, repentance, etc. be not
properly in God of their own nature, but only their effects: Anger properly is
not in God, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27.4. but revenge (an effect of anger) is
in God; for a man that is angered, is desirous to be satisfied, and to wreak
himself upon him that has provoked him; the passion of anger is not in the
nature of God, but the effect is: Vengeance is mine I will repay it, says the
Lord. So Repentance is not properly in God, but the effect of repentance is,
which is the change of something formerly done, or at least determined, a
sudden changing or alteration of that which he seemed to have continued, and
established. As for that place [ Genesis 6. Subita dispensationis mutatio
paenitetnia Dei dicitur, rerum subejus potestate constiturarum hominibus
inopinata mutatio, immutabili praescientia manente divina Aug. lib. 17. de
Civit. Dei. Haec quidem dicuntur humanitus, intelliguntuur autem ut Deo
convenit, Deus enim ad captum nostrum se demittens, se talem nobis figurat, non
qualis in se est, sed q^ali^ a nobis sentitur. Buc. loc. com. ut intellectus
noster immaterialiter intelligit materialia, ita Deus immutabiliter vult
mutabilia. Lyra. Dictum (...), pro eo quod est, hominem quem prius creaverat,
delere stauit, tanquam si paenituisset facti. Junius ad Genesis 6. Maimon in
Jesu-Dei hatrorah cap. 1 Sect. 11, 12. (...) Aristot. Ethic. Nicom. 7. cap. ult.
] It repents me to have made man; the meaning is, I purpose shortly to destroy
him; and (it repents me that I have made Saul King over Israel) that is, I
intend shortly to depose him, and take his Kingdom from him, and set up
another in his stead; for these and such like speeches Athanasius has a golden
rule for expounding them, as Bucan calls it; These things says he, are spoken
after the manner of men, but are understood, as it agrees to God; for God
stooping to our capacity, repents himself, to be such a one to us, not as he
is in himself, but as he is apprehended by us to be. As our understanding does
understand material things immaterially, so God, wills things mutable
immutably, remaining himself unchangable, as Lyra speaks. And Ainsworth out
of the Hebrew Doctors says, That forasmuch as it is clear, that not any
corporal accident does happen unto God, as it is evident that God is no
corporal or bodily thing, and neither composition nor division, nor time, nor
place, nor measure, etc. neither beginning nor ending, neither is he changable,
for nothing can cause him to change; neither is there in him anger or laughter,
or joy, or grief, etc. as the sons of Adam speak; but all these, and the like
things spoken of him in the Law and Prophets are parabolicall and figurative,
and spoken only according to the language of the sons of men.

Briefly, Geneva. Annot. in Jerem. 18.8.
the Geneva note on Jer. 18.8. (where the Lord says, That if a Nation against
which he has pronounced, repent and turn from their wickedness, he also will
repent of the Plague that be thought to bring upon them) there, says the
marginall note; when the Scripture attributes repentance to God, it is not
that he does contrary to that which he has ordained in his secret Counsel;
but when he threatens, it is a calling to repentance, and when he gives man
the grace to repent; then the threatening (which ever contains a condition in
it) takes no place. And this (say they) the Scripture calls repentance in
God, not because it properly is so, but because it so appears to man's
judgment. Austin says, Paenitudo est mutandorum immutables ratio. August.
That repentance in God is his unchangable disposition of changable things. God
is not changed Malac. 3.6. but the things are altered, God is immutable; but
when they whom God cares for are changed, Deus immutabiliter ignoscit.
then God changes the course of things as he sees expedient for them. For God
immutabiliter ignoscit, unchangably forgiveth those that repent, and
unchangably forgiveth not, when they repent not. The truth is, God never
alters his eternal Counsel, but always performs whatsoever he purposes,
Deus mutat sententiam consilium. Gregor. lib. 20. Mor. 2.
both for substance and circumstance; but it pleases him to use such phrases,
stooping to our capacity, and expressing himself in such words and terms as we
best understand. Thus when a judgment is denounced and not executed, it is
called repentance being indeed but the effect thereof, and indeed there never
was an intendment that it should be executed; for in the threatening against
Niniveh, there was this secret condition included, though not expressed, viz.
that Niniveh should be destroyed within the time limited, unless they
repented, which they doing, the threatening fell and the City stood. Of this
nature was that speech of God to Abimelech, Thou art but a dead man, God is not
changeable, nor can he change; for his nature is not subject to mutation; but
the order of things may alter according to the course of his Divine Providence.
Hieron. in Dan. 5.
viz. unless he restored Abraham's wife again, Genesis 20.3. Item, That of Isaiah
to Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1. Thou shall die, and not live; that is in course of
nature, Thou art but a dead man. Yet the Text tells us, that after he had
prayed to God and wept, such was the power of the God of nature, as he
lengthened his life, and added to his days fifteen years, v. 5. whence it
appears, that these speeches be not absolute but conditional, and so was
this threatening of Niniveh.

CHAP. XXVIII. Diverse Objections against this Doctrine of Providence, answered.
Objection 1. answered.
BUt against this Doctrine of Providence, diverse Objections may be made, which
to remove will be very necessary.

Some things fall out by chance; therefore all things are not guided and
governed by divine Providence. For proof of the Antecedent, Solomon tells us,
That the Race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor
bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of
skill; but Time and Chance happens to them all. Eccl. 9.11. It is said also,
Luke 10.31. By chance there came a certain Priest that way. So Ruth 2.3. it was
Ruth's hap to light on the field of Boaz.

Resp.
In respect of us, things may be said sometime to fall by Chance, because we
neither know nor can we render a reason of them, as in the former examples; But
in regard of God there can be none, who knows, orders, disposes, guides,
and governs all things by his Providence: Alas! Chance is nothing, for
nothing comes to pass without an order from above. (...). Jul. Scalig.
exercit. p. 188.
And it is wisely noted by a Learned man, Nature brings forth that which we
wrongfully call Chance, because it often comes unexpected. We read, 1 King
22.34. that a certain man of the King of Syria's Soldiers drew a bow at
adventure, or in his simplicity, or ignorantly, peradventure not seeing Ahab
King of Israel, at least not thinking it would be his hap to hit him, but God
so guided the arrow, as it gave him his deadly wound, to fulfill the prophecy
and prediction of Michaiah. Mr. Perkins Mr Perkins in Symbol.
tells us, There is Chance respectu nostri, in respect of us, but not mere
chance. God has set the time to all a man's successes and changes. Time (as
Mr. Cotton has well noted) is sometime put for the variety of conditions of
good and evil that befall men, Cotton in Ecclesiast. 9.
as Psalm. 31.15. Our times are in Gods hand. Now when these Times and Changes
come, no means that the Creature can use can prevail to withstand, Jerem.
46.17. Cfau non respectu Dei qui omnia scit and gubernat, sed sacerdotis, qui
nil tale praevidit. and ita casus admitti potest respectu nostri qui rerum
causas ignoramus. Junius and Tremel. in Luke 10.
Chance or occurrence comes to all sorts of men, that is, some occurrence
injected by the providence of God; and when it is said, that the Priest came by
Chance that way, Luke 10.31. the meaning is, by Chance, not in respect of God,
who knows and governs all things, but of the Priest, who foresaw no such
thing, and so Chance may be admitted in respect of us who are ignorant of the
causes of things. So Ruth, R. Barnard on Ruth.
though she went at unawares, making choice of no place, yet she lighted well
by Gods providence. It is not therefore unlawful to speak thus according to
men; It happened, it chanced, or it was my hap, so that we understand thereby
that which happened beyond our purpose and expectation, but yet guided by Gods
hand and providence, as a Learned man has observed; and also that we know and
hold no mere Chance as the Heathen have imagined without the hand of God
acknowledged therein, as the Idolatrous Priest and Diviners of the Philistines
once speak, 1 Samuel 6.9. always excepting in manifest cases where the apparent
hand of God is seen; Quae fiunt praeter naturam non fortuito sed casu fieri
dicuntur. Arist. Physic. 2. ca. 6.
for that was the error of the Philistines. What in the judgment of men could
more happen by Chance, then that when Abraham would have sacrificed his Son
Isaac, a Ram in that solitary place should be behind him caught in a thicket by
the horns? Genesis 22.13. Herus e domesticis duos, herilis consilij ignaros,
diversis viis ad eundem locum omnino mittit, hic alterum alteri occurrere casus
est, non Domino sed servis. Ita thesaurum reperiri a paupere fossore, casus est
quidem illi pauperculo, sed non Deo, qui opes illi ideo recondi voluit, ut eas
hic ipse mercenarius eo loci fossurus, reperirer and ditesceret, non casu, sed
paterna Dei providentia. Drexel. de conform. volunt. lib. 5. cap. 6.
yet this came to pass by the singular providence of God; and when Isaac said
before to his father; Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for a
buont Offering? Abraham answered, My Son, God will provide himself a Lamb for a
burnt Offering, verse. 8. It might be thought likewise that to have happened by
chance, that the daughter of Pharaoh should come down to wash her self at the
same bank of the river where the little Ark floted wherein Moses was, but
hereby Gods providence ordered it that Moses should be preserved, that in after
times he might conduct his chosen people out of the Land of Egypt. It might
likewise have been attributed to Chance, that Saul should come into the Cave on
the sides whereof David and his men lay hid; but God's providence so ordered
it, that by this means the righteousness and innocence of David, and the
unrighteousness of Saul might be the more manifested unto all that were
present.

CHAP. XXIX. Objection second answered, in five things.
IF there be a Providence, How comes it then to pass that there is such an
ataxie and disorder in the world? God seems not to regard the world, and the
things thereof; all things should be done orderly, those that do well should
have well. On the contrary, there should be no outward Idolatry, nor open
Tyranny and oppression, right should prevail etc. For of these things we see
Kings have care in their Kingdoms, Noblemen in their Countries; and all
masters in their houses. But the Devils are permitted to tempt men, and men
permitted to sin, yea some to continue sinning to destruction; The wicked
prosper and often triumph over the good, evil men are often advanced, good men
are oppressed; as if a Prince would advance vice and punish virtue, whence the
frequent complaints of the Saints do arise. Psa.l 73. Psalm. 74. and 75. Jerem.
13. Besides, there are many evil, few good, the way of vice is broad and
easy, of virtue straight and hard, as if God of purpose would have many bad,
few good, as Math. 7.13, 14. Upon this ground it was that Cato a wise Heathen
denied the providence of God; and this argument has not only gravelled the
Ethnicks, but even diverse well disposed. The Argument is thus formed,

If God had a Providence, and did take care of the world, there would be no
disorder in the world: But there is great disorder in the world: Ergo, negatur
Dei providentia. For a wise man if he could, would not suffer any disorder in
his family: But God suffers it in his Government when he may repress it.

I deny the Minor proposition, Resp. 1.
there is no disorder in the government of the world, but all things are
grounded and administered by a most prudent Council, and in a most beautiful
order. Some, as one says, would have God make the world all of gold, as that
painter who unable to pencill the beautiful Helen with so great diversity of
parts, and conformity of members, filled his Table with Drapery which seemed
rich, but was little to the purpose. Boet. de consol. lib. 4.
It is no marvel, says Boethius, that men should think that some things happen
disorderly and at all adventures, because the reason thereof is unknown: but
though men are ignorant of the cause after this or that manner, yet for that it
is a good God that rules the world, we need not doubt but that all things are
well ordered. The judgment of God is not our judgment, neither are his ways
ours, as the Prophet speaks; he does it for the manifestation of his glory,
by righteousness and mercy together; and thus we ought all admire with the
Prophet those things we can give no reason for, saying, How great are thy
works, O Lord, in wisdom have thou made them all? All things which God has
made are good in their own nature, and the evil things he permits make to
his glory, and the good and salvation of his Elect, as appears in the selling
of Joseph, and in the passion of Christ.

2. To deny this were to deny the wisdom, power and goodness of God, as a
Judicious Divine has noted; Stock on Malac.
For seeing God has made all things that are in the world (especially men) how
should he be wise if he knew not, how omnipotent if he could not, how good if
he would not keep all things he has made in a right order? Whence know we
evil to be evil, but by the existence of the contrary? Had there never been
an enjoyment of health, we had never known what bodily sicknesses were?
likewise when we see evils to happen in the world, Providentia est ratio
ordinis rerum ad finem.
we conclude presently it is evil, because it is against the order of good:
now wheresoever there is order, there is necessarily direction and providence.

3. No men in the world are absolutely good, and therefore can challenge no
reward by debt or desert, and for their sufferings, the least sin deserves a
thousand times more, and therefore they can complain of no wrong or injury done
unto them, and many times they are, and turn to their greatest good. Romans 5.3.
1 Cor. 11.32. Prove. 3.12.

4. Aquinas tells us, That there would never be perfect goodness in things
created, Perfecta bonitas in rebus creatis non invenirerut, nisi esset ordo
bonitatis. Aquin. contr. Gentes lib. 3. cap. 17.
were there not some order and decrees in the same. All the grace and beauty of
the world would be lost, if the multitude and disproportion of so many things
were taken away, which by an admirable discrepance and discord, harmoniously
agreeing, consent in the good of this great All; this is Gods Table diversified
with many colors, which God will not endure shall be defaced.

5. For the disproportion; Gods favor or disfavour must not be measured by
these out ward things which come alike to all, as Solomon tells us, Eccl. 9.1,
2. the time is not yet come when every one shall be rewarded according to his
works, as 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 These. 1.6, 7. They are at last overtaken by God's
justice who would not be taken by his mercy.
if we look no these things never so long with the eyes of flesh through the
spectacles of our own reason, we shall never find any reason hereof; but if
with holy David, we go into God's Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.17. then we shall
presently have satisfaction, and perceive plainly, that howsoever God's actions
be sometimes secret; yet they be ever most just. He punishes his children
here, that he may spare them for ever; Quibuidam parcit ad tempus, ut in
aeternum puniat and quosdam punit u^ perpetuo parcat crudelitas parcens, and
misericordia punieris. Gregor.
and spares the wicked for a time, that he may punish them for ever. This,
says Gregory, is sparing cruelty, and punishing mercy; as a Grasier puts
some Cattle into pasture knockle deep, that they may be the sooner fat and fit
for the shambles, and others he keeps only in working-plight which he
means to reserve for store. And whereas we say, that the innocent are
oppressed, and the wicked are prosperous, who knows what God intends to do
both with the one and the other? This Gold (says St. Augustine) of one side is
purified in the furnace; and on the other; that fish you thought happy has
already the hook in his throat. Caussin de provid.
The decrees of Divine Providence (says one) do resemble letters written with
the juice of a Limon, which never are read but by the help of fire; that day
when the Judge of all the world shall come in flaming fire, shall make all
manifest which our shallow wits are not now able to comprehend: Austin says,
If every sin were now punished with some notable judgment it might be thought
nothing would be reserved for the last Judgment; Si omne peccatum manifesta
plecteretur paena, nihil ultimo judicio reservari putaretur, and si Deus nonc
aperte puniret nulla providentia Divina crederetur. August.
and if God should now punish openly, no Divine Providence would scarce be
believed. -- Furthermore, in that a greater number perish than are saved, as
there be more wooden than golden vessels; it must cause them that have made
their calling and election sure, to be thankful for so excellent (and not
common) benefit. If thou hear a harp sound of diverse strings, and all keep one
harmony, thou will think one strikes them, though thou see him not: so it is in
God's governing the disorders of the world.

CHAP. XXX. Object. 3. Object. 4. answered.
Dii magna curant parva negligunt. Cicero. Plin. Not. hist. l. 2. c. 7.
Some make it a dishonor to take care of the sublunary creatures. The Heathen
thought God took care of greater, but neglected smaller matters. Some think it
injurious to God, to bring him down to the husbanding of Bees and Ants, and
that it is a disparagement to his Majesty to take notice of trivial objects and
occurrences. This Argument is brought by Pliny in his Natural History.

This is easy to answer; Resp. Quis disposuit membra pulicis and culicis?
August. in Psalm. 148. Non imaginari debemus Deum esse superbum, atque eas res
ceu indignas contemnere quas ipse condidit, atque per se dignissimas fecit.
for the minor is false. It is not an indecorum for God to govern the least
thing and meanest creature in the world. God is no more dishonored by taking
care of the meanest earthly creature, than the Sun is obscured and defiled by
shining upon the most unsavory things; if it were no dishonor to God to make
the least things in the world, than it is no disparagement to him to govern
them being made; neither is God any thing the lower by governing these
sublunary things; he humbles himself to behold the things done in Heaven, and
on the Earth; the one is no more a humbling to him than the other, Psalm. 113.6.
God takes care of Oxen, of Sparrows, and of things inferior to them. Hyper.
Meth. Theol. l. 1.
An Apocriphal Writer tell us, That God made little and great; and as there is
nothing so vast may escape his immensity, Austin says of providence, that the
world is governed thereby, usque ad arborum volatica folia. Aug. confess. l. 7.
c. 6.
so there is not any thing so small which is deprived the blessings of his
bounty; the Tree loses not one of his leafs; the Head one of its hairs; the
Air one little bird without his appointment. Is it not from Divine Providence
that Antidotes should grow in places where poisons spring: If Africa has many
Serpents, Histor. Sinar. part. 4.
there are Psylles to destroy them: If other Countries breed store of Snakes,
there are Ashen-flowers to drive them away: If Egypt has a Crocodile, it
affords an Indian-rat, called Ichneumon, that creeps into his belly, and
destroys it: The fire which consumes straw and dross, brightens the Gold,
Qui Deum accusant quod animalcula ut pediculos and pulices formaverit, similes
esse videntur, his qui picturae ignari id accusant quod pictor revidentes
colores ubique non adhibuerit, cum tamen ille congruos singulis distribuerit
locis. Theodor.
and refineth Silver; Water which drowneth men, does animate Fishes: The Spider
that poisoneth a man cures an Ape. Take poison from the Serpent, you bereave
him wherewith to live: Every creature is good for some use or other. Solomon
speaks of four things which are little upon Earth, but they are exceeding wise:
The Ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the Summer;
the Coneys are but a little folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; the
Locusts have no King, yet go they forth all of them by bands gathered together;
the Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces, Prove. 30.24, 25,
26. The great sagacity of these little creatures, and their industriousnesse,
does highly demonstrate the extent of God's Providence toward them.

How contrary are they to God that exercise cruelty to, and are tormentours of
the creatures; by sporting themselves at the torturing of the dumb creatures,
they do anatomize their own sin, rushing into Gods forbidden Edict. God has
made man a Lord over the creatures, an owner of them, and not a Tyrant over
them, or tormentour of them; he may kill them for his use, but not abuse them
at his pleasure; though the creatures be man's drudges, yet are they also his
fellow creatures. A good man (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast.

Object. 4. If all be overruled by Providence, then why serve Admonitions,
Exhortations, Reproofs, Corrections, unless men be amended by them?

Resp. God determines to bring things to pass by means; as to draw David to
repentance by Nathan's reproof. Peter by the crowing of a Cock, and to save
Noah from drowning by the Ark. Christ knew he should be glorified, as in
initio, and his Apostles; yet he prays for them, John 17. We must use the
least means for our own safety, as do the almost famished Lepers, but not tie
God to means for the accomplishment of his promises; as one of the Princes of
Samaria did, but paid dear for it, 2 Reg. 7.2, 17. nor must we rely upon
means, as Asa did upon Benhadad against Baasha, and on the Physicians for his
Gout; no unlawful means must be used in sickness: Ahaziah should not have
gone to Baalzebub the God of Ekron; nor Saul to the Witch of Endor.

CHAP. XXXI. Diverse Corollaries drawn from this Doctrine of Providence. Corol.
1. Corol. 2. Corol. 3.
FRom what has been said, diverse Consectaries will arise.

The first is; Cor. 1.
If all things come to pass by God's Providence, and that Providence be ever
working; then there is no mere Chance, or any such as the Lady Fortune in the
world; concerning whom, some of the best Philosophers have confessed her to be
the daughter of Ignorance; and she is no where so much talked of, as among
ignorant people. It was a great error of the Paynims to hold Fortune in so
high an account, Te nos Fortuna Deam Coeloque vocamus. Juvenal. Sat. 10. Pier.
Hierolog. lib. 29. Quint. Curt. lib. 7. Pacuvius in Rhet. ad Heren. Otho
Casman. mund immun. cap. 4. Benef. in Amos Lect. 10. Fortunae motus ludunt
mortalitatem, nunc evehentes quosdam in sidera, nunc ad Cocyti profunda
mergentes. Marcellinus. Ignoratio causarum Fortunam induxit. Arist. Physic. 2.
cap. 6. Vrsin. Catech. de provident.
for they esteemed her as a Goddess, and assigned her a place in Heaven, they
presented her by the image of a woman, sitting sometime on a Ball, sometime
upon a Wheel, sometime on a Roller; some picture her sailing among the waters
of the Sea; others sitting upon the top of an high Mountain exposed to all
winds. Some have pictured her without feet, having only hands and wings like
the finnes of Fishes; others picture her standing upon a stone as round as a
Bowl, voluble and turning; she is represented as having with her a rasour,
bearing in her right hand the stern of a Ship, in her left hand the horn of
abundance. By the rasour they would give us to understand, that she can at her
pleasure cut off our happiness; by the stern on her right hand, that the
course of our life is under her government; by the horn of abundance in her
left hand, that all our plenty is from her; by the Ball, Wheel, Roller, or
Stone, that she is very prone to volubility and change. Fortune has her name
from turning, it cannot stand long in one case. But this gross Idolatry of the
Heathen, giving the glory (due to the most high God) to their base
abominations; we that profess our selves Christians, must utterly renounce. We
ascribe this honor to the Lord of Hosts, and to him alone, and to no other do
we attribute the Sovereignty, Dominion and Government of the whole world. Basil
says of Fortune, That it is an Heathenish device, and ought not so much as
once to be named among Christians: It is a denial of providence. And Ursinus
says, All the grounds of Religion are shaken in pieces, if Providence be
denied. St Augustine Non Deam aliquam, sed tantum fortuitum rerum eventum in
externis vel bonis, vel malis. August. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 1.
in the beginning of his Retractations, confesses with grief and sorrow, That
himself in his younger years had too often used the word Fortune: And yet he
clears himself from superstition by expounding his meaning, saying, That he
never understood thereby Deam aliquam, any Goddess or Divine Power, Calvin.
instit. l. 1. c. 16. Fortuna ex hominum quaestu facta est Dea. Publ. Mimus.
Fortunam and casum Ethnicorum esse voces, quarum significatione piorum mentes
occupari minime deceat. Basil. Quaenam est illa mulier, quae velut coeca atque
insana super lapide quodam rotundo consistere videtur? Fortuna illa vocatur: Ea
non solum coeca, sed insana quoque and surda est. Cebes Thebanus in Tabula.
Quod Scriptura utitur hoc vocabulo (...), i. e. bona Fortuna, non hinc
imaginari licet Fortunam numen esse, sed accipi pro rebus fortuitis quae
fortuito videntur accidere, etsi aliae earum causae occultae divinitus dantur:
vel forte haec verba (...) retinebat Lea Jacobi uxorex antiqua forma loquendi
apud Gentes usurpata. August. Quaest. de Genes. 91. Fortune is a word without
substance, begotten by a fond conceit, brought forth with fading breath, no
sooner come but gone. That which is Fortune to the Servant is none to the
Master; that which is Fortune to the Child is none to the Father; that which is
Fortune to the Fool, is none to the Wife: So that take away Ignorance, and her
daughter Chance will be quite banished. Ral. Walker. Treat. de provid. He said
truly, which said, Sunt qui in Fortunae tam casibus omnia ponunt: Juvenal. Sat.
13.

Et nullum credunt mundum rectore moveri.
There are which Fortune say by chance all things does guide,
And therein do the Ruler of the world deride.
See the blindness of men concerning Fortune; they accuse Fortune of
injustice, but they believe in her power; they blame her as a blind dispencer
of her gifts, but they extol her as the only disposer of worldly goods; they
say she is inconstant, full of levity, and of no assurance; yet in all attempts
whether of War or Peace, they pray for themselves, and wish to their friends
above all other things good Fortune. So blindly are men led to think all
things to be ruled of that which of it self is nothing. Geo. More Demonstrat.
but only a casual event of things in externals, either in things good or evil:
Yet he says, That he was very sorry, that he had so often used the word,
because he saw corrupt custom had so far prevailed, as it was much abused,
and he feared lest his example might be some occasion thereof, as Calvin has
observed. Where the wise, All-seeing God is attended, as the Ruler of all,
there is no place for that blind Idol, for so they pictured Fortune. Struth.
Observe. Cent. 2.

This shows the nature of our God that he is most wise, Cor. 2.
knowing all things; now it is the property of wisdom to govern all things in a
good order, and to direct them to a certain end; and that he is most good,
ordering all things to the best, most powerful, being every where present to
these purposes. Therefore Hagar, when the Lord supplieth the want of her self,
and her son, she gives him the titles of videntis and viventis, as him that
lives and sees his people in all their afflictions. An Heathen could say,
Lucan. 9.
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris,
Estque Dei seeds, nisi terra and pontus and aer,
Et Coelum, and Virtus --
Thine eye thou can not turn,
nor move thy foot abroad
The Earth, the Sea, the Air,
is but the seat of God.
So Heaven and Power also --


No man can turn away from God, no place is without the view of his eye, and
the authority of his presence: the wisdom of God is sufficiently manifested in
the creating, preserving and governing the world, and all things therein
contained; he has disposed all things in number, weight and measure. Was it
not wonderful wisdom so to frame all creatures, as that they should keep their
continual and indefatigable course without alteration ever since the time of
their Creation, till their dissolution? He has so placed all the Elements that
they are not noxious to one another; he has so tempered them in the creature,
as is best for the preservation of them; he has so ordered heat and cold,
drought and moisture, as best fitteth the seasons of the years, the situations
of places, and constitutions of men's bodies; he causes the Earth to hang as it
were in a pair of balances, no man knows how, by his mighty power sustaining
it; he causes the Heavens to run round about the Earth once in four and twenty
hours, by the motion of the Primum mobile; he has placed the celestial
creatures, viz. the Sun, Moon, and the Stars, as that they exhale from the
Earth things hurtful, and with their sweet influences cheer and comfort these
sublunary things.

This proves the Deity of Christ, Cor. 3.
it being proper to God to create and to conserve: For so does he, Col. 1.16.
All things were made by him, and proceed from him, as from their efficient
cause; all things were made for him, and are referred to his glory, as the
final cause; all things consist in him; and as at first they were created ad
esse, so still they are continued in esse by him; as he made them, so he
maintains and upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb 1.3. as the
creation of things, so the sustentation of them is a work of Omnipotency. My
Father works hitherto, and I work, says our Savior. Socinus says, Socin.
lib. de servat. p. 176. Non sequitur Christum carne sua omnia portare, sed
tantum Christum hominem omnia portare verbo potentiae, hoc est divinitatis suae
communicatione idiomata naturarum personae communia. Paraeus in Heb. 1.3.
To uphold all things, is to have all power in Heaven and Earth, and that this
power Jesus Christ received as man: But the Son has upheld, and upholdeth all
things before he was incarnate, even from the beginning: Therefore he does not
uphold all things as Man, but as God Almighty by the word of his power. And
whereas it is said, That all power is given to him in Heaven and in Earth,
Matthew. 28. The meaning is, that it is given to him as Mediator; thence it does
not follow, that Christ upholdeth all things in his flesh; but only the
Man-Christ upholdeth all things by the word of his power, that is of his Deity;
by a communication of Idiomes, which is a manner of speaking, whereby that
which is proper to one nature, is attributed to the whole according to that
nature.

CHAP. XXXII. Corol. 4. Corol. 5.
SEeing it is proper to God to govern absolutely well; Cor. 4.
this shows, That the better every Ruler, Magistrate, or Master of a Family
governs in his place; so much the nearer he comes to God. Good Magistrates
and Governors (like Job) must be eyes to the blind, Job 29.15, 16.
feet to the lame, and fathers to the poor. Guides to the blind by giving good
counsel to those that are weak and simple: Feet to the lame, by giving
countenance to the just causes of those that are of meaner parts, and might
otherwise be overborn by those that are mightier than them: And Fathers to the
poor, by protecting those that are destitute of help, and fly to them as a
Sanctuary for refuge in their distress. (...). Arist Epist. ad Alexand.
And herein they will resemble God, who is a Father of the fatherless, and a
Judge of the widow in his holy habitation, Psalm. 68.5. God has not set up
Magistrates so much for their own sakes to dominier over whom they will, as for
the peoples sake, that they might have to whom to resort, and on whom they may
rely for help in their necessities: herein the precedence of Rulers above the
vulgar singularly consists, whereby they have the title of gods, that they
are able to succor those that are in misery, Princeps probus parum differt a
parente probo. Xenophon. Regum aut est aut esse debet paternum Imperium. Arist.
Polit.
and to do more good than others are. Xenophon says, That a good Prince
differs little from a good Parent. And Aristotle in his Politics says, That
Kings ought to govern their Subjects as tender fathers.

Ministers likewise ought to be very watchful over the flock of which the holy
Ghost has made them Overseers, Acts 20.28. Paul says, That he had a care of
all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28. And that he was gentle among the Thessalonians,
cherishing them as a nurse cherishes her children, being willing to impart
himself, yea his own soul to them being dear unto him, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. and he
tells the Corinthians, He would gladly spend, and be spent for them, 2 Cor.
12.15. We that are Ministers, says Austin, have two things, August. Tom. 9. de
pastor. cap. 1.
the one that we are Christians, the other that we are Ministers: Illud quod
Christiani sumus, propter nos est; quod autem praepositi sumus, propter vos
est: in eo quod Christiani sumus, attenditur utilitas nostra; in eo quod
praepositi, non nisi vestra. We are Christians for our selves, and Ministers
for you; in that we are Christians our own profit is attended, but as we are
Ministers your profit is sought.

Masters of Families should likewise imitate God in his Providence, Namque
proprium boni filii est, primo currere ad domum patris. Chrysostom. in Mat. 21.
Providence in man is an excellent thing, the more provident, the more in that
respect commended. Walker de provident. part 1.
in providing for their children and servants; If any provide not for his own,
and especially for those of his own house; he has denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. It is the property of a good and loving son,
as Chrysostom says, first to run to the house of his Father. Mistresses also
are not exempted from a providential care for those of the household. Solomon
says, The virtuous woman is like the merchant's ship, she brings her food
from afar; she rises also while it is yet light, and gives meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens, Prove. 31.14, 15. Therefore children are
required to carry themselves respectively to their Mothers as well as to their
Fathers. It is said, Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear, every man his Mother and his
Father. The holy Ghost puts the Mother in the first place, because she is
least able to help her self, having (for the most part) no such power and
authority over her children as her husband has, who may disinherit, or
otherwise punish his disobedient children at his pleasure: But she (for the
most part) is tender hearted and pitiful, and by Law restrained from using
such severity; and therefore because she has been an equal sharer in taking
care and pains for her child; God will have her to have an equal partition of
honor and duty from him.

Cor. 5.
Seeing that all things are governed most wisely; notwithstanding the great
divisions that are among us; the rapines, wars, tyrannies, oppressions,
blasphemies, sacriledges, strange disorders and confusions that are in the
world at this day, and the great plagues and punishments for them. Though these
be evil, as men commit them, yet good as God permits them. Many men are apt
to think, when they see such things as these, that God either regards not
what is done here below; or (at the least) though he does intend to bring men
to a reckoning at last, yet in the mean time he suffers them to do what they
please without restraint: But we are to know, that the Lord has power to
rectify all disorders whatsoever, and he does always exercise his dominion
over the whole world, though not to keep all things in an exact order
(according to our judgment) yet so to order all things as to get glory to
himself out of all: God conducteth the motions of all creatures to one end,
viz. the glory of his name; he will make those actions that in themselves tend
highly to his dishonor, to become occasions of praise and glory to him

His great wisdom in governing all things likewise appears in preserving a
Church to himself from several parts of the world: Psalm. 110.2.
He rules in the midst of his enemies, like a King that is able to keep up his
Court and royal Family in the midst of rebels; though they may sometime prevail
against, yet they shall never be able to root up the Church of Christ.

Object. But it may be objected, That when the seventh Angel sounded, there
were great voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. And the
four and twenty Elders fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying; We
give thee thanks, O Lord God Allmighty, which art, and wast, and art to come,
because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned, Revel.
11.15, 16, 17. Diverse circumstances show this to be a new event, and that God
had not always actual possession of all the Kingdoms of the world, it
happening at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, and when be took this great
power to himself, and entered upon the government of all the Kingdoms of the
world, it was then entertained by the Church with praise and thankesgiving;
which seems to show, that God did not govern universally at all times, and
in all Ages of the World.

Resp. I answer, that the Lord has a twofold Kingdom, Regnum Potentiae,
Regnum Gratiae, A Kingdom of Power, A Kingdom of Grace.


In the exercise of his power he has always reigned over the world. The Lord
has prepared his Throne in Heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm.
103.19. God has always ruled over all the world, when the world has reigned
most in wickedness; but in respect of the exercise of his government in regard
of the Kingdom of his Grace, by the Spirit of his Son in the hearts and
consciences of men, he has reigned over but a very few. This therefore is
meant of the Kingdom of his Grace, that the Lord upon the sound of the seventh
Trumpet, would bring them in subjection to his Gospel, causing men in all
places to yield subjection to the golden Scepter of Christ held forth in the
preaching of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXXIII. Corol. 6. Corol. 7.
Cor. 6.
IF God govern the whole world, then it must needs be that he cannot want
Instruments to execute vengeance upon his Enemies; he need not seek far for
Instruments; for there is not a creature in Heaven, in Earth, or in Hell, but
is at his command: If he speak to the fire, it burns the Sodomites; if to the
water, it destroys the wicked old world; if to the Earth, it opens its
mouth, and swalloweth up Corah and his companions; Two Bears at his command
tear in pieces two and forty children that mocked the Prophet: Worms at his
command devour Herod that persecuted the Apostles, Act. 12. He plagueth a proud
King by poor creatures, as Frogs, Lice, Flies, Ut per animalcula ostenderetur
opitulatoris omnipotentia. Theodoret. Pompon. Laetus.
Locusts or Grasshoppers, Exodus 8. that by those little animals the omnipotency
of his peoples helper, might be manifested; as Theodoret speaks. Profane
Histories tell us also that Honoricus King of Vandals, and Arnulphus the
Emperor, were fed upon alive, and gnawn till they were dead, by Worms and
lice. Fabius the proud Senator was suddenly taken away with an hair swallowed
in milk: And Pope Adrian the fourth, after that he had accused Frederick the
first, was choked with a Fly in a draught of cold water. Yea the Angels good
and bad are pressed at his command to do what he pleases. And should God make
use of none of these Instruments, yet his own immediate wrath were enough to
confound his Enemies; as Saul, Judas, Joseph. Naucler. Egesippus.
Atalus King of Pergamus, and Aristobulus son of Hircanus, who living in
horror of conscience, died in fearful sort; which examples serve to show,
that his means are, as his power is, infinite, to chastise and scourge the
proudest and greatest of his Adversaries. And if God arm not the creatures
against us, yet he can make one man to devour another: Such a judgment the Lord
threatens, Jer. 13.13, 14. viz. to fill the King of Judah, the Priests,
Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of the Land with drunkenness; and dash them
one against another. As drunkenness depriveth men of the use of common sense
and reason, and works so upon some tempers, as to fill them with rage and
fury, that like mad men, they spare not those that are near and dear unto them,
Carrion. Chron. lib. 2.
as is evident in Cambyses the second King of Persia, notwithstanding he was
well brought up, and dealt valiantly during the life of his Father Cyrus, who
committed the Kingdom to him while he lived, yet falling to drunkenness, he
slew his brother, married his own sister, and slew her afterward being great
with child, for but lamenting the death of her brother. So Alexander the Great
being drunk slew his dearest friend Clitus. Wit overcome with wine, is like a
Horse that has cast his rider: Even so such a spirit of drunkenness and
madness did God threaten to give up the people of Jerusalem unto, that like
drunken men they should destroy and consume one another. Yea God can cause
sinners themselves to become their own Executioners, and to lay violent hands
upon themselves. And as God has all the hosts of Heaven and Earth and Sea
ready pressed at his command, to perform his pleasure against his Enemies; so
likewise to do any good office for his children and friends; the jaw bone of an
Ass is both a sword and a bottle to Sampson, Judge. 15, 15, 19 And the Earth
helps the woman, by opening her mouth, and swallowing up the flood which the
Dragon cast out of his mouth, Revel. 12.15, 16. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 15.
Eusebius tells us, That at the same time God sent rain to refresh the
Soldiers of M. Aurelius his Army at the prayers of the Christian Legion,
Comment. Relig. and Reipubl. Galliae.
and a tempest to affright their Enemies. It Is likewise recorded, that God
provided wonderfully for the poor Protestants of Rochel, sending them plenty of
Fishes to feed upon during the siege, which ceased also when the siege removed.
Whence was it that Stephen Brune that godly French Martyr, could not be
consumed with a fire of Faggots twice made about him, so that the Executioner
was compelled to thrust him through with a Sword? Was it not from God's
overruling Providence?

Cor. 7.
If God govern the world by his Providence; then it is in his power to deny us
the use and benefit of any of his creatures, and of any thing that is most dear
unto us, and can at his pleasure take them from us; For the Earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof; and as the original right and title to all things is
the Lord's, so he never parts from the Fee-simple of any thing: no he does
not so much as let any Lease for any certain time, or any set term; but the
greatest Monarchs in the world hold their Crowns and Kingdoms of him in Capite,
and be no better than his poor Copyholders to be displaced at his pleasure,
and to be turned out of all they enjoy at less than an hours warning.
Therefore God charge the idolatrous Jews thus; She knew not that I gave her
corn, and wine, and oil, etc. Therefore will I return and take away my corn in
the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, Hos. 2.8, 9. Whatsoever
thou have the use and benefit of, it is the Lords, and he can recover it out of
thy hands when he pleases. When Herod was highly displeased with the men of
Tire and Sidon, they came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain their friend, they desired peace, Because their Country was
nourished by the Kings Country, Act. 12.20. Those Towns being Maritime Towns
depended upon Herod's Country, being a Corn country for their food and
nourishment. All that we have is in the hands of God, by whom we are sed and
nourished continually, and he can take away his creatures from us when he will;
and if he give us the creatures, yet he may deny us the use of them. Sometime
by bodily pains and violent sickness, God makes a man to abhor bread and all
dainty meat, Job 33.19, 20. or else by sorrow and sadness of heart God makes
the creatures useless to us, making men with David, to eat ashes like bread,
and mingle their drink with tears, Psalm. 102.9. Sometimes sudden dangers and
great fears deprive men of the use of the creatures; thus the Amalekites out of
fear leave all they had taken as a prey to David, 1 Samuel 30.19. And the fear
that surprised the Camp of the Syrians, made them fly away, and leave all that
they had to the men of Samaria, 2 Reg. 7.6, 7. Sometimes covetousness will not
suffer the greedy worldling to take the comfort of his enjoyments, though God
has given him Riches, Wealth and Honor; and that he wants nothing to his
soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but
a stranger eats it, Eccl. 6.2.

Here also I shall insist upon an instance of an higher nature, viz. the
unchurching of a people, the taking away the light of the Gospel and Ordinances
from them; whenever this happens it comes from God's Providence. God
threatened that famous Church of Ephesus, to remove her Candlestick out of its
place, Except she repented and did her first works. This Candlestick was the
visible Church in Ephesus, joined together in the profession of the Gospel, and
enjoyment of Ordinances, as a Candlestick holding a Candle in it. When God
forms a people into a visible Church, he sets up the light of the Word among
them, as men light a Candle, and put it into a Candlestick; but when God will
unchurch, he threatens to take away the Candlestick, take away all
Church Priviledges, and Gospel Ordinances.

I am of opinion, and humbly do conceive, that this Church of Ephesus repented
at this admonition of Christ, and was long preserved, that it stood firm under
the Roman persecutions, and a long time after; outstanding the rage of all the
Heathenish Tyrants, though that lasted three hundred years; for about an
hundred and thirteen years after, viz. about the year 413. after Christ, there
was a famous Council held in this Church of Ephesus, to condemn the wicked
Heresy of Nestorius, and to assert the truth of Christ; which shows, that it
is not in the power of men or Devils to take away Gospel Ordinances from any
Church or people, till the Lord pleases; and when at any time these are taken
away, it is the Lord that does it; it is he that removes the Candlestick out
of his place.

CHAP. XXXIV. Profitable Instructions arising from this Doctrine of Providence.
Instruct. 1.
THis Doctrine of Providence may now afford us many seasonable and profitable
Instructions.

My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways, Prove. 23.26.
Solomon by means of his great wisdom, did observe many things in his short time
of vanity, he saw a just man perishing in, or by reason of his righteousness;
and that many a wicked man lives to a great age and prospers,
notwithstanding his wickedness, Eccles. 7.15, 16, 17. The short life of man
upon Earth yields great variety of matter for much observation; the many
strange events that happen in a man's age, call for our most serious
observation: As a City built upon a narrow plot of ground has many Inhabitants
in it employed about several callings, wherein much may be seen within a little
compass: So the short life of man yields great variety of matters to be
observed. When I applied my heart to know wisdom, and see the business that is
done upon the earth, etc. Then I beheld all the works of God, that a man cannot
find out the work that is done under the Sun; because though a man labor to
seek it out, yea further though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not
be able to find it, says Solomon, Eccles. 8.16, 17. Though the secrets of
divine Wisdom in the various ways of his providence be often beyond the reach
of the wisest and most industrious Christians; yet ought we not to let any of
them pass without a serious observation. Do we not see that some men in a
short time will do great matters? What great things were done by Alexander by
the two and thirtieth year of his age, Histories testify. And Julius Caesar
being employed by the Praetor of Rome to ride in Circuit, being Quaestor, as
Lord Justice, coming into Spain to keep the Assizes, espied there the Picture
of Alexander with his Acts; and when perceiving that he had conquered the world
at his age, he desired license to depart speedily, having dispatched his
business, and that night he dreamed a dream, which the Augurs interpreted to
signify, Sueton. de C. Jul Caesar.
that the Earth should be subject to him, and under his Dominion; Hereupon he
undertook great matters, and so fortunate he was in his Wars, that at length he
carried in his Ensign these three words, Veni Vidi, Vici; I came to such a
Town, I saw it, and overcame it. Now if some men in a short time can do great
things, (as we also have seen in these our days) then God much more, who in
wisdom and power does far exceed all the men of the world. Besides, the Lord
for his own glory does vary much in the carr^^ge of things: As in the creation
of the world, he not only made all things good, but made also great varieties
of things, for the manifestation of his Wisdom, Power and Glory; so in
governing the world God makes use of variety of Agents in the world, led by
diverse principles: some by the spirit and power of grace, some by the flesh,
and by the spirit of the world, and by the Prince of the power of the air: some
labor to build up the Church of God; others like Sanballat and Tobiah do
hinder the building, and cross others who seek the welfare of Sion, and
altogether seek for honor and preferment for themselves. Now by these contrary
effects of men, the Lord brings forth contrary events, and causes his Glory
to shine through all.

How justly then are they to be reproved that have lived long, yet make no
special observations of those events that have happened in their days? Some
are so much taken up with vain and foolish delights, as pleasant Music, jovial
company, feasting and carousing, that they regard not the work of the Lord
neither consider the operation of his hand, Isa. 5.12. Whoredom and wine, and
new wine has stolen away their hearts, Hos. 4.11. Others there are whose
hearts are wholly taken up with worldly business, only minding earthly things.
It is an argument of a brutish spirit to neglect observation: Wherefore is a
price put into the hand of a fool, seeing he has not an heart, Prove. 17.16.
Gods work is about us, and in us (at least in a common providence) and yet few
there are that see it, or see God in it. It is the part of fools to pass by
these things without observation: Who so is wise will observe these things:
Psalm. 107. ult.
He that is endued with heavenly wisdom, and taught by the Spirit of God, will
observe them, and shall understand the loving kindness of God.

It is admirable to consider God's Providence without the Church among the
Enemies thereof. The Kings of Assyria had overcome diverse Nations; therefore
Sennacherib sends messengers to Hezekiah, to tell him, That the gods of the
Nations could not deliver them whom his fathers had destroyed, as Gozar, Haran,
etc. therefore he would have Hezekiah to have believed, that he could have done
the like to his God also. Now the use that he makes of it was, not slightly to
pass by these things, but makes a contrary use of it, acknowledging his God to
be the living God, and able to save him out of his hand; and that the gods whom
the Assyrians had cast into the fire, were no gods, but the work of men's hands;
therefore they had destroyed them. Now the issue was dreadful to the
Assyrians; Isa. 37.11, 12, 18, 19, 36, 37, 38.
An Angel of the Lord in one night slays an hundred fourscore and five
thousand in the camp of the Assyrians; and Sennacherib himself was afterward
slain by two of his own sons, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his
god. So likewise it is very observable concerning the Turks the vassals of that
base and grand Impostor Mahamet, who are great enemies of the Church; that the
Lord has so ordered it by his Providence, that they have not sent such huge
armies against the Christian Church for many years past as they did heretofore.

Within the Church Christ bids us discern the signs of the times, Mar. 16.2.
and makes it a note of hypocrisy to be able to discern the face of the sky
and of the earth, and not to discern the signs of the times; (as he sad to the
Pharisees,) which then were admirable, the Scepter being then departed from
Judah, and one of Esau's race enjoying it: John Baptist (the promised Elijah
the forerunner of Christ) being now come before the face of the Messiah as a
messenger to prepare his way before him, Great Miracles wrought by our Savior,
the blind receiving their sight, the lame walking, the Lepers cleansed, the
deaf hearing, the dead raised, and the poor having the Gospel preached unto
them; all which showed him to be that Messiah that was to come, and not another.

So in Luther's time there was an admirable change; What warrant have the
Papists for their Jubilees, but the Popes knocking at Rome-Gates with his
golden hammer, promising pardon to whomsoever shall enter in at them that year,
brings much Gold to St Peter's chair and the Pope's coffer; keeping their
Kitchen smokeing. Jubilees were of use before Christ's coming, but ever since
out of date.
clear light shining out of thick darkness, the year of Jubilee proclaimed the
acceptable year of our Lord, the year of release from Babilonish thraldom, and
Popish superstition, free justification by the blood of Christ preached: An
Angel comes down from heaven having great power, and the earth was lightened
with his glory; and he cries out mightily with a strong voice saying, Babylon
the great is fallen, etc. Rev. 18.1, 2. and verse. 4. Another voice from Heaven
says; Come out of her my people, that ye be not pertakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues.

And is it not vrey needful for us to observe the Signs of these our times;
how many Nations professing the truth of the Gospel with us, have of late
endured many hard and sore trials, God has destroyed the strength of many
Kingdoms, overthrowing the Charets and those that rode in them; the Horses and
their riders have come down, Hag. 2.21. 22.
every one by the Sword of his Brother. God has even shaken the Heavens over
us, and the earth under us, for the great formality and lukewarmnesse,
intemperance, earthlymindednesse of the Nations, and for the great opposition
of the Kingdom of Christ, the beauty of holiness, and the truth of God clearly
revealed in the Gospel.

Furthermore, It is very observable, how that many men in all ages have been
taken away by sudden judgments, and that diverse ways. Herod, on a sudden
comes upon the Galileans, and kills them as they were Sacrificing, mingling
their Blood with their Sacrifices, Luke 13.1. upon eighteen others a Tower
falls suddenly and kills them, as the house upon Job's Children. Thus some
men have been taken away in their drunkenness, and in their riotous meetings;
some fall from scaffolds, some be slain with timber, some killed with the
overthrow of earth, some drowned, some with falls from Horses, some with Tiles
or Stones falling from Houses, Mayer. Exposit. in Jam. Paenitentia est animi
medicina. Lactant. Secunda Tabula post naufragium. Hieron.
as that worthy Roman Captain riding through the streets of Rome in Triumph
after a famous victory, was killed by a Tile of a House falling on his head.
Now the use and end of God's judgments upon some, is to work amendment and
repentance upon all. Repentance (as Lactantius calls it) is the Physic of the
soul, which all that be sin sick (as all Adam's brood be) must take before they
can be recovered, and all that will not be drowned in the Sea of Sin, must of
necessity swim out upon the plank of repentance.

CHAP. XXXV. Instruction second.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered, says the Psalmist, The
Rabbines observe, that the Children of the Jews, the night beforeth Passover,
used to ask their parents, why is it called the passover? th y answered,
because the Angel passed over and destroyed us not, etc. Thus ought we to speak
publicly of Gods great mercies for the benefit of our posterity, to tell what
God has done for our souls; that his glory may be declared among all Nations,
and his wonders among all people. Joh. Menoch. de republ. Hebr.
Psalm. 111.4. They are worthy our remembrance. The works of his hand are verity
and judgment, verse. 7. not only the words of his mouth, but also the works of
his hand. When we cannot find out God's mind in his word, we may spell it out
in his works. God puts Israel in mind of their deliverance, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Thou
shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years
in the wilderness, etc. I brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the House of servants, and I sent before thee Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam. O my people, remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted,
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye
may know the Righteousness of the Lord, Mich. 6.4, 5. Remember the former
things of old, Isa. 46.9. All God's doings are very weighty in themselves and
not to be forgotten. When thou art apt to murmr for the want of any thing,
look upon the Rocks, and remember how God made water to flow out of the Rock,
to the Israelites ready to perish for thirst. When thou art in a straight, and
see the water, let that put thee in mind of God's dividing the red Sea. When
thou see the Sun, think how God can make it stand still for the good of his
Children, or go bacward to help forward our Faith. Art thou persecuted?
Remember what God did to Pharaoh, Deuteronomy. 7.18. and to all Egypt. When thou art
in affliction, then is a time to remember God; When my soul fainted within me,
I remembered the Lord, says Jonab, chap. 2.7. When God remembered Jonah, he
remembered the Lord, and prayed unto him.

Many men have quick wits, and fluent tongues, yet are mute reporters of Gods
Providence. It is a great sin to forget God or to be unmindfull of his works
and Properties. It is sad of the Children of Israel, That they did evil in the
sight of God, and forgot the Lord their God, Judge. 3.7. If David did as it were
curse himself if he should forget Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.5, 6. what then shall
happen to those that say to God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. God complains of some, that they had forgotten him days without
number. Jerem. 2.32. many remember but a part of God; his mercy to presume
thereon, Polan. Syntag. de Gratiar. action.
utterly forgetting his judgments. If we forget his word we forsake God; if we
obey it not, we do the like, Jerem. 32.33. If we play the Hypocrites, we forget
his Providence; and so whenever we are unmindfull of him, we rush into any
kind of sin, making not God our treasure, for then our hearts would be with
him. Ah! how easily do men remember foolish jests, vain sports, and tricks of
youth; but how soon are the word and works of God forgotten by us. David
rouzeth up himself, Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. In priscis rebus veritas non ad unguem
quaerenda. Diodat.
to remember the years of the right hand of the most High, To remember the
works of the Lord, and his wonders of old, To meditate of all his works, and
talk of all his doings. If thou can not remember particular days, labor to
remember the years of the most high; in ancient things a general knowledge is
sufficient.

Here I must now commend the lawful use of History; there we may search after
the proverbs and records of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24.13. There we may see how
others have demeaned themselves upon diverse occasions and businesses of great
importanec: Historiae utilitas est magna faelicitatem participat, etc. Diodor.
Sicul. lib. 1. de fabulos. gestis
It is (as one observes) a prudent Sat Counselor by whose advice a
Commonweal, may be framed, Governed, reformed and preserved: an army well
marshalled and ordered, Towns besieged and taken, Enemies vanquished, Kingdoms
subdued, and great victories obtained. In it as in a clear Chrystall-glasse we
may behold God's Providence governing the world, Joh. Crompton's Sermon of
marriage
and the actions of men, which have often strange and unexpected events; and
sometimes reach unto such ends as are quite contrary to the actors intentions;
it represents to us the vices and virtues of great ones; it leaves to
posterity the worthy sayings and doings of men famous in their generation, for
the imitation of their survivors.

But above all Histories, let us be careful to read the Sacred Histories of
God's wonderful Providence toward his people; this divides time to us, it
acquainteth us with all the passages of Gods Providence that have been from the
beginning of the world; it keeps God's benefits fresh in our minds; it
perfumeth the memorial of the Godly, making piety the more amiable; it teaches
us by the examples of those Worthies that are there mentioned, how we should
carry our selves upon whom the ends of the world are come. Now that we may the
better rub up our memories, we must make diligent enquiry after God's
wonderful works. Eliphaz tells Job, That he would not only declare to him
what himself had seen; but also what wise men had told from their Fathers, Job
15.17, 18. We should ask of those that have the best and most experience: we
love to hear travelers discourse of other Countries, especially those that
know them by experience; and albeit, Art and Learning are good helps, yet he
makes the best Comment upon God's works, that speaks from holy experience.
What a shame is it then for old men to be children in understanding; many old
men are indeed profound in worldly wisdom, but babes in other things; so that
even youths may teach the Senators wisdom; it is a great judgment when
Counsel perishes from the Ancient, Ezekiel. 7.6. Cyrus in Xenophon Xenophon.
reports that the Persians had a Law enjoining all men to be silent when an
Elder should speak, Callistratus.
to give him the wall when they met him in the streets, Hesychius.
and to set open and clear the passage ways when he should go any journey or
voyage. Monsieur Goulart's, Vieillard.
In the Ancient Roman Commonwealth great Reverence was done to old men; and the
Ancient Grecians, as Hesychius observes, gave Majestic titles to Old men; the
Counsels of Old men are more regarded than the strength of young men; it is the
best Ornament of the hoary head to be full of Heavenly wisdom, to be able to
instruct and govern young men in God's wondrous works.

CHAP. XXXVI. Instruction third.
Solomon tells us, Though there be many divices in man's heart, yet the
Counsel of the Lord shall stand, Prove. 19.21. We must not therefore say, we
will have this or we will have that. Some will have fair weather, some foul,
some will have plenty, others scarcity; and herein men are as often crossed, as
they are mightily deceived, being very unable to comprehend what is best for
them.

Holcot tells a story of an Hermit, that having fowed pot herbs in his garden,
desired fair weather and foul weather, as he judged to be best for his herbs
and plants, and so had all granted of God according to his request; but not one
herb ever came up, whereupon he thought there was a general failing of such
herbs in all places, till on a time walking to another Hermit, not far off, he
saw with him a very excellent crop; Putabas te sapientiorem Deo, and ipse
ostendit tibi fatuitatem tuam. Holcot in lib. Sapient. lect. 9.
then he told him what he had begged and obtained touching the weather, and
what effect it had; whereunto the other Hermit answered; Thou thought thy
self wiser than God, and he has showed thee thy folly; I for my crop never
asked any other weather than God should please to send. So there are some in
these our days that would have this government both in Church and State, some
would have that, and others would have no government at all. Well were it, many
in our days would learn of this old Hermit, to be less wise in their own
conceits concerning such things as these, and to rely more upon Gods
Providence, than there would not be so much murmuring among us as there is.

Seneca, writing of Caesar says, That having appointed a great feast for his
Nobles and friends of all degrees, Murmuratores similes sunt versantibus in
gyrum, donec capite and sensibus perturbatis caetera omnia perturbari putant.
Pythagor.
it fell out that the day was so exceeding wet, that nothing could be done;
whereat being enraged, he commanded all them that had bows to shoot up their
arrows at Jupiter, in defiance of him for that foul weather; which being done,
their arrows lighting short of Heaven, fell down upon their own heads. And
just so it falls out with many in our days, that murmr at God's Providence.
He is a very bad Soldier that follows his General with grudging; and he is
a very bad man that controleth God in his works. Murmurers (as the Philosopher
observes) are like unto such as turn round about, till their heads and senses
being turned, they think all thing to turn round.

Seeing then all things are ordered and disposed by Gods Providence, we must
not then say, we will do this or that of our own heads without asking cave of
any one, but do as David when he sent the Ark from Kiriathjearim: He consulted
with the Captains of thousands and hundreds, and with every Leader, and said
unto all the Congregation of Israel; If it seem good unto you, and that it be
of the Lord our God, let us send abroad unto all our Brethren every where, and
let us bring again the Ark of our God unto us, 1 Chronicles. 13.2. Socrates being
taught by Natural reason this Doctrine, wills Alcibiades, in all things to
say, if the Lord will. So St. James bids us all do, Jam. 4. Tarnb. Exposit.
Jacob.
Go to now ye that say to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and
continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain, verse. 13, 15. For that
ye ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we live we will do this or that. Here
the Apostle reproves the vain presumption of the proud Merchants and great
worldlings, who in the arrogance of their hearts, and vain confidence in
themselves, leave the reverend account they should have of the providence of
God whereby all things only are directed, and say to day or to morrow, we will
do this or that; it is very injurious to God's Providence to determine of
things long before hand at our Pleasure; Saying this shall be done, and who
shall hinder us? Are there not many in our days guilty in this kind, do not
many great Princes say, we will set on foot such a design, and bring such an
enterprise to effect? Say not many great Captains, we will invade such a
Princes Territories, and land such an Army, and besiege such a Town or Castle?
Say not our Merchants we will go to the East- Indies, to Spain, France,
Constantinople, to Leghorn, Aleppo, Smyrna, Hamborough, or to the
Low Countries, and there we will traffic and negotiate? Say not our young
gallants, we will go travel to Rome, Venice, Paduoa, Constantinople, Jerusalem?
Say not our rich Citizens, we will go down into the Country, and there take
the fresh air, and continue so many months, and then we will return again?
And say not most men and women, this and that we will do, and who shall
control us? A great vanity it is for men to boast that they will do such and
such things at such and such times, whenas the most skillfull man knows not
what shall be to morrow. No man knows whether he shall be rich or poor, be in
honor or dishonor, whether he shall live or die: Solomon says, There is no
man that knows what shall be, Eccl. 3.22. Eccl. 8.2.
for who can tell him when it shall be, etc. Hereby the idols of the Heathen
are convinced to be no gods, because they know not what shall be, Isa. 44.7.
Here all those may receive a check, that take upon them through judicial
Astrology, Palmistery, and calculating of nativities according to that Art, to
foretell what, notable accidents shall befall any man throughout his whole
life; yet do I not reprove the study of Astronomy and guessing at the weather
by observing the aspects of the planets and their houses, and the rising of
certain fixed Stars besides, Math. 16.2
and by observing the winds and other signs in the sky (for by these other men
can conjecture also many times rightly whether the next day shall be fair or
foul as our Savior speaks) so as we acknowledge God to be a free Agent and
not tied to the concurrences of second causes, which he disposes, orders and
alters at his pleasure.

CHAP. XXXVII. Instruction fourth.
Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 4. cap. 12.
must teach every man to be diligent in some calling or other, and to be
industrious therein. The very Athenians, Egyptians, and Romans severely
punished all idle persons, as Gellius tells us. The Godly that are truly
humble, refuse no honest kind of labor. Abel keeps sheep, Jacob and Moses
do the like, Sarah will bake cakes, Rebekah takes a pitcher and draws water;
Gideon will thresh, and Elisha put his hand to the plough, and the honorable
woman will put her hand to the distaffe. The wise man has allowed a time for
every thing else, but for idleness no time at all. Jacob's ladder had staves,
Generosos animos labor nutrit. Senec. ad Lucil. Epist. 31. Vita otiosa
umbratilis and solitaria, nec ad sanitatem facit. Plutarc. Mor. 1.
upon which he saw none standing still, but all either ascending or descending
by it. Man is born to labor as the sparks fly upwards. Excellent is the
example of Alfred sometime King of England, who flourished about eight hundred
seventy two years after Christ, and two hundred years before the Conquest, who
was very vigilant, laborious, and powerful, and often prevailed against the
Pagans, and restored diverse Cities to their immunities, being taken out of the
hands of his enemies: among other things he is famous for this, that dividing
the day nauturall into three even parts, he spent eight hours in reading,
writing, and praying, eight hours in hearing and determining matters of State
belonging to his place, and but eight for the provision of his body by meat,
drink, sleep, and other necessaries. King Alphonsus doing ^omething with his
hand, and laboring so, as some which beheld him found fault, smiled and said:
Has God given hands to Kings in vain? Some say, that the Grand Seignour of the
Turks, is by his Law daily to do some bodily work with his hands to grace
labor. The old Egyptians were wont once a year to call their Citizens
together, and have every man give account to their governors, how he got his
living; if they found any vagabonds and drones that lived by the sweat of other
men's brows, and used no lawful labor themselves, Quid vultis ut Dominus me
otiosum inveniret? Calvin.
they presently banished them. It was a worthy saying of Mr. Calvin when his
Friends found him continually macerating himself with painful studies,
demanding of him why he had so little care of his health; What will ye that may
Master at his coming should find me idle? It is the sin of many of the
Gentry, to whom God has given means and ability of doing good, to spend their
whole life either in doing nothing, or that which is worse than nothing. Ah
what confusion will overwhelm profane time spenders at the day of judgment,
when God shall show them the bill of their misspent life. Item, So much time
spent in swaggering. Item, So many nights spent in whoring Item. So much spent
in Carding, Dicing, and gaming. Item, So much spent in eating and gurmundizing,
rioting and drunkenness, Item, So many choice hours spent in swearing, lying,
scoffing at holiness, and in foolish and rotten communication. So much time
spent at the glass in frizzeling and poudering, in singing, complementing and
dancing. Certainly at the sight of all these dreadful Items, they shall then
wish (but all in vain) that they had one hour to spend in weeping for their
former folly.

Albeit there ought to be a difference in the manner of the employment between
those that are Nobly descended, and men of meaner rank, Dr Sanders. Sermon. ad.
populum in 1 Cor. 7.24.
yet no man should live idly. If God has made thee a man of authority in the
Country where thou live, and blessed thee with a large estate, thou ought
to keep thy family in good order; to be liberal to the poor, hospitable to Gods
Ministers and others; to endeavor to preserve love and peace among the
neighbors: he that does this he may, must needs be acknowledged a profitable
member in the Commonwealth; many prodigal young Gallants allege their birth
and their noble extraction; But was any man of higher birth than Adam, Mart.
Bucer. de Regno Christi. lib. 2. cap. 24.
who labored before he had sinned? Who higher born than Cain and Able the sons
of the absolute Monarch of the whole world? yet one of them is a tiller of the
ground, the other a Keeper of sheep. Would such men search their Pedigrees,
they would find their Worthy Ancestors raised their houses either by valiant
exploits they did in the field, by adventures at Sea, diligent attendance at
Court, or by industriousnesse of some particular calling; and though they
inherit the Lands and Titles of honor, yet if they also inherit not their
virtues, they are but the degenerate offspring of generous Ancesstors.

One observes, how industrious every Creature in the world is, and does his
office. The little Nightingale in the forest makes an Organ of her throat;
sometimes her notes are warbling, sometime she stretches them out at length:
the Swallow is busy in her masonry: the Be toileth all the day in her
innocent thefts, the Spider draws out the long train of her webs, (...).
Euripid.
and makes more curious works with her feet, than the most skillfull woman can
weave with her hands; Fishes play their parts under the water; Beasts of
service, as Horses, Oxen, etc. labor in their duty; nature has nothing at
all, except man, that is willing to be idle.

Here I may tax the vanity of many young Gallants, that for want of beter
impolyment travel into far Countries, merely to see and learn new fashions,
quaint phrases, apish gestures, foolish courtings, and vain complements; and
many times like unfortunate Merchant-adventurers, they exchange good company
for evil manners; the fashion of too many Travelers (as the old Lacedamonians
long since observed) is not to Brathwait. Engl. Gent.
bring home the wisdom and virtues, but the follies and vices; of foreign
Countries. Give me, a man says one, that has seen the Ephesian Diana in the
Louire, the great Vessel at Heidelberg, the Amphitheatre at Vlysmos, the
stables of the great Mogol, and Mahomets shrine at Mecha, yea all the memorable
Monuments of the world to delight the eye, or Learned Academies to enrich his
knowledge; yet are not all these able to alter the quality of his disposition;
whence Flaccus says.

Horat. lib. 1 Epist. 11.
To pass the Seas some are inclined,
To change their air, but not their mind.
But I take not upon me from hence to condemn all Treavelling into sorreign
parts. I know diverse sorts of Travelers are both Ancient and honest: as

1. Such as Traveled and undertook long journeys to deliver Captives from
unjust imprisonment, as the Poets feign of Hercules, that he undertook many
toilsome journeys to kill Monsters, and curb Tyrants that oppressed poor
innocents: this is lawful for great Princes, either to go in person, or to
send by deputation into foreign Countries to deliver Captives, and those that
suffer wrong.

2. To deliver souls from spiritual bondage, in preaching the Gospel in such
places where it was never heard of: thus did Christ himself, Paul and the other
Apostles.

3. It Is lawful to travel to get learning and knowledge; and therefore Plato
the Philosopher traveled into Egypt, and the Queen of Sheba or Ethiopia, came
to Jerusalem to be confirmed of what she had heard of King Solomon.

4. It Is lawful to treavell for traffic and Merchandises, because all
Countries afford not all commodities as the Poet speaks; Non omnis fert omnia
Tellus.

5. It Is lawful to travel in time of persecution to enjoy the liberty of our
conscience, to profess the truth: but of this I have largely spoken on Chap.
26.

6. It Is lawful to seek new seats where to settle our selves; if God so
multiply us, as our native soil be two little for us: thus God appointed
Abraham to do, Genes. 12. But this one thing must be remembered, that in all
such plantations we seek unpeopled and unhabited places, or where there be so
few, as the Countries may afford room enough for us and them. God takes
express order, Deuteronom. 2. that the Edomites and Moabites, may not be
disquieted by the Israelites: and surely the Laws of God, nature, and Nations,
require that Ancient inhabitants be not banished or displaced of their
possessions; which was an honorable care (as I have heard) of our Contrymen
in their Western Plantations.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Instruction five.
of deliverance, then it is good to raise up our spirits with these and the like
considerations.

1. God is as good to Israel as ever he was, and as mighty to help and save his
people as he was in the days of old.

2. As he has all times and seasons in his hand, so he is most wise to appoint
the fittest seasons for their deliverance.

3. If deliverance come not according to our desires; it is not for that it
will not come at all, but because the set time of mercy is not yet come.

4. That God will then help his people, when the help of man is vain, and when
he sees that their help is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36. when man gives over, there is
then both time and place for God.

5. That God is more wise to see, and more able to do that which is good for
his people, than all the world besides; let us therefore take heed lest by
distrustful cares we make God's providence work things to our grief who
usually makes all things to work together for the good of his Children; let us
do our duty cheerfully, and leave the event of things to God and his
Providence. God is styled a faithful Creator, and we are bid to cast all our
cares upon him, for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.7. rest fully on God's
Providence, resolving to well come whatsoever it brings to us. The Apostle
bids us, be careful for nothing. Phil. 4.6. Does God take care for Oxen? That
is, does he take such care for Oxen as for men, especially for his Ministers? 1
Cor 9. God provided food for man before he made him, and therefore will provide
for his Creature being made: Vivere sub tutela and providentia caelestis
patris, conditio est suavis, custodia tuta; patris enim est omnes curas and
labores in se recipere and nihilominus fructum eorum dividere cum filio. Otho
Gasm^^.
Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat, neither for the body what ye
shall put on, says our Savior; For the life is more than meat, and the body
than raiment, Luke 12.22, 23. Food is less than life, and Raiment less than
the body. He that gave us a body and life, will furnish us with necessaries for
both; if we can rely upon him, we shall have both a convenient and sufficient
supply in all our wants. Do we not see that as the necessities of man in
general are more than other Creatures, so the supplies that he gives to man
are of more excellent nature, and God allows us a larger maintenance then he
affords to other creatures; yea other Creatures die that we may live; how
many Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts lose their lives to keep our lives; God sends us
bread from one soil, drink from another, Fowls from the air, Beasts from the
earth, Fishes from the Sea, Wine from Spain and other Counteries, Spicery and
Bullion from the Indies: how often may we see the commodities of all Countries
in our houses and on our tables? Why then should our hearts at any time be rent
with distrustful cares, seeing God opens his hand so liberally to us; it is
man's privilege in temporal necessities to be better provided for than other
creatures; and it is the Saints privilege to be better supplied with grace
than other men, The Lord is my shepherd, says the Psalmist, therefore I shall
not want. It is a sweet thing to live under the care and providence of our
Heavenly Father, Psalm. 23.1.
such and such only are in safe custody.

Object. What then may some say, shall we therefore banish all care out of our
hearts, as the Cibbrites did all Cocks and watchful birds out of their Cities,
and nothing but turn our selves upon our beds as a door turns upon his
hinges with Solomon's sluggard?

Resp. I answer: all care is not forbidden; some cares are necessary because
God commands them, as cares of diligence and prudence; other cares are
unnecessary because forbidden, as carking cares. It Is said of the virtuous
woman, Prove. 31.27.
that she eats not the bread of idleness, but looks well to the ways of
her household: and Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant for instruction, Go to
the Ant thou sluggard, Consider her ways and be wise, which having no guide,
overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in
the harvest, Pro. 6.6, 7, 8. Joseph in time of plenty lays up against the
famine following, Genesis 42.48. and the Disciples every man according to his
ability provide to send relief to the brethren at Judea, against the great
dearth that should be thorowout all the world in the days of Claudius Caesar,
Act. 11.28, 29. And Paul tells us, that parents must lay up for their children,
2 Cor. 12.14. and says, that he that provideth not for his family is worse
than an infidel. Thus we see that we are not dissuaded from all lawful cares,
but from all distrustful carking cares, that might hinder us in the service of
God, and in the discharge of our duties, such a care as is called, Cura
eventus, a care about the issue and event of things, the contrary whereof is,
in faith to stand still, and see the salvation of God, Ex. 14.13. and in all
straights to say to our soul, Plura sunt quae terrent quam quae nos premunt;
and ita nimium timendo saepe frustra miseri sumus ante tempus. Multi vixere in
freto, moriuntur in portu. Senec. ad Lucil. Epist. 19.
as Abraham to his son, Deus providebit, God will provide. There are, more
things which affright men, says Seneca, than really oppress them, and so by
excessive fears we often become miserable before our time; many have been safe
in the ocean which have perished in the harbor.

CHAP. XXXIX. Instruction sixth.
viz. to provide for our souls. It Is the general fashion (and withal the
fault) of the world, to be altogether taken up about the care of their bodies
and goods, never regarding the good of their souls. Thus the Psalmist tells us,
That many seek after goods, few after goodness, Psalm. 4.6. The unjust Steward
is commended for making provision for himself, when he should be put out of his
Stewardship, Luke 16.8. Yet must we know; Christ is no patron of lewd
practices, or any manner of unjust dealing; for he commends his wit, not his
honesty; his policy, not his piety; he did not commend him, because he had done
honestly, but because he had done wisely, and thereupon he infers, That the
children of this world are wiser in their Nel grado loro, in their degree.
Ital. Annotat.
generation than the children of light: Even the children of light, partly by
the frailty of the flesh, but principally by the temptations and suggestions of
the Devil, are so tainted and infected, as they are neither so wise and
provident, eager and earnest for the things of a better life, as very
worldlings and earthworms are for profits, pleasures, and the things of this
life. Briefly, we should learn a good lesson of bad Tutors or Schoolmasters,
viz. that as the children of this world do bestir their stumps (as we say) and
beat their brains like beans in a bladder, to provide for themselves here on
Earth: So should every one of us (like God's faithful children) endeavor by
all holy means to provide for our selves hereafter in Heaven: But alas! Do not
the generality of men woo Hagar the handmaid, and forsake Sarah the mistress,
viz. spend their time in Law, Physic, Philosophy, the Mathematics,
Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, Astronomy, and pass by Theology; and with them
that do study it, is it not more for speculation and knowledge, than conscience
and practice? Yea, do we not with busy Martha, cumber our selves with many
needless things; but not with devout Mary, choose the unum necessarium, the one
thing necessary. The great care that most men have of their bodies, condemns
their bruitishnesse about their souls: Though the souls necessities are both
greater and more pressing than the bodies; yet most people are more sensible of
the bodies necessities, and more careful to supply them. What man is to
foolish as to feed his body with imaginations, or should he do it, it will not
be so deluded? It is a substance, and must have more than air to maintain it:
Yet how many are there that think to supply the necessities of their souls with
mere fancies and imaginations; having no more warrant for their salvation? But
alas! the eternal welfare of our souls, Providentia est praesens notio futurum
pertractans eventum. Seneca de 4. virtut.
is of too great concernment to hazard upon a fancy.

The Husbandman is so provident, as that he knows his best season to break up
his ground, and when to sow all manner of grain; the Gardener to set and sow
all seeds, to graff and inoculate, to plant and transplant all manner of Trees.
The Hunter knows where to find, and how to follow his games: The Merchant
observes where he shall have his best market to put off his commodities. The
Usurer enquireth how to let out his money to sure men, and such as may not
break. The Tradesman knows how to make the best advantage of all his wares:
Yea, very Sailours and Seafaring men (only by practice and experience) are so
cunning in the Compass, and know so well the course of the Winds, and the
position of diverse Stars, as upon the sudden they will be able to puzzle a
professed Mathematician and Astronomer: Yea we will all of us be well seen in
the tenure of our earthly inheritances: But oh! How few are there that give all
diligence to make their calling and election sure? We will be all skillful in
the letters of our friends; but who regards the Scriptures the Epistle of God
Almighty? We will all be cunning in the Wills and Testaments of our earthly
parents, but who almost regards the Will and Testament of our heavenly
Father, unless it be to cavil about it, and who labors to fulfill it? We
regard more the Statutes of an earthly Prince, than the Magna Charta of Heaven,
the Statutes of the King of the whole world. Our Savior bids us provide our
selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens that fails not, Luke
12.33. and that is, by distributing a man's goods to pious uses; this is to lay
up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy
6.19. He that sows liberally shall reap liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6. Liberality to
the poor is the best piece of Husbandry; he shall reap a liberal blessing in
this life, and grace for his soul, and his alms shall go before him to Heaven,
showing the garments he has made and given to cloth the backs of the naked,
and the bread he has dealt to the hungry members of Christ; as the weeping
widows showed Peter the Coats and Garments which Dorcas made while she was with
them, Act. 9.39. He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord; Faeneratur
Deo. Hieron.
He lends upon interest, as Hierome reads the words, Prove. 16.19. and what he
has lent him, shall be paid him again with advantage, for he lends to one that
will never break or fail him, or dodge or make him any abatements; he shall not
have eight or ten for an hundred, but an hundred for ten; yea a thousand for
one and more; for there is no proportion between what we give on Earth, and what
we shall receive again in Heaven, Mat. 19.21.

CHAP. XL. Instruction seventh.
Ben. Gorion. lib. de bello Judaeor.
He is a coward, and of a base spirit, who kicks and spurns, and complains of
the government of the world, and who had rather censure God than be obedient to
him. The Jews by placing a flag with the Romans Arms upon the walls of
Jerusalem on their three several great Feast-dayes, did thereby declare
themselves subject to the Roman Emperor: So let us be obedient and become
subject to the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in whom we live, move and have
our being; let us hang out the flag of subjection, and do homage to him who
governs the whole world. Even nature it self teaches us to tender him our
service from whom we receive our being and preservation. When it is the will of
a Sovereign all Subjects ought to obey; all Sovereigns look for obedience from
such as are under their protection and government; and especially, when God who
is the absolute Monarch of the universe does command, all that are under his
Empire must adore his Laws, and yield obedience to him. No man has Power,
Rule, Greatness, Wealth and Riches above others without him, all is by his
Providence. As a Ship upon the Sea were not able to stand one day, but would
soon perish without a governor; so would the highest, the richest, the
greatest soon come to naught without his protection and providence. If thou
acknowledgest not all thou art or have to be through his providence, thou
deservest not the name of a son or servant; but if thou do acknowledge it,
and perform^^ not obedience to him, what name is bad enough for thee? Stock on
Mal. chap. 1.
Nay, what punishment is sufficient for such an offense, as a grave Divine has
noted? The most high and holy Angels are most obedient, and shall sinful dust
and ashes be disobedient to their Sovereign Lord? The insensible creatures are
obedient, and shall the rational be disobedient? The Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
all celestial creatures, all the seasons, all flowers and fruits that adorn the
Earth serve for the use of man, and shall he be disobedient to the Lord his
King and Governor? 1 Samuel 15.23.
Therefore for men to continue in sin is rebellion against God, a denial of
his Sovereignty, and a rebellion against his Supreme Authority. What is he that
goes on in a course of sin, but a stubborn Rebel against the Lord of Heaven
and Earth. We are apt to make light of sin, and especially, if it be such a
sin as seems to do others no hurt; but we must learn to judge of sin, not
by such a Rule, but with respect to the Majesty of that God against whom it is
committed: This proves any sinful practice to be Rebellion against the King
of Kings. When sin grows common, usually sinners grow secure in sinning; but
this cannot excuse the sinner from Rebellion against the Lord of Hosts. Luke
19.27.
As for these mine enemies that will not have me toreign over them, says
Christ, bring them hither, and slay them before my face. The Lord will esteem
and condemn them as Rebels, and will command and see execution (himself) done
upon them: God is advanced far above his highest Enemies; he is higher than the
highest, and armed with so much power as to make all his foes his footstool,
and will bring his stoutest Enemies to fall before him; they shall be dashed in
pieces against this Rock, in the holes whereof the Saints hide themselves, and
are safe. If a King know such a man to be his Enemy, has feifed upon him,
condemned him to die, and resolved to put him to death; any wise man would
think that condition of his between the sentence and execution were not much
desirable: Now the Enemies of God are condemned already, God has them in his
power, and the sword of Divine vengeance hangs over their heads (as it were)
by an horse-hair, every moment ready to fall upon them; therefore let them for
the present enjoy great places, high dignities, and much power in the world;
yet none of these can secure them from falling into the hands of the living
God, who regards his greatest Enemies no more, than a stout Army does a
company of poor shepherds.

Labor then to keep close with God, walking in his ways, without denial or
delay; The Lord is with you while you be with him; if you seek him, he will be
found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you; when men will act by
principles of their own, and drive on evil designs upon corrupt pretenses, they
cannot assure themselves that God will prosper them, or so much as protect
them; the experience whereof we have seen made good of late by many severe
instances of Providence.

CHAP. XLI. Instruction eighth.
Publicani fuerunt illi qui populi Romani vectigalia, Judaeis invitis jure
belli imposita ipsorum nomine public tractarunt, unde reliquis Judaeis tanquam
hosts patriae libertatis exosi fuerunt. Chemnit.
doing that which is just and equal. The motion of God's Providence, like the
motion of the Heavens, is always equal and constant; as the best Harmony in
Music is of many discords well set together; so the different notes of
Providence make it very harmonious. Carnal hearts are apt to plead with God
about the inequality of God's ways and providence, as if they could amend what
God had done. You say the way of the Lord is not equal; hear now, O house of
Israel, Is not my way equal, are not your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18.25. The Lord
is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works of Providence; Let us
imitate the Lord therein.

When the Publicans, (who were customers in Haven-Towns, being for the most
part ex faece populi, of the scum of the people) came to be baptized of John;
they said unto him, What shall we do? He said unto them, Exact no more than is
appointed you, Luke 3.12, 13. He bids them not leave their Offices, but
teaches them how to use them.

Here all Levellers may be taxed, who would have no orders nor degrees among
men, denying duties to Kings, Rulers and Governors, contrary to the Doctrine
and practice of Christ and his Apostles. Christ was born in a time of Tribute;
he wills Peter to pay Tribute for them both, Mat. 17.27. He bids, Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. But Princes must moderate their
expenses according to their revenues, and not exhaust their treasures to
maintain their pleasures, Pastoris boni est oves tondere non deglubere. Sueton
as Tiberius the Emperor told one, that bid him lay heavier taxes upon his
people. It is the part of a good Shepherd to shear, and not to flea or skin his
Sheep. David would not drink the water that the three Worthies fet him, because
it was Pretium sanguinis, the price of blood. Such Magistrates may be said to
drink the blood of their people, that live idly, and lewdly spend what they may
spare.

This gives a check to all sorts of people that abuse their places, that make
more of them than the Laws of the Land, and a good conscience requires and
allows. All Purveyours and Takers, Customers and Searchers, that set their
Commissions upon the tenters. All such as buy Offices for gain; 'twere well if
all such were disabled to use them. For the saying of the Emperor Alexander
Severus is most true; He that buyeth an Office sells Justice. The Thebans had
a Law, That no man should bear any Office of credit among them, but such as had
discontinued their Trade by the space of ten years, to the end their hands
might be out of base taking. -- Here I might pull Lawyers by the sleeves, and
put them in mind of this precept of John, when they will have a double Fee for
a single pleading. Item, Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Justices-Clearks; all
which have their set Fees proportionable to their places appointed them by Law:
As also all such as are Overseers of Wills, Guardians of Infants and Orphans
under age; if they have any Legacy bequeathed them, they may take it; if they
be at any charge, they may allow it themselves; but let them beware of loud
reckonings, they be crying sins, and will make a loud noise in the ears of God.
In a word, all deceit in all dealing is wholly unlawful; as servants working
by halves, and taking wages for the whole; all false weights and measures,
adulterate and counterfeit wares, showing of one sort, and serving another;
hoording up Commodities to make a dearth; Landlords also oppressing their
Tennants, and Patrons corruptly bestowing their Advousons or Presentations to
Livings upon unworthy persons, may here justly be censured.

Next to the Publicans, the Soldiers likewise demand of John Baptist, What
shall we do? Luke 3.14. and he said unto them, Do violence to no man, Accuse
no man falsely, and be content with your wages; There are three Branches of
John's answer to the Soldiers.

1. Do violence to no man] Offer no injury to any man, abuse not your power to
do wrong, oppress not those whom you are appointed to defend, lest they rather
betray themselves to their Enemies, than yield to the abuses of such false
friends: Histor. Novi orbis.
Such Soldiers the Spaniards set in Hispaniola and other places, who carried
themselves so insolently among the people, as they had rather turn to the Turk,
than endure them among them. I might here dissuade from all cruelty even toward
Enemies, and embruing hands in cold blood. All Soldiers are not to do as Saul
should have done with Agag and all the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. Such Soldiers as
are billeted, should not so basely behave themselves, as to be more burden
than benefit to the Country.

2. Accuse no man falsely.] Histories tell us, That it was a custom among the
Romans to proceed against those whom they had conquered (of which sort the
Jews now were) according to the informations of their Soldiers that
quartered, and were ingarrisoned among them to keep them in subjection; and to
banish, or put to death the parties accused, and confiscate their goods, half
to the Senate, and half to the accuser; whereupon the Baptist knowing what a
bait rich men's wealth might be to hungry soldiers, and make them lift at a
lie, he labors to redress this vice.

3. Be content with your wages] with your allowance, whether in money, meat, or
whatsoever is provided for you fit and proportionable; be content with it,
keeping your selves within compass; and let your allowance suffice for your
maintenance, and neither mutiny against your Officers, nor go a forraging and
freebooting among the free people of the Country. Great was the Justice of
Aurelianus the Emperor in this case, Si vis Tribunus esse, imo si vis vivere,
militum manus contine: nemo pullum alienum rapiat ovem nemo contingat, uvam
nullus auferat. Aurelian. Imperat.
who told his Lieutenant; It thou will be a Tribune; yea if thou will live,
hold the hands of thy soldiers; let no man snatch away another man's Chicken,
nor touch a Sheep, nor take away so much as a Grape from another man. It must
be a rule to all servants and laborers, and whosoever are hired to any kind of
employment; the practice of true Religion and Equity is fit for all sorts of
persons; yea even for soldiers: which confuteth that foolish conceit of
Machiavel, That Religion may be spared in War, because it makes men cowards;
both parts of his Assertion are most false. For,

1. To whom can Religion be more necessary, than for those that are in most
danger?

2. And who have more reason to be resolute, than they that know their quarrel
is good, and cause warrantable for them to die in, and also have faith, and be
persuaded of the forgiveness of their sins. It was a wicked speech of Marius
the Roman, that being reproved for breaking the Laws of his Country in the
Camp, made answer, that he could there hear no sound of Laws for the clattering
of armor. Constantine had the exercises of Religion in his Camp, and the
Priest by God's own appointment made a short Sermon to the Israelites going to
battle, Deuteronomy. 20.3, 4. Let no man therefore do that which is irregular, and
then make Providence whistle to his own tune, as the manner of too many in out
days has been; because God has not presently executed vengeance upon their
abominations, therefore they have pleaded necessity, and brought in providence
for the approbation of them.

CHAP. XLII. The Conclusion, consolatory to the Church of God.
THis Doctrine of Providence may yield much comfort to all that are in Christ,
and at peace with that God that governs the world. The Lord reigns, let the
earth rejoice, let the multitude of Isles be glad thereof, Psalm. 97.1. that is,
Let the people that are dispersed here and there in several parts of the world
rejoice that the Lord is upon his Throne reigning over the whole world. It is
true, this is matter of terror to his Enemies. Clouds and darkness are round
about him, etc. verse. 2. A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies
round about, ver. 3. Yet is it matter of singular comfort to the people of God,
that their Lord and King reigns over the whole world. Sion heard and was
glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Lord;
for thou Lord art high above all the earth; thou art exalted far above all
gods, verse. 8, 9. There are now many dark clouds round about the Throne of God,
which seem to obstruct the dim-sighted carnalist from beholding the glorious
actings of him that sits upon the Throne. God's ways and providence toward
these Nations for diverse years together have seemed dark and cloudy, and his
actings to be in obscurity; but when by an eye of faith the godly can see
through all these clouds, they have wherewith to comfort their spirits in the
midst of all confusions, namely, that the Lord reigns.

When we see a new face of things, and great mutations in the world; we are apt
too much to look upon Instruments: Now such a party is cried up, anon cried
down: Some will inveigh against one party, some against another, according to
men's several affections, principles, interests, engagements. It is true, Some
sin grievously that are the grand Instruments in great Revolutions and Changes,
yet is it not in their power to change times and seasons, it belonging to God
alone to remove Kings, and set up Kings, Dan. 2.21.
as Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzar; and as for men, Time and Chance happens to
them all. God has appointed changes unto men in their condition, and no
wisdom, riches or strength can defend them from his appointment, Dr Preston of
God's Attributes.
as a Learned man has noted. Neither is it in the power of the most haughty
Instruments to change the face of times and things according to their own
wills; as we have seen of late by large experience in diverse instances. No,
this is the work of him who is a God unchangeable; and when he determines to
change times and seasons, to root up such and such Governments, or to change
the form of any Government, he makes use of Instruments of diverse sorts, good
and bad, and these do strive and struggle one with another, and do all work
together in accomplishing his secret counsel, known to himself, though to them
altogether unknown; the temper of the times carries upon it the impressions of
Eternity, and the two great Wheels of the Worlds Charet [ Motion and Mutation]
are driven by him with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning.
And though the great Changes that have of late befallen this Nation, seem new
to us, yet they are but God's counsels of old, and his Eternal Purpose brought
into Act: Acts 15.18.
For known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. God's
people then may comfort themselves, That the Kingdom and Government of the
most High shall stand as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abide for
ever, firm in the midst of all the Concussions, Revolutions, and turnings of
the time, and shall be upheld when all earthly Kingdoms shall be destroyed. And
therefore as the Sun always keeps one tract and way in a steady course,
because his way is above the Air, where winds, and storms, and tempests are: So
the glorious Sun of Righteousness is always going on without any stop to
bring to pass his Act, his strange Act, and to do his work, Isa. 28.21.
his strange work, because his Kingdom and Government is above the power of
time, Senault. Treat. 2. Disc. 5.
and of all creatures subject to time and chance. God's Providence still leads
men to their end with as much force as sweetness; his power hurts not their
liberty, because accompanied with sweetness; and his sweetness wrongs not his
Majesty, Duc me sum Pater, vasti Moderator Olympi, Quacunque placuit, nulla
parendi est mora; Adsum impiger: fac nolle comitabor gemens, malusque patiar
facere quod licuit bono. August. de civ. Dei. c. 8. l. 8.
because attended with power: What ever he does he acts always like a
Sovereign. I conclude all with that prayer of St Augustine, O Sovereign Father,
who governest the vast frame of Heaven, I submit to thy direction, lead me to
the right hand, lead me on the left, turn to what side thou please; I follow
thee without reply or delay: For what should I get by resistance, but to be
dragged weeping, and to bear being evil, what I might do sincerly, by becoming
good?

FINIS.

