THE SAINTS RECREATION, THIRD PART, UPON THE ESTATE OF GRACE. CONTAINING And
methodicially delineating a Christians Progress, Privileges, Comforts and
Duties, beginning at Conversion: describing also the blessed Redeemer JESUS,
both absolutely and comparatively: And all these in Spiritual Hymns and Songs,
suited to grave, sweet and melodious Tunes; Together with a plain Paraphrase
upon the margent, confirming all by Scriptures, explaining difficulties and
methodizing the Songs.

Compiled by Mr. WILLIAM GEDDES, Minister of the Gospel, first at Wick in
Caithnes, and after at Urquhart in Murray.

Colos. 3: 16. Let the word of CHRIST dwell in you richly, in all wisdom:
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs,
etc.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by David Lindsay, Mr. James Kniblo, Josua van Solingen and
John Colmar, Anno Dom. M.D.C.LXXXIII.

The PRIVILEGE.
FOR AS MUCH as Mr. William Geddes, late Minister at Urquhart, having made ane
humble address to his Majesty's Privy Council, Representing that he has been
at great care, pains, diligence and expenses, in compiling the Books following,
and which are now in the Press, viz. Memoriale Historicum, and the Saints
Recreation; and these other Books, Which he intends for the Press, viz.
Geographical, and Arithmetical Memorials, Memoriale Hebraicun, for facilitating
the Hebrew Language, Vocabularium Latino-Hebraicum, in Hexameter Verse, and
Familiae Famigeratae, and humbly desiring, that he might have a Privilege for
Printing the Books by himself, his Heits, Executors, or Assigneys, for some
years: and that he might be Recommended for his Encouragement and Assistance to
all Persons of Ingenuity and Generosity, for promoving and perfecting such ane
Work. THE LORDS of His Majesty's Privy Council having heard and considered the
foresaid Address and Representation, with the report of a commit of their
own number; that the said Books are worthy to be Published, and will be very
useful and conducive to the advancing of Piety and Learning: Do therefore
Recommend the said Mr. William Geddes his printed Advertisement of the said
Treatises, to all His Majesty's good Subjects, for his Encouragement and
Assistance in the said Work, as their generosity, and ingenuity shall prompt
them. And further, do hereby give and grant to the said Mr. William Geddes, the
sole and only Privilege of Printing the foresaid Treatises compiled by him,
for the space of Nineteen years, after the date hereof: Discharging all others
to print, re-print, import, or vent the same during that space, without the
said Mr. William Geddes his own, or the consent of his Heirs, Executors or
Assigneys, under the pain of Confiscation thereof, to his and their use.
Ordaining these Presents to be printed and prefixed to the said Books
respective, that none pretend Ignorane. Extr, by me.

Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of March, 1683. WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti Con.

An Apology for the Authors delay.
Whereas many generous persons have advanced before hand, the price of the
Books, mentioned in the Authors advertisement; and they may possibly admire,
that they have not received these Books long ago, according to the Authors
promise: I humbly plead at those generous persons hands, that they may have the
author excused. For, as no man can promise absolutely for his own life or
health, so much as for ane hour, so not for the constant progress of a press,
and the Author used all diligence imaginable, yet, Ultra posse, non est esse.
And as the best of works meet ordinarily with the most and greatest
obstructions, be reason of Satan's and his Instruments malice: So has his pious
and worthy design been obstructed several ways, which are not altogether
pertinent to be divulged. Therefore, I hope, that discreet and intelligent
persons will have so much humanity and ingenuity as to consider, that such
promises must be always understood to be conditional, implying such
reservations as these, IF GOD WILL, IF HEALTH-SERVE, etc.

I humbly entreat also, that you read this Book deliberatly and seriously,
comparing it with the Authors design mentioned in his Preface, before you pass
a rash or harsh censure upon it. In this Giddy Notional age, there is much
imaginary supposed knowledge, but too little conscience: Many new coined words
and high slown Notions, but few Spiritual Meditations and Religious practices,
which are most suitable to those who keep a closs constant Heart-communion with
GOD, walking always as in the view of Heaven and Hell, Death and Judgment:
And I suppose such hes been the Spiritual frame of the Author at the compiling
of this treatise. It is probable, that some Men of preposterous tempers, at the
first sight of the Book, not finding it stuffed with fruitles curiosities, may
presently nauseat and disdain. But read, I pray you consideratly, and you
shall find it wants not Christian acutenes: And be pleased but to have a little
patience, till the Authors other Book called Memoriale Historicum, come to your
hands, (which I hope shall be shortly,) and you shall find there some pleasant
curiosities, both for recreation and edification, which may serve to exercise
with delight, the Fansy, Judgment and Memory.

A summary VIEW of the Substance and Method of the Book.
IN this little Treatise, the first Part or Song describes a Sinners
conversion, bringing him through the pangs of the New Birth; and that partly by
the Information of the Word, by the Inspiration of the Spirit, by Conviction of
Conscience or Correction of Chastening Rods: The first part (I say) shows how
CHRIST Converts and Reclaims a straying Sinner by some of these Means, or by
all. Page 1. 2. The second Part or Song revives a fainting Soul struggling with
the Pangs of the New Birth, or latly delivered from the Spirit of Bondage, and
that by Spiritual Cordials of Comfortable Promises. P. 8. 3. The third Part or
Song brings forth a Converted Sinner, as it were, to a New World, transported
with admiration, and in a Triumphing Strein, describing the wonderful Work of
Man's Redemption, how it was decreed and gradually revealed, rejoicing in the
Nativity of our Blessed SAVIOR, and chiefly describing His matchles Person,
and admirable Union of His two Natures. P. 16. 4. The fourth Part or Song
describes our Blessed Savior's threefold Office, as King, Priest and Prophet.
P. 24. 5. The fifth Part or Song describes our Blessed Savior's Types, Titles
and Attributs, first in Order Alphabetical, and then in a Table Logical or
Philosophical. P. 31 to 49. 6. Our Blessed and Glorious REDEEMER, being in the
former Songs described absolutely, as he is in Himself: Here He is described
Comparatively and made infinitely to transcend and excel Men and Angels, and
all things else. P. 49. to 59. 7. In the seventh Part or Song are holden forth
the sweet Fruits of Redemption, viz, a Believers incomparable Blessings,
Comforts, and Privileges. P. 59. 8. The eight Part or Song plainly discovers
a Believers Evidences, and describes all Christian Duties, in testimony of
Thankfulness, and that both by Pattern and Precept. P. 73 to 89. 9. The
Epilogue or Appendix in the close, contains Devout and Religious Memento's or
Memorandums, for the whole days Spiritual Exercise. P. 89, etc.
THE DEDICATION. To the Right Honorable, most pious and virtuous Lady, Dame
MARGARET LESLEY, Councess Dowager of Weems.
MADAM,
THough this little Treatise may be called mine be way of composing, yet is may
be justly called your Ladieships work by way of publishing and presenting it
into the World: For it was your Ladieship and your Noble Daughter, that most
excellent Young Lady, Dame MARGARET, Countess and Heretrix of WEEMS, who gave
me the most considerable advance for my encouragement and assistance in
Printing. And by such works as this, Your Ladieship gives a clear
demonstraiting, that, you are not like that barren Fig Tree, mentioned in Luke,
Cha. 13. verse. 7. But like the pleasant Palm Tree, bringing forth (...) in Old
Age, Psalm. 92. 14. And the scope of this work being to divert [if possible] our
profane vulgar from (...) Sonners to more Christian and Spiritiuall
divertisements, I hope, Your Ladieship need not be ashamed to vouchsafe it the
smiling aspect of your favorable counten^^^^.

To run out upen Your Ladieships Elogies and Applauses, Your Virtues are so
great and conspicuous, and my Style so low, and disproportionable, that I dare
not much adventure, lest I be found deficient. Your Piety and Devotion toward
GOD, your Equity toward, Mert, your Charitable Supplies to indigent
Christians, your Equabilitie and composedness of Spirit in all conditions of
Life, whether Prosperity or Adversity are so menifest to all, that common
Fame [if I should insist] might easily put to silence my weak Oratrie. It has
pleased GOD Almighty to attend your Ladieship with some singular Providence
and extraordinary Blessings, (Lord great you suitable Thankfulness.) As first,
the LORD has been pleased to propagat and continue three Noble, Ancient and
Eminent Families by your happy Offspring. The Lord was graciously pleased to
make your Ladieship an happy and successful (...) in that wonderful
Restoration of our Royal Sovereign the Kings Sacred Majesty without Blood,
which is one of the great wonders of our Age, and whereupon all the World
^^^ked with admiration and astonishment: And this your Ladieship did by
influencing, with Christian Advice, (as I am informed) those General Major
Monk, afterward called Duke of Albemarle.
who were in power at the time.

And as this Noble Enterprise, at such a time, evidenced Masculine Courage and
Heroic Magnanimity, so it was an infallible argument of most Christian
Humanity and Superlative Loyalty. There is yet one thing more, which I cannot
omit, deserving great deference, being some piece of rariety in this cold,
Laodicean-like and backslyding Age: And that it your Christian-Moderation,
Prudence and Sobriety, that whileas the most part of People are deviating to
some sinful and vicious extremes, upon the right hand or the lest; some to
erroneous giddiness and unconstant levity; some to Atheistical loosenoss and
profanity, Your Ladieship all the time has kept the middle line of a golden
Mediocrity, even the straight course of solid, sober and substantious
Christianity: Which [I am confident] shall afford your Ladieship unspeakable
Peace and Comfort here, and conduct you to Eternal Felicity hereafter: And
this shall be the constant Prayer of him, who it.

Urquhart, June 6, 1683. MADAM Your Ladieships most obsequious and devouted
Servant in CHRIST, WILLIAM GEDDES.

Preface to the READER.
IT is not a new nor strange thing to teach Religion by way of Songs: We find
the most material and Spiritual subjects in all the Sacred Scriptures, not only
by way of precept enjoined, but also (according to divine precept) delivered in
Songs. Moses the choice Man of God is observed to make the first Hexameter
verses in Hebrew, in that super-excellent, gratulatory Song Exodus 15. upon the
miraculous deliverance of Israel at the Red Sea. Did not the Lord command Moses
to teach the People of Israel in a Song* Deuteronomy. 31. and chap. 32. His manifold
mercies; their horride and base unthank: fullness and the formidable consequents
of their ingratitude, to wit, fearful Judgments: Which is indeed, an
abridgment of all Prophecies. And so the People of Israel, by way of
Prophetical anticipation, are made to sing out their own ^ and acknowledge the
Justice of GOD in inflicting deserved plagues.
Beside the Book of Psalms, penned for the most part by David, and some by
Moses and others, which by some is called the marrow of Scripture; we have as
Spiritual and Soul ravishing a book as in all the Scripture delivered in Songs,
to wit, the Song of Solomon, which (being well understood) holds forth most
pathetically, the sweet, most intimat and heart-transporting communion betwixt
Christ and his Spouse the Church. Moreover we have the Song of Isaiah. Isai.
Chap. 12. Of Habbakkuk Chap. 3. ^. 17. The Song of Zacharias Luke 1. 67, 68.
etc. The blessed Virgin and Elizabeth at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness
upon the Horizon of a sinful World, or the Nativity of our Blessed Savior,
Luke 2: 42, 46. etc. And finally we have the heavenly Halelujahs of Angels and
Saints in the Church triumphant, delivered in Songs; Rev. 15: 3, 4. -- 19: 5,
6. The Blessed Apostle of the Gentiles not only enjoins to sing Psalms, but
also Hymns and Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5: 19 Col. 3: 16. The reason of all
this, seems to be, that the elegancy of the Poetical style, and accuratnes of
the form, together with the harmonious melody of the tune or air in singing,
may induce people to the more frequent perusing these subjects of the greatest
consequence, for meditation; and may take the deeper impress in the memory for
delightful retention. It is looked upon as one of the most edifying works that
ever the Protestant Reformers in Germany attempted, that (in imatation, as it
were, of the primitive pattern of the ancient Jewish Church) they reduced the
most of Christian Religion into Spiritual Songs, which the German Protestants
are continually singing to this day, when they are upon journey, when about
their secular employments, morning and evening and at all occasions. I have
been much longing for the like work in the English Language, for reclaming (if
possible) our profane vulgar from obscene, bawdy Songs (which are most
scandalous to our profession) to more Christian-like divertisements: but have
not, as yet, found such a thing don methodically and fully. I find indeed, many
excellent Poems upon scattered select subjects, far more accurat then mine,
and some godly ballads written by pious and devout Ministers at several
occasions, which (I acknowledge) Contain very good matter, and to my certain
experience, I have found them very useful for edification, and raising the
affections of some devout persons; (and have often wished that all these godly
Songs should be Collected and Printed in one Book.) Yet in them all, I
desiderat a methodical coherence, and confirmation by Scriptures, and some
other illustrations for satisfying the Judicious. I have attempted, according
to my mean Talent, to break the Ice, and lay a foundation for others of more
excellent parts, to bring such a work to some perfection. I have not sought for
a sublime, losty style, nor hunted after pedantick expressions, or Romantic
phrases; partly, that the Treatise might be useful and intelligible to the
vulgar, as well as to the learned; And partly, because I supposed, that neither
the whorish dress of human eloquence, or high flowing notions, nor yet the
sluttish Garb of rustic expressions, were suitable for the chaste Lady of
Divinity; but the grave Matronal habit of Godly, pertinent and Spiritual
simplicity. If any do not fancy to sing divinity (beside what I have said
already, which may be sufficient to refute that Childish mistake,) let such
read it as prose; and I hope, they shall find nothing but pertinency and
Spirituality. But I cannot omit here, to obviat an objection which may be
raised by some inconsiderat Persons, which is this: O say they, we remember
some of these Airs or Tunes were sung heretofore with Amorous Sonnets, wherein
were (may be) some bawdy-like or obscene-like expressions. To this I answer,
first, that in this practice, I have the president of some of the most pious,
Grave and Zealous divines in the Kingdom, who to very good purpose, have
composed Godly Songs to the Tunes of such old Songs as these, The bonny Broom,
I Will never leave thee, We Will all go pull the hadder, and such like, and yet
without any challenge or disparagement. Secondly it is alleged by some, and
that not without some color of reason, that many of our Airs or Tunes are
made by good Angels, but the Letter or lines of our Songs by Devils. We choose
the part Angelical and leaves the Diabolical. Thridly it is as possible and
probable, that these vain or profane men who composed those Amorous naughty
Sonnets, have surreptitiously borrowed those grave, sweet Tunes from former
Spiritual Hymns and Songs, and why may not we again challenge our own, plead
for restitution, and bring back to the right owner; applying those grave Airs
again to a Divine and Spiritual subject. And lastly, we find that Paul, the
great Apostle of the Gentiles sanctified some sentences and verses of Greek
Poets, converting them into Scriptural Maxims, such as that Cretenses omnes
sunt mendaces; The Cretians are always Liars, etc. Tit. 1: 12. And that in
Act. 17: 28. For in him we live, move, and have our being, etc. And why may not
we, (finding the measures of a melodious Tune or Air, indifferent in
themselves) consecrat and apply them to a Sacred Poem. I call this Treatise,
The third Part, as relating to two other Parts, anterior to this, both in order
of time and nature, to wit upon the Estate of Innocence, and the Estate of Sin
and Corruption, etc. which I have also ready for the Press, but have, for
several reasons begun with this Treatise, till I see how the work may get
acceptance; and as I find it pleasing. I may add the rest at another
impression. If any Devout and Religious persons reap any good by it, as it is
my principal Scope, so it shall be my great rejoicing, that I shall be
instrumental, either by word or write, to glorify GOD and edify his People.

To this GOD, infinite, eternal and incomprehensible, one in Essence, three in
distinct Persons, let all Men and Angels ascribe all Praise, Honor, Glory,
Power and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Approbations to the BOOK.
Ornatissimo and Dilectissimo fratri Pastori WICKENSI in Cathanesia.
Reverende in Christo Frater,
CVrsim and reptim quaedam legi in hoc pio and elaborato Poemate, niss, animus
meus vacillet, prout frequenter contingit, sapit limam, meretur praelum; sed
non sum adeo Suffenus, ut huic lucubrationi, herbam parietariam mei suffragii
apponere audeam. Quis ego sum, quipalam, Judicium far sine tribunali conarer?
Non possum ita paratragediari. Laudo equidem acumen and eruditionem Authoris,
and haec in obsequium exaravit festinante Calamo.

Toaduni, Aug. 5: 73. Tuus in Christo frater fraterrimus, Mr. GUL. RAITT.

Reverend Brother,
SO much as time and leisure could permit, I did read your Manuscript of
Spiritual Songs. In my humble opinion, the subject matter of them is pious and
grave, the expression plain and Scriptural, the method short and clear, and
the Paraphrase pertinent, and Orthodoxe. If encouragement be given by these in
power, for publishing it in print, It may be for good use to the ingenious
Reader: That God may be pleased to continue his assistance with you in your
labors, is the earnest desire of him who is

Ed. College, Aug. 15. 73. Your very affectionat Brother in the Lord, Mr.
WILL. COLVILL. Primar of the College of Edinburgh.

The impartial Judgment of a Sincere Friend upon the Author and the Poem.
THe matter's sacred, diction not abstruse,
Nor rustic; suited for a Christan Muse:
The method's plain, and helps the memory:
The Tunes most grave, and make sweet melody.
Me thinks, I see another David here,
Or other Saints come from the Elysian Quire:
As David when with sorrows most undone,
Then breathed Heout the Songs with sweetest tune:
So you are a Man of sorrows, yet thou Sings,
As if thou were not sharer of such things:
I know it now, the Lark does soar on hy,
And sing in hopes, for all the stormy day.
Thy Crosses seem to put on thee an edge;
Thou take affliction, for the Christian badge:
Sing on Magnanime Spirit, raise thy voice
Till these Songs meet with everlasting Joys.
M: W: A:

Upon the Authors Spiritual Songs and Chronological Tables.
THy airs are sweet (my Friend,) the Harmony
By thy Diviner twang, resounds so high
From thy well tuned Theorb, we think upon
The Conspituous tokens. of GODS special presence in Solomon's Temple.
Shecina in days of Solomon.
As Glory filled the house, the Readers heart
(If widely, op'e) shall learn thy' holy art,
With Seraphims, to sing, for God shall dwell
In'him, as there, when he strives to Alluding to the inscriptions of some
Psalms, which say to him that excelle^^ etc.
excel.
Water thy The Author had the work of Redemption described in the figure of a
Tree, but could not get printing for it at the time.
Tree, thy Tables show abroad;
To flourish, to declare the works of God.
Myriads are Vexed, as Saul the Son of Kish:
Thou comes like David, or the Son of Jesse.
Embrace thy Lyre, heighten thy Roundelays
First charm that Sp'rit, then wear eternal, bays.
So Prays Mr. WILL. ANNAND. Dean of Edinburgh.

To Mr. WILLIAM GEDDES Minister at Vrquhard, upon his two excellent Treatises,
to wit, The Saints Recreation, and his Chronological Tables and Memorials.
GOod Master GEDDES, it is sweetly done,
To cheer thy heart with Zions Spiritual Songs:
Whilst we with Gog and Magog fiercely run,
Against each other with our wounds and wrongs;
The joys for which in Heaven alone we look,
Are antedated in thy breast and Book.
But though the Fancy and the Judgment joined
With Eloquence, harmonious measures make:
Yet if with Memory not stamped and coined;
All are ingulfed in oblivions lake.
How blessed are thy Books, which all the three
Helps, Fancy, Judgment, and the Memory.
Mr. NINIAN PATERSON.

ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
BEfore you read this Book deliberatly, be pleased, first to take notice of and
correct with your Pen, these few escapes of the Press (for the most exact and
vigilant will have some) and this will keep you from a stop, when you come to
them in your ordinary reading.

Page 33. l. 9. with Ancient, let the marginal note be Dan 7: 22. P. 33. l. 13.
with Apostle, let the marginal note be, Heb. 3: 1. p. 38. l. 25. Immanuel, let
it have this marginal note, i e, GOD with us. p. 39. l. 29. for the last word
of the line (LORDS) r. Lords. p. 41. l. 14. Ointment, with the marginal note,
Cant. 1: 3, p. 41. 1. 29. let (n) be prefixed to Priest. p. 49. l. 22. for
Ministers r. Minister, verb. p. 52. l. 14. for recall life r. life recall. p.
64. l. 17. for portion r. potion. l. 20. for thou r. thou, p. 66. 1. 26. for
got r. get. p. 79. l. r. Widows mite, with the marginal note, Luke 21: 2, 3, 7.
p. 84. l. 4. for after r. alter. p. 84. l. 15. dumb, with the marginal note,
Psalm. 39: 9. p. 84. l. 26. for I, r. I Will. p. 91. l. 22. for Sunlights r.
Sun-light's.

THE SAINTS RECREATION, THIRD PART: UPON THE ESTATE OF GRACE.
The First SONG,
Containing two Parts, First, CHRIST'S Expostulation, With a straying Sinner,
Secondly, The Sinner Conversion and Recovery.

THE FIRST PART.
1.
WHat is the cause, poor Soul thou do so stray
From me thy LORD, and from the righteous way?
By Baptismal vows and afterward.
Was this thy oath when thou with me Cov'nanted?
Where are the vows which thou so freely granted?
2.
Enumeration of mercies Spiritual and Temporal, positive and privative.
Am I not LORD of Light, of Life and Love?
Am I not He, to thee so kind did prove?
Did I not know thee by my eye All-seeing?
I knew thy mould before thou had a being.
3.
Ezekiel. 16: 3. Ephesians. 2: 1, 2, 12.
A wretched babe thou wast in sin first born,
Under God's wrath and curse: and so forlorn.
Might thou not been a monster formles Creature?
Whilst I have given a perfect comely Feature?
4.
I did my self of Royal robbs divest,
And clothed me with thy nature for thy rest.
I scourged was, and crowned with the thorn,
The cross I bare, for thee I suffered scorn.
5.
The Gospel Light I gave thee to direct;
A Guard of Angels ready to protect;
My Sp'rit to warn, and be thy gracious guyd:
Yet from my precepts thou do ever slyd.
6.
I Gave thee food and raiment, health and peace.
My self I gave for thy poor Souls release;
And yet to me unkynd thou still wast proving,
And do not labor to requite my loving.
7.
From Satan, Mercies privative, or deliverance from all evils.
Sin, and Hell I made thee free:
That thou might never condemnation see:
A Ransom, Sacrifice and Propitiation I
Was, Divine Justice for to satisfy.
8.
I keep't thee from the Famine, and the Sword:
From Pestilence, and did all good afford:
From shameful sin, and from flagitious crimes:
From Satan's snares in these confused times.
9.
That Satan might not fright thee, nor possess:
From madness, sudden death and all distress:
From sickness sore; and sting of conscience fell:
I kept thee from dropping into Hell.
10.
I did thee Gently Incorrigibleness under the rod.
chasten with the rod;
That thou might mind thy duty to thy God:
But when the rod was off, with Pharaoh vain
Thou wallowed in the Mire of sin again.
11.
This was not all; Mercies Eternal.
I promised thee a Crown,
Even Heavens glory, riches and renown;
If thou should serve me, yet thy fruit is small;
Thou wanders from me like the Prodigal.
12.
Where is thy Faith? where is thy fervent Love?
Where is thy zeal, and works, thy faith to prove?
Beware, like Laodicea, thou me force
Thee to reject with dolorous divorce.
13.
If thou do not repent and soon return,
And for thy many sins thou do not mourn;
If answer not my mercies to thee shown,
I Will the reject and never more thee own.
SECOND PART,
Containing the penitent Sinners Conversion and Recovery.

1.
WHat thundering voice is this I hear? who calls?
Is this the voice of CHRIST from Heaven
that falls?
I sleeping was, and pampered with all pleasure;
But now I see my sin's above all measure! Confession of Sin.

2.
Justly, O LORD might thou from me depart;
Justly might thou my sinful Soul desert:
For most ungrate I heretofore was proving;
And most unworthy of such matchless loving.
3.
O! what am I, thou should so kyndlie call?
And did not suffer in the pit to fall;
Since I have from my God so long departed,
No wonder that for sin I sore had smarted.
4.
Thy calls I did repel, Slighting of calls and warnings.
thy word I slighted:
Thy Sp'rit I quenched: thy rods when they have lighted,
I did not hear their voice; nor mercies prized.
But I have done what Satan has devised.
5.
My sins in number they are like the Sand, Acknowledgement of Sin in its
quantity and quality.

By breaking of thy righteous Command;
For quality, atrocious, great offenses:
I sinned with Soul and the external senses.
My sins are many, Acknowledgement of Sin in its quantity and quality.
yet no more than thou
Can freely pardon, O my God most true!
My sin is great, yet is thy mercy greater:
I run to thee, there is no Savior better.
7.
Thou past by Angels and have sent thy Son
In humane nature, Extolling of Gods mercies and recourse thereto.
our poor Souls to win.
Thou raisest up the Soul that is dejected,
And thou have not the weary Soul rejected.
8.
Thy promise is to seek the Soul that is lost:
Thy promise is to comfort all that is crossed.
I Have lost my self, come now sweet Lord and save me.
I cleave to thee my God, O do not leave me.
9.
With blinks of mercy thou do wretches view:
Thy glory is, in weakness strength to show.
Thy mercy is on those that have no merit,
That heirs of wrath great glory may inherit.
10.
When multituds I saw in the broad way, A great occasion of the Sinners
straying is bad example.

I took delight with them to go astray.
Disdainfully thy precepts I did trample,
Thy promise sweet, thy threats, and Saints example.
11.
The many bypath have my Soul deceived; Vicious extremities of the times.

And have me of my Savior near bereaved:
Some not for peace, some not for piety,
Some not for truth, some like the Pharisee.
12.
Some live so loose, as mynding not a judge,
No God, no Hell, no Heaven a soul to lodge;
Some Laodicean like, they care not whether
Religion sink or swim, Fools altogether!
13.
Some seeming godly, yet they have no love
No Christian works, their fruitful faith to prove:
Some loyal (and good reason) to great Caesar;
But to serve God, have neither time nor leisure.
14.
Some pious-like, and yet disown a King,
As if rebellion were no heinous thing:
Some place Religion in their vain opinion,
Some in debats about the best dominion.
15.
Some place Religion in most base reviling
The men of God, their own poor souls beguyling:
Some in proud Koreh's arrogant rebelling,
And yet they fancy heaven to be their dwelling.
16.
Sometimes I followed one, sometimes the other;
Sometimes I Jarr'd with father and with mother
For trivial things: O poor distracted I!
And many things I did, I knew not why.
17.
I now perceive all these are sinful theams,
Impertinent, and vicious extremes.
I Will now betake me to the good old way
Of thy dear Saints, and more I will not stray.
18.
I now perceive, Satan has many wyles
And sly devices which the Soul beguyles;
And that he may bereave me of my right,
Sometimes 2 Cor. 11: 14.
ane Angel seems to be of light.
19.
I know now what the Lord of me desires;
Peace, Mic. 6: 8. Matt. 23: 23.
truth and mercy, Justice he requires,
To be renewed in the inner-man,
And bring forth fruits with all the strength I can.
20.
If to my self severe, to others myld,
Sweet, gentle, calm and harmles as a Child:
The fear of God, and loyalty to Caesar:
To all men love: in this He takes great pleasure.
21.
I purpose, Lord, to live no more in sin;
I strayed long, but now I will begin
To serve the Lord with all my heart and strength;
That heavens bliss I may enjoy at length,
22.
Begone, then Sin and Satan, worldly toys,
You stop my Christian course, yon mar my Joys.
Draw me O Lord, and then I Will follow thee,
I Will sing thy praises to eternity.
FINIS.
SONG II.
THE DOOR OF HOPE, OR A CORDIAL FOR A FAINTING SOUL: Affording some further
Encouragement to draw near unto GOD, and to adventure on the Scepter of Mercy,
from the consideration of the fullness and freeness of GODS Bounty and Clemency,
and from absolute, and conditional promises, such, as poor Sinners can lay hold
upon.

1.
BUt now Some dawning or glimmering light of comfort to a fainting Soul from
the consideration of GODS mercy.
I find some Soul revive,
I find my Cordial
Cheering my Sp'rit, that I may live,
Allaying bitter gall.
Glad tidings I begin to hear,
Sion does mercy sing:
Ephesians. 2: 12, 13.
Sweet JESUS can me draw full near
Unto Jehovah King.
2.
Gods wisdom, power and goodness are three great pillars of a Christians
considence.
Thou art most gracious, wise and strong,
Thou King of Heaven most high,
Psalm. 27. ult. Psalm. 130: 5, 6.
Therefore i will wait and not think long,
Till thou send some supply.
The Souls resolution to wait.
A Supplicant thrown at thy feet,
Thy mercy to implore:
Mat, 7: 7.
I Will beg and knock till alms I get,
I Will wait at Heavens Door.
3.
Necessity makes me to wait;
I cannot find but here;
I will with humble Sp'rit and meek
Unto my God draw near.
The incomprehensible greatness of Gods mercy.
When I begin for to recount
Thy mercies manifold;
Psalm. 51: 1. -- 40: 5.
In number they do far surmount
What Pen or Tongue have told.
4.
Romans 11: 33.
They Are high, they are deep, they are long and broad,
Psalm. 36: 5.
They reach the starry frame,
They Are over all thy works, o God,
To magnify thy name.
The freenes of Gods mercy.
The freenes of Thy goodness great,
Make me for to conceive, Isa. 55: 1. Hos. 14: 4.

That such a wretch may mercy get;
And this I humbly crave.
5.
It is thy Ezekiel. 16: 3, 4, 6.
glory to extend
Thy mercy, where there is
No merit; then thy mercy send, Misery, the fittest object of mercy.

And let me have the bliss.
I Am sick in sin, Psalm. 51: 8 -- 38: 2, 3.
both blind and lame,
Isa, 35: 5, 6. Rev. 3: 17. 2. Tim. 2: 26. Fulness of Gods mercy.
Poor, and a wretched slave;
An object fit for mercy am:
Oh let me mercy have.
6.
Psalm. 103: 11, 12. Exodus 34: 6. Absolute promises. 1. Sending a Savior.
Thy Treasure is so full of grace,
Nothing can it impare:
Thou ever gives and have no less;
O, let me have a share.
Thou sent a Mediator Genesis 3: 15. Isa. 7: 14. A Savior is sent to ane ungrate
World.
good,
When man did not require,
Even this Messiah for his need,
When none could give an hire.
7.
Since thou have sent, and he is come,
Of mere free Love and Grace;
Oh, do bestow on me Mat. 15: 27. 2. Calling of the Gentiles being Idolaters.
a crumb
Those sent Isa. 54: 1. -- 42: 6.
unto the Gentiles light,
When they by sin most vile,
Ephesians. 2: 12, 13.
Had lost all interest and right,
And under sad exile.
8.
Isa. 54: 1.
Thou made the barren Woman bear
More than the married Wife;
Romans 17: 17.
Thou gav'st the Olive wild a share
In promises of life.
Then I am one of Japhets race,
O do not me exclude;
Give me a drop of saving grace,
Though but a spurious brood.
9.
Thou promisest the stony Ezekiel. 11: 19. 36. 26.
hearts
To mollify, 3. To take away the stoney heart.
and then,
To write thy Law Ezekiel. 36: 26. Jer. 31: 33.
in inward parts
Of worthless wretched men.
I find this promise absolute,
To those who have no grace: 4. To extend mercy to those who require it not.

You Are found Isa. 65: 24.
of those who sought thee not,
Isa. 9: 6.
O Peerless Prince of Peace.
10.
To wit, those promises.
If these be free, why shall I then
My self from thence seclude?
When God excepts no Isa. 55: 1. Mat. 11: 28. Joh. 7: 37. Gal. 3: 28.
mortal man,
That Is come of Adams seed.
Their Of the promises.
Ocean-fulness Ephesians. 3: 20. Romans 10: 12. Jam. 1. 5. 6. 17. Ephesians. 2: 4.
can supply
All that I stand in need:
They, re precious, 2 Pet. 1: 5.
for they purchas't be
2 Cor. 1: 20.
By Christ's most precious blood.
11
The freeness of thy promises
Breeds hope: The grounds of comfort and waiting.
Their fullness suits
All my defects; Their preciousness
With all my wants it meets.
Act. 17: 24. Jos. 3: 11. Psalm. 46: 7.
Thy Sovereign supremacy
Makes me thee wait upon;
As well becomes a wretch to lie
At Thy feet while I moan.
12.
The greatness of Gods promises, in promising himself.
Thou say Thou Wilt with thy people dwell,
And give thy self to them:
Thou Wilt be their God, 2. Cor. 6: 16. Rev. 7: 15. -- 21: 3. Isa. 66: 1.
and then they shall
Thy glorious works proclaim.
Oh, what am I but dust and clay?
And will thou condescend
With me to lodge? O happy day!
Come then thy mercy send.
13.
Isa. 57: 15. -- 66: 4.
My heart thy house do thou prepare
For Thee that glorious guest;
For I have no delicious fare
For such a Royal feast.
Promise of the Spirit.
But usher in thy Joh. 14: 26. -- 16: 13. Luke 11: 13. Effects of the Spirit.
Sp'rit, and He
Will give what may thee please:
Then, welcome, welcome shall thou be;
This will my Spirit raise.
14
O give then that good Sp'rit of grace,
1. Direction. Joh. 16: 13.
In thy way to conduct:
2. Pacification. Joh. 14: 27.
He to my conscience Will give peace,
3. Information. Joh. 14: 26.
And plainly me instruct.
In Christ the Vine 4. Spiritual insition. Joh. 3: 5. -- 15: 1.
He will me graff,
5. Renovation. Exck. 36: 26. Ephesians. 4: 23, 24.
And wholly me renew.
6. Consolation. Joh. 14: 26.
All fears and tears He will drive off,
7. Confirmation and Ratification. Ephesians. 4: 30. Ephesians. 1: 13.
And be my Seal most true.
15
In midst of every Romans 8: 15, 16, 17. 35, 38.
Stormy blast
Of sad vexation,
Assures me of my interest
In Thy Salvation.
Against the fiery 8. Protection. Joh. 14: 26.-16: 13.
Serpents sting
Of strong tentation,
He me defends; so that I sing
With consolation.
16.
He Will give his Son, Promise of his Son. Mat. 17: 5. Jo. 1: 12.
if that I call
In Truth and verity;
Who will to me prove Phil. 3: 8, 9. 1 Cor. 3: 21, 22.
All in All,
And cure my misery.
So shall the blessed Joh. 14: 23, 26.
Trinity
take me to be their own;
Henceforth no sin or misery
shall my poor soul cast down.
17
He Will wisdom 1 Cor. 1: 36.
be, CHRIST fullness.
to give me light:
He Is Righteousness to clear;
Lest divine Justice do me fright,
He paid a ransom dear.
He is SANCTIFICATION,
Me wholly to renew:
He Will work me full Redemption,
For he is a Savior true.
18.
Into that gulf prepared of old,
I Am ready for to fall:
As a person ready to be drowned, is preserved, by laying hold on twiggs, on
the bank of the River; so a Soul at the brink of despair, is revived by the
consideration of absolute promises, and of Gods full and free mercies.
But of these twiggs I take some hold,
And yet for mercy As a person ready to be drowned, is preserved, by laying
hold on twiggs, on the bank of the River; so a Soul at the brink of despair, is
revived by the consideration of absolute promises, and of Gods full and free
mercies.
call.
Thou art that Sweet Luke 10: 33, 34.
Samaritan,
That cures a wounded soul.
Thou never did reject that man
1 Pet. 5: 7. Joh. 6: 37. Psalm. 55: 22.
On thee his care did roll.
19.
The weary-laden Mat. 11: 28.
Thou do call, Conditional promises.

That they may come to Thee:
Thou Wilt ease them of their burden all,
And cure their misery.
Thou promised life to them Isa. 55: 2, 3.
who hear;
Mat. 5: 6. Isa. 55: 1, 2.
The hungry Soul to fill.
Joh. 7: 37.
The thristy Soul with wine to cheer,
Of consolation still.
20.
They Are saved, who call upon Psalm. 50: 15 Joel. 2: 32.
Thy name,
Who knock at mercies gate:
Joh. 3: 16.
They who believe, meet with the same,
And who their Hos. 14: 8.
sins do hate.
Psalm. 119: 1. Psalm. 50: 23.
Who in Thy precepts way do go,
By them, their life to square,
Thou will to them Salvation show:
They ever Blessed are.
21.
I hear, I pray, I do believe,
Lord help my unbeleef:
O do my silly Soul relieve
from all my pain and greef.
I Am sorry for my sinful falls,
Thy voice I will obey:
I Will answer when on me thou calls:
Alas too long I stray.
22.
It Is by thy grace that I intend, All ascribed to Gods free grace.

To turn to thee again:
It Is Thy free grace that must amend
My conversation vain:
Phil. 2: 13.
The will, the work, is all of Thee,
My Sp'ritual thoughts each one:
Phil. 1: 6. Heb. 12: 2.
Then, Crown this work begun in me,
And send Salvation.
23.
A transition to the treatise of CHRIST.
But now I see the Day appear,
The Morning-Starre arise;
The Sun of Righteousness draws near,
fair The Sun so called by the Latin Poets.
Phoebus from the Skies.
O Shine upon my silly Soul,
With warming beams of light;
On Thee, my burden I do roll,
O Glorious King of might.
FINIS.
SONG III.
THE PILGRIMS PANACEA, OR BALM OF GILEAD, Holding forth (1.) the Restoration,
or Redemption of lost mankind, how it was Decreed, and gradually revealed,
until the Nativity of Our blessed SAVIOVR. (2.) Of CHRIST'S Nativity, His
matchless Person, His divine and humane Natures, His All Sufficiency to save,
with ane Introduction to His Offices.

1.
THough Satan, Death and Romans 5: 12, 13. -- 6: 23. Gal. 3: 10.
Hell conspire,
To throw me in Tartarean fire;
Yet some of Adams wretched race
Ephesians: 2: 8.
Rescued shall be by Gods free grace.
2.
Before the Earth foundation Romans 8. 29. Ephesians. 1: 4.
took, Salvation decreed.

It written was in Heavens Book;
Eternal and a firm decree
In Council of the Trinity,
3.
That Christ Jehovah's only Son
Should be a living 1 Pet. 2: 6.
Cornerstone:
In him were some Ephesians. 1: 4, 5.
Elect to be
Jer. 18; 6. Romans 9: 23.
Choice vessels to Eternity.
4.
Did that Immense, Eternal God, The devout Souls pious reflection upon the
consideration of Gods free grace.

In light who has a firm abode,
One Essence in blessed Trinity,
Three Persons in that Unity,
5.
Who from none else do'th seek supply,
(For in him all perfections be)
Psalm. 16: 2, 3.
My good to Him does not extend;
For why his glory has none end:
6.
Did that great Jove my bliss contrive?
Me wretched worm to keep alive?
To keep me from Eternal fire,
When Hellish powers did conspire?
7.
How shall poor I, then thankful prove,
For this great mercy, this free Love?
My Soul shall all her Psalm. 103. 1. -- 42: 11.
powers bend,
Him to extol, World without end.
8.
To Adam Genesis 3: 15.
this was first revealed* Redemption and Salvation revealed.

When to tentation He did yield:
He trembling run Genesis 3: 8.
himself to hide:
Gods presence He could not abide.
9.
When guilty of Apostasy,
By tasteing the forbidden Tree,
Horror of conscience did him fright:
Ill-doers always shun the light.
10.
God frowns, good Angels do forsake,
The Heaven is shut, th'Infernal-lake
Is ready to receive: and so
Nothing remains but wrath and woe.
11.
But He whose Exodus, 14: 10. 10. 1 Samuel, 23: 26, 27, 28. Ezekiel. 16: 4, 5, 6, etc.
opportunity
Is wretches great extremity;
He who dispenses every lot,
Isa. 65: 1, 2, 4.
Is found of them that sought Him not.
12.
He calls for Adam of free Grace,
And Preached to Him a blessed peace.
Come, Adam, thou have greatly sinned
Yet with me thou may mercy find:
13.
Afflictions sharp thou Gen 3: 17, 18, 19.
must endure,
But thy Salvation shall be sure.
I shall thee send a Genesis 3: 15.
Blessed Seed,
And He shall bruise the Serpents head.
14.
This is the Covenant of Grace,
Which brings my Soul so sweet solace.
There is Some distinguish the Covenant of Redemption, which is betwixt GOD the
Father, and the Son from the Covenant of grace which is betwixt God and Man by
the Mediator JESUS, which they ground upon such Scriptures as these. Act. 20:
28. 1. Cor. 6: 20. 1 Pet. 1: 18. Act. 23. comp. with Psalm. 2: 7. Ephesians. 1: 3, 4,
5. See Dicksons therapeutica Sacra l. 1. c. 4.
a gracious paction
Betwixt the Father and the Son.
15.
And by the Son, with Adams race,
Who should repent, and seek his grace.
The Son unto the Father spoke,
I will Man's nature on me take.
16.
I will my self a ransom give,
For the Elect that they may live:
Come, Son, (quoth He) if thou do so,
They shall be safe from Hell and woe.
17.
The Father to poor man he says,
If thou believe with saving Faith,
In this my Son; I Will give thee peace:
Eternal Love shall thee embrace. The promise renewed to Abraham, and the
Messiss restricted to His family and offspring.

18.
The Lord did promise even the same
To Faithful father Genesis 12: 3. -- 18: 18. -- 22: 18. The gradual clearing and
confirming of the Covenant of grace.
Abraham;
That in His seed all should be blessed,
And get from Him Eternal rest.
19.
This promise grows more Heb. 1: 1.
full and clear
Till that the full time did draw near:
So that Messiah's Dan. 9: 24, 25.
time and Mic. 5: 2.
place
The Prophets told, Isreal's race.
20.
This blessed Seed who glorious is, CHRIST and Redemption by him typified by
Sacrifices and Ceremonies.

P'raefigur'd Col. 2: 16, 17. Heb. 7. 8. 9.
was by Sacrifice:
By Types and Shadows Heb. 10: 1.
many one,
Even to His Incarnation.
21.
This Seed is that Messiah great;
Eternal God without all date:
Hence does my drouping Soul yet Live:
For He Salvation Act. 4: 12. 1 Col. 1: 30.
will me give.
22.
His Birth, his Life, His Death and all
His acts and sufferings great and small,
Mat. 9: 12, 13. Mal. 4: 2.
Are Balsam for my bleeding would:
In Him alone Salvation's found.
23.
I Will now my meditation raise;
1. Pet. 1: 12.
For this the Angels does amaze.
I Will soar on Contemplations wings,
Admiring these Celestial things.
24.
O how great sweetness JESU LORD,
Thy very Names my Soul afford! The comfortable names and titles of CHRIST,
whereof see more in Song V.

For, JESUS, that is a Savior Mat. 1: 25. JESUS is the same that Joshua, that
is, to save.
sure,
To give my Soul a Sovereign cure.
25.
CHRIST, that is the chief That same which the Hebrew word Messiah, that is
anointed, Joh. 1: 41 -- 4: 25. Isa. 61: 1. For he was furnished with all
suitable endowments to be our King, Priest, and Prophet, Psalm. 45: 7. Joh. 3:
34.
Anointed one;
To him a parallel is none;
Not with that Oil material,
Prescribed by Law Levitical;
26.
But with the Sp'rit above all measure,
Hence is my life, my Joy, my treasure,
Transcendent Col. 1: 19. CHRIST'S Nativity.
gifts (I know right well)
He has, my Soul to keep from Hell.
27.
Luke 2: 9, 10, 15.
O joyful tidings do I hear,
At Bethlehem in a Heavenly quire:
The Angels sing and shout for joy,
When Christ was born, that blessed Boy.
28.
To GOD be glory, Luke 2: 14, 15.
peace on Earth,
Good will to men, O Blessed birth!
Go, Shepherds, go, and leave your Tent,
This day to you a Savior's sent.
29.
To Bethlehem run and Him behold,
Of whom the Prophets have fortold. CHRIST'S immaculat and wonderful conception,
and Union of the divine and Humane natures.

Ye shall the great Messiah see,
In whom all Nations blessed be.
30.
The wonder first (for to begin)
A Man is born free Mat. 1: 20, Luke 1: 35.
of sin,
Job 24: 4. Psalm. 51: 5.
The like was not since Adam's fall;
This cleanses sin Original.
31.
Another thing I do admire,
That GOD Eternal comes so near.
My nature Heb. 2: 16, 17. Isa. 7: 14. Joh. 1: 14, Mat. 1: 16.
frail he did assume;
This keeps me from a dismal doom.
32.
If GOD and Man, none can so well,
GOD and lost Man kind Col. 1: 20, 21, 22.
reconcile.
This That is God-Man in one person.
Theanthropos only can
Make peace for sinful wretched Man.
33.
If God, CHRIST'S All Sufficiency to remove all evil and vouchsafe all good.
he cannot but Heb. 7: 25.
prevail:
If Man, Heb. 2: 17, 18 -- 4: 15, 16,
my Brother will not fail.
To plead for me, that heinous crimes
May not condemn in judging times.
34.
By Sin, though I be quite undone,
And there is no help below the Moon:
Yet Jesus Christ he Mat. 1: 12.
can me save,
Who rose Triumphing from the grave.
35.
Though I be full of putrid Isa. 1: 6.
sores,
My sinful Genesis 6: 5. Romans 5: 14, 8.
nature good abhorres;
Yet Christ is that Physician Mat. 9: 12, 13.
sure:
His Panacea will me cure.
36.
I Am Dead in sin, Ephesians. 2: 1.
I cannot move,
Nor speak or think of things above:
But He Will come in with quickening grace,
And will afford my Soul Solace.
37.
Though wrath Ephesians. 2: 3.
and curse I do deserve,
For many ways that I did swerve;
Yet Christ the Gal. 3: 13.
curse did bear for me;
And nailed my sins Col. 2: 14.
unto a Tree.
38.
Though I deserve Infernal pains;
Nothing in me but sin remains:
His painful death shall me Romans 8: 1.
relieve;
He did for me a Mat. 20: 28.
ransom give.
39.
Though I deserve eternal Dan. 9: 8. -- 12: 2.
shame,
For gross profaning of His name:
His ignominy Isa. 61: 7. Romans 9: 33.
and disgrace,
Keeps me from a confounded face.
40.
Like Stars my sins Ps. 40: 12.
in number be,
Or like the drops of Ocean-Sea;
Yet do His mercies far Psalm. 103: 8, 11, 17.
transcend
In number, for they have no end.
41.
Even crimson-red Isa. 1: 18.
by sin am I;
My sins are of a double dye:
But Christ will make Isa. 1: 18, 1 John 1: 7.
me white as Snow:
Me to exalt, he came below.
42.
For us poor sinners, for our sakes
Three offices He undertakes; A transition to CHRIST'S offices.

Then joyfully I Will say and sing,
He is my Prophet, Priest and King.
FINIS.
SONG IV.
THE HOLY TRIPLICITY, OR A Description of CHRIST'S THREE Office, with the devout
Souls Triumphing-Song, upon the consideration of CHRIST'S Allsufficiency and
Expectation of perfect Redemption by him.

To the Tune of the New Blackbird.
SECTION FIRST.
1.
I AM not an Astrologue to gaze
on the Skies,
To talk much of Trigons
The Astrologues talk of the fiery, airy, earthy and watery Trigons.
and Triplicities;
Nor with great Pythagoras ascribed much virtue to some numbers.
Pythogre
With some superstition
Ascribing much virtue to
Numbers condition:
Yet clearly I see,
Without any lie,
A Mystery wrapped Some things Natural run by sevens, as seven Planets, seven
Metals etc. Some things Political; as the seven principal Nations who have had
the greatest sway of Government in the World, as Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians,
Romans, Saracens, Goths, Turks, etc. Seven Mountains whereupon Rome was built.
Seven Governments in Rome, etc. Some things Ecclesiastic or Theological, as the
seventh day a Sabbath, the seventh year Sabbatical; seven Sabbatisms make a
Jubilee. Seven Bullocks oftin Sacrifices; seven Angels, seven Seals, seven
Trumpets, seven Vials in the Revelation, etc.
in seven, and in three.
2.
Three Persons there are in Essence divine:
Of Angelic orders, thrice three, that is, nine:
Twice three the Creation-dayes did compleet,
GOD then did all finish he found to be meet.
Four threes are the twelve
Tribes in Israel:
So were the Apostles in truth that excel.
3.
So CHRIST our Redeemer by offices three
He purchased Salvation for me and for thee.
He Is King, and a Priest, a Prophet divine:
So brings he the Elect in Glory to shine,
His own He rescues;
His foes He subdues,
Though Furies Infernal their forces combine.
4.
Our woeful Our ignorance to be supplied by the Prophetical Office: Our distance
and alienation from God by the Priestly: and our impotency to rescue our selves
by the Kingly Office.
defects they call for the three:
We, r blind and we know not how saved to be.
Estranged from GOD, and Children of wrath;
Unable to purchase a freedom from death.
By Prophet we see;
By Priest we draw nigh:
King JESUS gives strength, to GOD we may fly.
5.
All these our defects, they call for supply,
Which JESUs my LORD vouchsafes unto me.
I Am blind, and I cannot the way well descry;
But CHRIST is the Prophet to teach me the way.
His Spirit and word,
Shall help me afford,
From darkness to light, I Am led by my LORD.
6.
My sins make a distance between me and GOD:
For in his right path I have not abode.
His stroke is still ready to kill and destroy,
To damp all my comforts, my peace and my Joy.
But CHRIST will with ease,
The Father appease.
As Priest, he will get pardon, and comfort will raise.
7.
As Man CHRIST is Priest. Altar and Sacrifice.
He Is the Sacrifice, debt for to pay;
For all out trespasses on Him we do lay.
He Is Altar to sanctiby the Sacrifice;
As GOD to enrich it, and give it a price.
As both GOD and Man
He Is Priest, for He can
Plead, offer and Pray, and so favor win:
8.
His Kingdom He enters with Scepter and Sword;
His Elect He conquers by Spirit and Word:
By His Holy Laws He Governs them All:
His Power protects them, what ever can befall.
Their foes, He shall fright,
With terror and might,
And Crowns all His Saints with Glory most bright.
9.
The order The order of saving sinners requires three offices, viz. 1.
explaining; 2. purchasing; 3. applying.
of saving, the offices clears;
For first He explains it, and then He acquires:
And after applies what purchase He wan;
So comes there much comfort to comfortles Man.
As Prophet, declares:
As Priest, full of cares:
As King, He applies it, and keeps from tears.
SECTION II.
The Souls Triumphing-Song over all Enemies, upon the consideration of CHRIST'S
All Sufficiency, and the expectation of that perfect Redemption and Glory
purchased by Him.

1.
I Will then inferior comforts forsake, The Souls godly resolution.

My choice above all things Great JESUS I Will make,
Though Satan should fret, and fortune should froun.
I do not much value, when CHRIST is my own.
In Sickness and Health,
In want and in wealth,
I will seek my JESUS: till He give a Crown.
2.
And though all the World against me conspire,
And though all the Elements, Water and Fire,
The Earth and the Air and what ever more,
Though Men should massacre and Lions should roar,
Though Psalm. 46: 2, 3, 4.
Universe round
Turn upside that is Down,
Yet JESUS can conquer and give me a Crown.
3.
His Love is transcendent, His power is great;
Admitting no crossing, affliction or let;
He Is faithful in promise, and alters no words;
What wisdom contriveth, His power affords:
On these I rely,
Until that I dye:
And then sing His praises to eternity. Nothing shall terrify.

4.
Pale Death with his terrors me cannot affright,
Nor yet the That is, the Devil, Rev. 12: 2, 3, 4, etc.
red Dragon with power and might:
Sin is their advantage, and guilt is their sting;
But that is removed by JESUS our King.
Then conquering I,
Hosanna I Will cry
And sound out all praises to JESUS on high.
5.
When death me dissolveth, glad tidings I hear,
Though friends they forsake me, the Luke 16: 22. Heb. 1. ult.
Angels draw
Transporting my Soul to Mansions above: (near
Then all things below me but vanities prove.
My Joy and my rest,
Then find I at last:
For CHRIST I enjoy then of all things the best.
6.
And when the great day of Judgment appears, Comsorts at Judgment.

Which brings to the guilty and Godles their fears.
I Will be at his right hand with gladness of heart,
Mat. 25: 41, 42.
When sinners receive ane eternal depart.
He Will say unto me,
I chosen have thee
And now with Mat. 25: 34.
my Servants thou blessed shall be.
7.
The Stars do bespangle the Heaven as gemms The gloriousness of Heaven.

Which GOD does Psalm. 147: 4.
number and call by their Names.
This is but a payement to that Paradise,
Where CHRIST, he resideth, that Pearl of price.
Be humble therefore,
Admire and adore,
Let all thy aspiring be after this glore.
8.
With Abram and Isaac, The company of Heaven.
I Will set me then down,
My cross is exchanged with a glorious Crown.
No hunger, Rev. 7: 16. Immunity from evil.
no thrist, no sickness appears;
For CHRIST Rev. 21: 4.
from my eyes has wiped all tears,
With Angels I dwell,
In light that excel:
Phil. 1: 23.
But CHRIST I enjoy, and He Is All in All.
9.
My Joy is so full, Enjoyment of all good.
I seek not for more;
Of riches and honors I have so great store.
Nor can I be robbed, Mat. 16: 19, 20.
no change do I fear.
My riches they rust not, nor garments do wear:
For ever and ay,
They do not decay;
But last to Eternity, O happy day!
10.
My exercise is to adore Rev. 15: 3, 4.
and to sing, Exercise in Heaven.

Sweet songs of high praises to JESUS my King.
The more I do praise, more reason I find:
For this finit vessel cannot comprehend,
The glory that is there,
That Is free of all fear,
Come quickly, Rev. 22: 17, 20.
LORD JESU, and cause me draw near.
11.
Then on my Redeemer I Will sweetly rely,
With comfort reposing until that I dye.
Disclaiming, denying the World and all,
I Will give no repulses, when He gives a call.
And for every thing,
I Will joyfully sing,
A high Hallelujah to JESUS my King.
FINIS.
The BLESSED BETHLEHEMITE, THE FONTAIN OF LIFE: OR CHRIST'S EXCELLENCY,
Containing a farther description of the blessed Messiah, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, in his Types, Titles, Attributes, etc. Set down after the order of the
Alphabet, with their Scriptures on the Margent, together with the Explication
of difficulties, out of the soundest, and most learned Interpreters.

To be sung to the Tune of, I will go seek my Savior, the New Jerusalem, the
blessed ^ird, or any other grave Tune suited to such Verses, as have 8.
Syllables in one Line, and 6. in another.
1.
It Is not for naught, that wise men sought
Great Joy in Heaven and Earth at the birth of our SAVIOR.
To worship Christ newborn: Mat. 2: 1, 2.

Till by his Blood 1 Pet, 1: 18, 19.
He had Us bought,
We wretches were forlorn.
Luke 2: 13, 14.
The Heavens did ring, the Angels sing,
And shout for joy to see,
That silly Man, undone by sin,
Is fred of misery.
2.
Mat. 2: 6, 10.
That blessed Babe in Bethlehem borne,
I Cor. 15: 28.
Is all in all to me;
As in this Holy Alphabet
Most plainly you may see.
Then I Will begin to banish sin,
Contemning worldly toys:
With wings I Will fly and soar on high, A Christians pious resolution upon the
thoughts of CHRIST.

seeking for Heavenly Joys.
3.
I Will watch and pray, I Will mourn always,
For my transgressions great.
With Faith, Hope, Charity will I
Both read and meditate.
The first theme then that I will choose
For my instruction;
Christ's names and styles I will peruse,
And meditat upon.
SECTION II. A.
1.
He Is Second The first Adam being Author of natural generation, derived into
the World, sin, wrath and condemnation. CHRIST the second Adam, being the
Author of a Spiritual generation, by grace and free adoption, was the Fontaine
of Life, grace, mercy and eternal salvation. 1 Cor. 15: 45. Romans 5: 18, 19.
etc. Heb. 7: 25.
Adam who repairs
What Adam did destroy.
1 John 2: 1
He Is Advocat, to plead for me
That sin may not annoy.
Rev. 1: 11. This is ane allusion to the. Greek Alphabet, whereof Alpha is the
first Letter and Omega the last: So CHRIST as God, is the beginning of all
things, essentially and originally, being before all things. (2.) Effectively,
as Creator of all things, Heb. 1: 2. Joh. 1: 3. So he is the end of all, first,
Terminatively, as the end and scop of all, all things being for his glory. (2.)
Continuatively, for duration; for after the destruction of some things and
alteration of all, though all things should be annihilated, yet He should
continue still the same, unchangeable GOD for ever. Romans 9: 5. Jam. 1: 17.
Christ's Alpha and Omega blessed:
Beginning and the end.
Our prayers, praises and all Christian duties must be offered up in his name;
for in and through him, for his merits, righteousness, and intercessions they
must be accepted. Rev. 8: 3. Ephesians. 1: 6. 1 let. 2: 5.
That Golden Altar whereupon
Our prayers may ascend.
2.
Amen is ane Hebrew word from Aman, which in the Conjugation Hiphil, signifies
to believe. It imports then, fidelity and stedfastness in CHRIST, for the
fulfilling of his promises. Rev. 3: 14. 2 Cor. 1: 20.
Amen, the truth of promises.
The Ancient of Days.
The Revealer, Mediator and foundation of the Covenant of grace. Isa. 63: 9.
Heb. 8: 6. -- 9: 15. -- 12: 24.
The Angel of the Covenant.
Furnished with all qualifications suitable to a Redeemer: Psalm. 45: 7. Act. 4:
27.
Anointed, us to raise.
Of our Profession He Is the great
Apostle, above all.
Cant. 2: 3. Affording shelter, refreshment and the sweet fruits of pardon,
grace, peace, mercy, and consolation to his elect.
Delicious Apple Tree that yields
The fruit most cordial.
3.
An The Ark of the Covenant was a type of CHRIST. Heb. 9: 4. Eor 1. As in that
Ark was kept precious monuments, such as the Pot of Manna, the Tables of the
Law etc. so in Christ is found all fullness of incomparable excellencies: Col.
2: 9. And as they covered the Tables of the Law, so does Christ by his merits,
rightousness and intercessions keep up the Law from bringing a curse and wrath
upon us. Gal. 3: 13.
Ark wherein the richest store
Of Treasurs may be found,
Ark for my Soul, As the Ark of Noah preserved a remnant, when the most part
perished, So does christ preserve the Elect from the deluge of wrath.
that it by sin
And wrath may not be drowned.
Atonement Romans 5: 11.
is to make my peace,
And, expiate my sin
Author Heb. 12: 2.
and finisher of faith
That favor I may win
SECTION III B.
1.
THat blessed Babe in Bethlehem born
For me his blood did spend.
Beloved Ephesians. 1: 6.
of the Father, hence
Love does to man descend.
The Bishop of our 1 Pet. 2: 25.
Souls, to watch
The silly straying sheep:
In Gospels net our Souls to catch;
And in his ways to keep.
2.
The bravest Isa. 4: 1. Jer. 23: 5.
Branch on Jesse's stem,
That ever on it grew.
The Brazen As the people of Israel were cured of the stings and bitings of
fiery Serpents in the Wilderness by looking on the Brazen-Serpent, Number. 21: 9.
So are believers cured from the stings and wounds of sin and Satan by looking
with the eye of faith on JESUS lifted up upon the pole of the Cross. Joh. 3: 14.
Serpent, which me cured
When sin and wrath me slew.
That Bread Joh. 6: 35, 48, 51.
of life which whosoever eats
Shall not with hunger pine.
The Bridegroom Joh. 3: 29.
of my Soul, whose love
Is better than the wine.
3.
The Brightness of the Heb. 1: 3. Col. 1: 15. This is verifyed of CHRIST both
in his divine nature, having the same essence with the Father, secondly in his
humane nature, by his Heavenly doctrine and stupendous miracles.
Fathers glore,
In whom the Deity shines.
He Is Ocean Col. 1: 19. -- 2: 9.
full of saving grace
More Cordial then the wines.
Then I Will begin to banish sin etc.
SECTION IV. C
1.
THe Captain Heb. 2: 10. ^
of Salvation stout;
Of thousands ten Cant. 5: 10.
the Chief.
A Act. 4: 27.
Child, yet Champion foes to rout,
And bring my Soul relief.
A Cluster is of sweet Cant. 1: 14.
Camphit
Full of Soul saving grace.
A kind Isa. 54: 4.
Commander me to cheer,
And bring my Soul to peace.
2.
Israel's Luke 2: 25.
Consolation.
The 1 Pet. 2: 6.
Cornerstone is He,
Both Jew and Gentile for to join
In one Church curiously.
He Is given us for a Isa. 49: 8. Christ is the Mediator, the principal subject
and comfort in the Covenant of grace.
Covenant,
Which God and Man has tied.
A Isa. 32: 2.
Covert from GOD'S stormy wrath
My Isa. 9: 6.
Counselor and Guyd.
SECTION V. D.
1.
Jer. 39: 9. Hos. 3: 5.
DAvid according to GOD'S heart,
Goliath for to slay;
To kill ten thousands of my foes
And drive them all away.
2 Pet. 1: 9. Rev. 21: 27.
Day Star to bring the morning light:
Isa. 59: 20. Romans 11: 26. 1.
Deliverer Him I Will call,
The Holy Fathers chief Isa. 42: 1.
Delight.
Hag. 2: 7.
Desire of nations all.
2.
A Divine Luke 2: 26. -- 4: 18:
Doctor who has wit
Thrice infinite in store.
A Joh. 10: 7, 8.
Door whereby we access get
Into Celestial glore.
Then I Will begin, etc.
SECTION VI. E.
1.
THE Exo. 19: 4.
Eagle on his soaring wings
His brood does bear away
Far from all danger, so my Soul
By Christ is keept always.
My Heb. 2: 11.
Elder-Brother for my good
The Isa 42: 1.
Elect one of might.
Ane Isa. 11: 11, 12. All the Elect flock to Him, and delight to fight against
Spiritual enemies under his conduct.
Ensign lifted up on high
My enemies to fright.
2.
Romans 10: 4.
End of the Law, for it is a guide
And Schoolmaster to show,
That my foul sins without his aid
Will quite me overthrow.
The Jo. 1: 17. Gal. 4: 3, 4.
end also of Ceremonies,
For shadows they do fly,
When Christ the substance on the Cross
It Is finished did cry.
3.
Genesis 5: 24.
As Enoch most religious
Did ever walk with GOD,
And after caught to Heaven, where He
Eternal has abode.
Isa. 9: 6.
He Is everlasting Father too,
For Essence is but one:
In blessed Three, yet person'ly
He is the Fathers Son.
SECTION VII. F. G. H.
1.
He Is Psalm. 45: 2.
fairer than the Sons of men:
A faithful Steward he.
Faithful in witness and in word.
He Is Rev. 1: 11.
first and last I see.
With Fire of grace Mat. 3: 11.
He Will me Baptize,
To purge away my tin,
And if need be afflictions fire
Shall mortify my sin.
2.
1 Cor. 15: 20, 23. First in order of time, first for quality, being chief, as
also being the Author and pledge of our resurrection.

First fruits of Resurrection;
He Is the foundation sure.
Zech. 13: 1.
The Fountain whence the living streams
Do flow, my Soul to cure.
Heb. 6: 20.
As Forerunner, He Is gone before
Those mansions to prepare,
Where blessed Saints in Perfect glore
And Elect Angels are.
3.
Joh. 4. 10.
The Goodly Gift of God bestowed
On Adams wretched race.
Luke 2: 32.
The Glory of His Israel.
And true God for solace.
He Is my great Mat. 2: 5.
Governor and Guide
My foes he will deface.
Ephesians. 1: 21, 22.
Head of the Church, He Is Heb. 1: 2.
Heir of all,
He is my Isa. 32: 2.
Hyding place.
4.
Isa. 57: 15.
The High and Lofty One so great
Heb. 4: 15.
High Priest for Sacrifice:
Isa. 1: 4.
The Holy One of Israel,
And Israel's Hope He is.
Luke 1: 64.
The Horn of my Salvation strong,
To push my foes away.
Luke 21: 2.
A loving Husband to my Soul,
My grief for to allay.
SECTION VIII. I. K. L. M.
1.
He Is Mat. 1: 25.
JESUS or That JOSHUA great,
To keep my Soul from Hell.
The Land of Promise will me give
Gracious IMMANVEL.
Isa. 7: 14.
IMMANVEL, that is, God with us,
Oh wonder and admire,
That God and Man in Person one
Concur and come so near!
2.
As Mat. 12: 40.
Jonah cast into the deepth,
Yet He Is restored again
After three days. A Genesis 37: 28 com. with Mat. 26: 15.
Joseph sold
By brethren with disdain,
Betrayed and sold for little Gold,
Yet for his Brethrens good:
For they had famisht had He not
Provided them with food.
3
An Genesis 22: 9. with Isa. 53: 5, 10.
Isaac on the Altar laid,
And that most willingly
His Soul for an offering made;
Hence my felicity.
Luke 2: 10.
My Joy, my Heb. 7: 25.
Intercessour dear:
A 1 Pet. 4: 5.
Judge that will not sway.
The King of Kings, for opening hearts,
Isa. 22: 4. Rev. 3: 7.
Of David has the key.
4.
A Genesis 28: 12. Jacobs Ladder a type of Christ and his Angels.
Ladder leading up to Heaven,
The meekest Jo. 1: 29 -- 3: 6. Rev. 21: 22. Jam. 4: 12.
Lamb of God.
A Isa. 58: 4.
Lawgiver to frame and send
His statuts all abroad.
A Isa. 58: 4.
Leader, Joh. 14: 6.
life and glorious Joh. 8: 12.
light.
A Cant. 2: 1.
Lilly white and fair.
Of Judah's tribe the Rev. 5: 5.
Lion stout.
A living 1 Pet. 2: 4. CHRIST is a Spiritual Stone lively in the Spiritual
building of the Church, solid, durable, bruising enemies, and the chief corner
Stone to join Jew, and Gentile into one Church, as also a most precious Stone
full of transcendent virtues.
Stone and Rare.
5.
A Mat. 7: 21. -- 25: 11.
LORD of LORDS: for other LORDS
Have small supremacy.
Thour't altogether Cant. 5: 16.
Lovely, LORD,
Therefore I Will follow thee.
The Heb. 2: 17.
Man, restoring man to life.
Sweet Joh. 6: 5, 8.
Manna for my food.
My Joh. 13: 13.
Master to instruct my Soul,
And teach me what is good.
6.
The 1 Timothy 2: 8.
Mediator for my sin
The Father to appease.
Psalm. 110: 4. Heb. 5: 6.
Melchizedec the Righteous King,
To give me rest and ease.
Dan. 9: 25. 26.
Messiah the Anointed one,
To be Priest, Prophet, King.
The Mal. 3: 1.
Messenger of Covenant,
Glad tidings for to bring.
7.
The Heb. 9: 5.
Mercy-seat: he mercy gives,
When merit I have none.
Psalm. 45: 3.
Most Mighty and he is Romans 15: 8. Preaching Salvation unto the circumcised
Jews.
Minister
Of Circumcision.
Cant. 1: 13.
Of Myrrh a bundle to revive:
A Cordial for the faint.
Though we were dead. He Will make us live
For this his blood was spent.
SECTION IX. N. O. P. Q. R.
1.
A Heb. 10: 20.
New and living way to bring
To Canaan above.
A Mat. 2: 23.
Nazarite separate from sin,
Most worthy of our love.
As Genesis 8: 1. and Oh. 7.
Noah did an Ark prepare
A remnant for to save,
When all the World was drowned; so Christ
Life to the World gave.
2.
By woe and wrath, Sin, shame and death
Which make a fatal end,
We all had perished, but his blood
For Ransom he did send
An Romans 11. 17, 24
Olive, with the soap of grace
Cant. 1: 3.
For ever fresh and green.
An Ointment poured forth and full,
Of Odor and persume.
3.
The 1 Cor. 5: 7.
Passover for me was slain:
The Paschal-Lamb for food.
Our hearts by faith bedewed must be
And sprinkled with his blood.
That the Destroying Angel may
Pass by and do not kill.
He is our Mic. 5: 5. Ephesians. 2: 14.
Peace and Mat. 13: 26.
Pearl of price
With riches us to fill.
4.
A choice Mal. 4: 2. Mat. 9: 12, 13.
Physician for my Soul:
A Isa. 53: 2.
Plant of great renown:
A Isa. 49: 2. To pierce the hearts of rebellious sinners, either for
conviction or conversion.
Polisht shast: The 1 Cor. 1: 24.
power of GOD,
Psalm. 110: 4. Priest as Mediator God-man, the Sacrifice, in his humane nature,
and the Altar in his divine nature, sanctifying the Sacrifice, giving it worth,
merit and value.
To Pull mine enemies down.
Priest, offering, and the Altar too:
He is my Isa. 9: 9.
Prince of Peace,
A 1 John 4: 10.
Propitiation good and true:
A Luke 13: 33.
Prophet full of grace.
Q. R. 5.
A 1 Cor. 15: 45.
Quickening Spirit to revive
A Soul in sin that is dead.
Joh. 8: 49.
Rabbi to teach, a Isa. 54: 20. 1 Cor. 1: 30.
Ransom for
A Soul that is captive led.
Even my Redeemer with his blood.
He Is 1 Cor. 1: 30.
Righteousness to save.
A Joh. 11: 25. Being the Author and cause both of the Spiritual resurrection
from sin, and the corporal resurrection at the great day.
Resurrection from the dead,
Triumphing over the grave.
6.
Of Mat. 16: 18.
ages Rock impregnable,
The Isa. 11: 10. Rev. 5: 5.
Root of Jesse strong.
The Cant. 2: 1.
Rose of Sharon beautiful
Mic. 5: 2.
He Is Ruler us among.
SECTION X. S.
1.
A Heb. 9: 20.
Sacrifice for all our sins.
A Isa. 8: 14.
Sanctuary secure.
The true Luke. 10: 33.
Samaritan, my Soul
That Is wounded for to cure.
Judge. 15. and chapter 16.
A Samson, thousands to destroy.
Of Philistims Profane.
The gates of Gaza bare away,
Deaths gates for all his train.
2.
And in his Death, O wonderful!
The greatest victory
He gets over sin, grave, Satan, Hell,
And routs them totally.
A Joh. 4: 41.
Savior my poor Soul to save.
The Levit. 16: 8, 10.
Scapegoat for to bear
My woeful sins, his Heb. 1: 8.
Scepter brave
Does free my Soul of fear.
3.
A Phil. 2: 7.
Servant for our Souls he was.
Genesis 49: 10.
Shiloh sent for our good.
The Son Eternal, Heir of all.
A Shep-herd us to food.
Isa. 49: 22.
A Standard to the World displayed.
The Number. 24: 17.
Starr of Jacob bright.
A 1 Pet. 2: 4.
Stone most Precious, though refused.
A Mal. 4: 2.
Sun that is full of light.
4.
A Sun of Righteousness (I say)
To quicken and direct:
From him's my comfort, light and life,
He Is surety for my debt.
SECTION XI. T. W.
1.
A Mat. 3: 17. Jo. 14: 14.
Tabernacle, where our suits
Have answers most Divine.
Jo. 2: 19.
A Temple, where the Deity dwells.
He Is Joh. 14: 6.
Truth to clear my mind.
The Tree Rev. 2: 7.
of Life, far from all strife,
With meat and medicine,
Shall me supply and satisfy,
When Paradise I win.
2.
His Soul refreshing cordial grace,
Like Isa. 55: 1. Joh. 7: 3.
waters flow amain.
The way Jo. 14: 6.
conducting to that Place
Where Souls are free of pain.
Joh. 15: 1, 2.
Vine-Tree to cherrish me and give
The sap of saving Grace,
The Fathers 1 Cor. 1: 24.
wisdom, (I believe)
A See on the word faithful.
witness for release:
3.
The Joh. 1: 16.
Word of God Essential;
The Subject, Scope and end
Of Written-word, and Isa. 9: 6. Wonderful in respect of his natures united
into one person, in respect of his offices, words, works and sufferings.
wonderful
Salvation to send.
SECTION XII. Y. Z.
1.
To Day and Heb. 13: 8.
Yesterday the same,
Even to Eternity,
His Wisdom, power, and goodness great
Are forthcoming to me.
So Psalm. 69: 9. Joh. 2: 17.
Zealous for the house of God,
That nothing could restrain
Him from the shedding of his blood,
To Ransom them again.
FINIS.
TYPUS TYPORUM, OR A TABLE OF The several Types, Titles and Attributs of JESUS
CHRIST according to the nature of the things themselves, as in the former
treatise, they were set down after the order of the Alphabet.
Advertisment anent the Scope, use and form of this Table etc.
I.THE use of this Table explained in the former song, is manifold, as first
for Information, to let us see these matchless and incomparable excellencies
that are in Jesus Christ, our Lord. 2. For Consolation: The heart of a Sincere
Christian cannot but be filled with ravishing and transporting joys when it
beholds such excellencies in Christ; and then begins to find a title and
interest in them.

3. For Spiritual Devotion, every Type and Title almost affording excellent
compe^^ations to Christ, ground of confidence to draw near, matter of prayer
and praise, as for example; one in praying may say, Lord thou who art the King
of Kings, subdue my rebellious Spirit to thy self* by the Scepter of thy word
and Spirit etc. that I may be of the number of thy willing people: preserve me
powerfully from my Spiritual enemies etc. Thou who art that Vigilant Shepherd
of Souls, protect me from the roaring Lion Satan who is ready to rear me, and
lead me to the living Waters etc. 4. For matter of Meditation: every Type or
title etc. Affording Heavenly matter for the exercise of our Spiritual thoughts.

II. As to the exactness of it, it were easy to make it more Scholastic and
reduce it all to Dichotomies, but I thought this sufficient for the most of
ordinary Christians.

Here follows the Table.

TYPUS TYPORUM, OR A TABLE OF THE NAMES, TYPES AND TITLES OF CHRIST, According
to the Nature of the things themselves, as the last was after the order of the
Alphabet, etc.
CHRIST JESUS Our blessed Savior in Offices, Attributs, Benefits, etc.
represented by 1. Persons. 1. Typical: as Adam, Enoch, Jonah, Joseph, Isaac,
Melchizedec, Nazarite, Joshua, Samson, David, etc. 2. Emblematical, and that
either Celestial, as Angel, Archangel, or Sublunary; and these 1. More
General: as Anointed, Chief, Elect, First and last, Governor, Guide, High and
Lofty one, Holy one of Israel, Hope of Israel, Lovely, Man, Ruler, Shiloh,
Wonderful, etc. Beloved, Fairer than the Sons of Men, etc. 2. More special, and
that according to Relations. Oeconomical: 1. Conjugal; as, Husband and
Bridgroome of the Church. 2. Paternal; as, Everlasting Father, Child, Babe,
Son, Heir of All, etc. 3. Herile; as; Master, Servant, Faithful in GODS House,
as Steward, or Dispensator, Shepherd, etc.
2. Civil or Polical. 1. Pacifical, or Peaceable. 1. For Restoration: as
Physician, Deliverer, Redeemer, Samiritan, Savior, etc. 2. For Protection,
Provision, Direction and Promotion, etc. As King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
Prince of Peace, Judge, Lawgiver, Counselor, Master, Advocat, Intercessour,
Mediator, Surety, Forerunner, etc.
2. Martial: as Captain, Lord of Hosts. Commander, etc. most Mighty, Leader,
etc.
3. Ecclesiastical: As Apostle, Doctor, Bishop of Souls, Author and Finisher of
our Faith, First fruits from the dead, Glory of Israel, Head of the Church,
High Priest, Messiah, Minister of Circumcision, Priest, Prophet, Rabbi,
Messenger of the Covenant, etc.


2. Things. 1. Spiritual: as Consolation, Gift, Truth, Joy, To Day and
Yester-day the same, Zealous, etc. 2. Natural. 1. Celestial; as, Sun, Light,
Morning Star, etc. 2. Subcelestial. 1. Animate. 1. Sensitive; as Lion, Lamb,
Eagle, etc. 2. Insensitive and Vegetable; as, Vine-tree, Apple Tree, Branch,
Camphire, Myrthe, Rose of Sharon, Plant, Root of Jesse, Tree of Life, etc.
2. Inanimate; as Horn of Salvation, Stone precious, Cornerstone, Pearl, Rock,
Fire, Waters, Gold, Milk, Wine, Oil, Fountain, etc.

3. Ecclesiastical: As Altar, Ark, Atonement, Tabernacle, Temple, End of the
Law, Offering, Mercie-seat, Passover, Propitiation, Righteousness,
Resurrection, Sacrifice, Scape-goate, etc. 4. Political: and that 1. Peaceable;
as Covenant, Way, Peace, Scepter, Eye Salve, 2. Martial; as Ensign, Ransom,
Standard, etc.
5. Oeconomical: as Cornerstone, Door, Foundation, Key of David, Ladder, etc.
6. Artificial. 1. Typical: As Brazen Serpent, Tabernacle, Temple, etc. 2.
Emblematical. 1. Peaceable: for health, ease, honor, etc. Bread, Eye Salve,
Robbs of Righteousness, Ointment, Scepter, He makes his People as Pillars, etc.
2. Martial: as Polished shaft, etc.







SONG VI.
THE SAINTS DELIGHT, Or the PEARL OF PRICE: Wherein Christ's Transcendent
Excellencies are comparatively demonstrated (having treated of them absolutely
before) so that all things else compared with him are found to prove but empty
vanities, but dung and loss, Phil. 3: 8. and CHRIST is found to be
Superlatively Excellent, and to be the Compleet, and Adaequate Object of the
Love, Desire and Delight of rational Creatures.

To be sung to the Tune of You minor beauties, etc.
THE FIRST PART. CHRIST compared with Angels.

1.
YOu Isa. 6: 2. Col. 1: 16. Ephesians. 1: 21.
Seraphims and higher Powers,
Throns, Cherubins and Angels all;
You Ministers in several Towrs,
Though you be Spirits Celestial,
What are you? what are you?
Dan. 7: 10.
Ye serve LORD JESUS at a call.
2.
Great Luminaries, Sun and Moon, Celestial things visible.

You radiant Stars in Heavenly spears;
You serve both day, at night and noon,
And give influx as need requires:
What are you? etc.
Mal. 4: 2.
When Sun of Righteousness appears.
3.
You Gold and Silver, Metals, Minerals and precious stones.
Diamonds,
Rich minerals for man's device,
Ye Rubies, Saphires, Precious stones,
Which please men's fancies that are nice;
What are ye? etc
Yee'r nothing to that Pearl Mat 13: 45, 46.
of price.
4.
You stately Fur and Cedar tall, Vegetables.

You fruitful Vine, and Apple rise,
You Myrtle, Trees.
Cherrie, Cypress all
And Laurel that decides the strife;
What are ye? etc.
Rev. 2: 7.
What are you to the Tree of life?
5.
You Violet and dainty Rose,
Solsequium, and the Lilly fair,
You fragrant flowers fit for the nose, Flowers.

Delighting eyes with colors rare:
What are ye? etc.
Cant. 2: 1.
Our Sharons Rose surpasses far
6.
You ramping Lion, Animals irrational.
Elephant,
Ye Horses with your stately pace,
Ye Hearts that for the Waters pant,
Ye Goats and Gray-hounds are but base,
Yee'r naught to Christ that valiant,
That Lion of Rev. 5: 5.
Jehuda's race.
7.
You Man that is God's Masterpiece, Main in general.

Among all Creatures have no peer;
Thou art the rarest Artifice,
Genesis 1: 26.
And to Jehovah comes most near,
What are you? etc.
1 Cor. 15: 45.
When second Adam does appear.
8.
Ye mighty Monarchs that do sway
The Scepter, yee'r but flesh and bone: All Ranks of men, and first Kings
.
Psalm. 82: 6.
Yee'r Gods, but I Will be bold to say,
Like men you shall die every one.
What are ye? etc.
When Heavens King sitts on the throne.
9.
Ye Potentats and Noble Peers, Noblemen, Courtiers etc.

Ye stoup when Princes do but frown:
Ye have great Pomp for some few years,
Psalm. 41: 12.
But suddenly ye are cast down.
What are ye? etc.
The Saint he wears the Noble Crown.
10.
Ye Learned Doctors with your books, Learned men of all sorts.

High Contemplations you do teach,
1 Cor 1: 20.
Your doctrine flows like muddy brooks,
The shell of knowledge you but reach:
What are ye? etc.
1 Cor. 1: 30. Joh, 14: 6. 1 Cor. 1: 24.
When Christ from Heaven does wisdom preach
11.
Ye grave Divines, ye Stars of light,
Ye Watchmen and the Stewards true,
Ambassadors to God of light,
Jer. 17: 9, 10
The subtle heart ye cannot know:
What are ye? etc.
Joh. 1: 9. Luke 2: 46.
When Christ comes down with glorious show.
12.
Ye great Physicians, Physciians
who relieve
The body from tormenting pain,
Some sickness fore your selves does grieve,
And cannot recall life again:
What are ye? etc
Psalm. 49: 9.
When Death comes all your labor's vain.
13.
Ye Jurists that are Versed in law, Lawyers.

Eccl. 1: 15.
Ye cannot rectify the State,
Nor one poor Soul with pleading draw,
From Justice throne, or pluto's gate:
What are ye? etc.
Heb. 7: 25. 1 Ioh. 2: 1.
Christ is the Pleader, ye but prate.
14.
Isa. 47: 13, 14.
Ye that Prognostic by the Stars, Mathematicians, Astrologues etc.

The change of nature and of State,
Can ye prevent tumultuous
Or can ye alter your own fate?
What are ye etc.
Am. 3: 6. 1 Cor. 1: 19. Isa 29: 14.
When Christ inverts both day and date.
15.
Ye Men of war with Sword and shield, Souldiern

With mind heroic, strong and stout,
Like Alexander in the field,
To conquer ye do never doubt:
What are ye? etc.
Ephesians. 6: 12, 13. etc. Jam. 4: 7. Romans 16: 20. Navigators.
He Is valiant, that does Satan rout.
16.
Ye Navigators, that traverse
Remotest Indies East and West,
With wings of Icarus commerce,
And Eolus makes all your haist:
What are ye? etc.
Ye perish by a stormy Psalm. 48: 7.
blast
17.
Merchants that compass Sea and Land, Merchants.

The Pirates you do often bereave,
From the power of Satan.
One Soul from Pluto's cruel hand
Though you be rich you cannot save?
What are ye? etc.
Let me have Christ no more I crave.
FINIS
THE SECOND PART.
Holding forth the emptiness and vanity of all sublunary enjoyments, by general
arguments taken, from the common nature of all created comforts, with a
transition to the next treatise.

1.
HEalth, Temporal enjoyments,
Beauty, Strength, Personal endowments external.
ye are but flowers,
Soon withered with a stormy blast,
Decrepit age and sicknes-showers,
To dust makes you return in haist:
What are ye? etc.
Phil. 3: 8.
Christ is my choice, for he is best.
2. Prosperity.

You flattering Fortune with your smile,
Psalm. 30: 6.
Whose savor fills all my fails,
Job 1: 21. Psalm. 36: 7.
Your change will shortly me beguile,
I do not prize your prosperous gales:
What are you? etc.
Mat. 28: 20.
Christ is the friend that never fails.
3.
Riches.
You glist'ring Gold and Silver bright,
Which Mortal men do so desire;
You precious Gemms that shines with light,
You Carbuncle, that is like the fire:
What are you? etc.
It is for Christ that I aspire.
4. Honors.

You honors that do men advance,
The Rustic fears, your threatening rod;
In Orb of State ye give a glance,
And Idolized Psalm. 82: 6, 7.
as if a GOD:
I count you all Isa. 40: 15.
ane Atome small;
If Christ with me make his abode.
5.
You friends and Fav'rits that are great,
I will not on you much rely:
Ye love to day, Psalm. 146: 3, 4. Mic. 7: 5.
to morrow hate:
And where is your help when that you die:
What are ye? etc.
Psalm. 25: 10. Heb. 12: 5.
When friends forsake, He Will hear my cry.
6.
Ye Children are but pleasant toys,
Delighting Parents when you prate,
Some sickness grieves, some death destroys,
And some of you do prove ungrate:
What are ye? etc.
Yee'r good, but yet inferior joys.
7. Wisdom and knowledge.

Ye sublime notions and acute,
That reach both deepth and starry sky;
Before the Judge yee'r turned mute,
Isa. 29: 14. -- 33: 18. 1 Cor. 1: 20. Eccl. 1: 17, 18.
If grace you do not sanctify:
What are ye? etc.
1 Cor 1: 30.
Christ is that wisdom from on high.
8.
Sensual pleasures.
You sumptuous fare, delicious Wine,
You Indian fruit that is bought so dear:
You flattering Venus fair and fine,
That does the vicious wanton cheer:
What are you? etc.
Mal. 4: 2. Joh. 4: 14.
When Sun of Righteousness draws near.
9.
You Purple robes and Cloth of Gold, Apparel and ornaments.

Whose Mother is the brute and dust,
You Are cast away, when you wax old:
Your borrowed beauty soon does rust:
What are you? etc.
Mat. 22: 11, 12.
The wedding garment is my trust.
10.
Ye gilded trifles more or less, Common arguments. 1. From their unconstancy,
inutility and inequality to Man.

Eccl. 1: 1, 3.
Can ye your comforts Eternize?
Eccl. 2: 15.
Can ye Man's happiness increass,
When Man ye do not equalize,
What are ye? etc.
Phil. 3: 8.
Let me have CHRIST, He will suffice.
11.
Then I Will conclude with Solomon, 2. They are full of thorny cares and
vexations.

Created comforts all I see,
Are empty trifles every one,
Eccl. 1: 1, 2, 3.
Nothing but vexing vanity:
What are ye? etc.
When CHRIST appears in Majesty
12
No more than can a Circle round
The sharp Triangle satisfy; 3. Emptiness, being unsatisfactory.

No more my heart, Eccl. 1: 5. -- 5: 10.
all that is here found,
But ever- Blessed Trinity.
What are you? etc.
When Christ comes with his rich supply.
13.
They Are finite things, that is here below, 4. They are Finite and temporal.

My Soul, it sues for more and more:
A Spiritual object you must show:
And I must have some richer store.
What are you? etc.
When Christ comes with his heavenly glore.
14.
Nothing abides in constant frame, 5. Levity and mutability.

Like the Sea ebbing and flowing. Ecc. 2: 4. to 11.
Even like to Proteus, or the Air,
Or changing Moon, no hour the same;
Them to the Dew I may compare:
What are you? etc.
When Christ comes with his treasure fair.
15.
To morrow sick, to Day in health,
To Day I Am bound, to morrow free;
To morrow poor, to day in wealth:
To Day I Am Low, to morrow high.
What are you? etc.
When joys come with eternity?
16.
You crazy comforts are but mixed, Imperfection and mixture.

With as great crosses at your best;
You Are blazing Stars, and are not fixed;
You Are trifling toys that have no last.
What are you? etc.
Heb. 4: 9.
When Christ comes with eternal rest?
17.
But now the 2 Pet. 1: 19.
Day Star does appear, Transition to the next treatise.

Above the Horizon it does rise:
Mal. 4: 2.
The Sun of Righteousness draws near,
With light and life down from the Skies:
What are you? etc.
When this fair soaring Eagle flies?
18.
You're broken Cisterns less and more,
That living Water cannot give:
You cannot give me grace and glore,
That ever blessed I may live:
What are you? etc.
But broken reeds you all do prove.
FINIS.
SONG VII.
HONEY-DROPS, OR CHRYSTAL-STREAMS, Containing A Bundle of precious promises,
full of Soul-ravishing comforts, purchased by CHRIST, and belonging to
Believers in the Estate of Grace.

SECTION FIRST.
The grand and comprehensive promises of GOD Himself, of Christ, and to Inherit
all things, and the un-changeablnes of Gods goodness, with the Souls use of all.

1.
OF Gods great goodness now
I Will sing,
I will his mercy praise,
For to extol Jehovah King
A quivering voice I Will raise.
I Will be thy Jer. 24: 7 -- 32: 38. This is a very comprehensive promise, when
all that is in God and flows from God is forthcoming to his people.
God, Thou say,
O LORD,
This promised is to me:
What highest Heaven can afford
I will vouchsase on thee.
2
For this poor Earth thou needst not care,
Thou shall inherit Rev. 21: 7.
all:
With Christ my Son thou shall be Romans 8: 17.
heir,
In glore celestial.
OF Pause The Soul is transported with admiration of this incomparable mercy.
my Soul, and be amazd
At this transcendent grace;
And for thy vileness be abas'd,
be sure to make thy peace.
3.
Oh what am I but sinful dust,
And shall I have such store
Of riches, that shall never rust
In that Eternal glore?
Ist' not enough, I Am not in hell,
Tormented in that fire?
For often did I thy voice repel,
Provoking thee to ire.
4.
And shall not only thou relieve
Me from the Insernall lake,
But also promisest to Give
Good things for mercies sake.
And shall I not have only crumbs
Which from thy table fall:
But more than all the richest sums
Of Gold and silver all.
5.
And shall it not suffice to give
What creatures can afford?
But thou wilt have me for to live;
Even with thy self O LORD!
Shall God then be my Psalm. 119: 57. All Gods attributs for the good of his
people.
portion?
His wisdom to direct?
His goodness for Compassion,
His pouer to protect.
6.
His holiness to sanctify?
His alsufficent store,
Me to provide with rich supply?
Blessed be my God therefore.
Shall his high habitation,
Even be my dwelling place?
And shall his Romans 8: 28. Hos. 2: 18, 19.
creatures every one
Make way for my solace?
7.
Shall His brave Psalm. 34: 7.
Angels me surround,
And guard me from all ill?
O this great mercy Has no Bound!
Sing praises then I will.
O then, Psalm. 103: The Soul's resolution upon the consideration of this
incomprehensible mercy.
my Soul let all thy strength
And faculties each one,
Be consecrat to God at length
For His salvation,
8.
Thy time and talent then bestow,
His name to Glorify;
Who did to thee such mercy Show,
Praise Him most cheerfullie.
But as this mercie's Psalm. 103: 11. -- 145: 8.
great and free,
So does it still endure,
Most firm and sure Psalm. 136: The unchangeableness and perpetuity of Gods
mercy.
to eternitey,
None shall their Soul injure.
9.
A woman Isa. 49: 15.
may forgetful be
Of Infants to her born;
But though she would, yet will not God
Me leave to be forlorn.
The Isa. 54: 10.
mountains may removed be:
The day and night may change,
The Hills be cast Psalm. 46: 2.
into the Sea:
Though Heaven and Earth do range.
10.
Yet sure will He, most tenderly,
His precious Saints embrace.
In spite Mat. 16: 18.
of hell, they shall prevail,
And see His glorious face.
I Am grav'n Isa. 49: 10.
upon His Palms, Therefore
I Will not forgotten be;
Though I were Psalm. 23: 4.
even at deaths dark vale,
It shall not terrify.
11.
His wrath Isa. 54: 7, 8.
may for a moment last,
To chasten me for sin;
Yet everlasting kyndness, I,
And favor hope to find.
Then I Will begin to banish sin,
Contemning wordly toys;
with wings I Will fly and soar on high,
Seeking for heavenly Joys.
SECTION II.
Promises of Privative mercies, anent afflictions Or tribulations, either to
preserve Gods people from them, to support under them, to sanctify them, and
deliver out of them.

1.
WIth rods of Psalm. 29: 32, 33.
men I Will thee correct,
But yet my special love
I Will never fully from thee take,
But gracious will prove;
Yet altogether will not I
Permit the for to want
A chastening Prove. 30: 9. Deuteronomy. 32: 15. Necessity of affliction.
Rod, lest thou deny
Thy God and Covenant.
2.
Thou know, this is the way I took,
With all my Servants dear:
As in the Sacred Scripture Book,
Thou may both read and hear.
Thou hear'st that Abel, Moses, Lot,
David and Daniel,
Did meet with persecutions hot,
But now they with me dwell.
3.
No saint so pure, that wants all sin,
And sin I always hate:
Then I must purge him ^^^. 27: 9.
from the tin
And make him loath the bait.
One Son I CHRIST free of sin, but not of sorrow.
have, that never sinned,
Yet he must bear the cross:
How think thou then to be exeem'd
That Is full of sinful dross?
4.
I Will either keep thee Job 5: 19. Psalm. 91: 5, 6, 7.
from the pain,
Or strengthen 1 Cor. 10: 13.
thee to bear.
Affliction shall not prove thy bane,
The curse Romans 8: 1
thou need'st not fear.
I Will sanctify to thee the rod,
A blessing it Psalm. 1. 94: 12. Romans 5: 4, 5.
shall prove;
That thou may learn to fear thy GOD,
And never from him move.
5.
One Antidote Luke 15: 14. 16. 17.
it is for sin
A corrosive to cure: The pleasant fruits of affliction to man himself.

A purging Isa. 27: 9.
portion is therein,
To make thee clean and pure.
I Will Luke 15: 16. etc. Psalm. 119: 57.
wean thee from the world thereby,
That clearly thou may see
There is no Happiness, but I
And heavens felicity.
6.
Afflictions 1 Pet. 4: 12.
fire must thee refine,
And try thy Christian grace:
Therefore see thou do not repine,
If thou would see my face.
Affliction Psalm. 119: 67. 71.
makes thee mind thy God,
Before thou went to stray:
O come thou then and kiss that Rod,
That leads in Heavens way.
7.
This keeps thee 1 Cor. 11: 32.
from the fire of hell,
This quickens Lam 3: 40. Psalm 119: 59.
all thy grace:
This makes thee Hebr. 2: 18. 2 Cor. 1: 4.
sympathize with all
Who want their due solace.
This puts thee forth to So the Irodigal Luke 15: 16. and Manassch. 2 Chronicles.
33. 13, 14.
read and pray;
And watch against thy sin,
This keeps thee from Psalm. 94: 12, 13.
a dreadful day;
That favor thou may find.
8.
This makes thee Mitigation and Sweetning of the affliction. 2 Cor. 1: 4, 5.
mercy more to prize,
And then with thankful voice,
Thow'lt praises to thy God devise,
With all melodious noise.
And even in midst of all thy tears,
I will thee recreate
With Cordials, so that all thy cares
Shall quickly be delete.
9.
When all this work is done, Deliverance out of afflictions. Psalm. 34: 19. Joh.
16. ult.
then sure
My rod I will remove;
For now performed is the cure
In mercy much and love.
The event Heb. 12: 11. 2 Cor. 4: 17.
shall always prove full Good,
The Crown is by the Cross.
Thou shall at last find, that indeed
Thou did sustain no loss.
10.
I out The Lords wisdom, power and goodness are much glorified, in ordering,
measuring, sanctifying and removing afflictions.
of darkness can bring light;
Of bitter I bring sweet:
Confusions all As in Joseph's affliction, Genesis 50: 20. And in the crucifying of
our Savior, making all tend to man's Salvation. Act. 4: 12, 27, 28. Romans 8: 28.
I order right,
And do that which is meet.
The' Chemist does of stones extract,
Liquors medicinal;
The sharpest crosses I will make
Even for thy good befall.
11.
My wisdom, power and goodness great,
My truth and justice pure,
By this they always Glory get,
Therefore thou must endure.
Cast thou Psalm. 55: 22.
thy burden on the Lord,
And he shall thee sustain:
O praise Him all with one accord.
His grace does still remain.
SECTION III.
Promises of spiritual and eternal blessings, being the principal positive
mercies.

1.
Come and admire the crystal streams
Of overflowing grace!
Admire the radiant rays and beams
Of this fair CHRIST the Sun of righteousness Mal. 4: 2.
Phoebus face!
He Is Joh. 1: 16. Col. 1: 19.
Ocean-full: His Treasure great
Is inexhaustible!
The matchless mercies which I got,
Are inexpressible.
2.
He Will freely pardon all my sins, Christian Privileges, as 1. Justification.
2. Reconciliation.! 3. Adoption.

He will make up my peace;
My blessed LORD will favor win,
Through His abundant grace.
For honor, He Will adopt Joh. 1: 12. Ephesians. 1: 5.
me sure,
To be the great Kings Son:
Yea Kings Rev. 1: 6. Kings for dignity, Majesty and Victory: and Priests for
purity and piety.
and Priests Advanced shall be
Believers every one.
3.
I Will be a Rev. 1: 12. That is, strong, beautiful and unmovable, as the two
Pillars in Solomon's Temple, called Jachin and Boaz. 4. Sanctification.
Pillar in GODS House:
A new Name will he give,
And white Stone for absolviture,
That I may ever live.
With Gold Rev. 3: 18.
of grace He Will me enrich,
With robs of righteousness
He will me cloth, and this excells
All Silk and Satin dress.
4.
The Man of sin He Will mortify,
He Will wholly me renew:
With his good Sp'rit He Will Sanctify,
With grace He Will me endow.
He Will take from me the Ezekiel. 36: 26.
stony Heart,
A new Heart will he give:
So from his Laws I Will not depart,
And ever blessed live.
5.
My Rev. 3: 18. Renovation of all the faculties of the Soul, the judgment,
will, conscience and affections.
Judgment he will so renew,
That I shall then discern
What e're he in his word does show;
I Psalm. 110: 3. Phil. 2: 13. Ezekiel. 36: 27.
will delight to learn.
My will shall to the best incline:
My conscience Act. 15: 9. -- 24: 16.
shall be pure:
Nothing but objects all divine,
My Soul shall then endure.
6.
I Will serve God Sanctification of the affections, as love, fear, grief, joy
etc. Hos 2: 5.
with a filial fear:
I Will love Mat. 22: 37.
God and his way:
His Saints Psalm. 16: 3.
to me shall be most dear,
Who do his words obey.
I Will mourn for sin, I Will hate the same;
I shall rejoice Number. 11: 29.
to see
All men extolling Gods great name,
With Zeal and fervencie.
7.
I will rejoice to find my LORD,
For my great portion.
My hope I Will fix upon his word,
Which brings Salvation.
I Will Blush to Ezekiel. 16: 61.
offend my Heavenly King:
My Psalm. 69: 9.
angers turned to zeal.
I shall oppose each sinful thing
When grace it shall prevail.
8.
Faith, Hope, and charity will he
Into my heart infuse;
With Righteousness and piety,
So his way will I choose.
The Rubies Mal. 3: 17. See more of Sanctification, in the song called the
Pathway to Paradise.
ar but Rubish, naught;
The Saphir's not so fine,
As, is the saint from Heaven taught
Adorned with grace divine.
9.
Parts of Sanctification by allusion to bodily infirmities cured. Isa. 35: 5, 6.
If I be blind and cannot see,
His Eye Salve shall me cure;
If I be Deaf, He Will open ears,
His Word and Sp'rit to hear;
If I be Lame, He Will make me go
Into the ways of GOD;
His suppling Psalm. 23: 5. Isa. 61: 3.
Oil keeps me from toil,
And makes me walk abroad.
10.
If I be Tongue-tyed, He Will unty
My tongue, that praises sing
I may even to Eternity,
Unto JEHOVAH King.
Both milk Isa. 55: 1. i. e. All things necessary for Spiritual life.
and wine he will afford,
And Manna for my food:
With Crystall-streams He Will me refresh
I Will want Psalm. 34: 11.
nothing that is good.
11.
So then with GOD, is made my Romans 5: 1, 2.
peace,
With men and Angels Psalm. 34: 7.
too;
Each creature Hos. 2: 18, 19. 1 Cor. 3: 21, 22.
then shall me embrace,
And all their service do.
Access I have Ephesians. 2: 18. -- 3: 12.
to throne of Grace,
My Prayer Job 14: 13.
he does hear:
The smilings Psalm. 4: 6.
of His blessed face
Does all my spirits cheer.
12.
Assurance Joh. 15: 13. Psalm. 23: 4. Romans 8: 35, 38.
fills me so with joy,
That I cannot express;
I Am sure nothing can me annoy,
No Creature more or less.
My Burges bill i. e. Christian liberty, Joh. 8: 32, 36.
with heavens quill
Is so confirmed to me;
From Satan, sin, I Will fear non ill,
Though they great tyrants be.
13.
The moral Law with threate and frown,
And with its rigid strain,
Brings me no Romans 8: 1. Gal. 3: 13. Romans 6: 14.
condemnation,
No curse, no pinching pain.
And for the Act. 15: 10, 28. Col. 2: 16, 17.
Ceremonial rite,
It never has me tied:
For CHRIST fulfilled all of it
When on the Cross He died,
14.
Indifferent things Romans 14. throughout 1 Cor. 8: 9. 10.
they do not bind,
If there no scandal be:
I may, or not, if that I find
No breach of Charity.
Pale death who is of terrors King
unto the reprobate,
CHRIST has of him bereaved 1 Cor. 15: 56.
the sting,
I shall him soon Defeat.
15.
Death's but to me a gate Rev. 14: 13.
therefore,
And passage unto rest,
And Harbinger to Heaven, to Gloir;
Which is of all the best.
So shall I in that Heavenly Psalm. 16. ult.
quire
For ever blessed Live:
Fullness of joy at his right hand
For ever will he give.
SECTION IV.
Blessings Temporal, with the Christians confidence and Holy Resolution, upon
the consideration of all these gracious promises.

1.
THe spacious Earth Psalm. 24: 1.
is all the LORDS,
And all that it contains,
What e're the Universe affords,
And all that there remains.
I Will make all Psalm. 8: 6.
creatures serve thy turn:
For I Am their Sovereign LORD,
I Am Lord of Hosts why should thou mourn,
They all obey my word.
2.
Life, Psalm. 91. Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
Honor, health, with ease, and wealth,
Prosperity and peace,
Thou shall enjoy, and ay endure,
Thou and thy blessed race.
Here profit, pleasure, honor's joined,
what more can any crave?
From Grace to Glory He Will conduct,
And never He his leave.
3.
I Will triumph Romans 16: 20.
over hell and death,
Over sin and Satan fly:
I Will trust in God, whill I have breath,
To have the victory.
My Foes he will trample all alongs,
My sin he will do away:
My sorrows he will turn into songs;
Faint fear shall fly away.
4.
My ways I Will mend: I Will blush to offend
Against such matchles love:
I Will suffer all, Act. 20: 24.
though he me call
With martyrdom to prove.
For when this clay 2 Cor. 5: 1.
is past away
And turned into dust,
To mansions high he will make me fly,
In Him I Will ever trust.
FINIS.
SONG VIII.
THE PATHWAY TO PARADISE, OR THE POURTRAITURE of PIETY, By Patterns and
Precepts, Containing a Christian Directory, how to come to CHRIST, so as to
find him, and Eternal Salvation by him.

Method of this Song. In the first part of it, are Exemplified all Christian
Duties, as they were practiced by the most Eminent, Pious, and Zealous People
of GOD, as they are recorded in the Scripture of the Old and New Testament. In
the second part, are set down the several duties themselves, both for matter and
manner, etc.

To be sung to the Tune of that which is called Cromlicks.
The first part of the best Patterns or Examples.
1.
SInce richest treasures all
In Christ are Joh. 1: 14. Col. 1: 19. Col. 2: 9.
found,
And I Am by Adams fall,
Wretched and bound;
I Will to Isa. 7: 14. Mat. 11: 28.
Immanuel,
My sins and sorrows tell,
My woes I will bewail
With mournful sound.
2.
I will go search and Lam. 3: 40. 1 Cor. 13: 5.
try.
My former ways.
With grief I Will mourn and pray
For misspent days.
Hos. 14: 1.
Take off iniquity:
Receive me graciously:
So will I render thee
The Calves of praise.
3.
I Abel, liberal, sincere, faithful and cheerful in duty. Genesis 4: 4. Heb. 11: 4.
will with Abel give
The best I have.
Enoch strict and holy and was taken up to Heaven alive Genesis 5: 24.
I will with Enoch live,
Pious and grave.
And though the World stray;
Noah's holy singularity. Genesis 6: 8.
With Noah I will stay,
And walk in perfect way;
Thou shall me save.
4.
And with good Abraham's faith and obedience in dispensing with all worldly
comforts at God's call. Genesis 12: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. Heb. 11: 8, 9, 10, 24, 25.
Abraham,
That faithful Man,
Who from his kindred came
To Canaan:
I will even at thy call,
My comforts great and small
Genesis 22.
Disclaim: though Isaac fall,
Faith conquer can.
5.
Jacobs fervent and importunateprayer with absolute dependence on God. Genesis 32:
24, to 30.
With Jacobs Prayer bold,
I will address,
The Angel for to hold,
Till He me bless.
Joseph fears to sin in secret as well as in public and stands out against
strong alluting tentations Genesis 39: 9.
With Joseph sin I Will fly,
Though mortals do not see:
Jer. 17: 5. Psalm. 139: 5, 6, 7, 8.
For thy Alseeing eye
beholds this.
6.
Job was eminent for patience Job 1: 21. -- 13: 15.
With Job that great Divine
When He was pressed,
I Will not at all repine:
Patience is best.
As Moses Moses meek in his own quarrel Number. 12: 3. but very zealous in the
cause of God Exodus 32: 26, 27.
meekness had,
when he was hard bested;
This way I will be led
To Heavens rest.
7.
Caleb and Joshua they two only did not murmr or rebel against God in the
Wilderness: and therefore ^ they only of all that came out of Egypt entered the
Land of Canaan Number. 14: 6, 7, 8. 26: 65.
Caleb and Joshua
Keep straight with GOD.
Phineas kills (...) and (...) in the very act of whoredom and therefore got
^ne everlasting Priest hood Number. 25: 8. 9, 10.
Phineas stood not in awe,
Sinners He trod.
When his zeal waxed hot,
He slew and spared not:
For his reward He got,
A firm abode.
8.
With Samuel from a 1. (...). 11 28. -- 3: 19.
Child
I Will consecrate,
With Spirit meek and mild,
I Will separate
All I have for the LORD,
What my Soul can afford:
As from His sacred word
Precepts I gat.
9.
David choosing God for his only portion: eagerly and impatiently seeking after
him, and delighting in him. Psalm. 16: 5. Psalm. 119: 57. psalm. 73: 25. Phil. 3:
8.
With David I Will thee call
My Portion.
In Earth and Heaven all
You Are He alone,
Whom my heart does desire;
As with a flame of fire,
Faith, love and zeal conspire,
O matchless one!
10.
Psalm. 42: 1. -- 63: 1.
As chased Heart he pants,
After the Streams;
So my Soul when it wants
The warming beams
Of Divine Majesty:
It thrists exceedingly,
Till it find some supply,
Down from the Heavens.
11.
The Spouse in the Song of Solomen representing the Church being awaked from
security, indefatigably seeks after Communion with CHRIST the Spiritual
Bridgroome and undauntedly keeps it. Cant, 5: 1, 2, 3, Rev. 3: 30.
Long did thou knock and call
Both night and day:
Often did I thee repel,
And drive away.
Cant. 5: 6.
Justly might thou depart,
And my poor Soul desert.
Making me find the smart,
For I did stray.
12.
Cant. 5: 10. 11.
But now I know thy voice,
Sweet Jesu stay:
Cant. 5: 4, 5.
Thou art my only choice,
Help now I pray.
I Will sleep no more in sin,
But now I will begin
Phil. 3: 13, 14.
And strive that prize to win,
Oh that I may!
13.
Constancy in persecutions and against discouragements Cant. 5: 7.
Though men me stop and let
And take my veil;
Though they this body beat,
And make it quell:
Though I should wounded be,
Mat. 16: 24.
Though nailed unto a tree,
Act. 20: 24.
I Will ever follow thee,
IMMANUEL.
14.
Ephraim and Nineveh repenting, returning and reforming Jer. 18: 31. Jon. 3.
Joel 2: 13, 14. Hos. 2: 18, 19.
In Sack and Sable suite,
Sad sighs I Will send.
Fast with the Ninivite,
My ways I Will mend.
With Ephraim I Will bemoan,
My sins with sigh and groan,
Trespasses every one;
Thou Wilt favor Lend,
15.
The Centurion with faith, prayer and humility. Mat. 8: 8.
Unworthy wretch am I,
That my poor roof
Should thee lodge; but I Will pray,
Mark 9: 24.
Help unbeleef;
Mat. 23: 12. Jam. 4: 6,
So shall humility
Advance to dignity,
When peevish pride must fly
And stand aloof.
16.
The Haemoritess her faith and confidence Mat. 9: 21, 22,
Give me faith, that I may
But touch thy hemme;
This will my grief allay,
My bleeding stem.
This shall me well restore,
From all my sickness fore;
And I will then adore
Thy glorious name.
17.
I Will with the The wise Virgins their watching and preparing Mat. 25: 4, 6, 10.
Virgins wise
My Lamp prepare;
At midnight for to rise
With loving care,
To meet Christ who is mine
With Oil of grace Divine,
Mat. 5: 16.
Light of my works shall shine
O Phoebus That is CHRIST the Sun of Righteousness Mal. 4: 2.
fair!
18.
With Simeon Simeon sweetly reposing and contenting himself with CHRIST in life
and death Luke 2: 28, 29.
when I find
Christ and his grace,
Leaving the World behind
The prodigal Son with great compunction returning to his Father. Luke 15: 17,
etc.
I Will with the Prodigal
Turn, for my want does call:
My Father Pity shall
And send release.
19.
With the poor The Publican, humbly, reverently and fervently suing for pardon.
Luke. 18: 13.
Publican,
I Will mercy crave,
As a Poor wretched man,
Or as a slave.
I Will bring the widows mite,
I Will knock at Heavens gate,
CHRIST will have mercy yet
My Soul to fave.
20.
Luke 19: 1, 2, 3, etc.
The Contemplation-Tree, Zaccheus answering CHRIST'S call and reforming

I will ascend:
That I may Jesus see
He Will me defend,
Against the enemy,
That is both fierce and sly;
That Dragon He Will defy,
And succor send.
21.
Come down Zacheus then,
He will reply:
You Are a beloved Man,
I Will not deny:
This Day I Will with the dine,
I Will give to thee and thine
Salvation: Thou art mine,
I Will with thee stay.
22.
Luke 19: 8. Non tollitur peccatum, sinon restituatur ablatum. August.
What goods I purchased have
By force or fraud;
I will restore again;
Thou Wilt me applaud.
I Will give of what is mine
To the Saints who are thine,
Such as in sorrow pine,
Thy name to laud.
23.
Nathaniel, with sincerity and uprightness of heart. Job. 1: 47. Prove. 10: 9.
-- 23: 26.
With true Nathaniel
That Saint indeed,
In uprightness I Will deal,
So shall I speed:
For thou requires the heart,
Which is that Noble part:
O do not thou depart,
My chiefest good.
24.
The godly Centurion with fasting, prayer and alms.
With the Centurion.
T'le fast and pray:
Alms also will I join,
Then I will say:
Do thou this offering take
Though it perfection lack
O do not me forsake,
Nor cast away.
FINIS.
THE SECOND PART.
Containing especially the matter, and gracious acceptable manner of
performance of Christian duties. VIZ. They must flow from right principles of
faith, fear and unfeigned Love of God, together with a perfect detestation and
abhorrency of sin. 2. For the right end, to wit, The Glory of GOD, the good of
others and Salvation of our own Souls. 3. In the right manner, to wit with
Sincerity or Uprightness, Humility and Self-denyendnesse, Alacrity, Readiness,
and Cheerfulness, Zeal and Forwardness, Constancy and Perseverance: All which
are partly delivered in the former Examples or Paterns; but here again repeated
in precepts.

1.
HOw shall I thanks requite
For such a grace?
God's essential glory perfection and happiness, being infinite, can neither be
increassed or diminished, but his declarative glory may as he is more or less
owned, and served by his Creatures.
Can what is infinite
With grains encreass?
Psalm. 16: 2.
My goodness not to Thee
Extends, for why I see
Thou art still giving me,
Romans 10: 12. Ephesians. 2: 4. Romans 11: 33. 1 Timothy 6: 15.
Yet have no less.
2.
Yet You Are pleased King of Kings
To condescend,
Poor begger-underlings
Thy favor lend;
Hebt. 2: 16. -- 2. Pet. 2: 4. Jude. 6.
Lost Angels passing-by.
And choosing such as I,
Thy name to glorify,
World without end.
3.
Psalm. 119: 18. 32. 38. 34. GOD must give to us, before we can give to Him.
Give then what thou requires,
It shall be thine.
I Will do what thou desires
And not decline.
1. The first thing commending our services and duties to GOD is universality
both of the subject performing and object performed. first, for the subject,
the whole man must be consecrated and devouted to God. Romans 12: 1.
My self I Will consecrate,
To serve without a date;
Then I Will at Heavens gate,
In glory shine,
4.
My heart I Will give to Thee,
Mat. 22: 37. Psalm. 119: 10.
Thou lovs the same;
Psalm. 57: 7, 8, 9.
My tongue shall magnify
Jehovah's name.
Psalm. 8: 5, 6, -- 19: 1, 2, -- 28: 5.
Adoring eyes behold
The Sea and Earthly mould,
The shining Stars as gold,
In stately frame.
5.
I Will give my ears to hear
Thy Sacred word;
All trivial toys forbear,
That men afford.
I Will give my hands to do
All thy commands most true,
1 Pet. 3: 21. Romans 6: 3, 4.
As my Baptismal vow
Binds me O LORD.
6.
I Will to Universality of the object, in abstaining from every sin and
performing every duty. Psalm. 119: 6.
thy Precepts all
Have great respect,
By thy grace never shall,
Thy Laws neglect;
No duty tedious call;
No sin will I think small:
But answer at a call,
O LORD direct.
7.
GOD shall be of my choice, Duties to God and man.

The object chief.
I Will hear my neighbors voice,
And give relief.
As my self I Will him love;
I Will act for His behoof,
My bowels for him move,
That Is Christian-proofe.
8.
I will my self Duties of the first Table, toward GOD.
apply
Deuteronomy. 26: 17.
thy name to know.
My self I will deny, See the Scriptures in the exposition of the Cammandements
in the larger Catechism.

And Earth below.
I will have high esteem
Of Thee, and fear thy name.
Of my sin I Will think shame
And not approve.
9.
In GOD I will delight, The first Commandment.

In Him rejoice.
Call on Him Day and night,
With weeping voice.
I Will burn with fervent zeal;
Sing sweet as Philomel
To His Praise, I Will not fail
With joyful noice.
10.
When He bestows on me
His Precious things;
I Will make my praises fly
On soaring wings.
And if His Chast'ning Rod
On me do make abode;
I Will see the hand of GOD,
As David sings.
11.
With David I Will be dumb,
It is thy hand;
Submissive will I come,
At thy command.
With Job then will I say
Job. 1: 21.
I'ts Thou who takes away,
Blessed be thy name for ay^
In Isreal's land.
12.
All Idols I abhor, The second Commandment.

Thou do the same;
I with my heart adore
Thy glorious Name. The second Command meant.

All whereby thou art known
Shall be above my own:
So shall thou never frown;
Thou loves this frame.
13.
I Will keep thy Sabbath well: The fourth Commandment.

This is thy Day.
Thy wonders I will tell.
My vows I Will pay.
Thy word and Sacraments,
All holy Ordinance,
With zeal I will advance;
This is thy way.
14.
I will no man injure
By force or slight: The rest of the Commands.

Never shall I endure
To wrong his right.
His life and safety,
His goods and chastity,
His Name advance will I,
As in thy sight.
15.
Thou promisest reward
To Piety. A second thing commending our service to God, is the sound
principles of faith, fear and love; and eying the right end, to wit, Gods glory
etc.

Hells fire thou have prepared
To terrify.
The first is to alure,
The other must endure
All, who are not found pure
TO Eternity.
16.
I Will not for mere Hope of reward and fear of punishment may be motiva prima,
the first initiating motives to obedience.
reward
Sent from above;
Nor yet for Hell prepared
Sin disapprove.
These things shall never be
Prime motives unto me; (as humane testimony is to faith) but they should not
be motiva primaria, the chief motives; but love and fear of God and eying his
glory etc. Oderunt peccare boni vertutis amore; Oderunt peccare mali formidine
poena. Si non sit poena, virtus tamen esset habena. Job 1: 1, 9, 21. Psalm 63: 1.

But I will follow thee,
1 Timothy 1: 5.
Out of pure love.
17.
Give me that gracious Oil, of grace Mat. 25: 4. Psalm. 119: 32.
Oil
I Will run thy way;
Serve without any toil,
And never stray.
A third requisite in Christian duties is cheerfulness, readiness or alacrity.
Psalm. 33: 1. 2 Cor. 9. 7.
I Will cheerfully go on,
Through thy great strength alone:
So that prize shall be won,
At judgment day.
18.
If I be quite 4. Zeal, forwardness or fervency. Rev. 3: 16, 17, 19.
profane,
Without all grace;
If Laodicea's frame
My heart possess;
Thou Wilt never me receive,
But with the World leave:
Fervent zeal I must have
Else no solace.
19.
5. Prudence, moderation and discretion; Which excluds, first ignorance
remisness and preposterous rashness. Psalm. 101: 2.
I will deal prudently
In perfect way:
For though I zealous be,
Yet I may stray;
Romans 10: 1, 2.
As Jews in ignorance,
Joh. 18: 10. Peter cutting off Malchus his ear without a Commission is
reproved, though in defense of CHRIST.
As Peter's sword did glance,
Luke 9: 54. Praying for fire from Heaven.
Or he and John advance
When they did pray.
20.
I Will 6. Christian prudence is against unseasonable and preposterous rebukes.
Prove. 9: 8. Mat. 7: 6.
Circumstantiat
My sharp rebuke:
Good counsel such as that
In Sacred book.
7. Prudence distinguishes betwixt essentials or fundamentals and
Circumstantials and indifferent things in Religion. Romans 14.
I will distinguish well,
'Twixt circumstantial,
And To distinguish betwixt essentials and circumstantials in Religion.
grounding truth, my zeal,
So will I look.
21.
8. Christian prudence distinguishes betwixt external and internal duties.
Though we can never love God too much etc. Yet weak christians may read, pray
and meditate etc. to the destruction of the body.
External duties
Must still give place;
Mercy not Sacrifice,
Says love and grace.
I cannot too much love,
Nor yet too holy prove:
1 Timothy 5: 23. 1 Timothy 4: 8. as in excessive reading, fasting etc.
Weak bodies yet may move
Imprudent pace.
22.
9. Christian prudence shunneth all frivolous and vain Ianglings and
unnecessary disputs. 1 Timothy 1: 6 -- 6: 20. Col. 2: 8.
All disputs frivolous
I will avoid:
We should shun all overweening and Pharisaical conceit of our selves Job 9:
15. Phil. 3: 9. Isa. 64: 6.
Though I were Righteous,
I Will banish pride.
So prudence with my zeal,
Thus will I temper well.
And I will with thee dwell,
O gracious guide.
23.
This I take to be mean'd
By Solomon;
When in his book he penned
This caution;
Where men forbids he
Eccles. 7: 16. No advantage here for profane Ruffians, for we are bound to
love God With all our hearts, and endeavor after perfection in holiness. Mat.
22: 37. Mat. 5. ult. Phil. 3: 13.
Too righteous for to be,
But all profanitie
Hence and be gone.
24.
So with prepared A sixth requisite in duties is constancy and perseverance in
all graces and Christian performances and to be diligent in the use of all
prescribed means, such as prayer, watchfulness etc. Mat. 25: 4, 10.
heart
Mat. 24: 44. -- 26: 41. 1 Pet. 5: 8.
I Will watch and pray:
I Will not from thee depart
By night or Day.
Till my LORD from the sky
Mat. 25: 31.
With troops of Angels fly
1 Cor. 15: 55. Rev. 20: 14.
Then woe and misery
Shall flee away.
FINIS.
CHRISTIAN MEMENTO'S, MEMORANDUM'S, Or Meditations, To be affixed to several
parts of the House, as a help to Mortification, watchfulness and continual
Communion with GOD.
Deuteronomy. 6. verss. 6, 7, 8, 9. And these words which I command thee this day,
shall be in thy heart. 7. And thou shall rehearse them continually to thy
Children, and thou shall talk of them when thou tariest in thy House, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. 8.
And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thy eyes. 9. And thou shall write them upon the Posts of
thine House, and upon thy gates.
MEMENTO I.
A Memento to be affixed by the Door, and to be read, before we go abroad about
our secular employments.

1.
REmember, Man, before thou
pass the Door,
That GOD has granted
thee another day.
He gave thee Health and Peace
the night before,
Or, Hellish Fiends had
cach't thy Soul away.
More time thou have, thy talent to improve;
Even for His glory who thy Maker is:
Let Him then be the Object of thy Love;
And let not transient trifles after this.
2.
You Are stepping out into a world of sin,
Where Satan sly is still preparing snares;
O then beware of His deceitful gin;
Lest He by slight Surprise thee unawars.
No State, no Calling, Sex or Age is free:
No time, no Place, but Satan Seeks to stain.
And, ah, alace, too prevalent is He:
Watch, watch and pray, that pure thou may remain.
3.
Let thy GOD's glory, be thy chiefest aim;
His Holy Law the rule of all thy way:
His Saints thy fellows, then I may proclaim,
Thou shall have peace and succes all the day.
But if thou do thy gracious GOD forget,
And with Loose reins thou let thy fancy range,
Then wonder not, if GOD thy Labors let:
Thou meets a cross, it is not very strange.
4.
Thou Wilt see the broad way full of wretches vile,
Toiling themselves their own poor Souls to damn,
Not minding Death or Judgment, Heaven or Hell;
Nor yet the end why to the world they came.
Some are profane, and loose, some bear a show
Of Godliness, without the power of grace:
Some Heretics a vile erroneous crew;
Some with their factions trouble Zions peace.
5.
Some Laodiceans, neither cold nor hot,
They Are neither friends, nor yet CHRIST'S open foes:
Into such ways, I pray thee enter not,
And so thou shall escape their dreadful woes.
Commit thy way to GOD, He Will thee direct;
In all thy ways, see that thou, on Him call;
And thus a blessing, thou may then expect
From GOD Almighty, comforts great and small.
6.
In thy converse with men, see thou be just;
Give thou offense to none by force or fraud.
Loss not thy GOD for Gold, which is but dust:
Or CHRIST in Judgment will not thee applaud.
Spend all this day, as if thou had no more.
Be ready always, when the LORD shall call:
Thou shall be heir of everlasting glore;
With joy and peace where CHRIST is all in all.
II.
A MEDITATION or MEMENTO To be affixed on the Window.

THe Sun-lights glorious to our mortal eyes,
When from the Heaven He does disperse His rays.
If such a light the Creature does transmit,
How glorious then is He who formed it?
If Heavens pavement be so richly decked.
With precious gemmes; O what may we expect
In upper rooms, where is the dwelling place
Of Seraphims and Saints; O great Solace!
Light of the Word take thou to be thy guide,
In light, for ever then thou shall abide:
Where CHRIST our light, our life, our joy and peace
Shall with transcendent glory crown thy grace.
III.
Another MEMENTO or MEDITATION for the Window.

There Is light Ethereal, Light. 1. Natural. 2. Artificial. 3. Moral. 4.
Spiritual. 5. Celestial.
and there is light by Art;
There Is light of Joy and knowledge in the heart:
The GOD of light do thou with heart adore;
And He shall bring thee to the light of glore.
The works of darkness do thou ever flee:
And Hellish darkness shall not trouble thee.
IV.
A MEMENTO or MEDITATION, to be affixed at the head of the Table.

THou may well know by these thy fresh supplies,
Thy body's brittle, and at last it dies.
This earthly food does hastily decay:
Seek for that meat, which does endure for ay,
That Heavenly Manna which can thee revive,
Though thou were dead, and make thee ever live.
V.
A MEMENTO or MEDITATION to be affixed on the Muse or Study-house-door.

Amice quisquis huc venis,
Aut agito paucis, aut abi,
Aut me laborantem adjuva.
GOod friend, when ever thou comes to me,
Do not thy words then multiply;
But help my work, if that thou may;
Or else be gone and post away.
Our life is short, our work is great,
Of our abode we have no date;
Great need have we to watch and pray,
And fix us for the latter day.
VI.
A MEMENTO or MEDITATION For the Chimney.

IF thou would shun the Fire of Hell:
Then, seek the Godly fire of But let your Zeal be attended with knowledge
prudence and Moderation.
Zeal.
VII.
A MEMENTO To be affixed on the bed, for Nocturnal MEDITATIONS.

I.
THy bed's ane Emblem of the grave,
Thy sleep resembles death:
The bed-cloaths like thy winding sheet,
When GOD does cut thy breath.
Thy lying down's interring like;
The darkness like the shad
Of sepulchers, and so the worms
Like fleas about thy bed.
2.
The midnight's like securest times.
Before the latter day;
When mortals shall increasse their sins,
And zeal does quyt decay.
Cock-crowing's like the Trumpets sound,
Which all the World shall hear;
When faith on Earth shall scarce be found,
Then, Judgment draws near.
3.
The dawning or the morning sky,
Is like those lightsom Signs,
When Christ our King is drawing nigh,
With healing in his wings.
The rising Sun is like that time, Mal. 4: 2.

When Christ the King of glore,
Shall come with all his glorious train,
And time shall be no more.
4.
Who shall the godly then solace,
And free them of their pains,
And give them pleasure, joy and peace,
Which evermore remains.
But those who dally with their sins,
And do GOD's Law despise,
Their woe and torment then begins,
They did not mercy prize.
5.
Then, enter not into thy bed,
Let not thy Soul take rest;
Till that with GOD thy peace be made:
This is thy only best.
This night may be to thee the last,
Mind, mind mortality.
Thy sleep may, ever the night be past,
With death continued be.
FINIS.

