EPULAE OXONIENSES. Or a Jocular Relation of a BANQVET Presented to the Best of
Kings, by the best of Prelates, in the Year 1636, In the Mathematick Library at
St. John Baptists College.
The Song.
I.
IT was (my Staff upon it) in Thirty Six,
Before the Notes were wrote on Great Don Quix
That this huge Feast was made by that High Priest,
Who did Caress the Royalist of Guests.
Oves and Boves, yes and Aves too
Pisces, and what the whole Creation knew.
II.
For every Creature there was Richly dressed,
As numerous as was great Nevils Feast,
Here we crave leave only to make you smile
(For in the Term we must be grave a while)
At the Exhibit of a Banquet brought
Where all our Gown-men, were in Marchpane wrought.
III.
The Ladies waterd ('bout the Mouth) to see
And taste so sweet an Universitie.
In mighty Chargers of most Formal Past
A Convocation on the Board was placed:
In Capp and Hood and Narrow-sleeved Gown
Just as you see them now about the Town:
IV.
With this Conceited Difference alone,
The Scholars now do Walk but then did Run
There might you see in Honor of his place
Mr. Vice Chancellor with every Mace.
The greater Staffs in Thumping Marchpane made
In smaller, the small Stick of the small Blade.
V.
And after these, as if my Brethrens Call
Had fetched them up, (Sol, Hal, and stout Will: Ball)
In humble postures of a Bowing Leg,
Appeared the Doctors, Masters, Reg. non Reg.
Then in a Mass a sort of Various Capps,
(But could not Hum, for sealed were their Chaps)
VI.
Crowded the Senate, as if they would mind to hear
Some speech, or fall upon Themselves the Cheer,
It put their Majesty's unto the Laugh,
To see the Bedels resign up every Staff,
And were eat up, not as it used to be
Returned by his Gracious Majesty.
VII.
I think that Ieffry waiting on the Queen.
Devoured at one Champ the Verger clean.
But then (O rude!) as at a Proctors Choice
In run the Masters, just like little Boys.
So did the Ladies, and their Servants fall,
Upon the Marchpane-shew, Doctors and all.
VIII.
The Noble Men like to Clarissimos,
Grandees of Venice, did adorn these shows
In Velvet round Caps some, and some in Square,
(A spectacle most excellent and rare)
But their good Ladyships most courteously
Simperd, and eat the Soft Nobility.
IX.
Never was Oxford in such woeful Case,
Unless when Pembroke did expound the place:
Here lay a Doctors Scarlet, there a Hood
Trod under foot, which others snatched for Food
Capp, Gowns, and all Formalities were Rent,
As if the show had been in the Schools at Lent.
CHORUS.
If in the Trojan Horse enclosed were
Men of the Helmet, Target, Sword and Spear,
If by Ingenious Pencil ere was cut
The Learned Homers Illiads in a Nut,
Why in a Bisk or Marchpane Oleo
Might not a Convocation be a show.
Where for to please the Beauteous Ladies Bellies,
Masters were set in past, Scholars in Iellies.
Ed. Gayton.

^ It was (my Staff upon it) in Thirty Six, ^ Before the Notes were wrote on
Great Don Quix ^ That this huge Feast was made by that High Priest, who ^ did
caress the Royalist of Guests, Oves and ^ Boves, yes and Aves too, Pisces, and
what the ^ whole Creation knew. ^

3. Voc. The Chorus at last. ^ If in the Trojan Horse enclosed were, Men of the
Helmet, Target, If by In -- genious Pencil ere was cut, The Learned Homers
Illiads ^ If in the Trojan Horse enclosed were, Men of the Helmet, Target If by
In -- genious Pencil ere was cut, The Learned Homers Illiads ^ If in the Trojan
Horse enclosed were, Men of the Helmet, Target, If by In -- genious Pencil ere
was cut, The Learned Homers Illiads ^ Sword and Spear: Why in a Bisk of
Marchpane Oleo in a Nut. ^ Sword and Spear. Why in a Bisk of Marchpane Oleo in
a Nut. ^ Sword and Spear: Why in a Bisk of Marchpane Oleo in a Nut. ^ Might
not a Convocation be a show, Where for to please the beauteous ^ Might not a
Convocation be a show, Where for to please the beauteous ^ Might not a
Convocation be a show, Where for to please the beauteous ^ Ladies Bellies,
Masters were set in Past, Scholars in Jellies. ^ Ladies Bellies, Masters were
set in Past, Scholars in Jellies. ^ Ladies Bellies, Masters were set in Past,
Scholars in Jellies.


