A CAVEAT TO THE Standing Christian, AND To him that thinks he stands.

BY WILLIAM GEARING Minister of the Gospel.

Quod renati possunt ruere in peccatum grave, satis ostendunt tristissimi
lapsus sanctissimorum hominum. Ursin. Catech. de discrimin. peccat. LONDON,
Printed for John Crook, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1666.

Unto the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS STEVENS OF Little SADBVRY IN THE COUNTY
of GLOUCESTER, KNIGHT; And to the Virtuous LADY HIS WIFE, WILLIAM GEARING
Dedicateth this ensuing Discourse, Entitled, A Caveat to the standing
Christian, etc.

A Caveat to the standing Christian, and to him that thinks he stands.
1 Corinthians. 10.12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
I Do not know a more seasonable Exhortation then this of the Apostle; it is
indeed verbum diei in die suo, we living in such times wherein men fall into
irreligiousness and all manner of profaneness. Our Savior speaking of the
Signs before his coming, foretells how the Stars shall fall from Heaven, Math.
24.29. Some understand by Stars eminent Professors, and by Heaven the Church:
If this be true, then that Scri ture is this day fulfilled; many Stars are
already fallen, and others fall daily: So that if ever a word of Exhortation to
quicken Professors to heedfulness and circumspection be seasonable, now it is;
every Minister should now lift up his voice like a Trumpet, and cry aloud, Let
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

For Coherence.] The Apostle in the preceding verses sets before the
Corinthians eyes a Map of Isreal's provocations, and of Isreal's punishments, of
Gods exemplary judgments on them: Vengeance follows sin as the thread follows
the needle; if sin be in the house, judgment is at the door.

Their capital sins were,

1. Their lusting after evil things; which Interpreters understand of their
lusting after flesh, Ver. 6 of this Chap.
Numb. 11.4. The token of Gods displeasure against them, was his giving them
Quails in wrath, and a sore Plague to boot, Numb. 11.33.

2. A second sin mentioned was Idolatry, mentioned in the seventh verse of this
Chapter; of which we read Exodus 32.4.8. They made them a molten Calf, and
worshipped it, and sacrificed thereunto, saying, These be thy Gods O Israel,
which have brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. Gods judgment upon them
for this sin, was the Sword, by which there fell three thousand, ver. 28.

3. The third sin mentioned was fornication, ver. 8. a venial sin in the
account of the profane; and yet this sin was dyed in the blood of three and
twenty thousand, Number. 25.9.

4. A fourth sin was tempting of Christ, ver. 9. mentioned Number. 21.6. For this
sin God was avenged on them by stinging them with fiery Serpents.

5. The last sin was murmuring, the sin of Corah and his confederates, who
murmured against Moses: The murmurers were destroyed of the Destroyer; God sent
an Angel, called here a Destroyer, whether a good Angel or evil it is not
determined, and he destroyed them. Thus you see how God paid those sinners
their deserved wages; every sin like the Cockatrice has a sting of wrath in
the tail.

In the eleventh verse he gives a Reason why their sins and Gods judgments
stand upon Record in Scripture: Now all these things (i.) all these dreadful
judgments were inflicted on them (...), as types or examples in respect of us.
They are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come:
They are standing monuments of Gods wrath to all ages, even to the end of the
world, that none in all ages may run into the same sins, and so partake of the
same Plagues: God is as just to day as yesterday, and hates sin to day as
yesterday: If we commit fornication, if we tempt Christ, if we murmune against
Moses and God; if we sin as they did, he will visit us with the Sword, with the
Plague, with Serpents, with a Destroyer, as he did them: Where like sins
abound, expect the like judgments.

CHAP. II.
NOw from these examples of Gods wrath, and Gods end in setting up these
monuments of his indignation, he takes occasion to exhort us against carnal
security and confidence, and so much the rather because we live in the ends of
the world, in the corruptest ages and times.

Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, etc.

In the words we have four parts.

1. A Disease; the Falling Sickness.] Lest ye fall: (i.) fall into sin, fall
into the hands of the living God.

2. A Remedy prescribed; Circumspection or heedfulness of our selves.] Take
heed.

3. The person most subject to this Disease, and for whom the Remedy is good.]
Him that thinks he stands.

4. The Reason why we should take heed, expressed in that word Wherefore.] (i.)
Seeing others fell into grievous sins, and God visited them with dreadful
Plagues, do you therefore take heed.

For explication of the words.

Let him that thinketh] (...), Qui videtur: which in our Translation is
sometimes rendered, he thinks, and sometimes, he seems: Some there are that
think it to be a mere expletive particle, which rather fills up the sentence
then adds any thing to the sense: Mr. Isaac Causabon Isaac Causab. in
Capitol. page 180.
cites diverse places in the Roman Historians, in which this word is so used;
among the rest there is one out of Capitolinus, where speaking of a certain
Poem, he says, Epigramma videtur extare, the Epigram seems to be extant; and
then presently sets down the Epigram it self, where to seem to be extant, and
to be extant is all one. Salmasius Salmas. in Jul. Capitolin. page 106.
has gathered diverse sayings to the same purpose, both in Historians and other
Writers. Others have observed the like manner of speech even out of the Holy
Scriptures, such as these are; If any man seem to be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16.
that is, if any man be contentious. And Heb. 4.1. Hoord, Souls misery and
recov. c. 4.
Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you
should seem to come short of it; that is, lest any of you should come short. In
like sort, Mark 10.42 (...), They that seem to bear rule over the Gentiles, as
our old Translation rendered it, is no more but (...), They that do bear rule
over the Gentiles: So say they here, He thinks, or he seems, is a mere
expletive particle without any signification. But I suppose (...) is thus to be
rendered, (...) pro existimare, videri sibi est, f^lso praesumere. R^vanel.
Qui sibi videtur, he that seems to himself to stand, he that has this
opinion of himself that he stands, he that pleases himself with his own
conceit of the firmness of his estate, he that thinks

He stands.

Qui sibi placet in opinione constantiae quasi liceat secure vivere. P^scat.
Schol. in loc.
That is, 1. He that thinks he is in the faith. 2. That he is in the state of
grace. 3. That he shall continue and persevere to the end in the state of
grace: Let him

Take heed.

(...)] Let him see to himself, let him have a watchful eye over himself,

Lest he fall.

1. Lest he fall into sin: So falling is taken sometimes, Jam. 3.2. In many
things (...), we stumble, and fall: This fall wounds and bruiseth the
Conscience.

2. Lest he fall from the faith into error, 2 These. 2.3. The Apostle speaks of
a falling away before the coming of Christ: to fall there, is to depart from
the faith and profession of Christ unto heresy and idolatry.

3. Lest he fall away from the truths and ways of God. Heb. 6.10. If they fall
away.] Of all falls the most dangerous; for such stumble and fall, and never
rise more; they never cease falling till they fall headlong into Hell: Such was
the fall of Angels from Heaven into Hell.

4. Lest he fall: (i.) lest he perish for ever; let him take heed lest he fall
into everlasting destruction. Old Simeon said of the holy Child Jesus to Mary
his Mother, Behold this Child is set for the fall -- of many, Luke 2.34. (i.)
he is appointed for the ruin and destruction of many, who shall stumble at
Christ, and fall into the Sea of destruction. All these falls are comprehended
in this word in my Text.

CHAP. III. Some Objections for the clearing this Text answered.
BEfore I come to raise any Observations from these words, I must clear two
things.

Object. 1. The Papists argue from this place, that none can be certain of
their Salvation; for (say they) if those that stand must fear lest they fall,
then we cannot be certain, but be always doubting.

Resp. 1. The Apostle does not say, He that standeth] but he that thinks he
stands; he that conceives himself to be in the state of grace; he who
presumes to stand: This Exhortation is principally directed to the Christians
that are carnally secure.

2. This Exhortation to holy circumspection and heedfulness does not destroy
Assurance, but is an help to preserve Assurance: He that takes most heed to
himself, walks most surely: Holy circumspection is a pillar to uphold
Assurance: Presumptuous children do catch most falls, when as the wary do
escape.

3. Certainty of Salvation and a filial fear may well stand together; it
casts out slavish fear, but it stands with filial fear: Blessed is the man
that fears always, Prove. 28.14. that fears to displease God. Filial fear is
joined with the certainty of Salvation, servile fear with the fear of
Damnation, Dr Sutton in Romans 11.20. Magdeb. Cent. 13. cap. 4.
says a Judicious Divine of ours. The more curious difference of these two may
he had from Aquinas and Bonaventure, noted by the Magdeburgenses: A holy and
reverential awe of God in the heart, makes a man to take heed to his ways, that
he may please God: What better means can there be to keep Assurance?

Object. 2. Here it may be demanded, whether this Exhortation may not belong to
the godly, who do stand really, and not (...), seemingly?

Sol. Yes: for though they cannot fall totally and finally from the state of
grace, yet godly men may fall,

1. From gracious acts, though not from gracious habits.

2. From degrees of grace; they may fall from their first-love, though not from
love it self; a tanto, not a toto.

3. They may fall from their comforts, and for a time may lose the joy of Gods
salvation: David by his sin, had deprived himself of that joyful sense of Gods
love which he had before; therefore he prays, Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, Psalm 51.12. In those that are truly godly, In vere piis inest vera
pax conscientiae, vera mundities cordis, vera fiducia in Deum, vera accedendi
ad Deum parrhesis, verum gandium, vera falutis certitude: H^s spirit^^ Sancti
mo^^ and frullu^ ex animis pierum cum peccant, etsi non penitas, magna tamen ex
part excuti, qu^^ neget? Zanch. miscel. lib. 1. Fideles in atrocia peccata
lapsi, sensum gratia Dei ad tempus amittunt. Theol. Palate.
says Zanchy, there is a true peace of conscience, true purity of heart, a
lively confidence in God, true boldness of access to God, true joy, true
assurance of salvation: But that these motions and fruits of the Spirit are
greatly, though not wholly, shaken out of the souls of the godly when they sin,
who is there that will deny? And say the Palatine Divines, The faithful when
they fall into gross sins, do lose the feeling of Gods favor for a time.

4. They may fall into sin, whereby the Name of God may be blasphemed, Religion
disgraced, their Consciences sorely wounded, the godly much grieved, the wicked
extremely hardened in their sins by their falls.

5. They may fall into temporal destruction, though not into eternal; Prima est
haec ultio, quod se judice nemo nocens absolvitur. Juvenal. Satyr. 13.
they may fall into the correcting hands of God, though not into his revenging
hands; they may so fall, as that they may be filii sub ira, though not filii
irae, children under wrath, though not children of wrath. Even the Satyrist
could say, This is the first revenge which God takes on a guilty soul, that in
its own judgment the sin committed is detained till repentance dismiss it, and
so the sinner is under wrath.

So then these words reach all, both seemingly godly, and really godly; him
that thinks he stands, and he that stands by grace.

CHAP. IV.
THe words being thus cleared, I shall only lay down three Points of Doctrine
to be handled.

1. That every Christian ought to have a watchful eye over himself, lest he
fall into sin.

2. That every one that is a Professor of the Christian Religion is bound to
have a watchful eye over himself, lest he fall away.

3. Every godly man is bound to take heed to himself, lest he fall from grace
in any degree.

For the first.

Prop. 1. Every one that is a Christian, and professes godliness, ought to
have a watchful eye over himself, lest he fall into sin. I said I will take
heed to my ways, says David, Psalm. 39.1. This was David's resolved practice.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34. This charge was given by Christ to his
Apostles: And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness, Luke
12.15. In many other places is this pressed on men as a preservative against
sin, by such terms as these; Look to your selves, Watch, Walk circumspectly,
etc.

The Reasons of the Point.

Great reason there is why we should be watchful in this respect.

Reas. 1. Because of that propensity and natural inclination that is in us to
every sin: Every man's heart is fraught with the principles and habits of every
sin, his heart is a full treasure of wickedness: We may all sigh out that
doleful complaint of Paul, O miserable men that we are, because of a body of
death within us! Do some run greedily into drunkenness? Do others run greedily
into uncleanness? Do some commit fornication? Do some tempt Christ, and others
murmr against God? Do some run into those muta peccata, into unnatural sins?
Thou art naturally prone to act the same sins, yea the greatest sins that ever
were acted, if thou do not take heed and beware of them. Other men's
abominable vices are looking-glasses wherein we may behold the face of our own
hearts and natural inclinations: As face answers face, so does the heart of
man answer the heart of man. 'Twas an arrogant speech of that Pharisee, God I
thank thee, I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican, seeing he had as
vile an heart, as unjust an heart as yonder Publican. We tremble at the
thoughts of the sins which Cain and Judas acted, and ever judge them worthy of
that place where they are; we are as naturally sinful as Cain, as Judas, prone
to act the same; wherefore we must take heed in respect of our natural
proneness, lest we fall: the same weeds will spring up in our lives, if we take
no heed to pluck up these roots of bitterness.

2. Because we are subject to the same temptations as others are; wherefore let
us take heed lest we fall into the same sins into which others do, Gal. 6.1.
The same fruit with which the Serpent begui^ed Eve, he seduced Adam. The Devil
can find out a Babylonish garment, and a golden wedge to tempt thee, as he did
Acban: Thirty pieces of silver may entice thee to betray Christ, as it did
Judas: Abel's holiness may be an occasion to stir up malice in thee, as it did
in Cain: Common experience testifies that all are subject to the same
temptations; were there a general communication about temptations, this would
be the general vote, nemine contradicente, we are a^l tempted to pride, to
lust, to covetousness, to distrust, to despair, etc. what sin is there to which
we are not tempted? Every one that has any experience of Satan's malice, and
takes any notice of sinful suggestions darted by Satan, will say within
himself, as Luther once said, I think the Devil has no other work to do but to
tempt poor Luther: Wherefore take heed lest some temptation or other take you
by the heel, as Jacob did Esau, and supplant you; the less heed we take, the
more prevalent temptations are; Satan's fiery darts will soon set us on fire of
hell, if we do not take heed of him.

Reas. 3. Because there is a snare laid in every thing to entrap us; wherefore
let us take heed lest we fall. Alas for me (says S. Bernard) I see wars
providing for me on every side; Hei mihi, quia undique mihi tela video, undique
tela volant, undique tentamenta; undique pericula, quocunque me vertam! nulla
est securitas; and quae mulcent, and qua tristant, omnia timeo. Bernard. p.
1061.
weapons, tentations, dangers fly about me, and assail me wheresoever I go!
which way shall I turn me? There is no safe being any where, I am afraid of
every thing, of such things as delight me, and of such things also as molest
and make me sad. Antoninus dreamed that there were snares laid over all the
world to entrap him; it was his dream, but there are snares really laid in all
places to ensnare our souls. In the way wherein I walked, says David, have
they privily laid a snare for me; and in the way and places wherein we are
daily walking and traveling do these baits lie, they are the things which we
continually look upon, hear of, handle, taste, feel, and make use of. The Devil
lays his snares in our shops, in our houses, in the fields, in the streets, in
every company; he lays snares on our tables, Nemo unquam hostis tam
periculosus, quam in improbos prosperitas sua. Senec. Epist. 32. Meruis longa
atque insiguis honorum pagina. Juvenal. Sat. 10.
he lays a snare in our gifts, parts, duties, to draw us to pride and
hypocrisy; he turns every stone, that he might make us fall: As S. Paul speaks
of himself, that he became all things to all men, that he might gain some; so
we may say of the Devil, he becomes all things to all men in his way, that he
might gain men to himself. The Historian observes of Cataline, that when he
began his rebellion, he applied himself to every man's humor to draw him into
the same rebellion; if he saw a man covetous, he tempted him with money; if he
saw a man ambitious, he proffered honors, preferments and promotions to him to
ensnare him. Thus does Satan; if we are covetous, he has an Achan's wedge for
us; if we be addicted to honor, he can show us all the glory of the world, etc.

Reas. 4. Because of the malice of Satan: The Devil has the greatest malice
against the Professors of Piety; therefore he is called their Adversary; Your
Adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, says Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8.
The Devil is not called a wicked man's Adversary, he is called their Father; Ye
are of your Father the Devil, says Christ to the wicked Jews, John 8.44. Our
Savior told Peter, Satan desires to winnow thee: He does not so much desire
to winnow a wicked man; Christ says of them, that they will do the works of
their Father; they are as willing and forward to sin, as the Devil is to have
them to sin: A Fisherman had rather catch one fish then a thousand frogs;
Satan would rather draw a Professor to sin then a thousand profane persons: As
David said of Goliah's sword, There is none like that; so the Devil of the sins
of professing Christians, there is no sin like theirs; no fall like a Saints
fall; no adultery like that of David; his adultery was more advantageous to
Satan then the blasphemies of a thousand Rabshekahs: that as our Savior says
of the conversion of a sinner, There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons which need no
repentance, Luke 15.7. so there is joy in hell, in the presence of the Devil
and his Angels, over the fall of one godly man, more then over the abominable
practices of ninety and nine profane persons; for the Devil knows, 1. That
God is more dishonored and more blasphemed by the fall of one Professor of
Religion, then by seven falls of wicked men daily. 2. He knows that his fall
will bring a greater disgrace and discredit to Religion; thereby the Gospel and
the godly are evil spoken of. 3. He knows the falls of godly men (like the
fall of Amasa in the midway) do hinder people from following after Christ, yea
it extremely hardens wicked men in their wickedness; wherefore he will leave
ninety nine profane persons, to seek out one of them to tempt them to sin:
Wherefore O ye Professors of godliness take heed lest he give you a fall; you
are all in a warfaring condition in the field with an Adversary, and he no mean
one, but a Lion, a roaring Lion, a diligent Adversary, who is always going
about seeking whom he may devour.

Reas. 5. Because of the deceitfulness of all the Enemies of our Salvation: The
world is deceitful; the things of the world are deceitful, Math. 13.22. riches
are called deceitful riches; the favor of man is decitful, Prove. 31.30. and
Wine is a mocker, Prove. 30.1. Men are apt to be deceived and mocked by these
things: Now these things are not properly deceitful, they are so rather
objective then subjective: Man by sin has brought a curse upon the creature,
and by the judgment of God this curse is retorted from the creature to man
again. Soldiers in their march are subject to ambuscadoes; so the creatures do
as it were lie in ambush to do us a mischief. And as the things of the world
are thus deceitful, so are the men of the world very deceitful, laboring to
draw us into all manner of sin; these do not only deceive men by false hopes,
but also by suggesting false fears. Severus terrified the Roman Army by
clapping head-pieces with lighted matches upon the stumps of the trees in the
night, making the appearance of a new formidable Army; and as an Enemy giving
an alarm to a City on one side, draws the defendants thither, while the
Soldiers are undermining and scaling the other: So the world does many times
scare men out of their profession, and affright them with dangers from men, to
bring them in danger of the real wrath of God. Sin likewise is deceitful; and
the lusts and works of sin are deceitful; and your own evil hearts are
deceitful above all things, above sin, Devils, and the world; and all these
conspire together to deceive you: what need have we then to have a watchful eye
over our selves? You will take heed that men cheat you not out of your money,
out of your Estates and Land; and if you knew you had such persons about you
that would deceive you if you took not heed, you would double your watch.
Beloved, let me tell you, these deceivers I am now speaking of would deceive
you of your souls, more worth then the whole world, they would cheat you of an
everlasting Inheritance, of a glorious Kingdom in Heaven; their design is to
deceive you into Hell, and to bring you to eternal damnation: Wherefore take
heed lest ye fall.

Reas. 6. Because you that profess your selves to be godly, you have more to
lose then wicked men have to lose; therefore take heed lest ye fall: Have
wicked men a soul to lose, so have you? Have wicked men a Heaven to lose, so
have you? Have wicked men a God, a Christ to lose, so have you? But you that
stand have yet more to lose then they; you have communion with God to lose,
which wicked men have not; how will a great fall break your communion with God?
you have a Spirit of comfort and adoption to lose, which wicked men have not;
you have boldness of access to the Throne of Grace to lose, which wicked men
have not; you have joy in the Holy Ghost, and peace of Conscience to lose,
which wicked men have not: what need then have you to take heed to your selves
that ye fall not.

Reas. 7. Because of Gods severity against sin and sinners. This is the very
reason of the Apostle in my Text; wherefore let him that stands, take heed
lest he fall: Seeing God plagued Fornicatours, destroyed Murmurers, fixed such
exemplary marks of his displeasure upon the Israelites, let us take heed lest
we sin as they, and suffer the like punishment: If you murmur, he will send a
destroyer to destroy you; if you murmur against Moses, he can make the earth to
swallow you up; if you fall into fornication, and burn in lust, he will make
fire to burn you, as it did the Sodomites; if you harden your hearts against
Gods threatenings, he will make the waters to drown you, as they did the
Egyptians; if you lust after flesh, he will give you Quails in wrath, and the
Plague to boot; if you sin as Vzzah did, he may strike you dead presently: God
is always the same, as severe against sin in Christians, as against sin in the
Israelites; he will chastise his own people now under the Gospel, as he
chastised them under the Law: though hand join in hand, yet he will never
suffer sin to go unpunished. Remember Lot's wife, how God dealt with her for
one act of disobedience, O ye children of disobedience! Remember Corah and his
companions, O ye murmurers! Remember Zimri and Cozbi, ye fornicators! Remember
Vzzah, ye polluters of sacred things! Remember Belshazzar, O ye swinish
drunkards! Remember the rich Glutton, all ye sensual Epicures! Remember Cain,
all ye persecuters! Remember Judas, all ye covetous professors, lest their
plagues fall upon you, for your falling into their sins! Do you fear the
Plague, then fear Fornication? Do you fear War, then fly Idolatry! Do you fear
judgments, then fear sin? Do you fear to fall into Hell, fear sin? you need to
fear no evil of punishment, if you fear to commit sin; but if you fear not to
fall into sin, be sure you shall fall into misery.

CHAP. V.
Use 1. THis may inform us of the great falls and scandals among Professors:
There are two principal causes; Heedlessness, Self-confidence.


1. Heedlessness: Men take no heed to themselves, nor to their ways, wherefore
they stumble and fall, and oftentimes wound their Consciences: Heedless
children get most falls and broken bones; so do heedless Christians: many of
the Lords Worthies have fallen shamefully through heedlessness; for want of
circumspection David fell into great scandal. It is just with God to let loose
the Devil upon those who walk loosely: the Devil is said to watch, the main
thing he watches for, is to find us careless and heedless, then we become a
prey to him: The slumbering of the Sentinel gives advantage to the Enemy; when
the Guard is in a deep sleep, the City is soon surprised: many a precious soul
has the Devil surprised and devoured, finding them asleep, taking no heed to
themselves.

2. Self-confidence: When men presume upon their own strength, or presume that
they shall not fall into such or such a sin, they do not find inclinations to
it; they presume they hate it so, as that they shall never be overtaken with
it; like Hazael hearing what cruelties he should act upon the women and
infants, said to the Prophet, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do such
detestable things? as if he should have said, I hate the mention of such sins,
the naming of such cruelties: So it is with many a Christian, hearing of the
grievous falls of others into sin, they think they abhor such courses, and
though others commit such sins, they should not. It was Peter's case when our
Savior told him he should deny him, he abhorred the naming of it, being
confident of himself, though all the rest of Christ's Disciples and others
should deny him, yet he should not, he loved Christ too well to deny him; his
self-confidence supplanted him, and gave him that fearful fall.

1. God punishes self-confidence with subtraction of his grace; seeing the
child will go alone, let him go alone.

2. God puts them out of his protection, by giving such up to some strong
temptation, that they may fall; and that for these ends.

1. That Christians may see their own weakness, that they are as unstable as
waters; if they are not bank'd in with divine grace, their corruptions will
soon run abroad: the imperfection of our sanctification causes weakness, as
young tender Plants are weak and bowed every way.

2. That by their falls they may learn to take more heed: A burnt child will
dread the fire; a wounded conscience will make a Christian more circumspect;
sin works good in the godly occasionaliter, occasionally, though not
causative, causatively; Quia inde redeunt cautiores, humiliores, because they
go out from sin more cautious, and more humble, says S. Austin.

3. That God may have more of their company, and of their dependence upon him:
Children after they have received some hurt by a fall, will keep close to their
Mothers side, and will have them to hold them, lest they fall again: God is
then more sought unto from his people for supporting grace; God has more of
their dependence on him, lest they fall again into the like sins.

CHAP. VI.
Use 2. BE exhorted to take heed to your selves; Walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15.
Such as travel in slippery paths, or ways troublesome to be found, are careful
to look to their feet, to observe their marks and turnings; so must it be with
him that will travel safely through the slippery and dangerous way of this
worlds wilderness says a good Divine of ours. (...) de (...).
A man that walks over a narrow bridge in fear, walks (...), exactly,
circumspectly, his eye is on his feet, lest he step aside and fall into the
river. Ponder the paths of thy feet, says Solomon, that thy ways may all be
ordered aright, Prove. 4.26. Circumspection is a Christian Lifeguard; it makes
a Christian like that Beast in the Revelations, full of eyes within and
without; eyes without, to make him to look to his ways, that he fall not; eyes
within, to make him to take heed to his heart, that he be not deceived: A
Christian is then in his watchtower, when he walks circumspectly; that man
walks most surely, that walks most tremblingly: Blessed is the man that
fears always. Tantus gradus certitudinis, quantus gradus sollicitudinis. Do
you fear judgments? do you fear to be destroyed of the destroyer? do you fear
the arrows of divine vengeance? then fear sin: you need not fear judgments if
you fear sin: he that takes heed of falling into sin, does in that take heed of
falling into misery; he fears Hell most, that is most afraid of sin. Should
any put out this question, what shall I do that I may avoid judgments? the best
answer is, take heed that ye fall not; for if ye sin, be sure your sin will
find you out; if you fall into sin, you shall certainly fall into the hands of
the living God. I shall therefore show you, Of what we must take heed;
To what we must take heed.


1. Of what we must take heed.

1. Take heed of all sinful occasions: Occasio facit furem, opportunity makes a
thief; many a man is overtaken with a sin, being first overtaken with an
opportunity; the argument which the Harlot used to entice the young man was,
now is an opportunity, Prove. 7.19. Come let us take our fill of love, for the
good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey. So Joseph's Mistress uses
the same argument; When Joseph went into the house to do his business, and
there were none of the men of the house there within, she caught him by the
garment, saying, Lie with me, Genes. 39.11, 12. It is a note of a wicked man to
wait for opportunities of sinning: The Adulterer waits for the twilight,
says Job.

2. Take heed of the first rise of sin, a sinful motion, a sinful thought; take
these hellish brats, and dash their brains against the stones: Magna vis in
minimis, there is great force in the smallest things; a spark of fire has
burnt an house to the ground; a flash of lightening (which vanishes in a
moment) has done the like: As Sampson said of the jaw bone with which he slew
a thousand Philistines, with the jaw bone of an Ass (a poor inconsiderable
engine for war) have I slain heaps upon heaps; so the Devil by a sinful
thought, by a sinful motion has slain multitudes of men.

3. Take heed of making a parley with a temptation; it is not safe to play with
the edged tools of Hell: Eve entertained conference with the Serpent about the
fruit wherewith he tempted her, and Gods threatenings, and we feel the smart of
her fall to this day. Temptations to sin are to be resisted, not to be debated
upon; we have a promise, if we resist the Devil, he shall fly from us; if we
are afraid of the temptation that assaileth us, we shall be angry against it,
and show our anger in making a quick resistance against it, and so prevent or
expel the sin suggested.

4. Take heed of tempting company; Peter's being in the Highpriests Hall was
the occasion of his sad fall. He that finds and fears his proneness to any
sin, Quid tibi necesse est in ea ver sari domo, in qua necesse est quotidie aut
perire aut vincere. Hier. Ep. 47. de suspect. contuber.
whether gluttony, drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. must keep out of vicious
company, and occasions leading to those sins, and resolve with David to fly
whatsoever may draw him thereunto, and say with David, Away from me ye wicked,
for I will keep the Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119. Tempting company puts a
man upon a necessity either of perishing or conquering: So S. Hierom
intimates; Why must you needs live in that house, in which you must needs
either perish or vanquish every day? A circumspect Christian is loath to be put
to either.

5. Take heed of the least act of sin: It is notable what a Learned man says;
They are effects of former sins, and causes of the latter, and that not only by
Gods just judgment permitting it so, but also by coherence and affinity: one
sin brings on another, a lesser draws on a greater, as lesser sticks do set the
greater on fire: a little Thief put in at a window, sets open the doors to let
in the greater: in the body of man frequent labors though but little, beget an
aptitude to endure greater: a little rent in a garment makes it fit to receive
a wider, every nail and thorn is apt to take hold of it, and to make the rent
broader. Qui minima contemnit, paulatim decidit, he that takes no heed of
lesser sins, falls by degrees into greater absurdities: I think that more go to
Hell for smaller sins, then for great ones: lesser sins persisted in, provoke
the Devil to assault us with stronger temptations; as a maids easy yielding to
some lesser toyings provokes the Wanton to tempt her to greater indecencies:
The beginnings of sin (says a Learned man) are modest; Principia peccati
modesta sunt.
Satan tempts us but to small matters at first, but if he find us give way to
him therein, then (like bold beggars) he sets upon us for greater courtesies:
Men are more apt to commit lesser sins then greater; for if a man fall into a
great sin, 1. It is always in his fight, it stares him in the face; his
Conscience often bites and stings him for it: Medica sunt qua perdunt.
and 2. Lesser sins are often committed, and quickly forgotten; therefore they
are small sins that destroy most men. Therefore let me tell those that think
their case well, if they can be taxed but for one or two sins, and being told
of it, they answer it is all their fault, That as small sins destroy, so will a
few small ones; one knife in thy throat is enough to dispatch thee; one bullet
in thy guts will kill thee; and one sin in thy heart is enough to destroy thee.

2. To what we must take heed.

1. Take heed to your heart: In all thy keepings keep thy heart; Prove. 4.23. he
only that knows the sinfulness and deceitfulness of the heart, says it is
deceitful above all things: Men are deceitful, sin is deceitful, the Devil is
deceitful, but there is no such deceitfulness in them as is in our hearts; every
one of us carries his own supplanter within his breast. Be sure to keep sin
out of your hearts; if Satan can get and keep possession of our hearts, he has
won the main fort of the soul; no part of man can sin without the heart, the
heart can sin without all the rest: the Fox goes to the flock purposing to
devour a Lamb, and is prevented by the vigilance of the Shepherd, yet vulpes
exit, vulpes egreditur, he goes forth a Fox, and comes home a Fox: the heart
intends a sin which is never brought into action, yet it sins in that
intention; He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, says our Savior,
has committed adultery in his heart, Math. 5. The heart is like a Mill, if the
wind or water be violent, the Mill will go whether the Miller will or no, yet
he may choose what kind of grain it shall grind; if the affections be strong and
violent, the heart will be working: Be sure to keep sin out of your hearts, and
suffer not one known sin willingly to root there. It is said of Creta, that no
serpent nor venomous thing will live there, but dye as soon as it comes into
that Island, such an antipathy there is between them and the nature of that
soil; so let us be affected toward sin, let us labor to keep it out of our
hearts, knowing that a bad guest is more easily kept out, then thrust out of
doors; but if we cannot do that, let us labor to smother and stiffle it as
soon as it comes there.

2. Take heed to your affections: It is the Wisemans advice, When ye go into
the House of God, take heed to your feet, Eccles. 5.1. take heed to your feet
wheresoever you go; if a man has a love to sin, he will fall into sin when
opportunity serves: the affections are the feet of the soul, see that your
affections be ordered according to the dictates of faith sincerely and
constantly, cleaving to all good in an holy order, and shunning all evils in
their several kinds and degrees, as they are discovered to be evil by the power
of faith judging according to the word of truth: see that your affections be
moved by sound reasons, clearly apprehended, then you will not love what you
should hate; let your affections keep within the pale of sound Reason, and move
according to her information; it is very dangerous to give way to loose
affections, if once they have broken the bands of reason, they will hurry us up
and down into many inconveniences.

3. Take heed to your outward senses, especially the ear and the eye: Greg.
Nazianzen Greg. N^^^ianz.
said, That if a man would live in the world, he must have a vail on his eyes,
a lock on his ears, and a compass on his lips: If these two senses be not
watched, they will be like Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil: the senses are
the outworks; if Satan once take the outworks, he will quickly master the
fort within.

1. Take heed to your ears; do not listen to the voice of hellish charmers
charming never so sweetly; corrupt communication, dum aurem afficit, animam
interficit, while it affects and pleases the ear, it kills the soul. Joseph
would not hearken to the solicitations of his wanton Mistress, though she
spoke to him day by day, Genesis 39.10.

2. Take heed to your eyes, Prove. 23.26. David prays, Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119. The first sin that ever was committed, entered
in by the eye, Genesis 3.6. Physicians observe; that death first seizes on the
eyes, because sin first seized on them; at these windows most sins creep into
our souls; looking begets liking in the heart; therefore it is not good to look
where we may not like. The Romans did ill provide for the keeping the Law which
they made, that Virgins should drink no wine, when they permitted them to see
it; Solomon's wisdom exceeded theirs, when to a man that loves wine well, and
is apt to be ensnared by it, he gives counsel, not to look upon it, when it
gives its color in the cup, and moves it self aright, Prove. 23.31. Et licet
quidam putent majoris esse virtutis praesentem contemnere voluptatem, tamen ego
arbitror securioris esse continentia, nescire quod quaeras. Hier. Ep. ad
Laetam. Cassian institut. lib. 5. c 32.
So Hierom in one of his Epistles to Laeta, where he gives direction how to
bring up her daughter virtuously, among other things advises her not to suffer
her daughter to see those meats, which seeing she might be moved to desire; and
this his advice he shuts up with these words: Though some there be who think it
a point of greater virtue to contemn a pleasure when it is present, yet I judge
it to be a thing of more security, not to know or see that thing which one may
not safely desire. Cassian also reports of a certain young man, that after he
had left the world many years, and betook himself to a Monastery, having
received a packet of Letters from his father and mother, and diverse of his dear
friends, he durst not look upon them, but threw them all into the fire with
these words; Ite cogitationes patriae, pariter concremamini, ne me ulterius ad
illa quae fugi, vocare tentetis; Be gone ye thoughts of my Country, and burn
for company, for fear lest ye tempt me to look again toward the things which I
have forsaken: He feared (says the story) lest by the reading of their lines,
and the sight of their names, he should have been enticed to warp toward their
company and the world again. The eye before the fall of Adam was the window to
let in good instructions into the soul, but since the fall it is Proxeneta
peccati, the Broker that goes betwixt the heart and the object to make up the
sinful bargain.

CHAP. VII.
I Now come to the second point of Doctrine, and note from my Text,

Observe.
That it concerns all who profess godliness to take heed to themselves lest they
fall away from their profession. The Apostle principally aims at Professors
in this his Caution; He that thinks he stands, that is,

1. He that conceiteth himself to be in the state of grace.

2. He that conceiteth he shall persevere to the end, that thinks within
himself, he shall (as David speaks of the Sun) rejoice like a giant to run the
course of Christianity.

For explication observe these distinctions: there is a twofold falling away,
Partial, Total.




2. Total falling away; and this is when a man casts off the yoke of Christ,
and puts his neck under the yoke of Belial, shakes hands with his profession,
and embraces profaneness, or as Demas shook hands with Christ, and embraced
this present world; or falls from the show of godliness into an open show of
profaneness, takes no delight to sit with Mary at the feet of Christ, but
loves to fit in the seat of the scornful.

Temporary, Final.


1. Temporary, for a time; when men depart from God and Christ, as Noah's Dove
went from the Ark, who having tired her self abroad, and finding no resting
place for the soles of her feet, returned again to the Ark: Thus many a
Professor falls off from God and his ways, flutters up and down in the world,
but finds no peace in conscience, no content in the ways of sin, returns to God
again: Such was the falling away of Solomon, who did for a while cast off God,
fall into the fond and inordinate love of women, and insatiably too, of many
women; he had seven hundred wives, and three hundred concubines, 1 Reg. 11.1.3.
and that which was worse, into the love of strange women, idolaters, of whom
the Lord had given a charge to Israel, Ye shall not go in unto them, neither
shall they go in to you: and to outward incontinency he added spiritual
adultery; his wives turned away his heart from God, ver. 4. he fell to
idolatry, and followed after strange gods, erected Temples to the Idols which
his wives adored, set up Altars, Ornaments, Priests, and all upon Mount Olivet,
before the face of the Lord in his Temple, 2 Kings 23.13. he gave himself to
all pleasures and vanities under the Sun (as appears by his book of
Ecclesiastes, which he wrote after his return), but could find no contentment
in all, nor in any thing under the Sun; therefore see what he says, Eccles.
12.13. here is the summa totalis, totum officii, totum conatus, totum
faelicitatis; the whole duty, the whole endeavor, the whole happiness of man.
This was Isreal's revolt, Hos. 2.7. and some Divines conceive, that Demas thus
fell away for a time, and returned again.

2. Final falling; to fall irrecoverably, to cast off God and his ways for
ever; when men go from God and his ways, as Noah's Raven went from the Ark,
that fled away and never returned again. The word (...) frequently used in
Scripture, signifies to depart from that which we formerly stood to; it is a
military word; for among Soldiers such a one was anciently called (...), (...)
transfuga.
qui ordinem suum and locum in acie datum turpiter deseruit, that basely
deserted his place and rank assigned him in the battle, vel qui ad hosts
transfugit, who fled away to the Enemy: Such a one then is an Apostate, who
falls away and departs from that faith he formerly stood to and maintained, and
becomes the servant of sin, and the vassal of Satan. This is called in
Scripture, a turning away from following the Lord, Psalm. 125.5. Sound
Christians, like Caleb, follow the Lord fully, but the unsound Christian
turns away from following of him. It is likewise called, a leaving the paths
of righteousness, Prove. 2.13. a going backwards, and not forwards, Jerem. 7.14.
it is called a departing from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. when a man does despite
to the Spirit of grace, flings away the strictness of holy walking, casts off
the yoke of Christ, and turns the grace of God into lasciviousness, this is a
woeful apostasy; this is that which the Apostle meant in Heb. 6.6. where he
uses the word (...), which signifies the falling of reprobates, as learned
Zanchy Zanch. in Heb. 6 6.
notes, such who stumble and fall, and never rise more, who never stay till
they fall headlong into everlasting destruction: This was the fall of Hymeneus
and Alexander, of whom the Apostle says, they made shipwreck of their faith
and of a good conscience; it is impossible to recover a Ship once dashed into
pieces running upon a rock, and the Apostle says of such, it is impossible for
them to repent.



1. Open and notorious; a falling from open profession into open profaneness; a
falling from open profession into open opposition of the ways of God: Thus
Alexander the Copper-smith fell away and opposed Paul's preaching, which was
worse then to withstand his person; doctrinal opposition is far worse then
personal. Great was the Apostasy of Bols^cus, whom the Papists afterward hired
to write Calvin's Life, where so many lines, so many lies. Baldwin, another
Apostate, changed his Religion at least 3 or 4 times for advantage. Petrus
Carolus was also an odious Apostate, and troubler of the Church. What a
notorious Turn-coat was Ecebolius, who under the Emperor Constans was a
zealous Christian, under Julian again a bitter Pagan; but when Julian was dead,
and Christianity restored, he returns to Christianity again!

2. There is less open, and a not so notoriously scandalous falling away; such
as these are still Swine, who return to the mire, and wallow in it without much
noise; they backslide in heart from God: Some Professors fall like Stars from
the Firmament, all take notice of them; others go out like a candle put under a
bushel, little observed: Oh take heed of falling from God in any of these kinds!

CHAP. VIII. Reasons why we should take heed of falling away from the
profession of godliness.
THe Reasons why we should take heed of falling away from the profession of
piety are drawn, 1. From the sinfulness of this sin. 2. From the dishonor
which is cast on God. 3. From the judgments following upon it.

Reas. 1. From the nature of this sin; there is that sinfulness in this sin
which is not in other sins, which will appear in these ensuing particulars.

1. It is magis direct deordinativum a Deo, as the Schoolmen speak; every sin
is an aversion and deordination from God to the creature, but this is more
directly deordinate, and there is this difference; other sins are a departing
from God in obliq^ a linea, rather going aside from God, then going away from
him, going in a wrong way, then going in a contrary way; but to fall from God
is a going from God in directa linea, going in a contrary way against God,
turning the back upon God, Christ, Holiness, Heaven, and their faces directly
to the world, to their lusts, to hell; like the Moon, after she has been in
conjuction with the Sun, goes backward till she be in a diametrical
opposition; or, to use that familiar comparison of some Divines, other sins are
like the wanderings and runnings of a dog from his Master after every bird, and
after every sheep he sees in the field, and then returns to follow his Master
again; but this sin of falling away from God, is like the dog which goes with
his Master some way from home, and then leaves him and returns back homeward as
fast as he can again: therefore see how God complains of this sin, Jerem.
2.13. My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me, and gone to
the creature; he accounts it two great evils; drunkenness, adultery, and such
like, is but one single iniquity, but to depart from God is double iniquity,
it is two evils.

2. It is the fundamental breach of the Covenant between God and man, so other
sins are not; it is as the sin of adultery, which is the breach of the
Matrimonial Covenant; all other unkind passages betwixt man and wife are not
breaches of it, but only of their promise of love and obedience; but adultery
is the divorcing sin, it breaks the knot which nothing can untie but death: so
it is here; other sins are against our duty, and the engagement of our
obedience to God; but to fall away from God is a rejecting of God, and of
Christ for our God; you do ipso facto say in effect, that God shall not be your
God, and Christ shall not be your husband; and God again replieth, Loammi,
Loruchamah, ye are not my people, and I will not be your God, I will not have
mercy upon you, Hos. 1.6.9.

3. It is dispositivum ad deteriora; when a man is acting this sin, the Devil
has him on an high pinnacle, from whence he tumbleth headlong into any sin;
such a man falls from hypocrisy into open profaneness, from open profaneness
into Atheism, from that into opposition of all that is of God; as the Orator
said of some, a bonis ad mala, a malis ad vitia, a vitiis ad deteriora; so
these men fall from negligence in performances unto a willing neglect, from
neglect into wilful contempt, from contempt into hatred, from hatred into
opposition: Saul was first an Apostate, then a Persecuter; Judas first an
Hypocrite, then a Traitor: What Bishop Latimer called the sin of covetousness,
we may call this sin of falling away, viz. scalam inferni, a ladder by which
men go down step by step to the bottom of perdition and destruction.

4. It has nullum motivum ad poenitentiam, no motive to repentance, it is the
School-mens phrase; it shuts men up in impenitency and final hardness, Heb.
6.6. and the reason is, because falling from God is an ejection of the Spirit
of grace, and when the Spirit cease from his operation on the heart of such a
man, it is impossible then for him to repent; it is said so of no sin but this:
a Professor may fall into a gross moral vice, as into drunkenness, and be
renewed again by repentance; he may through weakness deny Christ, as Peter did,
and yet be renewed again by repentance: there is no sin but this, but a man
falling into it may be renewed again by repentance.

CHAP. IX.
Reas. 2. A Second Reason is drawn from the consideration of the great
dishonor which is cast on God, on Christ, on all the ways of God. 1. On God,
as if he were not a good God to enjoy, a good Master to serve, as if there were
no profit in serving the Almighty, or that there were more profit in serving
base lusts, then in serving God: See how God complains of such, Jer. 2.5.
Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are
gone far from me? So God may say to such revolters, you think that I am an
unjust God, that I have not shown my self ready to do you good, that I am an
hard Master, exacting, like Pharaoh, performance of your tasks, and pay you no
wages: what all ye that ye fall off from me? declare if there be any iniquity
in me: what am I a barren wilderness, a broken cistern, that ye go far from me?
Aquinas.
show me what fault is in me. Aquinas gives 3 reasons why men forsake a present
enjoyment for another: 1. Either it is because it is majoris boni impeditivum,
because it hinders a man from the enjoyment of a greater good, therefore he
forsakes it; or, 2. Because it is fastidiosum, it is loathsome and disrelishing;
or, 3. Because it proves minus delectabile, and minus utile, less delightful,
and less profitable. When men fall away from God, they charge God with all
these.

1. They look upon him as an hinderer of a greater good; the pleasures of sin,
the profits of the world are greater good things to them then God is, while
they follow him they cannot enjoy these things, therefore they cast off God to
embrace this present world.

2. They charge God to be a loathsome God, unworthy of their love, service, and
enjoyment, therefore they cast him off.

3. They charge God not to be so useful, so good, so necessary as he is. Is it
not a dishonor that base creatures should cast off their Lord and Creator, as
if he were unworthy of their service?

2. Fallers away cast insufferable contempt and dishonor on the Lord that
bought them: the Apostle says of such, that they tread under foot the Son of
God, Heb. 10.29. a sin beyond the sin of Judas who betrayed him, beyond the sin
of Pilate who condemned him, beyond the sin of the Soldiers who crucified and
pierced him, beyond the sin of the Jews who mocked him, they offered not such
contempt to him as to tread him under their feet: The phrase alludeth to our
custom; things which we detest and abhor, we cast them under our feet and
trample upon them; thus these men cast away Christ as if he were the
offscouring of the world. When Pompey's Soldiers made a mutiny against him
for restraining them from going to a certain place they desired to go to, and
were resolved to go in spite of him; when no persuasions could prevail, but go
they would, he laid himself down on the ground, speaking thus unto them; If ye
will go, then tread on me your Emperor and General: So Christ says to
backsliders, will ye go away from me? then tread on me your Savior, trample on
this body of mine that was broken for you, reject the blood of the Covenant as
an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, that is, offer
injurious rebellions against his motion on your hearts, against his holy gifts
and workings; such men do interpretatively say to the Spirit of grace, Let me
alone, I am joined to the world, and I will be joined; let me alone, move no
more upon the face of my heart, depart and take thy gifts with thee; for I will
have my will, I will fulfill my lusts.

3. They bring an ill report on Christianity it self, on Religion, on all the
Ordinances, as if there were no goodness in Religion, no pleasantness in the
ways of God, no excellency or efficacy in his Ordinances; and by this their
falling off harden the hearts of men against the ways of God, against Religion
and the Professors of it. Hoord, Sermon. in Ephesians. 4.30.
The Hebrews call the Winter (...) because it is a reproach, either actively to
the earth, as if it had no fructifying power in it, and to the other Seasons of
the Year, as if they were all like to the Winter; or passively to it self,
because it is a time, by reason of the sad face of it, the cessation of the
fruitfulness of the earth, leaves, blossoms, and comeliness of trees, and of
the warmth of the Sun, that is evil spoken of. It is a name that befits a
backsliding Christian, he is a reproach to the Ordinances of God, as if they
had no quickening and fructifying virtue in them; he is a reproach to all his
Society, as if all Christians were like himself; and he is a great
stumbling block to others, many in Hell take their damnation upon it, that the
falling off of a Professor from the ways of God, was the stumbling-stone at
which they stumbled and fell into Hell. Math. 18.7. Woe to the man by whom the
offense comes. The greatest offense that falls out in the world is the falling
away from the profession; it is a scandal with a witness, it is scandalum
magnatum, of God, of Saints, of the Gospel, of godliness. Woe to the world
because of offenses.

1. Because their falling away is the great stumblingblock, that rock of
offense at which the world of wicked men stumble and fall eternally into
destruction; they make men doubt whether that way of profession which they took
up, be a good and safe way or not; hereupon many grow resolute to continue in
their wicked and ungodly life, rather then to receive that faith, or walk by
those rules of life which such backsliders make professi^n of. Salvian in his
time does often aggravate the sins of Christians on this very ground: It cannot
be said (says he) of the Gentiles, Non potest dici de Gentib^^, Evangelia
legunt, and impudici sunt, Apostolos audiunt, and inebriantur, Christum
sequuntur and rapiunt, vitam improbam agunt, and probam Legem se habere dicunt.
In nobis igitur Christus patitur opprobrium, in nobis patitur Lex Christiana
maledictum. Vide Christianos, quid agunt, and evidenter potest de ipso Christo
sciri, quid loceat. Salvian, lib. 4. p. 139.
they read the Gospels and are unchaste, they hear the Apostles and are drunk,
they follow Christ and plunder, they lead a wicked life, and have a good Law,
as they say: but it may be said of us: well, what of this? he tells us; In us
therefore does Christ suffer reproach, in us does the Christian Law endure some
disgrace; for they say of us, Lo what manner of men they be that worship Christ
it is false, that they have a good Law, as they say they have; for if they
learned good things, they would undoubtedly be good persons; such is the Sect,
as are the Sectators and Followers of it. And a little after he brings in the
Pagans thus speaking: Look upon the Christians, see what they do, and by that
you may easily know what their Christ teaches. But why do they charge us
Christians and our God thus? he answers; Why? only for their sakes who are
called Christians, but are not, who by their flagitious and filthy lives do
defame the Christian name. By these speeches we may collect how ill the bad
lives of Christians made Pagans judge of the way of Christianity; and
consequently, what a blemish the evil conversation of Professors may
occasionally cast upon their profession, though never so pure and glorious in
it self: But woe to the man by whom these offenses come.

2. Because not only the guilt of his own falling away, but the damnation of
others will lie upon him also, as a millstone to sink him down to the bottom of
Hell. Vide Heylin's Geograph. of America.
I have read a story of Hathvey, an Indian Nobleman, who by the cruelties and
insolences of the Spaniards, of which his miserable Country had woeful
experience, was so much prejudiced against the Christian Religion, Barthol.
Cass. Narrat. Region. Ind.
that he refused to be baptized: They persuaded him by many arguments to become
a Christian: He demanded first, what place was appointed after this life for
such as were baptized; answer was made, Heaven and its joys: secondly, what
place they that were not baptized should go unto; it was answered, to Hell and
its torments: thirdly he asked, which of these places was appointed for the
Spaniards; answer being made that Heaven was, he resolved against his intended
Baptism, protesting, that he had rather go to Hell with the unbaptized, then to
Heaven with so cruel a people. Whosoever sins greatly (says Salvian Salvian.
) without the offense of others, does purchase damnation only to himself; but
he that causes others to blaspheme, casts very many together with himself
into destruction. Wicked men have little cause to scoff at such men, and at
Religion for their sakes, because their falls are a woe to them also.

CHAP. X.
Reas. 3. IN respect of your selves you ought to take heed of falling away; in
diverse respects.

1. All the good that ever you did in your lives will prove lost labor if you
fall away; all your fastings, prayings, hearing of Sermons, humiliations, all
your zeal and forwardness, all your righteousness shall be forgotten, as if you
had never done any holy duty or service at all, Ezekiel. 18.24. for as it is said
of a backslider returning home again, ver. 22. that all his transgressions
which he had before committed shall not be mentioned; so when a Professor
turns away from his righteousness, all his former righteousness shall not be
remembered; God will look on that man as if he had never prayed, nor done any
good duty at all.

2. If you fall away, all the good you have done shall be an aggravation of
your destruction, of your torments in Hell; all thy prayers, all thy fastings,
etc. shall be as so many piles of wood to increase the fire of Hell; all the
Sermons thou have heard shall heat Hell seven times hotter for thee then
others; thy profession lifted thee up to Heaven, it shall then cast thee down
to the lowest Hell. Tell me, O ye tormenting Devils, ye that are the keepers of
Gods house of eternal correction and vengeance, has not the Judge of all the
world expressed in his Warran^, that when as the petty drunkards and other
profane persons are to be lashed but with whips only, that you shall lash Judas
and Demas with scorpions?

3. If you fall away, God will never take any pleasure in you more: It is no
less then treason for a Subject to withdraw his allegiance from his Prince, and
become a servant to his Enemy; and it is high treason against Christ to fall
from him, and become a servant to his Enemy, it makes God to abhor him: If any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. The husband
may bear much with the froward humors of his wife, while she is chaste and
sincere; but if she withdraw from him, and follow after other Lovers, he cannot
endure it. God takes no delight either in the persons or services of Apostates,
whatsoever duties are done by them in their declining estate the Lord
abhors; he takes delight in his Spouse that keeps close to him, Cant. 2.14.
O my Dove, says he, let me see thy countenance; sweet is thy voice, and thy
face is comely: but God hears not the prayers, regards not the services of
such sinners as these are, if any be performed by them.

4. A spiritual curse from God commonly seizes on Apostates, which (as the
waters of jealousy under the Law given to suspected women, made their bellies
to rot, so this curse upon Apostates) will make their gifts, parts, seeming
graces to rot; an Apostate (like Nebuchadnezzars image) degenerateth from an
head of gold and breast of silver, into feet of iron and clay: when a man keeps
close to God, he blesses that little that he has, and it increases into a
great stock; but when a man departs from God, he is like a sieve that can hold
no water, or like a golden cup with an hole in the bottom: as the tree which
our Savior cursed for having no fruit when he came to seek some from it, dried
up immediately from the top to the roots; so a spiritual rottenness does
immediately and insensibly spread over their parts and gifts, and spiritual
abilities. How can it be otherwise? for the Spirit of God which gives life to
all, cease from his common workings in them: when the soul leaves the body,
it hastens to putrefaction presently; so does a Christian wither and decay,
when the Spirit of God leaves him. That curse which David wished to the
mountains of Gilboa, on which Saul and Jonathan were slain, falls upon
backsliders; Ye mountains of Gilboa, let no rain nor dew fail upon you: so God
says of such as fall away from him, let not the dew of my Word fall upon thy
heart any more; hear thou, but never understand my Word more. He that goes from
Jerusalem to Jericho, shall surely fall among Thieves, and lose his raiment,
and be wounded. Grace is like the leaves of a tree, when they fall off from the
tree, winter comes on immediately. See what backsliders are termed in
Scripture; they are called degenerate Plants and strange Vines, Jerem. 2.21.
Reprobate silver shall men call them, Jerem. 6.30. they are like land-floods
that run violently, and spend their strength as quickly, and soon dry up, Job
6.15. they are compared to Summer-fruits that soon putrify, Amos 8.1, 2. our
Savior compares them to shallow-rooted corn, that soon withers for want of
depth of earth, Math. 13.20. they are called empty vines, bringing forth fruit
to themselves, Hos. 10.1.

H^w woeful was the hand of God upon Spira and Latomus of Lovain, whose minds
being fi^led with divine terrors, unto their end cried out, that they were
damned and rejected of God, because that against their conscience they had
fallen from the truths of the Gospel!
5. Because of Gods dreadful exemplary revenge which sometimes he executes upon
such as fall away from him, filling their consciences with horror, and their
souls with final despair of mercy: time was when they had some flashy comforts
in duty, but this spring is now dried up from them, the Spirit of God is
departed from them, and an evil spirit from the Lord is fallen upon them, as it
did on Saul, tormenting them with horror, and possessing them with dreadful
apprehensions of inevitable and intolerable damnation. Who can conceive what
Boanerges, what sons of thunder their consciences become within their bosoms,
continually crying out upon them, Oh wretched creature what have thou done!
whom have thou forsaken? what! have thou cast off thy God, thy Lord? have thou
forsaken the fountain of living waters? have thou forsaken him who is the God
of peace, the God of comfort, of happiness, of all goodness? I must tell thee,
God has forsaken thee, and he will say to thee, Receive within thy self the
determinate sentence of damnation which the Court of Heaven has irrevocably
passed upon thee. Moreover God sometimes executes some outward remarkable
judgment upon revolters; Lot's wife had been in Egypt, and not poisoned with
the superstitions of Egypt, lived in Sodom, and not polluted with the sins of
Sodom, she was delivered from the errors of Vr, delivered from the captivity
of the five Kings, and at last delivered from perishing with the Cities of the
Plain; yet after all this she forsook her own mercy, and perishes in the sin
of defection; therefore says our Savior, Remember Lot's wife, Luke 17.32.

6. However the present dealings of God are with backsliders, yet in the end
they shall certainly fall into everlasting destruction, from the glorious
presence of that God, whose gracious presence they despised in this life; God
will then punish their departure from him with a departure, he will then say to
them, seeing ye have departed from me, ye shall depart from me; you have
departed from my ways, from my truths, from my worship, now depart from me ye
workers of iniquity; Go ye cursed; none shall stay you: seeing you (as the
Angels) fell from your first estate, you shall now receive the condemnation of
the Angels, you shall fall into Hell with them; you fell from your seeming
grace, you shall now fall from my real mercy into the hands of my justice.
Apostasy is nothing else but a falling from the arms of God into the hands of
the living God; and how fearful a thing it is to fall into his hands, let
Judas, let the Devils from Hell speak; for it is beyond the imagination and
expression of man.

CHAP. XI.
SECT. I.
Use 1. LEt the first Use of this Point be for caution to you; take heed to
your selves lest you thus fall away: spiritual caution is a special prevention
of falling away, necessary (if ever) now to be pressed upon you: Now here I
shall show you what you must especially take heed of, that ye may stand, and
not fall away.

1. Take heed of unbelief. Heb. 3.12. the Apostle tells us, that the Jews were
excluded from Gods rest because of their unbelief; God swear in his wrath that
they should not enter into his rest; that was terrible; let us take heed
therefore lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God: An evil heart of unbelief it is an Hebraism, put for the
evil unbelieving heart, where the Apostle describes unbelief by an elegant
paranomasia, (...). Unbelief is the cause and root of total and final apostasy,
and departing from God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. where the Apostle shows the
cause of that great apostasy which was to be in the Church at the discovery of
Antichrist, and why Antichristian lies should more prevail with men then the
truths of the living God, namely their unbelief, they received not the truth in
love, and they believed not the truth. What was the cause of the rich young
man's departing from Christ, but his unbelief? he was not persuaded he should
have life eternal, if he should sell all that he had, and give to the poor;
wherefore he went away sorrowful: So Alexander's casting off his faith, and a
good conscience (which is the Ark wherein God lays up this precious Manna) was
the cause why he proved such an enemy to Paul, and became a final and an
irrecoverable Apostate. Unbelief is the cause also why men in times of trial
fall off from God, and decline the holy profession of his truth; for God has
times of trial of his peoples faith and profession; as,

1. When a man's worldly advantages and the ways of God are put to the question,
whether you will forsake Christ and embrace this present world, or embrace
Christ and forsake the world, and that there is a necessity of one, unbelief
will put a man upon the choice of the world, and the rejection of Christ;
unbelief put Demas upon this choice, had he believed the promise of life
eternal, he would not have embraced this present world: no unbelieving heart
will follow Christ when worldly advantages fail; give them no more loaves, they
will make no more profession.

2. Times of persecution are trying times; unbelief makes many a man to fall
off, and to depart from God in times of Gospel-troubles, when Religion is in
disgrace, and the Professors thereof are troubled: When Paul was brought before
Nero, at his first answer no man stood by him, but all men forsook him: Those
hearers in the Parable of the Sower, that are represented by the stony ground,
they heard the Word gladly, made a fair profession for a time; but when
persecutions and afflictions arose, in time of temptation or trial they fell
away, because they had no root in themselves, they were not by faith rooted in
Christ; they heard the Word gladly, but did not mingle the Word with faith.
Reproaches and persecutions for the Name of Christ, are the blustering and
stormy winds that drive the Ship of a temporary faith upon the rocks, and bring
an irrecoverable shipwreck upon it: if you do not in such times as these,
heartily believe and close with Gods promises, you will certainly fall: Gods
way of rewarding his Servants for the present is more by promise then by pay;
if therefore you will not rest in his word, you will fall from his service:
Unbelief in the heart, like the worm in the root of Jonah's gourd, will make
your Religion wither in a short time. Fides est nervus Religionis, faith is the
sinew of Religion; if the sinew shrink, Religion will shrink. Sampson's
strength lay in his locks; the whole strength of Religion lies in the lock of
faith; if lust or the world cut off that, you will (as Sampson) grow as weak in
Religion as other men are.

SECT. II.
2. Take heed of professing Religion for carnal ends, either to enrich or
advance your selves; take heed of following Christ for loaves, of crying up
Religion as Demetrius and his rabble did Diana, for silver shrines; take heed
of the wicked supposition of corrupt men, that gain is godliness, that profess
godliness for gain-sake; because if godliness brings no gain in according to
expectation, such a Professor will fall from Religion to follow after gain.
Doubtless Judas proposed gain as the end of his Discipleship; so when he saw
Christ would not enrich him, then he would betray Christ, and the Pharisees
should: the Scripture notes this of him, who when he was angry at Mary,
because of the ointment which she bestowed on Christ, pretending it was better
that it had been given to the poor, not that he regarded the poor, but because
he had the bag. It is conceived by Interpreters, that the forward man that said
to Christ, Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou go, Math. 8.19, 20.
when he hears Christ's answer (The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head), that he
forsook Christ; if Christ has no preferment for him, then he will have no
regard of his service. Such men think not that God is an heart-searching God,
who if he sees carnal ends and worldly lusts cherished in the heart, and
covered over with a religious mantle, will in time uncase such Hypocrites,
pluck off their mask of godliness, and discover their base ends and lusts unto
the world to their shame: Foolish worldlings! ye mistake Christ in proposing
great things to your selves in serving him; because he plainly tells you of
losses, hatred, persecution and poverty; he shows you all the contempt of the
world: it is the Devils way to present to us the glory of the world. He that
takes up the profession of Religion with love to it, will stand to it whatever
become of it, he will leave worldly riches to cleave to poor truth; as Musculus
that forsook great preferments at Lutzelstein Abbey, to become a Preacher of
the Gospel in a poor Village, where he had not a bed to rest upon, but was fain
to lie on straw, and to dig in the Town-ditch to get bread for himself and
family; he was a man of a choice spirit, and of eminent parts and learning: It
is otherwise with the unsound Christian, he will keep on the shore, and not
launch too far into the deep, but so that if a storm should arise, he might
soon get to land again.

SECT. III.
3. Take heed of laying an ill foundation at first: Ill foundations are ruins
of stately buildings; ill foundations of profession are the ruin of many
eminent Christians, so reputed. Math. 7. if we lay not the foundation in
broken-heartedness, in faith, in sincerity, in love to the Gospel and the ways
of Christ, called by our Savior a building on the rock, but lay it in duties,
in religious education, in parts and gifts, called by Christ a sandy
foundation, great will be the fall of such Professors in stormy times. A
brokenhearted, sincere, believing Christian, is the stout and standing
Christian. Pools will soon dry up, if there be not a spring to feed them; so
Christianity will wither away, if there be not a principle of grace within to
feed it; there must be something within to enable us to a constant progress in
a religious course. Aristotle says, that the Heavenly Orbs keep their courses
constantly, because they are moved by Intelligences: but I am sure, a Christian
will move constantly in his Christian Orb, if the Spirit of grace whirl him
about; without this many forward Professors are like the Almond-tree, that
first blossometh, and is the first that is pinched with frost: Many loose
Christians never gave up themselves fully to Christ, therefore they stay not
long with him: Grace (says a Judicious Divine) is one of those rare things
that last long, and ripen by leisure: Torshel's Hypocr.
He that takes up Religion for by-ends, that man's profession will soon have an
end.

4 Take heed of making an extemporary profession of Religion, to profess
Religion on a sudden, in some heat or humor: Many men begin to build Towers,
and to wage war with Principalities and Powers in heavenly places without
premeditation what the charge and danger will be: It is Christ's own advice,
Luke 14.28. that when we go to build an house, we should first sit down and
consider what it may cost us, and whether we be able to finish it. There are
such foolish builders in the Church, who on a sudden raise up a religious
structure, without considering what it will cost them; if Religion be like to
cost such a man his credit, his profits, pleasures, his estate and life, he
then falls off. So likewise there are many such religious Soldiers, who begin
to wage a religious war, and never first consider that they must contest with a
hating, scoffing, contradicting world of enemies, against Devils, and Devils
incarnate; therefore when God in his providential disposals and commands puts
them upon such hard service, they leave the field, and forsake Christ their
Captain. A man that seriously thinks beforehand what Religion will c^st him,
what oppositions he must meet withal, will hold out, he will go on undauntedly:
I know (says he before hand) I shall be scoff d at for Religion; I know I
shall be hated of all men; I know that if I will live godly in Christ Jesus I
must suffer persecution; I know I must bear the Cross if I will be a Christian,
and part with my life too; Therefore shall such a man as I fly?

5. Take heed of consulting with flesh and blood in matters of godliness; ask
their counsel, and they will advise thee to take heed of niceness, of
strictness, of singularity (as they call Religion) lest you undo your self and
yours, like Peter's advice to our Savior, Master pity thy self; or it may be
give the like advice; or perhaps give thee desperate advice, such as Job's wife
gave him, Curse Religion, and dye; make no more ado. Our Savior would by no
means suffer the Disciple when he called him, to go to his friends again, Math.
8.22. lest they by their carnal advice might have drawn him away from following
Christ. Carnal advice was the ruin of Spira.

6. Take heed of a fruitless performance of holy duties, of giving way to
spiritual deadness and formality in religious services: a barren fig tree will
be cut down, a dead tree will be plucked up by the roots. Chrysostom. Homil. in
Math.
Chrysostom expounds the sheepskins which wolves have on them, to be
heartless, formal performances: What are the sheeps-clothing, says he, but
counterfeit shows of Religion, counterfeit alms, counterfeit prayer,
counterfeit fasting? That man that serves God heartlesly, finds no sweetness in
his service; where there is no relishing of the goodness of Gods service, it is
much if such fall not away.

7. Take heed of standing at a stay in Religion, and of non-proficiency in
Religion: It is an Axiom in Christianity, That not to go forward, is to go
backward: He that is not with me, is against me; he that gathers not with me,
scatters, says our Savior: He that goes not forward in Religion, goes
backward, says Leo. Leo Magnus.
The state of a Christian, says Chrysostom, is like a Ship sailing with the
wind against the stream; now if the wind be stronger then the stream, it is
carried against the stream; but if the wind slacken, it stands not still, but
goes backward: So it is with a Professor that is gone thus far, and has set up
his resolution to go no farther, he soon declines and goes backwards.

CHAP. XII.
Use 2. A Second Use shall be of Expostulation with those that are ready to
fall away from God: Our Savior speaks to you as he did to his Disciples, when
the multitude forsook him, Will ye also go away? will ye go away with the
Judasses and Demasses, why shall you and I part hands? why will ye cast me off
from being your God? look from the ends of the world, and see whether there be
any God like unto me; if there be, then go and serve that God: what will ye put
your hand to the plough, and look back? if so, you judge your selves unworthy
the Kingdom of Heaven. O remember the relation that we stand in to Jesus
Christ! Is not he the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and shall not the
sheep hear the voice of the Shepherd and follow him? Is not Jesus Christ the
husband of his Church, and shall not the wife dwell with the husband? Is not
Jesus Christ the hen to gather her chicken under her wings, and shall not the
chicken come under her wings, and keep there? yet how many are there that run
away from Christ, notwithstanding so many bonds to tie them to him! Consider,
that the Angels in Heaven are glad with the conversion of a sinner, and shall
we make them sad at our Apostasy, if they could be sad; and make the hearts of
Devils glad? O let it not be said of you, as Paul of the Galathians, Ye did run
well for a time, O what has bewitched or besorted you that ye are turned
aside! Christ says, Where I am there shall my servant be also: Are ye willing
to be with Christ hereafter, and will you not follow him here? do you think to
run away from him here, and be with him in Heaven? if you leave him, he can
soon have other and better followers, but be ye sure ye shall never find such a
Savior, such a Master again. Consider how unwilling God is to part with you,
though you have been guilty of some revoltings; Hos. 11.7, 8. see how God says
in the like case, My people are bent to backsliding from me, etc. How shall I
deliver thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? thou art bent to
backsliding, and deservest I should give thee up, yet I cannot tell how to do
it.

CHAP. XIII.
Use 3. LEt me now call upon lapsed and backsliding Christians to take notice
of their sad condition, and bewail their loss: Take that counsel given to the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and from
whom thou art departed; thou art departed from God the fountain of life. If a
rush go out of the water, it quickly withers; and if a soul depart from God,
it will soon decay: Let all those that are in this estate, bewail their sad
condition: Time was, they were as trees planted by the rivers of water,
spreading and flourishing, their fruits were fair and full; but now they are
become as trees in the wilderness, in a forlorn estate; their sweet Spring is
turned into a sad Autumn; their first days were their best days, and their last
their worst days: Time was, they were full of liveliness in Gods service; but
now they are cold and dead, their halcyon days are fled away, and the bonds of
death have taken hold of them: Ah! let such a one say, My heart was once the
Temple of God, and the Throne of Christ, I had sweet commerce with God,
receiving lively oracles from his mouth daily; but now I sit in the region of
darkness: time was, his statutes were my songs in this vale of Boehim; but now
I taste no sweetness in them: while I kept close with God, the tears which I
abundantly poured forth were as pleasant waters to me; but now the fountain is
stopped, and these streams are dried up and gone: my heart was wont to melt in
duty; but now my comfort is gone, and that heart that was once an heart of
flesh, is now become an heart of stone: Oh what is become of the chain of
graces that were linked together within me? where are those operations of
faith? where is that lively hope? where are those overflowings of love that
once I had? where are those holy desires, those heavenly raptures, those
enflamed affections, those heavenly ejaculations, those spiritual dispositions,
that once met in a blessed conjunction in my soul? I that was once under the
guardianship of Angels, am now constrained (like Daniel) to lie down in the den
of horror among devouring Lions: Time was, I had recourse to God, and oh how
sweet was the repast I had in his presence! but now my God is gone, my glory is
departed! I entreat thee, O backsliding soul, to remember from whence thou art
fallen, and lament thy doleful estate, and reckon that in this condition thou
art more miserable then those that never tasted that God is gracious, because
once thou wast in a happy condition; Miserum est fuisse faelicem; it is a
miserable thing once to have been happy: The wicked think they are well enough
without God, because they never knew what it was to enjoy him; but this is the
backsliders misery, that he has lost him whom once he did enjoy.

CHAP. XIV.
Use 4. LEt me now persuade backsliders to return to God; resolve with the
Church, Hos. 2.7. I will go and return to my first husband; for then it was
better with me then now: make haste to recover out of this sad estate, the
business requires speed; what the Angel said to Peter, I say to you, Arise
quickly, Act. 12.7. while you are in this condition you are at a great and
constant loss; you lose much peace, much inward strength, many refreshings from
Gods Spirit, many love tokens from Christ, many tastes of spiritual delights;
therefore make haste and return, do as the Disciples, when Christ called them,
they left all and followed him; and as David, when for a time he had declined;
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.59, 60.
I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments: Oh do not delay your
returning to God! if your hearts tempt you to delay, consider that delay is but
a modest denial; when men have a mind to put away repentance, they put it off:
God requires a present returning to him, the longer you delay, the deeper you
run into Gods debt, and run the more under the power of sin. I will propound a
motive or two to encourage such persons to return.

1. Consider Gods willingness to receive such as return to him: David's heart
longed to go forth to meet his son Absalom; the Father of the Prodigal made
haste to receive and welcome his straying son, that went from him into a far
Country, and rejoiced that he that was lost, was found again: God calls upon
such to return; Return ye backsliding children: Oh that every backslider could
say with the Church, Behold we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God,
Jerem. 3.22.

2. Turn to him, and he will heal all your backslidings, Hos. 14.4. There is no
Physician in heaven or in earth can cure this falling sickness, but God only:
he will not only heal you by the application of the blood of Christ to pardon
you, but also by the application of his Spirit of grace to renew and establish
you in grace; and when the Lord heals his peoples backslidings, he will never
upbraid them with what they have done; he looks upon backsliding Ephraim upon
his repentance, as a pleasant child, and though God spoke against him, yet his
heart is still upon him; I remember him still, I will surely have mercy upon
him, Jerem. 31.20. But if after all this you will not return, the Lord may shut
you up in a desperate state for ever: Joh. 8.21. I go away (says Christ to the
obstinate Jews) and you shall seek me, but you shall dye in your sins: Oh
consider, that hereafter you may find God as inexorable as now you are
obstinate, and then though you should seek him, he may leave you to dye in your
sins, and then woe unto you if you dye in such a condition; then the back-slider
in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. Backsliders shall eat
the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices; the turning
away of the simple shall slay them, Prove. 1.31, 32.

CHAP. XV.
Prop. 3. I Come now to the third Proposition; viz. That every godly man is to
take heed lest he fall from that measure of grace which he has received. We
must not spill a drop of oil out of our lamps, but must be daily increasing it:
God commands a growth in grace, is angry when he sees the least withering.
In the handling this Point, I will first show

How a godly man may fall.

1. A man in the state of grace cannot, and shall not fall away from that
state, his mountain is too strong to be removed; storms may shake him, but they
cannot beat him down, because he is builded upon a rock; a man once really
godly, and godly for ever; he is a mortal, yet immortally gracious: I may say
of grace, as Solomon of wisdom, Prove. 9.1. She has builded her house, and
hewn out seven pillars, on which grace stands so firm, that all the powers of
Hell cannot totally ruinate it.

1. The pillar of Gods eternal election unto the state of grace and glory is
impregnably strong: The foundation of the Lord stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. That
distinction is a mere dream, and not a Scripture revelation, of an election to
grace only, such may fall away; and an election to grace and glory, such cannot
fall away: but if God has elected any man to holiness, he is elected to
happiness, election to a state of grace is to a state of glory.

2. The pillar of Gods unchangeable love to his chosen ones so firmly upholds
the Saints, that they shall never fall away from that state: The Lord telling
his people, that he would have mercy on them with everlasting kindness, says,
Isai. 54.9, 10. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, etc. the mountains
shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord. The
Sea is not so full of water, nor the Sun of light, as this place is of love and
comfort to the Saints: God abhors that it should be said of him, that he is an
unconstant lover of his people.

3. The pillar of Gods and Christ's unconquerable power, 1 Pet. 1.5. his
omnipotency is a strong guard about the grace which his Spirit works in us;
for so the Greek word (...) signifies; Gods power is their strong garrison.
Christ says of his sheep, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand; My Father which gave them
me is greater then all, and none is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand,
Joh. 10.28, 29. The power that must dispossess your hearts of grace, must be
stronger then God and Christ.

4. The pillar of an inseparable union with their Head Christ: He and his
members are more firmly knit together then any natural head and members can
possibly be: the head may be severed from the body; the arms or the legs may be
cut off, or rent asunder by wild beasts; but all the strength of all the Devils
in Hell cannot rend a member from Christ; they shall as soon separate his
divine nature from the humane nature, as a living member from his body mystical.

5. The pillar of Christ's effectual and eternal redemption of them firmly
upholds grace in us, till he has consummated their redemption; it were no
better then a temporary redemption of his people, should they again return from
grace to captivity to sin and Satan.

6. The pillar of Christ's uncessant intercession in the behalf of his chosen
people. Joh. 17.11.15. he always makes intercession for his Church and people;
and God the Father always hears Jesus Christ in their behalf.

7. The seed by which God regenerateth his children is immortal, by the word of
God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. and this seed remains in
them, 1 John 3.9. neither can they sin, because they are born of God; they may
sin themselves out of Gods favor, but not out of grace; they may sin
themselves into Gods anger, but not into his hatred: when Solomon gave himself
to follow his hearts desires, yet then his wisdom remained with his, Eccles.
2.9. God once repented that he had made man, but never repented that he
bestowed his grace upon any: The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Romans 11.29. if God never repents of giving, they shall never lose
that precious gift of his grace. Upon these pillars our state of grace rests,
there is no falling from it.

CHAP. XVI.
2. YEt notwithstanding, though a godly man cannot fall from the state of
grace, yet may he fall from that measure of grace which he has; the day star
of grace may go back like the Sun in Ahaz dial 10 degrees, but shall never set;
the Saints may go back from many degrees of love, but shall never fall from
love it self; the spring of living waters may run low, but shall never dry up:
Christ told Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail, yet we
see it did shake; non rogavit ut ne deficeret, sed ut ne prorsus deficeret; his
prayer was not, that there should be no failing at all, but that there should
not be an utter decay.

3. A godly man may fall from the vigorous exercise of his graces; this is an
infallible consequent of the former; for the actings of grace are
proportionable to the measure; if strong, then vigorous actions; if weak, then
weak actions: a decay of vital operations follows the decay of vital spirits:
the less the flame is, the lesser is both the heat and light of the fire. He
that is ambitious to put forth eminent acts of grace, must labor for an
eminent measure of grace; he that desires to believe as Abraham did, must have
the like measure of faith as he had: a weak child cannot put forth manly acts.
Of this kind of falling a godly man must take heed.

Reas. 1. Because of the excellency of grace: as it is said of truth,
Quisquilia veritatis sunt preciosae, the sweepings of truth are precious; so it
may be said of grace: the very filings of gold are precious; one grain of grace
is more worth then all the world; one act of faith is better then silver, then
fine gold, more precious then rubies; all things a man can desire are not to be
compared to a dram of grace: a man is loath to lose the head of a pin that is
made of gold, nor the smallest piece of a diamond; shall a godly man be
careless of the least degrees of grace, more worth then a Mine of gold or a
rock of diamonds? See how careful the wise Virgins were, they would not spare
one drop of their oil, though to save the soul of another: an Angel would
sooner part with his glorious joy, then part with a drop of grace: he that
truly knows the worth of grace, and only he, will sooner part with a drop of
his hearts blood, then with a drop of grace.

Reas. 2. Because of the sad effects which undoubtedly follow falling from the
measure of grace.

1. Though you shall not lose your union, yet you may lose your sweet communion
with God and Christ; spiritual and doleful desertion is sometimes the reward of
your spiritual decays: God withdraws his favor for your withdrawing from his
grace, that when you sigh out your sad complaints, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? God answers, because thou have forsaken thy first love, thy
first zeal: Oh rather justify me, and condemn thy self, and say, O my God I
have forsaken my first love, therefore have thou forsaken me; the fountain of
life has forsaken me, because I have forsaken him!

2. The second sad effect is the loss of your comfort; the loss of your inward
joy and peace follows the loss of your graces; spiritual joy and comforts do
ebb and flow according to the ebbing and flowing of grace; the sorrows of Hell
are sometimes the chastisement of the loss of the grace of Heaven: want of
grace does not occasion sorrow so much as the loss of grace. What the Papists
feign of Purgatory and the Souls there, viz. that there be two rivers, one of
fire, and the other of water; when the souls are vehemently scorcht with the
heat of the fire, they leap into the river of water, when they freeze with
cold, they leap into the fire; this may be an emblem of a godly man: decays of
grace translate him out of the waters of comfort into Hell flames; the recovery
of grace translates him from sorrow into joy again: He that will maintain his
peace and comfort, let him maintain his graces.

3. Great temptations unto some great sin, do follow men upon falling from
their measure of grace, and Gods denying assisting grace at that time, that
sometimes they fall into some sin which wastes their consciences: As
Physicians to cure a man of the Lethargy, do let him fall into a burning fever;
so God to cure our decays, suffers us sometimes to fall into some dreadful sin,
that being humbled we may revive our graces. As David's enemies said of
themselves, Let us pursue him, let us overtake him, for God has forsaken him;
So the Devils cry out of a decaying Christian, let us pursue him, let us
overtake him with some strong temptations; for God has forsaken him.

4. Sometimes great afflictions overtake us, when we decline in grace: God
deals with his own children as Gideon did with the men of Succoth, Judge. 8.16.
He took the elders of the City, and thorns of the wilderness and briars, and
with them he caught the men of Succoth: So God with the briars and thorns of
afflictions teaches his people, and makes them know the bitterness of falling
from their graces; by such means a recovery is wrought in them, Hos. 2.6.

5. Your lusts grow through the decay of grace: Lusts and grace are in us as
two buckets in a well; if the bucket of grace goes down, sin rises up. Your
Gardeners observe of trees planted near together in a fat soil, if the one
withers, the other flourishes the more: it is true of grace and sin; If
grace decay, sin will flourish the more; if you delight not in the graces of
Gods Spirit, he will make you to groan under the burden of your lusts; if you
do not believe as formerly, he will make you to cry out, Oh my cursed unbelief!
if you do not walk humbly with God, he will make you cry out, Oh my cursed
pride, etc.

6. A decay in all duties of godliness follows a decay in your graces: Grace
makes the wheels of your chariots run gallantly; the more grace in your hearts,
the more activity in prayer, the more spiritual strength in all spiritual
services: lose grace, and you lose your strength; you cannot pray as formerly,
because you believe not as formerly; you are not fervent in prayer, because you
are not zealous as heretofore: the less oil is in the lamp, the more dimly it
burns: you cannot expect a great heat from the fire, if you take out the fuel
that maintains it.

Reas. 3. Consider the folly of this course; the grace that ye lose you must
repair again, if you desire communion with God again, or desire to recover your
joy and comfort, or your spiritual strength again: as a man climbing a ladder,
falling from many rounds, can never get to the top, till he has recovered the
very step from which he fell; so it is in our fall from grace, we must never
look to enjoy what we formerly had, till we recover that measure of grace from
which we fell.

CHAP. XVII.
Use 1. THe first Use is of Exhortation: You that think you are in the state of
grace, and have abundance of the Spirit poured out upon you, have a watchful
eye that ye spill not a drop of the grace of God; it is Gods own image, will ye
not be careful to keep that from the least defacing? it is the divine nature,
will you part with that? it is the blood royal of Heaven, lose not a drop of
it: Do you desire to maintain communion with God, to walk in the light of his
countenance, to be filled with the joy of Christ? do you desire to run like a
Giant the course of Christianity? then take heed of falling from that measure
of grace you have received.

Quest. What must we take heed of, that we fall not?

Resp. 1. Take heed of the neglect of holy duties: Watermen say, they lose more
by missing one stroke, then they can gain by many: So may a Christian lose more
by neglect of one duty, of one Ordinance, then he can gain by many: that man
will not grow rich in grace, that grows poor in duty; the praying, the hearing,
the meditating Christian, is the thriving Christian: as in nature, the seed
brings forth the flowers, and the flowers bring forth the seed, if one fail,
both will fail; so in grace, the seed of saving grace brings forth the flower
of spiritual duties, and the flower of spiritual duties brings forth the seed
and fruit of grace.

2. Take heed of remissness in duty; remissness in grace will follow upon it;
in praying we must pray, in hearing hear; serve God with all your might, then
God will strengthen us with all might in the inner man; that man that does not
exercise his graces in duties, will lose his graces; he that prays not in
faith, will lose faith in praying: it is an heavy curse, if a man in seeing see
not, and in hearing hear not; it is no less, when a man in praying prays not.

3. Take heed of overmuch love of the world; the love of the world is a cause
of total apostasy from God, as we see in Judas and Demas: he that is too
careful in seeking the things of the world, will be too careless in seeking the
things of Christ. The Arabians have a Proverb, Claude fenestras ut luceat
domus, Shut the windows that the house may be lightsom: So say I, shut your
eyes from beholding the glory of the world, that your souls may glister with
grace: why does our Savior so often give forth Caveats against covetousness,
but because he knows earthly employments are heavenly impediments?

4. Take heed of pride, because of your graces; for pride goes before a fall:
Angels and Adam were too proud of their glorious gifts, and they fell
fearfully; God cannot endure pride in any thing, though it be grace it self:
God to prevent pride in Paul sent a messenger of Satan to buffet him. When the
Roman Emperor saw the people grow so proud as to wear jewels in their shoes,
he took them away: Beware therefore of pride, and always remember, that God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

5. Take heed of ill principles and ill opinions; corrupt opinions and
principles destroy holy practices; some dangerous opinions entertained have
brought a great decay of grace upon many Professors: it is the Devils policy to
busy the heads of many about opinions, that the heart may sit loose in holy
practices.

6. Take heed of self-confidence: Peter fails in his faith, because he was too
confident of his love to Christ: That soul does most strengthen his grace, who
lives in an holy fear of decaying in grace; he that has a jealous fear over
his own heart, will be most watchful over it: where there is a fear of decay,
there is the greatest circumspection; God has the greatest communion with
such, who are afraid to depart a step from him.

7. Beware of spiritual niggardliness in laying out your graces; the more grace
you lay out, the more increase; To him that has shall be given, and he shall
have more abundance: having there is put for using; for the unfaithful servant
had a talent, but did not use it; this is the talent in the napkin, to have
grace, and not to use it: he that is slothful in improving grace, decays in
grace; improvement of every thing is the advancement and increase of it; money
is increased by improvement, ground is made fruitful by improvement; so is
grace also increased by an holy improvement of it.

Use 2. That you may not fall from the measure of grace you have received,
labor to grow in grace; and to this purpose,

1. See that you grow up in Christ in all things by the operation of the Spirit
of Christ upon your souls, which Spirit is as the soul of the new life within
you, so enlarging and corroborating every spiritual member, that it may be a
meet instrument of righteousness to bring forth fruit to God; be not like a
Giant in a painted cloth, that never attained to those dimensions by any growth
from any vital principle; but be ye in your spiritual growth in proportion like
the humane nature of Christ in his childhood, increasing in wisdom and stature,
and in favor with God and man, Luke 2.52. see that grace have the same
efficacy upon your souls, which the soul has upon the body; while the body is
in a growing condition, the soul enlarges the body in all the parts and
dimensions of it, that the members may not only fill more clothes, but take in
more nourishment, and so be more strengthened and fitted for service.

2. See that you grow not only without, but also from within; to live under the
powerful dispensation of the Word, to converse with lively and growing
Christians, men may catch something here and there that may make them seem to
grow, and by observing their shining conversations and godly examples, they may
endeavor to be like them; they may be bigger in notions, in words and phrases,
in the outward garb and motion of a Christian, but in the mean time wither and
decay within; such men's discourses of God and Religion are but like the
pratings of Parrots, being taught by others, they speak like men, but know not
what they say: If ye will increase in all the increases of God, as you have
your nourishment from without, so your growth must be from within; if you first
grow within, you will then grow without: see that ye be first engraffed into
Christ by the Word of God, then from Christ the heart will draw out so much
nourishment, as that Christ shall be formed in you, and from thence you will
grow and become fruitful in your conversations, not only in bringing forth the
leaves of profession, but also the fruits of obedience to God. A seemingly
growing Christian grows not at all in the inner man, but in the outward parts
only; it is only (as one notes) like the growth of the hair and nails, which
Nature puts forth as excrements of the skin and outward parts, which grow even
when a man is dead, as long as there is any moisture to feed upon: It is not
enough to grow externally, unless we have also internal growth; if we have no
more but the growth of knowledge, of zeal and affection, and some outward
formalities, it is but as a wen in the body, or an exuberance in the blood that
seeks vent by the pores; such knowledge the Scripture accounts no knowledge,
1 Cor. 8.2. such zeal no zeal, Romans 10.2. and such grace to be no grace, Acts
8.21. such a one, like the Church of Sardis, has a name that he lives, but is
indeed dead, even dead while he lives. See that your growth proceed not from
the excrescency of nature and corruption, but from the divine nature in you.

3. See that you grow every day more fruitful, that you go from faith to faith,
from strength to strength; that ye grow in grace, not for a fit and start, or
for a humor, but for continuance upon settled resolution and serious
deliberation; see that you hold on in your way (as it is said of the righteous
man) and grow stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. that ye be always going forward
toward perfection, that your good works be more and better at last then at
first, that ye grow more fruitful in old age, even fat and flourishing; it is
not enough that ye bear fruit, but ye must bring forth the best fruit at last;
the Lord still bestows more husbandry, and is at more cost upon them that do
still abound in the fruits of righteousness, that being purged they may bring
forth more fruit, Joh. 15.2. as trees of the Lords planting, the older you
grow, see that ye be the more fully laden with the fruits of righteousness,
being filled with all the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ
unto the praise and glory of God, Phil. 1.11. although your outward man decay,
see that your inward man be renewed day by day: Oh how many Professors of
Religion are there that grow very fast at first, but soon wither like the seed
cast into the stony ground, as that did for want of depth of earth, for lack of
root! Jonah's gourd was up in a night, and became a great shadow to him, but
there was a worm at the root that smote the gourd, that it also withered; so
some secret lust lying in the heart, blasteth a forward spring of profession in
many Christians.

4. See that your growth in grace be a proportionable growth; the formal
Christians growth is like the growth of a child that has the Rickets, that is
big in the head, but thriveth not in any other parts of the body; so many
seeming Christians are big in knowledge, but little in conscience, full of
seeming zeal, but little in judgment and discretion; yea one part is the
occasion of the decay of another; as in the body of man the increase and
swelling of the spleen, causes the body to languish; so where there is only a
seeming growth in grace, true love to God and his ways utterly decays: see
therefore that your growth be proportionable in every part; there is an
effectual working from the Head in the measure of every part: every Christian
is a member and a part of Christ; and all his members are the fullness of
Christ; and every part must aspire to the nature and figure of the Head in his
proportion, that it may be a model and resemblance of the whole body, which is
the fullness of him that fills all in all: see that every part and piece of
each part grow in Christ, that when you grow in knowledge, you grow in grace
also, and by growing in grace you will grow more in spiritual knowledge; there
is no true growth in the one without the other: be still therefore adding to
your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly
kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity; and be ye careful not only that
these things be in you, but that you abound in them, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. It is
true, some Christians have been more eminent then others in some one particular
grace; Abraham was eminent for his faith, Moses for his meekness, Job for his
patience, David for his zeal, John for his fervent love to Christ: as it falls
out in the parts of the body, some have a stronger arm, some a better leg,
another a taller stature, another a more lovely countenance; they may have some
one or other part that may more affect the spectator, yet all comely and
holding a good proportion: so it should be among Christians in the endowments
of the soul; some may excel more in one grace then in another, but if your
growth in grace be kindly, no one grace will hinder the growth of another, or
render any unserviceable or disproportionable to the rest. There is no body
that is altogether perfect, so that it is wholly free from obstruction or
distemper in some parts of it; neither is there any soul here so exact, but
that there may be an obstruction of some graces in their growth, so that some
graces may not hold pace with the rest: some violent distemper in the body may
be an impediment to a child's growth for a while; so some dregs of corruption
may obstruct our spiritual growth, which being purged away, a Christian grows
more fruitful afterward.

5. See that your growth in grace be more then a seeming growth, that it be a
real growth; see that ye be not like stakes or posts pitched in the ground,
standing as if they grew, but grow not; be not you like those women the Apostle
speaks of, ever learning and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy
3.7. but as thriving plants in Gods Orchard labor to increase more and more;
and like the Vine that shoots out as far as he can, while either the wall or
the pole will help him along.

FINIS.

