VETERES VINDICATI, IN AN Expostulatory Letter TO Mr. SCLATER of PVTNEY UPON
HIS CONSENSVS VETERVM, etc. WHEREIN The Absurdity of his Method are shown, The
Weakness of his Reasons are shown,
His false Aspersions upon the Church of England are wiped off, and her FAITH
concerning the EUCHARIST proved to be THAT of the PRIMITIVE CHURCH.

Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileau's French Translation of, and
Remarks upon Bertram.

King Charles the Martyr to the Prince. (...), 27. But if you never see my face
again -- I do Require and entreat you as your FATHER, and your KING, that you
never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or Disaffection
from the TRUE RELIGION established in the CHURCH of ENGLAND. I tell you I have
TRIED IT, and after MUCH SEARCH and MANY DISPUTES have concluded IT to be BEST
in the WORLD, not only in the Community, as Christian, but also in the special
notion, as Reformed; keeping the middle way between the POMP of SUPERSTITIOUS
TYRANNY, and the MEANNESS of FANTASTIC ANARCHY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1687.

IMPRIMATUR, Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Apr. 7. 1687.
TO THE READER.
IT is not material to thee to know what were the particular Reasons that put
me upon answering this Book of Mr. Sclater: whether it were a Challenge, or a
Request, both, or neither; such as it is, it was designed for a Vindication of
our most Holy Mother the Church of England from those very silly, and very
false Aspersions cast upon her by Mr. Sclater up and down his Book. I hope no
one will think that I have been too sharp upon him, I am certain his behavior
in his Book was so very extravagant, and his abuses so open, and so
intolerable, that I can assure the Reader that it was with trouble that I did
restrain using oftener a just Indignation. There is no one that reads him, who,
had he been to examine his Quotations as I obliged my self for t he most of
them, would not, I think, have been as sharp upon him as I have any where been.
It would have stirred up a very meek man's Indignation to have been served as
he did me his Reader with his Quotation from Hilary, page 38.
where having by chance cast my eye on the first part of the passage set down
by him, I went hunting for the rest of it as it stood in his Book, quite
through St. Hilary's whole Book from thence, and little dreamed of what I was
very angry to find that I was to look backwards in St. Hilary for the other two
parts of that passage. There are other dealings in his Book much more provoking
than this. However, if any one think I am too severe upon him, I must only
say, that it is perchance more pardonable in me than in another: not that I
have any personal quarrel against Mr. Sclater, whom I am morally certain I
never spoke with in my life; but upon another account.

One short Address I cannot avoid the making here to my Brethren of the Clergy,
who have not opportunities of a full examination of these Controversies in
Antiquity it self, that they would beware for Mr. Sclater's sake of taking
things too much on trust from our Romish Adversaries, or of relying too much on
some extraordinary passages out of the Fathers. This Address I make, because I
have been informed that this unhappy man was very much imposed upon, and
perhaps almost perverted by that passage out of St. Chrysostom about St.
Peter's having the Care of the whole Church committed to him: which passage
therefore I was the more careful to examine, and to confute it, that some may
see how unsafe it is to rely on scraps of Fathers about these Things, and how
little they ought to value even the most favorable place out of Antiquity for
Popery, since the stress of all Antiquity is directly against it, as our
excellent Writers have abundantly shown, and even such as I are able to show.

AN EXPOSTULATORY LETTER TO Mr. EDWARD SCLATER of PVTNEY.
SIR,
THE expectation that some person of more leisure, and better abilities would
have condescended to the trouble of examining this your Treatise, was the sole
reason that hindered your receiving this sooner from me: I am very certain there
is nothing in it, either so strong, or so well managed, that could affright any
such from bringing your Book to account, and therefore I must impute their
neglect herein to another cause, which I believe you are not at all desirous to
hear mentioned by me. I am sure I have the opinion of some and those learned
persons to confirm me in this my belief.

It Is for your own sake therefore chiefly, and for those Readers who may
possibly be startled at the Title of your Book, that I undertake to examine it,
and to oblige you and them to see, how very little reason you had (or they to
be moved by it) to call your Book Consensus Veterum, and what a miserable
mistake you have made in this your forsaking the Communion of your Mother the
Church of England, and falling to that of Rome.

I hope you will not be angry that I take the same liberty to examine your
method in this Change, that you say you did to examine that of our Church. One
thing I Will promise you (which I am persuaded I shall in the examining of your
reasons find you very often faulty in) that I will constantly, as to my Proofs
and Authorities, use all the fairness and ingenuity that becomes a Scholar, or
a Christian herein. The Cause of the Church of England is so infinitely better,
and more steady, than that you have so lately espoused, that it would be as
extremely imprudent, as unjust to practice the contrary in the defense of her;
as she does not need, so I am sure she does abhor, and is far from admitting
any indirect, or fraudulent management of her Cause.

I shall therefore without any farther Preface, prosecute my design, and begin
with your Preface, which presents the Reader with a needless Apology about the
Plural Title of your Tract; for if those other quotations and proofs about the
true Catholic Church, and the Supremacy of St. Peter and the Bishops of Rome
were of any force with you, they deserve their place in the Plural Title of
your Book, if they were not, yet that other about the Eucharist, though with
you All in All, can be but one, how great soever.

How Transubstantiation concludes Communion under one species, I cannot
understand, since if Transubstantiation was always the Opinion of the Catholic
Church, as you affirm it was, from the very beginning, it would have concluded
then, as well as now, which I am sure it did not; for, besides our Savior's
Institution in both kinds, and his Precept as strict for either of them singly,
as for both together, his most severe imposition of both, Joh. 6.53. we can
show you herein the Obedience of the Catholic Church for above a thousand
years, who were so humble, and so respectfull also, as not to think themselves
either wiser than our Savior, or above his express commands herein. Afterward
indeed one part of the Catholic Church grew more knowing, and the Council of
Constance (maugre our Savior's express command to be seen in the Gospels, and
very particularly in St. Paul) denied one half of the Communion, 1 Cor.11.24,
25.
the Cup, to the Laity, and so that Church continues ever since to do. Among
those several Arguments or Reasons mustered up by Gerson at the Command, and
for the Defense of this bold Council, I do not remember one, that is not either
ridiculous in it self, or highly reflecting upon our blessed and most wise
Savior's prudence or foresight.

But to pass by this, and your Argument from the 6th of S. John, which I shall
remember when I come to that point in your Book; methinks your assuring your
self, that if your former Faith was not right in this (the Eucharist), it was
wrong in all controverted Particulars, etc. is none of the clearest Inductions,
and would have appeared something too bold, had you not helped it out a little
with what I suppose you have heard some of your new Church say, that that
Church has the same Authorities and Traditions for them, as for this, etc.
which I think to be one of the greatest truths in your Book, and I do assure
you that I am perfectly of the same opinion, that the Church of Rome has the
same neither better nor worse Authorities and Traditions for all the Points
controverted betwixt the Church of England and her, that she has for
Transubstantiation, which I question not to show, when I come to that point, to
be either very bad, or none at all.

Whether you have wrought in this your search according to the directions of
the Church of England, will be better seen, when we come to your Proofs
themselves; I cannot pass the Canon of our Church you have quoted here without
making two short Remarks from it.

The first of which is, Imprimis vero videbunt, ne quid unquam doceant pro
Concione, quod a populo religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi quod
consentaneum sit Doctrinae veteris aut Novi Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa
Doctrina Catholici Patres, and Veteres Episcopi collegerint, etc. Liber Canon.
Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1571. Titulo Concionatores.
How little our Church is a favourer or encourager of the Private Spirit you
talk so often about, or of private Interpretations, when she does not allow the
Guides of the Parochial Churches themselves to teach any thing for Faith in
their Sermons, which is not agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and New
Testament, and the Interpretations of Catholic Antiquity.

2. That it is a most false as well as a most ridiculous Assertion of your new
Brethren of the Church of Rome, who say, our Church slights and rejects the
Fathers, because they are all against her, and that she owns they are all
against her: for a clear Contradiction to which, I would but desire of any
Romanist to read this short Canon of a Synod of ours in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth seriously over, and to consider it, and I do not question if he would
but speak plainly herein, as every ingenuous man ought, that he would own such
Assertours to be guilty of a downright Calumny.

For your Conditional Thanks that you seem willing to bestow on the Church of
England for her Directions; she can have no reason to expect any from you,
since I am pretty well assured that you have not observed her Directions, and
therefore can owe her none on that account: and for your Conditional Prayers
for the Teachers of her Communion, etc. I can assure you, that they are by her
Injunctions, and without any conditions, not behind-hand with you in such
civilities, since thrice a week at least they are commanded in the Litany to
put up constantly a Petition for you, and such as you.

Galatinus and his Rabbis I shall refer to their place in your Book, to which
I shall now pass, finding nothing farther in your Preface, that may not be
better considered in the Answers to the Particulars of your Book.

CHAP. I. The Method of the Answer, and a Consideration of Mr. Sclater's
Reasons of doubting in our Communion.
BEfore I undertake the Particulars of your Book, I cannot refrain the making a
complaint to you, that you have not put your writing into a Method becoming a
Scholar, but have managed your reasons so confusedly, and passed so abruptly
from one head to another, that it is sometimes difficult to know which of your
points you are then about. Method and clearness, and a fair transition from one
part of a Discourse to another were never counted trifles, nor ever thought
unworthy the care of any one Writer that did desire either to instruct or to
convince his Readers.

That I may avoid therefore my self, what I am forced to rereprehend in
another, I shall in this my Expostulation confine my self to, and direct my
self by, these Rules.

1. To consider the Reasons of your doubting during your continuance in our
Communion whether you were in the right way, and of a true Church. 2. The
Method you used for the resolving your self in your doubts. 3. The Reason or
Reasons that convinced you so far as to leave our Communion, and to espouse
that of the Church of Rome.

I do not believe I can wrong your Book in taking such a Method, or disoblige
you or any one else that may read this.

As to the first head then, the Reasons of your doubting, one might with reason
have expected, that you would a little more have enlarged your self in a thing,
the right managing of which was of so infinite concern, or at the least that
you would have afforded the World though but one Reason, that might have given
satisfaction. That, which you have put down, I mean the Text from S. Paul, Let
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, I am sure, cannot, since
that Text may as well serve against the approaching Easter as it did against
the last, and you may as well use it now as you did then; and should a giddy
mind possess you, and hurry you next to Socinianism, then to the Anabaptists,
and herd you at last among the Quakers, no body could refuse you your Motto,
and Let him that thinks he stands, etc. would serve you in as much stead
for any of them, as it did now. Without any satisfaction at all therefore about
the reasons of your doubt, which I wish we had had faithfully set down, that so
the World might not take that leave it does now of judging what it pleases
concerning the true reasons of your leaving us, I must follow you to that
wherein you are more copious, the Method you used for the resolving your self
in your doubts, which you forgot to set down here.

CHAP. II. His Account of Education and Interest examined and Refuted.
BEfore you enter on your Method you tell us you had two very great things to
conflict with, which were like to prove great obstacles in this your inquiry
after truth, Education and Interest, page 1.
Through Education and Confidence in the Teachers you had been inured to, you
complain you had almost been hardened against the lissening to any thing
contrary to those Precepts and Doctrines they had rooted in you, etc.

To hear an old Man complain of Education cannot but be a little strange,
especially from one who has been a Teacher himself (as he disdainfully I must
believe, calls our Clergy) perchance betwixt Thirty and Forty Years; if Twenty,
nay Ten, far too much sure for such a complaint: and in a Church too, which
permits and encourages her Clergy in the perusing, canvasing and examining all
Books of Controversy betwixt her self and the Church of Rome, and which is
more, obliges them to a perusal and diligent examination of the Primitive
Fathers by that very Canon you your self quoted in your Preface, which I have
put down also. page 2.
(1.) But this is the common voice of the Converts young or old, and therefore
whether to purpose or no, you must for company use it, though it be really
ridiculous from one in your circumstances, as I think I have made plain enough.
And truly the complaint would far the handsomer become you, now when you are of
a Church, that teaches her Members the pretty knack of captivating their
understanding, stopping their ears, and shutting their eyes against any thing
that might convince them of the Error they are in. I must confess that your
Church is not singular herein, the Turks practice it as strictly as you, that
they may secure their Members in their excellent and most safe (as they
doubtless think it) Communion and Religion of Mahomet.

But suppose Education might be a Prejudice, and would give a man a great deal
of trouble to rid himself of the Prepossessions it commonly instills into green
heads, yours could not give you any, since Alexander like you cut the Knot that
might have given you great trouble to unloose, by abstracting your self (when
you entered on your Method) from your self and Religion too; which doubtless is
both a quick and a sure way of ridding a man's self of the Prejudices from any
Religion, page 2.
by abstracting himself from Religion, and looking on himself as a Man of no
Religion. I cannot but applaud your Method of getting shut of the Prejudices of
Education, and cannot but admire it as the most clever, sure, short, unerring
way that any man could take to get rid of Education, which I will now with you
take leave of, and pass on to Interest, and see how you served it.

And here again you are as concise with Interest, as you were before with
Education, if a man may credit you. When I considered (say you) Solomon's
Advice, page 2.
buy the Truth, and sell it not: I was easily persuaded to look upon Interest,
as a thing worth nothing, etc. And did you serve it so? why then truly to give
you your due, you are an extraordinary Person among the Converts; one to whom
an Eye to worldly Interest cannot fairly be objected: and I suppose you are
very willing and desirous too, that the World should have such an Opinion of
you; that you have fairly quitted all purely for Conscience sake; that you had
two Livings indeed; but since you are convinced that you ought not to be any
longer a Communicant with, much less a Minister of, the Church of England, you
have sacrificed them both to the Interest of your Immortal Soul; that though as
the World now goes, it is the sure and only way to Preferments in Church or
State to continue a Member (at least outwardly) of the Church of England so
called, yet you for your part have, and do count all this worldly Interest, as
a thing worth nothing, and are resolved to turn your back to it, so that you
may but provide for the Salvation of your Soul.

This truly is the Picture of a very excellent Christian, the only question to
be asked now is, whether it is Mr. Sclater's of Putney; I am sorry that I must
acquaint the World, notwithstanding your speaking so contemptibly of Interest,
that really it is no more yours than the man's in the Moon; for to be more
serious with you, with what face could you write this, when almost all the
Kingdom knows, that you hold both your Livings still, though you disown your
being so much as a Member of the Church of England; and how briskly you
hectored and quarrelled the Church of Worcester, when they only desired to fill
the Cure of Putney with a Minister of the Church of England, which you denied
any longer to own your self to be?

A great many I am sure, think you did very ill to hold those Livings in your
present Condition, and I do assure you, it is infinitely worse to do it, and
yet by writing to insinuate to the World, that you have not, but have accounted
all worldly Interest (the Profits of two Livings may be so named I hope) as a
thing worth nothing. You have not lost, or delivered up any worldly concern
that I can hear of on this account, you stand I believe in as much probability
as ever you did of getting more: if this be the way of slighting, and
undervaluing Interest, I do assure you that all the Covetous, the Extortioners,
and the worldly Hypocrites do it as much as you.

CHAP. III. His Method shown to be Unreasonable.
LEaving then this false as well as disingenuous account of your setting aside,
and ridding your self of Interest, I must begin the Examination of your Method
of resolving your self in your Doubts, which indeed is surprising from a
Minister, and became Des Carts as to matters of Philosophy, a little better,
than it can do you or any one else in Matters of Religion. Here (say you) as I
had abstracted my self from my self and Religion too, page 2.
as a man of no Religion, but contemplating all: I must lay all before me, and
look studiously upon them, etc.

If you mean by this account of your Method, that you really put your self into
an abstracted state, and were really as of no Religion so of no Church at all
during this your search for a Communion wherein you might be afterward safe, I
must tell you, that as your Method was most extravagant, so it was of too short
a duration for your looking studiously, contemplating and comparing the two
Communions of England and Rome together, since it is as certain that you were
at Mass last Easter Day, 1686, as that you did give the Communion at Putney
Church on Palm Sunday before it, and therefore must have been a Minister of the
Church of England on the one Sunday, and a Member of the Church of Rome on the
next, during the time betwixt which two Sundays I am certain you are far from
being able to have considered and examined the Merits of the two Churches: you
are not so quick a Man, page 2.
for all your pretended discovering at first sight that all other Communions
were evidently confusion.

But allowing that during this search you only Ex hypothesi put your self in
such a state without leaving actually our Communion till your Method and
Reasons were over and satisfactory, it was a very odd Method for a Man that had
been so long a Minister, and was so old a Man, and would much handsomer have
become you, were you coming over from Paganism, or Mahometism, than from one
Church that evidently has the Catholic Faith to another. Whichsoever of the
two Senses was that which you designed, I am certain that the first was fit
only for a Madman, and the other almost as much unbecoming an old Clergy Man,
who after Threescore (as I believe you are) falls to abstracting and doubting,
and supposing, as if he had been in a Dream all the rest (and best part) of his
Days, since he was in Orders: and at last when others being to dote, he begins
to doubt, to search, and to make saving discoveries.

CHAP. IV. The Confusion of his search, and the Absurdity of it shown.
NOtwithstanding the Inconsistences in this your tale, which are so many as
would almost ruin any ones having the least value for your Book, or for the
Reasons and Arguments in it, I must follow, and see how dexterously you
managed, or how well you used this your wondrous Method. page 2, 3.
Upon a reserved Principle (say you) that Christ has a Church upon earth; in
my inquiry amongst my Brethren of the Church of England (who were as much your
Brethren in this state, and no more than they are Hobbes's or Spinoza's,) I
gave most attention to those teachers or writers, that had most reverence for
Church Authority, etc. I appeal to any Man of sense whether this passage does
not favor much more of a Man already a Papist, than of a mere Seeker; but to
pass that, Pray, Sir, what did you want, or what was you inquiring for? was it
for the Catholic Church, or for a particular Communion, wherein you might be
safe? if for the Catholic Church, you needed not to be curious whom you
inquired of among our Teachers and Writers, since the meanest of them could
readily have told you, that the Catholic Church is made up of all the
Particular Churches planted in the four quarters of the World, holding from
Christ the only Head of her the true Faith, and Catholic Unity; so that if
you intended to find where she was fixed, that so you might in necessity tell
her your grievances, she is confined to no place, page 5.
being a Diffusive Body throughout the World.

If you wanted a Particular Communion, a true Member of the Catholic Church
wherewith to communicate, and upon which to trust your Salvation, the Church of
England ( Particular as to place, Catholic as to Faith and Doctrine) is such;
so that your inquiry might here have ended, since if you were a true Member of
Hers, you were at the same time as true a Member of the Catholic Church.

Here I must take occasion to tell you, that you seem by your Abstracting your
self from your self, to have wilder'd your self, and thence to have confounded
the Notions of the Catholic and Particular Churches, while from our Savior's
promise that the Gates of Hell should never prevail against the Catholic
Church, you argue the Church must be one, which no Body denies; that it must
have one Faith, which no Body denies neither, and that it must by virtue of
Christ's promise perpetually abide in this one Faith, nor is this denied any
more than the other two by any of our Church; and what have you got hence?
only that Christ has and will always have a true Church upon Earth, which I
know no Body ever denied. But here is the grand pinch, and what one may easily
see you aim at, and that is to have this Catholic Church, and the Church of
Rome to be all one and the same; which we shall see how you prove by and by.

In the mean time I must return to you, where I left you quarrelling with our
Churchmen, and see whether I can make an end of the Quarrel. You say that you
found that those of our Church that had most Reverence for Church Authority,
meant only their own, etc. You had done the World a great kindness, if you had
told who they were you inquired of, and what were the Queries you put to them.
I hope if you asked after the Catholic Church, they did not tell you that the
National Church of England was the whole Catholic Church. If you asked after a
Particular Church, surely you cannot blame them for asserting the Authority of
their own Church. When you put the same Queries to the Romish Teachers or
Writers, did they reject their own Church's Authority, did not they mean their
own, when they would persuade you to their Communion, as much as our Men did
that of our Church, when you inquired among them? where then is the fault? what
would you have had 'em to do to please you? would you have had them to say
that the Church of England is the Catholic Church, which no one that has any
sense can say of Her any more than of the Church of Rome? would you have had
'em to say that they had a Church indeed, but that either she had no Authority,
or that no Body need to submit to it? which none but a mere Ignoramus could say.

This, Sir, is perfect Trifling, this is to write a Book, and yet not to know
what one wants, or what he would have. I wish to God you had reserved (when you
were abstracting your self) a little Logic, that a Man might have known what
you meant here, and where one might have you; that so, when a Reader thinks by
your Words and by Connection that you are talking of the Catholic Church, you
may not come off with a Pish, the Man understands me not, I was speaking of
Particular Churches. I wish you had licked this your confused piece into a
little better Method; and had bestowed on it a little thing called
Intelligibility; but perhaps you thought such a style fittest for a Man that
was going to write about Transubstantiation.

You are as little pleased with them, when you say they held the Scriptures in
high esteem (you might without a falsity have added, in far greater than the
Church of Rome does, of which you now are) though under that Notion, they
understood no more, page 3.
than what themselves were pleased to allow to be Canonical, admitting also
some Traditions, but taking and refusing as they saw good, etc.

To be brief with you on this point, if you speak here of particular Persons in
our Church, it is utterly false, since they are all obliged to believe that to
be the Canon of Scripture, which is set down in the Articles of our Church, and
there is not one Man of our Church that is at liberty to believe which he
pleases, and to reject which he pleases from being Canonical Scripture to him,
and for Traditions received in the Church, no particular Man has any more
power over them, than over the number of the Canonical Books. But if you speak
of our Church it self here, (which your words without stretching will not
bear,) it is as false of Her, since she believes and delivers those Books only
as Canonical, which the Primitive Church believed and delivered down to her as
such: She rejects none as Apocryphal, which were not also rejected as such by
the Primitive Church, as the Famous and most Learned Bishop Cousin has most
incomparably proved it for her in that his excellent Scholastic History of the
Canon of Scripture. And for Traditions she rejects none but such, as have no
evidence, nor probability of their ever having been of use in the Primitive
Church, or such as are of no moment; in which case I never saw reason, why the
National Church of England has not as much Authority herein to judge of these
things, as the Church of Rome her self, who (for example sake) has left off
giving the Communion to Infants, though a Tradition of the Catholic Church.

So that I cannot for my Life see; what you would fain, though most ridiculously,
deduce from hence, that all with us resolved it self into the Judgment of a
Private Spirit, page 3.
and must be (I suppose you mean the Private Spirit must be, though your words
are far from bearing it) the chief, or rather only support of your Protestant
Faith, etc. Since it is so palpably false, as I have just now shown, nothing as
to matters of Faith, Discipline, or Church Communion among us being either left
to, or guided by, or depending upon any Man, how great, or how learned soever,
his private Spirit; and so ridiculous, that I could not forgive it any Man,
that had not abstracted himself from his reason: but to do you right, you have
almost a mind to come off it with your Methought; and I am content without
being angry that it should pass for your thought, the abstracted-no-Religion
Man's.

You go on to show that you could not persuade your self that Scripture alone
could be the Judge of Controversies, page 3.
and resolve your doubts, when the Private Spirit was made the Judge of
Scripture, etc. Let the private Spirit be excluded, will you admit it then?
will you allow the Representative Church of England to interpret in new
Emergencies, which fell not within the care of Antiquity and the Four General
Councils? If you admit this, there need be no dispute, since long before your
doubts, the Church of England has by public Authority interpreted the
Scripture in all matters of Faith and Discipline, and tied up all her Members;
has in all the points of Controversy betwixt us and Rome determined, that the
sense of the Scripture is directly against them, and for us: If you will not
admit it, I should be glad to see one reason against it, that would not as
fully fly in the face of the Church of Rome.

As to the Mischief upon this Principle of the Private Spirit, page 3, 4.
the Wars and Murders, etc. You ought to have remembered that that Principle was
not set up by, but against the Church of England, and that it was not the
Church, but the direct and sworn Enemies thereof that committed all those
outrages; you cannot be ignorant that it was She only that suffered during that
Rebellion and Schism: and therefore it is most unjust in you to insinuate as if
She was cause of all that distraction, whereas nothing is more apparent than
the contrary to it. And as to your Tanrum Religio, etc. I challenge you to show
any one Principle of the Church of England that encourages, or does but glance
toward Rebellion, Sedition, or disturbance of either Church or State: This
I Will promise you for every one, I Will show you Ten of your new Church, I Will show
you Councils for it, your own most famous of all the European Councils, the
Fourth of Lateran leading the Van. Your Popes deposing Princes, page 84.
giving away their Kingdoms (as they have done ours more than once) setting up
in Rebellion Son against Father. I Will show you the Rebellious Holy League in
France, one King most barbarously Murdered by it, a Pope [Sixtus Quintus] in a
set Speech commending the Paricide: the Sorbone it self making Rebellious
Decrees against the Two Harries of France, both Massacred by their Catholic
(as they call themselves) Subjects; but enough of this, wherein you know or at
least should, that we have infinitely the advantage of your new Church as to
Principles of Loyalty.

The result it seems of your Inquiry and search among us was, that you could
not comply with common reason if you did not disclaim the Judgment of your own,
or any Man's private Spirit, etc. page 4.
I have upon this but one Question to ask you, and that is how you came to be a
Roman Catholic; if you disclaimed your own reason or private Spirit, pray who
chose your guide or Church for you; if you disclaimed every ones else, pray
tell us how any Body else could do it for you? But notwithstanding this your
disclaiming, we find you busy enough up and down the Book acting as if you
never had done any such thing, discovering, judging, complying, contemplating,
searching and Forty such expressions which used to denote the exercise of a
Man's private Judgment and Reason.

CHAP. V. His Method farther exposed, and the ridiculous Fruits of it.
THE Fruit of all your search hitherto has been only to find, page 4.
or at least to mistrust the ground you stood upon somewhat unsure, etc. What
ground it was you then stood upon, I cannot guess, since before this you had
abstracted your self from Religion, and supposed your self as of no Religion,
so most certainly of no Church. But all this is assuredly but a figure to bring
in the Rock, the Rock you think you were got upon, when once a Romanist. If I
might have had a word with you before you had mounted your Rock, for now I am
afraid there is no speaking with you, I would only have been informed by you,
whether there is but one Rock, and whether I must give Orig. Hom. 1. in Matthew.
Origin the lie who tells me that all the Apostles were Rocks as well as Peter;
and what I must say to Prescript. c. 32. and 36. Edit. Franck. 1597.
Tertullian and others, that tell me, other Apostles planted Churches as well
as Peter and Paul at Rome; and that I might be as safe in any of them all, as
in that at Rome, since they and Rome had the same Faith (as Cont. Haer. l. 1.
c. 2, 3. Edit. Feuard. 1625.
Irenaeus says) delivered to them, and had a Ministry settled by Apostles among
them. I wish I might be so happy as to have a satisfactory Answer to these
Queries from you or any one else.

But for the present you are too busy, having got the Text, that the Gates of
Hell should not prevail (which Text by the bye how came you to interpret of a
Church, since if you disclaim your private Judgment, it does, for any thing you
can know, relate to something else?) You are sure upon it that Christ has a
Church, that that Church has but one Faith; which I have already told you our
Church does not deny. And now you wanted nothing to find firm footing ( sure
footing you should have called it for Mr. Serjeant's sake) but to discover,
page 4.
whether the Church from her Original was the Commissioned Interpreter of the
Sacred Writings, etc.

One would expect here in a thing of that moment some well managed Reasons from
Scripture, Reason, and the Consent of Antiquity to prove that the Church of
Rome (which you cannot deny that you mean here,) was this Commissioned
Interpreter; but instead of that, you think you do it cleverly enough by
insinuating that without it there would be no end of Controversies, which is
not proving but begging. As to the choice of a Hundred Faiths (without such an
Interpreter) which you say you saw you might have; if you mean in the Church of
England, page 5.
and that you must mean, having already set aside all other Communions, and
being now employed in the examining whether of the Two Churches, the Church of
England or Rome, you might be safe with; I am obliged to tell you that there
are no fewer than Ninety Nine mistakes in this short Sentence, since the Faith
of the Church of England is but one, and as much one as that of the Church of
Rome her self.

But for all this talk you have not got to your Church yet, page 5.
which must be Visible; to wave needless Disputes, such the Church of England
is as well as the Church of Rome. And now you want nothing but a definition of
her, which you complain you could not get among us, and therefore was forced to
go to the Books of Catholics: As to the complaint I answer that you needed not
to have gone to the Catholics (as you call 'em) since the Church of England's
definition in her Articles will I think, satisfy any reasonable Man, while
Article 19.
it defines the Visible Church of Christ to be a Congregation of Faithful
[here Heretics and Schismatics are both excluded] Men, in which the pure Word
of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly Ministered according to Christ's
Ordinance [and that must be by lawful Pastors] in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

You could not but know of this Definition of the Church of Christ, you had
done well to have shown particularly, wherein it failed of separating Heretics
or Schismatics from being either Flock or Shepherds in the Church. But no
Ignorance is comparable to that which is affected. And since you would not be
contented with ours, I Will even try S. N's. and see what reason it has to be
preferred to that of the whole Church of England.

The Church of Christ is one Society or company of Men. S. N. Chapter of E. S. N.


The Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation.

Linked and combined together in the same Profession of Christian Faith.

Of Faithful Men. Chapter of E. S. N. Chapter of E.


And use of Sacraments under lawful Pasters.

And the Sacraments be duly Administered according to Christ's Ordinance.

Thus far we agree, as for S. N's addition of those Pastors also under one
Supreme Head Pastor or Conservator pacis and veritatis, do you or he prove it,
and then put it into the Definition; its being there now is no proof of the
Truth of it. However you, I perceive, were satisfied with it, and think this
Definition has brought you to the Rock, has done your business for you.

I have often heard indeed of Men disputed into a Church, of Men cajoled, and
of others threatened or frighted into a Church; but must confess I never heard
of any before you definitioned into a Church; and truly it looks surprising
that a Man should like a Church for a Definitions sake. Suppose your Definition
prove false, are you resolved to leave that Church, and go to another that has
a better Definition? If this be your Humor, the Sophisters would be too hard
for you, and lead you into an endless Maze. Satisfied however you are at
present, and so overjoyed at this Definition, that you forgot what was
necessary for it, and that was to prove and to confirm it; instead of which you
fall into extravagant Praises, and a hurry of Words and Ecstasies to no
purpose, whereas you neglect to prove, First, that this is a true and regular
Definition, and Secondly, that it does belong to the Church of Rome so called
exclusive of all other. Had you done this, page 6.
you had acted like a Scholar, whereas the other rabble of discoveries and
abused Psalms prove nothing at all, and would far better have become some Woman
or Poet-Convert than you, who should prove these things, and let them which can
do no better, admire.

After your fit of Ecstasies is over, you seem something willing to afford us
some Testimonies of Antiquity, to what purpose I must now inquire that so we
may avoid Confusion, and I may shorten my Answers. But here according to my own
design, I must take leave of your Method of resolving your self in your doubts,
being arrived at that, which I took leave for order and clearness sake to call
the Reasons of your Conversion, which convinced you so far, as to leave our
Communion, and to espouse that of Rome. I will take leave of it with this
Complement, that it really is the most admirable one I ever heard of for a
Clergyman of above Threescore.

CHAP. VI. His Proofs of a Monarchical Church under one Supreme Head from
Scripture Answered.
THE Fruit of your noble Method, and the effect of all your Search hitherto
has been (as far as I can perceive) that you have met with a Definition that
pleases you: Now except you take S. N. to be as infallible in making of
Definitions, as the Pope is said by some (and perhaps believed by you) to be in
making of Canons for the Church, and that you ought to submit to his
Definition, just as you do to the Popes Decrees, with all submission, without
any scruple, or examination, you know it will be expected from you to prove
this his Definition to be true: I cannot dare to think you so much a Madman as
to believe S. N's Infallibility at Definitions, and therefore now do wait for
your proof of these two things.

First, That this your espoused Definition is true, that is, that Christ his
Catholic Church is Monarchical, and governed supremely by one chief Pastor,
page 6.
his Generalissimo (a very fit Title in a literal sense for some of your Popes)
or Vicegerent here on Earth; and Secondly, That this Definition does belong to
the Church of Rome, and not to the Church of England: Do but prove me the
first, and I Will forgive you the trouble of proving the Second, and bestow it on
you, as a just reward for your pains about the first.

But before we begin, I must desire you to remember not to confound Particular
Churches with the Catholic Church, and not to take that as said of the one,
which does certainly belong to the other.

You begin your Proofs with Scripture, which a Man may easily see is not at all
on your side, you give us thence so few, and those nothing to the purpose. For
as to the first out of Acts the Second, page 7.
Verse 1. how that which is only an Historical Relation should be a Heavenly
Representation, I cannot imagine. No Body will deny that they that meet as the
Apostles then were, (...), in one place [not (...) as you falsely quote it, and
as ill translate it, at the same work] should be as the Apostles then were
(...) of one accord, or of one mind; and which is more, that every Particular
Church over the World should be as to the Rule of Faith (...) of one mind; but
I can never believe that for this reason they are, can, or ought to be (...),
always meet at the same place, which your use of it would insinuate, and must
require the one as well as the other for your purpose. But what this is to a
Monarchical Church with a supreme Head I cannot guess; nor your other from St.
Paul's frequent Injunctions to his several Plantations, that they should be all
of one mind, page 7.
and speak the same things. You had done well to have quoted some passages to
have illustrated what you say, or at least to have put down some references in
the Margin; but this alas was not convenient, then even those that swallow what
you say without examining, could not avoid seeing the Fallacy; for whereas St.
Paul writing to Particular Churches exhorts them to be at Unity among
themselves, you would fain turn it as if he should exhort them as to all
particulars and circumstances, to be at Unity or to have the same with the
other Churches; as if writing to Ephesus for example, he should exhort them to
be of the same mind, and to speak the same things with the Church of Corinth,
with the Church at Thessalonica, etc. Show this, and I Will yield the point; but
remember that if you mean of the same mind and to speak the same things as to
matters of Faith, this as it need not be proved, no Body gainsaying it, so it
does no ways serve what you cited it for, to prove a Monarchical Church.

It cannot appear otherwise than very strange to all considering Persons, that
these People should generally with so much confidence affirm, that our Savior
left his Church in such a condition with a Supreme Vicegerent over it, and yet
like you, when they should come to make the thing apparent from the History of
those first times, penned in the Gospels, Acts and Epistles, are forced to drop
the proof of it, and to impose upon their Readers a scrap or two out of those
writings, not one jot to the purpose oftentimes. You will easily find that I
mean this of you; and I must needs say that these your two useless proofs, I
mean Quotations for they are far from Proofs, forced me upon this Remark.

CHAP. VII. His Arguments for a Monarchical Church out of Antiquity refuted.
ONE comfort however you seem to promise us, that you will make your Reader
amends by your Testimonies out of the Fathers for your being so short, and so
destitute of 'em from Scripture. You begin them in a quaint style, which I
believe you took for a pretty fancy. page 7.
I followed (say you) I must confess a loof off, her [the Kings Daughter all
glorious within] Companions, that followed her, etc. This passage is one of the
pleasantest that I ever met with, and the fullest of Figure: I must profess,
till I saw your Book, I always took St. Dennis, Ignatius, Irenaeus, etc. for
Members of the Church, and never in the least dreamed that these persons were
her Companions, or the Virgins that are her Fellows: and I must own that it is
the first time I ever heard of a Members being a companion to the Body, or that
a Man without the breach of common sense may say that his Hand or Foot is a
Companion of his Body.

But you, Sir, had been contemplating just before the ravishing Beauty of the
Kings Daughter all glorious within: and the Virgins that be her Fellows and
Companions did so run in your head, that it is no wonder you mistook Dennis the
Areopagite and the rest you mention after him for the Queens Companions. At
present however we must let them pass as such, whom you followed you tell us
and lissened what they said of her, and overheard, First, Dionysius the
Areopagite St. Paul's Scholar. Secondly, Clemens Romanus, etc.

It Is commonly said it is ominous stumbling at the Threshold, and a bad presage
to trip at the first attempt, and this truly is your very case, for it is a
great mistake you should overhear either of them two using those passages you
mention, since neither of them ever said the things, St. Dennis having never
left any thing writ at all, nor St. Clemens any thing besides his two (allowing
the fragment of the Second to be his) Epistles. So that your two first
quotations are pitiful Forgeries, as I shall hereafter prove: but granting the
passages were true, and as old as you would have 'em: page 7.
they are not one jot to your purpose. The first of 'em saying only that the
Apostles desired their followers by their Instructions might be partakers of
the Divine Nature; the latter, that Bishops should observe the Orders left by
the Apostles; page 8.
both which are nothing to the purpose of a Monarchical Church, but prove the
contrary, if it were worth the while to show it.

Ignatius Saint and Martyr is the next you produce, page 8.
from him you tell us, that People in all things should submit to their Bishop,
that no Man can be partaker of the Eucharist, that abstains from the Bishops
Altar. A Man would guess by these passages, that you had already forgot, what
you were about to prove. You were to prove that Christ lest his Church under
one particular Governor, and here you prove that People must be dutiful to
their Bishops. page 8.
Ay but say you, St. Ignatius tells us there is but one Altar, and one Bishop,
as also that there ought to be but one Church and one Faith, which is in
Christ, etc. and that surely is to the purpose. This I utterly deny, I grant
indeed St. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians [not as you have
mistaken it, to the Philippians; to which Church he wrote no Epistle, though some
have coined one for him] does speak of one Altar and one Bishop; and you had
done fairly to have cited the passage at large, as you did the other two,
nothing to the purpose; but this is a certain sign that runs almost through
your Book, that where you only hint, or quote half, or put an etc. in the
middle of a Sentence there all things will not be found fair. The passage then
is this, (...). St. Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. Edit. J. Vossii.
Be careful therefore (says he speaking to the Philadelphians) to make use of
this one Eucharist: for there is but one Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
one Cup to Communicate to us [or unite us to] his Blood: one Altar, as but one
Bishop with the Presbyters and Deacons my fellow servants; that whatever ye do,
ye may act according to Gods appointment.

Now this passage is so far from proving what you would have it, that there is
but one Supreme Bishop, who you say is he of Rome, that it asserts the direct
contrary, for if it proves, as you say it does, that there is but one Altar and
one Bishop, I am as certain that it proves that one Bishop to be the Bishop of
Philadelphia, and that one Altar to be this Bishops, since he exhorts these
Philadelphians to make use and keep to that Eucharist, that was to be received
from that one Altar, that did belong to that one Bishop: and that one Bishop I
am sure was the then Bishop of Philadelphia. I will not urge upon you any place
of Ignatius, but will only say, and will be at any time ready to prove, that
he that cites Ignatius for a defender of a Monarchical Church under one Head on
Earth, either has not read Ignatius, or does not understand him.

What you urge from St. Cyprian is to no purpose, since every one owns that
every Member ought to keep the Unity of that Church to which he does belong,
and that no Man that is disobedient to the Church his Mother, will ever have
God for his Father. Nor your long quotation from St. Irenaeus, where your
faculty of translating appears to be none of the best, page 8.
This Preaching and this Faith, when the Church had heard spread through the
whole World, she diligently keeps, as it were dwelling in one House; to wit,
having one Soul and one Heart, etc. which give me leave to alter a little to
St. Irenaeus his good sense, and then you shall have my Answer about it. The
[Catholick] Church having received this Preaching and this Faith, although [she
be] dispersed over the whole World, yet keeps and preserves them as diligently,
as if she [were confined to or] did Inhabit a single House; and she does
believe them without any difference or disagreement, as though she had but one
Soul, and but one Heart, and accordingly does both preach, teach, and deliver
these things, [these Articles of Faith] as if she had but one Mouth, etc. Of
all the passages in Antiquity, I wonder what ill Fate put this piece of St.
Irenaeus in your way: had you considered it well, I am sure we should not have
met with it in your Book, since it does perfectly ruin the whole design of
this part of your Book; for whereas the benefit you intended from it was to
help you to prove that the Church of Christ is Monarchical under a single head,
there is nothing less here, and every thing contrary; for as it speaks of the
Catholic Church, as one through this Unity of Faith, so it proves (what we of
the Church of England so much contend for) that the Particular Churches of
Germany, Spain, France, Egypt and the East, of Lybia, Jerusalem, Rome, and the
rest, do make up this Catholic Church, without the least hint of a Head over
them all, or of any other Unity than that of Faith, the Light that does, like
the Sun, equally enlighten every where. You will say perhaps that the Church of
Rome is not expressly mentioned here, and that probably it is, because all
these Particular Churches mentioned are the several parts of her Body which
really is the same as the Catholic Church. But to spoil this groundless
Pretense, -- neque haequae in Medio Mundi sunt constitutae.
not to insist on it that by the Churches constituted in the middle of the
World in this passage, She as well as Jerusalem, and the Churches betwixt them
is certainly intimated; I desire you but to peruse the Third Chapter of his
Third Book against Heresies. Having in the beginning of this Chapter urged
against the Heretics that none of the Apostles delivered to the Bishops their
Successors any such things as they impiously taught, and that he could show
this from the Successions in all the Churches, he thus addresses them, Sed
quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine Omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare
Successiones, -- Romae fundatae and constitutae Ecclesiae -- Traditionem, etc.
St. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. contr. Haeres. Edit. Feuardent. 1625.
But because it is too tedious in such a Volume as this is to reckon up the
Successions of all Churches, etc. he then reckons up that of the very great and
very ancient Church founded at Rome by St. Peter and St. Paul, etc. If this
passage do not prove the Church of Rome to be one of all those Churches, and as
Particular a Church, as any of the rest, I will for the future (as you did)
abstract my self, and deny my Eyes as well as my Reason.

What you quote from Clemens of Alexandria and Tertullian, two of whose
passages are part falsely, page 9.
and part lamely translated) are nothing at all to your purpose, they only
speak of the Catholic Church as one through the Unity of Faith, not a word of
the Church of Rome, or of her being that one Church under one Head Bishop.

The same advantage and no more does that from St. Chrysostom afford you, page
9.
which says, The Apostle calls it the Church of God, -- (...).
that he may show it may be reduced into one [which with your leave I would
express thus, to show, or having showed, that it ought to be at Unity, etc.]
All which is no more than what the Members of the Church of England have said a
Hundred Thousand times, that every Church, as well as that at Corinth ought to
be at Unity.

You might have quoted our Collect for all Conditions of Men [ O God, the
Creator and Preserver of all Mankind, p. 9.
etc.] instead of the passage out of Theodoret, only you had a mind to show
your great reading, otherwise ours would have served you to all the purposes
this can, they both saying the same thing, that is, not one syllable to your
intentions. p. 10.
St. Ambrose's and St. Hierome's are just the same, speaking that which none of
our Church can deny, every member of it does believe that there is one
Catholic and Apostolic Church, and at the same time is as ready to profess,
that he does no more believe than any of the Primitive Christians ever did,
that the Church of Rome is that Church, or that that one Catholic and
Apostolic Church is governed by one Supreme Pastor the Bishop of Rome; which
was the thing you were to prove, but how little you have performed it, I dare
appeal to any one, that would but, as he reads, consider, and compare your
quotations, and what I have said upon them.

More Testimonies, it seems, you could have given us, p. 10.
but you say, it were too tedious, either to write or read, etc. There is
another reason why they would be tedious, and that is, because if they are no
better than these we have had already, they would have been nothing to the
purpose: and to say those Testimonies you have presented us are not the best,
would be to disparage your prudence and parts, which we need not do. One more
however you cannot refrain giving us for good omens sake, that of Constantine
the Great, whose Zeal for the Unity of the Catholic Church, and his most
earnest endeavors for the peace thereof all know and admire, and therefore
'twas needless to recite, since it has not one syllable to your business,
which was not to prove, what both sides affirm, that there is a Catholic
Church, but that the Church of Rome is that Catholic Church governed by one
Supreme Pastor. Quod restat probandum and aternum restabit.

One thing I must desire of you by reason of these passages, that if ever you
set up again for a Writer, you would either tell us what Editions the Books are
of which you quote; or name the Books you picked 'em out of; you cite the 62d
Chapter; Valesius's Edition says it is the 64th: you quote the 63d, and he says
it is the 65th Chapter of Eusebius's 3d Book of the Life of Constantine.

CHAP. VIII. The Ridiculousness of his Attempt against Protestant Communions
exposed, and an Unity of Faith among them proved.
HERE, page 10.
as though you had done wonders by your Authorities, you not without a secret
vainglory, say, What would I have once given to have found such an Unity
amongst Protestants? to have England, Scotland, Denmark, Zwethland, Geneva,
Zurick, etc. thus Unius Labii: nay to have found but one County in my own dear
Country, or perhaps one single Family so united a Brotherhood, etc. I wish,
Sir, that it might have been my good fortune to have met you sometime with
money in your Pocket in this generous mood, I do assure you that I would have
been reasonable, and for one Guinea, would have proved it to you, or have
forfeited 40, that all these Churches you have reckoned up in the North and
Western parts of Europe are as much Vnius Labii, as all the Proofs you have
tacked together do either prove or require; for to repeat the substance of
them, there is none of them all does either prove, or offer at it, that all the
Particular Churches of Christ should have the same Customs, Rites, Ceremonies
and Discipline without any difference one from another. That which they prove,
and indeed there is but one that does it clearly, that from Irenaeus, is, that
the Unity of the Catholic Church dispersed throughout the world, or, which is
the same thing, of all the Particular Churches every where which do make up the
Catholic Church was in and from the one Faith, which she had from the
Apostles: and this Faith was that which we call the Apostle's Creed, a Summary
of which St. Irenaeus having set down in the short Chapter immediately before
this out of which you have your quotation, begins this Chapter as you have
quoted that the Catholic Church, having received this Preaching and this Faith
( to wit, included in the Apostle's Creed, does preserve it, and teach it
inviolably, etc. and at the end of this same Chapter, Et neque qui valde
praevalet in Sermon ex iis qui praesunt Ecclesiis, alia quam haec sunt, dicet.
Nemo enim super Magistrum est: neque infirmus in dicendo deminorabit
Traditionem. Cum enim una and eadem fides sit, neque is qui multum de ea potest
dicere, amplius, (Lampliat) neque is qui minus, deminorat. S. Iraen. c. Haer.
l. 1. c. 3. Edit. Feuard.
he tells us, that the Church was so much Vnius Labii (as your phrase is) in
this Faith, that neither He that was more eloquent among the Pastors of the
Church, will say [or teach] any things different from these [Articles of Faith]
for no Man is above his Master: nor he that is less expert, will diminish any
thing from this [Faith delivered or] Tradition. For since the Faith is one and
the same, neither he that can say most about it, does add any thing to it; nor
he that can say least, does take any thing from it. This Faith then (to use St.
Irenaeus's simile) like the Sun, Ibidem.
enlightens all parts of the world, shines to them all, and does influence all
with her one Faith, as with a common heat, and makes all that embrace it
throughout the world to become the constituent parts of the Catholic Church.

By this time I do not question but that you think your Guinea might have been
in danger, since no man that has common sense can deny, that the Churches of
England, Denmark, Swedland and the rest are Vnius Labii in this Faith, which is
equally embraced and professed by them, and therefore has the same influence
over them, that it had over the several Churches in St. Irenaeus his time, to
make them true Members of the Catholic Church. So that as all your money would
have been lost on this account, so your Pity over your own dear Country is not
only lost but childish and ridiculous too, and would far handsomer have become
a Woman that never saw farther than her Psalter, than you that pretend to such
a large knowledge in Fathers and Divinity.

But though your Pity were lost, page 10, 11.
you are resolved your Country shall not want your hearty prayers, that true
Charity -- may possess their hearts, and that there may be a most holy love
planted, and reigning in their hearts for ever, etc. I used to think it was the
opinion of the Church of Rome and her Party, that we of the Church of England
wanted the true Faith, if so, you are not then so charitable for all your
Pretenses as you might be, and a little petition, that true Faith, as well as
true Charity may possess our hearts, would not be so very much, or so
troublesome for you, now you are on your Rock, to put up for us. But perhaps
your opinion is, that our Faith is good enough in this Church, only that we
are an ill-natured, uncharitable Church, and therefore want such an Orator as
you to obtain for us the Gift of Charity. But do we want Charity so much more,
than our neighbors at Rome? God will one day judge, and let the world do it
in the mean time, whether we or they want it more, they that damn all besides
their own Church, or we that hold that even they may be saved. And for our
Faith neither shall we need to flatter our selves; by and by we shall be called
to account by you about it, and proved to our sorrow to want that altogether as
much as Charity, so that in the mean time how are you the compassionate, and
charitable Man?

It Is no wonder that one that has made so great a mistake, as to say, there is
no Unity among the Reformed Communions, should make such ado to make the
Church of Rome appear great, by reckoning up all the Universities, Bishoprics,
etc. that own and submit to the Pope's Jurisdiction. I have not so much time to
trifle away as to examine whether your Muster be right; all that it proves is,
that a great many Churches that by the Rules of Christianity, and by the
ancient Laws of the Catholic Church were free and independent, do now labor
(willingly or unwillingly I do not pretend to know) under the Usurpation of the
Church of Rome and her Universal Bishop, which Title Gregory the Great, himself
a Bishop of that See, thought Antichristian. When you reckon Sicily and its
Bishops, you ought to have remembered, that they have a Supreme Head of their
own, the King of Spain (who is therefore once a year excommunicated by the
other Supreme Head at Rome, but, for quietness sake, as constantly the next day
absolved) who acts as supremely and Independently there, as the Pope himself
does in Rome or any part of Italy. But this perchance you did not know, and
therefore 'twould be very unreasonable to expect a true account of it from you.

CHAP. IX. A Digression, wherein is proved that the Church of Rome is a
particular Church, and that the Unity among the Primitive Churches was in Faith
only.
YOUR next design, if I understand you right, is to prove the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome. But before I undertake to talk with you about that, I will take
leave to make a Digression, the Design of which shall be to show you (that I
may not be only employed in pulling down what you build) how much you have
been mistaken about your Notion of the Catholic Church, and how miserably that
Definition of S. N. or rather the Romish Missionaries have imposed upon you. I
will contract it as much as I can, and care not how short I am, so that I be
but clear and intelligible.

The things therefore I propose to make appear are these,

First, That the Church of Rome in the Primitive times was looked upon to be as
particular a Church, as any other then in being.

Secondly, That as an Unity in Faith was always required in every Particular
Church to make it a true branch of the Catholic Church, so there were in those
Primitive times always found, and always allowed of, differences as to
Practices, Ceremonies, Discipline and such things between the several
particular Churches without any breach of Catholic Peace and Unity.

1. The first of these I am almost as much ashamed to attempt, as to prove that
I had a Mother, it is so plain and visible through all Antiquity: that I admire
any Man that owns his Reason can in the least question the Church of Rome's
being as Particular a Church as any of its neighbors; such I am sure St. Paul
thought it to be, when he wrote his Epistle from Corinth to that Church, and
such St. Clemens knew it certainly to be, when he writes in the name of the
Church settled at Rome the famous Epistle to the Church of Corinth: the Epistle
St. Ignatius wrote to it, just before his Martyrdom there, does equally prove
it with the other two, and not one syllable is there to be met with in these
three best Monuments of Antiquity (as far as I can see) that does at all
advance her above the common level of the other her sister Churches, or in the
least hint her any ways being the Mistress, or Mother of them all, as the late
and our modern Wisemen are pleased to say she is, but for proving it are
willing to be excused.

I question not but what I have cited out of St. Irenaeus proves the sentiment
of him and his time to have been, that she was a particular Church among the
rest in the world; he was certainly of this opinion, S. Iren. con. Haer. l. 3.
c. 3.
when telling the Heretics that it would be too tedious to reckon up the
Successions of ALL the CHURCHES, he puts down that of Rome, which he could not
have done, had not she been one of those All he there mentions. I will but
produce one more upon this too evident a point, Tertullian -- Edant ergo
Origines Ecclesiarum suarum: evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per
Successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex
Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, etc. habuerit auctorem and antecessorem. Hoc
enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt: sicut Smyrnaeorum
Ecclesia habens Polycarpum ab Joanne conlocatum refert: Sicut Romanorum
Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit: proinde utique and ceterae exhibent, etc.
Tertull. de Praescript. c. 32. Edit. Franck. 1597.
, who challenging the Heretics to show the Original of their Churches, the
Succession of their Bishops in a direct line from either an Apostle, or an
Apostolical Person that always kept within the Unity of the Church; tells them
the Apostolical Churches could do this; for example the Church of Smyrna that
had Polycarp placed there [for their first Bishop] by St. John, the Church of
Rome that had Clemens ordained by St. Peter, and for the rest of those
Churches, that they did the same.

2. I Will pass now to the second point, to show, That as an Unity in Faith was
always required in every Particular Church to make it a true part of the
Catholic Church, so there were in those primitive times always found, and
always allowed of, Differences as to Practice and Ceremonies, Discipline and
such things between the several particular Churches without any breach of
Catholic Peace and Unity.

As to the Unity by Faith, I need not much, if at all, insist upon the proof of
it, since we both make it necessary to the being a Member of the Catholic
Church: S. Irenaeus cont. Haer. l. 1. c. 3.
St. Irenaeus in the Chapter you and I quoted, does sufficiently prove that it
was the Faith received from the Apostles, that made the Church one; that it was
that which enlightened, and therefore saved every particular Church as well as
particular Person: No Man speaks more of the beauty and necessity of Unity, and
yet that He meant it only as to an Unity of Faith, is very apparent from that
famous Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, who had most imprudently and
irregularly excommunicated the Asiatick Churches for not keeping Easter at the
same time He and most other Christians did.

In this Epistle he tells Victor that before his time, All Churches though
several of 'em differing in this thing of the time of observing Easter
preserved Catholic Peace, and did communicate one with another,
notwithstanding such a difference. Neque enim de Die (viz. celebr. Pasch.)
solum controversia est, sed etiam de forma ip^a Jejunii. Quidam enim existimant
unico die sibi esse jejunandum: alii duobus, alii pluribus -- nihilominus tamen
and omnes isti pacem inter se retinuerunt, and nos invicem retinemus. Ita
Jejuniorum Diversitas Consensionem [(...)] Fidei commendat. apud Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. Ed. Vales.
He gives him the Instance (in this same Ep.) of St. Polycarp and Anicetus, who
differing and resolved so to continue in this point, did most lovingly
communicate together at Rome it self: Anicetus, as a particular mark of Honor
and Brotherly Love, permitting St. Polycarp to Consecrate the Eucharist in his
Church and stead: and did as lovingly part. He further informs him, that it was
not about the time of observing Easter only that there were Differences
between particular Churches: he mentions the much greater variety in the great
duty of Fasting, that some fasted but one Day, some two, others more: yet did
however preserve Peace and Unity with all that differed from them; and so he
says, they still did continue to do in his time: and concludes this Narrative
thus, That the Diversity of their Fasts did commend the Unity of their Faith;
than which I could never desire a more evident proof for what I have affirmed,
that different Customs were found and allowed of in the different particular
Churches without breach of Catholic Unity and Communion.

Tertullian is as express in both points of the Unity of Faith, and diversity
of Discipline and Customs, that though the first is necessary to all Churches,
yet that the other is lawful and practiced in different Communions. Regula
quidem Fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis, credendi
scilicet in unicum Deum. -- Hac Lege Pidei manante cetera jam disciplinae and
conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis. Tertul. de Virgin. velandis c.
1. Edit. Franck.
The Rule of Faith (says he) is altogether one, immovable, and incapable of
any Reformation or Alteration, after which he sets down an Abridgment [as
Irenaeus had done above] of the Apostles Creed, and then proceeds hac Lege,
etc. This Law or Rule of Faith continuing firm, the other matters of Discipline
and Manners do admit of Correction or Amendment. These two eminent Writers are
so clear and convincing in this matter, that I Will wave the producing any more
Authorities to this purpose besides that of the very eminent and famous
Firmilian Bishop of the Cappadocian Caesarea, Eos autem qui Romae sunt, non ea
in omnibus observare quae sunt ab origin tradita, and frustra Apostolorum
auctoritatem praetendere; scire quis etiam inde potest, quod circa celebrandos
dies Paschae, and circa multa alia divinae rei Sacramenta, videat esse apud
illos aliquas diversitates, nec observari illic omnia aequaliter quae
Hierosolymis observantur. Secundum quod in caeteris quoque plurimis Provinciis,
multa pro locorum and nominum ( l. hominum) diversitate variantur; nec tamen
propter hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque unitate aliquando discessum est.
Firmiliani Epistola Cypriano, inter Epist. Cypriani 75. p. 220. Edit. Oxon.
who in an Epistle to St. Cyprian, acquaints the World, that they of the Romish
Church did not observe in all things what had been delivered from the beginning
(I pray then what is become of your Palladium, Tradition) and that they did to
no purpose pretend the Authority of the Apostles: he instances about the
Observation of Easter, and lays further to their charge some differences about
many other divine affairs and administrations, and says that they do not
observe the same Customs that are at Jerusalem. This he mentions not to blame
them for them, but to reprove their Pride and their disturbing the Peace and
Unity of the Catholic Church, by breaking Communion with other Churches upon
such accounts, for in the next words to these I cite, himself mentions that in
very many other Provinces, Cum una sit Fides, cur funt Ecclesiarum diversae
consuetudines, etc.
many things were varied according to the diversity of places and names, (men)
however that the Peace and Unity of the Catholic Church was not hereby broken;
(...).

3. Interrogatio Augustini ad Gregor. M.

CHAP. X. An inquiry into Roman Unity under their Dictator.
HAving now discharged my self of my digression, and satisfactorily I hope
proved that which I undertook in it. I do now pass to your Muster of all those
places and persons under the Pope, the Unity of which, your assurance is, does
hence proceed, p. 11.
because they submit themselves to the Judgment and Regulation of one Dictator,
who conserves the ancient Decrees of General Councils, deposited with him by
the whole Church, from whom if any dissent, or walk irregularly, he is severed
and cut off from the rest of the Members, etc.

That the submission of all those Churches you mention to the Dictator at Rome,
is the cause of that Unity you say is among them, no Body does deny any more,
than that all the Philosophers among the Heathens would have been as much at
Unity, had they made Aristippus or Pyrrho their Universal Dictator, and
resolved never to think, speak or write besides what he was pleased to command
or teach them. The Question betwixt us is, whether Christ did leave his Church
in a Monarchical State under the sole ordering of St. Peter at first, to be
continued after his decease under the successive Bishops of Rome; and this is
the thing to be proved; as for what you talk about the Roman Dictators keeping
and managing the Canons of General Councils, I question not before we part upon
this head to prove your Reasons for it either false, or ridiculous.

But before we go any further, is the Church of Rome really at that Unity that
one might expect from its having such an Universal Dictator over it? I trow
not; for did you never hear of that long bandying (which perhaps is not ended)
about the Immaculate Conception; nor of the violent Feuds betwixt the
Jansenists and Molinists, which for all the Popes determination continue to
this Day? Is that whole Community agreed about the Infallibility? How is it
then that some are for the Personal Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome as
such; some that He is so only in Cathedra; some that only a General Council
is such? Are they agreed about his Jurisdiction? How is it then that some put
him under, and others above a General Council? Is his Supremacy determined
wherein it does consist? Whence is it then that the Clergy of France so lately
made Determinations for the Limitation of it, 1682.
and to deny his Deposing Power, or Meddling in Temporals: And the Clergy of
Hungary under the Archbishop of Gran did 1684 Condemn the Determinations of
France, to omit the Inquisition of Toledo doing the same thing against them?
What was the reason that the Pope, who is Dictator, and might with a word as
such silence these Quarrels, suffers these contrary Determinations, but that he
has wit enough to know that he is not so much a Dictator, as Mr. Sclater makes
him, in France, and that his Bulls would signify no more there about these
things, than they did about the Regale. Are not the Professed Members of that
Communion for all their Dictator still quarrelling and bandying one against
another, witness the Satyrs and virulent Libels betwixt the Jesuits and the
Carmelites, to pass by the more personal ones betwixt Maimbourgh and
Schelstreat, betwixt Alexander Natalis and D'enghien, betwixt Arnauld and
Malebranch; I will but ask you one question, why all F. Alexandre Noel's Books,
wherein he has done all he can to vindicate their Religion, were all condemned
to the Fire not excepting one by this Pope's Breve in Eighty Four. I doubt we
shall find that Doctors differ about the deposing Power and the Popes Supremacy
in the bosom of the Church of Rome it self: and that the French did not submit
quietly to the Condemnation of their Determinations by the Clergy of Hungary.

These things perchance are most of 'em news to you, and therefore you cannot
be blamed for thinking or writing that they are at Unity under their Dictator
at Rome, because you knew no better; but if you be angry and say you did know
them, I desire to know how you could say that the Members of that Church do
submit to that Dictator, and are at Unity under him, whereas the Instances I
have given are more than enough to convince, that what you have written is but
a Dream, and your own confident mistake.

CHAP. II. Arguments from the Three first Centuries and the beginning of the
Fourth, for St. Peter's Supremacy, answered.
TO leave this and proceed in your Book, your business being as I told you
above, to prove that Christ left his Church in a Monarchical State under the
sole ordering of St. Peter at first, to be continued after his decease under
the successive Bishops of Rome: It is strange to see how confusedly you go
about it, but much stranger that you should begin with St. Dennis, and not with
the Scripture. But I am afraid this Book it self, as well as the private Spirit
that used to sense it, are now distasted by you alike, and that it is looked
upon as a far more dangerous than useful Book, and so fittest to be set aside,
where there is no absolute necessity of bringing it upon the Stage.

For your Testimony from St. Dennis, you know my mind already, page 11.
and we shall have occasion by and by to talk a little more about him. page 11.
St. Irenaeus his Testimony had come in I think, a little better under your
last Head among your Testimonies for the Unity of the Catholic Church. But how
it proves St. Peter's Supremacy I cannot devise, except you can prove that St.
Peter and St. Paul were but One Individual, and make them two into one Man, as
( p. 76.) you have made Scotus Erigena into two: Nor is there a word here about
Supremacy; all that Irenaeus says is, (...) [viz. Romae,] (...). Iren. c.
Haer. l. 3. c. 3. Edit. Feuard.
that St. Peter and St. Paul by their joint endeavors having founded that
Church made Linus Bishop there, etc. which place seems to (if it really do not)
exclude St. Peter's being Bishop there himself at all, so far is it from proving
his Supremacy.

But if it will not serve for this purpose, lets see what it will do for to
prove the Catholic Church to be Monarchical, and no other than the Church of
Rome. You found (say you) Irenaeus [I'll venture to put in, saying, for without
it or such a word I must confess that I cannot make English out of your
Period,] that it was of necessity that every Church should agree with the
Church of Rome, etc. Your translation here I cannot admit, for convenire ad
hanc Ecclesiam is surely to come up to this Church; the reason of which St.
Irenaeus makes the potentior Principalitas (which I wonder you should omit in
your Translation) the more powerful Principality, the Supreme Civil
Government, Rome then being the Imperial City of the World, and the Seat of the
Senate and chief Judicatures, which must of necessity bring People, Christians
as well as others, thither from all parts, and therefore make the Church of
Rome a most visible and eminent Church, and so the fittest for St. Irenaeus his
design against the Heretics, when he had obliged himself to reckon up the
Succession of one among the several Apostolical Churches of the World.

I am not ignorant your now party are very earnest upon this place, and very
desirous to have it believed that by potentior Principalitas here is meant the
Dignity and Jurisdiction of the Church at Rome over all other Churches, and
that therefore they should resort to her as to their Head and Mistress. But not
to insist on the Inconsistency of such a sense of these words with all the
accounts we have of this and the rest of the Apostolical Churches from the
purest Antiquity (which I could easily show, had I room here,) I only ask
them, what every Church was to go thither for? Was it for the Catholic Faith?
that St. Traditionem igitur Apostoloru^ in toto mundo manifestatam in Omni
Ecclesia adest perspicere omnibus qui, etc. Iren. con. Haer. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus assures us they, every one had at home, the Apostles after their
Churches planted delivering to them the true Faith, which then was kept as he
assures us, inviolably by them, and therefore no need to go to Rome for it. Was
it for Discipline? There was as little need for their going about this as for
the other, since in the several Churches which they planted, the Apostles
ordained them Bishops, delivering to them Idem Ibidem.
suum ipsorum locum Magisterii, their own place and power of Jurisdiction,
which certainly was for Discipline. If they of your Party can invent any other
business for their going thither, I do not question but that any of our Writers
will be able to refell it, as soon as mentioned.

By this time you have taken leave of St. Peter, and are got to that, which you
will begin again two pages hence, to prove the Primacy did not dye with Peter;
for Method truly I cannot but admire you: but must however take your Arguments,
as they come. Well then you say of St. Clemens, that under him a great
dissension arising among the Corinthians, page 11.
He wrote powerful Letters [I wish you had told us how many, Eusebius that had
almost as good opportunities as you, heard but of one, and we commonly think it
was but one that he wrote on this account] to them, compelling them to Peace,
repairing their Faith, and declaring what Tradition they had lately received
from the Apostles, etc. This Testimony to give it its due, if it can but pass
Muster, will do your business, this compelling looks as if a Generalissimo had
to do about it, and this repairing their Faith shows as clear as the Sun, that
the Bishops of Rome had the sole keeping of the Apostolical Faith and
Tradition, that so if any Church had lost it, they might know whither to go to
have it repaired; a much nobler Province than that of conserving the ancient
Decrees of General Councils.

But is all this certainly true? why did you not then give us the passages
where St. Clemens is so brisk upon the Corinthians? no Sir, if you had, they
must have been of your own making, for I am pretty certain there is no such
behavior in that letter, but the direct contrary. I have particularly perused
it upon this very occasion, and can meet with nothing, but suasory Arguments
there, such as might have become any other Bishop as well as him; and therefore
I must take the freedom to tell you, that I do not believe you have read this
Epistle over, and that it was those you transcribed that imposed upon you, as
you have done upon your Reader: and the same opinion I must have of your next
Testimony from Tertullian, for could any but one that is a stranger to that
particular Book (as well as to the rest of his Writings, as I believe I shall
find you) quote him calling the Bishop of Rome Pontifex Maximus, Bishop of
Bishops, bonus Pastor and benedictus Papa, when the Bishop of Rome is not once
mentioned in this Tract; but granting him to be aimed at there, is it not as
plain that all these Titles are given purely in derision [and therefore prove
nothing to your purpose] by Tertullian now a Heretic, De Pudicitia.
and in this Tract ridiculing the discipline of the Catholic Church? You might
with as good a face have cited St. Cyprian and the African Bishops in Council
with him calling the Bishop of Rome Bishop of Bishops, for him I verily believe
they meant there, though they did not name him: but that there was such a sting
in the tail of these Bishops Preface to their Council, as would have spoiled
all your designs, and have blown away all your groundless talk about a
Supremacy; for after they had resolved to give their own opinions concerning
what they were met about, without judging others, or denying to communicate
with those that might be of a different Judgment, and had said that none of
them made himself Bishop of Bishops, or attempted to fright any of their
Brother-Bishops into an Obedience, or Submission to their Opinion, (by which
expressions they more than seem to wipe the Bishop of Rome) they give the
reason of this their temper and moderation, because every Bishop -- had his own
Free Will, -- Quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis and
potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium; tamque judicari ab alio non possit, quam
nec ipse potest judicare. Sed expectemus universi Judicium Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, qui unus and solus habet potestatem and praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae
suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro judicandi. Council. Carthag. Episcoporum
87. A. D. 256. apud Cyprianum. p. 229. Edit. Oxon.
and could no more be judged by another [the Bishop of Rome himself not
excepted,] than judge another [Bishop] and upon this conclude for themselves,
that they must all expect the Judgment of. our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone had
the power as of making them Bishops for the Government of his Church, so of
calling them to an account for their discharge of the care and employment he
had placed them in.

There is no one that has read St. Cyprian and considered him, that will not
grant I might easily bring twenty places as evident as this for the Equality
and Independency of Bishops: But I must remember my task is to answer yours,
not to write a Book on this subject. page 12.
However this I could not omit thereby to obviate your quotation from him as if
he should say the Church of Rome is the Mother and Root of the Catholic
Church, Cypriani Epistola. 45 Cornelio. Edit. Oxon. Pamel. 42.
whereas his advice (as he tells Cornelius here) to those persons was, upon his
having communicated to them the Legality of Cornelius his Ordination about
which there had been so much dissension, to keep to Unity the Mother and Root
of the Catholic Church; and therefore to communicate with Cornelius who was a
Catholic Bishop, and not with the Schismatics who did not keep to the Unity
of the Church, for the persuading of whom to such Unity he had sent among them
Caldonius and Fortunatus. A man would guess from your saying that Cyprian goes
on, and advises the Bishops of Numidia, etc. that this Epistle had been writ to
them, but this is but another touch of your skill, and reading the Authors you
quote.

But now you are returned to St. Peter again, page 12.
whom Eusebius (you say) calls (...), the Prince or Prolocutor, etc. which are
betwixt you and me two very different things, that he (...) for his virtue or
zeal's sake was their Prolocutor, I easily grant, but this does not prove him
their Prince or Supreme, and you ought to remember that honourary Titles or
Compellations are not to be rigidly taken, or stretched too far.

As to your large Title and Testimony from the Epistle of Saint Athanasius to
Marcus Bishop of Rome (where again you have lest St. Peter) upon which I
suppose and that out of St. Bernard you ground your former Assertion that the
Bishops of Rome are the Conservers of the ancient Decrees of General Councils;
page 12.
I will be brief and tell you that it is a pitiful forged nonsensical piece of
stuff, that you would here impose on us for the Venerable St. Athanasius. To
wave Dr. Cave, and our own Writers, who make and prove it to be a forgery, your
own great De Scriptoribus Eccles. in Athanasio.
Bellarmine and Baronius had the same opinion of it, the latter of whom, as you
may see in Bellarmine ( de Script. Eccl. in Gratiano) has quite ruined it. And
here I cannot but admire that you should offer to put off such pitiful
obsolete stuff in a Nation that has so vast a number of learned men, and
thereby to make your self ridiculous and contemptible, when such learned men as
Baronius and Bellarmine, who had as much zeal as any for the Chair at Rome, and
more learning than 40000 --, had already baffled the forgery, and caused it to
be hist off the stage. But such stuff it seems will down with you, and so does
that which is as bad, you may easily guess what it is I mean.

CHAP. XII. His Arguments from the Fourth Century for St. Peter's Supremacy
refuted.
WHAT you wanted of evidence from the three first Centuries of the Church,
which are far from affording you any Practice of such a Supremacy, or any hints
of there being any such thing settled at Rome, but all speak the direct
contrary to it, as I could very easily show; you think to make up from little
scraps of Fathers of the fourth and fifth Centuries, whose Rhetorical and
honorary Expressions ought not to be taken in a strict literal sense, because
otherwise it were easy to make them contradict themselves, nay altogether
unavoidable to prevent it. The Instance shall be in St. Hilary whom you first
quote. page 12.
He tells us (say you) Christ gave St. Peter the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and that he built his Church upon him: and yet in another part of his Works
Super hanc igitur Confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est -- Haec Fides
Ecclesiae fundamentum est. Hilarious de Trinit. l. 6.
this Father makes the Confession it self (as most of the Fathers do) the
Rock, on which our Savior built his Church. If you will then take the words
you quote in a strict sense, and I take those that I quote in as strict and
literal; St. Hilary I perceive is like to suffer betwixt us, and be made
directly to contradict himself. As to the keys, that I Will answer anon. As we
served St. Hilary, so we must Epiphanius about the Rock, whom you quote making
St. Peter, page 13.
the first of the Apostles, the firm Rock upon which God's Church was built.
Him (...). Epiphan. adv. Haeres. L. 2. Tom. 1. p. 500. Edit. Petav.
I quote also making St. Peter's Confession (not his person) the foundation of
the Catholic Church. I must confess that it is purely necessity that forces
me, or any of our Church to show these incoherences in the Fathers if taken in
a rigid literal sense, whereas allowing them a latitude befitting Homities, not
Controversies, Rhetorical Amplifications, not close inartificial Discourses,
they are consistent enough.

And so for St. Ambrose saying, Christ left St. Peter, as it were the
Vicegerent or Deputy of his Love to us; page 13.
in another place He makes this very Statim loci non immemor sui primatum egit
-- primatum Confessionis utique, non honoris, primatum Fidei non Ordinis. S.
Ambros. de Incarnat. c. 4.
Primacy, a Primacy of Confession, not of Honor, of Faith, not of Order; which
expressions of his, together with the perfect silence of Scripture and Prime
Antiquity as to the thing, make me I must confess neither Proselyte to
subscribe to, page 13.
nor an Admirer of, what you quote from St. Hierome, that although God's Church
was not so altogether founded upon St. Peter, but that the other Apostles also
had a share with him in the Office [with your leave from your own Margin I
translate, that all the Apostles were equal in the foundation, did equally
receive the power of the keys, which expressions by the bye as they contradict
your own Testimonies from St. Hilary and Epiphanius, so they ruin your
pretensions for the Papal Supremacy of Jurisdiction] yet one is chosen amongst
the Twelve, that a Head being placed over all, occasion of Schism might be
taken away. I will but urge one place of Scripture, why I think I ought not to
subscribe to it, and that is Acts 8.14. Now when the Apostles which were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received [by the Ministry of Philip] the word
of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; which had Peter been their Head
[their Prince, their General, as others call him] would have looked just as
well, and not a jot less, as if the College of Cardinals upon any important
business into France should delegate and send the Pope and the Dean of their
College thither.

But to pass these Objections and to admit St. Hierome's assertion, page 13.
it nor that from Optatus concerning the Prima Cathedra prove any thing more
than a Primacy of Order, which our Church I believe will not deny to the Bishop
of Rome; but that is not the thing will, or ever has for these eight or nine
hundred years contented them, they are for a Supremacy of Jurisdiction, as well
as a Primacy of Order; their chief ground for which pretension is, as I take
it, the investing St. Peter their Predecessor with the power of the keys, the
thing I shall according to my promise undertake here the consideration of.

The dispute betwixt us about it is, not whether the keys were given to St.
Peter, which no body of our Church did ever deny, but whether he received them
in his own person, for his particular use and trust exclusively to all the rest
of the Apostles. That he did not receive them in his own person, is plain from,
and the Judgment of, Antiquity; to you I need only urge your own Testimony
from St. -- Cuncti claves regni coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos
Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur. L. 1. adv. Jovin. c. 14.
Hierome who makes the Apostles equally to receive the power of the keys, and
to be equal in the foundation of the Catholic Church; for others sake I might
urge St. Cyprian Vnus pro omnibus loquens, and Ecclesiae voce respondens. S.
Cyprian. Ep. 59. Edit. Oxon.
, who makes St. Peter the mouth of them all, and to make that Confession (upon
which the keys were bestowed) in the name of the Church. St. Augustine August.
Ep. 165. Edit. Frob.
who is of the same opinion, and others, but I had rather recur to Scripture it
self, where I think it is evident enough, that he did in the name, and for the
use of them all receive those keys: This I prove from St. Matthew, who brings
in our Savior (within two Chapters from that Matthew. 16.13, 14, etc.
, wherein the discourse of our Savior with his Disciples, and his gift of the
keys to Peter is recorded) speaking to his Disciples as invested already with
this power of binding and loosing S. Matt. 18.17, 18. And if he shall neglect
to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be to thee as an Heathen man and a Publicane; verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound, etc. and whatsoever ye shall
loose -- shall be loosed in heaven.
: which place with me puts it past all doubt, that the rest of the Apostles
were equally concerned in that speech of our Savior's to St. Peter, and
thereby had equal power. But if they will not allow this place to suppose a
power already given, they will not dare to deny that it does confer, so that if
he had the power given to him particularly in the Sixteenth Chapter of this
Gospel, they all have it now in the Eighteenth, and thereby the same
Jurisdiction and Authority in the Church; which quite destroys all you have
been hitherto about, which was indeed to prove St. Peter had the same Supremacy
invested on him by our Savior, which the Bishops of Rome do since from him
exercise and enjoy; But how little you have performed, I dare appeal to any
indifferent person, to your own self, if you will but compare your papers and
mine together: so that I might save my self the trouble to try what you say
about that Primacy not dying with Peter; but I will not, lest you should say, I
left that part unanswered.

CHAP. XIII. Arguments for the Primacy not dying with Peter answered, the
Proofs out of St. Chrysostom for St. Peter's Supremacy fully confuted.
YOUR Arguments for the Primacy not dying with Peter are few and which is worse
nothing to your purpose, page 13.
since they are far from proving what you desire: but you ought to have
remembered that it is not only your Task to prove that there was such a
Primacy, and that it was not to die with St. Peter, but that it was to descend
to the successive Bishops of Rome after his decease, and not to any of the
Apostles, nor to the Bishops of Antioch. But since I perceive we shall find the
first, to wit of proving the Primacy not to die with St. Peter, too many for
you, it would be cruel to put you upon proving any of the other: for as to that
proof out of the Epistle of St. Hierome to Demetrias, all it proves is that
Innocentius was Anastasius's Successor in the Apostolical Chair at Rome: now
if you cannot prove hence, page 14.
either that this was the sole and only Apostolical Chair, or that it was
always the chief and governing Chair of the Catholic Church, every one will
see that you alleged a place nothing to the purpose, having not a word of St.
Peter in it; that you cannot show either of them, is what I, to prevent your
trouble of inquiring among your people about it, will make appear in a very few
words.

That the Apostolical Chair at Rome is not the only Chair in the Church
Catholic Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae
Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur. -- proxima est tibi Achaia, habes
Corinthum -- Philippos, -- Thessalonicenses, -- Ephesum -- Romam. Tertull. de
Praescript. contr. Haeret. c. 36. Edit. Junii Franekerae. 1597.
, Tertullian is demonstration; Run over (says he) the Apostolical Churches, in
which the very Chairs the Apostles used are to this day presided in by the
Bishops in their several places: and then he reckons Corinth and Philippi, and
Rome it self among the rest.

That it was not originally the chief or governing Chair is as plain from the
account we have in Euscbius from -- Pest servatoris Ascensum Petrum; Jacobum
and Joannem, quamvis Dominus ipsos caeteris praetulisset, non idcirco de primo
honoris gradu inter se contendisse, sed Jacobum cognomine Justum,
Hierosolymorum Episcopum elegisse. Clemens apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1.
Edit. Vales.
Clemens his Sixth Book of Institutions; That after our Lord's Ascension,
Peter, James and John, though preferred [not Peter alone] by our Lord above the
rest of the Apostles, did not thereupon contend among themselves for the first
place of Honor, but chose James the Just Bishop of Jerusalem. Whose Chair I am
sure this passage makes Primus Honoris Gradus, the chief Cathedra in the world.

Having thus spoiled this your proof, your next will give me the less trouble,
page 14.
wherein St. Hierome tells Damasus, that in this miserable condition of the
Eastern Churches being overrun by Heresies, he would stick to St. Peter 's
Chair and that Faith commended by St. Paul, etc. which passage would have
cleared it self, had you but been so just as to have translated the very next
words, which bring us St. Hierome's reason for this his resolution of slighting
all Heretics, and communicating with the Apostolical Chair at Rome, because he
had in that Church been first made a Christian, -- Inde nunc meae animae
postulans cibum, unde olim Christi vestimenta suscepi. Hieron. Ep. Damaso.
and therefore thence would receive the spiritual food for his Soul. Had you
Mr. Scl. but made St. Hierome's resolution your own, you had never fallen from
the Catholic, Apostolical and Orthodox Communion of the Church of England unto
that of --. In the mean time remember that you have not proved either a
Primacy, or a Succession in it for the Bishops of Rome.

In the next place, as though conscious to your self that you had done nothing
hitherto, and that your Arguments for the Supremacy and then for the Succession
were too weak, you fall again to the proving that St. Peter was Supreme, O
incomparable Method! and are now resolved to do it to purpose. But how? out of
St. Chrysostom's Homilies and Comments; There is no one that has looked, though
but a little, into that Father, that will not smile at this your attempt.
However you tell us, and no body will deny it, that he gives St. Peter
extraordinary and noble Titles, page 15.
that he calls him, Prime Leader of the Apostles, the head of Orthodoxy, the
great High Priest of the Church -- the Pillar of the Church -- the Head of the
Chorus of the Apostles, and says that He took the charge of the whole Church
throughout the World, etc.

I have only this question to put to you, whether you take St. Chrysostom, as
to these passages concerning St. Peter (the greatest as well as the clearest of
which for your purpose I have here set down) in a strict literal sense? if you
own it, as you seem to do by placing them here for such a purpose, I must then
plainly tell you, that you do a very great wrong to this Holy and learned
Father, than whom no one perchance ever gave himself a greater liberty as to
Rhetorical flights in his Homilies: since in other places he bestows Titles as
high and as great as these on other Apostles, which if I take in the same sense
that you do these, the Good Father is made inconsistent with himself, and to
preach downright falsities and contradictions. I Will instance only in St. John
and St. Paul; do but give your self the trouble to read over his Preface to
his Comments on St. John's Gospel, and tell me then, whether you do not find
him among other large Elogies calling St. John the Pillar of all the Churches
throughout the world, -- (...). Tom. 2. p. 555. ad fin. Edit. Savil.
and telling us that He had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But for St. Paul, I am confident I can make even you confess that He mounts
him above St. Peter himself, concerning whom you have furnished a Catalogue of
such glorious Titles. Look but upon his Comment on that (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 3.
p. 679.
saying of St. Paul's [2 Cor. 11.28.] about his care of all the Churches (a
passage by the bye that is more, than all your whole Church can patch together
for St. Peter,) how he advances our Apostle; there he tells us, that St. Paul
had the care and charge not of a single House, but of Cities, and Countries,
and Nations, yea of the whole world -- (...). Orat. 5. contr. Jud. Tom. 6. page
364.
: in another place that he was entrusted with the charge and Government of the
whole world, which is the very same Commission and as full and clear as that
great one (which is your chief and best) that you quote for St. Peter of his
having the charge of the Church throughout the world. And he does not only
make St. Paul (...) equal in dignity to St. Peter, but which is much more
advances him above him, as I undertook to prove. (...). D. Chrysostom. Orat. 9. Tom.
6. p. 97. Edit. Savil.
No one (says he speaking of St. Paul) is greater than he, no nor equal to him
neither, etc.

By this time I hope I have made it evident, that St. Chrysostom will not do
your business, that he is as much, nay more against you, than for you; and that
you and I ought both of us to own our several Quotations for Rhetorical
Flights, since in another -- (...). D. Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 115. Edit. Savil.
place, if you and I be obstinate against any allowances for these passages; He
spoils all we have both brought, when he tells us, That the Apostles were
appointed by God to be Rulers, not [Temporal] Rulers, to receive each his
Nation or City, but [Spiritual Rulers] entrusted in Common All together with
the Care of [the Catholic Church throughout] the World. Therefore as all your
Authorities from St. Chrysostom for St. Peter's Supremacy are out of doors,
page 15.
so that from St. Augustine comes too late having the same fault, as I could
most easily show, but do not think I need to trouble my self with it, page 15.
or what the Popes Legates said at Chalcedon, that being to make a Man his own
witness. Especially since that great Council had so little value for what they
said that they did (notwithstanding all the Pope's opposition) decree that
Constantinople should enjoy equal Privileges with old Rome, and which is more
did declare, Etenim antiquae Romae Throno QVOD VRBS ILLA IMPERARET jure Patres
Privilegia tribuere, and EADEM CONSIDERATIONE moti 150 Dei amantissimi Episcopi
S. Sancto novae Romae Throno AEQVALIA PRIVILEGIA addixerunt, etc. Council.
Chalced. cap. 28. Edit. Bever. Oxon.
that as well old as new Rome had such great Privileges bestowed upon them,
purely because they were successively the Imperial Cities of the world.

CHAP. XIV. The ridiculous Use of his Testimonies shown, and his foolish
Aspersions upon the Church of England wiped off.
THese Testimonies, say you, I content my self withal, as sufficient to show,
page 15.
I have not gone rashly on without the advice of ancient Counselors, etc. It
had been one further happiness for your Testimonies could they but have
contented others as well, as you say they have done you; but how can that be
expected, since they are (as I think I have fully shown) far from being
satisfactory, because altogether insufficient for the design you gathered them
for. In a word, you have neither proved that Christ left his Church in a
Monarchical State, nor that St. Peter was made the sole Head and Dictator (as
you word it) of the Catholic Church, nor lastly that the Bishops of Rome have,
and do succeed him in such, a charge. Had you done these, you had done your
cause service: to attempt and not to do it, is but to tell the World that it
cannot be done; and what thanks you will have for that, I can very easily guess.

All these Testimonies you sum up with St. Bernard, page 15.
but since he lived far too late to be admitted a Witness about these things,
and you might as well have quoted those two Monsters of Men Gregory the Seventh
and Innocent the Third for those purposes; I must set him aside.

No Body ought to wonder that you are pleased with what you have thus scraped
together, or that you think you have found something, since every one likes his
own best; how little reason you had to flatter your self, I think I have
abundantly proved; but on you go, and now strongly imagine that the wise God
and his Son -- could leave (which is a little too bold with God, did leave,
might surely serve you) none other at his Ascension, page 16.
etc. To be short, Sir, all this pleasant fancy is answered already, and all
you have so carefully been about hitherto, proves but a Dream, a Delusion
proceeding from your examining things by false Measures, and through a false
Glass. But for all this, This must be the Church you called Catholic in your
Creed, and till now, did not so well mind, etc. Alas, Sir, that a Man of your
parts and years should not before this have minded what Catholic meant, and
where that Church was, when there is scarce a person of any tolerable sense in
England, that cannot with a great deal of readiness give a sufficient account
of these things: but here is the Mystery, you have found that the Church of
Rome is this very Church mentioned in our common Creed, and that when we
profess we believe the Holy Catholic Church, we mean though we do not mind it,
the Church of Rome.

It is to no purpose to endeavor to reclaim such Men as you, since you seem to
have abandoned the common principles by which Mankind govern themselves, for
else how could you dream of a part being the whole; a Member, the Body. That
the Church of Rome was from the beginning reckoned a particular Church, I think
is as plain as that Rome is in Italy; I have proved it so fully above, that I
almost loath such a ridiculous subject of discourse. page 17.
And your Authorities from Pacian and Cyril of Jerusalem are not one jot to
your purpose, if you intend them to confirm that the Church of Rome is the
Catholic Church; all that they say or prove being that Catholic is the
Surname of true Christians, and that every one should enquire for, and unite
with the Catholic Church into whatsoever place he comes. Now what is this to
the Church of Rome, here is no mention of her here, not a syllable to determine
that she is the Catholic Church, to unite with which these two Fathers are
careful to advise.

These things, you tell us, gave you some small encouragement to betake your
self to that Communion, that was both Christian and Catholic, etc. for which
very reason you needed not have left the Communion of the Church of England,
which is both Christian and Catholic.

You ought to dislike Papist upon the same ground you dislike Protestant, and
if Christian was too large for you, you needed not to leave the Church of
England to be both Catholic and Christian: the Church of England denominates
her self from no particular Persons good or bad, but is a True Church having
lawful Pastors and a Catholic Faith.

You next say you cannot imagine why Protestants should so decline the Title
(of Catholic you mean) or suffer it with so much silence to be laid aside,
unless it be, page 18.
because it imports a Faith spread throughout the World, which they very well
know, would be utterly impossible to prove their Protestant Faith ever was,
etc. Whether this passage is more ridiculous or false, I must own that upon the
sudden I cannot tell; if you mean here as you ought the Church of England, (as
you must to be consistent with your self, having a good while ago cast off all
the other Reformed Communions) nothing can be more false and ridiculous, since
twice a Day we use it constantly in our Service, and surely you will not be so
extravagantly unreasonable to say we do not Mean or Pray for our selves, when
we Pray for the Good Estate of the Catholic Church: So that our decling the
Title, and suffering it with so much silence to he laid aside, must be put to
the account of the grosser sort of Untruths.

And we need not wonder that you would offer a false reason for a false thing;
our Faith and the Faith of all the Reformed Churches having been already proved
to be Catholic; and therefore your utterly impossible to prove it to be a
Faith spread throughout the World, must be put up on the same account.

Nor is there ever a Member of the Church of England of any Learning that I
ever met with, or heard of, that either declined the Title of a [Reformed]
Catholic, or was not ready only to profess, but also to prove that by being a
Son of the Church of England he was a Member of a Catholic Church.

As to what you add about the other Adjunct in our (ours I say of the Church of
England, as well as yours at Rome) Creed, Apostolical, that you saw less reason
for their claim to that, and to give them their due, they were more modest than
much to insist upon it, etc. This Sentence is Brass every bit of it; for if you
mean the Church of England here, I am astonished to think you should have so
little Conscience, or so little Modesty to publish such a gross untruth in the
face of a Church, that is so far from not insisting on the Title of
Apostolical, that it denounces every person excommunicate that shall dare to
say the Church Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Church of England by
Law established under the Kings Majesty is not a TRUE and an APOSTOLICAL
CHURCH, teaching and maintaining the DOCTRINE of the APOSTLES, let him be
Excommunicated ^pso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop,
after his Repentance and public Revocation of this his WICKED ERROR. Can. 3.
of the Synod in 1603.
of England is not an Apostolical Church, and calls such an affirmation an
impious Error. But if you are resolved to carry things at this rate by
brazening us down, it is to no purpose to contend with you; I must needs tell
you that you might as well have published to the World that the Church of
England has no Creed in her public Service, nor believes a Trinity, nor has
any Bishops to preside ov^^, her, as this of her neither having nor pretending
to Apostolical Faith and Succession. If you include also the rest of the
Reformed Churches, you might easily know, that there is no thing they so much
insist upon as the proving their Faith and Practices to be purely Apostolical,
and therefore their Churches to be such; so that neither are they so modest as
not to insist on their being Apostolical; as to the want of Succession among
them that you object against 'em, and they do not deny; you your self have
furnished them with an answer to your Party from St. Ambrose's words, Non
habent Petri haereditatem, qui Petri Fidem non habent. de Poenit. l. 1. c. 6.
that they enjoy not the inheritance [or Succession] of Peter, who have not the
Faith of Peter.

But here you have a mind to make the Church of England to be of your opinion,
that is, that the foreign Reformed Churches have no true Ministers, because
those that come out of France with the Title of Ministers, are not allowed to
exercise their Ministry, before they receive the Orders of the Church of
England, page 19.
etc. It is true, they are not allowed to have a Cure of Souls here without the
taking of Episcopal Orders, because it is expressly provided by Act of
Parliament among us, that no one shall have such a Cure of Souls without
Episcopal Orders, which Act you know was fully designed against our home
Dissenters, who had opportunities of Episcopal Orders at home; not against
them, who could not have them at home, with whom also we had nothing to do: But
since no exception was made in the Act for them, the Church cannot dispense
with an Act of Parliament in their favor: However that she allows theirs to be
true though imperfect Churches, is hence plain, because her Members in their
Travels communicate with those Churches; which thing she would never permit,
had they no Ministry; it was the Practice of our Exiles in France during the
long Rebellion; and Dr. R. Watson has lately put forth the most Learned and
most Religious Bishop Cousin (who was one of those noble exiled Confessors) his
Defense of their communicating there with Geneva rather than Rome. So that your
Argument fails you also here.

CHAP. XV. More of his foul Aspersions on the Church of England exposed and
confuted.
YOU are next resolved to have a little fling at the Church of England about
her Orders, which you say, page 19.
they [of that Church] very much endeavor to prove, and fain would have
confessed to be [received from] undoubted Bishops of the Church of Rome: But here
your heart failed you, and this is all you have to say against our Orders,
which is nothing at all, since we are much abler, and as ready to prove the
Legitimacy of our Orders, as you can those of your Pope himself: this is to
bark, when you dare not come near to fasten, but if you have a mind to show
your parts upon this subject, do but undertake and answer Archbishop Bramhals
Confutation of the Nags-head Ordination, etc. and I Will do, as I hear you have,
renounce my Orders. But Alas Sir I might as well put you upon carrying
Westminster Abbey to Putney, as upon the Answering that Unanswerable Book.

After the civil hint that the Church of England has no true Orders, you are
for making her amends, out of Reverence to her, by proving that she is a very
Nonsensical foolish Church, which you attempt by two small (you have a kindness
still for her, or else we might have had four, perhaps ten great) Observations.

Your first is, That this reduces the Catholic Church into a narrow corner of
the World -- Toto divisos orb Britannos, 1 Obs. page 19.
and as small a handful in that narrow Corner, etc.

But pray Mr. Sclater how are we got hither? What is this, This, that reduces
the Catholic Church, etc. Has the Church of England denied the foreign
Reformed Churches to be true Churches? Pray show us where? But suppose she had,
this will not prove that the Catholic Church is reduced into this narrow
Corner of the World, except you show, that she has also denied the Church of
Rome, and those Churches that submit to her to be true Churches. Nor this
neither will not confirm your Observation, supposing the Church of England had
rejected both the foreign Reformed, and Unreformed Churches out of the
Catholic Church; since you have surely heard of such a Church, as the Large
Greek Church under the Four Patriarchs, of the Russian Church, of the vast
Ethiopian Church, of the Armenian, and of the Nestorians to omit others. Have
you or can you prove that the Church of England has excluded all these also
from being Parts or Members of the Catholic Church? If you cannot, how does
she confine the Catholic Church here, or what contradiction is she guilty of,
that abhors the thought of such a thing as you would fasten upon her.

I cannot refrain showing a just resentment here, and therefore must tell you,
that this your Observation is the most disingenuous, and the most foolish that
I ever met with in my Life, and that I could never have suspected that any Man
that had common sense, and pretended to Conscience, could have been guilty of
so foul a thing, had I not met with it in this Book.

And just such stuff as this is the Remark in this Observation, upon our
Church, that she is pleased in order to avoid the Word Catholic, to call it an
Universal Church, etc. Who would expect that a Man that has been a Minister in
our Church these Thirty Years, that has used our Service perchance a Thousand
times, should make such a strange Remark; has our Church (as you say she has)
in order to avoid the Word Catholic, struck it out of that Translation of the
Apostles Creed, which she appoints in her Liturgy? Has she struck it out, and
put in Universal in the Four places it used to occur in in the Creed of St.
Athanasius? Is it gone out of the Nicene Creed she appoints? Pray get some Body
to look those Three Creeds for you. A Man would believe you had not seen a
Common Prayer Book these Thirty Years, or pass a much severer Sentence upon
you. Does not the Church of England command its Daily Use in the General
Collect, which we daily put up for the good Estate of the Catholic Church? And
further she is so far from altering or endeavoring to avoid, as you most
falsely would observe she does, the Word Catholic, See Bishop Sparrows
Collection of Canons, etc.
that whereas in the Injunctions of King Edward the Sixth, 1547. the Form of
bidding the Common Prayers [before Sermon] begun thus; You shall Pray for the
whole Congregation of Christ's Church, and, etc. in those of Queen Elizabeth,
1559, and in the 55th of the Canons Ecclesiastical of the Synod under King
James the First, 1604. the Word Catholic is put in, and every Minister is
commanded to begin his bidding of Prayer in these very words, Ye shall Pray for
Christ's Holy Catholic Church, etc. Nay you your self used the term Catholic
(while you continued, and as a Member of our Church) on last Palm Sunday at
Putney Church, or else you broke our Church Laws: So that I cannot now avoid
the asking you your self what you now think of this your Remark, and whether
you had not saved your self a disparagement, had you had the good fortune not
to have put it down.

You have a Second Remark much akin to the First, in which you profess you can
no more tell [how she can be the Catholic Church] than she is able to find her
self in the innumerable huddle of ten times Ten more Dissenters, Dissemblers,
and Indifferents, page 19.
than her number is able to make, etc. How you come to know the number of those
that hold Communion with the Church of England to be so very small, is matter
of wonder to me; but if I should say that your Calculation is most intolerably
false, I am sure you cannot disprove me, since I am certain I have truth and
the common Judgment of all unprejudiced Men on my side, that Calculating the
numbers of the several Parishes through England, there are one with another Ten
(I may I believe safely say Twenty) times more that hold Communion with the
Church of England than dissent from it: As for Dissemblers and Indifferents how
you come to know Men's Hearts so well is owing more to your new than old
Religion, which would have taught you more Prudence about such things.

After you have come off so wretchedly with your first Observation, no Body
will expect wonders from your second, which is, 2 Obs. page 20.
That you should have had the better Opinion of this handful (as you
ridiculously call the Church of England) if their Faith had been conformable to
the Faith of those Bishops from whom their Bishops had their Mission, etc.

That our Bishops have their Mission from Rome, is what we utterly deny, that
they were, some of 'em, in the beginning of the most necessary Reformation
ordained by those that held with the Church of Rome in her corrupt Faith and
Practices is what we do not deny. This however we say cannot prejudice our
Reformation, since if there were Errors fit to be thrown out of our Church,
you your self (I am sure your Learned Men) will grant that no Ordination can
prejudice or hinder such a Rejection of Errors. That there were such Errors
crept in which ought to be cast out, and were at our Reformation, is what our
Churchmen a Hundred times over have invincibly proved.

As to the Rule you bring from St. Ambrose that they enjoy not the Inheritance
of Peter, page 20.
who receive not the Faith of Peter, we are very ready to join issue with you,
or any of your Church upon it, and I question not before you and I part on this
subject, to ruin the Papal and Roman Succession by your own Rule, to wit, by
proving that they have receded from the Faith of Peter and the whole Primitive
Church.

We readily own that a true and Apostolical Mission, page 20.
Commission and Ordination are considerable particulars, and are as ready any
time to assert that our Church has them, and to prove it against you at any
time, if you have a mind to undertake this point against her.

CHAP. XVI. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Eucharist put
down. Mr. Scl. 's Reasons from Scripture for Transubstantiation answered.
HAving traced you hitherto, and found all your Attempts vain, and your Reasons
to no purpose, which you took so much pains to scrape together, to have proved
that our Savior Christ left his Catholic Church in a Monarchical State under
a Particular Vicegerent, and that that Vicegerent was the Bishop of Rome, and
his Church the Catholic Church. And having shown all your Attacks against, and
Remarks upon the Church of England to be very vain, extremely abusive, and
extravagantly ridiculous; I have now only your last, your great Reason to
examine, wherein you make an effort to prove, that her Faith concerning the
Eucharist is contrary to that of the Catholic Church.

If you could have proved this, I must confess your forsaking our Communion
would have been much more reasonable: and therefore I question not, but that as
you have mustered up abundance of Authorities, so you have done all you can to
make them speak and declare against us: but to how little purpose you have made
all this noise and ado about this point also is what I shall quickly see.

Before I enter on your particular proofs, I have a fresh complaint to make,
that you have not used herein that Ingenuity, that would have become a Scholar;
one might very rationally have expected that as your Intentions were to prove
against the Church of England, that her Faith was as to the Eucharist false and
corrupt, so you would have set down what that her Faith is. This would have
looked like fair and ingenuous dealing, first to have put down her Faith about
the Eucharist, and then to have shown, how contrary it was to Scripture, and to
the unanimous Consent of Antiquity. If you reply to this my Complaint, that her
Faith is so well known that you needed not put it down together, but that you
have occasionally done it up and down these Authorities; I must tell you that
by the account you give of it occasionally, one would be persuaded that it is
far from being so well known: I am sure that slender account, or rather hints
that you so often intersperse about it, are utterly false and very foolish: so
that if any one should take an account of our Churches Faith from you, and whom
can they better take it from than one that was so lately a Minister among us,
they must believe that we hold the Eucharist to be mere figures, mere
representations, and bare signs; for that is the most you allow us to make of
it that I can meet with in your Book; all which how far it is from Truth I
shall quickly show you.

Well then, since you had not the Ingenuity to put down an Account of the
Church of England's Faith about the Eucharist, I must, that so I may the better
examine the Proofs you bring, and any one may compare the Authorities you
quote, and our Faith together, and thereby more impartially judge, and more
readily discover, whether Antiquity fairly laid down speak for, or against us.

Concerning this Sacrament the Church of England in her 28th Article of
Religion delivers her Opinion thus, The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign
of the love that Christians ought to have among themselves one to another; but
rather it is a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to
such as rightly, worthily, and with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we
break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing is
a partaking of the Blood of Christ. After which having declared her self
against Transubstantiation as repugnant to plain Scripture, and to the nature
of a Sacrament, and [against any Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh
and Blood in the Declaration about kneeling at the end of our Communion-Service
in our Liturgy,] she goes on in this Article to declare that The Body of Christ
is given, taken and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual
manner: and that the Mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in
the Supper, is Faith; which last expressions exclude the wicked from partaking
of Christ's Body, and allow them barely the Sign, or outward part of the
Eucharist.

In the Public Catechism in the Liturgy, having taught her Catechumens that
there are two things in each of the Sacraments, the outward Sign, and the
inward spiritual Grace, she teaches them to answer that the outward part of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is Bread and Wine, and that the inward part or
thing signified, is the Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed
taken and received by the Faithful in the Lord's Supper.

These passages are sufficient to show that our Church holds a real, but not
carnal, a Spiritual and Heavenly but not Corporal, Participation of Christ's
Body and Blood, which though locally and naturally in Heaven, is yet after a
Mystical and Supernatural way communicated to the Faithful not by the mouth of
the Body, but by that of Faith.

Thus much for her Sentiment concerning this Sacrament, page 20.
now I must try your Reasons against it. You tell us that you had been a long
time greatly concerned for the Interpretation of but five small words of our
Savior, etc. The result of your concern I suppose was that those five words (I
doubt we shall find more than five, or double five concerned in this business)
are to be taken in a literal sense; and that which you offer for proof of it is
this. First, Because this Sacrament was his last Will and Testament, which
ought not to be worded obscurely or doubtfully to prevent quarrels and
divisions. Secondly, Because this Will is repeated by so many of his Apostles
without the least variation or caution against the literal sense. Thirdly,
Because it was an Oath or Sacrament, a Testament, a Precept, an Article of
Faith, or a Position to continue in the Church for ever, the true
Interpretation whereof, if Catholic Tradition have not given us, it is likely
it will never be agreed on.

These are the strength of what you say, first of which I answer that this Will
was neither worded obscurely, or of doubtful interpretation; that there are
Divisions about them is not owing to the words, but to the perverse humors of
some Men, whose quarrels no plainness is able to prevent. second I say, that it
is utterly false that our Savior's Will, or the Institution of this Sacrament
was repeated by so many of his Apostles (allowing Mark and Luke the name of
Apostles, though you know it is very unusual) without the least variation: to
convince you of which, do but look upon this Parallel Account that I here send
you out of them, and then consider what reason you had, or with what face you
could affirm as you do.

St. Matthew. c. 26.26, etc. -- And said, take eat, This is my Body, -- drink you
all of this, for This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many
for the Remission of Sins. St. Luke 22.19, etc. -- saying, This is my Body,
which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me: -- saying, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you.
St. Mark 14.22, etc. -- And said, take eat, This is my Body, -- and they all
drank of it, and he said unto them, This is my Blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc. -- and said, take, eat,
This is my Body, which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. --
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, This do ye, as often as you
drink it in remembrance of me.

For the other part of your second Argument, that the Apostles put down no
caution against the literal sense, the reason is evident enough, because there
was no need of it, since the Words neither then, nor now can be taken in a
literal sense, as I shall quickly show you; and since nothing was more common
to the Jewish Mode of speaking, than to give the name of the thing it self to
that which is the sign of it: As is most plain from the Paschal Lamb its being
so Deuteron. 16.2, 5, 6. Matthew. 26.17. Luke 22.7, 11.
often in both Testaments called the Passover, whereof all know it was but the
sign; from Genesis 17.13.
Circumcision its being called the Covenant, when it was but the sign of it:
nay nothing is more common among us, than to say such an one lives at the Lion,
the Bear, the Ship, the Bible, which yet any one, that talks with us, knows
that we mean bearely the signs of them, without any Caution given, or requisite
against taking us in a literal sense.

3. Your third Argument I do not well understand, since an Oath, a Precept, an
Article of Faith, and a Position are very odd terms to express this Sacrament
by: and it is the first time I ever heard it called, or knew it to be an
Article of Faith, having ever before thought it to be a divine Rite or Practice
that was by Christ's Command to continue ever in the Church: but to pass over
such trifles; We do affirm, that Catholic Tradition has given us the true
Interpretation of these words, which is, that they are to be taken in a
Figurative sense, and that by Body here is meant -- hoc est Corpus meum
dicendo, id est Figura Corporis mei. Tertull. c. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Figura, as Tertullian, Signum, as St. Non dubitavit dicere, Hoc est Corpus
meum, cum Signum daret Corporis sui. D. August. contr. Adamant. c. 12. Edit.
Basil. 1569.
Augustine, and many more acquaint us, as we shall by and by prove. In the mean
time I must prove that these words, This is my Body, cannot be taken in a
literal sense; which our Enemies themselves of your Party will grant me, if I
prove that the THIS mentioned here is Bread.

That it was is thus cleared, That which our Savior took into his hands (when
he was about the Institution) was Bread; that which he blessed was the same
thing that he had taken into his hands; that which he brake was the same thing
that he had blessed; that which he gave them when he said it was his Body, was
that which he had broken; But that which he broke, which he blessed, which he
took into his hands was Bread: therefore it was Bread, which he gave his
Disciples, and by THIS is meant This Bread.

This Induction is so fair and so clear, that I am sure you cannot evade it:
but farther,

If by the This here is not meant the Bread, pray let us know what it was then
exclusive to Bread, and which is more; how the Bread could be by the words,
This is my Body, converted into the Body of Christ, if the Bread was not
mentioned here, nor meant by the word This.

This matter and Argument is so demonstrative, that I cannot but stand amazed
that men who pretend to Reason can refuse it; I could urge this Argument much
farther, but will content my self with these few Remarks. First, That though our
Savior did not say plainly, This Bread is my Body, yet he said according to
St. Luke and St. Paul, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25.
This CUP is the New Testament in my Blood; which passage does fully determine,
that the Bread was as much meant in the This is my Body, as the Cup was in the
This is my Blood, ^atth. 26.28. ^ark 14.^4.
in St. Matthew and St. Mark. Secondly, That our Savior himself calls the Wine
after he had consecrated it, the Fruit of the Vine, Matthew. 26.29. and St. Paul
does not less than three times call the Bread after Consecration 1 Cor. 11.26,
27, 28.
Bread; which places are evidence enough, that our Savior neither destroyed
the Substances of the Elements, nor that St. Paul, or any of the Faithful ever
believed that he had.

Places I could bring enough out of the Fathers to confirm that by This they
understood this Bread, but must not to avoid being tedious, one however out of
your Fathers I cannot omit, which as it proves what I say, so it does prove you
to be not only a very excellent Translatour, but a very honest sincere Man. It
is from your Rupertus Abbas Tuitiensis (who lived in the twelfth Century) whose
words are these as you cite them, Hoc [inquit] id est hic Panis est Corpus
meum, sive Caro mea, which words you thus translate, page 81.
This (says he) is that, This is my Body, this is my Flesh. A Translation so
abominably false, and so intolerably ridiculous, that when I was at School, I
would have disdained to have been guilty of such pitiful stuff: look at it
again Mr. Sclater, fetch down your Dictionary, and try again at it, and see
whether you that translate but at this rate, be fit to set up for a
Book-writer, and a Manager of Controversies, and a Balancer of the Merits of
the two Churches. I am ashamed that any Man our Church should either have so
little brains or so little honesty: but to let your Translation alone, Rupertus
does confirm my reason for the determining This to mean This Bread, when he
says, This [ says our Saviour] that is, This Bread is my Body or my Flesh.

CHAP. XVII. His false Slander of our Church, and his foolish Observation about
Judas shown.
I Must next consider what you have of Argument in your Preface, where you
would have us believe that the sixth Chapter of St. John's Gospel is to be
taken in a literal sense; but since you were not at leisure to offer any Proof
for it, I need spend no time to answer: one thing I must examine there, and
that is the danger you said you must live and die in, under the denial, or but
doubting of so great a Truth, Pref.
in Communion with those that said, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat?
And does our Church say so, that our Savior cannot give us his Flesh to eat?
How is it then, that in the Prayer [We do not presume, etc. she orders her
Communicants to pray to our Gracious Lord to grant to them, so to eat the Flesh
of his dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood, that their sinful Bodies
may be made clean by his Body, and their Souls washed through his most precious
Blood, etc. That in the Prayer of Consecration the same Petition is put up, to
omit any more places?

This, Sir, is very provoking, and highly unjust, that a Man, who has
perchance a hundred times used these very Prayers, who did last Palm Sunday use
them, read them when he administered the Eucharist to the Parishioners of
Putney, should in the face of the Sun, in our own Nation, in our own Language
publish so gross and Untruth, and affix so false a Scandal upon our Church as
to say, she affirms our Savior cannot give us his Flesh to eat. If these and
such be the Fruits of your Conversion, sit anima mea cum Philosophis rather
than with such Christians.

Do not think to bring off your self with saying that our Church denies that
any one can eat the Flesh of Christ in that sense which those people meant it
that spoke these words: that will not do your business, since that Church
whereof you now are, for all its belief of Transubstantiation, abhors the
Capernaitical sense of these words as much as we, and are ready to say with us
that our Savior cannot, and does not give us his Flesh to eat in that carnal,
sensual, abominable manner that these Capernaites talked of.

Your next Observation in your Preface that Judas was one of the Disciples that
went back and walked no more with our Savior, is I must confess a rarity,
which has escaped, I believe, all our Commentatours: but will your pretty (and
spiteful) Observation hold? Matthew. 26.23, 25.
how is it then that we meet with Judas in our Savior's dish the very night
before he was Crucified? I know no other fetch that you can have to save your
ingenious Observation besides that of a Gentleman, who in a dispute holding
that Abraham was justified by Faith, and being pressed by the Opponent with
that of St. James that Abraham was justified by Works, saved his bacon by
saying that there were perhaps two Abraham's: and so you may gravely say, that
there were two Judas Iscariots.

CHAP. XVIII. His Authorities from Galatinus, and the Spurious Liturgies for
Transubstantiation rejected, and the reason of it. His railing and Absurdities
about these and other Spurious Pieces examined and exposed.
NOW we are come to your main Battle, where, like as the Turks are said to have
had a sort of Soldiers called, as I remember, Asaphi, whom they set in the
front of their Battle to dull and evigorate their enemies by their cutting down
of these dull Souls, so you have placed Galatinus and his Rabbis in your front
to hinder your Adversaries falling with too much stomach upon your main Body.
You saw it necessary however in your Preface to bespeak your Reader in favor
of Galatinus, Preface
that he was always accounted a very learned Man. You had done well to have
quoted some people on your side here, because your bare word will not pass with
me, nor with any one else, that will take the pains to read our two papers; I
am sure he showed neither Learning nor Honesty in those passages you quote from
him, See Dr. Cave's Chartophylax in Galatino. p. 336.
since he stole them from Porchetus Salvaticus without owning in the least
whence he had them: and for the Passages and Rabbis themselves, it is the
Opinion of Learned Men, that there were neither such Rabbis, nor such Works of
theirs as to these things, but that they are the Pious Frauds of Porchetus and
others: So that I need not trouble my self, but set aside this forged stuff;
your calling them Prophetic, page 21.
and abusing the place of St. John of the Spirits blowing where it lists,
etc. would in any other sort of People have been called Enthusiasm, and
downright Fanaticism.

And truly you put in as fair for a touch of the latter as your veriest Enemy
could desire, when instead of Argument you vent your Anger, and instead of
reasoning fall into downright railing against the Impious Ambition, and
unlimitted appetite of rule of the Private Spirit, which would fain soar above
the Heavens, and make it self Lord even of the Writings of God also. Her
private Glosses, imperious Sentiments, and contradictory Interpretations, like
the Victorious Rabble of the Fishermen of Naples, riding in Triumph, and
trampling under their feet Ecclesiastical Traditions, Decrees, and
Constitutions, Ancient Fathers, Ancient Liturgies, the whole Church of Christ,
etc.

But pray, Sir, if your Catholic fit be over, who is it that has or own this
Private Spirit you have been venting so much Spleen against? If you designed it
for a Character of the Church of England, which I believe you did; I am obliged
to tell you that it is a most impudent, and a most false Slander. Do but look
into that Canon of our Church, which you your self quoted, See the Canon it
self, and the Remarks above. p. 2.
and those little Remarks I made upon it, do but peruse again, what I said
above, as to our Church tying up, and obliging all her Members by her Articles
without leaving any of those things to a Private Spirit: and then look at what
your bitter Pen has here vented; if it do not make you eat up these Choleric
Nonsensical Words, and recant this Scandal upon an Apostolical Catholic
Church, I must then tell you that you left common Honesty, and the Church of
England at the same time.

But you go in your virulent strain, and tell the world that it is not likely;
those who upon their own bare Authority, and private Sentiments reject what
Authors they please -- should with much kindness lissen to the Ancient
Liturgies of Saint Peter, Saint James the Elder, Saint James the Younger, and
Saint Matthew, or value the Testimonies of Saint Dionysius Saint Paul's
Scholar, Saint Martialis [you should have added, Saint Dionysius his companion
into France,] Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Andreas, etc. they must suffer too.
The Servant is not better than his Master, etc. who would not guess by this
stinging farewell, that the Learned Men of the Church of England had served our
Savior as bad as they have done these Liturgies, Dennises, Martials,
Andreases, etc. and that they had denied him as well as them. I must tell you,
Mr. Sclater, that your Book is one of the most disingenuous, that I ever met
with, and that this passage deserves much severer Language than I shall bestow
upon it: but your Conclusion of it is just as true, (and not one jot more) as
that of our rejecting what Authors we please upon our own bare Authority and
private Sentiments: which I shall now examine, and go through the Authors, and
Liturgies you put down.

For the Liturgies then first you tell us you do not know why these Ancient
Liturgies should be rejected, etc. to which I can answer you as briefly, that I
do believe you that you do not; but if you would take a little Heretical
advice, I could direct you to those who might inform your Ignorance herein; but
I believe you are too angry at me before this time to take my advice. Against
the Liturgies I have these things to urge first, An Universal Silence
concerning them for many Ages of the Church, that of Saint James being the
first heard of, and that not till after the Fifth General Council, being first
mentioned in the Council held in Trullo, which was under Justinian Rhinotmetus
in the Sixth Century. Eusebius, than whom no one was more accurate and careful
to find out the Writings of those famous Persons whom he speaks of in his
History, among all the Catalogues he reckons up of the particular Apostles and
First Fathers, does not make the least mention of any of these Liturgies. All
Saint Jerome's care in his time could not furnish us with one Syllable about
such Liturgies; which reasons together with those taken from the Liturgies
themselves have satisfied all reasonable Men that there were no such genuine
things. No Body now (I mean to Learned Man) believes Saint Peter's Liturgy, the
demonstrative Arguments against which are many, it makes mention of Saint
Cyprian and Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, it prays for the Patriarch, and the
very Religious Emperors. I could furnish you with more intrinsic Arguments
against it and against the rest which labor under the same or worse
Absurdities out of your own (to omit our) Authors; the Nouvelle Bibliotheque
des Auteurs etc. des Liturgies Faussement Attribue es aux Apotres. p. 21, 22,
23, 24. A. Par^s. 1686.
present Learned and Judicious Sorbonist Du Pin has gathered enough against it
and the rest to prove them all suppositious: if you have a mind to show any
parts in this sort of Learning, I do not question, but the worthy Doctor, or
some one here in England for him, will give all due satisfaction in the point,
but alas, Sir, you seem to me; who judge of you by your Book, to be far from
able to meddle in such matters. One Liturgy of yours he has not encountered,
that of Saint James the Elder, not because he had nothing to object against it,
but because there was no such Liturgy to be objected against: but you may pass
for a Discoverer, and a bringer to light of Ancient Authors, and though you be
denied a place with Baluzius and such, yet no Body can deny you one with honest
Annius Viterbiensis.

After all in defense of your self, some Body wiser than some Body having I
suppose put it into your head, that these same Liturgies were not altogether
unquestionable, you gravely tell us in your Preface that it was not your
business to assert the Authors of them, etc. To which I answer, Preface.
that it is very well for you that it was not, since I am sure you are a very
unfit Man for any such thing; so that now you your self are content that these
Liturgy-Authors should suffer as well as their Master. You say next, page 28.
Preface.
that it is enough for your purpose, if they be allowed of that Antiquity, that
may give them some competent interest in Tradition; to be short with you, they
are not allowed any Authority, since not only ours, but your own Authors, Du
Pin for example, have proved them invinciblement, page 22.
(as he words it) supposititious and Novel, either of which is enough to ruin
them, and hinder their having their place in Tradition.

These things are sufficient to show that I need not say one word to your
Authorities for Transubstantiation out of these forged Liturgies: I will only
remark that you begin very unluckily with them, page 28.
and for your first, Blessed God, by whom we are vouchsafed to change the
immaculate Body of Christ, and his precious Blood, etc. I would fain know into
what the Priests were vouchsafed to change the Immaculate Body of Christ, and
his Blood. This is Transubstantiation with a vengeance. I thought your business
had been to prove, that the Bread is changed into the Body, the Wine into the
very Blood of Christ, but here for a leading Card, the Body and Blood of Christ
are changed into Bread and Wine, or something else. Well for a Man that keeps
to his Text I know no Body like you, and for supererogating no Body can come
near you. I question not but if you had a mind, you could very easily prove,
that the Transubstantiation is to be from Body to Bread, not from Bread into
Body; but this it is to be a Read Man, when a Man can with a wet Finger prove
either way; and I verily believe you can as easily do the one as the other, and
bring as many Fathers for the one as for the other: But farewell Liturgies, I
must now inquire about Saint Dionysius, against whom you say we have such
pitiful Objections. page 29.


Had you offered any reason for your calling them pitiful Objections, it would
have looked something like a Scholar, but he that catches you at that, may
have you for nothing: So that since you will not let me answer you, I must say
what I can for the Objections against Saint Dennis his being a Writer.

Eusebius is as much a Witness for us here, as against the Liturgies, though he
speaks of Saint Dennis the Areopagite, yet he gives not any hint of any
Writings of his, a thing he is always so careful about, when he speaks of any
of those venerable Ancients. Saint Hierome is as silent as to any Writings of
his: But that which is more than these two Negative Arguments, the first Men
that produced these supposititious Writings of Saint Dionysius were Heretics,
and the first time was in the sixth Century at a Conference held in the
Emperor Justinian's Palace betwixt the Catholics and the Severian Heretics
who produced them but as dubious or probable at most ( sicut suspicamini, Illa
en^m Testimonia quae vos dicitis Dionysii Areopagitae te, unde potestis
ostendire vera esse, sicut suspicamini: si enim ejus erant, non potuissent
latere Beatum Cyrillum quando and Beatus Athanasius, si pro certo scisset ejus
fuisse, ante omnia in Nicaeno concilio testimo^ia protulisset adversus
Arii-Blasphemias Collatio CP. in T. 4. Concili^r. p. 176. Edit. Cossart.
as the Catholics told them) but were rejected by the Catholic Bishops upon
the very same reasons I have urged against them: as I urged that Eusebius would
have known of them, had there been any such Writings, so They urge that St.
Athanasius would have made use of them at Nice against Arius; as I urged that
St. Hierom would have mentioned them, so they urge that St. Cyril [of
Alexandria] would have known of them. But besides these sufficient reasons, the
Books themselves are the greatest Evidence of all, they being writ in a style
quite different from the Apostolical Times, and treating of matters after such
a different manner, and of things unknown to those times: if you desire to see
these things proved and instanced in, do but look into one of your own Writers
the Learned Sorbonist I have mentioned above; Du Pin's N. Bibliotheque, p. 89,
90, 91, etc.
and then tell me, how you could call these Arguments pitiful Objections, which
are perfect Demonstrations of these Writings of St. Dionysius their being
forged, so that we must set St. Denis aside, and call in his Companion St.
Martial.

But before we try him, I would fain know what you mentioned him for, you make
no use of him or his Epistles in your Book: this is such a strange piece of
hardiness of you, that I cannot but wonder at it; Methinks you had business
enough on your hands to prove the Genuineness of your other Authors and
Liturgies, and needed not to have brought in him by head and shoulders hither,
whom I will soon dispatch; now he is here, and tell you that there was no such
Man in those Times, and therefore no Epistles of his. Nouvelle Bibliotheque,
etc. p. 496.
Du Pin has put the true Martial [if there ever were really such a Person] in
the third Century, but for the Epistles (which In Martiali Lemovicensi ap. Lib.
de scriptor. E.
Bellarmine had rejected at spurious long ago) he says, that no body doubts
their being supposititious, which is a great mistake in this Learned Man, since
you, Mr. Sclater, believe the contrary concerning them. And truly I know not
how to bring the honest Doctor off, unless his meaning was, that no body that
had any learning or sense did, as I verily believe he meant, so that you may,
if you will, tell him, as the late Jerusalem Synod have in effect the famous
Monsieur Claude, that they are not ignorant and unlearned.

Having dispatched St. Martial, St. Clemens Romanus is next put up, whose
genuine famous Epistle to the Corinthians we do with all Antiquity admit and
admire; the doubtful fragment of the second Epistle with Hist. Eccles. l. 3.
c. 38. Edit. Vales.
Eusebius and Antiquity we cannot admit to the same honor the other enjoyes,
however we will not quarrel about it, since I see nothing out of it in Controversy
betwixt us: the Constitutions are the things in question among us, against the
genuineness of which (though you like your self offer not a syllable of Argument
here for them) I have this to say, that Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 38.
Eusebius rejects them in express terms as spurious, if they be the same work
that in his time went under the name of Doctrina Apostolorum, as the Opinion of
some is; but though these are not the same book, yet Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 38.
Eusebius does ex Consequenti condemn them, when he admits of nothing either as
genuine or probable besides the two Epistles. We have the same silence in St.
Hierom as to these Constitutions, and therefore an Argument from him against
them; Photii Biblioth. number. 1.12.
but without either of them, I think it is enough to say they are infected with
Arianism, to omit other faults, as Photius long since charged upon them, and
therefore cannot be the genuine work of Clemens Romanus.

S. Ignatius his seven genuine Epistles we receive with all readiness, so that
he does not suffer among us as well as his Master. But for your next Author
Andreas, I must confess I am mightily at a loss, I can hear no news of such an
Author any where, I have examined Eusebius and St. Hierom, our Excellent Dr.
Cave, your Bellarmine, and your learned Sorbonist Du Pin, and cannot hear one
word of such an Author. However you quote him, and in your Margin over against
the Passage out of him I find Lib. de Passione D. by which I suppose you mean a
book of St. Andrews concerning the Passion of our Lord. P. 30.
I must now therefore question with you, whether there be really such a book as
you quote? I am sorry I am forced to tell you hereupon, that you have
discovered an intolerable and wretched Ignorance, and have exposed it more to
the World your own self, than any enemy could have done it for you. I must tell
you that you have most sillily imposed upon your self, and that I wonder that
your new Superiors ( who, I am assured, perused and examined your book) should
suffer the cheat upon you, and license you to put it upon the World. The Book
you quote is the Passion of St. Andrew himself, of which I hope I need not any
Arguments to prove that himself was not the Author. Apud Sarium de vitis SS. ad
30 Novem. p. 619. Edit. Colon. 1575.
The book is said to have been writ by the Presbyters of Achaia present at his
Martyrdom. But that it is a spurious book I need not urge our own Men Charto
Phylo. Eccl. p. 5.
Dr. Cave, etc. only, but your own Du Pin, who (upon reasons able to destroy
the credit of it wholly) says that Nouvelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs
Ecclesiastiques, p. 48.
at least it ought to be considered as a doubtful writing, which according to
St. Hierom, one cannot make use of to prove any Article of Faith; as you have
made Transubstantiation to be. I have been the more particular about these
Liturgies and Authors to let you see how impertinent, and how unjust your
railing at our Church about these Books was, and to expose your gross ignorance
to your new Superiors, that they also may see (which perhaps they did not know
before) how unfit a man you were to meddle with this sort of learning, and how
wretchedly you have come off.

CHAP. XIX. The Authorities from Ignatius, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus for
Transubstantiation answered.
I come now to examine, as they come to hand, your several Authorities for
Transubstantiation: the Liturgies as spurious are already dispatched. The first
of your Authorities from Ignatius, (which you needed not, if you really did, go
to Theodoret for, since it is now common in Ignatius himself from the
Florentine Copy) that the Heretics [that denied Christ had a true Body]
abstained from the Eucharist, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be
the Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, P. 30.
etc. does you no service, because We of the Church of England who do not
believe any Transubstantiation, say with St. Ignatius, that the Sacrament is
the Body and Blood of Christ. However as we say that it is figuratively such,
so there is nothing here to determine that St. Ignatius meant otherwise than we
do, since his Argument is as strong (not to say stronger) in a figurative sense
against the Heretics; it invincibly proving (as Contr. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Tertullian does upon the very same account) that our Savior had a true Body,
since none but such could have a figurative Body, or Figure: a Figure of a
Figure or Phantome being perfect nonsense: so that St. Ignatius is no help to
prove a Transubstantiation, and your reasoning upon it ridiculous, since if the
Heretics had owned the Eucharist with Calvin or Zuinglius to have been the
sign or Figure of Christ's Body, P. 30.
they had quite ruined their own doctrine, and had allowed Christ to have had a
true Body, since none but such could have a Sign or Figure: but some Men are so
fond of saying something, that so it be but said, they matter not, whether it
be for, or against themselves, which this your reasoning really is. Your next
Authority from St. Denis, as spurious is to no purpose; P. 30.
nor your next upon the same account from your Andreas, who, methinks as an
Apostle, should have had the place of St. Denis, and both of them before St.
Ignatius; but you I suppose either found them in this order, or thought
Ignatius fittest to be put first, because he looked a little more to your
purpose than either of them: Though as to the latter of them, your Andreas, had
you but shown any ingenuity in what you cite from him, he would have proved
full as little to your purpose, but you cunningly slip over in this short
passage that which would have told you that the Sacrifice here spoken of could
be no other than a figurative and representative Sacrifice, since it is said to
be offered in altari crucis, upon the Altar of the Cross; which you wisely though
not over honestly leave out to make your Author speak something toward the
purpose we meet him here for. Your Note upon this Passage that truly eaten
excludes eating in sign only or Spirit does as much discover your Ignorance of
the Sense of the Genuine Fathers, as your Phrase in sign only does your
malice, who cannot but know that the Church you have forsaken never said so: to
say that he which eats both in Sign and Spirit, does not eat truly, is to give
the lie to a whole Tract of S. Tractatus 26 in Joann.
Austins, where among twenty other Confutations you may find that such Persons
as Moses, Aaron and Phineas, who pleased God, visibilem cibum spiritaliter
intellexerunt, spiritaliter esurierunt, spiritaliter gustaverunt ut
spiritaliter satiarentur; did spiritually understand the visible Food [the
Manna,] did spiritually hunger after and taste of it, that they might be
spiritually filled and satisfied: and that the true eating the Bread of Life so
as not to dye does belong Pertinent ad virtusem Sacramenti, non ad visibile
Sacramentum. Qui manducat intus non foris, qui manducat in cord, non qui
premit dente. August. Tract. 26. in Joan,
to the virtue of the Sacrament, and not to the visible Sacrament: and that the
true receiver is he who eats inwardly, not outwardly, who eats with the
heart, and not he who presses it with his teeth.

Justin Martyr you next cite, saying, P. 31.
It Is not common Bread or common Drink we take, how then? Why as the Word of
God, Jesus Christ our Savior, was made Flesh, so we are taught that our
Nourishment by Prayer, proceeding from him, being made the Eucharist, to be the
Flesh and Blood of the same incarnate Jesus, etc. This Translation I accuse not
only of falsehood, and of perverting the plain sense of St. Justin, but of
direct Nonsense: for first whereas St. Justin says, (...). S. Just. M. Apol.
2. p. 98. Edit. Morel. Paris. 1636.
We do not receive these things [the consecrated Bread and the consecrated Wine
mingled with Water] A S common Bread or common Drink, you make him say that
'iis not common Bread, or common Drink we take: which is directly contrary to
the true sense of his Words, which are so far from denying, that they evidently
suppose and prove them to be still Bread and Wine after Consecration, or else
they could not be received in a different manner from that at common Meals.
Again, whereas our Author goes on but as by the Word of God, Jesus Christ our
Savior being incarnate, had both Flesh and Blood for our Salvation, you
nonsensically translate him, as the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Savior, was
made Flesh, where you not only lame his sense and obscure it, but quite pervert
it, you making the Word of God to be our Savior himself, the second Person in
the Trinity, whereas Justin means by it the Power of the Holy Ghost, which
over-shadowed the Blessed Virgin. I will give you but another touch of your
nonsense, and that is when you translate, so we are taught that our nourishment
by prayer -- to be the flesh, instead of, is the flesh I hate so mean an
employment as to be thus taken up in ripping up your pitiful dealing, or else I
could expose you further from this very passage out of Justin; but I think this
enough to let you and your new Superiors see what wretched stuff we are like to
be put off with, and how vastly unfit you are to meddle about such things.

To leave then this miserable murdering of Justin, I come now to see what you
would have thence; suppose you had known, which you did not, what the Author
meant here. You argue our Savior was made Flesh, therefore the Eucharist is
Flesh, or Justin could not say they were so taught. I answer, That as our
Savior was not Transubstantiated when he took our flesh upon him, so no more
need was there that the Bread should be transubstantiated to become his
Sacramental Body and Blood. Nay, St. Justin directly supposes the contrary when
he makes the Eucharist to be Bread, though not received then as common Bread, and
proves it too, when he says Which words you suppress in your translation. Was
you afraid we should conclude from them that Just. Mart. did not think the
Accidents did subsist in the Eucharist without the Substance? But let that pass.
that by this consecrated nourishment [the Body and Blood of Christ] our
Bodies, our Flesh and Blood are nourished, which I am sure your learned men
will grant to be impious to say of the natural very Body and Blood of Christ,
and impossible if no substance but that be there. So that it is evident that by
the Body and Blood of Christ in this passage must be meant Christ his
Symbolical Body and Blood, or the Sign or Figure of his Natural Body and Blood,
the substance as well as accidents of the Elements remaining.

As to the reason you add, that Justin should have told the Emperor (if he
meant no more by it) that by the Flesh and Blood of Christ, he intended only
the Signs of them, since it was, he knew, objected to the Christians his
Brethren, that in the Mysteries of their Religion they did eat man's flesh: I do
retort it upon you, and challenge you to show, where they ever pleaded guilty,
or where they ever made any Apology for, or distinction about their eating our
Saviors Natural Flesh and Blood, though they abstained from the Blood of every
thing else, as any one that is but little conversant in the first Antiquity
knows they constantly pleaded against the so often objected dapes Thyesteas;
upon this point Nihil rationabilius, ut quia nos jam similitudinem mortis ejus
in Baptismo accepimus, similitudinem quoque carnis ejus sumamus, and
similitudine pretiosi sanguinis potemur: ita ut, and veritas non desit in
Sacramento, and ridiculum nullum fit Paganis, quod cruorem occisi hominis
bibamus. Aug. apud Great. de Consecr. Did. 2. Sect. utrum. p. 1958. Edit. Taur.
St. Austin, as quoted by Gratian, is so express both against your reason and
your opinion, that I cannot omit it here, he says, Nothing is more reasonable
than that as we have received the similitude of his, to wit Christ's death in
Baptism, so we should also receive the likeness of his Flesh, and drink the
likeness of his Precious Blood; that so neither may Truth be wanting in the
Sacrament, nor Pagans have an occasion of ridiculing us for drinking the Blood
of one that was slain. Which it seems Pagans would then have done; had the
Christians then talked of drinking literally Christ's Natural Blood: and the
Jews and Mahometans do now do, since some Christians took up an Opinion, and
talked of doing it in a literal sense, witness that severe Observation and
Reflection of Averroes upon them sufficiently known.

Your first place from St. Irenaeus is not exactly translated, eum panem in quo
gratiae actae sint, etc. is not barely that Bread in the Eucharist is the Body
of Christ; but that that Bread, which has been consecrated is the Body of his
Lord. This passage is so far from being for, that it is directly against you;
that Bread which has been consecrated is demonstration that he looked upon it,
as to the substance to be Bread still; here you were forced to show us a little
of your Legerdemain, or else I am sure this Chapter of Irenaeus had been secure
enough from your quoting it, there being that in the middle of this passage
(which you have slily left out) which is perfect demonstration against
Transubstantiation Quomodo autem rursus dicunt carnem in corruptionem devenire,
and non percipere vitam, quae a corpore Domini and sangaine alitur. Iren. l. 4.
c. 34.
while St. Irenaeus argues for the immortality of our bodies from their having
been nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ: and as much against you is your
next passage from him, and as well translated by you, for as that which is
Bread from the Earth, perceiving (very wise Bread truly this same was) the call
of God [or as I would say, being consecrated] now is not common Bread, but the
Eucharist, consisting of two things, one earthly (i. e. the accidents) and the
other Spiritual: so our bodies receiving the Eucharist are not now corruptible,
having the hope of the Resurrection. What can be more plain against
Transubstantiation than this place, which still supposes it to be Bread, when
it says that after Consecration it is not common Bread; had Irenaeus taught or
believed a Transubstantiation here, he must have said that after Consecration
it is not Bread at all, and not have talked of a terrestrial or corporeal thing
or part in the Eucharist, as well as a heavenly or spiritual: but you say this
earthly part is the accidents. I would fain know, what part of St. Irenaeus or
the Ancients you learned this from, I am sure you ought to be ashamed of
talking at this ridiculous rate; there is any Body scarce, but knows that
earthly and material or corporeal are Synonymous, but you however contrary to
all Reason, and all Philosophy, must be setting up material Accidents, and you
might as well have told us of incorporeal bodies, and corporeal nothings, as of
earthly Accidents: but such inconsistent ridiculous stuff will down it seems
with a man that believes Transubstantiation.

Your talk about imposing a new signification upon the Bread and Wine is
nothing to the purpose, p. 31.
since our Church makes the Elements not only to signify, but to communicate
to us the Body and Blood of Christ after a spiritual and heavenly manner, which
thing requires an Omnipotent Power for the instituting it for such an effect,
and enduing it with such a virtue or power.

CHAP. XX. His several Proofs from Tertullian answered, and his Falsification
of that Author exposed.
TErtullian your next Author you have abused worse than St. Justin, I must
profess that when I first took your Book into my hand, I did expect you would
have had the prudence to have let him and Theodoret alone: but it seems all the
Fathers either are for Transubstantiation, or you will make them so.

It is pleasant to see what shufling you make about your first quotation from
him, and how afraid you are of his, p. 32.
id est Figura Corporis mei, that you durst not translate it; and next how
sillily or rather falsely you english nisi veritatis esset Corpus, unless it had
been the truth. There needs nothing else to impeach your attempt of ignorance,
and a depraving Tertullian than the putting his own words together.

Corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est Corpus meum dicendo, id est Figura Corporis
mei: Figura enim non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus ceterum vacua res,
quod est Phantasma figuram capere non posset. Tert. c. Marcion. l. 4. c. 40.
Edit. Franck.
He made [speaking of our Saviour] that [Bread] his ^ody, when he said This is
my Body, that is the Figure of my Body: Now it could not have been the Figure,
unless there were a true Body [of Christ] since an empty thing as a Phantome
really is, can have no figure of it self. I appeal now to your own self as well
as to the world, whether any thing can be more direct against
Transubstantiation, than this passage put together, and fairly translated. Nor
can you make any thing out of his fecit. since he does not only sufficiently
explain himself here, but a very little lower, he asks Marcion deriding him,
Cur autem panem Corpus suum appellat, and non magis peponem, quem Marcion
cordis loco habuit? Non intelligens v^terem suisse islam figuram corporis
Christi dicentis per Jeremiam, etc. Idem codem loco.
how our Savior came to call Bread his Body, and not rather a Pompion? And
then tells him that Bread was the ancient Figure of our Saviors Body in that
passage of Jeremy chapter 11.19. according to the Version of the Septuagint.) So
that what you would infer from the quotation is altogether groundless: and your
next argument is worse that there is no such repugnancy between the Body of
Christ, and the Sign and Figure of his Body, for if it is the Body, it cannot
be the Figure; p. 32.
if it be the Figure only, it cannot be the Body. But some men can believe as
well as say any thing.

You next furnish us with a plain Declaration from Tertullian, p. 33.
that the Flesh is fed with the Body and Blood of Christ, etc. You ought to
have put down here, whether you quoted this place for, or against,
Transubstantiation: a man would suspect you had here turned the Tables, since
this place is perfect Demonstration against Transubstantiation, while it makes
our bodies to be fed with Christ's Body, to affirm which of his Natural Body is
impious among your own learned men as well as us: but of this distinctly before
we part.

The bare Translation of the first passage you quoted, and I translated
clearly, from Tertullian is answer enough to all your silly borrowed Criticism
about Representation. p. 33.
I come now to your last place from him, which I accuse of a direct
falsification of the Text, as well as of perverting the sense of our Author.
This you and your new Superiors may think a heavy charge, and that I ought to
have examined well, before I laid it upon you: to tell you and the world the
truth, I did; for I did not rely only on my own notes, nor on the Franeker
Edition of Junius of 1597. out of which I had them, and which I again consulted
on this occasion, but I examined these several Editions, that of Rhenanus at
Basil 1528. which was the second Edition of Tertullian, whom ^henanus printed
the first time there, in 1521. I cannot find by his notes that this his second
differed at all in this place in controversy from his first Edition; at the
Margin of this Edition over against the passage Non sciet Maritus, etc. which
you quote, he puts Eucharistia in Capital Letters, and in his Notes guesses
that dicitur has been mistook for benedicitur. I examined also another Edition
of Rhenanus at Basil 1539. a third of his at Paris 1545. that of Pamelius with
Latinius and Mercer at Cologne 1617. that of de La Bar at Paris 1580. that of
de La Cerda at Paris 1624. that best Edition of Rigaltius at Paris 1634. the
Annotationes Diversorum upon Tertullian, wherein this passage is so often
quoted and commented upon, printed at Paris 1635. that of F. George the
Capuchin at Paris 1646, -- 48, -- 50. and lastly that in C. Moreau's Tertull.
Omniloquium Alphabet. at Paris 1657. So that I suppose I may after an exact and
troublesome search of these eleven several Editions, be allowed to tell you,
that you have falsified Tertullian by leaving Panem out of this short
quotation, which every one of these Editions has, to which Panem, the illum
does relate, and not to Christ: so that to confute you, I need but restore
Tertullian to himself, whom you make to say, Non sciet Maritus quid secreto
ante omnem cibum gustes? and si sciverit PANEM, non illum credit esse qui
dicitur. Tertull. ad Uxorem. l. 2. c. 5. Edit. Franck.
Thy Husband shall not know what thou do taste before all other meats; (which
Translation I allow, though some translate it interrogatively) and if he shall
know, he does not believe it to be Him, whom it is said to be; whereas his own
words are, and though he shall know it to be BREAD, he does not believe it to be
THAT Bread, which it is said to be, to wit Eucharistical or Blessed Bread.

Let any one compare our two Translations with Tertullian's own words, and then
let him freely give sentence betwixt us.

CHAP. XXI. The Proofs from Clemens Alex. Origin, Hilary, Gregory Naz. Basil
and Macarius answered.
YOur next passage out of Clemens Alexandrinus is not a jot to your purpose. p.
33.
It were easy for me to bring places out of him directly contrary to
Transubstantiation, but I have been forced to be so long in exposing and
confuting your Authorities hitherto, that I must omit them, and shorten my
answers as much as I can, having already ruined your best strength.

The several passages out of Origin can do you no more service than those
already answered, and are as well translated by you. You have discovered a
gross ignorance in the translation of the first Passage from him. What Nonsense
do you make with translating in Specie, first in kind then in form; when as it
is plain enough that by in Specie is meant clearly in opposition to the
darkness of the legal Types. As to the Christian now eating the Flesh, and
drinking the Blood of him, who said his Flesh was truly Meat, and his Blood
Drink indeed, etc. (Which is the strength of your three first Proofs;) had you
been conversant in Origens Writings, had you but read his Homilies on the Book
next before this out of which you quote, I mean on Leviticus, you might have
been sufficiently fore-armed against taking these Expressions in a literal
sense; while Origin would have told you, that there is a letter [or literal
Expressions] in the Gospel, which kills him, (look to your self Mr. Sclater)
who does not understand spiritually the things it speaks, Est and in novo
Testamento litera, quae occidat eum, qui non spiritaliter quae dicuntur
intelligit. Si enim secundum literam sequaris, hoc ipsum quod dictum est, nisi
manducaveritis Carnem meam, and biberitis Sanguinem meum, occidit haec litera.
Orig. Hom. 7. in L^vit. Basil. 1571.
and he instances in this very thing: for if (says he) one takes in a literal
sense the Expressions of eating his Flesh, and drinking Christ's Blood, this
letter [or literal sense] will kill: which is the sense of the Great St.
Athanasus, after him, upon this Passage in the sixth of St. John.

Your last place from him out of his eighth Book against C^lsus, p. 34.
has not a syllable for your Transubstantiation, all it says is, that the
Bread which had been offered, was become or made by Consecration (...), a
sacred Body, that has the virtue to sanctify those that do with Faith receive
it. Which is what we can and do subscribe to who utterly reject
Transubstantiation.

Your next Author is St. Cyprian, p. 34, 35.
but since all Scholars are satisfied the Piece you quote is none of his, and
the Learned Sorbonist Du Pin gives this short but very sharp Character of it,
Nouvelle Bibliotheque de Auteurs, etc. p. 472.
that it is a ridiculous Piece, and full of Impertinences; we can neither
permit it a place here nor any where else: and as short I must be with you
about your next Authority of the Semi-Arian Eus^bius Emissenus, p. 37.
since those Homilies under his name are rejected as supposititious.

St. Hilary is your next Author, p. 38.
whose words a man would believe were really thus connected, and in the same
order he finds them set down by you, but I do assure every one that you are not
a man to be trusted in these things. The passage ought to be divided into three
distinct parts, with a mark of separation betwixt them, and which is more, the
first part to be placed last, and the middle first, and the third in the
middle. Certainly, Mr. Sclater, you never saw St. Hilary in your life, or you
would never have been guilty of such wretched dealing, if your Skill in the
Fathers lies in playing such tricks with them, I do assure you I will never
quote after you. But for the words themselves in their true order; though they
seem to take our Savior's words, my flesh is meat indeed in a strict sense
(against the Doctrine of the much Antienter Writers, Tertullian, Origin and
Athanasius (above quoted) who expressly reject the literal sense as dangerous
and ridiculous, and therefore so may we) yet do not prove any
Transubstantiation; since our Savior may be received in St. Hilary's sense
cibo Dominico, in the Eucharist (not as you very homely translate it, in our
Lord's meat) with the Sacramental Bread, by an Union with it, which The Union
of the most Holy Body, and precious Blood of our Lord-Jesus Christ, are the
words of the Priest, when he breaks the Bread, Page 28.
your own quotation out of your St. James's Liturgy would teach, without any
Annihilation of the substance of the Bread, which I believe St. Hilary never so
much as dreamed of, and therefore could be no Patron of your Novel Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

Gregory Nazianzen's first passage says no more than our Church, p. 38.
which calls the Sacred Elements the Body and Blood of Christ, and directs In
the Prayer in our Communion Service, (We do not presume, etc.
her Communicants to pray that they may worthily eat the Flesh and drink the
Blood of Christ. As to your Observation, that St. Gregory's advice had been
needless, if we did only eat the flesh of Christ in sign and figure: had you
been skillful, (as I suppose you are willing enough to be thought) in his
Writings, you might have found, as ridiculous as you think it, St. Gregory
himself calling the Blessed Bread and Wine, the Antitypes or figures of the
Body and Blood of Christ, in that very Oration you your self next quote, and
within a dozen lines of that very place you produce thence; where he tells us
that his Sister Gorgonia, in a great sickness mingled her tears with the
Antitypes or Symbols of our Savior's precious Body and Blood, Et si quid
uspiam Antityporum pretiosi corporis aut sangulnis manus recondiderat, id
lac^ymis admiscuisset, o rem admirandam, statim liberatam se morbo sentit.
Greg. Naz. Orat. 11. in Laudem Gorgoniae, p. 187. Edit. Paris, 1630.
with as many of them as she had treasured up. I hope you do not believe that
she had as many Bodies of Christ, as she had in her hands parts of these
Antitypes, which I do assure you do mean nothing more than Signs or Figures.
This passage has not only confuted your first, but provided fully against the
second out of him, about his Sister Gorgonia her prostrating her self before
the Altar with Faith, p. 38.
and praying to him with great clamor (as you neatly translate it) who is
worshipped upon the Altar. Desperatis omnibus aliis auxiliis ad mortalium
omnium medicum confugit, atque intempesta nocte captata, cum morbus nonnihil
remisisset, ad Altar, etc. Idem cadem Oratione, p. 186.
Upon this you tell us gravely, that she prayed not to Bread and Wine, and I
tell you, that she prayed no more unto the Host, since neither our Bread and
Wine, nor your Host were then upon the Altar, for it was at Midnight that
Gorgonia went privately into the Church, when there was no Priest, nor Service,
nor Eucharist or Host to be worshipped, but she alone, as far as we can gather
from St. Gregory, prostrated before the Altar, at or upon which God is
worshipped. But some Men if they get a little thing by the end, that looks as
if it might do them a Service, quickly lay hold of it; and never consider the
connection it has in the Discourse from whence it is taken; if you had but read
this Oration you so readily quote, and had but considered it, it might have
saved you the making two silly remarks.

You quote next St. Basil's Book, De Baptismo, c. 2. whereas the St. Basil that
I use Printed at Paris has two Books de Baptismo; p. 39.
in the second of which under the third Question I find what you quote, but
cannot find that it is any thing to your purpose: we say with him that every
one ought to prepare for the worthy receiving this holy Sacrament, and that the
worthy Receiver is made Partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ. In his
Antiphone the Bread and Wine are called the Types or Figures of the Body and
Blood of Christ.

As far from helping to prove Transubstantiation are the two first passages
from Macarius; p. 39.
that he understood the eating the Flesh and drinking the Blood of Christ in
the Catholic, that is, in the spiritual sense, is past question evident from
his 27. Homily, (...). Macar. Homil. 27. page 164. Edit. Paris. 1621.
where among other things that the Saints before our Savior's time were
ignorant of, he reckons this, that in the Church should be offered Bread and
Wine, Antitypes or Symbols of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that
those which eat of this Visible Bread, should spiritually eat the Flesh of the
Lord. This passage is so convictive of it self, that it needs not help to
enforce it against all literal eating of Christ's Body and Blood, and against
Transubstantiation. I need say nothing to your last Testimony from him, nor
shall, only that your Translation of this short passage is very silly, and
very false too. Do you or your new Superiors look at it again, and then deny
it, if you can.

CHAP. XXII. Arguments for Transubstantiation from Gregory Nyssen and Cyril of
Jerusalem answered, and a ridiculous Mistake of Mr. Sclater's observed.
GRegory Nyssen's Testimonies are the next you do produce to prove a
Transubstantiation, p. 40.
and do indeed promise more in order to it, than any you have hitherto
produced, while they say that the sanctified Bread is changed into the Body of
the Word of God. However that Gregory Nyssen meant no change of the substance
of the Bread and Wine, or that they were annihilated, and the Body and Blood of
Christ substituted into their place, but merely a change in their Use, Office
and Virtue, is past all question evident, since in another place he illustrates
this change of the Elements of Bread and Wine by, and compares it to, that of
the Altar, which I hope you do not believe, Nam and Altar hocsanctum,
cuiadsistimus, lapis est natura communis -- sed quoniam Dei cultui consecratum
-- Altar immaculatum est -- Panis item, panis est initio communis: sed ubi eum
Mysterium sacrificaverit, Corpus Christi fit and dicitur. -- Eadem item Verbi
vis etiam Sacerdotem augustum and honorandum facit, novitate Benedictionis a
communitate Vulgi s^gregatum. -- cum nihil vel corpore vel forma mutatus --
ille sit, qui erat, invisibili quadam vi, ac gratia, invisibilem animam in
melius transformatam gerens. -- Ac simili rationum conseque^tia, etiam aqua,
cum nihil aliud sit quam aqua, superna Gratia benedicente ei, in eam, quae
mente percipitur, hominem renovat regenerationem. Greg. Nyss. in Baptismum
Christi Oration, p. 802, 803. Edit. Paris. 1615.
or any of your Party dare say, that upon its being dedicated to the Service of
God, it undergoes any change of substance, but merely a change of use, it being
now separated to God's Service, which before was of common use, and for the
most common Services He compares it to the change in a Priest, which is not of
the Substance of his Body when he is ordained, but of his Soul only by an
invisible Grace, which qualifies him for the particular office of a Priest. He
compares it to the change of Water in Baptism, which all the world will grant
is not in the substance, but in the virtue only, through the benediction of
the divine Grace.

I could bring his Comparison of the change of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist to that of Chrism, but these I have brought, I think, are more than
enough to prove that our Gregory Nyssen meant no other change of the Elements
than a change of Use, of Office, and of Virtue; and that if your people are
resolved that he shall mean a change of Substance, we shall have
Transubstantiations enough, then the Water in Baptism is no Water, though it
seem such to all Senses, but is transubstantiated into a divine Grace; and you
and I when we were ordained were really transubstantiated into the mere Office
of a Priest, and for all our eating and drinking are as mere Accidents as those
in the Eucharist: one thing I am puzzled at, and that is what the Stones of the
Altar are transubstanced into.

These, Sir, as ridiculous as they be, must be necessary Consequences of your
making our Author teach Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, and all the Arts
of your whole Party cannot avoid them; so that I suppose we have reason to deny
you Gregory Nyssen his being a Teacher, or Favourer of your Vpstart Doctrine I
should before parting examine your translating Gregory Nyss. but I am too much
in have to stay upon such wretched blundering, only one observation, I must
advertise the young Critics of, and that is, that (...) which in all other
authors, signifies put to death, in Greg. Nyss. according to the sage Mr.
Sclater signifies made immortal.

Cyril of Jerusalems Testimonies do promise at first view, p. 40, 41.
as much or more than the last from Gregory Nyssen, to prove all you intend
them for, to wit, a Transubstantiation, when they not only say with Gregory
Nyssen, that the Bread and Wine after Consecration are made the Body and Blood
of Christ; but which is further, that the Bread which is seen by us is not
Bread, although the taste perceive it to be Bread, but the Body of Christ. To
which I answer first, that St. Cyril is far from teaching Transubstantiation in
these places; since what he says first is not denied by our Church, that the
Bread and Wine are made by Consecration the Body and Blood of Christ, and are
no longer common Bread, and common Wine, which very expressions sufficiently
prove, them to be as to their Substance Bread and Wine still, though now hereby
distinguished from common Bread and Wine. And therefore upon this very ground
Cyril advises his Catechumens to consider the Elements consecrated, (...). Cyr.
Mist. Catech. 4. p. 237. Edit. Paris. 1640.
not as bare Bread and Wine (which certainly proves them to be so as to their
substance) though their Senses suggested to them, that they were nothing else
than bare Elements, but, as our Lord said they were, his Body and his Blood. So
that we hence give a good account of that other expression that seems the more
favorable to Transubstantiation, about the visible Bread being not Bread, but
the Body of Christ: which we are as ready now as Cyril was then, to say is not
Bread, bare Bread after consecration, but the Body of Christ, inasmuch as it is
now honored with the Title of the Body of Christ, since it is made by
Consecration the Instrument to make us Partakers of the Body of Christ, as St.
Paul says 1 Cor. 10.16. and after him Cyril himself in this Catechism advises
his Catechumens to receive with all assurance [the consecrated Elements] as the
Body and Blood of Christ, -- (...). etc. Idem eodem loco.
upon this very reason because under the Type or Figure of Bread is given [to
the worthy Receiver] the Body of Christ and under that of Wine, is given his
Blood.

This Passage you, (or rather Grodecius, for you do but translate him) have
endeavored to make speak for you: which is an easy thing to make any Authors
do, if you should serve them, as you have done him; for 1. you make him say,
Let us take the Body and Blood of Christ, whereas he has, (...), here, and
faith, let us take, to wit the consecrated Elements, AS the Body and Blood of
Christ (which is a trick you played St. Justin Martyr as well as Cyril:) and
then you from Grodecius translate (...) by species, a word unknown to the
Primitive Christians in the sense you Transubstantiatours use it in, witness
Non valebit Christi sermo ut Species mutet Elementorum p. 48. ex Arubrosio.
your own Quotations out of St. Ambrose, when as any one that knows but a
little Greek, could tell you it means a Figure.

But to rescue Cyril clearly out of your hands; had you but turned one leaf
backward, you might have read that, which would, if you had any ingenuity in
you, have hindered your bringing Cyril on the stage for a favourer or teacher of
Transubstantiation: there in his Mystigogical Catechism about Chrism, having
spoken of the use and vast benefit of it, he thus addresses his Auditors, but
take heed that thou do not think that [Chrism] to be bare Oil: (...), Cyr.
catechism. Mystag. 3. p. 235, Edit. Paris. 1640.
for as the Encharistical Bread after the Invocation [ and illapse] of the Holy
Spirit, is no longer ordinary Bread, but the Body of Christ: even so this holy
Oil is no longer bare or, as one may say, common Oil after the Invocation of
the Holy Spirit, but Charisma Christi the Gift or Grace of Christ: and a little
after he says, (...). Idem ^odem loco.
the Body is anointed with the Oil that is seen by us, but the Soul is
sanctified by the Holy and Quickening Spirit.

Here we meet with as high and as strange Expressions about the Chrism, as in
the next Cathechism about the Eucharistical Bread and Wine: as there the Bread
upon Consecration is said to be no longer common Bread; just so it is said here
about the Chrism that it is not common Oil after Consecration; as he talks
there of a (...), which you would have us to believe is no more than the bare
appearance of Bread, so here of a (...), which upon the same reason must be
only the appearance of Oil without any Substance. In a word, if St. Cyril
proves a Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine there, he as certainly proves
a Transubstantiation of the Chrism-Oyl here: if you say as all confess that he
does not prove this of the Oil, I must say upon equal grounds that he does no
more prove the other of the Bread and Wine; so that St. Cyril is not for your
purpose of proving Transubstantiation.

But before I pass to your next Author, I have a question to ask you, and that
is, why you put down the Text it self of Cyril here? whereas your English, if
it be your own, is word for word translated from Grodecius his Latin
Translation of St. Cyril: I appeal to your own Conscience, whether what I say
is not true; but since you may be too peevish to tell me, I will give an
instance or two, besides those already observed, where you have both equally
added to the Text of St. Cyril, or, grossly mistaken it. St. Cyril says (...)
[which two last words you have altered into (...),] this place you verbatim
from Aquam aliquando mutavit in vinum, quod est sanguini propinquum, in Cana
Galilaeae, sola voluntate: Grodec. Lat. Inter.
Grodecius translate thus, he sometimes changed Water into Wine, which is near
to blood in Cana of Galilee, by his only Will; whereas according to Grodecius
his Greek, there is not a Syllable of such an Expression, as, which is near to
blood, and according to yours, not a Syllable for, by his only Will; and yet
you two could nick it so exactly.

But that which is the pleasantest of all is, that you not only transcribe a
Blunder of his, but make it ten times worse: (...). Cyril. [ex Luc. 5.34.]
Filiis Sponsi. Grodecil Interpr. Latina. To the Sons of his Spouse, Sclaters
Engl. Translat.
Cyril in this Passage speaks of the Children of the Bride-chamber, Grodecius
has made them the Children of the Bridegroom, and you have made them the
Children of the Bride, when you call them the Sons of his Spouse; by which you
mean our Savior's Spouse which I am sure is his Bride the Church. This is
translating with a witness, and this it is to make a Man's self a slave to
another Man's Translation, which is guilty of such Blunders and Errors, and
yet by putting your Margin full of Greek to make the World believe you had been
at the Fountainhead your self. I must confess it is the first time I ever
heard of a He-Bride, or could have suspected that a Man that has so much Greek
and Hebrew in his head would have translated hic Sponsus, our Savior his
Spouse.

I have been so large upon these two Fathers, St. Gregory Nyssen and St. Cyril,
not only because they are always reckoned the chiefest Authors for
Transubstantiation, but because I might thereby very much shorten the Answers I
am to make to your following Authorities, which I shall consider if they speak
any thing new, if not, refer to some of my Answers already made.

CHAP. XXIII. Those from Epiphanius, St. Ambrose and St. Chrysostom answered.
YOur Testimony out of Epiphanius proves nothing more than your Infirmity in
translating, P. 42.
for he that believes not that he is true, you have ridiculously made it, who
believes it not to be his very true Body. But such dealing is not strange to
me to find in you, this Talent runs almost through your whole book. You are
very copious in the next place from St. Ambrose; P. 42.
your first Testimony from him proves nothing against the Church of England,
nor your second, since in our Liturgy we use in the distributing the
Consecrated Bread the same Expressions used then ( the Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ) and our People are taught to say Amen. P. 43.
Nor your third, fourth, and those which follow, wherein this Father uses so
much of Allegory, and therefore is not to be confined to a literal Sense. P.
44, 45, 46, etc.
Your last from him is your best one, which however proves no more than what we
never deny, that the Nature of the Elements are changed, as to their Virtue and
Quality: but as to a change of their very substance, we do deny it upon reasons
from Scripture and purer Antiquity; nor does this Father attempt the Proof of
any such a Change. He proves the contrary, p. 43.
when in your first Testimony from him he speaks of the Elements Continuing
What they were [that is as to their Substance or Essence] and yet being changed
into another thing, Quanto magis Operatorius est, ut sint quae erant and in
aliud commutentur. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
which must be as to quality and Use: and had you but translated this passage
like a Scholar, and continued your quotation a line or two further, you had
found him proving this change of the Elements by, and comparing it with, Ipse
dixit and factum est: ipse mandavit and creatum est. Tu ipse eras, sed eras
vetus ereaturae: pestea quam consecratus es, nova creatura esse caepisti. Idem,
Ibidem p. 439. Tom. 4. Edit. Froben.
that of a man by Baptism, whom no body believes to be changed thereby as to
his substance, but only to be renewed inwardly, and changed from a sinful
state to a state of virtue and holiness by the influence of the Spirit of God;
and therefore St. Ambrose could not affirm any more of the Elements than a
change of quality by an accession of virtue, and power to sanctify and to
communicate to us Christ's Body and Blood, and to apply to us all the Merits of
his meritorious passion.

But after all this Father himself puts the thing out of debate betwixt us;
when, in your last Testimony, p. 49.
he calls the consecrated Bread the Sacrament or Symbol of his Flesh, Vere ergo
carnis illius Sacramentum est -- ante Benedictionem verborum coelestium alia
species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus significatur -- post
consecrationem sanguls nuncupatur. Ambros. de iis qui Mysteriis initiantur. c.
9.
and says that after consecration it is the sign of his Body; for so I
translate corpus significatur, because afterward speaking of the Wine, he says
that after consecration it is called or bears the name of his Blood. Upon this
place indeed you set up for a Critic, and give us a touch of your Greek and
Hebrew, which I cannot read without smiling at it: all that I will say to you
upon it is, that it is very hard for those that understand not Greek and
Hebrew, p. 50, 51.
that they must not be allowed to know what significo means; had that word been
a branch from either of those tongues your Criticism would have looked somewhat
like, whereas now it is but a more formal piece of trifling.

Optatus his Testimony is nothing to the Purpose, and that from Gaudentius is
so far from being for your Transubstantiation, that it is directly against you,
as had I time or room here, I could easily show.

St. Hierom's places prove the very same, p. 51. Nos autem audiamus, Panem,
quem fregit Dominus, deditque Discipulis suis, esse Corpus Domini Salvatoris,
ipso dicente ad eos. atcipite, comedite, Hoc est Corpus meum. St. Hieron.
Hedibiae. Tom. 3. p. 144. Edit. Froben.
that is against you, as first that which says it was Bread our Savior gave to
his Disciples, and that that Bread was his Body, which sort of expressions your
own learned men allow to prove a figurative Body only, since Bread can no
otherwise be the Body of Christ.

I wonder what you brought the Testimonies for, about the Clergy's always
praying; if you did it for a touch at our married Clergy, remember that it
touches your self; and though it does not me, p. 53.
yet this I will assure you that St. Hierom's Argument is very faulty and
proves nothing at all because it proves too much, since if the Clergy must
abstain from Matrimony, because they must always pray; upon the very same
reason all the Christian Laity will be obliged also to abstain from it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. p. 54, 55, 56, etc.
they being most expressly commanded to pray without ceasing.

From St. Chrysostom you have brought us a great many passages. How much that
Learned Father delighted in Rhetorual Flights has been already observed above,
when I examined just such quotations as these about St. Peter's Supremacy; and
that his Homilies are not to be strictly taken, nor can be in a literal sense,
has been abundantly proved above; However here you are for having the passages
you cite him for about a Transubstantiation taken in a literal sense: which no
man of learning would have said, since it is impossible they should: I will
instance but in one of them, (...). D. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Tom. 2. p. 514. Edit.
Savil.
How many now say, I would see his Form, his Figure, his Garments and his
Shoes, behold thou see him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him. I appeal to
that person of meanest judgment in your whole Church, whoever he be; to your
own second thoughts, whether any one can or does, strictly speaking, See, Touch
or Eat our Savior: therefore if you will have a literal sense of these and
such his hyperbolical expressions, you are easily answered that these passages
you quote from St. Chrysostom prove nothing at all, because they prove too
much; because they assert that which all learned men nay all men except you,
grant to be impossible. But besides all this, you your self afford us a little
passage, (...). Idem. in 1 Ep. ad Corinth. Tom. 3. p. 379.
which evidently destroys your attempt of making St. Chrysostom a
Transubstantiation man, which you endeavor by your English to obscure, (as you
have served many a larger place in your Book) and therefore I will clear the
place thus, for as that Body is united to Christ, so we also are united to him
by this Bread, which sufficiently proves the Substance of the Bread to remain
in the Eucharist. St. Chrysostom's opinion as to this point in controversy
betwixt us is so apparent from the late recovered Epistle of his to Caesarius,
as nothing can be more, I shall reserve it to a further particular occasion.

CHAP. XXIV. His further Arguments for it out of St. Austin, Cyril of
Alexandria, Theodoret, etc. Answered.
I Must in the next place follow you to St. Austin, p. 59, 60, etc.
and see what you would have from him, who is so extraordinary plain and so
point blank against Transubstantiation. I will not only say, that the Places
you have from him, as spoken allegorically cannot do your business, though you
help them (as you did St. Hierom, when you translated Vinum, Blood; St.
Chrysostom when you translated (...) the Eucharist) by translating Sacramentum
a Sacrifice: but will give you a place or two to convince you that St. Austin
was not for Transubstantiation.

In his Book against Adamantus, he says plainly, Non enim Dominus dubitavit
dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum Signum daret Corporis sui. Aug. contr.
Adamant. c. 12. Edit. Basil.
For our Lord made no Scruple to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of
his Body.

In his Epistle to Boniface he says, Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem
earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent.
Ex hac autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sicut
ergo secundum quendam modum Sacramentum Corporis Christi Corpus Christi est,
Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi Sanguis Christi est, ita Sacramentum Fidei Fides
est. Aug. Ep. 23. ad Boniface. P. 62, 63. P. 63.
that if the Sacraments had no resemblance with those things whereof they are
the Sacraments, they would not be Sacraments at all: from their resemblance it
is that they commonly bear the names of the things themselves: for as the
Sacrament of the Body of Christ is after a certain manner the Body of Christ,
so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. I might easily show you, how he
distinguishes between Sacramentum and Res Sacramenti, that Judas only received
Panem Domini, whereas the rest of the Apostles received Panem Dominum; but I
must hasten to your next Testimonies from St. Cyril of Alexandria, the first of
which has been already more than once answered; your second is directly
against your self, the Jews fault being that they understood our Savior in a
literal sense, and not in the Spiritual in which he meant it; and Nicodemus his
fault was of the same nature about Regeneration, so that you certainly took
this place on trust without considering it; and your Jeer at the end of it is
both groundless and ridiculous; hictius doctius, hei Presto, be gone, do far
better become your People who teach that upon pronouncing hoc est corpus meum
the Bread is gone, and the Body of Christ is in its room in a trice: but to
pass such childish stuff, your last Testimony from this St. Cyril does not
deserve any consideration, it proving nothing for your purpose.

I am now arrived at Theodoret. P. 63.
him, whom of all men I little thought you would have cited in, and of all
places you would not have meddled with that you do; but to give you your due,
you are a hardy man, and resolved to go through with Theodoret also, though you
loose some Skin by it, and get never so many blows and hard words. Well then
you bring us his second Dialogue against the Eutychians, where after the
Questions asked and answered about the Sacramental Bread and Wine, their being
the symbols of the true Body and Blood of Christ, which is also received it
self in the Eucharist: the (...). -- Orthodox. --
Eutychian thinking he had caught the Orthodox Adversary, argues upon his
concession, that as the Symbols then of the Body and Blood [here you make a
stop, and it was time for you to do it, wherein you show, though no honesty, yet
some cunning; but I must continue the objection of the Eutychian to make the
sense clear and full, as well as to ruin your silly design hence] are one
thing before Consecration, but after it are changed, and made another thing;
just so the Body of our Lord after its assumption is changed into the divine
Substance or Nature. This was the Eutychians Argument upon which the (...).
Theodoret. Dial. 2. p. 85. Edit. Sirmond. 1642.
Orthodox makes a quick reply, and tells him that he was caught in his own
Nets, since the Mystical Symbols [the blessed Bread and Wine] do not after [or
upon] their Consecration depart from their essential Nature, but continue in
their former Substance, Form, and Kind, and are as visible, and as palpable
now, as they were before their Consecration, etc. This place of Theodoret is so
demonstrative against Transubstantiation, that you had need, if you must be
bringing it in for you, to obscure the sense by your abrupt and caetera, and to
falsify it too as you have done here by a ridiculous Translation, which quite
spoils Theodoret's Argumont hence against the Eutychians, as I shall by and by
show in one of my Corollaries; in the interim to let you and the world see the
intolerable disingenuity of your Translating (...) appear no other than in
their own nature, I will but bring a short passage out of his first Dialogue to
evince it, where he says, (...). Idem. Dial. 1. p. 18.
our Savior honored the Symbols and Signs [the Sacramental Bread and Wine]
with the names of his Body and his Blood, not [by] changing at all their
NATURE, but by adding of GRACE to Nature.

Proclus of Constantinople your next Author is directly against your self,
(...) AYTOY (...). Procli C. P. de Traditione D. Liturgiae. p. 581. Edit.
Romae. 1630.
since it is the Presence of the Holy Ghost according to him, and not of the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ, which makes the Bread and mingled Wine, the
very Body and Blood of Christ.

Your Quotation from Eucherius (p. 64.) falls in with those from St. Ambrose,
and is answered there. That from Isidore Pelusiota, (p. 65.) and that from Pope
Leo, which is false translated, have been answered sufficiently above. Your
Story out of Gregory Turonensis, (p. 66.) were it true, makes nothing to your
purpose; but you ought to remember that we always demand the genuine plain
Testimonies of Fathers in the Controversy about Transubstantiation, and cannot
admit, or rely upon Stories and Miracles, such as this is, and that from (p.
69.) Paulus Diaconus.

I am weary of this tedious Examination of further particular places of Writers
at too great a distance to be set up, were they really what they are far from
being, against the Primitive Fathers as to this Controversy. I will only
vindicate your Pope Gregory the Great, and our Countryman Venerable Bede, p. 68.
and then leave off this Method of answering. The place you quote from Gregory
does you no service, since it is so very allegorical and cannot be taken in a
literal sense; but that which we meet with in his Ipsi qui sumimus Communionem
bujus sancti panis and Calicis, unum Christi Corpus efficemur. -- Quaesumus --
ut illius Salutaris capiamus effectum cujus per Mysteria PIGNUS accepimus.
Greg. L. Sacram. p. 1337. Ed. Par. 1695.
Sacramentary is directly against Transubstantiation, where in Prayer it is
said, We which do receive the Communion or Sacrament of the consecrated Bread
and Cup, are made one Body of Christ.

Ut videlicet pro carne Agni vel sanguinem suae carnis sanguinisque
Sacram^nt^^n in Panis ac Vini Figura substituens, etc. Beda Comm. in Luc. 22.
p. 424. Edit. Colon. 1612.
Venerable Bede's words are as clear as we could wish, and as full against
Transubstantiation as we can speak, when he says, that our Savior Christ
substituted into the place of the Flesh and Blood of the Paschal Lamb, the
Sacrament of his own Flesh and Blood under the figure of Bread and Wine, Coena,
in qua Figuram sacrosancti corporis, sanguinisque sui Discipulis tradidit, etc.
Idem in Psalm. 3. p. 324.
and in another place, that our Lord gave to his Disciples at his Last Supper
the Figure of his sacred Body and Blood.

CHAP. XXV. Some Corollaries against Transubstantiation.
HAving hitherto sufficiently answered all your pretended Proofs for
Transubstantiation, and shown in part the Sense and Arguments of the Fathers
against it, instead of wearying my self, or rather our Reader with any more of
your Authors which you very irregularly place, and which you your self will
grant to be produced to no purpose, if the former Primitive Fathers were of a
contrary Faith about the Eucharist: I shall here adjoyn a few Corollaries to
vindicate the Faith of the Catholic and Apostolical Church of England against
Transubstantiation, and will make it apparently clear that her Doctrine and
Faith herein is both Primitive and Orthodox, and exactly the same with that of
the Fathers of the Catholic Church.

My first Corollary shall be, 1 Coroll.
That the Fathers gave such Titles to the Consecrated Elements of Bread and
Wine, as utterly exclude a Transubstantiation.

It was sufficiently common with them, to call the Elements Tertullian. con.
Marcion. l. 4. c. 40. Beda. Comment. in 3. Psalm.
the Figure, August. de Doctr. Christi c. 7. Origin. Dialog. cont. Marcion. p.
116. Edit. Wets.
the Sign, Basil. Anaphora. Cyril. Hierosol. Col. 4. Cat. Mys.
the Type, Greg. Naz. Orat. 118. Macarius. Hom. 27.
the antitype, August. in Gratiano.
the Similitude, Theodoret. Dialog. 2.
and the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, Tom. 6. Council. Edit. Cossart.
and a whole Ecumenical Council of 338 Bishops at Constantinople, A. D. 754.
declare them to be the true (and only) Image of our Savior's Body and Blood.

These Expressions and the like I argue to be utterly inconsistent with the
Elements, being Transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ, since
it is impossible any thing can be the Figure of a thing, and the thing it self;
or the thing it self, and yet but the figure of it: he that will affirm this
may without an absurdity say that the Sign of the King at a Tavern door is the
King himself, that the Picture of the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard is as real
a true Ship, as any on the River, and that the Image of the King in the
Exchange is really King James 2d. in his very Person. In short, if any thing be
the Figure, it cannot be the thing; if it be the thing it self, it cannot be
the Figure of it, since nothing can be the Figure of it self. And therefore if
Christ's Natural Body be really on the Altar, that which is there cannot be the
Figure of it; But if (as the Fathers almost unanimously speak) that which is
there be the Figure, the Sign of it, then consequently our Savior's Natural
Body it self is not.

This is so evident, See Tertullian's 4th Book against Marcion. chapter 40th.
I think I need not say any more upon this Point, I might very easily else have
shown that the Strength of one of Tertullian's Arguments, for our Savior his
having a true substantial Body, against Marcion depended wholly on the
Eucharist, its being the FIGURE of his Body: but I will wave it, and conclude
this Corollary with that of Facundus, Et potest Sacramentum Adoptionis, Adoptio
nuncupari. Sicut Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis ejus, quod est in Pane and
Poculo consecrato, Corpus ejus and Sanguinem dicimus. Non quod proprie Corpus
ejus sit Panis and Poculum Sanguis: Sed quod in se Mysterium Corporis ejus,
sanguinisque contineant. Hinc and ipse Dominus benedictum Panem and Calicem,
quem Discipulis tradidit, Corpus and Sanguinem suum Vocavit. Facund. Herm. pro
Defens. 3. Capit. Con. Chalced. Lib. 9. c. 5. p. 404, 405. Edit. Sirmond. 1629.
Bishop of Hermiana in Africa, the Sacrament of Adoption may be called by the
name of Adoption, as we call the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the
consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine, his Body and his Blood; not that the
Bread is properly his Body, or the Cup his Blood, but because they contain the
Mystery of his Body and Blood: upon which very account it is, that when our
Lord delivered the consecrated Bread and Cup to his Disciples, he called them
his Body and his Blood. One thing I must not forget here, that though these
Fathers and the Church of England with them, look upon the consecrated Elements
as Signs and Figures only, yet they and we believe that by the Institution of
Christ they are the Means of conveying all the Virtue and Benefits of our
Savior's crucified Body, of communicating the Blood and Body of Christ unto
every worthy Communicant. This I could not omit to let you see the silliness of
your foolish Cant up and down of mere Signs of what, mere figures, etc. such
Expressions were designed against the Church of England, or what do they in
your Book against her; if they were, I must tell you that they are sottishly
ridiculous, and most intolerable from a man, who was, I am sorry I can say it,
a Minister of the Church of England, and therefore must so often have seen her
Articles, and so often have used her Communion-Service.

My Second Corollary is, 2. Coroll.
That such things are attributed to the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ,
by the Primitive Fathers, as do altogether exclude their being
transubstantiated into the Natural Body and Blood of Christ.

I instance in that of the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ their being
said to Nourish our Bodies.

That the consecrated Elements do nourish our Bodies is very apparent from
(...). Justin. Apolog. 2.
St. Justin Martyr's saying that our flesh and blood are nourished by the
consecrated Elements being changed into our Substance: From Quando ergo Calix
and Panis percipiunt ^erbum Dei, fit Eucharistia Sanguinis and Corporis
Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit Carnis nostrae Substantia. S. Iren. c.
Haer. l. 5. c. 18.
Irenaeus and Caro Corpore and Sanguine Christi vescitur, ut and Anima de Deo
saginetur. Tert. de Resurrect. c. 8.
Tertullian, that our Flesh is fed and nourished with the Body and Blood of
Christ: From -- Ille Cibus, qui sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, perque
obsecrationem, juxta id quod babet materiale, in ventrem abit and in secessum
ejicitur. Orig. in 15 Matt. p. 27.
Origin, that the Eucharist as to its Material Part, undergoes the common
course of our common repasts: From Quia sicut visibilis Panis and Vini
substantia exteriorem nutrit and inebriat hominem: ita Verbum Dei, qui est
Panis Vivus, participatione sui Fidelium recreat mentes. Isidor. Hispal. apud
Rathramni. Lib. de Corp. and Sang. D. p. 120. Edit. Paris. Boileau. 1686.
Isidore of Sevil, that the Substance of the Visible Bread and Wine do nourish
the outward man, that is our Bodies, as the Word of Christ, the Living Bread
does nourish the Souls of the Faithful Communicants.

Rathramne or Bertram Up and down the second part of his Book from p. 127.
uses this Nourishment of our Bodies by the Sacramental Body and Blood, for an
Argument to prove his distinguishing betwixt the Sacramental and the Natural
Body of Christ to be just and necessary: Illa Eucharistia temporaria est, non
aeterna: corruptibilis; critque minutim divisibilis: inter Dentes manditur, and
in secessum emittitur. Homilia Anglo Sax. apud not as Whelochi in Beda. L. 5.
c. 22. p. 472. Edit. Cantabrig. 1644.
Our Saxon Paschal Homily, which used to be read in our Churches in the Tenth
Century follows Rathramn exactly in this point, and teaches that the
Sacramental Body is corruptible, because it may be broke into several pieces,
grinded by the Teeth, and being swallowed down into the Stomach, is thence cast
into the draught.

Having collected Passages enough, that which I intend to prove from them is,
that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ (into which you Transubstantiators
say the Bread and Wine upon Consecration are transubstantiated) cannot without
the greatest impiety be thus said to Nourish our Bodies. There is no one that
understands what Nourishment means, how that macerating by the Teeth, Digestion
in the Stomach, Separation in the Guts of the impure and excrementitious (which
passes into the draught) from the purer, which passing through the Lacteals,
and other channels falls into the Common Mass of Blood, are all necessary in
order to Nourishment; but must at the same time abhor the very thought of our
Saviors Natural Body undergoing such tortures and changes in order to the
Nourishment of our Bodies. Either it is Bread or Wine, or the Natural Body and
Blood of Christ that undergoes these several stages in order to our
Nourishment: Neither you nor we talk of any third Body for these purposes. If
there be no Bread and Wine upon Consecration left, which you affirm, then it is
unavoidable that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ which are come into the
others place must afford this Nourishment to our Bodies; but if you dare not
affirm this, which it were most blasphemous to do; it will of necessity follow
that the substances of the Bread and Wine do after consecration continue in
order to this Nourishment, and therefore no Transubstantiation either is or
could be believed by them, who did attribute this power of nourishing to the
Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ.

My next Corallary is, 3. Coroll.
That the Fathers speak such things of the Eucharist, as are perfectly
inconsistent with its having after Consecration the bare Accidents, and Species
of Bread and Wine.

The Proof of this Corollary depends upon the preceding, which showed that the
General Doctrine of the Fathers was that our Bodies are nourished by the
Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ. Now as I made it evident in the last
Corollary that this Nourishment was infinitely inconsistent with the Nature of
Christ his Natural Body now, and for ever to continue, in a glorified state; so
it is as easy to show, that such Nourishment is as inconsistent with your
upstart ridiculous Doctrine of Accidents: Since the bare Accidents and Species
cannot nourish a Body, and since it is impossible that That which has neither
Substance, Matter, Quantity nor Body should give or add to another both
Substance, Matter, Quantity and Body, every one of which are necessary to a
corporal Nourishment: from which we must conclude that the Fathers never so
much as dreamed of bare Accidents after Consecration, since They taught and
wrote that which is utterly inconsistent with such things, and consequently
with Transubstantiation.

This Corollary I intended chiefly for your sake Mr. Sclater, and the late
Translator's of Bertram, Printed at Pa^is. 16^^
Monsi^ur B^ile^u the Dean of Sens. As you had a mind to i^^ose upon us that
Irenaeus his pars terrena of the Eucharist was the Accidents, which
consequently must nourish us, p. (...).
notwithstanding their having nothing of Substance; so p. 89.. 19. p. 118.. 40.
p. 152, 126.. 19, etc.
he very gravely up and down his Translation, and his Remarks tells us of the
Bodies being nourished by that which falls under the sense, by which he only
means as he continually explains himself, the mere figure and vail, the mere
Accidents of Bread and Wine, with which the Natural Body and Blood of Christ
are veiled.

I must acknowledge that I am astonished to see a man, who has doubtless a
great deal of Learning, write direct nonsense with such formal Gravity: I durst
appeal to his own Conscience, and am persuaded that he does not believe
himself, that Figures, Vails and Accidents, which according to all men's notions
of them are without any substance, and are perfect nothings as to Body, can
give nourishment to, or increase the Substances of our Bodies. A man might as
well write that people may dine at Church on the Ministers voice, as that
non-entities, mere nothings can nourish our Bodies. But if you two be resolved
to believe so still, I would desire no other Argument to make you both recant,
than that you two (were the thing possible in Nature to separate the Accidents,
Qualities, and Modifications of Bodies from the substances of the Bodies
themselves) might be put up, and constrained to live but one fortnight upon
these same Accidents and Vails, and try how nourishing they are: I am pretty
certain that it would cure you of believing corporeal Accidents, and him of
ever writing again that Figures do, or can nourish.

I will conclude this Corollary with a passage out Quis conc^sserit, aut cui
posse fieri videatur, ut id quod in Subjecto est, maneat ipso intereunte
Subjecto? Monstruosum enim, and a veritate alienissunum est, ut id, quod non
esset, nisi in ipso esset, etiam cum ipsum non fuerit, possit esse. D. August.
Solioliq. l. 2. c. 13. p. 536. Edit. Basil. 1569.
of St. Austins Soliloquies, which will abundantly confirm all that I have said
in this Corollary, Who can grant, (says he) or think it possible, that that
which is in [ and depends for its being upon] a Subject, can continue, when the
Subject it self is perished? for it is a Monstrous thing, and as far as can be
from Truth, that that which would have no Being but for the Subject in which it
is, can still have a Being, when its Subject [on which it depended] has none.

Before I pass to my next Corollary, I must make a little Digression to
expostulate with the French Dean about his Translation of Rathramn or Bertram,
and his Remarks upon it: He must certainly think so much wrong could not be put
upon so venerable a Writer, and no body would speak in his behalf; it was a
strange attempt to make Bertram a good Catholic, that is in your style, a true
man for Transubstantiation at last, when hitherto their Church had damned this
Writer to the Pit of Hell, and Mr. Sclater himself has very chronologically
put him among the followers of Berengarius, who first disturbed the long peace,
p. 76. p. 75.
and as long continued Faith of the Catholic Church of Transubstantiation.
This strange attempt was accompanied with Arts and Tricks, as strange, and
unusual with all honest men, that is, with a violent perverting of the Authors
sense, and an unjust, and most foolish Turn of the whole design of Bertram. In
his ^emarks upon Bertram, p. 207, 208, etc. Printed at the end of his
Translation. Paris, 1686.
This Gentle man makes Bertram to write his Book against some that held our
Savior's Natural Body was received in the Eucharist without any Vail or
Figure, that is, to put it into downright English, with the very same
dimensions, Skin, Hair, Flesh, Head, Feet and Arms that he had on the Cross.
But is it probable there ever were any such men? No, it is so far from it, that
it is impossible there ever could, since this Opinion must be grounded upon
their seeing it so, which I am sure never was, never could be: this Gentleman
thinks the very Praes. p. 21.
knowing what stercoranism means is enough to confute it; but is it not far
stronger against this fancy of his, for I dare not call it any men's Opinion,
since I am very well satisfied there never could be any men that held such a
thing.

It is pleasant however to see, how the Dean goes about to prove, that there
was such an Opinion, and such men, against against which our Author did write
this Tract; he tells us, that one Abbaudus, and one Gaultier, Prior of St.
Victor held that our Savior's Natural Body was palpable and sensible in the
Eucharist: but since these men by his own Confession lived two or three hundred
years at soonest after Bertram, it is but a very odd way of proving that there
were such men in or before Bertram's time, because there were about three
hundred years after. Such proof is fitter for Children, than Deans of
Cathedrals to use, and ought no more to pass from him, p. 213, 214.
than if it came from them: but to help himself and his ridiculous Authorities,
he tells us that it is not probable, that they two were the first Authors of
this Opinion; now for brevity sake to set this aside, which is pitiful begging
and not proving, were these two men after all, the Abbaudus and Gualtier of
this Opinion, that our Savior's Body is received in the Eucharist without any
Vail, or Figure? This is so very false, that I wonder how any man, that has
common sense or any learning could have the face to assert it; -- Cogitavetam
and illis aliqua respondere, qui dicunt ipsum Corpus non frangi, sed in
Albedine ejus and Rotunditate aliquid factitari, sed recogitans ineptum esse in
Evangelio Christi, de Albedine and Rotunditate disp^tare, etc. Abbaudus p. 211.
-- and sensualiter, non solum Sacramento, sed etiam veri^ate manibus Sacerdotum
tractari and frangi and fideli^m dentibus atteri. Ecce Catholi^^ Eides. Ist^
autem Scholasticus sic exponit, vere quidem ait, est; sed in Sacramento tantum.
Gaultier p. 212. in the Remarks.
they say indeed that the Natural Body of Christ is palpable and sensible in
the Eucharist, but that they do not mean sensible to the Eye, or visible, is
hence apparent because they talk of the Whiteness and and the Roundness, which
certainly are that which you call the vails of our Savior's Body; and all the
intent of their Arguments was to prove, that though our Savior's Body was hid
under the Accidents of Whiteness, Roundness, etc. yet that it is palpable, and
subject to be broke, since Whiteness and Roundness which are mere Accidents,
could not be broken, or parted asunder. So that now we find by this Dean's help
at last, that Rathramn's or Bertram's Book was writ against no body, and about
nothing, since it is impossible there ever were such Persons, or such an
Opinion for any body to write against.

Certainly this Gentleman thought all the world asleep besides their own Party,
or he could never have had the courage to have writ such stuff, and though I do
not wonder at the French King's giving his Royal Privilege to this Book, and
calling the Translator, his dearly beloved, because I suppose he does not
desire to be thought to have read, or examined the Book, yet I am perfectly
amazed to find the Approbation of the Sorbonne to this most ridiculous
nonsensical Piece, and can give my self no other reason for it, than that those
People are resolved to approve and license any thing against us, though it be at
the same time as much against common sense and reason. I hope some one will do,
what I cannot have room, or leisure to do here, that is, take this Dean
Boileau's Translation, and Remarks to task, the very foundation of which I have
perfectly ruined in that little I have said here; But to return,

My fourth Corollary is, 4 Coroll.
That the Illustrations and Comparisons, by which the Fathers used to prove a
Change in the Elements, do prove their Opinions to have been opposite to
Transubstantiation.

I will here instance in the several Comparisons, Greg. Nyssen Orat. in Bapt.
Christi.
of the Water in Baptism, Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
of the Person baptized, Cyrit. Hier. Catech. Mystag. 3.
of the Oil in Chrism, Greg. Nyssen. supra.
of the Ordained Person, Idem Ibidem.
and of the Altar. These the Fathers made use of to prove such a change in the
Elements of Bread and Wine. Now there is no man of any learning or sense will
say they taught any Transubstantiation of the Water, of the Person baptized, of
the Oil, of the Stones of the Altar, or of the Person ordained, and therefore
neither any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine. They compare
these several changes together, and make them to be parallel and equal: So that
it is evident they meant an equal change in them, and no Transubstantiation of
one of them, more than of the rest.

And farther, all the change they attribute to any of these things, the Water,
the Oil, the Baptized person, etc. is not at all as to their substance, by
removing it away; but as to the Virtue, Quality, Office, and Use of them by the
Accession or Influence of the Spirit of God, as I have particularly showed
above in Gregory Nyssen, Cyril of Jerusalem and St. Ambrose: so that I may
hence conclude, that as the Primitive Fathers taught no substantial change of
any of those things mentioned, in order to the Effects they are dedicated to,
so they taught none of the Bread and Wine in order to their Communicating to us
the Benefits and Virtue of our Savior's Passion.

I will end this Corollary with that of Theodoret, (...). Theodoret. Dial. 1.
p. 18. Edit. Sirmond 1642.
our Savior honored the Symbols and Signs; the Consecrated Bread and Wine,
with the Titles of his Body and his Blood, not [by] changing their NATURE at
all, but [by] adding GRACE to NATURE.

My fifth Corollary shall be, That the Argument from the Eucharist used by the
Fathers to prove the Verity of the two Natures in Christ, does evidently deny,
and reject any Transubstantiation.

This I shall demonstrate from particular Fathers, most eminent in their times;
the first of which shall be the Great St. Chrysostom, in his Epistle to
Caesarius a Monk, whom he was endeavoring to secure from Apollinarius his
Heresy, who denied the Truth of the two Natures in Christ. For the disproving
of which, false Doctrine among other Arguments, He urges this from the
Eucharist. Sicut enim antequam sanctificetur Panis, Panem nominamus, divina
autem illum sanctificante Gratia, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus est quidem
Appellatione PANIS, dignus autem habitus est Dominici Corporis APPELLATIONE,
etia^si NATURA PANIS in ipso permansit, and non duo Corpora, sed unum Corpus
Filii praedicatur: Sic and hic Divina (...), id est, inundante Corporis natura,
unum filium, unam Personam, utreque haec fecerunt. Agnoscendum tamen
inconfusam, and indivisibilem rationem, non in una solum Natura, sed in duobus
perfectis. D. Chrysostom. Ep. ad Caes. in the Appendix to the Defense of the
Exposition, etc. p. 156.
For as [in the Eucharist] before the Bread is Consecrated, we call it Bread,
but after that by the mediation of the Priest, the Divine Grace has sanctified
it, it is no longer called Bread, but is honored with the name of our Lord's
Body, though the nature of Bread continue in it still; and it does not become two
distinct Bodies, but one Body of the Son of God; even so here the Divine Nature
being united to the humane [or Body], they together make up but one Son, one
Person. But must however be acknowledged to remain without Confusion after an
indivisible manner, not in one NATURE, but in TWO PERFECT NATURES.

The very same Argument does Theodoret urge against the Eutychians, whose
Heresy was the same with that of Apollonarius, as I have above put down his
words at large from his second Dialogue against the Eutychian Heresy (p. 70.)

One of your own Popes, ^elasius I. against the same Heretics, says, Certe
Sacramenta, quae sumimus Corporis and sanguinis Christi, Divina Res est,
propter quod and per eadem Divinae essicimur Consortes Naturae, and tamen esse
non desinit SUBSTANTIA vel NATURA PANIS and VINI: and certe IMAGO and
SIMILITUDO CORPORIS and SANGUINIS Christi in Action Mysteriorum celebrantur.
Satis ergo nobis evidenter ostenditu^, hoc nobis in ipso Christo Domino
sentiendum, quod in ej^s Imagine profitemur, celebramus and sumi^^us. ut sie^^
in hane, scilicet in Divinam transeunt, Sancto spiritu per^iciente Substantiam,
PERMANENTE tamen in suae (rect.) sua PROPRIETATE NATURA: Sic illud ipsum
Mysterium Principale, cujus nobis efficientiam, virtutemque veraciter
REPRESENTANT, ex quibus constat proprit PERMANENTIBUS Unum Christum, quiae
integrum, ver^mque Permantre demonstrant. Gelasius Papa de duabus in Christo
Naturis in Biblioth. P Prum. Part 3. Tom. 5. p. 671. Edit. Colon. 1618.
Doubtless the SACRAMENTS of the Body and Blood of Christ, which we receive,
are a Divine Thing, in that they make us Partakers of the Divine Nature, though
the SUBSTANCE or NATURE of the BREAD and WINE does still Remain: and indeed the
Image and Likeness of Christ's Body and Blood is celebrated in the Mysterious
Action. By this therefore we are plainly taught to think the same of our Lord
Christ himself, as we profess, celebrate and receive, in, or by, his IMAGE,
that as the Elements pass into a Divine Nature, by the Operation of the Holy
Ghost, and yet continue to have their own Proper Nature, so that principal
Mystery ( the Incarnation) the Virtue and efficacy of which the [Consecrated
Elements] do truly Represent unto us, does as evidently demonstrate, that there
is One True and entire Christ, consisting of two distinct Natures.

Ephrem, or Ephramius, the Patriarch of Antioch in the sixth Century urges the
same Argument Apud Photii Biblioth. number. 229.
against the same Heretics.

That which I gather from these evident places of these great Men is, that as
they held the humane Nature to continue entire after its Union with the Divine
into the One Person of Christ, so they held the true Substance of the Bread to
continue after its Consecration into the Sacramental Body of Christ; and that
if they had not believed this, they would never have used it as an Argument to
prove the other.

These Places and this Argument are so convictive, that I admire that any man
can believe Transubstantiation, that does but read and consider them. I know
some of your Writers say, that the Fathers by Substance and Nature here mean
only the outward Appearance and the bare Accidents.

But, not to insist how we shall ever know any Author's sense in any one thing,
if men may take this Liberty not only to make a word signify what they
please, but the direct contrary to what it should and always does; This is to
make the whole Argument of these several Greatest Men, of a Pope himself, and
him perhaps as learned as ever sat in the Chair, and as Infallible, perfect
Foolery and direct Sophistry; to give up their Cause, as well as their
Arguments unto the Heretics, their Enemies, while they make these Learned
Fathers to prove that Christ had not the Appearance only (which none of the
Eutychians did deny him) but a true humane Nature by the Example of a Thing,
which had not the true Nature of Bread, but the bare Appearance of it without
any Substance.

Certainly such men do not consider what great wrong they do to these Fathers
in making their Arguments so very weak, and impertinent: Had They then believed
Transubstantiation, it had been perfect Madness in Them to use the Eucharist
for an Argument against the Heretics, since the Heretics would most easily
have retorted it, and shown out of their own mouths, that as upon Consecration
the Substance of the Bread is gone, and nothing but the appearance of Bread
remains; so upon the Union of the two Natures the humane was absorpt, or (to
borrow a word of you for the Eutychians) transubstantiated into the Divine, and
only the Appearance of flesh remained: and this the Fathers could never have
disproved, if they themselves had held, that the Appearance of a Thing as to
Color, Dimension, Smell, Taste, etc. might subsist without the Substance unto
which those Accidents do belong.

In a word, had there been such a thing as Transubstantiation believed then, as
the Fathers could not have urged the Example of the Eucharist its continuing in
the very same NATURE and SUBSTANCE it had before Consecration against the
Eutychian Heretics; so it is Morally Impossible that those Heretics should
omit so home an Argument in Defense of themselves: but since these are never
known to have urged any such thing for themselves, and we find the Greatest and
most Learned Fathers urging the Example of the EUCHARIST its remaining in the
TRUE SUBSTANCES of BREAD and WINE after CONSECRATION, we have all the Reason in
the World to conclude that the Fathers neither did, nor could ever believe such
a thing as Transubstantiation.

I might have added another Corollary from the Distinction between the Natural
and the Spiritual Flesh and Blood of Christ so much insisted on by the Fathers,
Clemens of Alexandria, Paedag. L. 2. c. 2.
and others, and especially by Rathramn or Bertram, who has made it the
Subject of the Second Part of his Book from Section 50th. p. 127; by our
Countrymen Illa Eucharistia non est C^^pus Christi CORPORALITER sed
SPIRITVALITER non Corpus illud QVO passus est, sed Corpus illud de quo locu^as
est: quando Panem and Vinum in EUCHARISTIAM nocte una ante Passionem suam
Consecravit. Alsric. apud Wheloci notas in Bed. H. E. l. 4. c. 24.
Alfrick Arch-B^^^op of Canterbury in an Epistle to Wulphin Bishop of
Shirb^urn, and by Wulphin himself Hostia illa est Christi Corpus non
Corporaliter, sed Spiritualiter. Non Corpus in quo passus est, sed Corpus de
quo locutus est, quando Panem and Vinum ea quae Passionem antecessit nocte in
Hostiam Consecravit, and de Sacrato Pane dixit, Hoc est Corpus Meum, etc.
Wulfini Oration Synodica apud Vsser. de Christ. Eccl. Succes. and Statu. c. 2.
p. 44.
in a Synodical Oration of his to his Clergy, in the Tenth Century near a
Thousand years after Christ.

I might also have insisted on some more such, particularly on that Account in
Hesychius Hesychius in Levit. l. 2. c. 8.
of the Custom of the Church of Jerusalem to burn what was left of the
Consecrated Elements; but to avoid being tedious, those I have already made are
abundantly sufficient to show, that Transubstantiation was not, could not be
the Belief of the FATHERS; that their FAITH concerning the EUCHARIST is the
very SAME with the FAITH taught and embraced by the CHURCH of ENGLAND, which
was the Thing I undertook to evince.

CHAP. XXIV. Two or Three Reflections upon the Remainder of Mr. Sclater's Book:
The Conclusion.
HAving done This, I shall not trouble my self with the rest of your Citations,
but shall wave them as not one jot to the Purpose, since if they should be
against OUR CHURCH, I have already proved that they as are much against THE
PRIMITIVE CHURCH, I will only make two or three Reflections upon the Rest of
your Book, and then take leave of you.

The First shall be upon your Great Lateran Council, p. 84.
That it did determine (allowing, what is denied by some of your own side, that
things were managed fairly at this Meeting) for Transubstantiation, and for the
PAPAL POWER of DEPOSING KINGS at the same time. If it erred in Determining the
LATTER, why not in Determining the FIRST. I am sure that TRANSUBSTANTIATION is
as MUCH against the PRIMITIVE FATHERS, as that DAMNABLE HERETICAL DOCTRINE of
POPES POWER of DEPOSING of KINGS, and DISPOSING of their KINGDOMS can be. A
Discourse concerning Christ's Kingdom, in TWO SERMONS preached before the
University of Cambridge, Printed for Green, 1682, p. 18, 19.
And we do not envy your having TRANSUBSTANTIATION determined by such a
Council, as FIRST Conciliarly determined that HELLISH DOCTRINE of DEPOSING of
KINGS, a Practice so Impious that Dr. BARNES not LONG SINCE in a SERMON before
the FAMOUS UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE thought it to be ONE of the most
IRREFRAGABLE ARGUMENTS (to use his own words) to prove HIM [CHRIST his
PRETENDER VICAR the POPE] to be THE ANTICHRIST, and he goes on to tell THEM,
That whereas some have taken a great deal of Pains to prove HIM [the POPE] so,
from the obscure Prophecies of Daniel; And others with great Labor and
Difficulties have applied all the Phenomenon, and Characters of the
Apocalyptical fall Prophet to the POPE; THIS is a most SURE and COMPENDIOUS
WAY of stamping upon HIM the MARK of the BEAST. This Doctor's words and Opinion
I have chosen the rather for this Purpose, because I believe he does not pass
in the Rank of MISREPRESENTERS among YOU, and because it was in a SERMON before
an UNIVERSITY, p. 18.
wherein HE told them, he would deal sincerely with THEM. I am persuaded that
those of your Party that know HIM will grant him to be none of our fiery
Zealots, p. 49, 50. N. B.
and Furioso's against Popery, though HE does in the second SERMON speak of JUST
EXCLAMATIONS against the SUPERSTITIONS and IDOLATRIES of the CHURCH of ROME,
and of a COMMENDABLE INDIGNATION against the WICKED and HELLISH PRACTICES of
the ROMISH EMISSARIES to ESTABLIH the POPISH RELIGION.

My next Reflection is, p. 75, 76.
that your Account of Berengarius discovers abundance of malice and of
ignorance too, because He could not be the first Disturber of the long Peace of
the Church, by teaching a Doctrine opposite to Transubstantiation, since in the
Century before that Berengarius lived in, not to go abroad, in our OWN NATION
the SAME DOCTRINE, that Berengarius did stand up for, was the COMMON FAITH of
OUR CHURCH, and was publicly taught, and believed, as appears most evidently
to a Demonstration from the Public Authorized SAXON HOMILY for EASTER, and
from the Writings, and SYNODICAL ORATIONS (wherein a Man may most reasonably
expect to meet with the genuine and public Faith of the Church) of ALFRICK
ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY [our ENGLISH PATRIARCH] and of WULPHINE Bishop of
SHIRBOURN, as I have already observed, p. 73.81. N. B.
and put down their words; and the SAME FAITH was generally believed by almost
ALL the FRENCH and ITALIANS as well as by the ENGLISH in Berengarius his time,
as Matthew Westminster tells us Eeodem tempore Berengariu^in haereticam
prolapsus pravitatem, omnes Gallos, Italos et Anglos suis jampenecorruperat
pravitatibus. Matthew. West. ad annum, 1087.
who was mistaken in saying it was by the Infection of Berengarius's Doctrine,
since it is certain THAT was the GENERAL and PUBLIC DOCTRINE here in the
Century before; and in FRANCE the Century before that (to wit, in the NINTH
CENTURY) as one may believe from the Writingr of Bertram and Erigena.

And here I cannot but observe how much you discover a gross ignorance, when
you make Bertram, p. 76.
and Scotus Erigena ( whom you have split into two) Followers of Berengarius,
whenas They both lived two Hundred years before Him. Nay a man would believe
almost from you, that Berthram was at this present alive, when you say that
Berengarius's Opinion and Arguments are still urged by Bertram, p. 76.
lately reprinted in English. You have a great deal more of such wretched
stuff, but I am so weary of it, that I will but speak a word or two to you as
to the Greeks, and then pass to a sarewell request to you, and your new
Superiors.

That the present great Ignorance, Poverty and Ambition of the Greek Church
has taught a great many of them, leaving their own ancient Faith, to embrace
for lucre sake the Latin Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is what we cannot now
deny, but that which we have to say upon this business is, that those persons
neither learned this new fangled Doctrine from the Fathers, from their own
Liturgies, or from the ancient Creeds, or Ecclesiastical Constitutions; See Dr.
Smith of Oxford his Miscellanea
that Gabriel of Philadelphia ( who studied and lived so long at Padua and
Venice) first broached Transubstantiation in their language, since whom many
Latinized Greeks have espoused it, and the four Patriarchs, at the Instance of
Monsieur Nointel, Ricaut his Preface to his Present State of the Greek Church.
or rather his French Money (as I hope a Gentleman who was then in Turkey will
e're long make it sufficiently appear) subscribed the Oriental Confession
(drawn up by one bred in Italy) in the year 1672. not, as you falsely tell us,
1643.

As their Ignorance (which is so great, that Sr. P. Ricaut says most Mechanics
among us are more learned and knowing than the Doctors and Clergy of Greece)
disposes them for any Doctrine whatever, so their great Poverty (which no body
denies) and their unaccountable and prodigious Ambition hurry them on to any
thing for lucre sake. The Dire effects of their extravagant Ambition are
sufficiently seen in that they have thereby run their poor Church into such
arrears with the Port, that it will never be able to claw off. Ricaut 's
Pr^s^nt State of the Greek Church.
Through their changing of Patriarchs (whereof they p. 102, 102, etc. p. 98.
had six in eight years at Constantinople) and their most unchristian
shouldering of one another out, the Poor Church was indebted in the year 1672.
to the Grand Se^gnior three hundred and fifty thousand Dollars, as Sr. Paul
says he was informed by the Bishop of Smyrna.

This is enough to show the miserable Humor as well as Condition of those
People, who to get monys to buy out the incumbent Patriarch and to place
themselves though but for a month on the Patriarchal Throne at Constantinople,
would I question not subscribe a worse Doctrine than that of
Transubstantiation, since they have ignorance enough for any. The behavior of
the Archbishop of Samos to Doctor Smith of Maudlins, makes me to have a very
slender opinion of those sort of men: See Dr. Smiths Preface to Miscellanea
when he met with him in France, then Children only received in the one kind,
and they could not digest Flesh; but as soon as he had crossed the Water, and
breathed a little English Air, then Children did undoubtedly partake in both
kinds, as he quickly wrote to Doctor Smith. But enough of this Man, and the
Humor of that miserable People, which is nothing to the purpose of a Consensus
Veterum.

The Request I have now to make to you Mr. Sclater is, that you would consider
what a miserable mistake you have made about these things, how grievously you
have suffered your self to be imposed upon, in leaving a Communion which is
truly Catholic and Apostolical, and has not one unlawful Term of Communion,
and in falling to a Church which for all the Paints and Washes laid on it
appears to be very deformed, and has a great many unlawful Terms of Communion.
If their Condition be dangerous that were bred in that Communion, if they have
any opportunities (as all here in England have) of knowing more and of better
information; what must be thought of yours, who can pretend no want of
Information, have had so long a Tract of opportunities to have secured you even
in old age from such a doleful Fall; I do from my soul wish that you may
(before death surprises) recover your self, and return to that true Faith from
which you have swerved, and that all that lie under the same guilt may in God's
good time be again gathered into our Apostolical Church. May God remove all
Ostacles, that do at present hinder such a Return.

And my request to your Superiors is, that if ever they think fit to have
another Convert appear in Print against us, they would oblige us so far as to
choose one that has a little more Modesty, and a little more Learning, one that
can distinguish between the Presbyters of Achaia and St. Andrew, between the
Second General Council of Constantinople, p. 72.
and the (reputed) Seventh at Nice, whence he quotes that impudent lie of
Epiphanius the Deacon; one that can translate what he is taught to borrow; that
so if ever any of our Church vouchsafe to answer him, he may not have so many
complaints to make as I have had in the Examination of Mr. Sclater's Book.

March 1st. 1686.
THE END.

