Gemitus Ecclesiae Cambro-Britannicae: OR, THE CANDLE-STICKS REMOVED, By the
Ejectment of the Ministers of WALES, under the power of the late Act, for the
Propagation of the Gospel there.

Being a Declaration to All Christian People, and more especially the Reverend
Ministers of ENGLAND.

Expressing the sad Condition of the several Parishes, and Ejected Ministers
in that Country.

LAM. 1.12. Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, which
is done unto me.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1654.

TO ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE, and more especially to the Dr. Jo. Owen Dr. Tho.
Goodwin.
Reverend Ministers of the Gospel, and other Commissioners appointed for the
approbation of public Preachers, withitn this Commonwealth of England, Grace
and Peace be multiplied from the Author thereof, Christ Jesus our Savior.
THE poor Ejected Ministers of Wales, (who) have long borne their Griefs in
silence, and powered out their complaints in secret before the All seeing and
All-knowing God, committing their sad condition to him alone, who searches the
Heart and Reins, and will judge their Cause in the balance of his Mercy, and
Compassion, Have taken the boldness with the Power of his Blessed Spirit to
publish to your Christian Souls, both theirs, and the sufferings of their
several Congregations, (who have often called upon them,) and to present the
same unto your public view; That the whole Nation of England, and more
especially their dear Breathren and Fellow Laborers in the Truth and purity
of Christ's Gospel, entrusted with the settlement of his Church Government, may
take notice of the Reformation in Wales, and learn by the abuse and
miscariages of persons empowered in that great Work to discover Truth, and
walk according to the Rule of Gods Spirit, discerning between the true
Ministers of the Gospel, the true people of God, and Saint-like Impostors, who
have masked the foulest intentions under the fairest pretenses.

1. The Midwifry of the Act for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales.
In the year 1649. There was an Act passed by the Parliament, Entitled, An
Act for the Propagation of the Gospel in Wales. A specious Title; But how
far cunning Heads, and bold Informers may impose upon a Parliament, and abuse
a wise Council; This one Act may be a sufficient evidence; teaching others to
be more circumspect and cautelous hereafter. For some men of their own Nation,
driving more at self ends and interests then the Glory of God, or the
Propagation of Christ's Gospel (as the issue of their Actions has now fully
discovered their Aims) did represent, to the Honorable House of Parliament,
the condition of Wales as most sad, and deplorable, overspread with Ignorance
and Profannesse (as the words Run in the said Act;) I As though Wales were
still a Land of Darkness, the poor Inhabitants thereof out of Christendom,
sitting in the Region and shadow of Death; Which Information (though a
frontlesse untruth in it self, and a shameless Aspersion upon the whole
Nation, as we shall show anon,) yet served to bring their ends about, who
framed it. The Inhabitants thereof having few Representatives to make known the
true state of their Country, For the Parliament in their Charity to the
Country, and care of the public good, Did take this Land of Darkness into
Consideration, And did put the Act above mentioned upon the Anvill to be framed
and filed for the Work, pretended and desired.

This was the Midwifry of this Act, and the manner of bringing it to the Birth.

Now for the Munagery thereof, and how it was executed, we intend herein to
declare with all Plainness, Sincerity and Candor, and with as much Charity
toward the Actors, as the truth of the Relation will permit.

2. Concerning the ignorance, and profaneness, cast upon the Nation.
But we will first speak something to the Ignorance, Heathenisme, and
Profaneness cast upon the Nation by those, that did owe better Offices to
their Country, and then proceed what we chiefly intend in this Narration.

And we say first (and speak it to Gods Glory, and not our own) That not
only our Nation was converted to Christianity as soon almost as our Savior
suffered; But also the Countries of Wales are by the blessing of God, and the
light of the Gospel of Christ Jesus civilized in a very good measure, 1. A
vindication of the Laity.
and in an equal degree to diverse places of England; The Gentry are Men of
Knowledge, Religion, and Breeding, most of them having had their Education in
the best Schools and Universities of this Land; And the Commonalty generally
careful to bring up their Children in Private Schools. So that they are far
from that wild Heathenisme, and brutish Ignorance, which these Men have
injuriously aspersed them with.

2. Of the Minist^ry.
And in the second place for the Ministry, (To pass by many Apostolical
Martyrs, and Planters of Religion here among us,) We say, That the Ministers of
these Countries were not so few, nor so illiterate, nor so idle in their
Function and Ministry, That any should fear the people (committed to their
charge) were in a perishing state. Some of our own Nation (for a man's worst
foes are of his own Household) Have Preached, and also Printed it for a
preparative to the said Act, and to bring this Trojan horse into their
Country; That there were not thirteen painful Preachers in the thirteen
Counties of Wales. God is merciful, and may pardon Pulpit-slanders, and
untruths, which are delivered openly in the face of Divine Majesty; But how
great an untruth this is, we could soon evince if we were pleased (not speaking
of diverse most painful and Reverend Ministers therein of former times, and in
our memory) To give here a List of the Doctors, Batchelours of Divinity,
Masters of Acts, and other able men of Inferior degree in the Universities,
that were lately planted in these parts, whose Doctrine dropped as the Rain, and
made the Mountains of Gilboah fruitful.

A great noise was made about the scandalous and illiterate Ministers of Wales.
We do confess as in the neatest Gardens, there are some weeders, so there
might be such in the Country; for there is, and ever will be in all
Professions some that are scandalous to their Profession, yet there were fewer
of these, then the Report made them. But there were scandalous Livings too in
these Countries, as well as scandalous Ministers, and those produced these.
There were Vicaridges of twenty Marks a year and under that; There were
Impropriators that would have Curats of the cheapest rate they could get, and
every Parish was ambitious to have a Peculiar Minister; For Pluralities of
Benefices was not long since as great a sin as Pluralities of Wives, though
now an Itinerant may supply twenty; So these small means could have Men but of
small Abilities. But those Benefices that were Presensative, and were endowad
with competent maintenance, They were filled with able Teachers, whose lips did
preserve knowledge, and whose Lives were consonant to their Doctrine.

If the Gentlemen of the Ecclesiastical Commission, had trimmed the Lamps of
the Church, or snuff'd the Candles that burnt dim, if they had spurred up the
Lazy, and sharply admonished those that were fallen, if they had winnowed the
Chafe from the Wheat; purged out the scandalous Ministers only, they had
done God and the Church good service, but we have found their ends and aims
to be far more misterious; Satan desiring not to Winnow out the
Beneficiaires, but the Benefices, not Ministers, but their Livings.

3. The managing of the Act.
But to return from this Digression into the Road, where we left. And to show
how the said Act was managed, and put in Execution.

For the better Propagation of the Gospel in this Country, the Ministers of
the Gospel must be extirpated. This was Resolved on by some of the
Commissioners (entrusted for that Work) before hand; we could name the place,
where they entered into this holy League; And their own Tongues discovered
their Resolutions.

For one of them, and one of the highest form too, and who indeed was
(Ecclesiae pestis and fundi nostri calamitas) the Ruin of our Church, could
say to a Petitioning Minister, Major Genesis Harrison.
That his face was against all of the Order.

Another could say, That All of them must be taken off from their Cures, and
this man was the Hand of this Committee, as the other was the Mouth. A third
(when a Minister did crave his favor) said, it was in vain to strive, for All
were to be Outed first or last. And a fourth, (and he a Preaching Property,
belonging to the Work) Did often Preach, That the Son of the Bond woman, must
not inherit with the Son of the Freewoman, which Text he has since more
clearly expounded, by putting this in practice, and casting them out of their
Inheritance.

Thus according to the Westphalian Law, their Judges had past their Sentence
upon them, before any offender was brought to the Bar, their Profession was
declared Antichristian, and unlawful, and their Calling a Crime; For many were
Ejected, and they know not as yet, wherefore, but because they were Ministers.
Eusebius complains, that Dioclesian took away the Presbyters, But Julian the
Presbytery; So here the Ax is laid to the Roo^ of their Calling, to hew down,
and level the very Function; If it were not so meant, surely some of the old
Clergy might have been thought worthy and fit to keep their Stations. For all
had not corrupted their ways, all were not scandalous, nor illiterate, nor
dumb Dogs, as their common phrase and application was before their Ejectment.

Now as in the case of Naboth, though his Vineyard was already forfeited in
Ahabs thoughts, who was resolved to have it, yet to compass it more plausibly,
there must be legal proceedings to condemn his person: Sons of Belial must be
h^d to prove the pretended Crime, that so he might commit. Murder and Robbery,
in the habit of a Judge: So here in their business, though their Judges had
already prejudged them, and others had already cast Lots upon their
Inheritance, and divided the spoil, (which was the chief Propagation of the
Gospel, that some aimed as, and the only thing that made them all criminal)
yet to give the matter some gloss, and tincture of Justice, it must be carried
on in the form of a Legal Process.

4. The Itinerants became Captains.
Observe how warily they proceed. That the Action may be better countenanced,
and attended, Commissioners are obtained by such as were to be Itinerants,
Gospel Preachers (as they are termed) and some of them approvers nominated in
the Act. They raise Horse and Foot in most Counties, especially in
South Wales, with which they suppress the poor Ministers, and discourage, and
affrighten their several Congregations from following and assisting them; That
this great Work may go on, and be more vigorously put in execution, with such
Instruments, the cry of the Children Sacrificed unto Moloch, must be drowned
and suppressed, we believe they have left but few other Monuments of their
valor unto posterity. We could name their persons, and Counties, and Actions,
but that we are resolved neither to digress, nor stigmatize them.

The first thing they do, is to disarme the Ministers, by disabling them of
any means of defense; And to perform this the better at a private meeting of
some of the Commissioners; All Tithes in general were sequestered in the County
of Radnor, before any of the Ministers are questioned; Thus they are sent to
the Field without weapons, They may sue and Appeal, but they shall do it, sub
forma Pauperum, poor Men, they are exposed to ruin without Mercy, being
utterly deprived of any means either of subsistence or defense.

5. Registers, Sollicitors, chosen.
This being done, and All obstacles Removed, Registers are named, Articles must
be exhibited, Sollicitors must be appointed to receive Accusations, and
Witnesses must be examined with all closeness, and secrecy without their
knowledge or privity; Yet there is neither Commissioner, nor Register, nor
Solicitor, nor any other Officer sworn, nor any set Examiner of all: And who
are their Accusers, ad Witnesses against them?

6. Who are Accusers, and Witnesses aagainst them.
Truly they, who enjoyed their Houses, or Glebes, or Tithes (A tender of a good
bargain of any parcel of their Tithes, being made to such as would join with
them to do this great Work they had in hand.) And judge you, whether that
Hellish Aphorism was not put to the uttermost? Calumniare fortiter, and
aliquid inhaerebit.

They are Resolved to brand them deeply, That their Marks may appear, being
spiteful Accusers to suggest any thing, And such bold Witnesses, that no want
of proof might frustrate the Ejectment.

1. They laid to their charge things that they knew not Psalm. 35.11. Contrary
to all Verity, struunt de proprio calumnias innocentiae. 2. They wrested their
words, Psalm. 56.5. contrary to all Ingenuity. 3. And they pressed the very
rigor of the Letter of the Act against them, being not the intent and sense of
the Enactours, contrary to all Equity.
The smalest offenses of 20 or 30 years standing, were freshly Arraigned as
Capital Crimes, and their least Infirmities were unpardonable, without any
respect, had either to their Abilities, fidelity in their Callings, or
submission to that present Government.

Thus they pursued them so hard, That they could not give them over, as long as
they had any thing worth the loosing.

Sic Reus omnis orit, de quo victoria lucro
Esse potest -- Ovid.
When they or their distressed Wives came to the Doors, either to Petition, or
to hear their accusation (though their good Names, and Being lay at the stake)
yet they are violently thrust back, or scornfully abused, and trampled upon by
the Itinerants Soldiers, prepared for these insolences.

How then could they choose, but be found Guilty, when they had been long
before condemned; And so by this formal kind of Judicature (this pomp and
Ceremony of Justice) they thought they had sufficiently satisfied the people,
though we confidently believe, they had either lulled asleep, or seared up
their own consciences.

But to make up the Scene and solemnity of this Assize, A Preacher Va Powell
preaches a railing Sermon.
must come in to Act a part, and that trust be the D^vells part, To be an
Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. and to do that, which Michael durst not do
against the Accuser himself, that is, bring a railing accusation against him;
And that in the Pulpit, and in numerous Assemblies and concourse of people come
together from several Counties, Jud. 9.
Reviling them as the worst and vilest of men, and condemning them for unsavory
Salt, Mat. 5.13.
fit only to be thrown into the Dunghill, and to be trodden upon. When we
call to mind King David's enemies, whose Tongues were Spears and Arrows, and
Razors, and sharp Swords, as though their Mouths had been an Armory or
Magazine; This man was not inferior to them for such Artillery, and was as free
of them as they were, which he shot at all of the profession, without any
distinction, There was not one Grape of the cluster good and sound.

O Modesty and Charity, where are ye fled? O the mercy, and goodness of God,
and the cruelty of men?

His chief Aim and task was to Murder their good names, and to possess the
people how justly they were divested of all their fortunes, putting them in all
the deformed shapes he could invent, to stir up the people to a hatred of
them and their calling, accounting them (as another of that rank did.) To be
men, forsaken of God and man.

Thus as the Ancient Christian Martyrs, they are transformed into other shapes,
and clad in the Skins of wild Beasts, that they might be sooner fastened upon,
and torn in pieces.

But we will pass over this hired Balaam, for which he received the wages of
unrighteousness; And when you hear that he railed for that, you may suppose
he did it to some purpose, though he was a stranger in the Country, where he
Preached, and knew not one of the Ministers (by face) he did so roundly rail
against: but we find now, it is his Pocket-Invective, through which he
travaileth, seeing his present Highness the Lord Protector, his sage Council,
the Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, have not escaped him; what could the
poor Ministers, (whose calling he accounts uscles and Antichristian) expect
at his hands.

This was the course and Method of the Propagation of the Gospel in Wales.

7. The Poverty of the ejected Ministers.
And now their Persons b^ing thus defamed, and their Means S^questred, they
are exposed to Poverty and want in their old Age, and are like to bring their
gray hairs with sorrow to the Grave, most of them having not as much as a
House to put their heads in, but during pleasure, which was but a sickle
Tenure, considering the affection and quality of their Landlords, they could
nor be Tenants to their means, they were denied not only their Tithes, but
also their Gleabes and Houses upon Rent. Nay a Command was given by the
Commander in chief Major Genesis Harrison.
(then) among them, for the Tumbling of them out of their Houses, to use his
own words, of which command many felt the execution; And so were unhoused, as
well at unchurched. The Prophet Jeremy compained that his Countrymen, Drank
their Water for money, and their Wood was sold unto them, that is, Lam. 5.4.
they were feign to pay for their own, But these found harder usage then they:
They could not have their own for Money.

8. The fifth either denied or undervalued.
And to complete their M^series to the uttermost of their endeavors, Though
there was Provision made by the Act for Propagation, for a Fifth part toward
the maintenance of their Wives, Children and Families, yet by the
undervaluations made by the merciless Sequestrators, and their Farmours, and
the tedious Petitioning to the Commissioners for the obtaining thereof (which
wearied them and their poor Wives, with many hopeless journeys, and doubtful
Answers.) They brought it to nothing, but labor and expense unto them, so that
their Condition herein being like those Inhabitants of a Town in Holland, who
upon surrending were promised their lives by the D. of Alva but after delivery
they were starved to Death, they were R^solved (having spent the Water in their
Bottles) to lay down their Wives and Children before the Lord, lifting up
their voices and weeping before him, Genesis 21.15, etc.
hoping that the time of their Deliverance is at hand.

9. The Appeal a remediles course.
But you will say they were justly and legally outed, and ejected, otherwise
why did not they take the benefit of Appeal?

It was a remedy worse then the disease, The manner of their proceeding,
according to the said Act being as follows.

1. Five Commissioners Examine and Eject. 2. Twelve, upon the Ejected's
Complaints, were to Review and Determine. 3. The twelve Commissioners upon the
Ejecteds Appeals, were to transfer and Certify the proceedings to the
Committee for Plundered Ministers.
Now the Twelve did seldom meet, living remote, the one from the other, and
the time and place of their meeting, was not usually published, nor generally
known.

And suppose that the twelve did meet: was it probable That they who adjudged
the Cause would transfer and certify against their own Judgments? And there
was no Provision in the Act to enforce them, in case they refused: But suppose
they should transfer and certify the Proceedings, yet the Act disabled the
Appellants to examine any more Witnesses (whereas many of their depositions
might be laid down contrary to the examinants intentions; most of them being
illiterate persons, and ignorant of the English Tongue) and were thereby made
incapable of their just defense; so that being once ejected, they receive small
benefit by their Appeals.

Nay if any that conceived himself aggreived therein, did seek any Remedy in
Law, which is afforded to all others the free People of the Nation: The
Commissioners named in the said Act (as they were Commissioners of Indemnity,)
Had Power to enforce Obedience, and Submission to their Orders, stop all the
proceedings of the ejected Ministers: And Indemnifie themselves, and their
Agents for any thing done by color of the said Act.

Who can find out a Clue in such a labyrinth to lead him forth? This we may
boldly say, That the Profoundest subtilities of the ambiguous, and intrapping
Articles of some former projects (which we leave to your thoughts) cannot
out-bid the Invention and Contrivement of this remediles Dilemm of Appeal.

10. They are commanded not to preach.
But this is not all, They are thought not to be sufficiently punished, by
being deprived of their means, but they must be robbed of their calling also;
Being straightly threatened and commanded not to speak at all, nor teach in the
name of Jesus; so that for their Talents what over they are, They are charged
to lay them up in their Napkins, or bury them under ground, for with their
leaves they must not use and employ them, though they earnestly did, and do
desire to continue their pains in Gods Vineyard freely, expecting their reward
from the Lord of the Vineyard only, but it would not be granted.

11 Keep School.
Nay when some of them resolving by Gods Assistance to obey God rather then
men, did hold forth the word of truth unto thousands of people, who to this day
endure a Famine thereof; They were drawn by the necks out of the Pulpits,
abused, threatened, and imprisoned: and when others went about to keep private
Schools, for the support of themselves and Families, they were straightly
commanded to supersede from that employment: And we must tell you, it was not
safe to disobey such Ruling Masters.

12 The Parishes not supplied.
Among all this their Complaints, we may not forget those of their respective
Congregations, who are forced to pay their Tithes more exactly then ever they
did before; And yet have nothing in lieu thereof, neither the comfort of
Praying, and Preaching, nor Sacraments, nor visiting the sick, nor of any
decency of Burial, for few or none are su^stituted to these Offices in the
rooms of those that performed them: And for the number of the Itinerants in
each County, (whose Fathers had designed them to other vocations,) they do go
up and down the Country to preach where, and when they please themselves: so
that men are glad to hear a Sermon in some places once in a twelve month, and
in most places once in a month; That were wont to have one at least, every
Lords Day. -- Ei succus pecori and lac subducitur agnis.

The Children cry for Bread (the Bread of life) and there is none to give it
them, or else instead of Bread they have but a Scorpion, and are fed with
Poison instead of Manna, and wholesome food, to wit, the poison of false
Doctrine, Heresy and Sedition, being leavened with the sowrest Tenets of
Anabaptisme, and whose ways (as is now too apparent) are destructive to
Magistracy, as well as Ministry, which they boldly vent among their hearers.

And this is a plain and brief Account of the Prosecution, and Managery of
the Act for the better Propagation of the Gospel in Wales; and let all
Christian people judge What Propagation this was.

13. Conclusion.
But if this Relation stagger any man's Faith, or may seem to him like those
Marandae auditiones of Aristotle, more like a fiction Sen.
then real truth (Majora veris monstra vix capiunt fidem) we make bold to
protest with the Apostle, That we take God to Record upon our Souls, we have
delivered nothing but truth, passing by many Indignities, and Affronts, with
diverse Acts of cruelty, unfit to be acted by any toward their fellow
Creatures, much more toward their fellow Christians; And since they will not
give them leave to Preach, They will take leave to pray, That since they have
no part nor portion left them in the Land, That God would be their Lot, an
their Portion, and then they shall not want, that he would grant them to run
with patience the Race that is set before them, looking up to Jesus the author
and finisher of their Faith. 1^. Tim. 1.13. Heb. 12.20.
And that he would bless their Widowed Congregations, and guide them with his
Holy Spirit, That they may hold fast the form of Doctrine, which was once
delivered unto them; And that the great Shepherd of the Sheep, would
continually Lead and Govern them, To whose Gracious care and Protection, they
do heartily Recommend them in their Prayers.

1. That the reverend Ministers of England would commiserate the Ministers.
And do earnestly beseech you ( the Reverend Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ in England) to lay to heart, and be grieved for the affliction of your
poor Joseph's, the ejected Ministers of Wales. And to be a means (at least)
that their Wives and Children may enjoy a competency of liveli-hood, and
subsistence, and that they may understand what has been laid to ch^ir Charge,
and be made capable without expense (being wholly disabled) to make their answer
thereunto.

2. And Churches of Wales.
O! mou^ne for the affliction of your disconsolate Sister: Is it nothing to you
that pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto he sorrow. All
beauty is departed from her Sion, Lam 1.12.
the Lord has taken away the Tabernacle, destroyed his places of the Assembly,
and caused the solemn Fast, and Sabbaths to be forgotten among them: Lam. 2.6.
Is this nothing to you?

O! She is your little Sister, and she has (now) no Breasts, Can. 8.8.
What will ye do for your Sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?

O comfort her by the Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.4.
wherewith ye your selves have been Comforted of God; Plead her cause, as the
Lord has pleaded yours. For if it had not been the Lord, who was on your side
( may now the Ministers of England say) if it had not been the Lord, who was on
your side, Psalm. 124.1.2.
when their Enemies rose up against you also; Then they had swallowed you up,
and those proud Waters had overwhelmed, and gone over your souls.

But praised be God, who has raised you a Mighty deliverer in the Day of your
trial, and praised by the God of your Salvation.

FINIS.

