STATUS ECCLESIAE GALLICANAE: OR THE Ecclesiastical History OF FRANCE.

From the first Plantation of CHRISTIANITY there, unto this Time: Describing
the most notable CHURCH MATTERS: the several Councils holden in FRANCE, with
their principal CANONS: The most Famous Men, and most LEARNED WRITERS, and the
Books they have written, with many Eminent French Popes Cardinals, Prelates,
Pastors, and Lawyers. A description of their UNIVERSITIES with their FOUNDERS.
An impartial account of the State of the Reformed CHURCHES in FRANCE; and the
Civil Wars there for Religion: With an exact succession of the FRENCH KINGS.

By the Author of the late History of the Church of GREAT BRITAIN.

Historia est lumen Veritatis, vita Antiquitatis. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Passenger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge; and Ralph Smith at the Sign of
the Bible under the Tiazz of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 16^6.

Amplissimis, and Admodum Reverendis in Christo Patribus ac Dominis, HENRICO,
Providentia Divina Episcopo Londinensi: and Joanni eadem Providentia Episcopo
Roffensi; necnon Decano Westmonasteriensi, Salutem in Christo sempiternam.
Venerandi Patres, and Domini Colendissimi!
EA, qua par est, submissione, Historicum hocce (...), ex antiquis and
recentibus Authoribus Collectum, vobis offero, nuncupo, dedico: ut splendore
clarorum vestrorum nominum lux aliqua opusculo huic per viam affulgeret,
omnisque sinistra obmurmurantium scaeva propitio vestro favore procul amoveatur.

Flosculus est, quem Ego pauperculus, humilisque Christi Hortulanus vobis
proesento: non ille quidem Lectissimus, sed is tamen qui in vestris primum
sacratis manibus cupiat sua qualiacunque folia explicare Carpent illum e
vestris manibus alii quoque, and delibabunt. Si enim vestro olfactui
sagacissimo non ingratus fuerit; si vestrae gratiae calorem fenserit; non
dubito, quin Piis omnibus bonum publicae aedificationis odorem captantibus,
gratus and jucundus sit futurus.

Hoc mihi solamen est, quod viri praestantissimi, and Honor and Doctrina
proecellentes, non tam muneris oblati dignitatem, quam gratum offerentis animum
perpendere soleant. Si hunc librum accipere, and diligenter perlegere
dignemini, honestabor and gratia meis laboribus optima referetur. De Materia
and Methodo hujus Historiae, modum an satis servarim, Vos pro vestris acerrimis
Judiciis aestimabitis. Illam siquando forte inspexeritis, and in ea aliquid
observabitis, de quo me admonendum putabitis, illud rogo significetis: and
quicquid egeritis, meam non modo voluntatem, sed etiam sententiam cum vestra
conjungam: hoc etiam Beneficium, and quidem summum accipiam, quo nimirum and
melior and doctior evadam. Deus Amplitudinem vestram, in Ecclesiae suae,
nostraeque patriae utilitatem, quam diutissime servet incolumem.

Vestrae Reverentiae Observantissimus. G. G.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Design of this Treatise is to set forth the State of the Gallican
Churches, both of the Popish, and the Reformed. As to the Popish Church in
France, it is holden to be the best Privileged of all the Churches in
Christendom under the Pope.

As touching their power, the Gallican Clergy stands more stoutly to their
Natural Rights against the Encroachments and Usurpations of the Sea of Rome,
than any other that lives under the Pope 's Authority; which they acknowledge
so far only, as is consistent with their own Privileges, and the Rights of
their Sovereign: for it was long e're they could submit to the Decrees of the
Council of TRENT, nor have they yet admitted of the Inquisition.

The Doctors of the Sorbon, are accounted together with the Parliament of
Paris, the principal Pillars of the French Liberty, whereof they are exceeding
jealous, as well in matters Ecclesiastical as Civil.

When Gerson Chancellor of Paris, had published a Book in approbation of the
Council of Constance; where it was Enacted that the Authority of the Council
was greater than that of the Pope, the Sorbon Doctors declared that also to be
their Doctrine. For John Gerson in his defense of the Decree of that Council,
speaking of the Adversaries says, Perniciosos esse admodum adulatores, qui
Tyrannidem istam in Ecclesiam invexere, quasi nullis Regum teneatur vinculis:
quasi neque parere debeat Concilio Pontifex, nec ab eo judicari queat.

The Kings themselves also befriend their Clergy in the cause, and therefore
not only protested against the Council of Trent, wherein the Spiritual Tyranny
was generally consented to by the Popish faction; but Henry the second King of
France, would not acknowledge them to be a Council, calling it in his Letters
by no other name than Conventus Tridentinus. An indignity which the Fathers
took grievously.

Moreover, when King Jews XI. to gratify Pope Pius the second, purposed to
abolish the Pragmatick Sanction, the Sorbonnists in behalf of the Church
Gallican, and the University of Paris, Magnis obsistebant animis (says Sleidan
in his Commentary) and a Papa provocabant ad Concilium. The Council unto which
they appealed, was that of Basil, where that Sanction was made: so that by this
Appeal they verified their former Thesis, that the Council was above the Pope.

And before the Pragmatick Sanction was ordained, the Pope had yearly drained
the State of a Million of Crowns, as the Court of Parliament manifested to King
Jews the eleventh.

Since which time the Kings of France have sometimes omitted the vigor of the
Sanction, and sometimes also exacted it, according as their affairs with the
Pope stood: therefore it was called Froenum Pontificum.

And in the Year 1613. casually meeting with a Book written by Becanus,
entitled Controversia Anglicana de potestate Regis and Papae; the French
called an Assembly, and condemned it. For, although the Main of it was against
the Power and Supremacy of the King of England, yet did it reflect also on the
Authority of the Pope over the Christians by the By, which occasioned the
Sentence. So jealous are they of the least circumstances, in which any of their
immunities may be endangered.

The Pope has no power in France to pardon criminals. Le Rescript. C. de
precib. Imp. offer. Gratian. cause. 25.
The very faculties of the Legates heretofore sent into that Kingdom, make not
any mention of it, but of the Remission of Sins proceeding from crimes. And
though there should be any such thing, yet they are still curbed in with this
Bridle.

To use it in such things as are not contrary, derogatory, nor prejudicial to
the Rights and Prerogatives of the King and Kingdom, nor against the sacred
Councils, the Laws of the Universities, the Liberties of the Gallican Church,
and the Ordinances Royal.

The Clergy of France do not hold their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
Pope, but of the King alone, Bellarm. Tom. 1. controv. 2. li. 4. ca. 24.
howsoever the Jesuits teach the contrary, when they do not use it as they
ought: when they connive at the punishment of crimes, whereof they have the
Cognizance, the Courts of Parliaments may interpose by means of an Appeal, as
from Abuses, especially considering, it is it that grants them Jurisdiction
over Spirituals. And if the Question be of granting pardon to a Priest, or
other Ecclesiastic, not only in a privileged case, but also in a common crime
by him committed, it belongs to the King only to grant it, not to the Pope, nor
the Bishop. And so it has been always accustomed to be done in France.

Moreover, the Pope cannot there restore Clergymen to their former State,
Papon. ca. 15. and 16. des libertez. de l'Eglise. Gallic.
so as to free them from the infamy which they have incurred; nor Laymen
unless it be to receive them into Orders, Offices, and Ecclesiastical Acts, not
otherwise. As also that within this Realm, he cannot pardon or remit the
Honorary Amends, adjudged by a Layman, albeit the condemnation were passed by
an Ecclesiastical Judge, and that against a Clerk, as making such Honorary
condemnation a part of the civil satisfaction.

The Pope cannot make any Unions, or annexations of the livings in France,
during the life of the Incumbents, nor at other times: but he may grant out
Writs of Delegation concerning unions, which is conceived to be done, according
to the form prescribed in the Council of Constance, and with the consent of the
Patron, and not otherwise.

The Kings of France have always reserved this authority and prerogative to
themselves, to determine of the Residence of Bishops, to compel them to feed
their Flocks, and wait upon their Churches when need required, and that by
seizing upon their Temporals; to call them from Rome to return into France, to
dispense with them, and approve the causes of their absence.

The Pope cannot in France dispense for any cause whatsoever, with that which
is of the Law of God or Nature, or with that wherein the Councils do not allow
him to dispense. And the Ordinances of the French Kings do expressly forbid all
the Judges of the Land to have any regard to dispensations granted contrary to
the sacred Decrees and Councils, upon pain of losing their places: And declare
furthermore, That such as procure the said Proviso's and dispensations, shall
not make use of them, unless they get leave and permission from his Majesty.

The Gallican Church is also more free from payments to the Pope than the
Church of Spain, as also to the King. The Clergy of France pay only the Disme;
whereas in Spain the King has his Tertia's, Subsidio, Pyla, Escusado; in all a
moiety of the Church Livings.

As to the French Churches separating from Communion with the Church of Rome,
they have often been brought very low by the Popish party.

Sad was the condition of the Church of Merindol, which was cruelly rooted out
by virtue of an Arrest of the Parliament of Aix, Men, Women and Children being
destroyed. And yet (I doubt not) but some small remainder of them was
preserved. For so the story says expressly, pauci quidem profugi Genevam and
alia loca Vicinia pervenerunt. Osiand. Eccl. Hist.
Some few of them escaped by flight to Geneva, and other Neighboring places.

What Persecutions did the Waldenses, or Albigenses suffer, when the Pope sent
about his Friars in France (it seems) to preach Crusado 's, viz. That
whosoever would take the Badge of the Cross upon his Garment, and serve the
Pope forty days in his Wars against those Christians who denied him obedience,
and opposed his Pride and Tyranny, should have full pardon of all his sins; and
if he dyed in the Wars should presently go to Heaven, and escape the flames of
Purgatory: and by this means (as I remember) he had at one time about an
hundred thousand of the silly people in Arms, whom he used against the most
faithful Christians, seeking utterly to extirpate them, and by this means much
Blood was shed. It was easy for him in those times of darkness to draw
multitudes of poor blind Souls to Destruction. And Reimond, Earl of Toulouse, a
great Prince, and Peer of France, was ruined, the Pope seizing on his Estate
and holding it unto this day.

A French Historian speaking of the bloody massacre in the Reign of Charles IX.
says, Thuan. Hist. li. 54.
that many wise men that were Papists themselves, did think, that in all
Antiquity there could not be found an example of like cruelty. But even then
remarkable was God's Providence toward those of the Reformed Religion in
France. In the time of that cruel massacre at Paris the Protestants being in
great fear shifted for themselves here and there. Among the rest many of them
fled to a certain honorable Lady for protection, who being near of kin to the
King, was the more bold: but being a faithful Christian, she was also willing
to receive them.

Hereof complaint being made, the King in great displeasure commands her to
dismiss them all, which she could not withstand: so that in one day about 300
Wagons (for the most part filled with Women and young Children) were
constrained to dislodge, and without a guard to go to a strong Town for the
safety of their lives. In this Journey they were to pass through their bloody
enemies straggling up and down in Arms, and ready to seize on such a booty. But
by the special providence of God, a certain Troop of Armed Gentlemen on
Horseback happened to meet them, who soon perceiving and pitying their danger,
conducted them along in safety, and often repulsed their enemies that were
ready to assail them. And though the French Kings (have all of them) professed
the Roman Religion, yet the Lord has had many Instruments, who with the hazard
of their lives, and outward Estates, have stood for the defense of his Church,
diverse Princes of the Blood, Nobles, Gentlemen and others, and did strangely
raise his Church again after that horrid massacre, by which it seemed to have
been extinguished.

And King James of happy Memory, speaks thus of those worthy Patriots whom
God raised up for the defense of his Church at that time, in his book of the
defense of the right of Kings. I never knew yet (says he) that the French
Protestants took Arms against their King. In the first troubles they stood only
on their defense. Before they took Arms they were burnt and massacred every
where. And the quarrel did not begin for Religion: but because when King
Francis the second was under Age, they had been the Refuge of the Princes of
the Blood expelled from the Court, even of the Grandfather of the King now
reigning, and of that of the Prince of Conde, who knew not where to take
Sanctuary, it shall not be found that they made any other War. Nay is it not
true (as a learned Divine of ours has well observed) that King Henry III. sent
Armies against them to destroy them, and yet they ran to his help as soon as
they saw him in danger? Is it not true, that they saved his Life at Tours; and
delivered him from extreme danger? And in the Year 1617. they had the Testimony
of their fidelity from their own King Jews XIII. written to their Deputies
assembled in a Synod at Vitre in these terms. We have received with good
satisfaction the new assurances and protestations which you have made unto us
of your fidelity and obedience, in the which if you persist, as ye ought, and
as ye have done before, you may also be assured, that we shall always have a
care to maintain and preserve you in all the advantages which have been granted
unto you.

A Reverend Divine on the Revelation, speaking of the French Churches says;
God has made the Church of France a wonder (to me) in his proceeding toward
them from first to last, and therefore to me great and special honor would
seem to be reserved for them yet at the last. For the first light of the
Gospel, the first and second Angels preaching, (Rev. 14.) which laid the
Foundation of Antichrist's ruin, was from them, namely those of Lions, and
other places in France: and they bare the heat of persecution, which was as
great as any since, if not greater. Moreover, the Churches of France have ever
since had as great a share in persecutions, yea greater than any of the
Protestant Churches. And although it be well nigh five hundred years since they
began to separate first from Antichrist, yet they never had the great honor
and privilege (which other Churches have been so blessed with) as to have a
supreme Magistrate, professing their Religion, except one, who also continued
not therein.

Pareus in his Commentary on the Revelation, writing concerning the destruction
of Rome, Paraei. Com. in 17. Apoc. Vis. 6.
inserts a Prophecy, taken out of an Ancient Manuscript found in the house of
Salezianus, and a little before his writing on that Chapter sent unto him,
which is as follows.

Ex Natione Illustrissimi Lilii orietur Rexquidam, etc. There shall arise a
King out of the Nation of the most illustrious Lily (viz. France) having a long
forehead, high brows, great eyes, and an Eagle's nose. He shall gather a great
Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his Kingdom, and slay all that fly, and
hide themselves in the Mountains and Caves from his face. For Righteousness
shall be joined unto him as the Bridegroom to the Bride: with them He shall
wage War, even to the fortyeth year, bringing into subjection the Islanders,
Spaniards, and Italians: Rome and Florence he shall destroy and burn with fire,
so as salt may be sowed on that Land. The greatest Clergy who have invaded St.
Peter's seat, he shall put to death, and in the same year obtain a double
Crown: and at last going over Sea with a great Army, he shall enter Greece, and
be named King of the Greeks. The Turks and Barbarians he shall subdue, making
an Edict, That every one shall dye the death, that worshippeth not the
crucified one: and none shall be found able to resist him, because an holy Arm
from the Lord shall always be with him, and He shall possess the Dominion of
the Earth. These things being done, he shall be called, The rest of Holy
Christians. Thus far the Prophecy, which every one may credit so far as it
likes him, says my Author.

There is another common Prophecy, viz. That from the Carolingians, that is, of
the race of Charlemaigne, and Blood Royal, shall arise an Emperor of France,
by name Charles, who shall be a great Monarch, and shall reform the Church and
State. He that is curious to see this Prophecy, may find it among the vulgar
Revelations. Whether this Prophecy has any weight in it, I refer my self to
other Men's Judgments: When God has appointed it to be done, he will touch
their hearts that shall do it.

W. G.

THE Ecclesiastical HISTORY OF FRANCE.
Century I.
BEing about to write the History of the Gallican Church, Ephr. Pagit
Christianogr.
I shall begin with the first Plantation of the Gospel in France.

Some Writers tell us, that Philip the Apostle, of the City of Bethsaida, first
preached the Gospel in France; and having afterward preached in Phrygia, he
was honorably buried with his Daughters at Hierapolis. Others say, Heylin's
Cosmogr. Lib. 1.
that the Christian Faith was first planted among the Gauls by some of St.
Peter's Disciples, sent thither by him at his first coming to Rome, Xystus,
Fronto, and Julianus, the first Pastors of Rhemes, Peregort and Mantz, being
said to be of his Ordaining in the Martyrologies.

The like may be affirmed, (but on surer grounds) of Trophimus, said to be the
first pastor, or Bishop of Arles. For, afterward in a controversy betwixt the
Archbishops of Vienna in France and Arles, for the Dignity of Metropolitan, in
the time of Pope Leo the first, it was thus pleaded in behalf of the Bishop of
Arles, Quod prima inter Gallias, etc. That Arles of all the Cities of Gaul, did
first obtain the happiness of having Trophimus ordained Bishop thereof by the
hands of St. Peter. Trophimus was a partaker with St. Paul in all his
afflictions, and his daily companion. Zosimus writes, that out of his
Spiritual Fountain all the Rivers and Brooks of France were filled. Neither is
St. Paul to be denied the honor of sending some of his Disciples thither also
to preach the Gospel.

Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
Crescens, a companion of St. Paul, mentioned by him in his second Epistle unto
Timothy, is said to have departed into Galatia, 2 Timothy 4.10. which Eusebius
says was France. That he was the first Bishop of Vienna forementioned, not
only the Martyrologies, but also Ado Viennensis, an ancient Writer of that
Church does expressly say. And that it was into this Country that he sent
Crescens at that time, and not into Galatia in Asia Minor, the testimonies of
Epiphanius and Theodoret, Doroth. de LXX Discip.
which affirm the same, may sufficiently confirm. Dorotheus says, that
Crescens preached the Gospel in France, and was there martyred and buried in
the time of Trajan the Emperor.

In the History of Lazarus and Maximinus, we find, that they with Mary
Magdalen, and her sister Martha came to Marseilles. Maximinus was one of the
seventy Disciples of Christ, as diverse Authors tell us. The French Antiquities
tell us, That after the Ascension of our Lord, Anno 14. the Jews raised so
horrible a persecution against the Christians, that the most part fled whither
they could: That Maximinus accompanied with Lazarus, took Mary Magdalen,
Martha, Marcella her handmaid, and some others, and committing themselves to
the Sea to avoid the fury of the Jews, they arrive at Marseilles, where the
Prince of Marseilles was baptized. Lazarus became first Pastor of Marseilles,
and Maximinus of Aquens. They were ordained to those Churches in the Year of
Christ, 46. in which Year these Authors tell us, that Simon the Leper (whom our
Savior cured of that infirmity) was Ordained to be Minister of Mentz,
Cenomanensium in the Latin.

In the Year following, Martial was sent into France, who Converted diverse
Provinces and people, as the Annals of France do plainly testify.

In the Year of Christ 48. Aphordisius, by birth an Egyptian, and Governor of
all Egypt, at the time when our Savior being driven into Egypt, the Idols of
the Temples there fell down, being the Disciple of St. Peter at Antioch, was
Constituted Pastor of Bourges in France. After he had preached there six years
he died, and Vrsinus (whom some call Nathanael) succeeded him

Anno Christi 54. Paulus Sergius was also Constituted Pastor of the Church of
Narbon.

Anton. de Mocharez. Lib. 2. de Miss.
About this time Clement Surnamed Flavius, with Celestus and Felix, and our
Country man Monsuetus, came also into France, and preached the Gospel there:
so did Amator with others.

Eisingrenius out of diverse Authors proves, that Savinianus, Eisingren. Cent.
Part 1. distinct. 3.
or Sabinus, one of the LXXII Disciples of Christ, was by St. Peter the Apostle
sent into France, and was Bishop of Sens, when Claudius was Emperor, Anno
Christi 54. and that unto him succeeded in the Year 74. Potentianus, who
afterward was an Holy Martyr.

Century II.
IN the second Century under the Empire of Marcus Aurelius, Sulpit. Sever.
Histor. Sacr. Lib. 2.
about the Year of our Lord, 168. Christian Religion began to spread in France,
and then first began Martyrdoms, as Sulpitius Severus says, who was a Gaul,
and lived near about that time. Under Aurelius Son of Autoninus (says he) the
fifth Persecution was moved, and then first Martyrdoms were seen in France, the
Religion of God having past very late over the Alps, being seriously received,
and sincerely entertained there.

Many Christians there suffered Martyrdom by the Emperor's Cruel Edicts, among
whom the Martyrs at Lions and Vienna (by both which Cities the River Rhodanus
does run) were the most eminent.

The Holy Churches there, sent a Letter touching their Martyrs unto the
Churches throughout Asia and Phrygia, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 5.
the Title of which Epistle thus begins; The Servants of Christ inhabiting
Vienna and Lions, Cities of France, unto the Brethren throughout Asia and
Phrygia, obtaining with us the same Faith and Hope of Redemption, Peace, Grace
and Glory from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord, be multiplied.

Having premised certain things by way of preamble, they proceed in these
words. The greatness of this our Tribulation, the furious rage of the Gentiles
against the Saints, and what things the blessed Martyrs have suffered, we are
able exactly neither to express by word, nor comprehend in writing, etc. Then
they show, how they bare manfully all such Vexations as the clustered multitude
laid upon them, viz. Exclamations, Scourgings, Draggings, Spoiling, Fettering,
Stoning, Imprisonment, and that being brought before the President, who had
exercised all kind of extreme cruelty against them, Vegetius Epagathus, a young
Noble Man, being full of fervent Zeal for God, with vehement motion required
that Audience might be given him to plead for the Brethren, affirming, that
they had committed no impiety: Which was denied him; the President demanding
whether he were a Christian, he confessed it with a loud voice, and so was
received into the fellowship of the Martyrs, and called the Advocate of the
Christians. Then they declare, that Ten weak Christians, not able to bear the
burden of so weighty a combat fell in time of Persecution, to their great
heaviness, and sorrowful lamentation. They add, that out of both these Churches
as many as ruled and bare the greatest sway, were taken and executed. Great was
the whole rage both of President, People, and Soldiers against Sanctus, Deacon
of the Church of Vienna, and against Maturus, lately Baptized, yet a notable
warrior, and against Attalus a man of Pergamus, who was a Pillar of the Faith,
and against Blandina, who at the time of her answer was so replenished with
Grace from Above, that the Executioners which tormented her by turns from
morning to night, fainted for weariness, and ceased, confessing themselves
overcome, marvelling that as yet she drew breath, having her whole body rent in
pieces, and the wounds open; they confessing withal, that one of these Torments
was of force sufficient to cost Her her life, much more so many and so great
sufferings: But this Blessed Woman like a Noble Wrestler, was renewed at her
Confession; for as often as she pronounced, I am a Christian, neither have we
committed any evil: She was refreshed, and felt no pain of her punishment. And
such was the constancy of Sanctus, that in the midst of his Torments, he
uttered neither his own Name, neither his Kindred, nor the Country whence he
was, but unto every Question he answered in the Roman Tongue, I am a Christian:
Thus confessed he often, neither could the Gentiles get any other Language of
him. When the wicked Tormentors a few days after had brought him to the place
of Torment, and well hoped, that if they punished him now (having his whole
body pufft up with swelling and festered wounds, so sore that it might not be
touched, no not with the least finger) they should overcome him, or that if he
died in torment, they should terrify the rest; none of all these happened unto
him, but beyond all men's expectation, his body was released of the pain,
recovered it is former shape, and the members were restored to their former use.

Then Biblis, a Woman, was grievously tormented, who in the midst of her
Torments, cried out unto the Tormentors, and said, How could they devour
Infants, which were not suffered to suck the blood of brute Beasts? Then She
confessing her self a Christian, was brought to Execution.

They show, that Photinus Bishop of Lions after great Torments was cast into
prison, being about ninety years old, being weak of body, scarce able to draw
breath, creeping on apace, and being strengthened in Spirit for the conceived
joy of Martyrdom which he desired: He was carried by the Soldiers, and laid
before the Tribunal-Seat, accompanied with the Potentates of the City, and the
whole Multitude; and being demanded of the President, who is the God of the
Christians? Answered, If thou become worthy thou shall understand: After this
Answer, such as were nearest to him pricked at him with the hand, and spurned
him with the foot, reverencing his years nothing at all; and those that stood
afar off threw at his head whatsoever they had in their hands: He almost
breathless is thrown into prison, where after two days he departed this Life.

Maturus, Sanctus, Blandina and Attalus, were led unto the brute beasts in the
public spectacle of the Heathens. Maturus and Sanctus were diversely Tormented
with all kinds of punishments, as if they had suffered nothing before: At
length, after they had endured this grievous Trial, they were beheaded.
Blandina was hanged in chains on a Gibbet so low, that the wild beasts might
reach her: after that she had hung a long while, and no Beast touched her, she
was taken down, cast into prison, and reserved for further Torment.

Attalus also a Famous Man, and notably exercised in the Christian Profession,
was led within compass of the Theater with a Scroll before him, wherein was
written in the Roman Tongue, This is Attalus the Christian. The President
knowing that he was a Roman, commanded him to be imprisoned, and closely kept
with the other prisoners, concerning whom he had written unto Caesar, and
expected an Answer.

Alexander, a Phrygian born, and a Physician, having dwelt in France many
years, a man well known for his great Zeal toward God, and boldness of speech,
stood hard by the Tribunal-Seat, and comforted and encouraged many Martyrs at
their Examination: When the people that stood by took in evil part that they
which before had recanted, did now confess Christ, with one consent they cry
out against Alexander as Author thereof: Then the President demanding of him
what he was, he Answered, I am a Christian; for which Answer he was allotted to
be torn in pieces by the wild Beasts.

Attalus was fried to death in a scalding Iron Chair, so that the savor of his
broiled body filled their nostrils; who being demanded what Name God had,
Answered, God is not called after the manner of Men.

Blandina, together with Ponticus (a youth of fifteen years of Age) was brought
forth, whom they would have compelled to swear by their Idol's Name: But they
contemning their Idol, the multitude were enraged against them, tormenting them
with all manner of punishments. Ponticus being comforted and confirmed by
Blandina in presence of the Pagans, after he had suffered most exquisite
Torments yielded up the Ghost. Last of all, Blandina like a noble Mother,
having exhorted her Children, and sent them before as Conquerours unto the
King, pondering with her self all the punishments of her Children, hastened
after them, joying and triumphing at her end, as if she had been invited, and
going to a wedding dinner: After scourging, after combating with wild Beasts,
after the broiling of her body as it were in a drying pan, at length she was
wrapped in a Net, and tumbled before a wild Bull, which fanned and tossed her
on his horns to and fro, yet had she no feeling thereof, in the end she was
beheaded; the Pagans themselves pronouncing, That never any Woman among them
was heard to have suffered so many, and so great Torments.

As many as were choked with the noisome stench of the prison, were thrown to be
devoured of Dogs, the Pagans keeping a watch day and night, that none of them
might be buried by their Friends. To be short, after that the bodies of the
blessed Saints had been every kind of way spitefully and scornfully entreated,
lying six whole days unburied, at length they were burned to ashes, the ashes
also they gathered together, and scattered in the River Rhodanus which passed
by, so that no jot or relic thereof should any longer remain upon the earth.
This they did, that there might (as they said) be no further hope of their
Resurrection.

Irenaeus (after Photinus) was Bishop of Lions, he flourished in the days of
the Emperor Commodus, his meek disposition, and peaceable carriage, answered
to his Name (...), that is, Peaceable, and made his Name to be in great account
among Christians.

Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 4.
The Martyrs forementioned did highly commend Irenaeus unto Eleutherius Bishop
of Rome, as their own words do declare in this manner; Father Eleutherius, we
wish you health in all things, and always in God. We have requested Irenaeus
our Brother and Fellow Laborer, to deliver you these Letters, whom we pray you
to accept of, as a zealous follower of the Will of Christ. For if we understood
that any man's degree yielded forth, and delivered Righteousness unto the
Graduate, namely, as being Minister of the Church which this man is, we would
have chiefly commended this in him.

Iren. Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Eusebius has set down out of Irenaeus a Catalogue of the Roman Biships unto
his time.

Iren. Lib. 2. cap. 57.
Irenaeus shows, how unto his time Miracles were wrought by the faithful:
some (says he) do soundly and truly cast out Devils, others have the
foreknowledge of things to come, they see Divine Dreams, and Prophetical
Visions; others cure the diseased, and restore them to health by their laying
on of hands. The dead were raised to life (says he) and lived together with us
many years. Again, in another place, Irenaeus thus writes, We have heard of
many Brethren in the Church which had the gift of prophesying, which were able
through the Holy Ghost to speak with sundry Tongues, Iren. Lib. 5.
which could reveil the secrets of men where it so behoved, and expound the
dark mysteries of God.

Then arose a Controversy about the keeping of Easter; for the Church of the
West, and part of that of the East did Celebrate the Feast of Easter upon the
Lord's day: but part of the Church of the East did Celebrate it upon the
fourteenth day of the Moon of March, not looking for the Lord's day. Toward
the end of this second Century, Victor, the successor of Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome took that business in hand with eagerness, and for that cause separated
the Oriental Churches from his Communion. Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus resisted
him; Victor being incensed with that resistance, excommunicateth all the
Eastern Churches. Eusebius says, That this did not please all the Bishops,
wherefore also they made him a contrary Command, that he should keep Peace,
Union and Charity with his Neighbors. Among other Examples he brings forth the
Epistle of Irenaeus to Victor, whereby he accuses him to have violated
Charity, and to have departed from the Example of his Ancestors. Ruffinus
relates the same.

Eusebius makes mention of what Irenaeus wrote concerning the Holy Canonical
Scriptures, and the translation of the Septuagint. Irenaeus wrote diverse
Epistles to confute such as at Rome corrupted the sincere Rites of the Church:
He wrote one to Blastus of Schism, another to Florinus of Monarchy, or showing
that God is not the Author of Evil, which Opinion Florinus seemed to be of, but
afterward he was seduced with the Error of Valentinus. Irenaeus in his
Epistle to Florinus, Reports, that he had conversed with Polycarpus, so that
he remembered the place where Polycarpus sat when he taught, his course of
Life, the figure and proportion of his body, the Sermons he made unto the
Multitude, the report he made of his Conversation with St. John the Apostle,
and others which saw the Lord; how he remembered their sayings, and what he
heard out of their mouths touching the Lord, of his Power and Doctrine. These
things (says he) I diligently marked and printed them in my heart: And I am
able to testify, if that Holy and Apostolic Elder had heard any such thing,
he would have presently stopped his ears, and reclaimed it. To be short, this
may be reported for true out of the Epistles which he wrote for the
Confirmation of the bordering Churches, or out of the Epistles which he wrote
to certain Brethren for Admonition or Exhortation-sake. Thus far Irenaeus.

There are but few of the Fathers but have some particular Opinion which the
Church of Rome disalloweth as well as we. The Learned Dr. Du Moulin mentions
many of the Ancients, Du Moulin Contr. Perront. Lib. 1. cap. 49.
and among them Irenaeus, who says, that Jesus Christ Taught until the Age of
forty or fifty years. Fevardent, who has Commented upon the Book has written
in the Margin, Naevus de aetate Christi; it is a fault of Irenaeus about the
Age of Christ. The same Father also Teaches, that the Souls separated from the
bodies have a bodily shape, and keep the character or form of the body to which
they were joined. The same Irenaeus says, Iren. Lib. 4. cap. 30.
That the Law was not given to the Fathers that lived before the Law, because
they were Righteous, and there was no need they should be warned by
Reprehensions: but that this Righteousness being given in Egypt, God then had
given his Law. The same Father in the Fifth Book, Chap. 33 and 34 brings in
bodily Feasts after the Resurrection, because Christ said, He should drink of
the New Fruit of the Vine in the Kingdom of his Father. The same Father
opposes them as Heretics, that hold that the Souls of the Faithful departed
do enjoy the Heavenly Glory. His Opinion was, that at their going out of the
Body, they go down into an invisible place where they expect the Resurrection.

Besides those Epistles of Irenaeus forementioned, there is extant another very
learned and necessary Book of his against the Gentiles, Entitled A Book of
Science, or, Knowledge: Another unto Marcianus his Brother, Entitled, A
Declaration of the Apostles Preaching: And another Book of diverse Tracts, where
he makes mention of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Book of Wisdom, called
Solomon's.

Ex Platina in vita Sixti.
In the time of the Emperor Commodus, Peregrinus flourished, who had been sent
before by Xistus Bishop of Rome into the parts of France, to supply there the
room of a Bishop and Teacher: Because of the horrible Persecutions thereabout,
those places were left desolate and destitute of Ministers and Instructors;
where after he had Preached with much success among the Flock of Christ, and
had established the Congregation there, returning to Rome he there finished his
Martyrdom. Six several Synods were held about the Observation of Easter, and
the fourth was held in France, in which Irenaeus was Chief.

Century III.
AFter the Death of the Emperor Commodus, Reigned Pertinax but few months,
after whom succeeded Septimius Severus, under whom was raised a notable
Persecution against the Christians. Great Persecution was stirred up on every
side, whereby an infinite number of Martyrs were slain, as Eusebius reports.

Vincent, Lib. 11. cap. 6. Ex Martyrol.
Vincentius speaks of one Andoclus, whom Polycarpus before had sent into
France; which Andoclus, because he spread there the Doctrine of Christ, was
apprehended of Severus, and first beaten with staves, and after was beheaded.

About the same time died Irenaeus, Henry of Erford, Ado, and other
Martyr-writers do hold, That he was martyred with many more for the Confession
and Doctrine of Christ, about the fourth or fifth year of Severus. This
Irenaeus, as he was a great Writer, so was he greatly commended of Tertullian
for his Learning, whom he calls, Omnium doctrinarum curiosissimum
exploratorem, a great searcher of all kind of learning. In the time of this
Irenaeus, the state of the Church was much troubled, not only for the outward
persecution of the foreign enemy, but also for diverse Sects and Errors then
stirring, against which he diligently labored, and wrote much, although but
few Books be now remaining.

Calixtus succeeded Zepherinus Bishop of Rome, and after him Vrbanus, which
both (as some Writers affirm) did suffer under the Emperor Alexander Severus:
This Calixtus in his two decretal Epistles written to Benedictus, and to the
Bishops of France, gives forth diverse Ordinances concerning the Bishops and
Ministers of the Church. Vincentius affirms, that Calixtus was tied to a
great stone, and so out of a window was thrown into a ditch.

Under the Emperor Decius (as Gregory of Tours observes) Gratian came to
Tours to preach the Gospel among the Pagans, Gregor. Turonens. Hist. Lib. 5.
Anno Christi 252. Saturninus preached at Toulouse, and was the first Bishop of
that place. Dionysius also came to Paris, where he was Bishop, and suffered
Martyrdom: This is he who is falsely named Dionysius, or Denis the Areopagite.
Saturninus also was thrown down from the Capitol of Toulouse: Rusticus and
Eleutherius also there suffered Martyrdom.

The Author of St. Omer's Life relates, that Fuscianus and Victorinus the
Companions of Dionysius preached at the same time the Faith of Christ. That St.
Quintin did the same among the Ambianians, and suffered Martyrdom.

Aurelius Probus being invested with the Empire, Anno 276. went into France
where he regained sixty Towns out of the Barbarians hands, and killed of them
near seventy thousand. Having quieted all things in France, he went into
Sclavonia, and overcame the Nations in Scythia: And being gone thence into the
East, he gave battle to the Persians, and having overcome them, and taken some
of their Cities, as he was returning to Italy, passing through Sclavonia, he
was killed at Sirmium by the Soldiers, Anno 282.

M. Aurelius Carus, born at Narbon in France, succeeded Probus, who soon after
Created his Sons Carinus and Numerianus Caesar's: And having sent Carinus into
France, to keep it in peace, he with his Son Numerianus went against the
Persians; there, having overcome Mesopotamia, he was stricken dead by a
Thunderbolt. Numerianus was slain by the conspiracy of Aper his Father in Law.
Carinus was slain by a Tribune, whose Wife he had defloured: Dioclesian
succeeded him.

Dioclesian upon his Establishment, associated unto him Maximianus Hercules in
the Government of the Empire, and they both chose Constantius Chlorus and
Galerius to be their Colleagues, and they were Created Caesar's.

In the time before the Tenth Persecution, the Church of Christ having had
above forty years of outward rest and peace through the connivance and
indulgence of some Emperors ( viz. from the death of Valerian until the
nineteenth year of Dioclesian) this prosperity being abused by the Clergy, and
other Christians unto idleness, contentions, etc. moved the Lord to scourge
them; whereupon followed that sharp and cruel Persecution under Dioclesian:
Maximianus in the West, and Dioclesian in the East bent all their Forces to
root out the profession of Christian Religion; Dioclesian endeavored to
destroy all the Churches and Temples of the Christians, that they might not
Assemble together to Pray, and to use Divine Service; he burnt all the Books he
could get of the Holy Scripture, and would not permit any man if he were a
Christian to hold any Office or Magistracy: The Soldiers being Christians,
which would not renounce their Faith, he cashiered, and deprived of all
military honor, and some of their lives. Many of the Bishops were plundered,
slain and martyred. Great Cruelties were exercised against the Christians in
Egypt, Syria, Phrygia, and in other parts, Vincentius says, Vincent in Specul.
Lib. 12.
That at Triers (which is a City situated by the River Mosella) one
Bietionarius exercised so great cruelty, that the River was red with the blood
of the Christians that were slain. In France likewise he sent Posts up and down
hither and thither with Decrees, and express Commissions to this end, that in
whatsoever place any Christian was found, he should presently be put to death.

But these two bloody Emperors, seeing the number of the Christians rather to
increase than to diminish, notwithstanding all the cruelty that they could
show, and having now (as it were) their fill of blood, they ceased at last of
their own accord to put any more Christians to death; and finding themselves
not able to destroy the Church, they gave over the Empire, and became private
men.

Constantius Chlorus, and Maximinus Galerius succeeded in the Empire.
Constantius parted the Empire with Galerius, and would Rule but in Britain,
Spain and France. Galerius chose to him his two Sons, Maximinus and Severus;
and Constantius took Constantine his Son Caesar under him. Constantius was a
great supporter of the Christians; And when in the other Jurisdictions of the
Empire the Congregations of the Christians were molested with Persecutions,
Constantius gave liberty to the Christians.

Century IV.
COnstantius dying at York, ANNO 306.
Constantine his Son succeeded him in the Empire: Constantine who Ruled France,
did not only abstain from shedding Christian blood, but also had the Christians
in great esteem: Nazarius and Patera were esteemed rare Orators in France,
living at that time.

The Histories of those Times make mention of one Sebastian a Martyr, he being
born in that part of France called Gal^ia Narbonensis, Fox Act. and Monum. Vol.
1.
was a Christian, and a Lieutenant General in the Army of Dioclesian, who also
encouraged many Martyrs of Christ by his Exhortations unto Constancy, and kept
them in the Faith; He being therefore accused to Dioclesian, was apprehended,
and brought into the open field, where of his own Soldiers he was thrust
through the body with innumerable arrows, and after that his body was thrown
into a jakes or sink. St. Ambrose makes mention of this Sebastian the Martyr in
his Commentary upon the 118. Psalm.

Constantine restored Peace unto the Church, Anno 311. he Reigned thirty and
two years; great Tranquillity enjoyed the Church under this good Emperor.
Before he had subdued Licinius, he set forth many Edicts for the restitution of
the Goods of the Church, for the revoking the Christians out of Exile, for
taking away the Dissentions of the Doctors out of the Church, for the setting
of them free from public charges: A Copy of his Constitutions may be seen in
Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History, in his tenth Book and fifth Chapter.

In the fourteenth Year of Constantine there was holden a Council at Nice, for
the debating of the Controversy about the Feast of Easter, and for the rooting
out the Heresy of Arius. There was likewise a Council holden at Arles under
Constantine's Reign.

Constantine left three Sons, whom he had by Fausta, Maximian's Daughter, Heirs
of the Empire, who also divided the Empire among themselves. A sudden Sedition
after their Father's death embroiled them all in blood and wars, by the
commotion and dissimulation of the Emperor Constantius.

In his Time the Arrian Heresy, which for fear of Constantine had been
suppressed, began now again to lift up it is head, for Constantius propagates
that Heresy.

Hilary Bishop of Poictiers in France, lived under the Reign of Constantius, a
man in Religion constant, in Manners meek and courteous; he wrote sharply
against the Arians; Ruffin. Lib. 1. cap. 31.
he was banished immediately after the Council of Milan into Phrygia, as some
suppose. Among diverse others, he dedicated his Book, De Synodis fidei
Catholicae contra Arianos, to the Bishops of the Provinces of Britain, during
his Exile for the Orthodox Faith, commending them for their constancy in the
profession of that Faith.

Theodor. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
Theodoret writes, that he was banished to Thebaida, and recalled from Exile
again under Julian: But it is more apparent that he remained in Phrygia until
the Council of Seleucia, unto which Council he was brought from banishment; not
by any special Commandment from the Emperor, but by a general command given to
his Deputy Leonas, Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
to assemble together the Bishops of the East, under pretense of executing the
command of the Emperor, Hillary being banished in the East, was brought to the
Council of Seleucia; from thence he went to Constantinople: The Emperor
refused to hear him dispute with the Arians in matters of Faith, but gave him
liberty to return to his own Country again. He took great pains to purge the
Country of France from the Arian Heresy; and he prevailed so far, that Jerome
compares him to Deucalicon, who both saw the flood of waters overflowing
Thessalia, and the abating of them also; even so Hillary saw both the growth
and decay of Arianism in France. Hilar. Lib. 10. de. Trinit.
Yet even this Father had his Errors, for in his Tenth Book of the Trinity,
and upon Psalm. 138, and 53, he maintains, That Jesus Christ in his death
suffered no pain, but that only he would make us believe that he suffered, and
that the blows did not give him any pain, no more than if an arrow pierced the
water, or pricked the fire, or hurt the air, and that the virtue of the body of
Christ received the violence of pains without feeling: The same Father says,
That Christ did eat and drink, not out of any necessity, but to comply with
Custom, for which Opinion he is reproved by Claudius Bishop of Vienna, Du
Moulin cont. Perron Lib. 1. cap. 49.
in the Book of the State of the Soul. That Error so gross, has brought him
to another, that in these words of the Lord [Father, let this Cup pass from
me.] Jesus Christ desired his Father, that his Disciples also might suffer in
the like manner: so that by his account St. Peter felt no pain in suffering
martyrdom. It is also one of his Opinions, that Souls are Corporal. He lived
six years after his return from banishment, and died under the Reign of
Valentinian. Stephanus Paschasius has these Verses of him in his Icones, Et
nos exhilaras Hilari sanctissime Praesul,
Et monitis victa est Arria secta tuis.


Jerome, although he was born in a Town of Dalmatia called Stridon, and was
instructed in rudiments of Learning at Rome; yet from Rome he went into France
of purpose to increase his Knowledge, and to diverse other places.

Constantius being dead, Julian his Cousin German alone governed the Empire,
Anno 361. having before obtained of Constantius the Title of Caesar, and been
Entitled Augustus by the Soldiers in the City of Paris.

In the Year 375. St. Martin was made Bishop of Turin in France; Exuperius was
Bishop of Toulouse; Simplicius of Vienna; Amandus of Bourdeaux, Maurice of
Anjou, Philastrius of Breux; these were all accounted Bishops of great fame.

About this time sprung up the Sect of the Donatists, Fuller's Profane State.
Cap. 11.
who were so called from a double Donatus (as one says) whereof the one
planted the Sect, the other watered it, and the Devil, by God's permission,
gave the increase. The elder Donatus raised a Schism in Carthage against good
Cecilian the Bishop there, whom he loaded unjustly with many crimes, which he
was not able to prove; August ad quod vult Deum.
and vexed with this disgrace, he thought to right his credit by wronging
Religion, and so began the Heresy of the Donatists: His most Dominative Tenet
was, that the Church was perished from the face of the earth, the relics
thereof only remaining in his party.

There were two principal sides of them; first, the Rogatists, so called from
Rogatus their Teacher, to whom St. Augustine bears witness, That they had
zeal, but not according to knowledge. These were people of good lives, hating
bloody practices, though erroneous in their Doctrine. But there was another
sort whom they called Circumcellions, though as little Reason can be given of
their Names as of their Opinions.

Their number in short time grew to be considerable: Their Tenet was plausible
and winning, and that Faith is easily wrought that teaches men to think well
of themselves. From Numidia, Quod apud eum solum justitia locum haberet. Aug.
contr. Petil. Lib. 2.
where they began, they overspread Africa, Spain, France, Italy, and Rome it
self: Their greatest increase was under Julian the Emperor. This Apostate,
next to no Religion, loved the worst Religion best; they fled to this Bramble
for succor, extolling him for such a Godly man, with whom alone justice did
remain; and he restored them their Churches again, and armed them with many
privileges against Christians: Hereupon they killed many men in the very
Churches, murdering Women and Infants, and ravishing Virgins, etc. The
Donatists were opposed by the Learned Writings of private Fathers, Optatus
Milevitanus, and St. Augustine, and by two Councils, one at Carthage, Vid.
August. Epist. 162.
another at Arles in France. Pope Miltiades was by the Emperor made Judge
between the Catholics and Donatists, and after him the Bishop of Arles. This
Heresy continued till about the six hundredth year of Christ; and that which
put a period to this Heresy, was partly their own dissentions: but chiefly,
they were suppressed by the Civil Magistrate: for Honorius the Emperor by
punishments, mixed with Instructions from the Church, Vide Baron. Annal. in Anno
362. Number. 264.
converted and reclaimed very many. He caused the Patent of Privilege which
Julian granted the Donatists, Publicis locis affigendum in ludibrium, To be
affixed to public places for a reproach unto them.

Julian was slain in battle against the Persians, having governed the Empire
after the death of Constantius one year and seven months. Then Jovian was
saluted Emperor, who being a professor of the Christian Faith, rejected the
Arians; but he died of a surfeit in the eighth month of his Reign. Then
Valentinian was Elected Emperor, a man constant in the Christian Faith; but he
died of an Apoplexy in the twelfth year of his Government, leaving his Son
Gratian to succeed him in the Empire; who after the death of Valens his Uncle,
had the Government both of East and West: his Brother Valentinian was his
Colleague in the Government of the West. Gratian in the beginning of his Reign
reduced from banishment those Bishops whom Valens that Arian Persecutor had
banished: Gratian was slain by Andragathius, Captain of the Army of Maximus,
who usurped the Empire of the West, by fraud and treachery near Lions in
France, where he made his abode. But Theodosius, a man of Noble Parentage in
Spain, to whom Gratian had committed the Government of the East, being mindful
of the kindness of Gratian toward him, l^d an Army against Maximus: The
Captains of Maximus's Army hereupon delivered him bound to Theodosius, who put
him to death: Andragathius, who slew Gratian, seeing no way to escape threw
himself headlong into the Sea, and so perished.

Not long after, Eugenius by the Power of the Earl Arbogastes, Usurped the
Government, Anno 391. And the year following, the said Arbogastes slew
Valentinian at Vienna in France: Epiphanius says, he was strangled in his
Palace.

Century V.
IN the Year 401. died St. Martin, Bishop of Turin, who following Hillary into
France from his banishment, having there lived an austere and retired life, was
Created Bishop of Turin, almost at that time that St. Ambrose was established
Bishop of Milan, viz. in the Year 375. A man to be admired above all his
Predecessors for Piety, whom the Emperors themselves have had in great esteem;
and among the rest Maximus, who feasted him Anno 386. in a Feast that his Wife
the Empress had prepared, who supplied the place of a Waiter and Attendant at
the Table her self. Sulpitius Severus in the life of St. Martin shows, that
when he was to be chosen Bishop, one of the people having taken the Psalter in
the place of the Reader then absent, began to read the eighth Psalm, where
there was, Vt destruas inimicum and defensorem; at which word defensorem, the
people cried out against one Defensor, who opposed Martin's Election to the
Episcopacy. About this time the Monastical Profession came into Europe, to
which Jerome at Rome, and St. Martin in France did much contribute.

In the Year 446. the Pelagian Heresy having spread over all Britain, the
British Churches being infected therewith, King Vortigern sent for Germanus
Bishop of Auxerres, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Champagne out of France, men
eminent for their Counsel and Doctrine, who confuting the Pelagians, gained to
themselves great esteem among the Britans.

After the return of Germanus and Lupus into their own Country, Pelagianism
began to sprout forth again in Britain: But after three years, Germanus
returning back again into Britain, brought with him Severus, and the Pelagian
Heresy was again condemned in a second Synod. Britain being thus settled in
good order, Germanus went again into France, and died soon after his return.

In this Century flourished other worthy Bishops and Preachers in France;
Eucherius Bishop of Lions was then eminent, some of whose writings are yet
extant. Baron. ad Ann. 453.
About this time Baronius speaks of a Synod of Anjou, which says, Let none be
Ordained Priests or Deacons, but such as have one Wife only, who married
Virgins.

Hillary first Bishop of Arles, and afterward (as appears) of Vienna,
flourished about the year 458. he opposed himself directly to Leo Bishop of
Rome, and would acknowledge no Jurisdiction nor Domination of the Bishop of
Rome over the Churches of France. Hilary called himself Primate of the Churches
of Gauls subject to the Roman Empire, that is, of Provence and Daulphine: for
the rest of the Gauls was then held by the Visigoths and by the Francks. The
quarrel was, that Hilary conferred the degree of Bishop in his Diocese, not
expecting the consent and approbation of the Bishop of Rome: but Leo would
oblige him to acquaint the Roman See with it, and to get his approbation.

Upon that Leo sends Letters to the Bishops of Daulphine, where after he ha^^
(...) swe ling words exalted the Dignity of the Roman See; he add^^h Hillary,
To trouble the State of the Church, Leon. Epist. 87. ad Episcop. per Viennensem
provinciam constitutos.
and the Concord of Bishops, by new presumptions has exceeded measure,
desiring so to subject you to his power, that he will not suffer you to be
subject to the blessed Apostle Peter, challenging to himself the Ordination of
all the Churches in Gauls.

But Hilary came to Rome, not regarding the Anathema's of Leo, and to his face
affirmed, that neither did Christ appoint Peter to be Head of the rest of the
Apostles, neither had the Bishop of Rome a Sovereignty over the Churches of
France.

In that strife, Leo according to his custom had his recourse to Valentinian,
who presently without hearing what Hilary could say for himself, gave sentence
for Leo, and made a Law which is extant in the Theodosian Code among the Novel
Constitutions, in the 24th Title; the Law runs in these words, Whereas the
merit of Peter, who is the Prince of the Episcopal Society, and the Dignity of
the Roman City, and Authority of the Sacred Synod, have established the Primacy
of the Apostolic See, let not presumption attempt any lawful thing against the
Authority of that See; for then shall the peace of the Churches be maintained
every where, if the Universality do acknowledge their Governor: In which words
we may observe by the way, that Valentinian does not ground the Popes Primacy
upon the Word of God: He adds, We Decree by a perpetual Ordinance, That it be
not lawful, either to the Bishops of Gauls, or to those other Provinces to
attempt any thing against the venerable Pope, etc. but that to them and to all,
whatsoever the Authority of the Apostolic See has decreed, or shall decree,
may be a Law, so that what Bishop soever being evocated to the judgment of the
Roman Prelate, shall neglect to appear, he be constrained by the Governor of
the Province to make his appearance.

But Valentinian being deprived of Africa by the Vandals of Africa, and of
Spain, and Guienne by the Goths, and of most part of Gauls by the Franks,
nothing remaining to him but Italy, Sicily, Provence and Daulphine, all the
East being in the power of Theodosius, that Law was but of little force.

How much that Law was despised in the Empire of the East it is easy to see;
for in the Year 472. that is, about 22 or 23 years after that Law of
Valentinian, a contrary Law was established by the Emperor Leo, which is the
16th Law in the Code, De Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis: The words of the Law are
these, Whereby the Emperor decrees, that the Church of Constantinople be the
first of all Churches, and the Bishop of Constantinople be the first of all
Bishops: We judge and decree, that the most holy Church of this Town, which is
Mother of our Piety, and of all Christians of the Orthodox Religion, and the
most holy See of the same most Religious City, have all the privileges and
honors concerning the Creation of Bishops, and the right of sitting before
others, etc. Baronius declaimeth against that Law of Leo, and says, It
proceeded from him who is the Head over all the Sons of pride. Baron. Annal. ad
Ann. 472.


Then lived Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Clermont in Auvergn, whose Epistles
are extant, great part of which are written to the Bishops of France his
Colleagues; but in none of them is there any trace of subjection to the Roman
See, or of communication with the Bishop of Rome. The same Sidonius calls Lupus
Bishop of Troyes Bishop of Bishops, and the first Bishop of the world, and
says, That he is sitting in the Apostolic See. This Man wrote all his
Epistles in Latin, and Preached also in Latin: In the tenth Epistle of the
second Book, he complains, That in his time among the Vulgar, the purity and
property of the Latin Tongue decayed, and degenerated into barbarousness. And
in the Epistle to Pope Perpetuus (for then all the Bishops that were a little
more respected than the ordinary Bishops, were called Popes) there is a Latin
Sermon made by the said Sidonius unto the people of Bourges, a certain proof
that the people of Bourges understood Latin.

About this time flourished Prosper of Aquitain, so called from his Country,
not the place of his Bishopric, as Baronius says: He wrote De Vita
Contemplativa, Of a Contemplative Life: In his first Book, Chap. 23. he
prescribes, That the Preacher's Language be simple and plain, though it be not
very good Latin, yet that it be orderly and grave, Usser. de Britan. Eccles.
Primord. Cap. 8.
that it may hinder no body (though ignorant) to understand it. He wrote a Book
De Ingratis, by which name he always marketh out the Pelagians that sprung out
of the ashes of that Arch-Heretick Pelagius. Regiensem Episcopum fuisse
recentiores commemorant. In sententias quasdam Augustini Epigrammata varia
conscripsit. Catal. Test. Verit.
He wrote many excellent things in defense of the Grace of Christ against the
Pelagians, and shows himself to be a Disciple, and vehement defender of St.
Augustine, says Bellarmine.

Salvianus Bishop of Marseilles lived then when the Nation of the Goths
oppressed France, and many began to doubt of the Providence of God, in regard
that those wicked wretches had got the upper hand, and prospered so much in the
world; therefore he wrote an excellent Treatise, De Judicio and Providentia
Dei, to Salonius Bishop of Vienna: One entitleleth him, Gallicae Gentis
Episcoporum Magistrum, The Master of the Bishops of the French Nation.

Salonius wrote upon the Books of the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes.

Claudianus Mammertus Bishop of Vienna is praised by Sidonius with excessive
commendations, as if all the Graces of Jerome, Augustine, Patr. Syms. Eccles.
Hist.
Basil, Nazianzen, and many other Fathers had been incorporated in him. He
wrote three Books De Statu Animae, Of the State of the Soul, to the same
Sidonius, with two Epistles. How much the Popish Bishops differ from those
Famous Bishops that flourished in those days, the Reader may understand by
this following Epitaph of Claudianus Mammertus made by Sidonius: Hoc dat
cespite membra Claudianus,
Triplex Bibliotheca quo Magistro
Romana, Attica, Christiana fulsit:
Quam totam Monachus virente in aevo
Secreta bibit instructione,
Orator, Dialecticus, Poeta,
Tractator, Geometra, Musicusque,
Doctus solvere vincla quaestionum,
Et verbi gladio secare sectas,
Vi quae Catholicam fidem lacessunt.


Tandem Concludit: At tu quisquis doles, amice lector,
De tanto quasi viro nihil supersit,
Vndis parcegenis rigare marmor:
Men's and gloria non queunt humari.


Paulinus lived about this time, he was Bishop of Nola, born in France, a man
of a great wit, and an excellent Orator and Poet.

Of both Testaments he writes thus to Severus; Paulin. Epist. ad Sever. 12.
Nam quia latorem duo Testamenta per unum
Pacta Deum in Christo copulat una fides.
Lex antiqua novam firmat, veterem nova complet;
In veteri spes est, in novitate fides,
Sed vetus atque novum conjungit gratia Christi.


And upon the Supper of the Lord, I will add these mystical Verses out of the
same Epistle, In cruce fixa caro est, qua pascor, de cruce sanguis
Ille fluit, vitam quo bibo, corda lavo.
Carne tua vivet, tunc illi pocula sanguis
Praebeat, in verbo vivat agatque tuo.


The next I shall mention is John Cassian, the Scholar of Chrysostom, and made
Deacon by him at Constantinople, afterward he was a Presbyter of the Church of
Marseilles.

Vincentius Lirinensis, a French man, spent the first part of his life in
Secular and Military employments, but afterward he led a solitary and
contemplative life, and became a Presbyter, as the Catalogue of Gennadius
relates; he wrote against the Pelagians and Nestorians, and against profane
novelties.

In the Year of Christ 485. Clovis the first of that Name, and the fifth King
of France, began his Reign, being about the Age of fifteen years; a Prince of
singular Hope, born for the establishment of the French Monarchy: He had the
honor to be the first Christian King of France. Although Clovis was a Pagan
before by Profession, yet was he no enemy to the Chrstians, fitting himself to
the humor of the Gauls, who generally followed the Christian Religion. He
suffered his Wife likewise to Baptize her Children. Causins Holy Court. Part. 2.
Clotilda desired nothing more than the Conversion of her Husband, which
happened in this sort: The Suevi, a people of Germany, passed the Rhine with
great Forces, Commanded by many Kings, who were personally in the Army, and
came to rush on the Gauls, with intentions to destroy the beginnings of the
French Monarchy: Clovis speedily opposes them with good Troops, for he
likewise had drawn together to his Aid the Ribarols, people near bordering on
the Rhine, who were Allied to the French, and had first of all given notice of
the Enterprise of the Suevi, who in a near degree threatened them.

The encounter of the two Armies was near Colen, which was one of the most
desperate that we find in Histories. The King undertook the Conduct of the
Cavalry, and had given unto Prince Sigebert his Kinsman, the Infantry: There
was nothing but fire, tempests, deaths, and slaughters, so great was the
resistance on either side: In the end Sigebert valiantly fighting, was wounded
with an arrow, and born all bloody out of the battle by his Son. The Infantry
(through the absence of their Colonel) was defeated and put to rout. All the
burden of the battle fell upon the Cavalry, which did great exploits, fighting
before the eyes of their King; but in the end, the shock of their enemies was
so impetuous, that it brake through and scattered them. Clovis covered with
blood and dust, performed the duty both of a great Captain and valiant Soldier;
but notwithstanding all his endeavors, terror had so seized on these flying
men, that his affairs grew desperate: Hereupon Aurelianus, the Kings great
Favorite, persuades him to make a vow unto God to be Baptized, if he returned
victorious from this battle; which he did, calling aloud upon the God of his
Wife, and promising an absolute Conversion to the Christian Faith.

The word was no sooner spoken, but that his Troops rallied themselves up, made
head against their enemies, pursued them, ran through and routed them with so
great a massacre, that the fields were all covered with dead bodies: The
discomfiture so terrified them on the other side of the Rhine, that the Almans
which survived yielded themselves tributaries to his Majesty.

Clotilda hearing the news of this victory, and of the King's pious Resolution,
went out to meet him as far as Champagne, accompanied with Remigius Bishop of
Rhemes, a man of great Piety and Eloquence to instruct him in the true
Doctrine, wherein he was very ignorant. De Serres Hist. in Vit. Clodov.
It was necessary he should be instructed by a discreet man, that in leaving
the vanity of Pagans, he might not be infected with the Arian Heresy, which
then was dispersed in diverse places; and even his own Sister Lantielde was
infected therewith.

The preaching of Remigius was effectual with Clovis, and the Example of Clovis
with his men of war: When he came to the Church of Rhemes to be Baptized,
Remigius spoke to him these words, Bend thy neck to the yoke in mildness,
worship that which thou have burnt, and burn that which thou have worshipped:
He Answered, I worship the true God, which is the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
the Creator of Heaven and Earth. The King being Baptized, exhorted his men to
the same belief; they cry all jointly, We leave our Mortal Gods, and are ready
to follow the Immortal. So Clovis was baptized at Rhemes by Remigius, and with
him three thousand of his Soldiers, to the incredidible joy of the Gauls,
greatly affected to Christian Religion; and this perfected the union betwixt
them and the French, making their yoke easy, and them tractable.

The first War he undertook after his Baptism, was against Gombaut King of
Burgundy, who being vanquished became Tributary to Clovis. Gombaut was an
Arian, and this his Heresy drew upon him the vengeance of God. Afterward
Clovis encountered with the Forces of Alaricus in Aquitain, discomfiteth them,
and kills Alaricus. The hand of God thundered and lightened at that time upon
many Diadems of Heretical Kings, viz. Gombaut, Godemar, Chilperic, Godegisilus,
Alaricus, and in the end on Theodorick himself.

Remigius was a man of most holy Conversation, and besides his admirable
sanctity, acknowledged throughout all France, he had the reputation to be one
of the most able and eloquent men of his time; witness Sidonius Apollinarius,
who speaking of his eloquence with admiration, says, He thought there was not
a man living upon the face of the earth, whom Remigius surpasses not, without
any elaborate study at all, through the experience he had acquired of
well-speaking: his conceptions were unimitable, his language so sweet and
polite, that it resembled a very smooth piece of ice, whereon nothing might be
seen unequal: His sentences were full of weight, his arguments forcible, and
his words glided along like a river, and ever bare in them some flashes of
lightning at the end of his periods: He was a very learned man, as by the
Commentaries which he wrote upon the Old and New Testament evidently appears.

Catal. Test. verit.
Among the Collections of Aventinus, there is an Epistle with this Title, The
Epistle of the Bishops of Germany and France to Pope Anastasius: This was
written in the time of King Clovis.

Leporius a French Monk made a flourish of the Nestorian Heresy, but being
refuted by Augustine, he asked pardon of his Error.

Faustus of an Abbot was made Bishop of Rhegium in France, as Gennadius writes
in his Catalogue: He wrote against the Pelagians and Epicureans. A contention
arose in France about the Doctrine of Predestination which had it is rise out of
the Books of St. Augustine, being ill understood. Lucidus made opposition,
Faustus chastised him, and brought him to his Opinion: Eleven Bishops
subscribed to the Epistle of Faustus in the Council of Arles; by which Faustus
himself affirms, that an hard piece of work was put upon him, of disputing
concerning Grace and Free Will. About the same time also was solemnized at
Lions an Assembly of twenty seven Bishops.

Victorinus of Aquitain, at the request of Hillary set forth an Easter-Circle
of 532 years, in the year 563.

Century VI.
THe Province of Narbon, which was called the first Province of France,
remained in the Goths subjection, and thence it began to be called Gothia; for
Amalaricus (his Father Alaricus being dead) hastily flying into Spain, he
retained under his Power Spain, with that part of France, which we have
mentioned before.

The Divine Providence gave to Clovis, above all other Princes in the world,
such happy success, as oftentimes his wars were miraculously confirmed to be
guided of God; among which is that remarkable thing, That hastening against
Alaricus, having encamped near the River Vigenna, he found a shallow place by
the direction of an Hind that passed over the River before him, through which
he transported his Army to the other side; and after this victory, preparing to
besiege Angoulesm, the walls of the City falling down of their own accord, gave
him an easy entrance into the City: Which things being known, the Emperor
Anastasius the year following the victory of Vocles sent a Standard to
Chlodoveus or Clovis: Petav. Hist. Orbis. Lib. 7. cap. 2.
And he went in Procession in St. Martin's Church at Turin, with his Belt, his
Purple-gown, and his Diadem; then coming to Paris, there he established his
Throne Anno 507, with so happy successes.

Procopius says, that the Franks made a League offensive with King Theodorick
against the Burgundians, and that the Goths delaying the time purposely, at
length arrived when the fight was ended; and so without receiving any loss,
they divided the spoil with the Francks, equally sharing the Kingdom, which it
is like came to pass about the year 508, it being after the Visigoths great
defeat, although at that time the Burgundian Kingdom was not utterly extinct in
France; for Gundebaut being defeated and dead, Sigismond his Son kept still
what remained, who harkening to Avitus Bishop of Vienna, changed his Arian
Heresy into the Orthodox Faith.

After this Clodoveus raging against his nearest Friends, put them almost all
to death, and at last, in the year 511. died in Paris. Clovis convoked the
first Synod at Orleans.

Then flourished in France Caesarius Bishop of Arles (whom we read to have been
one of the Council of Agathus, held in the year of Christ 506.) and lived unto
the time of Vigilius, of whom he received a Letter, Anno 538.

Also Avitus Bishop of Vienna, by whom the Burgundians received the Christian
Faith.

Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, called the Apostle of the Francks, died Anno 534.

In the same Year was held a Council at Avergnes, wherein was Flavius Bishop of
Rhemes: Then are Hincmarus and Flodoardus mistaken, in saying, that he
officiated in the Bishopric 74 years, and lived 96 years.

In France Launomarus of Chartres, and Maximinus of Orleans were renowned
Friars, Maximus builded the Micians Monastery near unto the City, he was Nephew
to Euspicius. Clovis, as he went first to Orleans, brought them both thither
along with him. Sigebert calls that Monastery of the Micians Maximus's
Monastery; also Avitus and Carilesus, Maximus's Disciples: But Clovis being
dead, his four Sons divide the Realm into four Kingdoms. Childebert was King of
Paris, and under this Realm was comprehended the Provinces of Poictou, Main,
Tourain, Champaigne, Anjou, Guyenne, and Auvergne, Clotaire was King of
Soissons; and the dependence of this Realm were Vermandois, Picardy, Flaunders
and Normandy. Clodamir was King of Orleans, and the Estates of this Realm were
all the Duchy of Orleans, Burgundy, Lionois, Daulphine and Provence. Thierri
was King of Metz, and to his Realm was subject the Country of Lorain, and all
the Countries from Rhemes unto the Rhine, and beyond it all Germany, which was
the Ancient Patrimony of the Kings of France: De Serres in vit. Childeb.
He was received in this Royal Partition with his Brethren, though he were a
Bastard, the which has been likewise practiced by others in the first Line:
And as every one of these four Kings called themselves Kings of France, so they
also added the name of their Principal City, where they held their Court.

But there was a Civil Dissension betwixt the Brethren, they Leavy Forces with
intent to ruin one another: They Reigned forty and two years together as Kings
of France, yet with a particular Title under this general, as has been said:
But in the end Clotaire remained King alone.

At this time were frequent meetings of Bishops in Aurelia, or Orleans; many
superstitious Constitutions were hatched among them, Symson's Church History.
Lib. 6. de Conciliis.
especially about prohibition of marriage, for this Doctrine had now got the
upper hand in the West.

In the second Council Simony is condemned, and the receiving of money for the
admitting a man to a Spiritual Office is condemned.

In the third Council Perjury is abhorred in a man having a Spiritual Calling,
but softly punished by two years, excluding him from the Communion.

In the fourth Council it is Ordained, The Bishops met in the Synod at Orleans,
direct their letters thus to the King, To our Lord, the most Illustrious King
Clovis, the Son of the Catholic Church, all the Clergy whom you commanded to
come unto the Council, etc. And it is said in the Preface to the second Council
of Orleans, We are here Assembled by the Command of our most Illustrious Kings,
in the City of Orleans.
That in the offering of the Holy Chalice, nothing shall be presented but Wine
only unmixed with water, because it is a sacrilegious thing to transgress the
holy mandate and institution of our Savior Christ.

In the fifth Council it is condescended, that no man shall be Ordained Bishop
without consent of King, Clergy and People, according to the Ancient
Constitution of the Church, and that no Spiritual Office shall be bought by
money.

There was an heap of Constitutions about the keeping of Lent and Easter, about
the prohibition of Marriage betwixt Christians and unconverted Jews, about
Servants not to be admitted to Ecclesiastical Orders; about Assemblies to be
(at the least) yearly Convocated by Bishops, about Ecclesiastical Rents not to
be dilapidated.

Under the Reign of Theodebert King of Lorain, Burgundy and Turinge, the
Fathers who were present at the Councils of Orleans, convened also in the
Council of Overnie, and ordained, that no man should arrive to the Office of a
Bishop by the favor of men in Authority, but by the merits of an honest and
unreprovable life.

That the dead body of a Bishop in time of his Funeral, should not be covered
with the Pall (otherwise called Opertorium Dominici corporis) lest the honor
done to the body, should be a polluting of the Altar, with many other
Constitutions.

Under the Reign of Cherebert King of France, a Council was Assembled at Tours.
In this Council it was Ordained, that the Clergy and People in every
Congregation should provide relief for their own poor, and not permit them to
wander up and down.

It was also Ordained, that a Bishop should count his Wife as his Sister, and
that he should no manner of way company with her, and for this cause should
have Presbyters and Deacons so familiarly conversant with him, that they might
bear testimony of his honest behavior, viz. that he never companied with his
Wife. The Papists themselves could not overpass this Canon without a censure.

Moreover it was Ordained, That no Priest or Monk should receive in bed with
him another Priest or Monk, to the end they might be so unreprovable, that they
would abstain from all appearance of evil.

In this Council were set down very strict prohibitions, that no man should
oppress the Church, and convert to his own use any thing duly belonging to
them, lest he incurr the malediction of Judas, who was a Thief, and kept the
bag, and converted to his own use a part of that money which belonged to the
poor.

A Council likewise was holden at Paris, wherein order was taken concerning
admitting of Bishops to their Offices, That no man should be admitted Bishop
without the full consent of Clergy and People, and that no man should presume
by favor of Princes only, without the consents aforesaid, to become Bishop in
any place.

Now Clotaire remained alone King of France, his Brethren being dead, their
Children also were dead, and Childebert the eldest died without Issue. The
Reign of Clotaire was short and wretched; He sought to extort the thirds of all
Ecclesiastical Things to his private Affairs: but the Clergy opposed themselves
against him, so as threats prevailed not. He dies Anno 567.

Before that he Rules as King alone, he Erected the little Realm of Yvetot upon
this occasion. Upon good Friday he slew Gawter of Yvetot his Servant in the
Chapel where he heard Service. It is said, that the King had ravished his Wife
lodging in his house, so as he that was beaten suffered the punishment. Pope
Eugenius displeased with this infamous murder, condemned him to repair the
fault upon pain of Excommunication: Clotaire for satisfaction Ordains, That
from thenceforth the Lords of Yvetot should be free from all homage, service,
and obedience to the King for the Land of Yvetot in the Country of Normandy:
And so this small seigneury has continued long with the Title and Prerogative
of a Realm, until that this Title of a Realm was changed into a Principality,
the which the house of Bellay does now enjoy. Clotaire had by two Wives five
Sons and one Daughter; four survived him, viz. Cherebert, Chilperic, Sigebert,
Gonthran and Closinde his Daughter.

Cherebert was King of France, Chilperic King of Soissons, Gonthran King of
Orleans, Sigibert King of Metz or Lorain, although each of them called himself
King of France, and commanded absolutely over the Countries under their
obedience: All of them Reigned together fifteen years.

The second Council of Matiscon was convened in the twenty fourth year of King
Gunthran: In it complaint was made, that Baptism usually was ministered on every
holy day, insomuch that upon Easter day scarce were two or three found to be
presented to Baptism: This they Ordained to be amended, and that no man (except
upon occasion of infirmity) presume to present his Child to Baptism, but to
attend upon the Festival days prescribed of old, that is, Easter and
Whitsunday.

Also it was Appointed and Ordained, that the Sacrament of the Altar should be
Administered before any of the Communicants had tasted of meat or drink.

That no person who flees to the Church, as to a City of Refuge, should be
drawn back again by violence from the bosom of the Church, or be harmed in
that holy place.

That a Bishop shall not be attached before a Secular Judge.

That the Houses of Bishops shall be kept holy with exercises of prayer and
singing of Psalms, and shall not be defiled with the barking of dogs, and
muting of Hawks.

That Secular men shall do reverence to those of the Clergy, even unto the
lowest degree of them; in such sort, that if the Secular Man do meet any of the
Clergy walking on foot, he shall honor him by uncovering his head: But if the
Secular man be riding on horseback, and the Clergyman on foot, then the
Secular man shall light down from his horse, and shall do reverence to the
Churchman.

In the third Council at Matiscon, we read of nothing but a contentious
disputation between two Bishops, Palladius and Bertram, and foolish questions
scarce fit to be disputed in Grammar-Schools.

Chilperic, a crafty man, seizes on his Father's Treasure, and labors to
become Master of the City of Paris, but was not able to effect it.

Cherebert having cast off his Lawful Wife, and being Excommunicated by German
Bishop of Paris, dies at Blavia in Sancton in the ninth year of his Kingdom
about the year 570, whose Kingdom his Brothers divide among themselves.

Chilperic and Sigebert waged War one against the other: Chilperic enters the
Country of Sigebert, and takes from him the City of Rhemes: Hereupon Sigebert
pursues his Revenge, and takes from Chilperic Soissons, the Capital City of his
Realm, with his Son Theodobert, forcing him to retire to Tournay. Sigebert
comes a Conqueror to Paris, where he is received by common consent; and so all
the Cities belonging unto Cherebert yield him obedience. But as he thought
himself settled, behold two young soldiers (suborned by Fredegund an harlot of
Chilperic's) came to his Court, enter freely into his Hall, and getting near
unto him, each of them stabs him with his dagger, and he falls down dead in the
place: These murderers were suddenly torn in pieces, so as they could not be
known, nor declare by whose instigation they had committed this murder: Yet
was it generally thought, it was the practice of Fredegund to free Chilperic,
and to make her way the more smooth by the death of Sigebert who crossed her
most. Now is Chilperic received King of France in the place of his elder
Brother, Anno 578. and Reigned fourteen years at Paris and Soissons, while that
Childebert the Son of Sigebert Reigned in Austrasia or Lorain, and Gonthran at
Orleans and Burgongne. He found Brunhault the widow of Sigebert at Paris, a
subtle and audacious woman, whom he confined to Rhoven, whither he likewise
sent his Son Merovee to take possession o the City; but there he was surprised
by the beauty of Brunehault: She so insinuated into the Bishop, that he allowed
of this Marriage, although she was his Aunt: Chilperic moved herewith came to
Roven, degraded and banished the Bishop, and puts Merovee into a Cloister.
Merovee fleeing, is pursued, taken, and slain by his Father's command; and lest
Audovere his Mother, (a virtuous Princess) and Clovis her other Son, should
seek means of revenge, he rejects his Wife, and causes Clovis his other Son to
be slain.

For these disorders the Nobility complain against Fredegunde; hereupon
Chilperic takes Galsonde to Wife, the Daughter of Athanagild King of Spain; but
by the instigation of Fredegonde Chilperic strangleth his second Wife, and
publicly marries Fredegonde.

Chilperic when he had seen Clotharius born to him of Fredegonde, the fourth
month after, a little before night, returning from hunting, is by privy
murderers killed Anno 584. That murder was hatched by Fredegonde, and
committed by Landerick an Adulterer of hers: thus died this detestable
Chilperic. Historians make him guilty of impiety, as well as of execrable
wickedness; for he denied the truth of the three persons in one Deity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God.

Gunthran dies in the year of Christ 593. having left a good memorial behind
him of Piety and other Virtues, the which being committed to Church-Tables, is
repeated every year on the 28th of March. His Kingdom came to Childebert.

Childebert, Anno 596. is taken away by poison, together with his Wife, whom
Theodoric and Theodebert his Sons succeed, under the tuition of their
Grandmother Brunehault. They fight against Clotharius, and being overcome in
battle, they force him to part with the greatest part of his Kingdom.

Sagittarius Bishop of Ebreduna, and Salonius Bishop of Vopinga in France, for
their wickednesses, and also because being armed they fought in manner of
soldiers, in the Assembly of Lions were before this deprived of their
Episcopacy in the sixth year of Gunthran; but they appealing to Pope John, were
restored by his command. At last, because they continued in heinous offenses,
they were again by the Cabillonian Council deprived of all Dignity.

At Augustoritum died Radegund, Anno 587. in whose Monastery were some Virgins
sprung from a Royal Stock, who being lifted up in pride against Leubovera, the
Governess of the Nunnery, first of all departed from her: The Guardians being
sent into the Monastery, and all things taken away, they drew out Leubovera by
force from thence. At length by the command of Ch^ldebert a Council of Bishops
being gathered together in Pictavia, they were Excommunicated, and Leubovera
restored unto her former place.

About the year 590. Serenus Bishop of Marseilles seeing his people falling to
the adoration of Statues, brake them, and cast them out of the Church: About
which Pope Gregory the first reproves him in two Epistles, saying, That Images
indeed ought not to be worshipped, but that they ought not to be broken
neither, because they are instead of Books unto the ignorant.

But it was not long before the Popes became the great Patrons of the adoration
of Images, and made it a means of their rising; for when the Greek Emperors
fell to the breaking of Images, Gregory the second took thence occasion to
shake off the yoke of the Emperors, as enemies of the Saints, Sigon. Lib. 3.
de regno Ital.
and made Rome and part of Italy to revolt from the Obedience of their
Sovereign: And he made himself a Temporal Prince, under color of defending
Images, as Sigonius relates.

Venantius, Honorius, Clementianus, Fortunatus, by Nation an Italian, came into
France, seating himself first at Tours, afterward at Poictiers; he was first
made a Presbyter, then he became Bishop of that place. He is reported to have
reduced the French to a more gentle kind of life, by his writings and example.

Illyricus make's mention of one Alcimus, Catal. Test. verit. Lib. 6.
of the Ancient Family of the Aviti, whose Great Grandfather, Grandfather,
Father, Uncle, Brother, were famous and eminent for Ecclesiastical Dignities:
His Father succeeded Mammertus in the Bishopric of Vienna, Alcimus succeeded
his Father: Many excellent Verses of his are extant unto this day.

Concerning the first sin of Man, and the Grace of Christ, you may read what he
says in these following Verses: Quod varii eveniunt humana in gente labores,
Vnde brevem capiunt mortalia tempora vitam:
Vel quod polluti vitiantur origin mores,
Quos aliena premunt priscorum fata Parentum:
Addatur quanquam nostra de part reatus,
Quodque etiam amisso dudum peccatur honor,
Adscribam tibi, prime Pater: qui semine mortis
Tollis succiduae vitalia germina proli.
Et licet hoc totum Christus persolverit in se,
Contraxit quantum percussa in stirpe propago:
Attamen Auctoris vitio, qui debita lethi
Instituit, morbosque suis ac funera misit.
Vivit peccati moribunda in carne cicatrix.


And speaking unto Christ, he adds, Nullum aliud, praeter te unum, solamen
habemus.

Then speaking of Christ the Mediator, whose Figure was that Bow in the Heaven
after the flood, and of the salvation of those that believe in him, he says,
Nunc quisquis semel allatam servare salutem
Optas, signatum potius signo inspice Christum:
Verus enim atque unus firmati faederis arcus
Ille deum atque homines inter, qui virgin carne
Virgineo ex utero sumpta, jam munere lucet
Multiplici in caelo Varius, sed fulgidus omni,
Vitalem monstrat sacrati pignoris arcum,
Hunc coram aspicies, quisquis baptismate tinctus
Ad coelum liber culpis pereuntibus ibis.


And of the water flowing out of the Rock, he thus speaks, Nec portentificae
caepit me oblivio virgae,
Quo signo summus percussa rupe sacerdos,
Protulit irriguos poculis sitientibus haustus.
Insinuans Christum stabilem consistere petram,
Percussus jaculo largas qui praebuit undas,
Porrexitque suis sacro de vulnere potum.


Hist. magdeb. Cent. 6. cap. 9.
King Chilperic before his death called a Synod, made up of the Gallican Bishops
at Prennacum upon this occasion. The Earl Leudastes applied himself to
Riculphus a Presbyter, a perverse man, and rebellious against Gregory Bishop of
Tours, his own Bishop; these two reported to the King, as if Gregory had said,
that Queen Fredegund had carnally lain with Bertram Bishop of Bordeaux;
hereupon Bertram accuses Gregory before the Synod, Chilperic being present,
Gregory constantly denies it: But the King asserteth, that he could convince
Gregory of this calumny by witnesses; yet first of all he propounds it to be
debated by the Synod, whether witnesses ought to be admitted against a Bishop,
or whether the bare assertion of the Bishop only ought to be believed: The
Synod pronounces, That they could not safely give credit to an inferior
person bearing witness against a Bishop: Yet they require Gregory to say Masses
at three Altars, and that he purge himself by Oath: which being done by
Gregory, he was absolved.

But the Synod excommunicated his Accuser, and certified other Bishops by
Letters concerning the absolution of Gregory.

In this Century Rupertus Bishop of the Francks, with twelve other Divines came
into the Country of the Boii, and there Rupertus, by preaching the Gospel,
converted Theodon the Prince of the Country, with his Son, from Heathenish
Idolatry unto Christ, and baptized them both at Ratisbon: Many others also were
converted by him.

In this Age flourished German Bishop of Paris forementioned. Osiand. Eccles.
Hist. Cent. 6. Lib. 2.
When he was an Abbot, in a dream he saw the Keys of the Gates of Paris
delivered to him; and demanding the cause of it, he was answered, That he
should, as Pastor, feed the Lords Flock belonging to that Church. Not long
after the Bishop of Paris dying, he was Constituted Bishop there by King
Childebert. With singular zeal he provoked the People to Godliness; great was
his gravity in preaching, and his words were weighty and powerful; he was
liberal toward the poor, and redeemed many Captives. King Chilperic after his
death (who was wont to deride and contemn other Ministers) wrote this
honorable Epitaph upon him, which I thought fit to set down: Ecclesiae
speculum, patriae vigor, ara reorum:
Et pater, and medicus, pastor amorque gregis.
Germanus virtute, fide, cord, ore beatus,
Carne tenet tumulum, mentis honor polum.


The Histories of this Age make mention of one Etius Archdeacon of the Church
of Paris, who when he understood that Innocent Praetextatus Bishop of
Rhothomagum (accused of Treason against the King) was in danger to be condemned
in a Synod at Paris, he with great boldness entered into the Synod, and
admonished the Bishops and Assessours, to beware of having an hand in the
condemning of an Innocent person, he told them they ought rather to reprove
King Chilperic for his sins.

In the Reign of this King many Jews were baptized in France, but many of them
returned to their vomit, and perfidiously renounced the Christian Religion.

In those days there were great inundations of waters, which did much hurt in
many places, especially at Lions, where part of the walls of that City were
thrown down. Horrible earthquakes made great concussions in part of France, and
overturned some mountains toward Spain, which overwhelmed many men and beasts.
A fire falling from Heaven consumed the City of Orleans, and the streets of
Bourdeaux, together with the fruits of the earth. Other places were sorely
afflicted with a grievous hail. There followed almost through all France a
malignant Cough and bloody Flux, which destroyed very many men and women; by
which disease that wicked Austigildis, Wife of King Gunthran perished. The
cause of these evils was said to be the dissentions, civil wars, and horrible
impieties of those three Brothers forementioned, Sigebert, Chilperic, and
Gunthran, Kings of France, and their Counselors and Ministers, who provoked
them to those impieties; who were punished of God for their flagitious
practices with most grievous judgments.

Here I shall make mention of the various fortune of Theodorus Bishop of
Marseilles in the Reign of Childebert, Divamius (a most wicked man) being
Governor of that Province: This man hated Theodorus, and laid diverse snares to
entrap him. And when Theodorus was going to King Childebert to implore his
help, he was seized on by Divamius in the midst of the City of Marseilles, and
injuriously dealt with, and so dismissed. In his journey Theodorus, by the
instigation of Divamius, is taken by Gunthran King of Orleans: then the Clergy
of Marseilles being no better than Divamius, being very joyful at the news of
it, do immediately invade and plunder all the substance and treasures of the
Church, and load Theodorus with diverse calumnies. King Chilperic sets
Theodorus at liberty, and sends him back with Gundulphus the Governor to
Marseilles, that there he might be restored to his former dignity. At the
coming of Gundulphus and Theodorus, Divamius and the Clergy do shut the gates,
and drive them back reproachfully. But Gundulphus by Art getting into the City
with his Soldiers, soon brake the power of Divamius, and sharply rebuked him;
yet Gundulphus being appeased with deprecations and gifts, Divamius having
taken an oath that he would restore Theodorus to his Bishopric, and for the
future be faithful to the King, he returned to his house.

But Divamius despising his Oath, signifies the restitution of Theodorus to
King Gunthran, adding, That while Theodorus held his Government, King Gunthran
could never enjoy the City of Marseilles. Gunthran being angry sends Soldiers
to take Theodorus, who seizing upon the Bishop unexpectedly, they carry him on
horseback bound with chains most ignominiously to their King: But King Gunthran
knowing the innocence of Theodorus, without doing him any harm suffers him to
return to his charge, bestowing many gifts upon him. Upon this occasion great
enmity grew between King Gunthran and Childebert: Many other calumnies, and
grievous indignities did this innocent Bishop suffer from other of his wicked
and malicious enemies. About that time Mundericus, Episcopus Ternoderensis,
being by force taken away from his Church, is thrust into a close and strong
Tower built upon the bank of the River Rhodanus, and there was detained almost
two years, and most grievously handled.

Under the Jurisdiction of Gregory Bishop of Tours, there was a certain
Presbyter who denied the Resurrection of the Body. The foresaid Gregory
disputed against him, which disputation you may read at large in the
Magdeburgensian History. The disputation being ended, the Presbyter promised,
that he would afterward believe the Resurrection of the dead. Chidet. Anast.
Child. Reg. cap. 10.
This Gregory has put out these works, Hist. Francorum; de Gloria Martyrum; de
Gloria Confessorum; de vitis quorundam Patrum. I find him by a certain Writer
thus styled, Osiand. Cent. 6. Lib. 4. cap. 17.
Antiquissimus and fidelissimus Francorum scriptor. He wrote sharply against
the Jews and Arians; yet there are diverse errors found in his writings, which
are mentioned by Osiander. He was very intimate with Gregory the Great, Bishop
of Rome, flourishing at that time.

Century VII.
THe Author of the Book, called the Catholic Traditions, first in French, and
then Translated into English, searches the difference of all Churches, and
except in Rites or Ceremonies has not marked any great difference of the
Abyssines and Jacobites, from our Reformed Churches. And in his Preface, he
says, They pretend to have their name [Jacobites] from Jacob the Old
Patriarch, and the name [Cophtes] because they are circumcised; and in Qu. 5.
he says, They call themselves Christians of the first Conversion.

Phocas, a mean Captain in Thracia, in a sedition of the people did kill his
Sovereign Mauritius the Emperor, usurped the Crown, and held the Empire seven
years. He gave unto Pope Boniface the Title of Universal Bishop, which Title
Gregory his Predecessor had disclaimed.

Gregory devised many new Rites, yet tied not others to follow them: For when
Augustine (whom he sent into Britain) demanded of him, seeing the Faith is one,
why are the customs of the Church diverse? and why is one sort of Mass in Rome,
and another in France? Gregory answers, Thy Brotherhood knows the custom of
the Roman Church, in which thou have been nourished; but it pleases me,
whether in the Church of Rome, or of France, or in any other, thou have seen
any thing that may please the Almighty God, that thou diligently follow it.

In France the two Sons of Childebert, Teodorick and Theodebert (their
Grandmother Brunehault working that thing) reigned with perpetual disagreement
among themselves, and with Clotharius. Theodebert being overcome by his Brother
in Battle, Anno 612. is slain by his own Soldiers at Colonia: Theodorick dies
the year following: Brunehault being hated of the French, Anno 613. Clotharius
having obtained the whole Kingdom of the French, bound Brunehault with a Cable
rope, led her about with wild Horses, and tare her to pieces. Thus by God's
judgment She died most justly, who had cruelly caused many others to die. Thus
died Brunehault, only commended in Histories to have built many. Temples, and
given great revenues for the maintenance thereof, De Serres Hist.
whilst she wallowed in her pleasures. St. Gregory has set down certain
Letters of his to Brunehault, wherein he commends her highly (though basely
flattering her) for her Piety and singular Wisdom.

Clotharius seeing himself King of so great a Monarchy, after a long and
horrible confusion of intestine wars, used all diligence to pacify the Realm.
He augmented the great Authority of the Maires of the Palace, who controlled
Kings, and in the end usurped the Royalty, whereas they were before but
Controllers of the King's House, not of the Realm. He had one only Son, whose
name was Dagobert: He committed him to Arnulph Bishop of Metz, a learned and
good man to be instructed by him.

Petries Church-Hist. in Cent. 7.
Agrestin who had been Clerk to King Theodorick entered the Abbey Lexovien with
all his wealth, but he soon became weary of the superstitious Rites, and left
the Abbey: Then went he to Aquileia, (which then was not under the Romish yoke)
and from thence he wrote unto Eustasius Abbot of Lexovien against the Rites of
the Monks, exhorting him to reject those Rites. Eustasius and his Convent
exclude him out of their Society. For removing this Controversy was Assembled
the fourth Council at Matiscon in Burgundy; there Agrestin accuses Eustasius
of many superstitious Ceremonies, contrary to Canonical Institution, viz. That
they did use to lick a Cockle marked with a Cross, and used Hallowings when
they went in or out of an house; Catal. Test. Verit. Lib. 7. Ex Vit. Eustas.
Abb.
they multiplied Prayers and Collects in the Mass; they ridiculously cut off
their hair, and abstained from the company of men: but the Bishops condemned
Agrestin. Hence we see, that some persons did not allow the Rites creeping in,
and the Inventers of them were but private persons, and the Abetters were
pleased with the least shadow of Reason.

Clotharius dies in the year 631. having Governed 44 years from his cradle,
and passed happily through many perilous difficulties: He left his Son
Dagobert for his Successor.

Dagobert at his coming to the Crown found great difficulties among his
Subjects, being bred up without Justice, under the long licentiousness of Civil
Wars, and the lenity of Clothaire; whereto he provided wisely, reducing
Justice, fortifying it by his Authority, with so good a moderation, as no man
was offended at his severity, neither durst any man attempt any thing against
the Laws, seeing both the reign and the rod in the hands of their Lawful
Prince: To this good Order he professed to love holy things; and the better to
confirm this Opinion in the minds of his Subjects, he built and enriched many
Temples, especialy that of St. Denis, the which has since been the Sepulcher
of the French Kings.

This King was much ruled by the forenamed Arnulph Bishop of Metz, and by Pepin
Major of the King's Palace: This Pepin was Grandfather to that Pepin, who was
the first King of the second Race of the French Kings, Fabian's Chron. Part. 5.
and began to deal absolutely in the Government of the Realm. Dagobert and all
his Realm were in great honor and tranquillity, till the death of Arnulph,
after which the King began to change his conditions to the hurt of his whole
Realm.

There were at this time great numbers of Jews in France, the which were
hurtful to the Realm: Dagobert banished them by a perpetual Edict out of the
Territories under his obedience. But this Zeal of Religion was blemished with
the soul blot of Adultery, which made him infamous both to his Subjects and to
Strangers. Amandus Bishop of Paris reproved him for his fault; but Dagobert
impatient thereof banished him: Yet by the earnest persuasion of Pepin, he
yielded to Reason, and having dismissed many of his lewd followers, he calls
home Amandus again from banishment. Amandus was a man famous for Holiness in
those days. At that time Austregesil was Bishop of Bitures, Lupus Bishop of
Sens, Bavo was converted from a robber by Amandus. Columban likewise being much
vexed by Brunehault, lived under Clotharius, and his Scholar Gallus.

Projectus was a Martyr in Aquitain, he was successor to Serenus Bishop of
Marseilles.

Dagobert having Assembled the Estates of France in great solemnity at Byguage,
he made his Testament, and Ordained, that he made his younger Son Clovis King
of France, Fabian's Chronic.
and his elder Son Sigebert King of Austrasia or Lorain. His Testament he had
caused before to be written in four sundry skins, endented to be read, and then
sealed with certain seals; whereof the one he willed to be kept in the Treasury
of St. Denis; the second in the Treasury of the City of Lions; the third in the
Treasury of Metz in Lorain; and the fourth in the Kings Treasury. Dagobert died
having Reigned fourteen years, and was buried in the foresaid Monastery.

To maintain the invocation of Saints, the Papists say, that at that time the
soul of Dagobert King of France was delivered out of the hands of the Devil by
Dionysius and Maurice Martyrs, and Martin the Confessor, whom Dagobert had
Adored.

A Council was Assembled in a Town of France, Symson's Church-Hist. Lib. 4.
Cent. 7.
called in Latin Altissidorum, vulgarly Auxerre, in which were met a number of
Abbots and Presbyters, with one Bishop, and three Deacons.

In this Council they condemned Sorcery, and the consulting with Sorcerers, in
the first, third, fourth and fifth Canons, whereby it appears, that Sorcery
has been in frequent use in France.

Many superstitious Constitutions were set down in this Synod concerning the
number of Masses; prohibition of tasting meat before Mass, concerning burial;
prohibition of Baptism before the Festivity of Easter, except upon necessity,
and fear of approaching death; prohibition of Matrimonial copulation with their
own Wives to Presbyters and Deacons after their Blessing and Consecration; with
prohibition of Marriage also to the Widows of the defunct Presbyters, Deacons,
or Subdeacons; Brothers and Sisters Children are forbidden to marry.

They Ordained, that it is not lawful for a Presbyter to sit in judgment, when
any man is condemned to death.

That it is not lawful for a Clergyman to cite another of the Clergy before a
Secular Judge.

That it is not lawful for a Woman with a naked hand to touch the Holy
Eucharist.

That it is not lawful to take refreshment of meat with an excommunicate person.

If any of the Clergy receive an excommunicate person, without the knowledge of
him who did excommunicate him, he shall receive the like sentence, that is, he
shall be likewise excommunicated.

That it is not lawful for a Presbyter in Banquetting-time to sing or dance.

Many Canons, to the number of 45, were concluded in this Council: But I shall
not trouble you with an heap of unprofitable, unnecessary and superstitious
Canons.

Another Council was afterward called at Cabillon, vulgarly called Chalon,
which is a Town in Burgundy, not far distant from Matiscon. In this Town, by
the Commandment of Clovis King of France, convened 44 Bishops: Gandericus
Bishop of Lions was President, and Landilenus Bishop of Vienna. Theodorus
Bishop of Arles, because he refused to appear before the Council, was suspended
from his Office until the next Council.

In this Synod the Canons of the Council of Nice had great allowance. It was
forbidden that two Bishops should be Ordained in one Town; that no man should
sell a Christian Servant to a Jew; and that two Abbots should not be chosen to
govern one Monastery.

That no laboring of the ground, or other secular work shall be done on the
Lord's day; with many other Canons coincident with the Canons of other Councils.

Clovis the second married a Gentlewoman of Saxony, named Baudour, a Lady of
good life, and much given to Devotion, as the Abbey of Shelles, St. Baudour,
with other Foundations do witness. Whilst she busied her self in her Devotion,
and to build Monasteries, Clovis addicted himself to sensuality: Yet one
memorable thing is recorded of him, In a time of great dearth, to relieve the
poor people, he suffered them to take the Silver wherewith the Temple of St.
Denis had been covered by Dagobert.

Aimo says, that two years after, a famous Assembly of Bishops being had, he
appointed the Monastery of Dionysius, which his Father had built nigh unto the
City, to be free from the Jurisdiction of all Bishops, Landerick the Chief
Ruler of Paris agreeing to it. Clovis died Anno 660. of his Reign 17. At the
same time Erchenwald Major of the Palace dying, Ebruin succeeds him: From
which time the French Kings being let loose into sloth and riot, the Government
of the Affairs of State came to the Majors of the Palace: The Kings being
contented only with the Name or Title, contained themselves in their Palace,
neither came they but once every year ( viz. in the Kalends of May) into open
view of the people.

Clotharius, the eldest Son of Clovis succeeded his Father, but having Reigned
four years he died, Anno 664.

Theodorick his Brother for a short space was Chief; but the French being weary
of this man, shut up Theodorick in a Monastery, being shaven at St. Denis in
Paris, and Ebruin at Luxovien: Then Childerick was made King, who after three
years Reign was slain by Bodille a Noble French man, whom he had commanded,
being bound to the stump of a tree, to be whipped with rods. His Queen also
being great with Child, was killed by the same Bodille.

Ebruin secretly breaking out of the Monastery, Petav. Hist. Lib. 8.
again invadeth the Lieutenantship of the Palace, and kills Leudesius the Son
of Erchenwald Major of the Palace, and Leodegar Chief Ruler of Augustodunum,
whom after he had been tortured with diverse torments, and in an Assembly of
Bishops spoiled of his Dignity, he commanded to be smitten with a sword.

In those times there were many in France flourishing in Holiness, among whom
Eligius Bishop of Noviomum, and Audoenus Bishop of Roven are mentioned. Eligius
died in the seventieth year of his Age. Audoenus died being ninety years old,
in the 44 year of his Bishopric. Private persons also graced France with an
exact holiness of Life, viz. Furseus, Foillanus, Vltan, who having come out of
Ireland built Monasteries in France.

Thierri the first is now made King of France, a King in show, who is a
spectator of diverse Tragedies. Thierri dies having reigned 19 years.

Ebruin in the third year after the death of Leodegar was thrust through by
Hermenfrid; then Pepin governs the Kingdom.

Clovis the third, the eldest Son of Thierri reigned four years, and dies
without Children: His Brother Childebert the second succeeds him.

Century VIII.
CHildebert Reigned 17 years, and died Anno 711. having left two Sons, Dagobert
and Clothaire.

Pepin made great show of love to Religion, and for this cause makes war
against Robod Duke of Frisia, a Pagan, whom he conquered, and forced to receive
the Christian Religion, with all his Subjects. He restored Lambert Bishop of
Traict to his Dignity, being expelled by Ebruin, and confined unto a Monastery;
and one of his chiefest cares was, to advance them that had charge over the
Church: He commanded absolutely, being armed with the Authority of his
Sovereign, neither was there any appeal from him to the King.

Yet Pepin, besides his Lawful Wife called Plectrude, held a woman named
Alpaid, for the which the forenamed Lambert reproved him. Of this Alpaid he had
a Son whom he named Charles; which Charles was after surnamed Martel, and was
very profitable to the Realm of France. Alpaid caused Bishop Lambert to be
slain by her Brother Dodon, who soon after felt the punishment of this blood;
for being diseased with Worms, not able to endure his own stench, he cast
himself headlong into the River Meuze.

Pepin upon his deathbed Ordained Charles his Bastard to succeed him in the
Government of the Realm. But Plectrude after the death of Pepin causes Charles
to be imprisoned at Colen, and advances Thibauld to the Government, although
in effect She under his Name governed all the Affairs of State. Dagobert dying
at this time, the French took a Prince of the blood, called Daniel, out of a
Cloister: Him they called King, under the Name of Chilperic the second; and
they give him a Noble Man of France, called Rainfroy to be his Major, who
having leavied an Army, De Serres hist.
defeated Thibauld, and his Grandmother Plectrude in battle. But Charles Martel
getting out of prison assisteth Plectrude, gathers Forces, and overcomes the
new King and Rainfroy.

Charles is now received and installed Major of France, and having assured
himself of the Children of King Dagobert; he caused them to be gently brought
up in a Monastery.

At Colen he seizes on Plectrude and Thibauld, and inflicts no other
punishment upon them, but enjoins them to live quiet, and to attempt nothing
without his liking. He pardons Rainfroy, and gives him the Government of Anjou.
He degradeth Chilperic, being advanced against Law, and causes the eldest Son
of Dagobert to be chosen King, named Chilperic the third. Chilperic dies having
reigned five years, and in his place his Brother Thierri was crowned King: He
reigned ten years, and dying left his Son Childerick the last King of this
first race of the Merovingiens.

Charles Martel from Major of the Palace, is chosen Duke or Prince of the
French.

Eudo, Prince of the Gascoigus, to whom Rainfroy joined himself, called in the
Saracens with their King Abdiram out of Spain, Anno 725. whom Charles met, and
killed them with an universal slaughter: there were slain in one day three
hundred seventy and five thousand, and of the French fifteen hundred, among
which were many of the Nobility and men of Note. And having recovered Burgundy
and Lions, in the year following Eudo dying, he invaded Aquitain, and overthrew
the Saracens in great numbers invading France in the year 731, and regained
Avignon taken by them, and forces them to abandon Narbon, and the whole
Country to his mercy. At that time diverse devout Monks lived in France, viz.
Vandegrisil of Fontinel, a builder of Monasteries, of whom Sigebert makes
mention: Vrsmar of Lobia, a Founder of a Monastery: Bertine, Abbot of Sithiena,
and holy Aegidius.

Childeric was King in show nine years, Anno 744. Pepin in the time of King
Childeric, called a Council at Soissons, where he assisted in person, together
with the greatest Peers of the Land.
five under the Authority of Charles Martel, and four under Pepin the Son of
Charles, who dispossessed him.

Charles Martel having governed the Kingdom five and twenty years dies: He had
four Sons, Carloman, Pepin, Giles and Grypho: Giles was made Bishop of
Rhotomagum, and left his Government assigned him by his Father unto Carloman
and Pepin, and they two divide the Kingdom, and Govern each one his own part
under the Title of their Father, as is apparent by the first words of the
Council under Carloman: In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, I Carloman, Duke
and Prince of the French, in the year from the incarnation of Christ 742. on
the 11th of the Kalends of March, by the advice of the servants of God, and of
my Nobes, I have Assembled the Bishops in my Kingdom, etc. Within seven years
after this Synod, he laid aside his Princely Authority, says Bellarmine, and
entered into a Cloister, becomes a Monk, and so dies at Vienna, and then all
the Authority was in Pepin alone. Grypho had rebelled against Carloman, but at
last Pepin took him in Italy, and caused him to be beheaded. Anno 753. Pepin
having the Government alone aimed at an higher Title.

Blondus and others, who have written the Acts of the French, Blond. dec. 14.
Lib. 10.
say, that the Nobility and Commonalty of that Nation, duly considering the
worthiness of Pepin, and sottishness of Childeric, consulted with Zachary
Bishop of Rome, whether they should tolerate so foolish a King any longer, and
defraud Pepin of his deserved Princely honor. And when the Pope answered, That
he was most worthy to be a King, who could best discharge the Office of a King,
Petrie's Church-Hist. Cent. 8.
the French, with the public consent of the whole Nation, did pronounce Pepin
for their King, and Childerick was shaven, and made a Monk. Then the Pope wrote
unto Boniface Bishop of Mentz to Anoint Pepin King of France, and declare all
his Subjects free from their Oath of Allegiance unto their lazy Sovereign. The
Pope was chiefly moved hereunto, with hope to draw help from Pepin against the
Lumbards, Council. apud Palate. Vernes.
his mortal enemies. Pepin, Anno 755. called almost all the Gallican Bishops to
meet at the Council of Vernes the Palace.

About this time Aponius a French man wrote several Books.

In the Council called by Carloman (of which I hinted before) he begins
thus, I Carloman, etc. have Assembled the Bishops which are in my Kingdom, with
the Priests into a Council and Synod, These are, Boniface Archbishop of Mentz,
Burchard of Wirtzburg, Reginfrid, Guntharius, with the rest of the Bishops and
their Priests: That they should give me Counsel how the Law of God, and
Religion of the Church may be restored, which in the days of former Princes
has been shattered and fallen; and how Christian People may attain the
salvation of their souls, and not perish, being deceived by false Priests: And
by the advice of my Priests and Nobles, We have Ordained Bishops through
Cities, and set over them the Archbishop Boniface, who is the Legate of St.
Peter. And we have Ordained that Synods should be called every year, Council.
Tom. 2. Edit. Crab.
that in our presence the Decrees of Canons, Rites and Laws of the Church may
be restored. And we restore unto the Churches the Moneys that have been taken
from them. We have also discharged all the Servants of God from hunting and
wandering in woods with Dogs, and that they have no Hawks nor Faulcons. We have
also Decreed according to the Holy Canons, That each Presbyter dwelling in a
Parish be subject unto the Bishop where he dwells; and that always in Lent
he give an account of his Ministry, whether of Baptism, or Catholic Faith, and
prayers and order of Masses. Then he forbids sacrifice to the dead, and
other profane Rites of the Heathen. He appoints punishments against the
Fornications and Adulteries of Monks. It was also decreed, that Monks and Nuns
should live within their Abbeys and Cloisters, according to the Rule of their
Father Benedict.

Pope Stephen confirmed Pepin and his Heirs for Kings of France, and of him
asked aid to withstand the Power of Aistulphus then King of Lombardy, who then
had exacted Tribute from certain Lands belonging to the Bishop of Rome, and
because it was refused, took up Arms. The Pope wrote a Letter, directed to the
Kings of France, and to all Bishops, Abbots, Priests and Monks, and to the
Glorious Dukes and Counts, and unto the whole Army of the Kingdom of France:
Stephen, Pope, and all the Bishops, Priests and Deacons, Dukes, Counts, People
and Army of the Romans, all being in anguish, with how doleful and bitter grief
we are encompassed on every side, with how great perplexity and doubtfulness we
are distressed, and how many tears our eyes do shed, because of the continual
troubles which are multiplied upon us, we think that the smallest part of all
the elements do declare: for who beholding our tribulations will not mourn? who
hearing of our calamities will not lament? Affliction is on every side, and we
know not what to do! O ye Christians! behold the days of trouble, the days of
mourning and bitterness are come upon us; It is come (as we feared) from the
Lombards, for we are afflicted, distressed, and besieged on every side by their
most ungodly King Aistulph, and that Nation: Therefore with the Prophet, we
pray the Lord, saying, Help us O God of our Salvation, and for the honor of
thy Name deliver us, etc. And now because Aistulphus with an Army has pitched
his Tents, and encamped against us, and has often said unto us, Open unto me
the Gate of Salaria, that I may enter into your City, and give me your High
Priest, and I will show Clemency unto you: If not, beware, lest when I have
battered down your walls, I kill you altogether with the sword; and let me see,
who can deliver you out of mine hand: Wherefore our Beloved, I beseech you, and
(as if I were present) I adjure you by the mysteries before the true and living
God, and before St. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, that with great speed you
help us, lest we perish; seeing under God we have committed all our lives into
your hands, forsake us not.

After this the Pope sent another Letter in the Name of St. Peter, A Letter
sent in the name of St. Peter.
as if it had been written from Heaven, which begins thus: Peter called an
Apostle, Grace, Peace, and Power, to deliver the Holy Church of God, and the
People of Rome committed to me from the hands of their enemies, be fully given
from the Lord God unto you most excellent men Pepin, etc. and to the most holy
Bishops, Abbots, Presbyters, and all Religious Monks, etc. I Peter, the Apostle
of God, who have you my adopted Children, to deliver from the enemies hand this
Roman City, and the people committed of God unto me, provoking all your Love,
do exhort, and protesting do admonish you to deliver the Church of God, which
by Divine Power is commended to me, seeing they suffer very great afflictions
and oppression by the most wicked Nation of the Lombards. Think not otherwise,
but certainly believe it, that I my self am standing alive in the flesh before
you; and our Lady, the Mother of God, the Virgin Mary, with us, does adjure you
with the greatest Obligations, and Protests, Admonishes, and Commands,
etc. Behold, here with what fooleries and impieties they would bewitch the
world.

But Pepin did not leavy an Army until Pope Stephen came into France: And when
he took his journey, he commended himself to St. Mary, and his flock unto St.
Peter: Pepin hearing of his coming, sent his Son Charles an hundred miles to
meet him, and when he came within three leagues of Carisiac, Pepin went forth
unto him, and returned on foot, and the Pope on horseback: Then Pepin was
crowned again by the Pope for the greater pomp. Pepin went into Italy, and
forces Aistulph to give hostages to render unto the Pope all due Right: But
after the return of Pepin into France, Aistulph with new Forces does more
mischief to Rome. Then Pope Stephen wrote another Supplication to Pepin, who
made no delay, but forces Aistulph to perform the former conditions, and to
give unto the Pope the exarchate of Ravenna. Within a year Aistulph dies, then
a division arises between Rachis and Desiderius for the Kingdom. Then Stephen
wrote his fourth Epistle unto Pepin, giving him thanks for his aid, wishing
many blessings unto him, and showing that Aistulph was stricken by the hand of
God, and drowned in the bottom of Hell, and that by the hands of Peter Prince
of the Apostles, and by thy most powerful arm [speaking unto Pepin] Desiderius,
a most mild man, was Ordained King of the Lombards, who had sworn to restore
unto St. Peter the Cities, Faventia, Insubres and Ferrara, with all their
Territories; and also Ausimo, Ancona, Humana, Bona, with all their Territories;
and he had sworn to keep peace with the Church of St. Peter, and to be Loyal
unto the Crown of France, and entreated Pepin to approve the Coronation of
Desiderius upon these conditions. Henceforth the Pope began to lift up his
head, and having large Territories given unto him, will not rest until he be
Monarch of the world. When Stephen had peace he began to repair the Churches
which Aistulph had caused to be thrown down, and died in the sixth year of his
Papacy.

Fabian's Chroni. Part. 6.
Then Gaifer Duke of Guienne imposed a Tribute upon the Lands of the Clergy in
his Dukedom without their consent; wherefore the Bishops for a redress
complained unto King Pepin thereof; Pepin reproved the Duke for it: but the
Duke not regarding the Kings Admonition, Pepin soon after with an Army entered
the Territory of Guienne, wasting and spoiling the Country. Hereupon the Duke
hearkened to him, and bound himself to restore unto the Clergy what he had
extorted from them. But the King being returned into France, the Duke gathering
Forces together, sent them to the City of Chalours in Burgundy, and did much
hurt to that Town and Country.

The King being sorely discontented at it, returned with his People into Guien,
and therein beat down many strong holds and Castles, and took or won Burbon,
Cancarvile and Cleremont, and wasted the Country with fire and sword till he
came to Limoges. The winter coming on, the King having strengthened the
foresaid Cities, Towns and strong Holds that he had won, and then rode to a
place called Cause, there kept his Christmas and Easter. In the next Spring he
re-entred the foresaid Duchy, and took by force the Cities of Bourges and
Tours.

The People of that Country considering the obstinacy of their Duke, murdered
the said Duke, and after yielded themselves and their Country to the King, with
all such Treasure and Jewels as to the said Duke belonged; whereof King Pepin
offered a great part unto St. Denis. Then this victorious Prince was vexed with
grievous sickness; wherefore in all have he sped him to St. Martin's, where he
made certain Prayers and Oblations: And from thence (his sickness increasing)
he was conveyed unto Paris, where he shortly after died, when he had reigned as
King there by the space of eighteen years.

After the death of Pepin the Estates of France Assemble, and by their consents
Charles and Carloman his Sons divide the Realm between them by equal portions.
Charles was Crowned at Worms, Carloman at Soissons: But by the death of
Carloman the whole Realm came to Charles within three years after the death of
his Father.

Charles was endued with singular gifts both of body and mind; he had the
instructions of a virtuous Conversation, and was bred up in Learning and Arms:
He was Religious, and reverenced the Churches and Pastors; he was a great
Justitiary, a reliever of the poor, and kept his Faith both to friend and foe;
he was a lover of Learning and learned men: Paul of Pisa instructed him in the
Greek and Latin Tongues, and Aimon in Philosophy and the Mathematickes: He
delighted in Poetry, but especially in History, in which he was well read. The
University of Paris built (or enriched) by him, does witness the love and
honor he bare to learning. A valiant man, none commanded with more obedience,
nor performed any thing with greater fortune, nor used his Victories with more
mildness and judgment. Never did King reign with more Authority, nor was more
reverently obeyed than Charlemagne.

About the Year 786 Charles King of France made a league with Archaius King of
Scots: Archaius sent unto him Albinus, or Alcuinus, John Melrose (so named from
the Abbey Melrose) Claudius, Clemens and Anthony, all very devout and learned
men.

John Melrose became Abbot of the Augustinians at Ticino, Bale in Cent. 14.
and Claudius was Bishop of Auxerre: They wrote several works, as John Bale
shows.

Alcuinus had good knowledge of the Latin and Greek Languages: Biblioth. de la
Bigne, Tom. 3.
Charles calls him his Master, in an Epistle written unto him, De Septuages.
and Sexages. He has many excellent things in diverse of his Books and Writings.

Desiderius began to make War first against the City of Ravenna, and the
Marches thereof, and took the Cities of Ferrara, Faventia, and other Towns. The
Pope sent to Charles the Great for aid, who came into Italy with great Forces:
Desiderius fled to Pavia, and was there besieged: Charles leaving an Uncle of
his at the siege of Pavia, went against Verona, which he took without any great
difficulty: From thence he went to Rome to kiss the Pope's Foot, and to hold
the Feast of Easter, where he was received with great Solemnity.

After this his coming thither, he confirmed to the Church and Popes of Rome,
the Donation which his Father Pepin had made of Ravenna, and other Lands, and
made another of many other places, among which is reckoned the Isle of Corsica,
and all the Coast of Genoua, with the Cities of Parma, Ancona, Vrbin, and many
other Towns, besides Rome and the Territories thereof, which the Popes had
already in possession; so as to the Emperors remained only that part of Italy,
which is part of Calabria, and of Puglia, and a great part of that which now is
the Kingdom of Naples

Charles having been only eight days in Rome, returned against Desiderius, who
after six months besieging in Pavia, yielded upon composition, and Charles
carried him with him, and banished both him and his Sons into a certain Island,
and then took Milan, and all the other Cities in Lombardy, which is the Ancient
Gallia Cisalpina, where he placed French men for Dukes and Governors: So Italy
remained in his Obedience, excepting those Lands and Provinces which were left
to the Church of Rome: so ended the Kingdom of the Lombards, which had
continued 204 years in Italy.

Rhegno. Sub. Annum 787.
In the Year 787, Charles being departed from Rome to come into France, as soon
as he was arrived at Worms (says Rhegno) he called a Synod, and declared the
Reasons of his journey to the Clergy and Princes of his Realm.

We find the French Synods in those days oftentimes to have consisted both of
Laymen and Clergymen, jointly to determine of matters, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil.

Charles the Great did the like in the Council of Franckford, where he
discoursed points of Faith, and made them deliver their Opinions upon such as
himself proposed. The Canons and Decrees also run in his Name, the Emperor
(says he) has Ordained with the consent of the Synod, etc.

Vide Acta Council. Francf. in libello sacro. Tom. 3. Council. page 635.
In the Year 794 Charles Assembled this Council at Franckford, partly in regard
of the Heretic Foelix, who called Christ, The Adoptive Son of God in humane
nature, and was condemned in a Council Assembled at Ratisbon. But he was
returned to his vomit again, and therefore was now again condemned as a notable
Heretic in the Council of Franckford; partly also in respect of the great
contention which arose every where concerning the worshipping of Images,
disallowed in the Council of Constantinople, and allowed in the second Council
of Nice.

Not only the Bishops of France, but also of Germany and Lombardy (as Provinces
subject to the King of France) were present at this Council: The Pope sent his
Ambassadors, Theophilact and Stephanus to the Council, King Charles himself
also was present thereat.

Alcuinus wrote against the Heresy of Foelix, Alcuin. contr. Foelic. Lib. 2.
and Elipandrus Bishop of Toledo, and in his second Book says, Show us any
Nation, Town or Church, either Roman or Constantinopolitan, or of Jerusalem
(which was Dedicated by the presence of the Lord himself) or of Antioch, where
first the Name of Christianity is read to have been, or of Alexandria, or of
any other Church, either in Italy, or Germany, or in France, or in Aquitain, or
in Britain, which agrees with you in your assertion. Here he acknowledges all
these to be true Churches at that time, and distinguishes them one from
another.

Foelix continued in his error till Alcuinus wrote against him, and then he
became Zealous of the Truth, and wrote a Recantation unto the Presbyters and
Deacons of his Church, That as he had been a scandal unto them, so by his means
they may be brought again from Error unto the Truth, as he himself writes:
And this Recantation is printed among the Works of Alcuinus. But Elipant
Archbishop of Toledo, having read the seven Books of Alcuinus, wrote very
sharply for maintaining the same Error.

R. Hoveden writes, R. Hoveden in continuat. Bedae.
that Charles the Great sent over into England the Acts of a Synod sent him
from Constantinople, for the Adoration of Images: Against this Adoration (says
he) Alcuinus wrote an Epistle well-grounded on Divine Scriptures, and carried
it with some Synodical Acts in the names of the English Princes and Bishops to
the King of France.

All Italy being now in peace under the protection of King Charles, two
Cardinal Priests of great account, called Pascal and Capulus, conspired against
Pope Leo, who with their accomplices apprehended him on a day as he was going in
Procession: Some say they put out his eyes, and cut out his tongue, committing
him prisoner to the Monastery of St. Erasmus, publishing abroad, that they did
it for the crimes by him committed, and the Errors by him maintained. Some
Authors affirm, that he was miraculously restored to his sight and speech.
Hereupon King Charles comes to Rome, accompanied with many great Dukes, and
other Princes, his Subjects: To him came out of Italy, and from many other
parts, many Bishops and Prelates. After eight days abode there, he commanded
all the Princes and Prelates which then were in the City to be Assembled; and
the Pope himself, and all the rest being together, there were some that accused
the Pope to the Emperor. Then the Emperor openly asked every man's opinion
concerning those accusations; all answered, That no man ought to judge the Head
of the Church: which the King observing, he asked no more questions.

The next day all being Re-assembled, the Pope went up into the Pulpit, and
taking a Book of the Holy Evangelists in his hands, said with a loud voice,
That he swear by God, and those Holy Evangelists; That all that which his
Adversaries had laid to his charge, was false and untrue; and that he had
neither committed, nor thought any such matter as they objected; but that they
had of malice and envy slandered him; and that he therefore publicly made this
Protestation, and confirmed it by his Oath, seeing that to them all the manner
of his Life and Government was well known.

His Oath was allowed, and himself commended, and the King commanded his
Accusers, Pascal and Capulus to be sought out, and put to death: But the Pope
was content their lives should be spared, so as they might be committed to
prison, and thence be condemned to perpetual exile.

Eight days after, the Pope having considered, first, how much the Greek
Emperors envied his Greatness, together with the small affection they bare to
the worshipping of Images, and other points, wherein they were opposite to the
Church of Rome; and then how requisite it was to have an Emperor which might
maintain the Provinces of Italy in peace, which were often disturbed; but
chiefly to show himself grateful for the benefits, which he and the Church of
Rome had received from him and the House of France: But above all, for
accepting his Protestation in his own defense, for a proof of his Integrity, he
resolved to make Charles the Great Emperor, and to Translate the Head of the
Empire into the West. And having ruminated hereupon, against the day of the
Nativity of Christ, he commanded all the Priests, Cardinals, and all the other
Prelates to come to a Mass, whither Charles was also invited, and came;
together with all the other Princes; and so about the midst of the Mass, the
Pope then saying it, he turned about from the Altar to the People, and with a
loud voice said, That he did there Elect, Create and publish Charles the Great,
the most Mighty and Victorious King of Italy, of the Germans, and of the
Frenchmen, Emperor and ever Augustus. Which being done, he set the Imperial
Crown upon his head, and all those which were present consented thereunto, with
acclamations and applauses, saying, To the most Godly, ever Augustus, Great and
most Victorious Emperor Charles, God grant long life and victory.

This acclamation being ended, the Pope anointed him, and then and there also
anointed and entitled his Son Pepin (with the good liking and consent of his
Father) King of Italy. Which Coronations were performed with great Feastings
and Solemnity, upon Christmas day, Anno 800.

So Charles remained Emperor, and the Empire was transported from the Greeks
to the Germans.

Pope Adrian with his whole Synod (which consisted of one hundred fifty three
Bishops, Abbots, and Religious persons) had given before the right and power of
Electing the Pope unto Charles the Great, and further Ordained, That the
Archbishops and Bishops of all the Provinces should receive their investiture
from him, in such sort as no Bishop can be Consecrated by any man, unless he be
approved and invested by the King, pronouncing an Anathema against such as
shall do otherwise.

Century IX.
CHarles having left his Son Pepin in Italy, visits Germany, subdueth the
Saxons, and reduces them to the Christian Faith. He had Wars with them for the
space of thirty years; he oftentimes subdued them, and gave them their Liberty
upon condition they would embrace the Christian Religion: but on every occasion
their Duke Wedekind cast off both Loyalty and Christianity. At several times
when Charles had obtained a Victory he erected a new Bishopric: He founded
seven Episcopal Cities in that Province, Crantz. in Saxon. Lib. 2. cap. 23.
giving them Princely Power, because he judged that those fierce people might
be tamed by Religion rather than by Arms. These were Bremen, Verda, Minda,
Padeburn, Osnaburg, Hildeshein, Halberstadt. The Historian says, Although
Charles gave unto the Bishops power of Governing, yet the Nobles did not
altogether lose their Power: whence it came to pass, that when the War was
ended, the Secular Power beyond the Veser, was acknowledged by them all to
belong unto him. At last, because the Saxons had so often revolted, he removed
ten thousand of them, with their Wives and Children into Brabant and Flanders,
and sent and settled some French in that Province, and left his Son Charles
there with an Army to keep them in obedience.

Charles understood that the Latin Translation of the Bible was much corrupted
through the negligence of Writers, Baron Annal. Tom. 9. ad Ann. 908.
and gave it in charge unto Alcuinus to amend the Translation; who did Correct
both the Old and New Testament, as Baronius testifies.

Alcuinus was Governor of the Monastery of St. Martin at Tours; yet was he
neither a Monk, nor a Priest, but contented himself with the Order of a Deacon:
He died on Whitsunday, Anno 804.

Pepin King of Italy and Charles, two Sons of Charles the Great died before him.

When Charles the Emperor was now Aged, and saw many abuses in the Church, he
endeavored by all means possible to procure Reformation of the lewd manners of
Churchmen: therefore he appointed at one time, Symson's Church-Hist. Cent. 9.
(namely in the year 813.) five National Councils, to be Convened in diverse
places for the Reformation of the Clergy and People: One was Convened at Mentz,
a second at Rhemes, the third at Tours, the fourth at Cabillon or Chalon, and
the fifth at Arles. In all these Councils no opposition was made to the Council
of Frankford; neither was the adoration of Images avowed in any of the
Councils: So available is the Authority of a Prince for suppressing of false
Doctrine and Heresy.

In the Council of Mentz were Assembled thirty Bishops, twenty five Abbots,
with a great number of Priests, Monks and Judges. After three days abstinence
and fasting, joined with Litanies, public prayers, and imploring Gods
assistance, they divided themselves into three Companies.

In the first were the Bishops with some Scribes, reading the History of the
Gospel, and the Epistles, and Acts of the Apostles, together with the Canons
and Works of the Ancients, and the Pastoral Book of Gregory, to the end, that
by the Precepts contained in those Books, the enormity of men's lives might be
corrected.

In the second Company were Abbots and Monks, reading the Rules of St.
Benedict, for the reformation of the lives of Monks.

In the third Company were Lords and Judges, pondering the causes of all men,
who came to complain that wrong was done unto them.

The first, second and third Canons of this Council, entreat concerning Faith,
Hope and Charity.

The fourth concerning the Sacraments to be ministered, chiefly at Easter and
Whitsunday, etc.

The fifth, that unity and concord shall be kept in the Church, because we have
one common Father in Heaven, one Mother, viz. the Church on Earth, one Faith,
one Baptism, and one Celestial inheritance prepared for us, etc.

The sixth and seventh Canons entreat of Orphans and poor People, whose
weakness is to be supported.

The eighth Canon recommendeth unity to be kept betwixt men in spiritual
Offices, and Civil Judges.

The ninth and tenth Canons prescribe to the Clergy Precepts of a modest and
sober life, with abstinence from the delicate pleasures of the world, from
theatrical spectacles, from pomps and unhonest banquets: Usury, Avarice and
Ambition, Deceit and Conjurations, and many other sins were also restrained.

I pass by the Precepts concerning the behavior of Monks and Nuns, and the
fabric of their dwelling places.

In the 32 Canon, the difference between (...) and (...) is set down.

In the 33th, the great Litany, or Rogations to be observed three days by all
Christians, with fasting, sackcloth, ashes, walking barefooted, and all kind
of humble carriage.

In the 34, 35, and 36, public fastings, and keeping of festival days is
commanded.

In the 37, That the Sabbath Day be kept holy, that in it no Merchants wares be
sold, and no criminal cause be judged.

In 38. and 39, That Tithes be precisely paid, and men fleeing to Churches for
safeguard, are not to be violently drawn out from thence.

In the 40, In Churches and the porches thereof, let no secular judgment be
exercised.

In the 41, That no Ancient Church be spoiled of Tithes and Possessions for the
building of new Oratories.

In the 42 concerning Church-rents bestowed for reparation and upholding of
Churches.

In 44, That no Priest say Mass himself alone, for if he have none but himself,
how can he say, Dominus vobiscum, or, sursum corda, or other such passages? All
frequent offering of the sacrifice of the Mass, and presenting of the Paxe is
recommended to Christian people.

In 45, That every person be acquainted with the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer;
and that every one (at least) learn them in their own vulgar language.

In 46, That they who continue in drunkenness be excommunicated.

In 47, That Godfathers shall see that their spiritual Children be brought up
in the true Faith.

In 48, That lascivious songs be not sung in Churches.

In 49, The cohabitation with Women is forbidden to all the Clergy.

In 50, That all Bishops, Abbots and Churchmen, have such Agents in their
affairs, who are men that fear God, and hate all unrighteous dealing.

In 51, That the dead bodies of the Saints be not transported from place to
place, without the advice of the Prince of the Country, or the Bishop and
Synod.

In 52, That no dead body shall be buried within the Church, except the body of
a Bishop, or of an Abbot, or of a worthy Presbyter, or of a faithful Laick
person.

In 53, That incestuous persons be separated from the fellowship of the Church,
except they be penitent.

In 54, 55 and 56, Marriage in the fourth degree of consanguinity is forbidden;
and that no man shall marry his God-daughter, nor spiritual Sister; neither the
Woman, whose Son or Daughter he has led to the Sacrament of confirmation: And
in case they be found to be married, they shall be separated again. And no man
shall take in marriage his Wives Sister; neither shall a woman marry her
Husband's Brother.

Of the Council of Rhemes.
A Council was also Assembled at Rhemes, by the Commandment of Charles the
Great, Anno 813. In this Council Wulfarius the Archbishop was President: forty
four Canons are rehearsed in the second Tome of Councils, made in this Council.

In the 1. Canon it was concluded, That every man should diligently acquaint
himself with the Articles of his Faith.

2. That he learn the Lords Prayer, and understand the meaning of it.

3. That every man in holy Orders shall walk worthily according to his Calling.

4. The Epistles of St. Paul were read to give instructions to Subdeacons, how
they should behave themselves.

5. The Gospel was read to give instruction to Deacons, to Minister worthily in
their Office.

6. Ignorant Priests are instructed to celebrate the Service with understanding.

7. They are also instructed how to prepare the Catechumeni to the Sacrament of
Baptism.

8. The holy Canons were read out of the Decretal of Innocentius, for ordering
the lives of Chanons.

9. The Rule of St. Benedict was read to reduce Abbots and their Convents to a
remembrance of their Order.

10. The Pastoral Book of Gregory was read, to admonish Pastors of their Duty.

11. Diverse sentences of the Ancients were read, to admonish both Prelates and
People to a holy life.

12. Then they set down a form of receiving confessions, and prescribing of
penance, according to the Canonical institutions.

13. They reasoned about the eight principal vices, that every one might know
what vices to eschew, and teach others to beware of the same.

14. That Bishops should take heed to the reading of the Books of Canonical
Scripture, and the Books of Fathers, and should attend upon the preaching of
the Word of God.

15. That Bishops should preach the Sermons and Homilies of the Holy Fathers,
so as the People might understand them.

16. The sixteenth Canon is coincident with the twelfth.

17. That Bishops and Abbots permit no man to solace the company with filthy
jesting in their presence: but that the poor be refreshed at their Tables with
Lectures of Divine Scripture, and praising of God.

18. In the 18th Gluttony and Drunkenness is forbidden to the Ministers of God.

19. That no Bishop judge rashly in things secret, which are to be referred to
the judgment of God.

20. Presbyters shall not transport themselves from a low place to a greater.

21. Whosoever by giving money procures a preferment in the Church, shall be
deposed.

22. No Churchman shall cohabit with a Woman, except it be with his Mother or
Sister, or such like person, by whose company no suspicion of uncleanness can
arise.

35. That the Sabbath Day be kept holy, and no servile work be done in it.

36. That no man bestow upon the Church that thing which he has fraudulently
taken from others.

37. Nor yet by lies and deceit withdraw any thing duly belonging to the Church.

38. That Tithes be precisely paid.

39. That no man receive rewards for his Decree and Sentence.

40. That Prayers be made for the Emperor and his Noble Race.

41. In the 41 Canon mention is made of a certain Rent left by King Pepin,
which they wish the Emperor Charles should not alter, nor transfer into
another sum, lest many perjuries and false testimonies might ensue.

42. That no man should be removed from his Mansion, to whom the Emperor's
Alms is distributed.

43. That the Statute may be confirmed by his Highness's allowance, whereby all
contentions are Ordained to have an end.

44. That the Statute made in Bononia concerning false witnesses may be
ratified; with augmentation if need require, for eschewing of perjuries, false
testimonies, and many other inconveniences.

Of the Council of Tours.
In the same Year 813, at the Commandment of the Emperor Charles the Great, a
Council of many Bishops and Abbots was Assembled there about establishing
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

1. In the first Canon, all men are admonished to be obedient to the Emperor
Charles, and to keep the Oath of Allegiance made unto him, and to make prayers
for his prosperity.

2. All Bishops shall frequently read all the Books of holy Scripture, together
with the Books of Ancient Fathers written thereupon.

3. It is not lawful for any Bishop to be ignorant of the Canons of the Church,
and of the Pastoral Book of Gregory.

4. Let every Bishop feed the Flock committed to him, not only with Doctrine,
but also with an holy Example.

5. That a Bishop be content with a moderate diet, that holy Lectures be read
at his Table, rather than the idle words of Parasites.

6. Let strangers and poor people be at Bishops Tables, whom they may refresh
both with corporal and spiritual repast.

7. That the delicate pleasure of the eye and ear be eschewed, lest the mind be
enchanted therewith.

8. Let not the Lords Servants delight in vain jesting, nor in hunting and
hawking.

9. Let Presbyters and Deacons follow the footsteps of their Bishops in leading
a pious life.

10. Let Bishops take care of the poor, and faithfully dispense Church-goods.

11. That Bishops may, with consent of Presbyters and Deacons, bestow somewhat
out of the Church-treasure to support needy people of that same Church.

12. A Presbyter is not to be Ordained till he is thirty years old.

13. Let the Bishop see, that in his own Parish Church, no Presbyter coming
from any other parts do Service in his Church without Letters of Recommendation.

14. Let a Presbyter leaving a low place, and presuming to an higher, incurr
that same punishment which a Bishop taken in the like fault should incurr.

15. A Presbyter who gets a Church, by giving money for it, let him be
deposed.

16. Let Tithes bestowed upon Churches by advice of Bishops, be faithfully
distributed to the poor by the Presbyters.

17. The Families of the Bishops shall be instructed in the sum of the true
Faith, in the knowledge of the retribution to be given to good men, and the
condemnation of evil people, and of the resurrection and last judgment, etc.

18. That the Bishop instruct his Presbyters concerning the Sacrament of
Baptism, what it is they should desire the baptized people to renounce.

19. That Presbyters when they say Mass, and do communicate, do not distribute
the Lord's body indiscreetly, to children, and to all persons who happen to be
present, etc. Then Reader, take notice, that private Masses had no place in
those days, but they who were duly prepared did communicate with the Priest.

20. Presbyters shall not suffer the holy Chrism to be touched by any man.

21. Presbyters shall not haunt Taverns.

22. Bishops and Presbyters shall prescribe to sinners, who have confessed
their sins, penance discreetly according to the nature of their fault.

23. Chanons, who dwell in one City shall eat in one Cloister, and sleep under
one roof, that they may be ready to Celebrate their Canonical hours.

24. From the 24 to the 32 Canon, are Constitutions concerning Monks and Nuns,
which I overpass with silence.

32. All Christians are exhorted to peace and concord.

33. Lords and Judges should hearken to the good admonitions of their Bishops;
and Bishops on the other side should reverently regard them.

34. Lords and Judges are not to admit vile persons to bear witness in their
Judicatories.

35. Let no man for his Decree receive a reward.

36. Let every one be careful to support indigent persons of his own kindred.

37. That Christians do bow their knees in prayer, except upon the Lord's Day,
and other Solemn days, on the which the Universal Church keeps a memorial of
the Lord's Resurrection. At such times they use to stand and pray.

38. That none enter into the Church with noise and tumult; and in time of
prayer and celebration of the Mass not to be busied in vain confabulations; but
even to abstain from idle thoughts.

39. Let not the Consistories of Secular Judges be in the Church, or porches
thereof in any time to come, because the House of God should be an house of
prayer.

40. That Merchandise be forbidden on the Lord's Day: that the whole day be
spent in God's service.

41. That paricides, murderers, and incestuous persons be reduced to Order, by
the discipline of the secular power.

42. That all people abstain from Magical Arts, which are the deceitful snares
of the Devil.

43. A frequent custom of swearing is forbidden.

44. That the causes of many Free Subjects, brought to poverty by oppression,
be examined by the Emperor.

45. That false weights and measures are an abomination to the Lord.

46. The 46 Canon bewaileth, that Tithes were not duly paid to the Church,
showing the ill effects thereof.

47. When general Fastings are appointed for any impendent Calamity, let no man
neglect the fellowship of the humble Church, etc.

48. Drunkenness and surfeiting are forbidden, etc.

49. Lords and Masters are to be admonished, not to deal cruelly with their
subjects; yea, and not to seek that which is due unto themselves, with
excessive rigor.

50. Let Laick people communicate at least thrice in a year, unless they be
hindered by some great sins committed by them.

51. In the last Canon mention is made, that they diligently examined the cause
of them who complained to the Emperor, that they were dis-inherited by the
donation of Lands, which their Fathers and Friends had bestowed on the Church;
and in their bounds they found no man who did complain: yet in that matter, if
any thing was done amiss, they humbly submitted themselves to be corrected by
their Sovereign Lord and King.

Of the Council of Chalons.
This Council was Convened in the same year of our Lord 813, by the Commandment
of Charles the Great, for the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Estate.

Many of the Canons of this Council are co-incident with the Canons of the
former, which I shall overpass, and mention only some of the other.

Can. 3. Let Bishops Constitute Schools, wherein Learning may be increased, and
men brought up in them, that may be the salt of the earth, to season the
corrupt manners of the people, and to stop the mouths of Heretics.

4. Let Churchmen show humility, in word, deed, habit and countenance.

5. Let Priests be unreproveable, adorned with good manners, and not given to
filthy lucre.

7. Bishops and Abbots, who have circumvented simple men, and shaven their
heads, and by such means do possess their goods, let them be subject to
Canonical or Regular Repentance.

8. If Churchmen lay up provision of Corn in Victualling-houses, let it not be
to keep them to a dearth, but therewith to support the poor in a time of need.

11. The Bishop or Abbot must not resort to Civil Judicatures to plead their
own Cause, except it be to support the poor and oppressed. Presbyters, Deacons
and Monks having obtained License from the Bishops may appear in Civil
Judgement-seats, accompanied with their Advocate.

12. Let no Presbyters, Deacons or Monks be Farmers or Tillers of the ground.

13. An Oath used by some in the time of Ordination inhibited.

14. Bishops in visiting of their Parishoners, not to be chargeable unto them.

15. This Canon was against the Tyranny of Archdeacons.

16. That Bishops provide Balm and Chrism for the Lights of the Church.

17. That Presbyters pay no Tribute to the Bishop.

18. Against taking of pawns from incestuous persons, and from those who pay
not their Tithes, and from negligent Presbyters.

19. Let people give their Tithes to those Churches wherein their Children are
baptized, and whereto they resort all the year long to hear Church Service.

23. The Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons is to be made at certain
prescribed times.

24. Concerning Presbyters, Deacons and Monks, who shall happen to be slain,
let the Emperor determine to whom the satisfaction of blood shall belong.

25. That the Emperor be entreated, that the Ancient Discipline may be
restored again, and they who sin publicly, may be brought to public
repentance; and every man according as he deserves, may either be
excommunicated or reconciled.

27. Neither the Sacrament of Baptism, nor the Sacrament of Confirmation should
be re-iterated.

28. Concerning the degrees of Affinity, and in what degree Marriage may be
bound up, every one is to go to the Canons of the Church to be resolved.

30. Rules concerning the Marriage of Servants.

31. That such Women as either negligently, or fraudulently present their own
Children to Confirmation, shall be forced to do penance all the days of their
life; neither shall they be separated from their Husbands.

32. Let a sinner confess unto his Father-Confessor, all his sins which he has
committed either in thought, word or deed.

34. In prescribing of penance, let favor and hatred of any person be laid
aside, and let the Injunctions be given according to the Rule of Holy
Scripture, and according to the Canons and Customs of the Church.

36. Let no man sin of purpose, to the end he may abolish his sins by
Alms-deeds; for that is all one, as if a man should hire God to grant unto him
a liberty to sin.

37. That such Canons of Councils are especially to be read, as appertain unto
Faith, and reformation of Manners.

38. Books called Libelli Poenitentiales, are to be abolished.

39. In the Solemnities of the Mass, prayers are to be made for the Souls of
them who are departed, as well as for them who are alive.

40. Degraded Presbyters, remaining impenitent, are to be excommunicated.

41. No Presbyters to be admitted in strange places, without the testimony of
the Bishop, and other sufficient witnesses.

42. Let no Church be committed to a Presbyter without consent of the Bishop.

43. In some places are found Scotch men, who call themselves Bishops, and they
Ordain Presbyters and Deacons, whose Ordination we disallow.

45. Against the going of the Clergy and Laics to holy places, such as Rome,
Turon, etc. men imagining, that by the sight of these places their sins are
remitted.

46 and 47, That the receiving the Sacrament be not long deferred; and none to
come to it without due preparation: That when the Sacrament is to be
universally received in one day, none do neglect to receive it, except some
grievous crime do hinder him from receiving it.

48. According to the Precept of St. James, that weak persons should be
anointed with oil by the Elders, which oil is blessed by the Bishop.

From Canon 52 unto the 66 are contained Precepts of chaste and honest living
prescribed to Prioresses and Nuns.

Of the Council of Arles.
The Canons of this Council were in number 26.

1. They set down a confession of their Faith.

The five following Canons are some of those mentioned in the former Councils.

The 7 and 8 Canons belong to the ordering of Monks and Nuns.

The 9th pertains to the payment of Tithes, and First Fruits.

10. That Presbyters shall preach the Word of God, not only in Cities, but also
in every Parish. From thence to the 17th are some of the Canons of the other
Councils.

17. Let every Bishop Visit his Bounds once every year, and support the
oppressed.

18. Let Presbyters keep the Chrism, and give it to no man under pretense of
Medicine.

19. Parents and Witnesses shall bring up baptized Children in the knowledge of
God.

20. Ancient Churches shall not be deprived of Tithes, nor of any other
possession.

21. That the Constitution of the Ancients shall be kept concerning burial in
Churches.

22. That Civil Judgement-seats shall not be in Churches.

23. If goods belonging to the poor be bought, let it be done openly in sight
of the Nobles and Judges of the City.

24. Let fugitive Churchmen be sought out, and sent back again unto the Bishop.

25. He who has a Benefice bestowed upon him, for helping the fabric of
Churches, let him support the building of them.

26. They who sin publicly, let them make their public repentance according
to the Canons.

All these Canons were presented unto the Emperor, to be corrected by the
wisdom of his Highness.

Charles at the request of Pope Adrian, 1. Banished the Ambrosian Service out
of his Kingdom, and against the will of the French Clergy, by force established
the Gregorian or Roman Office. By this change the Latin Tongue in the Public
Service was fully established.

Here I shall make mention of one notable passage written in the Life of
Charles the Great, namely when he made war against the Saracens of Spain.
Agoiland one of the Saracen Kings made show of friendship with Charlemagne, and
open hatred of the other Saracen Kings, with whom notwithstanding he had a most
strict correspondence; to betray Charles, Agoiland seemed to incline to peace:
After many Messengers sent on either part, they resolve to parley: So upon
Charlemagne's Faith, Agoiland comes to the Camp of the French.

Charles told the Pagan he should have his Friendship, if he would be baptized,
and become a Christian: Agoiland answered, That he was not yet so Abject, nor
his Forces so weak as to refuse the battle: But because it would be an infinite
loss to hazard so many men, he desired to make trial of the Right by some
Troops; and he that vanquished should have the Right, and True Religion on his
side, protesting to yield to that Religion which should appear to be the best
by that Trial. The condition was accepted by Charlemagne: The Combat being
made, the Christian Troop vanquished the Saracen.

Now Agoiland protests openly to be a Christian, De Serres Hist. in vit.
Caroli magni.
but in heart he meant otherwise, and takes this occasion to break the Treaty.
One day he finds Charlemagne at Table, well acccompanied with his Chief
Followers, (for then it was the custom of the French Kings not to eat alone)
and sees twelve poor men ill-apparelled, sitting by upon the ground near to
the Table of the Noblemen: He demanded what those poor miserable Creatures were
that did feed apart: One answered, They were the Messengers and Servants of
God: He then said, Their God was of small account, seeing his Messengers and
Servants were so miserable and contemptible, and thereupon retired himself;
having by this Treaty qualified the Force of Charles, viewed his Train, and
made show of his Courage, even without an Ambassador.

Charles Resolved to avenge this affront of the Saracen, He raises an Army of
an hundred and thirty thousand men, He returns into Spain, at the first
encounter he defeated Agoiland's Army near to Pampelona, and for a seal of his
Victory carries away the Head of Agoiland, slain by the hand of Arnold of
Belange, a Noble and Valiant Knight.

Charles wrote diverse Books: He began a Grammar of the German Language, but
ended it not. He changed the names of the Winds and Months from the Heathenish
manner. In the Epistle to Alcuinus before his Books De Divinis Officiis, he
says, when Christ was at supper with his Disciples, he brake the bread, and
gave the cup to them in figure of his body and blood, and left a great
Sacrament, which is profitable unto us.

Lib. 1. cap. 15.
He says elsewhere, The Miracles which they say have appeared in Images, if
they did not appear truly (as no Authentic History shows) were but lies. If
by some imaginary over-shadowing they did appear to deceive men's minds, it is
most dangerous, lest that Old Enemy by his subtilty, through show of wonders
persuade to do unlawful things. But if these things did verily appear, we
should understand, that when many wondrous things are done at the pleasure of
God by some Creatures, Lib. 3. cap. 25.
or in whatsoever Creatures they be done, yet these things are not to be
worshipped, by which, or in which these wonders are made; because God, who
shows many signs unto men by visible and palpable things, to mollify the
hardness of men's hearts by these visible things, works not these signs to
confirm the worship of any Creature; for he has commanded to worship himself
alone. Because God spoke out of a bush to Moses, should the bush therefore be
worshipped? Because a Woman was healed by touching the hem of Christ's garment,
should hems therefore be worshipped? The Catholic Church professes to serve
God, not by Images, not by men, nor ethereal powers, but by Christ our Lord.

Charles the Emperor made many Laws and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which
Angisus, Abbot of Lobien, and then Archbishop of Senon gathered together, with
the Constitutions of his Son Lewis, and divided them into seven Books. Sinderus
testifies, that they were in the Abbey of St. Gallus, and were not long since
printed at Paris.

Alcuin. cont. Elipant.
Alcuinus says thus of him, Charles was a King in Power, a Catholic in Faith,
an High Priest in Teaching, a Judge in Equity, a Philosopher in Liberal
Studies, famous in Manners, and excellent in all Honesty. He was never served
at Table with more than four dishes at once; his Recreations were hunting, and
reading of Histories. He died in February, Pedro Mexia Hist.
Anno 814, and was interred at Aix la Chapelle, where he was born, and his
Memory honored with a goodly Epitaph. The greatness of his Monarchy is
admirable, for he quietly enjoyed all France, Germany, and the greatest part of
Hungary, all Italy, and a part of Spain. He left his Son Jews sole Heir of his
great Kingdoms, who was the weakest of all his Sons.

The French Monarchy being come to the height of it is Greatness, not long after
the death of Charlemagne it began to decline. The foolish lenity of Jews was
the beginning, the which was continued by the disordered confusions of his
Successors, who (in spite one to another) hastened the ruin of their House,
making way thereunto by their Vices and Misfortunes. Jews (more fit to be a
Monk than a King) was so given to Devotion, and of so soft a spirit, that he
made his Authority contemptible both within and without the Realm: This made
diverse Nations subject to the Crown, to fall from their obedience.

Bernard King of Italy, an ambitious young man, was persuaded by the Bishops of
Orleans and Milan, to seize upon the Realm of France. But being in field to go
into France against his Uncle, with an imaginary favor of the French to be
proclaimed King, both he and all his Counselors were taken by Jews his
Subjects.

Jews having both his Nephew and Counselors in his Power, despoils him of all
his Realm of Italy, confines him to perpetual prison, and puts out his eyes:
the like he does to all the Bishops and Noble Men he could get, and after a few
days causes them to be beheaded. This act from Jews, and committed against
such persons, began to breed a general dislike, the which was aggravated by a
domestical dissension.

After the death of Bernard, Jews gave Italy to his eldest Son Lotharius, and
associated him in the Empire. To his Son Pepin he gave Aquitain, to Jews
Bavaria, and would have them all bear the name of Kings.

Jews had a Son by Judith his second Wife, an ambitious Woman, called Charles.
This Woman played the Empress and Queen over all, which caused Jews to be
hated and contemned. His Sons, Lotharius, Pepin and Jews, by the Advice of the
Bishops (who were incensed against the Emperor by reason of the death of those
Churchmen) resolve to seize upon their Father, Mother, and younger Brother, to
dispossess them of all Authority, and then to govern the States after their own
wills, wherein they must use force, and a public consent.

Lotharius lieves a great Army, and calls a National Council of the French
Church at Lions, supposing sooner to suppress Jews by this means than by a
Parliament. Jews appears, and yields to the censure of the Prelates, which
was to retire himself into a Monastery, there to attend his Devotion, and to
resign the Empire and the Realm to his Children. So Jews was conveyed to
Soissons, to the Monastery of St. Medard; his Wife and her Son Charles were
committed to other places, and the whole Government committed to Lotharius and
his Brethren. And the greatest of the Churchmen were guilty of this Outrage,
seeking to maintain their Decrees. Jews continued in prison five years, viz.
from the year 829, unto the year 834.

Then Lotharius being forced to yield to his Father, goes to field, takes him
prisoner again, and leads him back to the Convent at Soissons, where he stayed
not long, for the French did bandy openly against Lotharius, and his Brethren
abandoned him, so as he was forced to yield unto his Father, and to crave
pardon. Then Jews gives portions to his Children, to Lotharius he leaves the
Realm of Austrasia, from the River of Men's unto Hungary, with the Title of
Emperor; unto Jews Bavaria, and unto Chrarles France: Pepin enjoyed Aquitain
without contradiction.

Jews not content with Bavaria, levies an Army, and passes the Rhine. The
miserable Father prepares an Army to go against him, but he falls sick and
dies, Anno 840.

There was a Council held at Paris by the Command of Jews, and his Son
Lotharius, Anno 829, and three others at the same time in other places, as is
collected from the Preface. It was Ordained, that Synods should then be
Assembled in four several places of their Empire.

In his Reign, in France was used of Priests and Churchmen precious and
shining Vestures, and golden and rich staring Girdles, with Rings and other
Ornaments of Gold: Fabian's Chron.
Wherefore the said Jews procured of the Pope a correction for all such as
used such strange apparel, causing them to wear brown and sad colors.

After the death of the Emperor Jews, Lotharius his eldest Son, and Emperor
by his Fathers Testament, would force his Brethren to a new division. He
quarrelleth with Charles King of France, and Jews Duke of Bavaria; but the two
Brethren unite together, and join their Forces to oppose Lotharius.

Lotharius finding himself the stronger, refuses the Conditions of Peace
offered by his Brethren: Then Jews and Charles charging the Army of Lotharius,
overthrew it with a notable slaughter. Lotharius after this defeat changes his
humor with his estate; he enjoyed the titulary mask of the Empire with
Austrasia, yet much curtailed and divided to his three Sons, Jews, Charles and
Lotharius. Then Lotharius having remorse of Conscience for attempting against
his Father and Brethren, professes himself a Monk in the Abbey of Pluviers, and
dies a Monk in the Year 855.

Charles and Jews after the Victory call the Bishops to take their Advice upon
Occurrents, who being solemnly Assembled exhort them to Concord: They hearken
to them, make an Alliance, and come to the dividing of their parts. Charles
remains the sole King of France. Daulphine and Provence were left to Jews in
his partage, for the commodity of Italy which was given him, notwithstanding
the pretensions of Bernard's Children: But he died soon after without any
Issue-male, leaving one only Daughter, called Hermingrade, Heir of all his
great Estates.

Charles married his Niece Hermingrade to Boson Earl of Ardennes, Council.
Meldens. Cap. 78. Tom. 3.
brother to his Wife Richilde, who called himself King of Arles.

At the Council at Meaux held about this time, it was Decreed, that the
Capitular Laws concerning the Church, made by Charlemagne, and his Son Jews,
should be strictly observed. The same Council entreats King Charles the
Younger, to grant the Bishops a freer liberty for the execution of their
Ministeries in their Parishes.

Charles called the Bald, began his Reign, Anno 841. King Charles was present
at the Council holden at Pistis upon Sein, Anno 963. He is named first, the
Decrees are conceived in his name.
He caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor after the death of Jews, who
survived Lotharius, without contradiction: He went to Rome, and was Crowned
Emperor by the Pope, with the Imperial Diadem; then raising his Spirit very
high, after the custom of the Grecians, he walks with a Surplice.

This King Charles the Bald, relying on the Popes help, favored the Pope with
all his Power, and brought the French Clergy to the subjection of the Roman
See, as much as he could: Then began the Popes Legates to come to the Councils
of France, and there to preside. Then also the French Kings began to tremble
under the thunderbolts of the Vatican, and to fear the Excommunications of the
Pope.

The first Pope that made trial of his Excommunications against them was Pope
Nicholas the first, who threatened Lothary to Excommunicate him, unless he
recalled Tietberga his Wife, whom he had put away, to take Waldrada whom he
loved, which also this Pope did Excommunicate: Whereupon there was great
murmuring of the Prelates and People of France against the Pope, being
displeased both at the Pope's Usurpations, and the pusillanimity of their
Kings. These things happened from the Year 863 to 866.

After that Nicholas, came Adrian the second, who favoring Jews, Du Moulin
cont. Perron. lib. 3. c. 9.
Grandchild to Jews the Gentle, against Charles the Bald his Uncle, sent
peremptory Letters into France, whereby he declared, That if any presumed to
make an enterprise upon the Kingdom of Jews, not only he would make void by
his Authority all that he should do; but also that such a man being bound with
the bonds of Anathema, and deprived of the name of Christian, should be lodged
altogether with the Devil.

Pope John the 8. having excommunicated Count Lambert, and Count Adalbert, and
some others which had ill entreated him in Italy, came into France Anno 870,
where he called a Synod at Troyes, consisting of the Bishops of that Kingdom,
to desire their Consent to that Excommunication; which they accordingly granted
him.
This is seen in the Epistle which Hinomarus Archbishop of Rhemes writes to the
said Adrian upon the said subject, where he says, That both Ecclesiastical and
Secular men being Assembled at Rhemes, would say in a reproachful way, That
never any such Mandate was sent from that See to any of the Kings Predecessors:
Adding, That the Bishops of Rome had never withdrawn themselves from the
obedience of Heretical Emperors: Wherefore (said they) we will not believe,
that we cannot otherwise attain to the Kingdom of Heaven, but by receiving him
for a Temporal King, whom this Apostolical Lord recommendeth to us.

It was in this ninth Age, that the Decretals were forged by Riculphus Bishop
of Mentz, as is supposed, who published them under a false Title. And at that
time, and a long time after the Archbishops of Mentz were the first promoters
of Papal Authority in Germany. And nothing has helped more to the
establishment of the Papal Empire, than these Epistles, which have for a long
time been held for Oracles in the West; by them the Father of lies has wrought
very powerfully.

These Decretals were forged under the Reign of Charlemagne, and of his Son
Jews the Gentle, being unknown before, and never mentioned in all Antiquity,
bearing on the front the name of Isidorus Peccator; and in some Copies Isidorus
Mercator, a man unknown, and a name forged at will.

That Collection of Decretals began to go about in France in the beginning of
the Reign of Charles the Bald. The first that used them, was Hinckmar Bishop of
Laon upon this occasion: Hinckmar Archbishop of Rhemes had promoted to the
Bishopric of Laon another Hinckmar his Nephew, who having excommunicated his
Clergy, and hindered the Divine Service, and the Baptism of Children in his own
Bishopric, and committed diverse crimes and excesses, was cited to appear
before his Uncle, who was his Metropolitan: But he would not obey nor appear.
Upon that Hinckmar of Rhemes disanulled all the Acts of Hinckmar of Laon, and
would synodically proceed against him.

Hereupon Charles the Bald Convocated a Council in France at Acciniacum,
consisting of ten Bishops; the Bishops of Lions, Vason and Triers were Chief
Presidents in the Council. Hinckmarus Bishop of Rhemes proposed unto the
Council fifty Canons, which he desired to be read in the Synod. Hinckmar of
Laon to defend himself brought forth the Collection of the Decretals, of the
ancient Popes made by Isidorus, where by the Popes Decrees such causes are
reserved to the Apostolic See.

Hinckmar of Rhemes being not learned enough to know the forgery of the Author
of these Decretals, and not daring to reject them openly, brought diverse things
to invalid their Authority. He said, that Hinckmar of Laon was mistaken, if he
thought that he was the only man that had those Epistles; that the Country was
full of them, and that Riculfus Bishop of Mentz had published the Book of
Epistles collected by Isidorus, which was brought to him out of Spain.

Hinckmar also (to defend himself against those Epistles) said, that they had
been good in their time, but that the Fathers Assembled in Council had altered
those things, and made Canons of greater Authority, which are to remain
perpetually; and that those Decretals were never put in among the Canons of the
Church. That strife between the two Hinckmars happened Anno 870.

The Synod forenamed, accused Hinckmar Bishop of Laon of petulancy, and
compelled him to subscribe obedience to King Charles, and to his Metropolitan:
He was also deprived of his Office, and both his eyes were thrust out. But Pope
John IX, Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 9. cap. 9.
under the Reign of Charles the Gross, restored him to his Office again, being
the more affectioned to him, because he had appealed from his own Bishop, and
from a Decree of a Synod in his own Country to be judged by the Chair of Rome.

Pope Nicholas bestirred himself with violence against Hinckmar of Rhemes,
complaining that he despised the Decretals collected by Isidorus. Hinckmar
resisted him stiffly, neither did he ever suffer the causes which he had judged
to be revised at Rome, nor any man that had been deposed by the Synods of
France, to be restored by the Pope. And all his life time he maintained with
great constancy so much liberty as remained to the Gallican Church, which
liberty suffered by his death a great diminution. The Popes durst not touch him
because he was the King's Uncle.

Baronius writing of this Hinckmar of Rhemes, notably abuses him, for he
says, That upon the testimony of Fredoard, Hinckmar had obtained of Pope Leo
IV, by the mediation of the Emperor Lothary, a Pallium, or Archiepiscopal
Cloak, with a privilege to use it every day. But Hinckmar himself in the Book
of the fifty five Chapters, says the contrary, speaking in this manner, Leo
IV, and Benedictus did confer upon me some privileges, which I did not ask for.
For the privileges which are conferred upon every Metropolitan by the sacred
Canons, are sufficient for me. It was a generous part of Hinckmar, to declare
that he had no need of the Pope's privileges, and that he held his dignity from
the Canons, not from the Roman Prelate.

As for the writings of this Hinckmar, there are his Opuscula and Epistolae:
Admonitio de potestate Regia and Pontificia. We find this character given of
him: Fuit vir doctus, and pietatis studiosus sub Carolo secundo Lu^ vici pii
filio circa 870, Domini annum; tametsi and magni Caroli tempora adolescens
attigerit. Is dum corrigere vitia morbosque Clericorum conatus est, multum
molestiarum a perditae vitae Clero, eorumque ad Papam appellationibus, imo and
a Papis ipsis sustinuit, Illyr. Catal. Test. verit. lib. 9.

In this Century Claudius Bishop of Turin, was defamed as an Heretic by
Theodomire an Abbot, Petries Church-Hist. Cent. 9.
who did accuse him unto the Pope. He wrote his own Apology, that it might
appear wherefore he was accused, and to show how Godly men have been traduced
from time to time.

Agobard Bishop of Lions took part with Lotharius against Jews his Father, and
therefore was deposed: after their reconciliation he was restored, and being a
man of wisdom and knowledge, was employed about the great Affairs of the
Kingdom. His Works were printed at Paris, Anno 1605. from which Impression
these passages are extracted, page 52. There is one immovable Foundation, one
Rock of Faith, which Peter confesses, Thou art the Son of the Living God. And
page 128, The uncleanness of our time deserves a fountain of tears, when so
ungodly a custom is become so frequent, that there is none almost aspiring to
temporal honor, who has not a Priest at home, not whom he obeys, but of
whom he exacteth all manner of obedience incessently, not in Divine, but in
worldly things; so that many of them do serve at Table, or mix wine, and lead
dogs, feed horses, or attend Husbandry; neither regard they what manner of
Clerks these be, but only that they may have Priests of their own; and so they
leave Churches and Sermons, and public Service: it is clear, that they seek
them, not for honor of Religion, because they have them not in honor, and
speak disdainfully of them. He is large against the worship of Images.

Bellarm. de scriptorib. Eccles. Sect. 9.
Bellarmine says, that Jonas, and other Bishops of France in that Age, were
overtaken with Agobard's error. By the Jesuits confession then many Bishops
of France, were against the present errors of Rome.

Catal. Test. verit. Lib. 10.
Then Angelom, a Monk of Luxovia, a man of great reading, at the entreaty of
Drogo, wrote many Books. Druthmarus of Aquitain wrote some things upon the
Evangelists.

Then Raban Magnentius, otherwise surnamed Maurus, was famous in the University
of Paris, Trithem. Catal. illustr. viror.
for Poesy, Rhetoric, Astronomy, Philosophy and Theology, unto whom neither
Germany nor Italy brought forth an equal, says Trithemius. He became Abbot of
Fulda, where he was born, and there he wrote Commentaries on all the Books of
the Bible. He was sometime Scholar to Alcuinus. His Monks were offended, that
he did so much study the Scriptures, and did no better attend their Revenues;
therefore after 24 years he left the Abbey; they besought him to return, but he
would not: He abode with Jews the Emperor, until Orgar Bishop of Mentz died,
and then succeeded. Thomas Walden in the Acts of Pope Martin V. reckoned him,
and Herebald, or Reginbald, Bishop of Auxerre, among Heretics, because they
favored Bertram.

At that time there was much debate about the Doctrine of Predestination.
Gotteschalk (by birth a Franck or Belgic, Avent. Lib. 4. Annal. Bojor.
as Aventinus calls him) was Ordained a Priest by Rigbold Chorepiscopus, in
the vacancy of the Sea of Rhemes. The forenamed Hinckmar writes, that he held
these five Articles:

1. God did before all Ages, and e're he made any thing, Hinckmar. in Epist. ad
Eccles. Lugdun.
predestinate unto salvation whom he would, and also unto destruction whom he
would.

2. That they who are predestined unto destruction cannot be saved.

3. That whereas the Apostle says, God wills that all men be saved, he
means, only all them who shall be saved.

4. That Christ came not to save all men, nor did he suffer for all men, but
only for them who shall be saved by the mystery of his passion.

5. Since the first man fell of his Free Will, none of us can use Free Will to
do good, but only to do evil.

Remigius Bishop of Lions, in the name of the Church of Lions defended these
five Articles; whereupon Hinckmar wrote unto Pope Nicholas against Gotteschalk,
and calls these Articles, the heresy of the Predestinarians, which was
overthrown in Africa, and afterward in France, by Authority of Pope Celestine.
When Gotteschalk returned from Italy, Raban Bishop of Mentz summoned him to a
Synod, and when he could not persuade him to change his mind, he wrote unto
Hinckmar and others. Hinckmar summoned Gotteschalk unto a Synod of twelve
Bishops, and some Priests and Abbots in Carisiac on Isara, where four Articles
were enacted against him. He was condemned of Heresy and contumacy; he was
whipped with rods, Vid. Petries Chapter Hist. Cent. 9.
and cast into prison. The Church of Lions after sight of these four Articles,
sent forth their censure of them.

Remigius, was a man of a most holy Conversation, and very learned, as
appears by the Comments which he wrote upon the Old and New Testaments.

At this time was published a Commentary on the thirteen Epistles of the
Apostle St. Paul, which was lately printed at Rome, under the name of Remigius
of Rhemes.

Lupus, Abbot of the Monastery of Ferraria, by the water Lupa running into
Sein, at the same time wrote several Epistles unto King Jews, and to Hinckmar,
which were printed at Paris, Anno 1588. He comfort his Master Einhard after
the death of his Wife: He speaks honorably of Marriage, and comfortably of the
estate of the Godly after this life, without any mention of purgatory, or Mass
for the defunct.

At the same time also was a question of the presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament. Charles the Bald King of France, commanded Bertram, a Priest at
Corbey, to search and write what was the Doctrine of the Fathers, and Ancient
Church in this Article. Trithemius says, Bertram was singularly learned, of an
excellent eloquence and utterance, pregnant in judgment, and no less famous
for holiness of life, and wrote many excellent Treatises. In obedience unto
King Charles he compiled a Treatise, De corpore and sanguine Domini, which is
all inserted in Catal. Test. verit. lib. 10. This Book was forbidden to be read
by order from the Roman Inquisition, confirmed afterward by the Council of
Trent. Usher's Answ. to the Jesuits challenge.
The Divines of Doway perceiving that the forbidding of that Book did not keep
men from reading it, but gave them rather occasion to seek more earnestly after
it, thought it better Bertram should be suffered to go abroad, but handled in
such sort, as other ancient Writers that made against them were wont to be.
Bishop Ridley highly commends this Bertram. Ridl. Pres. at coen. Dom.


Paschasius Rathbert, Abbot of Corbey at the same time wrote a Book of the
Eucharist. Remigius Bishop of Auxerre flourished about the year 880; he wrote
many Books: He was called Doctor Sententiosus.

Charles the Bald died at Mantua, Anno 879, being poisoned by Sedecias the Jew,
whom he employed for one of his Physicians, leaving the Realm to his Son Jews
the second, called the Stuttering.

Jews King of Germany had vowed that he would take both Empire and Kingdom
from Charles the Bald, but was arrested with sickness at Frankford. There he
divided his Kingdom among his three Sons, to Jews he gave Saxony, Turingia,
Frisia, and the Provinces within them, with the Title of East-France: to
Carloman he gave Bojaria, Austria, Bohemia, and Moravia, with the Title of King
of Bavaria: To Charles his third Son he gave Suevia, Franconia, with some parts
of Lorain (which he had taken after the death of Lotharius) with the Title of
King of Germany.

De Serres Hist.
Charles the Fat King of Germany strove for the Empire, and was Crowned by the
Romans. Pope John would not consent, and therefore was imprisoned; he escaping
goes into France, and confirms Jews the Stutterer. He was courteously
received by Jews, stays in France a whole year, and there holds a Council at
Troyes in Champagne.

The Pope was scarce gone but Jews dies, having reigned only two years. He
had no lawful Children, but two Bastards: he left his Wife with Child. The
Queen was afterward delivered of a Son, which was saluted King, and called
Charles.

During the minority of Charles, Jews and Carloman Brothers, the two Bastards
of Jews the Stutterer, are chosen by the States to Govern the Realm of France.
Jews was defeated by the Normans, and dies for grief. Soon after his Death it
is said, that Carloman fell down and brake his neck. Another Jews succeeds
to these two Brethren, but he quickly dyed. Then the States called Charles the
Gross, King of Bavaria, to this high Dignity. He began his reign, Anno 885, and
reigned nine years. His entrance was goodly, but his end Tragical. He was
crowned King with promise to restore the Crown to the lawful Heir, and to
govern according to the will of the States. He was Son to Jews called
Germanicus, Son to Jews the Gentle: Being defeated by the Normans, he yields
to a prejudicial peace, and is much hated of the French. At length the French
and the Grrmans resolve to dispossess him.

The Germans made choice for their Emperor of Arnulph Son to Carloman, the Son
of Jews the Gentle. The French likewise reject this miserable Charles from the
Regency of the Realm, and call Eudes of Odon, Duke of Angers, named by the will
of Jews the Stutterer.

So this poor Prince is cast out both from Realm and Empire, and remains naked
without an house to shroud himself in from this disgrace; being banished from
Court, and driven into a poor Village of Suevia, where he lived some days in
extreme want, without any means of his own, or relief from any Man; in the end
he dyed, neither pitied nor lamented of any, in a corner unknown, but to have
been the Theater of so extraordinary a Tragedy, that one of the greatest
Monarchs in the World, should dye without House, without Bread, without
Mourning, and without Memory, but the note of this end so prodigiously
memorable.

Century X.
CHarles the Third, called the Simple, was Crowned in the Year 902. Eudes
governing with him eight Years from his Coronation. Charles remaining alone
after the Death of his Regent, Reigned 27 Years. His Reign was miserable
throughout. Now begins a notable league against the King. Robert Duke of Anjou
becomes the Head of this League, accompanied with many great Men of France.
This Robert was Governor by the Death of his Brother Eudes.

They caused Charles to quit the Crown, discharging him with the name of simple
or foolish, and declaring him incapable of so great a charge. Robert arms
boldly against Charles, to dispossess him of his Estate. Charles flees to Henry
the third Emperor, and labors to calm this storm.

At the approach of their Armies, Robert (to have some Title to make a War)
causes himself to be Crowned King at Rhemes, by Herve the Archbishop, who
died three days after this unlawful Coronation.

As the Armies approach near Soissons, striving (in the view of Paris) they
join, the combat is cruel, but Robert fighting in the Front is slain, leaving
for that time the victory to King Charles, who seeks a Treaty of Peace, out of
an unseasonable fear. Hebert, Earl of Vermandois, Son-in-law to Robert,
beseeches Charles to come to St. Quintins to confer together. Charles comes
thither without Hostages. Hebert there takes him Prisoner, and conveys him to
Soissons, where he had assembled the chief of the Realm, chosen after his own
humor, where he makes him to resign the Crown to Raoul his God-son, the first
Prince of the Blood by his Mother Hermingrade, Daughter to Jews, and Wife of
Boson King of Burgundy. So this poor Prince is led from Prison to Prison for
five years and dies of a languishing melancholy.

He had by his Wife Ogin a the Daughter of Edward King of England, a Son named
Jews. She takes her Son Jews, and flees into England, to her Brother
Athelstan who then Reigned.

But the Reign of Raoul was unfortunate, who Reigned thirteen years during
Charles his imprisonment, and after his Death.

But Raoul after many broils dies at Compiegne, Anno 936. Now are great
confusions in France, there is nothing sacred; all is violated for Rule, all
respect is laid aside, every one plays the King within himself; for one King
there are many; and where there are many Masters, there are none at all. In
this confusion there were many Kings, Dukes and Earls, although these Titles
were but temporary, having no other Title but the Sword. There was no Governor
of any Province throughout the Realm, which held not proper to himself and his
Heirs, those things which were given to them but as Offices. From hence sprang
so many Dukedoms, Earldoms, Baronies, and Seignories, which for the most part
are returned to their beginnings. Italy (given to an Infant of France) was now
possessed by diverse Princes. Germany (withdrawn from the Crown) was banded into
diverse factions, so as the Empire of the West, confirmed in the person of
Charlemaigne, continued scarce one hundred years in his Race: for Jews the Son
of Arnulph, was the last Emperor of this Blood. In his place the Germans
erected Conrade, Duke of East Franconia, Anno 920. the Empire being then very
weak. After Conrade was chosen Henry the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, and after him
his Son Otho, Princes adorned with singular virtues fit for the time to
preserve the West. For the Emperors of the East did run headlong to their
ruin, who were men either of no valor, or altogether wicked, attending the
last blow by the hand of the Mahumetans, whose power they strengthened by their
vicious lives, until they had lodged them upon their own heads.

In these confusions of State the power of the Pope of Rome increased daily, by
the ruins of the Empire. The design of the Popes was to erect a Monarchy in
the Church, by Power and Authority, Seignories, civil Dissentions, Arms,
Revenues, and Treason: And soon after they grew to that greatness, as they
sought to prescribe Laws to Emperors and Kings, who refusing it, and disputing
this primacy, many dissentions arose, and were dispersed among the people.

After the Death of Raoul, Athelstan King of England (having drawn unto him
William Duke of Normandy) sends an honorable Embassage to the States of
France, entreating them to restore his Nephew Jews, to his lawful and
Hereditary Dignity. The French consent to it: So Jews, the Son of Charles, is
called home by the Estates of France, being accompanied with a great Troop of
Englishmen and Normans.

Jews hegan to Reign, Anno 935, and Reigned 27 years.

About this time, Ambrose Ansbert, a Frenchman, wrote Commentaries on the
Psalms and Canticles, and part of the Revelation.

In this tenth Century there was little study of liberal Sciences, the Schools
were few, and empty of Languages. The Popish Priests and Clergy (having
forsaken their old Discipline) were given to filthy lucre, nor were they
respected by their flocks; only Monks were noted to have some Eloquence. And
such was the corruption of the times, that none durst scarce speak of the
Corruptions, Idolatries, Superstitions, and wickednesses of that Age, which at
that time were so luxuriant. Diverse Signs were seen in Heaven: and great
changes happened almost in every Kingdom, The Hungarians oppress Italy and
Germany, besides many other broils in both those Nations. France will shortly
have another Race of Kings: great were the Wars in Spain between the Moors and
the old Inhabitants, and the Saracens suffered neither Greece nor Asia to rest
in peace.

Bellarmine speaking of this Century, says, Behold an unhappy Age, Bellarm. in
Chronol.
in which are no famous Writers, few or no Councils, bad Emperors, and no good
Popes.

Baronius on the beginning of this Century, says, Baron. ad Anno 900. Sect. 1.
A new Age begins, which for rudeness, and barrenness of goodness may be
called The Iron Age, and for deformity of evil abounding, The Leaden Age, and
for want of Writers is called, The Dark Age.

Under the Reign of Charles the Simple, King of France, a Council was called at
Rhemes, for correcting the abuse of Church-rents: for Noblemen in Court, such
as Hugo, and his Brother Robert, Master of the King 's Horses, and Vincmarius
with diverse others, under pretense of sustaining the King 's Honorable Estate,
and paying wages to Soldiers, had converted to their own use a great part of
Church-rents, especially belonging to Abbeys. Fulco, Archbishop of Rhemes
uttered his mind freely in the Council. Vincmarius one of the notable
oppressors in the Court, defiled the Council with Blood, and killed Fulco
Bishop of Rhemes. The Fathers of the Council returned unto their own Churches
with great fear: for the like of this was not heard since the second Council of
Ephesus, in which Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople was slain.

Du. Haillan in vit. Caroli Simpl.
A Council also was held in France, in which it was permitted Priests to marry
Virgins.

At this time there was a great Famine in France.

The People had been much given to Gluttony and Drunkenness, and God punished
them with penury and scarcity of Victuals.

Jews dies Anno 955. at Rhemes, hated of the French, leaving to Lothair, his
Son, a Crown near the ruin, and to Charles the youngest, the favor of his
eldest Brother.

Lothair detested of all men, died Anno 964. leaving behind him an execrable
memory of his actions, and Jews, his Son, for a final conclusion of his race,
as an outcast of great Charlemagne.

Jews V. reigned one year only, and dyed without Heir, leaving his place void
in troubles of State, and confusion of times horribly corrupted, unto the House
of Hugh le grand, Earl of Paris, God had prepared the means, both for the
Father to lay the foundation, and for his Son Hugh Capet, (appointed for the
Regal Dignity) to finish this goodly building.

Now comes in the third race of the Kings of France, called Capets, of the
name of Hugh Capet.

Charles Duke of Lorrain, was first Prince of the Blood Royal, he was Son to
Jews IV. Brother to Lothair, Uncle to Jews V. the last King, to whom the
fundamental Laws of France did adjudge the Crown. But Hugh Capet was chosen
King by the French assembled in Parliament, and Charles Duke of Lorrain was
rejected from the Crown.

This change happened in July, Anno 987. This new King was surnamed Capet, or
Capitosus, either for that he had a great Head, or that (being young) he was
accustomed to catch at his Companions caps, as a presage of that he should do
unto Kings. Otho and Henry two other Sons of Hugh le grand, were Dukes of
Burgundy, one after another; his other Sons were advanced to Ecclesiastical
Dignities, the one Archbishop of Toulouse, the other of Rovan, and another
dyed young.

Charles of Lorrain gathered an Army, and entering France came to the City of
Laon, within which City he by the Treason of Anselm the Bishop of that City,
was taken and delivered with his Wife and Children into the hands of his
Enemies.

Hugh being crowned King, causes his Son Robert to be crowned King at Rhemes,
Anno 990. three years after his Father's election. Hugh decrees, that the
elder Son should reign alone among his Brethren: and suppresseth the Majors of
the Palace.

He likewise decreed, that hereafter Bastards should not be only rejected from
the Crown, but also from the surname of France, the which before was allowed
them. To him likewise are due the goodly Ordinances of Justice. Paris was the
chief place of Hugh's residence, which City was greatly augmented and
beautified in his Reign.

Arnulph, Bastard to Lothair, was the only Man which had favored Charles of
Lorrain, against Hugh Capet. This Man was both perverse and disloyal, having
deceived both Charles of Lorrain, and Hugh Capet, who had given him the
Archbishopric of Rovan, in recompense of the service he promised him against
Charles, to whom (notwithstanding) contrary to his Faith, he gave means to
seize upon the Cities of Rhemes, Laon and Soissons. Hugh therefore resolves to
suppress Arnulph: but respecting his quality, he assembled a National Council
of the French Church in the City of Rhemes. This Assembly deposed Arnulph, as
guilty of Treachery, and a troubler of the public quiet; and they substitute
Gilbert in his place, who had been Schoolmaster unto Robert. Afterward Hugh
confines him to Orleans with Charles of Lorrain, there to end his days in rest.

The Prelates of France in this Synod, made a Declaration, that the Popes have
nothing to do to usurp the power and authority of Kings. Arnalt, Bishop of
Orleans, maintained in that Synod, that the Popes have no power at all over the
Bishops of France, so as to have any cognizance of Cases belonging to them: and
he declaimed most stoutly against the avarice and corruption of the Court of
Rome.

Seguin, Archbishop of Sens, was sent also to Orleans, to be imprisoned,
because he consented not freely to the deposition of Arnulph.

Pope John 12. being displeased with Hugh, for that he had not appealed to him
for his confirmation in this new Royalty, disanulleth this Decree of the
Council of Rhemes, excommunicates the Bishops which had assisted, restores
Arnulph, and deprives Gilbert of the Archbishopric of Rovan, and to temper
this sharp and rough proceeding with some lenity, he does invest Gilbert with
the Archbishopric of Ravenna. And this was a means to raise him to the
dignity of Pope.

Acta Synodi Rhemensis. Anno 990.
The Acts of this Council of Rhemes under Hugh Capet, have these words. Poor
Rome! What clear lights of Fathers have thou brought forth in the time of our
Predecessors? What horrible darkness have thou poured out upon our times, which
will redound to our shame and dishonor in future Ages?

The Pope threatens his curse against Hugh, and his Son Robert. The King
returned Answer, that he had done nothing in contempt, but that he was willing
to justify what He or his Bishops had done, if it pleased the Pope to meet him
at Gratianople, on the Frontiers of Italy and France, or, if rather he would
come into France, he promised to receive him with the highest honor. The Pope
sent his Legates into France.

Gerebert, Archbishop of Rhemes, sent an Epistle unto Seguin forementioned
(who was said to favor the deposed Arnulph) the tenor whereof is. Morn. in
Mist. iniqu.
It became your worthiness, to eschew the craftiness of deceitful men, and to
hear the voice of the Lord, saying, Here is Christ, Hist. Magdeb. in Actis
Synodi.
or there is Christ, follow not. One is said to be in Rome, who justifies
those things which ye condemn, and condemns those things which ye think just.
God says, If thy Brother offend against thee, go and rebuke him. How then say
some, that in the deposition of Arnulph, we should have waited the
determination of the Romish Bishop? can they say, that the Judgment of the
Bishop of Rome is greater than the Judgment of God? But the Prince of the
Apostles says, We must obey God rather than Man. St. Paul also cries, If any
Man Preach unto you otherwise than what you have received: although he were an
Angel from Heaven, let him be accursed. Because Pope Marcellinus offered
Incense unto Idols, should therefore all Bishops offer Incense? I say boldly,
that if the Bishop of Rome himself sin against a Brother, and being often
admonished will not hear the Church; even the Roman Bishop according to the
command of Christ, should be esteemed as an Heathen and a Publican, for the
highest rise has the lowest fall. And if he think us unworthy of him, because
none of us assenteth to him, when he judges contrary to the Gospel, he cannot
therefore separate us from the Communion of Christ, seeing even a Presbyter,
unless he confess, or be convict, should not be removed from his Office, etc.
The Privileges of St. Peter (says Leo the Great) are not, where Judgment is
not exercised according to Righteousness. Wherefore occasion should not be
given unto these our envyers, that the Priesthood, which is one every where, as
the Catholic Church is one, should be subject unto one Man, that if he be
corrupt with Money, favor, fear or ignorance, none can be a Priest, except
whom these virtues recommend unto him. Let the Law of the Catholic Church be
common. Farewell, and suspend not your selves from the sacred Mysteries.

Pope John had intelligence of this Letter, and summoned the Bishops of France
unto a Synod, first at Rome, then at Aken. The Bishops answered, They were not
obliged to go out of their own Country. At last he named Munson on the borders
of France: where only Gerebert appeared, and boldly maintained the cause of the
French Church: so that the Legate Leo could do nothing without new instructions
from the Pope, save only that he appointed another Synod at Rhemes; and in the
mean time he suspends Gerebert, who wrote the Apology of the French Church, as
his Epistle unto Wilderodon Bishop of Argentine, testifies.

Gerebert excelled in Learning, and came afterward to the Roman Chair, and
called by the name of Silvester the second: he was promoted to that dignity by
the Emperor Otho.

Hugh Capet having reigned peaceably nine years, died November. 22. 996. leaving
his Son Robert his successor; a Prince wise, resolute, peaceable and
continent: he is said to have been Learned, a lover of Divinity and humanity.
They sing Hymns of his Invention, the which thus begins. O Constantia
Martyrum mirabilis; the which bearing resemblance with the name of his Wife
Constance, he was wonderfully pleased with the humor she had to be honored
with his writings, being then greatly esteemed throughout the World.

He preferred virtue before the prerogative of primogeniture, and caused Henry,
his younger Son, to be Crowned in his life time, decreeing by his Will that his
eldest Son Robert should content himself with the Duchy of Burgundy, doing
homage for it to the Crown of France.

Century XI.
IN the beginning of this Century, Arnold Earl of Sens, Fabian's Chronic.
used great Tyranny among the Bishops and Ministers of the Church. Hereupon
Leofricus, Bishop of that See, through the advice and aid of Reginald Bishop of
Paris, put out the said Arnold, and delivered the City unto King Robert. But
the Brother of the said Arnold, with diverse of his Knights, fled to the Castle,
and held it by force. Then the King besieged the said Castle, and took both it
and Fromond, the Brother of Arnold, and sent him to Orleans, where being
imprisoned he dyed shortly after.

This Robert builded the Castle of Mountfort: He founded also diverse
Monasteries and Temples, at Orleans the Temple of St. Avian, at Stamps a Church
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and many other in diverse places of his Realm. And
he endowed the Church of St. Denis with many great privileges, and had special
devotion to St. Hypolite, above all other Saints.

At this time flourished Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres, a very learned Man:
Sundry Sermons and Treatises that are amongst the works of St. Austin are said
to be his. He wrote an Epistle to Adeodatus, wherein he first reproves a gross
opinion of some Men, who held that Baptism and the Eucharist were naked signs.
Then he proves that these should not be considered as mere and outward signs,
but by Faith according to the invisible virtue of Mysteries. The Mystery of
Faith it is called, says he, because it should be esteemed by Faith, and not
by sight, to be looked into spiritually, not corporally; the sight of Faith
only beholds this powerful Mystery, etc. Then he illustrates the same by
comparison of a baptized Man, who albeit outwardly he be the same he was
before, yet inwardly he is another, being made greater than himself, by
increase of invisible quantity, that is, of saving grace, etc. Here is no word
of substantial change of the Elements; the Bread is still Bread: But we find
two other changes, the Faithful are transposed into the body of Christ, and
Christ is infused into the habitation of a faithful Soul; yet so, that Christ
's body remains in the Heavens; and by the Revelation of the Spirit faith
beholds Christ present, Biblioth. part de e bigne Tom. 3.
or lying in his Mother 's bosom, and dying, rising, and ascending: and he
enters into the gracious habitation of a faithful Communicant, and many ways
refreshes him. Here also we see, that the substance of Bread remaineih, as the
substance of him who is Baptized remains, albeit inwardly he be another.

Some say, that Fulbert composed many Songs in praise of the Virgin Mary; and
that he built a Temple and dedicated it unto her. Historians also do feign,
that Fulbert being sick was visited by the Virgin Mary, Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 11.
and that she cherished him with her own Milk. O impudent forgers of lies! O
foolish Mortals, who gave credit to such palpable lies.

King Robert dyed Anno 1031. His Son Henry succeeded him; and reigned 33 years.
In his time the Realm of Burgundy had an end in the posterity of Boson, and the
Emperors of Germany challenged the right and title of it.

Robert Duke of Normandy, had maintained the Hereditary love of his Father with
King Henry, greatly relying upon his friendship. Having resolved upon a long
and dangerous Voyage to the Holy Land, he entreated him to take the protection
of William his Bastard Son, whom he had made his Heir, excluding his lawful
Children. Robert settled his Estate before his departure, appointing him good
Governors, and putting the strongest holds, and treasure into their hands.
Robert dyed in this long Voyage beyond the Seas, at the City of Bythinia;
having before his departure commanded the Lords of Normandy, and sworn them,
and Robert Archbishop of Rovan, to perform their Allegiance unto his Son
William, and to take him for their Lord and Duke, if he return not again.

When King Henry had settled his Land in quietness, he then builded the
Monastery of St. Martin, called Des Champs, besides Paris, and set therein
secular Priests. King Henry after he had reigned 31 years dyed, and was buried
at St. Denis.

Anno 1046. Gregory VI. created Odilo Abbot of Cluny, Archbishop of Lions,
sending him the Pall and the Ring, which he received, yet without accepting the
dignity, saying, he would reserve it for him that should be chosen Archbishop.

Berengarius a Frenchman, Deacon of St. Maurice in Anjou, was the Disciple of
Fulbert. He was the first that was accounted an Heretic for denying of
Transubstantiation, and troubled for the same. In his days it was broached,
that the Bread of the Eucharist was the very body of Christ, and the Wine his
Blood, substantially or properly. Berengarius on the contrary, taught that the
Body of Christ is only in the Heavens, and these Elements are the Sacraments of
his Body and Blood.

Adelman Bishop of Brixia wrote unto him. In the beginning he saluteth him as
his holy and beloved Brother, and Con-disciple under Fulbert Bishop of
Chartres. Then he shows, he heard it reported, that Berengarius did teach,
that the Body and Blood of Christ, which are offered upon the Altar throughout
the Earth, are not the very Body and Blood of Christ, but only a figure or
certain similitude, howbeit indeed Berengarius had said nothing so. To the
intent Adelman may bring his Brother from this opinion, he entreats him not
to depart from the Doctrine of their Master Fulbert, and of the Catholic
Church. Then he appealeth to the testimony of Ambrose, Augustine and Hierome
[who never taught the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.] He writes also, that
the very Flesh and Blood of Christ, was given unto the Apostles at the first
Institution, and are still given unto faithful Communicants. Adelman enlarged
much on this subject.

What answer Berengarius did return to him, we find not. But he wrote an
Epistle to Lanfrank declaring the abuses of the Sacrament, and commending the
Book of John Scotus upon that question. Occolampad. Epist. l. 3.
And he wrote expressly, that the Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, but as
in a sign, figure or mystery. He spoke also in his Preachings against the
Romish Church in the Doctrine of Marriage, and necessity of Baptism. And
Bellarmine witnesses, that Berengarius called the Church of Rome the malignant
Church, the Council of vanity, and the seat of Satan, and he called the Pope,
not Pontificem, vel Episcopum, sed pompificem, and Pulpificem.

It happened, that Lanfrank was not at home, and the Convent opened the Letter
of Berengarius, and sent it with a Clerk of Rhemes, unto Pope Leo IX. The Pope
summoned a Synod at Verceles. Berengarius was advised not to go himself to the
Synod, but send some Clerks in his name to answer for him. The two Clerks were
clapped in Prison. Scotus was condemned 200 years after his death, and the
Doctrine of Berengarius was condemned, yet nothing done against his Person at
that time, because many favored him. Lanfrank pleaded for him: but he was
commanded by the Pope to answer him, under no less pain than to be reputed as
great an Heretic as he. Petries. Chapter Hist. Cent. 11.
Lanfrank following the sway of the World (for afterward he was made
Archbishop of Canterbury by Willliam the Conqueror) performed the charge.

Guitmund, Bishop of Aversa, wrote more bitterly, and less truly against
Berengarius.

Nevertheless Berengarius abode constant, and was in great esteem both with the
Nobility and People: And therefore Pope Victor the second, gave direction to
the Bishops of France, to take order with him. The Pope's Ambassadors were
present at the Council, and Berengarius answered, that he adhered to no
particular opinion of his own, but he followed the common Doctrine of the
Universal Church, that is, says he, as the Fathers, Primitive Church, and
Scriptures have taught. This gentle answer mitigated the fury of his
Adversaries: yet he persisted in his own opinion; and for this cause Lanfrank
objected against him, that he deluded the Council of Tours with general and
doubtful words.

Du. Moul. Contr. Perron li. 1.
Afterward, Pope Nicholas the second hearing that he was honored of many,
assembled a great Council against him at Rome, of 113 Bishops, where it was
declared and pronounced, That the Bread and Wine which is put upon the Altar,
after the Consecration is not only the Sacrament, but also the true Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And that not only the Sacrament, but the Body of the Lord is
It seems they meant sensibly.
sensually and in truth, handled by the hands of the Priest, broken and bruised
by the teeth of the faithful.

When Berengarius with many Arguments defended, that the Sacrament (to speak
properly) was the figure of Christ 's body, and Cardinal Albericus, who was
nominated to dispute against him, could not by voice resist him; Sigon de reg.
Ital. li. 9.
and neither of the two would yield unto the other, Alhericus sought the space
of seven days to answer in writing. And at last when disputation could not
prevail against him, he was commanded to recant, or else he must expect to be
burnt. They prescribed to him a form of Recantation of his error as they
called it. Gratian de consecrat. did. 2.
The Recantation was penned by Cardinal Humbert, and is registered by Gratian.
Nevertheless the words of the Recantation are far from Transubstantiation.

These are the words so far as they concern our present purpose, Massons Annal.
Franc. li. 3.
faithfully translated. I Berengarius, do consent to the Apostolic and Roman
See, and with my Mouth and Heart confess, that the Bread and Wine laid on the
Altar, after the Consecration, are not only the Sacrament, but the very body
and blood of our Lord Jesus, and sensibly, not only in Sacrament but in truth,
are handled with the hands of the Priest, broken and chewed with the hands and
Teeth of the faithful.

John Semeca, the Glossator of the Decrees, expressly condemns the words of
this Recantation, and says, If thou understandest not the words of Berengarius
soundly, thou shall fall into a greater Heresy than he did: for we break not
Christ 's body into pieces, nisi in speciebus. Usser de success. Eccles.


Berengarius returning home, returned also to his former Doctrine, and wrote in
defense of it. Some have written, that Berengarius denied the Baptism of
Infants: But Archbishop Usher says, that in so many Synods held against him,
we never find any such thing laid to his charge.

Illyricus gives this Character of him, Tempore Leonis noni, circa 1049.
Berengarius, Vir pietate and eruditione Clarus, Andegavensis Ecclesiae
Diaconus, quum videret Pontificios Doctores quam plurimos ingenti fastu
Transubstantiationis fundamenta sternere, quod mentem Augustini and aliorum
Veterum non intelligerent, Vid. Thevet vies des hommes Illustres li. 3.
sed Sacramentales and Hyperbolicas nonnullas locutiones ad novum sensum
inducendum detorquerent, veram sententiam ex Orthodoxo consensu repetitam his
corruptelis opposuit, and verbo Dei Testimoniisque Veterum Theologorum
refellere conatus est, scriptis etiam and evulgatis libris, ut pii in vera
Doctrina confirmarentur. Catal. Test. Verit. lib. 22.

Berengarius dyed (holding his first Doctrine) at Tours, in the Isle of St.
Cosina, and was buried at St. Martins, where his Tomb was reared: and Hildebert
Bishop of Caenoman, and then of Tours, and made his Epitaph, which William of
Malmesbury has set down. And this is a part of it.

Quem modo miratur, semper mirabitur orbis,
Ille Berengarius non obiturus obit. Guil. Malmsb. de Gest. Anglor. li. 3.

Quem sacrae fidei vestigia summa tenentem,
Huic jam quinta dies abstulit, ausa nefas.
Illa dies damnosa dies, and perfida mundo,
Qua dolor and rerum summa ruina fuit,
Qua Status Ecclesiae, qua spes, qua gloria Cleri,
Qua cultor juris, jure ruente ruit.
Post obitum secum vivam, precor ac requiescam,
Nec fiat melior sors mea sort sua.
Platina calls Berengarius, famous for learning and holiness. He was a great
friend to learning, Platin. in vit. Joann. 15.
and bred many Students of Divinity at his proper charge, and by means of them
his Doctrine was sowed through all France, and the Countries adjacent. This was
matter unto his adversaries to envy him the more. Albeit he did waver as Peter
did; and although his Doctrine was so often condemned by the Popes, yet it
could not be rooted out of the minds of men: for Matthew Paris writes, Math.
Paris Hist. Anglor. Math. Westminster.
that all France was affected with this Doctrine. and Matthew of Westminster at
the same time says, That the Doctrine of Berengarius had corrupted all the
English, Italian and French Nations. So that the Berengarians, that is, the
Preachers of the true Faith, (which the Romanists call Heresy) against the
rising errors did not lurk in a Corner.

Sigeb. Gemblac. Chroni.
And Sigebert in his Chronicle says, that there mere many disputations among
diverse persons, both for him and against him, both by word and by writing.

Thuan. Hist. in Epist. Dedicat.
Thuanus also has noted, that in Germany were many of the same Doctrine; and
that Bruno Bishop of Trevers, banished them all out of his Diocese, but sparing
their Blood. And John Tossington a Franciscan, in his confession set forth Anno
1380. says thus. The Heretical sentence which is raised of the dreams of
Berengarius affirms openly, that all the Fathers of the Church, and Doctors
of the second thousand years (as they speak) that is, who have been within 380
years have been after the loosing of Satan, and the Doctrine which we (says
he) hold to be the Faith of the Church; Usher ca. 3.
concerning the blessed Eucharist, they say it is not right, but an error and
heresy, and the tares of Satan being let loose.

To defend the words of the former Recantation, which was given in the Synod at
Lateran unto Berengarius, these flatterers of the Romish Idol have devised a
new distinction of oral manducation, viz. That oral eating is either visible or
invisible. And they called the opinion of eating Christ 's flesh visibly, the
error of the Capernaites, and they said, the eating of Christ 's flesh with
the mouth invisibly, was the explication of Christ. But the Fathers of higher
antiquity condemned all oral eating as Capernaitism; neither were the
Capernaites so subtle, as to make such distinctions: yea surely Christ would
have made his correction according to their error. Mark what St. Augustine
says, August. Tract. 27 in Johan.
who abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without all doubt,
he neither spiritually eats Christ 's flesh, nor drinks his blood, albeit
carnally and visibly he with his teeth do press the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ. And Tract. 28. What is it? They are Spirit and Life, they are
spiritually to be understood: Understandest thou them spiritually? they are
Spirit and Life. Understandest thou them carnally? so also they are Spirit and
Life, but not to thee. They understanding spiritual things carnally, were
scandalized.

Here St. Augustine opposes carnal eating unto spiritual eating, and he says,
that carnally men eat not the flesh of Christ, but the Sacrament of his flesh.

Philip the first, succeeded his Father Henry. This Henry had caused his Son
Philip to be crowned King being but seven years old, and gave him Baldwin Earl
of Flanders, for Tutor and Regent of the Realm. He lived but a little time
after his Son 's Coronation. The King 's Minority passed quietly by the wise
government of Baldwin, who having accompanied his Pupil to the Age of 15 years,
dies, and leaves him his Realm in peace. Baldwin left two Sons, Baldwin and
Robert with their Mother Richilde. Then their Uncle Robert the Frison,
pretended the Inheritance to belong to him, and supplanting his Nephews,
seizes on the Earldom of Flanders: and King Philip forsakes Baldwin's Children
at their need, forgetting the good Offices he had received from their Father.

Now William Duke of Normandy is received King of England, and Crowned in a
solemn Assembly of the English, and homage is done unto him as their lawful
Lord, Anno 1066. He had encountered King Harold and overcome his Host, in that
place where afterward was builded the Abbey of Battle in Sussex.

The day after the Battle very early in the morning, Odo Bishop of Baieux sung
Mass for those that were departed, being slain in the Battle.

Before this time Priests were forbidden to marry, but could not be restrained
from their liberty.

In the Year 1074. Pope Gregory VII. otherwise Hildebrand in a Synod at Rome,
condemned all married Priests as Nicolaitans. He directed his Bulls (as they
called them) to Bishops, Dukes, and other Powers, declaring every one to be no
Priest, that had a Wife. His Bull was sent into Italy and Germany. This Decree
being proclaimed through all Italy, he sent many Letters unto the French
Bishops, commanding that they should upon pain of an everlasting curse, put
away all the Women from the Houses of Priests. But the residue of the Clergy
stoutly withstood the Pope 's decree, and would not agree thereunto.

Then there arose such a Schism in the Church, that the people would not send
their Priests unto the Bishops, but did elect them among themselves, and put
them in Office without the knowledge of the Bishops. And Nauclerus says, that
both Priests and people did oppose the Pope 's decree, and that not only in
Germany, but in France also. Yea Gebuiler, a late Papist, testifies, that in
those times 24 Bishops in Germany and France, with their Clergy, did constantly
maintain the liberty of Priests marriage. If other Nations had followed the
like concord and constancy of these German and French Ministers, the devilish
decree of this Hildebrand had been avoided.

About this time at Nantes, a Letter was presented unto a Clerk, as directed
from Hell; in it Satan and all that fry, gave thanks unto all the Popish
Clergy, Math. Paris Hist.
because they were not wanting to do their wills and pleasures, and because by
negligence of preaching they had sent so many souls to Hell, as no Age
preceding had seen so many.

After the death of Hildebrand, Victor the third, Abbot of Cassa, was made
Pope, not by the Election of the Romans or Cardinals, but was thrust in by the
aid of his Harlot Mathilda, and the Normans that were of his faction.

He being established, began to defend Gregorie's pranks, against the Emperor
and others. But the hastiness of his death, shortened his malice.

When Gregory and Victor were dead, the Bishops of Germany and France,
considering the calamities of the Church, by that unhappy schism, Avent. Annal.
li. 5.
met at Gurstung, to end the controversy. There Conrade Bishop of Vtrecht made
a long Oration in the Assembly. The Papal party had chosen Gebhard Bishop of
Salisburgh, to speak in their name, but when he heard the Oration of Conrade,
he would not open his mouth to speak on the contrary.

At length a Synod was convocated at Mentz, whither came the Emperor, the
Electors, and many Dukes, Peter Bishop of Portua. and Legate of Clemens, and
many Bishops of Germany and France, There the faction of Hildebrand by common
suffrage was condemned, as contrary unto Christian piety, and a decree was
published, that all Christians should shun the company of those accursed
persons.

Hildebert Archbishop of Tours, lived under Philip the first King of France.
At that time the Kings of France furnished the Churches with Pastors after the
death of the Incumbent. Then Hildebert approved the presentation made by the
King to a certain Bishopric of his Realm, commending him in this manner. I
congratulate with virtue, Review of the Counc. of Trent p, 295.
that has her reward under our King. He has found that the power of a King
shines more bright by gifts and liberality, than by the Scepter, and that it is
not sufficient for a Prince to stir up his Subjects, to well-doing by Examples,
unless they be also provoked by rewards. Hence it is, that your good manners
were honored by a great Priesthood. The disposition of the King was sound and
prudent, considering, it could not better provide for the Church than by
placing you in it.

At this time Ivo Archbishop of Chartres in France, after he was elected by
the Clergy, was presented to the same King Philip the first, and received his
Investiture, and pastoral staff from him, upon the refusal of the Archbishop
of Sens, he was consecrated by the Pope; whereat the said Archbishop was
highly offended, insomuch that He with other Bishops at the Synod of Estampes,
were upon the point of revoking the said consecration made by the Pope, as
prejudicial to the King 's Authority. See here what the same Bishop says of it
in a Letter unto Pope Urban. Moreover, I give your Holiness to wit, Ivo Epist.
12.
that the Archbishop of Sens being infatuated by the Counsel of the Bishop of
Paris, having summoned the said Bishop of Paris, and two others of the same
humor (viz. he of Meaux and He of Troyes) did very indiscreetly accuse me this
present Year, because of the consecration which I had received from you; saying
that I had offended against the King's Majesty, by attempting to receive my
consecration from the Sea Apostolic.

This Urban the second, Ivo Epist. 134.
forbade the Bishops of France to Crown King Philip, whom he had
excommunicated: but they were readier to obey their King 's commands, than his
prohibition. In the Council of Clermont in France (says Matthew Paris) held
Anno 1094. Math. Paris in Will. 2.
Pope Urban excommunicated Philip King of France.

And another English Author says, Will. Malmsb. li. 4.
In this Council the Pope excommunicated King Philip of France, and all such as
should call him their King or their Lord, and which should obey him, or speak
unto him. In like manner Ivo Bishop of Chartres speaks of them both. By reason
of this accusation King Philip was excommunicated by Pope Urban at the Council
of Clermont, and having resumed the same Wife after he was divorsed from her,
he was afterward excommunicated at the Council of Poictiers by the two
Cardinals. John and Bennet. Notwithstanding which Excommunication he was
Crowned by the Archbishop of Tours in a full Assembly of other Bishops.

Know you therefore (says the same Bishop of Chartres in a Letter of his to
Pope Urban) that contrary to the prohibition of your Legate, Ivo Epist. 28. ad
Urban. secund.
the Archbishop of Tours has set the Crown upon the Head of the King. He
speaks afterward of the Election of a Bishop, made at the same time by those
who were assembled with the said Archbishop.

In another Epistle written to the same Urban, he shows him how Philip had
sent Ambassadors unto him with prayers in one hand, and threats in the other,
such as these, That the King and Kingdom would relinquish their obedience to
him, unless he did restore the King unto his Crown, and absolve him from the
sentence of Excommunication. And afterward he advertiseth him, How the
Archbishop of Rhemes, Sens and Tours, had by injunction from the King,
appointed their suffragan Bishops to meet at Troyes, the first Sunday after
All Saints day, after he should have returned his Answer.

Whence we collect two things. 1. That the Bishops of France did not cease to
acknowledge their King. nor to obey him, and communicate with him,
notwithstanding the prohibition from the Council of Clermont. 2. That they were
very ready to put in Execution those threats which the Ambassadors went to
make unto the Pope, in case he did not condescend unto the King's pleasure.

The same Ivo complains of the Pope's Legate, because he had chosen the City of
Bloyes, there to decide the cause of the Clergy of Chartres, who could not
repair thither with safety by reason of the populousness of that City.

The same Bishop having a controversy with some of his Clergy, depending
before the Archbishop of Sens, his Metropolitan, entreats him to appoint a
place for Judgment, whither they might go and come in safety.

The Legate forementioned, having appointed a Council, consisting of French
Bishops to meet at Sens, for the absolution of King Philip the first, from the
Excommunication which was darted out against him by the Pope, by reason of his
unlawful marriage, he gives him notice that he might have done better, to have
proceeded to that absolution in another place than Sens, Ivo Epist. 166.
that so every one might have had means to speak his opinion freely.

Idem. Epist. 116.
The same Bishop of Chartres continuing his devotion to Pope Urban, upon the
Election of an Archbishop of Rhemes, assures the Pope that one was chosen,
who was very zealous for the Sea Apostolic, adding afterward. No whow
necessary is it for the Church of Rome, to place in that See a Minister, which
is devout and affectionate unto her, it is not for me to inform your Wisdom,
which knows very well, that this See wears the Royal Diadem, and serves for a
pattern to all other Churches of France, either of Ruin or Resurrection.

This Ivo of Chartres, although he had received his Investiture from King
Philip; yet inasmuch as he had gotten his confirmation from Pope Urban, he was
always affectionate to him, and the Roman See, even to the prejudice of the
King and Kingdom, as may be collected from some of his Epistles.

Lup. Epist. 40.
On the contrary because Lupus had gotten the Abbey of St. Peter de Ferriers in
the Diocese of Sens, by the donation of Charles the bald, he was always loyal,
and even brags of it in one of his Epistles.

It happened, that there came a French Pilgrim to Jerusalem, called Peter an
Hermit, Tho. Fuller. Hist. of the holy War lib. 1. ca. 8.
born at Amiens in France; one of a contemptible person, yet a man of a quick
apprehension, and eloquent Tongue, and one that was counted very Religious.
With him Simon the Patriarch of Jerusalem often treated, concerning the present
miseries of the Christians under the Turks, what hope of amendment, and how the
matter might be secretly contrived, that the Princes in Europe might assist and
relieve them. Peter moved with the Patriarch 's persuasions, the equity and
honourableness of the cause, and chiefly with a Vision (as they say) from
Heaven, took the whole business upon him, and traveled to Rome, to consult
with Pope Urban the second, about the advancing so pious a design.

Some think, that the Pope first secretly employed this Hermit to be his
Factor, and to go to Jerusalem to set on foot so beneficial a Trade for the
Church of Rome; because the Pope alone was the gainer by this great adventure,
and all other Princes of Europe came off losers.

Pope Urban had called the Council of Clermont in France forementioned, where
met many Princes and Prelates to whom he made a long oration: which was to this
effect. First, he bemoaned the miseries of the Christians in Asia, and the
vastation of those holy places. Next, Tyrius li. 1. c. 15.
he encouraged the Princes in the Council to take Arms against those Infidels;
and to break their bonds in sunder, and to cast their cords far from them (as
it is written) to cast out the Handmaid and her Children.

Otherwise, if they would not help to quench their neighbors houses, they must
expect the speedy burning of their own, and that these barbarous Nations would
quickly overrun all Europe.

Now to set an edge to their courage, he promised to all that went this Voyage,
a full remission of their sins, and pennances here, and the enjoying Heaven
hereafter. Lastly, he thus concluded, Gird your Swords to your Thighs, O ye men
of might: It is our parts to pray, yours to fight: ours with Moses to hold up
unwearied hands to God, yours to stretch forth the Sword against these Children
of Amaleck. Amen.

This motion was most cheerfully entertained, so that the whole Assembly cried
out, God wills it: Sabell. An. 9. lib. 3.
A speech which was afterward used as a fortunate Watchword in their most
dangerous designs.

Then many took a cross of red cloth on their right shoulder, as a badge of
their devotion: And to gain the favorable assistance of the Virgin Mary to
make this War the more happy, her Office was instituted, containing certain
prayers, which at Canonical hours were to be made unto her.

One observes, that it is enough to make it suspicious, that there were some
sinister ends in this War, Tho. Fuller Hist. sacri belli.
because Gregory VII. otherwise called Hildebrand (and by Luther in his
Chronology, Larva Diaboli.) the worst of all that sat in the Papal Chair,
first began it: but death preventing him, Urban the second (whom Cardinal Benno
called Turban, for troubling the whole world) effected it.

Now a great controversy was in Christendom about the investiture of Bishops,
whether the right lay in the Pope, or in secular Princes.

Now the Pope diverted this question out of Princes Heads, by opening an issue
another way, and gave vent to the activity of their spirits in this Martial
employment, and in the mean time quietly went away without any corrival.
concluding the controversy for his own profit.

Moreover, he got a Mass of Money by it. He had the office to bear the bag, and
what was put into it, as contributed to this action from pious people, and
expended but some few drops of the showers he received.

As the Pope, so most of the Clergy improved their Estates by this War: Aemil.
de gest. Franc. p. 109.
For the secular Princes who went this Voyage, sold or morgaged most of their
Estates (selling for Gold, to purchase with Steel and Iron) and the Clergy were
generally their Chapmen. Godfrey Duke of Bovillon, sold that Dukedom to the
Bishop of Liege, and the Castle of Sartensy and Monsa to the Bishop of Verdun.
Baldwin his Brother sold him the City of Verdun. Daniel in Henric. 1.
Yea by these sales the third part of the Feoffs in France, came to be
possessed by the Clergy, who made good bargains for themselves, and had the
conscience to buy Earth cheap, and Heaven dear.

Many Prelates and Friars left their pastoral Charges and Covents to follow
this business.

The total sum of those pilgrim Soldiers amounted to three hundred thousand.
The French, Dutch, Italian and English, were the four Elemental Nations,
whereof this Army was compounded. But France contributed more Soldiers to this
Army than all Christendom besides. The signal men were Hugh, surnamed le Grand,
Brother to the King of France. Godfrey Duke of Bovillon, Baldwin and Eustace
his younger Brothers; Stephen Earl of Bloys, Father to Stephen afterward King
of England; Reymund Earl of Toulouse; Robert Earl of Flanders; Hugh Earl of St.
Paul; Baldwin de Burge, with many more: besides of the Clergy Aimar Bishop of
Puy, and Legate to the Pope, and William Bishop of Orange.

Out of the farthest parts of Italy, Boemund Prince of Tarentum, and Tancred
his Nephew, (both of the Norman seed, though growing on the Apulian soil) led
an Army of twelve thousand Men. Many Soldiers also went out of Lombardy.

England also (the Pope's pack-horse in that Age) sent many brave men under
Robert Duke of Normandy, Brother to William Rufus (now King of England after
the Death of his Father) as Beauchamp and others whose names are lost.

All these Princes being called up by Pope Urban, gathered together great
Armies at diverse times and places unto that War. After many difficulties, and
the loss of many men they arrived in Palestine, and Jerusalem was won by the
Christians, and twenty thousand Turks therein slain on July 15. Anno 1098.

Robert the Norman refuses the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and Godfrey of Bovillon
is chosen King. In this choice, that they might know the nature of the Princes
the better, their Servants were examined on Oath to confess their Master 's
faults. The Servants of Godfrey protested their Master 's only fault was this,
That when Mattens were done, he would stay so long in the Church, to know of
the Priest the meaning of every Image and picture, that Dinner at home was
spoiled by his long tarrying: All admired hereat, and unanimously chose him
their King.

In the latter end of this Century, Bruno, Chanon of the Church of Colen and
Rhemes, bare the praise of Learning and Holiness, and was Master of the
Schools, by whom the order of the Carihusians was begun.

The Cistercian Order was begun Anno 1098. by Robert, Abbot of Molisma, as
Sigebert says.

Godfrey of Bovillon dyed, having reigned one year, wanting five days. After
his death, the Christians with a joint consent sent to Baldwin his Brother,
Count of Edessa, (a City in Arabia, the Lord whereof had adopted this Baldwin
to be his Heir) and entreated him to accept of the Kingdom, which honorable
offer he courteously embraced, Anno 1100.

He was a Prince of the largest size, higher by the Head than his Subjects;
Bred he was a Scholar, entered into Orders, and was Prebendary in the Churches
of Rhemes, Liege, and Cambray, but afterward turned secular Prince, but
Baldwin put not off his Scholar-ship with his habit, but made good use thereof
in his Reign.

Century XII.
ANno 1107. Pope Pascal the second, gathered a Council at Troyes in France, to
throw out of the hands of the Emperor Henry V. the right of Investiture of
Bishops.

In the beginning of this Century, Great Hugh of France was buried at Tarsus in
Cilicia, Duke Guelpho at Paphos in Cyprus. Diemo the Archbishop of Saltzburgh
saw his own Heart cut out, and Martyred by the Turks at Chorazin, so many
thousand Soldiers were consumed with Plague, Famine and the Sword, that
Conrade, Abbot of Vrspurg, Urspurg. in Chronico p. 38, 39.
who went and wrote this Voyage, says, God manifested by the event, that this
War was not pleasing to him.

Rabbi Solomon-Jarchi, a learned French Jew, who has commented on the whole
Bible, to whom Lyra is beholden for the Hebrew, dyed Anno 1105.

Philip King of France having resigned his Crown to his Son Jews at Orleans,
and caused him to be Crowned King, dies at Melun, Anno 1109.

Calixtus the second, before called Guido of Burgundy, descended of the Kings
of England and France, succeeded Pope Gelasius. He was chosen Pope at Clugny in
France by a few Cardinals, whom Gelasius had brought with him, yet was Pope
Gregory alive, whom the Emperor himself had created.

Calixtus besieges Satrium, a Town where Gregory was, and having taken the
Town, and his fellow Pope, he caused him to be set upon a Camel, with his Face
to the Camel's Tail, so he was brought through the streets of Rome, holding the
Tail in his hand instead of a Bridle: and afterward being shorn he was thrust
into a Monastery.

This Pope Calixtus was the first that established the decrees of the Papal
See, against the Emperor. He held a general Council at Rhemes, and decreed
that Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons should put away their Concubines and
Wives: and whosoever was found to keep his Wife, should be deprived of
Benefice, and all other Ecclesiastical living, whereupon a certain English
Writer made these Verses following.

O bone Calixte, nunc omnis Clerus odit te,
Quondam Presbyteri poterant Vxoribus uti.
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti,
Ergo tuum merito nomen habent odio.
He sat five years, and ten months. Honorius the second succeeded him. In the
time of this Honorius, Arnulph a singular preacher of Christian Religion
flourished. Hugo, Platina and Sabellicus say, he was Bishop of Lions in France.
Trithemius says he was a Priest, whose History I will briefly set down.
Arnulph, was a devout, and zealous Man, a worthy preacher; Coming to Rome, he
rebuked in his preaching the dissoluteness, incontinency, avarice, and pride of
the Romish Clergy, provoking all to follow Christ and his Apostles, rather in
their poverty and pureness of Life: by reason whereof this man was well
accepted and liked of the Nobility of Rome, for a true Disciple of Christ: but
of the Cardinals and Clergy he was no less hated, than favored of the other;
insomuch that privily in the night season they took him and destroyed him. This
his Martyrdom (says he) was revealed unto him before by an Angel, he being in
the desert when he was sent forth to preach. Whereupon he thus spoke unto them
publicly. I know (says he) ye seek my Life, and will destroy me privily,
because I preach to you the truth, and blame your pride, avarice, incontinency,
with your unsatiable greediness in getting and heaping up riches, therefore you
are displeased with me.

I take here Heaven and Earth to witness, that I have preached unto you that
which I was commanded of the Lord, but you contemn me and your Creator, who by
his only Son has redeemed you. And no marvel, if you seek my death, being a
sinful man preaching to you the truth, whereas if St. Peter were here this day,
and rebuked your vices, which do so multiply above measure, you would not spare
him neither. And as he was saying this with a loud voice, he added, for my part
I am not afraid to suffer death for the truth's sake, but this I say unto you,
that God will look upon your iniquities, and be avenged of you. You being full
of all impurity, play the blind guides to the people committed to you, leading
them the way to Hell. Thus the hatred of the Popish Clergy being incensed
against him for preaching, they conspired against him and killed him.
Sabellicus and Platina say, Fox Act. and Monum. ad ann. 1131.
that they hanged him, and others that they drowned him. All the Clergy were
defamed for his death; the Pope took it ill, but he revenged it not.

Hildebert forementioned, Archbishop of Tours, about this time wrote many
Epistles: in one unto an Earl going in Pilgrimage, he condemns Pilgrims for
visiting of Monuments. And speaking of the Romanists, he says their business
is in ease, their prey is in peace; their fighting is in fleeing, and victory
in cups: they regard no man, nor order, nor time: they are in Judgment
Scythians, in Chamber vipers, at Feasts peasants; in understanding stones, in
respect of anger fire, to forgive iron, in discretion prattling Daws; in
friendship Panthers, in deceit Foxes, in pride Bulls, to devour Minorants. He
wrote to Honorius II. refuting appellations to Rome, because it was a novelty
contrary to the Scripture, and very hurtful to the Church. He shows the
condition of Rome briefly in two Verses.

Morn. in Mist.
Vrbs foelix, si vel Dominis urbs illa careret,
Vel Dominis esset turpe carere fide.
He was apprehended, and imprisoned at Rome.

King Jews called a Council of the Lords and Bishops of France, at the City of
Orleans, where, of the Bishop of the same place, he was solemnly anointed and
Crowned, but not without the grudging of the Archbishop of Rhemes. The French
begin to fall from their obedience, and rebellions are kindled in diverse places
of his Realm: and the places near unto Paris began these first revolts; his
Reign was very troublesome.

He had crowned his eldest Son Philip, who going to take the Air on Horseback,
an Hog passed under the Belly of his Horse, which being scared threw him down,
and bruised him so, that within few days after he dyed. Then King Jews
marries his Son Jews to the Heir of Guienne. He made Henry, his third Son,
Bishop of Beavois, another Philip Archdeacon of Paris, Peter Earl of Courtney,
Robert Earl of Dreux, and married his only Daughter Constance to Reimund Earl
of Toulouse and St. Giles. Jews the gross having thus settled his Children,
dyed Anno 1137.

His Son Jews VII. succeeded him, and reigned three and forty years, his long
reign was nothing happy, and contains in it nothing that was memorable, but
that the foundation was laid for a long calamity for France.

After the death of Baldwin, King of Jerusalem, Baldwin de Burgo his Kinsman,
was chosen King.

This Baldwin was a proper Personage, and of able body, born nigh Rhemes in
France, Son to Hugh Count of Roster. He was very charitable to the poor, and
pious toward God; witness the brawn on his hands and knees made with continual
praying, valiant also, and excellently well seen in martial affairs.

After the death of Arnulph, Patriarch of Jerusalem, Guarimond born in France
succeeded him.

About this time the two great orders of Templers and Teutonicks appeared in
the World, The former under Hugh de Paganis, and Ganfred of St. Omer their
first Founders. They agreed in profession with the Hospitallers, and performed
it alike, vowing poverty, chastity and obedience, and to defend Pilgrims coming
to the Sepulcher. It is falsely fathered on St. Bernard, that he appointed them
their rule, who prescribes not what they should do, but only describes what
they did.

At the same time began the Teutonick Order, consisting only of Dutchmen well
descended, living at Jerusalem in an house, which one of that Nation bequeathed
to his Countrymen that came thither on Pilgrimage.

King Baldwin was afterward taken prisoner, and Eustace Grenier, chosen
Viceroy while the King was in durance, stoutly defended the Country. Baldwin
a little before his death renounced the World, and took on him a religious
habit. He dyed not long after, viz. in the thirteenth year of his Reign, and
was buried with his predecessors in the Temple of the Sepulcher.

Fulco, Earl of Tours, Mam and Anjou, coming some three years before on
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, there married the King 's Daughter, he was chosen the
fourth King of Jerusalem.

He was well nigh 60 years old. By his first Wife he had a Son, Geoffery of
Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, to whom he left his Lands in France, and from whom
our Kings of England are descended.

Fulco having reigned eleven years with much care and industry, Tyrius lib. 15.
ca. ult.
was slain as he followed his sport in hunting. Thomas Fuller brings him in
thus speaking his Epitaph.

A Hare I hunted, and Death hunted me.
The more my speed was, was the worse my speed: Fuller's holy War. lib. 2.

For as well-mounted I away did flee,
Death caught and killed me falling from my Steed.
Yet this mishap an happy miss I count,
That fell from Horse, that I to Heaven might mount.
Baldwin the third succeeded his Father. He was well learned, especially in
History, liberal, witty and facetious. His mother Millesent continued a Widow,
and as for Children's-sake she married once, so for her Children's-sake she
married no more. St. Bernard and she often conversed together by Letters: He
extolled her single Life.

This St. Bernard Abbot of Clarevaux, or Clareval, was famous in that time. He
often complains of the defection of the Church.

He sharply rebuked the vicious lives of Bishops and Abbots. Yea, he did not
spare the Popes, Bern. Ep. 42.
as appears partly by what he wrote unto Pope Eugenius, and unto Innocent the
second. And for his liberty in speaking against the errors of his time, Epist.
178. Apolog. ad Willerm. Abbat.
he was reproached, so that he was constrained to publish Apologies, where he
says, that they called him the most miserable of Men, one who presumed to
judge the World, and by the shadow of his baseness insult over the lights of
the World.

And he says there, that he was like to be killed every day, and was judged as
a sheep for the slaughter; yet nevertheless he was not afraid to speak of their
vices, because (said he) melius est ut scandalum oriatur, quam veritas
relinquatur: It is better that a scandal should arise, than truth should be
relinquished. Who at the beginning when the order of Monks began (says he)
could think that Monks would become so naughty? Oh how unlike are we to those
in the days of Anthony? did Macarius live in such a manner? did Basil teach so?
did Anthony ordain so? did the Fathers in Egypt carry themselves so? how is the
light of the World become darkness? how is the salt of the Earth become
unsavory? I am a Liar (says he) if I have not seen an Abbot having above
sixty horses in his train: when ye saw them riding, ye might say, These were
not Fathers of Monasteries, but Lords of Castles; not feeders of Souls, bur
Princes of Provinces.

They have carried after them their Table-Cloths, Cups, Basins, Candlesticks,
and Portmantua's stuffed not with straw, but ornaments of Beds, scarce will any
of them go four miles from his house, but he must have all things with him, as
if he were going into a leaguer, or through a Wilderness, where necessaries
could not be had. O vanity of vanities! the Walls of Churches are glorious, and
poor folks are in necessity.

Yet may it be said, that Bernard was a follower of the Popes. I answer, yes;
he gave them all the Titles that others gave them: but see what blows he gave
them, as appears by what he wrote to Innocentius, and Eugenius, he lays on
them the blame of all the wickedness in the Church, In rites he was carried
with the sway of the times, but his Doctrine was far different from the Tenets
of the Church of Rome. In one of his Epistles he writes thus. Bern. Epist. 91.
ad Abbates Suess Congreg.
I would be in that Council, where the Traditions of Men are not obstinately
defended, nor superstitiously observed, but where they search diligently and
humbly, what is the good, perfect and acceptable will of God: thither am I
carried with all my desire; and there would I abide devoutly.

In Tract. de praecept. and Dispens.
And elsewhere he says, many things were devised and ordained; not because they
might not be otherwise, but because it was so expedient, and certainly but for
conserving charity: therefore so long as the things do serve charity, let them
stand without change; nor can they be changed without offense, no not by the
Rulers.

But contrarily, if they be contrary unto charity, in the judgment of such
only unto whom it is granted to oversee, is it not clearly most just, that what
things were devised for charity, should also be omitted, or intermitted for
charity, when it is so expedient? or (at least) that they be changed to another
thing more expedient: as on the other side, certainly it were unjust, if these
things that were ordained for charity, be held against charity. Let them
therefore hold fast that which is immovable.

The same Bernard informs us, Bern. de consider. ad Eugenium li. 3.
that then was held a Council at Rhemes, wherein the Pope was president. And
says he, Brethren I tell you of another Synod, where the Lord God will sit in
Judgment, where we must all stand, and there will God judge all the World.
Here (on earth) unrighteousness is shut up in a bag; but in that Judgment God
will judge righteously: and there we must all appear whether he be a Pope, or a
Cardinal, or an Archbishop, or a Bishop, or poor or rich, or learned or
unlearned, that every one may receive according to what he has done in the
body, whether good or ill.

Moreover, he said unto the Council, that the Imposthume was spread through all
the body of the Church, from the sole of the Foot to the Head, the Bride was
spoiled, and even they that were called the Bridegrooms of the Church, were not
the friends of the Bridegroom? And the Council so far took with this rebuke,
that some Acts were made for Reformation, though no reformation followed.

About that time had been started that opinion concerning the Virgin Mary, viz.
of Universal freedom from original sin: which opinion had been in the minds
only of some private persons, but yet was not come among the ceremonies of the
Church, nor into the minds of the learned. About the year 1136. the Chanons of
Lions durst first bring it into the service of the Church. St. Bernard
flourishing at that time for piety and learning, before all the Divines of that
Age; and so immoderate in the praises of the blessed Virgin, that he calls
her, the neck of the Church; as if by her all Grace did flow from the Head;
nevertheless he sharply writes against these Chanons, that without reason, and
without example of former times, they had brought in so dangerous a novelty. He
confesses, that they had matter enough to commend the blessed Virgin; but such
ambitious novelty (which is the mother of fondness, the sister of superstition,
and daughter of levity) he says, could not please her. Recentissimus est
vixitque post confirmatam Episcopi Romani Tyrannidem. Cham. de Oecum. Pontif.


Bernard dyed in the 63. year of his Age, Anno 1153. From erring Bernard that
frequent proverb of writers erring drew it is Original, Bernardus non vidit
omnia: neither is it a wonder, seeing he flourished in the darkest midnight (as
it were) of Popery. He is much commended by diverse learned Protestants: as by
Bishop Morton, Bishop Carleton, Carlet. Consens. ^^cles. contr. Trident. l. 6.
Hist. Pelag. li. ca. 21.
Vossius and others. He has solidly disputed concerng the chief Heads of
Faith, of the Scriptures of the Church, of the misery of man, of free
justification, of grace, of new obedience, with the Catholic Church against
the Tridentine Fables, so that nothing can be found more solid.

In the Council of Rhemes forementioned (where were assembled 434 Prelates)
these five principal acts were concluded.

1. That no Man should either buy, or sell any Bishopric, Abbotship, Fox Act
and Monum.
Deanery, Arch Deaconship, Priesthood, Prebendship, Altar, or any Ecclesiastical
promotion, or Benefice, Orders, Consecration, Church-hallowing, Seat or Stall
within the Quire, or any Office Ecclesiastical, under pain of Excommunication,
if he did persist.

2. That no Lay-person should give Investiture, or any Ecclesiastical
possession, and that no spiritual man should receive any such at any Lay-man's
hand under pain of deprivation.

3. That no man should invade, take away, or detain the goods or possessions of
the Church, but that they should remain firm and perpetual, under pain of
perpetual curse.

4. That no Bishop or Priest should have any Ecclesiastical Dignity or benefice
to any, by way of inheritance. Adding moreover, that for Baptism, Chrism,
Anointing, Burial, no Money should be exacted.

5. Item, That all Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, should be utterly
debarred and sequestered from company of their Wives and Concubines, under pain
of excluding from all Christian Communion.

The Acts thus determined were sent soon after to Henry the Emperor, to try
(before the breaking up of the Council) whether he would agree to the Canonical
Elections, free consecration, and investing of spiritual persons; and to other
Acts of the said Council. The Emperor makes answer, that he would lose
nothing of that Ancient Custom, which his Progenitors had given him: Yet
because of the authority of the general Council, he was content to consent to
the residue, save only the investing of Ecclesiastical function to be taken
from him, unto that he would never agree. Upon this, at the next return of the
Pope to the Council, Henry the Emperor was excommunicated.

In the Year 1142. Pope Eugenius came to Paris, where that he might usurp the
right of investiture, and deprive the King of it, he gave the Archbishopric
of Bourges, to his Chancellor of the Apostolical Chancery, named Peter Aimery
without the consent of King Jews, a Prince very much given to obedience unto
the Papal See. Yet the King was so angry at it, that he swore upon the Holy
Relics, that never so long as he lived, Aimery should set his foot in Bourges.

But the Pope knowing the King's timorous nature, excommunicated him, put his
person in interdict, and gave order that in France, in all places where the
King came, divine Service should cease; and all his Court were deprived of the
Communion.

This lasted three whole years till St. Bernard came to the King, and persuaded
him to receive the said Archbishop.

But because by so doing, the King brake his Oath made upon the Holy Relics,
he was enjoined for satisfaction to take a Journey to the Holy Sepulcher in
Syria, to fight against the Saracens. In which Journey the King lost the flower
of the French Nobility, and returned afflicted and full of confusion, as you
shall see more hereafter.

Peter Bishop of Clugny was in great account with Pope Eugenius.

Bernard wrote many Epistles to him: in one Epistle he calls him a Vessel of
Honor, full of Grace and Truth, and endued with many gifts.

The loss of Edessa (wherein Christianity had flourished ever since the
Apostles times) moved Conrade Emperor of the West, and Jews VII. sir-named
the young, King of France, to undertake a Voyage to the Holy Land.

Pope Eugenius III. bestirred himself in the matter, and made St. Bernard stis
solicitour to advance the design. The Emperor's Army contained two hundred
thousand foot, besides fifty thousand Horse: nor was the Army of King Jews
much inferior in number. Paul. Aemil. in Lud. VII.
In France they sent a Distaff and a Spindle to all those that went not with
them, as upbraiding their effeminateness. But by the way, the Grecian Emperor
did them all possible mischief, by mingling lime with their meal, by killing of
straglers, by holding intelligence with the Turks their enemies, by corrupting
his Coin, so that the Dutch sold good Wares for bad Money, and bought bad Wares
with good Money, by giving them false conductors, which trained them into
danger, so that there was more fear of the guides than of the way.

The King of France followed after the Emperor, and drank of the same Cup at
the Grecians hands, though not so deeply, till at last, finding that those who
marched through the Continent, met with an Ocean of misery, he thought better
to trust the Wind and the Sea than the Greeks, and taking shipping, safely
arrived in Palestine, where he was welcomed by Reimund Prince of Antioch. Some
weeks were spent in entertainment, and visiting holy places, till at last, Tho.
Fuller holy War. lib. 2.
Elianor Wife to the King of France, who accompanied her Husband, made Religion
her Pander, and played Bankrupt of her honor, under pretense of Pilgrimage,
keeping company with a base Saracen-Jester, whom she preferred before a King.

The Emperor and the French King besiege Damascus: but some of the Christians
corrupted with Turkish Money, persuaded the King of France to remove his Camp
to a stronger part of the Walls; which they long besieged in vain, and returned
home at last, leaving the City and their honors behind them. The French
Proverb was verified of this Voyage: Much bruit, and little fruit. Many
thousand Christians perished in this adventure.

The French King coming homeward, was taken prisoner by the Fleet of the
Grecian Emperor, and rescued again by Gregory, Admiral to Roger King of
Sicily. When he was arrived in France, his Wife was in open Parliament divorsed
from him. He gave her back again all the Lands in France which he had received
with her in portion. Herein he did nobly, but not politickly, to part with the
Dukedoms of Poictou and Aquitain, which he enjoyed in her right: for hereby he
dismembered his own Kingdom, and gave a torch into the hands of Henry II. King
of England (who afterward married her) to set France on fire. St. Bernard was
condemned among the vulgar sort for the murderer of those that went this
Voyage; and it was an heavy affliction for his aged back, Bern. de consider.
li. 2. ca. 1.
to bear the reproach of many people. In his book of Consideration he makes a
modest defense of himself, whither we refer the Reader. Upon the departure of
the Emperor Conrade, and King Jews, Noradine the Turk much prevailed in
Palestine.

Peter de Bruis, a priest at Toulouse, preached in sundry places against the
Popes, and the Doctrine of Rome, calling the Pope the Prince of Sodom, and Rome
he called Babylon, the mother of Whoredoms and confusion. He preached against
the corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Morn. mist. Iniqu.
against the sacrifice of the Mass, he condemned the worship of Images, prayers
to Saints; single life of priests, pilgrimages, multitude of Holy Days, etc.

The forenamed Peter, Abbot of Clugny wrote against him. This Peter de Bruis
began to preach about the year 1126.

Guilerm. lib. 3. ca. 5.
After him, his Disciple Henry, a Monk, continued preaching the same Doctrine.
Guilerm, an Abbot, writing the life of St. Bernard says of this Henry, That he
denied the grace of Baptism unto Infants; he despised the prayers and oblations
for the Dead; the excommunication of Priests; the pilgrimage of Believers; the
sumptuous buildings of Churches; the idleness of Festival-days; the
consecration of chrism and oil, and all the ordinances of the Church. He
shows them that the people sent for Bernard to come against him, but he
refused until Albericus Bishop of Ostia was sent Legate against him, and he
persuades Bernard to go with him to Toulouse. And then Bernard wrote his 240.
Epistle unto Hildefonsus, Count of St. Giles against this Henry. Certain it is
(as the proverb is) Bernard saw not all things, and howbeit he wrote bitterly
against him, yet he commends him as a learned man, and he was so reverenced,
that the people did follow him. De Bruis was burnt at Toulouse, and Albericus
carried Henry into Italy. Their Books were burnt.

In Palestine King Baldwin was poisoned by a Jewish Physician. And Almerick
Brother to King Baldwin, succeeded to the Crown. In the Church of Jerusalem one
Almerick was Patriarch, a Frenchman born, though little fit for the place.

King Almerick against his promise invadeth Egypt, but his perjury was punished
with the future ruin of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and himself dies of a
bloody flux.

Baldwin his Son, the fourth of that name, succeeds. This Baldwin IV. had
excellent Education under William Archbishop of Tire, a pious man, and
excellent Scholar, skilled in all the Oriental Tongues, besides the Dutch, and
the French his Native Language, Tho. Fullers Hist. Holy War. li. 2. ca. 38.
a moderate and faithful Writer: For in the lattter part of his History of the
holy War, his eye guided his hand, till at last the taking of the City of
Jerusalem so shook his hand that he wrote no more.

Treasurer he was of all the Money's contributed to the holy War; Chancellor
of this Kingdom, employed in several Embassies in the West; present at the
Lateran Council, the Acts whereof he did record. Cardinal he might have been
but refused it.

Jews the French King caused his Son Philip to be crowned at Rhemes, at the
Age of 14 years, Anno 1179. He betrothed him to Isabel the Daughter of Baldwin
Earl of Henault. King Jews having thus disposed of his affairs, died Anno 1180.

The Title of Augustus was given to Philip his Son and successor. In the
beginning of his Reign he purged the corruptions that were then prevalent among
the people, viz. Blasphemies, Plays, Dicing-houses, public dissoluteness in
infamous places, Taverns and Tipling-houses. He expelled the Jews (dispersed
throughout his Kingdom, and given to griping usury) and albeit they obtained a
return for Money, yet in the end he banished them out of all the Territories of
France.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem being arrived in France, Anno 1184. with the Prior
of the Hospital of Outremer, Rigordus de gestis Philippi Augusti.
and the Grand Master of the Templars, to demand succor of King Philip
Augustus against the Saracens, he sent out a Mandamus to call a general Council
of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Princes of the Realm, which was holden in
the City of Paris. Philip also calls a Parliament at Paris: they diswade him
from the Voyage, but he fights against all difficulties. Great charges were
imposed upon such as went not the Voyage, to pay the tenth of all their
revenues, both Temporal and Spiritual, called for this occasion, the Saladines
Tenths.

Richard I. King of England, and King Philip of France, laying aside their
private dissentions, unite their forces against the Turks.

King Richard was accompanied with Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert
Bishop of Sarisbury, Robert Earl of Leicester, Ralph de Glanvil, late
Chief Justice of England, Richard de Clare, Walter de Kime, etc. His Navy he
sent about by Spain, and with a competent number took his own Journey through
France.

Roger Hovedon in Ricard. 1.
At Tours he took his Pilgrim's Staff and Scrip from the Archbishop. His Staff
at the same time casually brake in pieces, which some construed a token of ill
success. Likewise when He and the French King passed over the Bridge of Lions,
on the fall of the Bridge this conceit was built, That there would be a falling
out betwixt these two Kings, which accordingly came to pass.

At Lions, these two Kings parted their Trains, and went several ways into
Sicily. At Messana in Sicily, these two Kings meet again, where King Richard
beheld his Navy safely arrived. Tankred, a Bastard born, was at this time King
of Sicily, who secretly applies himself to the French, which King Richard
easily discovered. Mean time the Citizens of Messana did the English much
wrong: wherefore King Richard took Messana by assault, seized on most Forts in
the Island. Tankred gave to our King what rich conditions soever he demanded,
to pacify him.

Worse discords daily increased betwixt the Kings of England and France, King
Richard slighting the King of France his Sister, whom he had promised to marry.
King Philip hasted presently to Ptolemais, Richard followed with more leisure,
and took Cyprus in his way. Cursac reigned then in Cyprus, who killed the
English that landed there. But King Richard speedily overran the Island, bound
Cursac with silver fetters. The Island he pawned to the Templars for ready
money; and there took to Wife his beloved Lady Beringaria, Daughter to the King
of Navarr.

The City of Ptolemais was taken, the Houses which were left, with the spoil
and Prisoners, were equally divided betwixt Philip and Richard. Here the
English cast down the Ensigns of Leopold Duke of Austria, who had fought so
long in assaulting this City, till his Armor was all over gore-blood, save the
place covered with his belt. But King Richard afterward paid dearly for it.
King Richard caused seven thousand of his Turkish Prisoners to be put to death,
and Saladine in revenge, put as many of our Captives to death. But the French
King reserving his Prisoners alive, exchanged them to ransom so many Christians.

Philip the French King, Odo Duke of Burgundy, Duke Leopold; most of the Dutch,
all the Genoans and Templars, side with King Conrade. King Richard, Henry Count
of Champaigne, the Hospitallers, Venetians, and Pisans, take part with King
Guy. But King Conrade's side was much weakened by the departure of the French
King.

About that time Conrade King of Jerusalem was murdered in the Marketplace of
Tire.

Now King Guy exchanged his Kingdom of Jerusalem for the Island of Cyprus,
which he had redeemed from the Templars, to whom he had pawned it. Henry of
Champaign was chosen King by the procurement of King Richard, who after many
notable exploits done in Palestine, and a peace made with Saladine, in his
return passing through Germany in a disguise, was taken Prisoner in Austria,
sold and sent by Duke Leopold to Henry the Emperor. At last he was ransomed
for an hundred and forty thousand marks, a sum so vast in that Age, that to
raise it in England, they were forced to sell their Church-plate to their very
Chalices.

After this Money, Peter of Blois made an Apostrophe to the Duke or Emperor,
sending this good prayer.

Bibe nunc Avaritia,
Dum puteos argenteos,
Larga diffundit Anglia,
Tua tecum pecunia,
Sit in perditionem.
And now thou basest Avarice,
Drink till thy Belly burst;
Whilst England pours, large silver showers,
To satiate thy Thirst.
And this we pray, Thy Money may,
And thou be like accursed.
King Richard after eighteen Months imprisonment returned into England. And in
Austria the Duke with his Money built the Walls of Vienna. But God punished the
Dominions of Leopold, with fire and water, and by famine; for the Ears of Wheat
turned into Worms: A Gangreen seized on the Duke's body, who cut off his Leg
with his own hand, and dyed thereof: who by his Will caused some thousand
Crowns to be restored again to King Richard. Soon after, Henry King of
Jerusalem, as he was walking in his Palace, fell down out of a Window, and
broke his neck.

Roger Hoveden tells us, that near about this time, there was in the City of
Toulouse a great number of Men and Women whom the Pope's Commissioners, ( viz.
Peter Cardinal of St. Chrysogon, and the Pope's Legate, with the Archbishops
of Narbon, and Biturium, Reginald Bishop of Bathe, John Bishop of Pictavia,
Henry Abbot of Clareval, etc.) did persecute and condemn for Heretics: of whom
some were scourged naked, some chased away, some compelled to abjure.

Now sprang up the Doctrine and name of them, which were then called Pauperes
de Lugduno, which of one Waldus, a chief Senator in Lions, were named
Waldenses; they were also called Leonistae, and Insabbatati, about the year of
our Lord 1170.

It happened on a day as diverse of the principal men of the City assembled
together, consulted upon diverse matters, that one of the company fell down and
dyed suddenly, the rest of the company looking on. This Waldus being terrified
at the sight of it, was converted, and presently reformed his Life. He
ministered of his Goods large Alms to the Poor, he purchased a Bible, studied
the Scriptures, instructed himself, and his Family with the true knowledge of
God's word. He admonished all that resorted to him to repentance and amendment
of Life. He gave out to them that were ready to learn certain rudiments of the
Scripture, which himself had translated into the French Tongue, for he was both
Wealthy and Learned.

The Popish Prelates threatened to excommunicate him: but he neglecting their
threatenings, said, God must be obeyed rather than Man. At length they drove
both Waldus, and all his adherents out of the City. The Articles of the
Waldenses, I find in order and number to be these.

1. That only the Holy Scripture is to be believed, in matters pertaining to
Salvation, etc.

2. All things to be contained in Holy Scripture necessary to Salvation.

3. That there is one only Mediator; that other Saints are in no wise to be
made Mediators, or to be invocated.

4. They rejected purgatory, asserting that all men, either by Christ are
justified to Life, or without Christ be condemned, and besides these two,
neither any third or fourth place to be.

5. That all Masses, viz. such as be sung for the dead, be wicked, and are to
be abrogate.

6. That all Men's Traditions are to be rejected, at least not to be reputed as
necessary to Salvation, etc. That constrained Fasts, difference of Meats, such
variety of degrees and orders of Priests, Friars, Monks and Nuns, superfluous
Holy Days, so many sundry benedictions, and hallowing of Creatures; vows,
peregrinations, with all the Rabblement of Rites and Ceremonies to be abolished.

7. The supremacy of the Pope usurping above all Churches, and especially above
all politic Realms, and Governments, not to be acknowledged; neither that any
degree is to be received in the Church, but only Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

8. The Communion under both kinds to be necessary to all people, according to
the Institution of Christ.

9. That the Church of Rome, is Babylon spoken of in the Revelation, and the
Pope is Antichrist.

10. They reject the Pope's pardons and indulgences.

11. They hold the Marriage of Priests and Ecclesiastical persons to be pious,
and necessary in the Church.

12. That such as hear the Word of God, and have a right Faith, are the true
Church of Christ.

John Archbishop of Lions, excommunicated Waldus and all his followers, They
were dispersed into diverse places, of whom many remained long in Bohemia, who
writing to their King Vladislaus to purge themselves against the slanderous
accusations of one Doctor Austin, gave up their confession, with an Apology for
their Christian profession, defending with strong and learned Arguments, the
same which is now received in most reformed Churches, concerning Grace, Faith,
Hope, Charity, Repentance, and Works of Mercy.

Reynerius, an Italian Inquisitor, under Pope Innocent the third, writes of
them thus. Among all the Sects that ever were, or now are, none is so hurtful
to the Church, as these poor men of Lions, for three causes.

1. Because it continues longest: for some say, it has been from the days of
Pope Sylvester I. and others say from the days of the Apostles.

2, Because it is most general, seeing there is no Nation where it spreads
not.

3. Whereas all other are conjoined with blasphemy against God, this Sect of
the Leonists has a great show of Godliness: for they live justly before men,
and believe all things concerning God, and all the Articles of the Creed: only
they reproach and hate the Roman Church; and the multitude is ready to accept
such things.

Reynerius says, there were accounted forty Churches defiled with this
Heresy, as he calls it: and in one Parish they had ten Schools. Verner in
Fascicul. Tempor.
So He. Vernerus says, there were some most subtle persons among them, who
endeavored to maintain their opinions. And James de Rebiria says, Because
they who were called Priests and Bishops at that time, were ignorant almost of
all things, it was easy unto the Waldenses, being learned, to gain the first
place among the people. Catal. Test. verit. li. 15.
Some of them disputed so accurately, that the Priests permitted them to preach
publicly.

As for the continuance of this Sect in following times, one having inserted
the Confession of Faith, which they sent to the King of Hungary, Anno 1508.
says, It differs not much from those things that are now taught by Some,
meaning Luther. And he adds, that the Waldenses may be better known from that
confession, than by the Catalogue of Heretics, set forth by Bernard of
Lutzenburgh.

Nauclerus says, that the Hussites followed the Sect of the Waldenses. Thuan
Hist. ad Ann. 1508.
And Thuanus says, that Peter Waldus leaving his Country went into Belgium
and Picardy, finding many followers; he passed thence into Germany, abiding a
long space in the Cities of Vandalia, and lastly he settled in Bohemia, where
to this day (says he) they who embrace that Doctrine, are called Picards.

His Companion Arnold went into Aquitain, and abode in Albium, whence the
followers of him were called Albigei, or Albigenses. Their liberty of Speech*
wherewith they used to blame the vices and dissoluteness of the Princes of
France and the Clergy, Du. Havillan Hist. in Phil. August.
yea to tax the vices and actions of the Popes, this was the principal thing
that brought them into Universal hatred, and which charged them with more evil
opinions than they had.

Philip Augustus intending to declare his Son Philip, his successor in the
Realm, M. Joan. Du. Tillet greffier en ses memoires.
called a general Council at Paris, of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
together with the principal Lords of his Kingdom. In this Council they treated
of all things Temporal and Spiritual. Whence that appears to be true, which a
learned Frenchman has written long ago, That anciently the affairs of France,
were managed by the Clergy, and Laymen jointly.

King Philip had put away Queen Isabel his Wife, and married Alix the Daughter
of the King of Hungary, who lived not long with him. She being dead, he took
Jugerberga, Sister to the King of Denmark; whom likewise he put away, and in
her place married Mary the Daughter of the Duke of Moravia, yet after a long
and bitter controversy upon the repudiation of Jugerberga, he received her
again, and ended his days with her. The King of Denmark vehemently pursued
Philip in the Court of Rome, Philip prepares his Advocates to show the reasons
why he had put her away. The cause was to be pleaded before the Pope's Legate,
in the great Hall of the Bishop's Palace at Paris, De. Serres Hist. in vit.
Philip. August.
says, de Serres. In this great Assembly Philip's Advocates pleaded well for
him against his Wife, but no Man appeared for her. As the Crier had demanded
thrice, if there were any to speak for Jugerberga, and that silence should be
held for a consent, lo, a young man unknown, steps forth of the press, and
demands audience, it was granted him with great attention.

Every man's ears were open to hear this Advocate, but especially Philip's, who
was so touched and ravished, with the free and plain discourse of this young
Advocate, that they might perceive him to change his countenance. This Advocate
having ended his discourse, returns into the press again, and was never seen
more, neither could they learn what he was, who sent him, nor whence he came.
The Judges were amazed, and the cause was remitted to the Council. Philip
presently takes Horse, and rides to Bois de Vincennes, whither he had confined
Jugerberga: having embraced her, he receives her into favor, and passes the
rest of his days with her in Nuptial Love.

An ancient Historian says, Rigord. de gest. Philip. August.
that there was a Council holden at Soissons, in which King Philip was
assistent, with the Archbishops, Bishops, and chief Lords of his Realm, where
the point of the divorce or confirmation of the King's Marriage with Jugerberga
was discussed.

After the death of King Richard I. of England, Philip Augustus having some
difference with King John of England, concerning the Dukedom of Guyen, and
Earldom of Poictiers, which Philip supposed to belong to him, because homage
was not done for them; and concerning the Dukedom of Britain, which was
confiscated unto him by the murder of Arthur, King John's Nephew, whom he had
killed; he was summoned to Rome by Innocent III. upon the information made by
John, supposing that the Pope ought to have the determining of their
controversy, by reason of an Oath upon the settling of the Lands formerly made
between the two Kings, and the violation thereof: concerning which, he writ at
large to the Bishops of France, that they would approve of his proceedings,
which was so well liked by his Successors, that they Canonized his Decretal,
which nevertheless has been disliked by some Divines. Gabr. Biel supr.
Canonmissae sect. 75.
And for the Canonist's, some of them have said, that the protestation which he
makes at the beginning of it, contradicts the Act it self; inasmuch as he
declares he will not meddle with the jurisdiction of France, which nevertheless
he did: for the feudal differences being determined by the Peers of France,
betwixt Philip the Lord, and John the Vassal, yet the Pope would have his
Legates to take cognizance of them: for hearken how he speaks. That Philip
would patiently suffer the Abbot of Casemar, and the Archbishop of Bourges, to
have the full hearing, whether the complaint put up against him be just, or his
exception legal. See what learned Cujacius observes upon that Chapter. He
protests (says he) doing one thing, and pretending another, not to
intermeddle, nor usurp the cognizance of the Feoffs belonging to the King,
which he knows to appertain to the King and the Peers of France, but only to
have the cognizance of the perjury. And he afterward adds. All this he wrote
to appease the Peers of France, Cujac. in d. c. novit. de Judic. extr.
and bear them in hand that he proceeded justly against their King, and put all
his Kingdom into an Interdict upon this occcasion, yet for all that he gained
nothing by it.

In this Century, William Archbishop of Senon, wrote unto the Pope thus. Let
your Excellency, most Holy Father, hear patiently what we say, for our Soul is
in bitterness, and so is your devoted Son, the Most Christian King of France,
how all the Church of France is troubled with scandals flowing in time of your
Apostle-ship, from the Apostolical See; seeing (as our Nation says) Satan is
let loose there to the ruin of all the Church; there Christ is Crucified
again, and manifestly sacrilegious persons and murderers go free.

Peter, a Monk of Paris, being of great Age, dyed Anno 1167. he commends
God's Word, and taxes the idleness and impieties of Priests, the curiosity of
Schoolmen, the multitude and abuses of Masses, the multitude of Men's
Traditions, whereby the precepts of God are made void: He calls Indulgences a
godly deceit.

Bernard, a Monk of Clugny about that time wrote a large Satyr, not sparing the
Pope nor Cardinals, of which here are some passages.

Pontificalia cord carentia cord probavit,
Pontificalia corda pecunia contenebravit,
Pontificum status ante fuit ratus, integer ante
Ille statum dabat, ordine, nunc labat ille labante.
Qui super hoc mare debuerat dare se quasi pontem;
In Sion, omnibus est via plebibus in Phlegetontem,
Stat sibi gloria, pompa, superbia divitiarum.
Hoc prope tempore nemo Studeus fore pons animarum.
Qui stat in agmine primus in ordine Presbyteratus,
Est vitio levis, officio brevis, inguine fractus.
Then of the Popish Prelates and Clergy, he says.

Vos volo credere quod volo dicere, Pseudoprophetas,
Nulla feracius ac numerosius hac tulit oetas.
His sacra nomina, sacraque tegmina, corda superba,
Agnus eis patet in tunica, latet anguis in Herba;
Quilibet improbus extat Episcopus: Abba creatur
Vi, precio, prece: Dignus homo nece sceptra lucratur.
Nullus ei timor, haudque sui memor, est aliarum
Non sine Simone, sed sine Canone dux animarum.
Diverse others he has of this Nature, which I shall pass by.

Peter Abailard spoke and wrote against the Holy Trinity, and against the
Office of Christ. In the Doctrine of the Trinity he was an Arian; of Grace, a
Pelagian; of the person of Christ, a Nestorian. He was summoned to answer in a
Council at Soissons, where he did appear but would not answer, but only did
appeal unto the Court of Rome, and did glory that his books had found
acceptance there. The Bishops did note and condemn his Error, and the sentence
against his person they did refer unto Pope Innocent.

Peter Cantor flourished about this time, he was of Paris. He wrote a Book de
verbo abbreviato.

In that Book, he not only taxes the loose life of the Clergy, and the neglect
of their Office, but also many other abuses of the Pope and his Mass-Priests.
John de Vesalia in his Book against Indulgences, writes that this Cantor said,
that Indulgences are pious frauds. Among other things he sharply taxes many
abuses of the Mass, especially the too-frequent multiplication, and
profanation of it: he reprehendeth the heap and impiety of Popish Traditions,
saying, that for the Commandments of Men, they made void the Commandments of
God.

Hugo de Sto. Victore, was by Nation a Saxon, but Abbot of St. Victor at Paris.
His Works are extant in three Volumns, and many of them mentioned in Oxford
Catalogue.

Richard of St. Victor, flourished at the same time with Hugo aforementioned,
and lived in the same Monastery with him. His Works are extant in two Volumns.
Catal. Test. veric. lib. 15.
In that he was esteemed for a very learned Man, and was Religious in his
outward conversation, he wrote many things, of which much is lost.

Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, at this time followed the footsteps of his
Brorher Gratian, and gathered the sum of Divinity into four Books of Sentences,
out of the writings of the Fathers; Pezel. Mellif. Hist.
and he is called, The Master of the Sentences. Gratian compiled the Pope's
decrees, or the Canon Law.

These two Brethren were the greatest doers in finding out, and establishing
the blind opinion of the Sacrament, that the only similitude of Bread and Wine
remained, but not the substance of them, and this they call the spiritual
understanding of the mystery.

Lombard's Sentences were authorized as the Text in all Schools, and to the end
that no man from thenceforth should search antiquity and truth any more from
Fathers or Councils, under no less danger than guiltiness of Heresy.

Hear what Cornelius Agrippa says of this Scholastic Theology. It is (says
he) of the kind of Centaures, Cornel. Agripp. de vanit. scient. ca. 97.
a twofold Discipline blown up by the Sorbon of Paris, with a kind of mixture
of Divine Oracles, and Philosophical reasonings, written after a new form, and
far different from the Ancient Customs, by questions and sly syllogismes,
without all ornament of Language, etc. He adds that the faculty of
Scholastic Divinity is not free from error and wickedness. These cursed
Hypocrites and bold Sophists have brought in so many Heresies, which preach
Christ, not of good will (as St. Paul says) but of contention; so that there
is more agreement among Philosophers than among these Divines, who have
extinguished ancient Divinity with humane opinions, and new errors.

Bartholomew Gravius, a Printer at Lovain, in his Preface before his Edition of
these Sentences tells us, that he had a purpose to reduce all the Testimonies
unto the first Fountains sincerely: but to his gr^^t admiration he was told by
the Masters there it could not be so; because albeit in their Editions,
innumerable places were corrected, yet many errors were as yet remaining and
these not little ones. And not a few things in the Edition at Paris were
changed: not according to the truth of the old Books, but in conjecture; yea,
and oft-times the old words were corrupted through an immoderate desire of
amending, and in many places the worse was put for the better, etc. And seeing
these Books have been so often changed, little credit can be given to any of
their late Editions, and that even the Master himself had not written soundly
according to the Fathers which he cites.

Century XIII.
ALegat came into France, and commanded King Philip upon pain of Interdiction,
to deliver one Peter out of Prison, that was Elected to a Bishopric, and
thereupon he was delivered.

In the Year 1203. John King of England, lost all his holds and possessions in
Normandy through the force of the French King.

The Pope had Excommunicated King John, not only for the paricide of his Nephew
Arthur, but also for the ill usage of his Clergy. King John sends confiding men
in all have to Pope Innocent IV. beseeching him, to protect him against the
King of France, promising thereupon to bind the Realm of England, and Seigniory
of Ireland, to hold of him and his successors, and in sign of obedience to pay
him a yearly tribute of a thousand marks of silver. Innocent sends his Legate
presently to absolve him, to pass the contract, and receive the homages of
Fealty, as well of himself as of his Subjects. John is absolved, and having
laid down his Crown, Scepter, Cloak, Sword and Ring, at the Legates feet* he
does him homage for the Realm of England, kissing his Feet as his Tributary,
and binds the English to the like duty by a solemn Oath. He was willing also to
discharge what he had taken from his Clergy. This was done, Anno 1215.

Then the Legate returning into France, requires Philip in the Pope's name,
that he should suffer John to enjoy his Realm of England in peace, and freely
to possess the Lands which he held by homage of the Crown of France. Moreover
that he should satisfy the great complaints which the Clergy of his Realm had
made against him, restoring that which he had exacted from them during the
Wars, upon pain of Excommunication if he did not obey presently. Philip
promises to submit himself; and before the Legat's departure, he frees the
Clergy of his Realm of the Tenths which he had exacted for the charge of the
Wars, according to the decree of a National Council held at Soissons.

King John being freed by the Pope, and pressed by him to perform his command,
oppresses his Subjects by extraordinary impositions; and Tyrannical exactions.
The English Nobility therefore reject John, and offer the Realm to King Philip,
who sends his Son Jews, giving him a train fit for his person in so great an
exploit.

Jews having taken Hostages of the English, for assurance of their Faith,
passes into England, and so to London, Math. Westminster. Il. 2. sub anno 1215.
where he is joyfully received. In the mean time complaints come to Philip from
Pope Innocent, who in a general Council held at Rome, did Excommunicate Jews
the eldest Son of Philip Augustus with all his adherents.

King John dies, and the English receive Henry the Son of John, and dismiss
Jews of France.

King Philip instituted the Provost of Merchants, and the Sheriffs at Paris for
the politic Government thereof: he caused the City to be paved, being before
very noisome by reason of the mire and dirt: he built the Halls and the Louvre.
He Walled in Bois de Vincennes, and replenished it with Dear and other Wild
Beasts: he finished that sumptuous building of our Ladies Church. In his
Testament he ordained many notable things: he left toward the winning the City
of Jerusalem III. C. M. pounds of Paris Money; to the Hospital in Mountfort,
one C. M. pounds; and to be distributed among the poor Commons of his Land he
gave XX. M. pounds. But a pound of Paris Money was then but two shillings six
pence sterling. King Philip dyed and was buried with great pomp in the
Monastery of St. Dennis, Anno 1223. and Jews VIII. his Son succeeded him, who
was crowned at Rhemes.

Pope Innocent III. having gathered together an Army of one hundred thousand
pilgrims, set forward for the final extirpation of the poor Albigenses, The
best Champions for the Pope herein were the Duke of Burgundy, the Earls of
Nevers, St. Paul, Auxerre, Geneva, Poictiers, with Simon Earl of Montfort. Of
the Clergy, Milo the Pope's Legate, the Archbishops of Sens and Rovan, the
Bishops of Clermont, Nevers, Lysieux, Bayeux, Chartres, with diverse others:
every Bishop with the Pilgrims of his jurisdiction; to whom the Pope promised
Paradise in Heaven, but not one penny on Earth.

Their work was to destroy the Albigenses, which were in great numbers in
Daulphine, Tho. Fullers holy War. li. 3. ca. 21.
Provence, Narbon, Toulouse, and other parts of France. Their commission also
extended to the rooting out of all their friends and favorers, whether
detected, or only suspected; such as were Reimund Earl of Toulouse, Reymund
Earl of Foix, the Vice-Count of Besiers, Gaston Lord of Bern, the Earl of
Bigorre, the Lady of la Vaur, with diverse others.

The first piece of service these Soldiers performed, was in sacking the City
of Besiers, and Borough of Carcassone, in which many of the Papists dwelt, and
promiscuously were slain with the Albigenses. Yea, Priests themselves were cut
in pieces in their Priestly Ornaments, and under the banner of the Cross.

As for the City of Carcassone, which was not far from the Borough, whilst the
City was besieged, they escaped out by the benefit of a Vault underground, and
so shifted abroad for themselves. Hitherto this War was managed by the Pope's
Legate.

Simon Earl of Montfort is now chosen Captain of this Army, who swears to vex
the Lord's enemies.

After he was seized of the Vice-County of Besiers, he took many other Castles
and Cities.

When the Quarantine, or forty days service of this Army was expired (the time
the Pope set them to merit Paradise in) they would not stay any longer, but ran
away. And though the Bishops persuaded some few to stay, yet could they little
prevail, which was no small advantage to the Albigenses.

The Earls of Toulouse, Foix, and Coming, and Prince of Bern, sheltred
themselves under Peter King of Arragon, whose homagers they were, receiving
investiture from him, though their Dominions lay on this side the Pyrenean
Hills.

This King suspected the greatness of the Earl of Montfort, therefore he
fomented a faction in them against the Holy Army: he charged Earl Simon for
seizing on the Lands of good Catholics, for supposed Heretics, and complained
that the Vice-Count of Besiers, who lived and dyed firm in the Romish Faith,
was lately trained into the Legat's hand, and against Oaths and promises of his
safe return, was kept Prisoner till his death, and his Lands seized on by Earl
Simon.

A pitched Battle was fought near the Castle of Moret, where the King of Arragon
being wounded to death fell from his Horse, and immediately his Army ran all
away. Simon pursued them to the Gates of Toulouse, and killed many thousands.
The Friars imputed this Victory to the Bishop's Benediction, and adoring a
piece of the Cross, together with the fervency of the Clergyes prayers, that
remained behind in the Castle of Moret.

Yet within few years, the face of this War began to alter, for young Reimund,
Earl of Toulouse, exceeding his Father in valor and success, so bestirred
himself, that in few months he regained what Earl Simon was many years in
getting. And at last, Earl Simon besieging Toulouse, with a stone which a Woman
let fly out of an Engine, had his Head parted from his body: Some conceived,
they saw God's finger in the Woman's hand, that because the greater part of his
cruelty lighted on the weaker Sex (for he had buried the Lady La Vaur alive,
respecting neither her Sex nor Nobility) a Woman was chosen out to be his
Executioner. He dyed even then when the Pope and three Councils, of Vaur,
Lateran, and Montpelier, had pronounced him Son, Servant, favorite of the
Faith, the invincible defender thereof. Among other of his styles, he was Earl
of Leicester in England, and Father to Simon Montfort the Cataline of this
Kingdom, See Camden in Leichestershire, also in Worcestershire.
who under pretense of curing this Land of some grievances, had killed it with
his Physic, had he not been killed himself in the battle of Evesham in the
Reign of King Henry the third.

Here ended the storm of open War against the Albigenses, though some great
drops fell afterward. And the Pope grew sensible of many mischiefs in
prosecuting this people with the Holy War. Perin de Albigensib. li. 2. ca. 4.
Three hundred thousand of these croised Pilgrims lost their lives in this
expedition within the space of fifteen years, so that there was neither City,
nor Village in France, but by reason hereof had Widows and Orphans, cursing
this expedition. The Pope therefore now resolves upon a privater way, namely to
prosecute them by way of Inquisition. The chief promoter of that War was
Dominick the Author of the Order of the Dominicans.

His Mother being with child of him, dreamed, that she had a dog vomiting fire
in her Womb. Du. Moul. Contr. Perron. l. 7.
This ignivomus Cur (as one calls him) did bark at and deeply bite the poor
Albigenses; who put above two hundred thousand of them to death.

Almerick for his laziness was deposed by the Pope, and John Bren was made King
of Jerusalem. In the beginning of his Reign, this accident fell out: In France
a Boy for his years went about singing in his own Tongue.

Jesus Lord, repair our loss,
Restore to us thy Holy Cross.
Numberless Children ran after him, and followed the same tune their Captain
and chanter did set them.

No bolts, no bars, no fear of Fathers, nor love of Mothers could hold them
back, but they would to the Holy Land to work wonders there, but this merry
music had a sad close, all either perishing on Land, Math. Paris p. 324.
or being drowned by Sea. Matthew Paris says, it was done by the instinct of
the Devil.

King Jews VIII. having compounded with Almery, the Son of Simon Earl of
Montfort, for Languedoc, resolves to unite this rich Province to the Crown.

To this end he levies a great Army, fortified with cruel Edicts against the
Albigenses as Heretics, and Rebels. Count Reymund submits himself to Pope
Honorius, and yields to Jews, and persuades the Earl of Cominges to the like
obedience. Thus both of them abandon the people, and go to Rome, leaving the
poor Albigenses to the mercy of Jews, who presently subdues all Languedoc and
Provence. The House of Montlor, one of the greatest in the County of Vivaret,
having followed the Albigenses party makes his peace, by means of the Town of
Argentiere, given to the Bishop of Viviers, who enjoys it to this day. Many
Families were made desolate: These poor miserable people were dispersed here
and there; and such as remained in the Country were forced to acknowledge the
Pope's Authority. Jews ordered the Marshal Foy, of the house of Mirepois to
command his Forces, leaving the Lord of Beaujeu, for Governor and
Lieutenant General of Languedoc.

All this mischief was contrived by the Pope, who had sent his Legate into
France, Fox. Act. and monum Vol. 1.
to summon a Council at Biture, whither the King with six Archbishops, and the
Bishops and Suffragans of nine Provinces repaired, to the number of an hundred,
besides the Abbots, Priors, and Proctors of all the Covents of France. Having
dispatched the business of Earl Reymund, and the Albigenses, the event whereof
has been before declared; Romanus the Pope's Legate gave leave to all Proctors
of Covents, and Chapters to return home, only retaining with him the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, to whom he opened another part of his
Commission; which was to obtain of every Cathedral Church two Prebend-ships;
one for the Bishop, the other for the Chapter. And in Monasteries also after
the like sort, where the Abbot and Covent had diverse and several portions, to
require two Churches, one for the Abbot, the other for the Covent, keeping this
proportion, that how much should suffice for the living of one Monk, so much
the whole Covent should find for their part, and as much the Abbot for his
likewise.

The Clergy of France answered, that the thing he enterprized could not be
brought to effect without great offense taken, and inestimable damage to the
Church of France.

In conclusion, when the matter came to debating with the Legate, the objections
of the inferior Clergy were these following.

1. They alleged the great damages and expenses, Math. Paris.
which they were like to sustain thereby, by reason of the continual
procurators of the Pope, which in every Diocese must live, not of their own,
but must be sustained upon the charges of the Cathredral Churches, and other
Churches also; and many times they being but procurators will be found as
Legates.

2. By that means (they said) great perturbations might ensue to the Covents
and Chapters of Cathedral Churches in their elections: Forasmuch as the Pope's
Agents and Factors, being in every Cathedral Church and Chapter House,
perchance the Pope would command him in his person to be present at their
elections, and so might trouble the same by delaying and deferring, till it
might fall to the Court of Rome to give, and so should be placed more of the
Pope's Clientele in the Churches of France, than of the proper Inhabitants of
the Land.

3. By this means they affirmed, that all they in the Court of Rome, should be
richer and receive more for their proportion, than the King of the Realm: by
means whereof the Court of Rome would delay and drive off great suits, and
would scarce take any pains with small causes. Thus would Justice be turned
aside, and poor suitors should dye at the gates of Rome: and for the better
speeding of their causes, they thought, seeing it was meet they should have
friends in the Court of Rome, by keeping them needy, their gifts might be the
sweeter, and their causes sooner dispatched.

4. Seeing it is impossible that the Fountain of greedy desires should be
stopped, it was to be feared, that either they would do that by others, which
they were wont to do by themselves, or else they should be enforced to give
greater rewards than before, for small gifts with great Rich Men are little
regarded.

5. Whereas the removing away the slander was alleged which goes on the Court
of Rome; by this means rather the contrary were to be feared, wherein that
sentence was alleged.

Quod virtus reddit non copia sussicientem,
Et non paupertas, sed mentis hiatus egentem.
That great riches stop not the taking of much, but a mind contented with a
little.

6. They added, that great riches would cause factions among the Romans, and
taking of sides and parties, so that by great possessions sedition might follow
to the ruin of the City.

7. That though they would oblige themselves to that contribution, yet their
Successors would not be so bound, nor yet ratify that bond of theirs.

8. They desired the Legate, that the zeal of the Universal Church, and of the
Church of Rome would move him: for if this oppression of the Church should be
Universal, it were to be doubted, lest an Universal departing might follow from
the Church of Rome, which God forbid (said they) should happen.

The Legate hereat excused himself, that he being in the Court never agreed to
this exaction; and that the Letters came not to him before he was in France,
and as for him he would stir no more in the matter, before it were proved what
other Countries would say and do therein.

King Jews passing with a great Host by Bourges and Nevers, marched to Lions;
and from Lions to Avignon, which for disobedience to the Church of Rome had
stood accursed by the Pope for seven years. The Citizens of Avignon, shut their
gates against the King and his Army, not suffering them to come within the
City. Wherefore the King assaulted the City, Fabian's chronic.
and lost there many of his Men, among which Guy Earl of St. Paul, and the
Bishop of Lemerick, and others to the number of two and twenty thousand there
were slain. In the end they submitting to the King's pleasure, and the
correction of the Pope, an agreement was made; and the King and his Army were
received into the City, and the Citizens received absolution from the Pope's
Legate.

King Jews to avoid the pestilence that was in his Camp, went into an Abbey
not far off, where shortly after, he dyed, and was carried to Paris, where he
was interred, Anno 1226.

Near unto this time, Gulielmus de Alta Petra, Bishop of Paris, wrote a Book de
Clero, wherein he thus speakerh of the Clergy of his time. No godliness or
Learning is seen in them, but rather all devilish filthiness, and monstrous
vices; they are not the Church, but Babylon and Egypt, and Sodom: the Popish
Prelates build not the Church but destroy it; they mock God, and they and their
Priests do profane the body of Christ; they lift up to the Heavens with all
manner of Ecclesiastical honor the limbs of the Devil: in a word; they bring
Lucifer into the Church of Christ. He taught also that there is no Law
belonging to the salvation of man, but the Gospel of Christ.

King Jews IX. called St. Jews, succeeds his Father in the Kingdom of
France, being but twelve years old, and was Crowned at Rhemes.

There is extant a constitution of this King Jews, bearing date, Anno 1228.
sub. Tit. de Taliis, wherein he regrateth the Avarice of Popes; saying, that
exactions, and grievous burdens of Moneys are laid on the Churches of our
Kingdoms by the Court of Rome, whereby the Kingdom is miserably exhausted. We
will therefore, that these be levied upon no condition, nor gathered, except
only for a reasonable, pious, and most urgent necessity, and by our express and
willing consent, and with the consent of the Church it self of our Kingdom.

At that time the Senate of Paris, did present unto John Santroman, the King's
Advocate, the Pope's Bull to be read and answered. He replied, saying, The
greatest confusion of all things would arise upon the accepting of that Bull:
for by authority of such in former times, the French people had in great
numbers gone out of the Kingdom to Rome, of whom some became slaves or clients
to the Cardinals; and some living more liberally, had idly wasted their
Patrimony: Brut. Fulmen ex Chronic. Britan. Armoric. li. 4.
and others in the City, or by the way had perished with the badness of the
Air, and frequent pestilence: and so France was exhausted of Subjects,
especially of Learned men. He shows also, how vast sums of Moneys were
carried away for vacancies, ad Advouzons of Bishoprics and Abbeys, and other
Titles in the Church, so that sometimes ten or twelve Bulls were sold for one
Priesthood. And if this custom shall continue (says he) it shall come to pass,
that who has any store of Moneys, will send to Rome, and buy a Priesthood unto
his Son or Cousin. The Rector of the University of Paris, spoke to the same
purpose; and having protested at length against the Bull, he appealeth from the
iniquity thereof to the next Council.

The Pope's Legate having raised an immense sum of Money in France, Jews
prohibited that the Money (which was yet in France) should be delivered to the
Pope's Assigns, or transported out of the Kingdom.

King John Bren resigneth the Kingdom of Jerusalem to Frederick the second
Emperor. There was also a Peace with the Turks concluded for eight years.

John got now more in a twelvemonth than in seven years before, P. Aemil. in
Phil. 2.
going from Country to Country. In France, besides rich gifts left to himself,
he had the managing of sixty thousand Crowns, the Legacy which Philip Augustus
the King on his Deathbed bequeathed to the Templars, and the Holy War. In
England he received many presents from King Henry III. though afterward he
proved but unthankful for them. Math. Paris. p. 627.
In Spain he got a rich Wife, marrying Beringaria, the Daughter of the King of
Castile: In Italy he tasted largely of the Pope's bounty; but at last
perfidiously raised rebellions against Frederick, his Son-in-Law, by the Pope's
instigation. It is conceived that the Pope provided that match for Frederick to
employ him in Palestine, whilst he at home might play his game at pleasure.

Frederick recovereth all Palestine and Jerusalem without expense of time or
blood: and concluded a ten years truce with the Sultan without the Pope's
consent. And on Easter Day tryumphantly entering Jerusalem crowned himself King
with his own hands. For Gerard Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Oliver Master of the
Templars, with all the Clergy absented themselves: neither was there any Mass
sung in the City, so long as the Emperor being excommunicated remained there.
In the Interim, the Christians every where build and repair the Cities of
Palestine, being now resigned into their hands: Joppa and Nazareth they
strongly fortified; the Walls of Jerusalem were repaired, the Churches adorned.
But short were the smiles of this City, which groaning under God's old curse,
little joyed her self in this her new bravery.

About the year 1232. the Greeks recover their Empire from the Latins, who had
made an hard shift to hold Constantinople almost sixty years under five
succeeding Emperors. 1. Baldwin the first, Earl of Flanders. 2. Henry his
Brother. 3. Peter, Count of Auxerre in France, Henry's Son-in-Law. 4. Robert.
5. Baldwin the fifth, and last.

At this time the Tartarians overrun the North of Asia, and many Nations fled
from their own Countries for fear of them. Among other, the Corasines, a fierce
and Warlike people, were forced to forsake their Land.

Being thus unkennelled, they have recourse to the Sultan of Babylon, who
bestows on them all the Lands the Christians held in Palestine. They march to
Jerusalem, and take it without resistance. Soon after the Corasines elated
herewith, fell out with the Sultan himself, who in anger rooted out their
Nation, so that none remained.

The Frenchmen make War against Reymund, Earl of Toulouse, and think to
enclose him in his Castle of Saracene: but the Earl lying in Ambush for them in
Woods, slew many of them, and 500 of the French Soldiers were taken; and of
their Servitors to the number of 200 men in armor were taken, of whom some
lost their eyes, some their ears, some their legs, and so were sent home: the
rest were carried away Prisoners into the Castle. Thrice that Summer were the
Frenchmen discomfited by the aforesaid Reymund.

King Jews puts a stop to the persecution of the Albigenses, saying, that they
must persuade them by reason, and not constrain them by force, whereby many
Families were preserved in those Provinces.

In those times lived Gulielmus de sancto amore, a Doctor of Paris, and Chanon
of Beauvois, exclaiming against the abuses of the Church of Rome. He wrote
against the Friars and their hypocrisy, but especially against the begging
Friars.

In his days there was a most detestable and blasphemous book set forth by the
Friars, which they called, Evangelium Aeternum, or Evangelium spiritus sancti:
The Everlasting Gospel, or, The Gospel of the Holy Ghost. Wherein it is said,
That the Gospel of Christ was not to be compared to it, no more than darkness
to light. That the Gospel of Christ should be preached but fifty years, and
then this everlasting Gospel should rule the Church.

He mightily impugned this pestiferous Book. Fox Act and Monum. p. 410. ad 416.
He was by the Pope condemned for an Heretic, exiled, and his Books were
burnt. His story and Arguments may be read in Mr. Fox his first Volumn. Pope
Alexander armed Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventure (men of violent spirits)
against him, but he was too hard for these reprovers: his followers were called
Amoraei.

Pope Gregory succeeds Innocent, and is a great Enemy to Frederick the
Emperor, who had entered Italy with a great Army. After his Election he sends
his Nuncio into France, to exhort Jews to succor him. The Pope comes into
France, and calls a Council at Lions, whither he cites Frederick, but yet upon
so short a warning as he could not appear. Frederick (having sent his
Ambassadors to require a lawful time, and to advertise the Pope of his coming)
begins his Journey to perform his promise. Being arrived at Thurin, he has
intelligence given him, that the Pope had condemned him as Contumax,
excommunicated him, and degraded him of the Empire. But this was not without
the consent of the Princes Electors of the Empire, who after mature
deliberation proceeded to a new Election. They choose Henry Landgrave of Thuring
for Emperor; but he besieging the City of Vlmes, was wounded with an Arrow
whereof he dyed shortly after.

Frederick writes to the French King, against the sentence against him at Lions.

Then the Electors chose William, Earl of Holland for Emperor. In all the
chief Cities, the Guelph's Faction was the stronger, through the Authority of
the Council of Lions. Frederick over-pressed with grief, dies, leaving Italy
and Germany in great combustion.

The Pope having Canonized Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury soon after Blanch,
Queen Regent of France, came into England to worship that Saint, representing
to him, that he had found refuge for his Exile in France, and beseeching him
not to be ungrateful. She said, my Lord, most Holy Father, confirm the Kingdom
of France in a peaceable solidity, and remember what we have done to thee.

Now Jews IX. came to assist the Christians in Palestine. His nobility
diswaded from that design. Jews takes up the Cross, and voweth to eat no
Bread, until he was recognized with the Pilgrim's Badge. Their went along with
him, his two Brothers, Charles Earl of Anjou, Robert Earl of Artois; his own
Queen, and their Ladies, Odo the Pope's Legate, Hugh Duke of Burgundy, William
Earl of Flanders, Hugh Earl of St. Paul, and William Longspath Earl of
Sarisbury, with a band of valiant Englishmen.

The Pope gave to this King Jews for his charges, the tenth of the Clergy's
revenues through France for three years, and the King employed the Pope's
Collectors to gather it; whereupon the Estates of the Clergy were shaven as
bare as their crowns; and a poor Priest, who had but twenty shillings annual
pension, was forced to pay two yearly to the King. Having at Lions took his
leave of the Pope, and a blessing from him, he marched toward Avignon; Where
some of the city wronged his Soldiers, especially with foul Language.

His Nobles desired him to besiege the city, the rather, because it was
suspected, that therein his Father was poisoned. To whom Jews most christianly
said, I come not out of France to revenge mine own quarrels, or those of my
Father, or Mother, but injuries offered to Jesus Christ. Hence he went without
delay to his Navy, and so committed himself to the Sea.

Jews arrives in Cyprus, where the pestilence raging, two hundred and forty
Gentlemen of note dyed of the infection. Hither came the Ambassadors from a
great Tartarian prince, invited by the fame of King Jews his piety, professing
to him, that he had renounced his Paganism, and embraced Christianity, and that
he intended to send Messengers to the Pope to be further instructed in his
Religion: but some Christians which were in Tartary diswaded him from going to
Rome. King Jews received these Ambassadors cuurteously, dismissing them with
bounteous gifts. And by them he sent to their Master a Tent, wherein the
History of the Bible was as richly, as curiously depicted in Needle Work,
hoping thus to catch his Eyes, and both in his present; pictures then being
accounted Laymens books.

The French land in Egypt, and Damiata is taken by them. Discords grew between
the French and English, the cause was, for that the Earl of Sarisbury in
sacking a Fort got more spoil therein than the English. Then dyed Meladine, the
Egyptian King. Robert Earl of Artois, Brother to King Jews, fighting with the
Egyptians, contrary to the Counsel of the Templars, is overthrown. In his
flight he cried to the Earl of Sarisbury, flee, flee, for God fights against
us. To whom our Earl, God forbid my Father's Son should flee from the face of a
Saracen. The other seeking to save himself by the swiftness of his Horse, and
crossing the River was drowned. The Earl of Sarisbury slew many a Turk, and
though unhorsed and wounded in his Legs, stood on his Honor, when he could not
stand on his Feet; and refusing all quarter, upon his knees laid about him like
a desperate man. He fought till at last he breathed forth his Soul in the midst
of his Enemies. Of all the Christians there escaped no more than two Templars,
one Hospitaller, and one common Soldier, the Messengers of this heavy news.
The Plague swept away many thousands of the French daily. Mean time King Jews
sent many of the weakest of the people down the River to Damiata, Melechsala
King of Egypt, meeting them by the way, either burned or drowned them all, save
one Englishman, Alexander Giffard (whose ancient Family flourishes to this
day at Chellington in Staffordshire) who wounded in five places of his body,
escaped to the French, and reported what had happened to the rest. Melechsala
came upon the rest with an infinite multitude, and put them all (being few and
feeble) to the Sword, taking King Jews with his two Brethren, Alphonse and
Charles prisoners. Then was there a general Lamentation over all Christendom,
chiefly in France, where all were sorrowful.

Melechsala is slain by Tarqueminus, a sturdy Mammaluke, who succeeded him in
the Egyptian Kingdom. Jews at last was restored to his Liberty upon condition,
that the Christians should surrender Damiata, and he also pay back to the Turks
many thousand pounds, both for ransom of Christian Captives, and in
satisfaction of the vastations they had committed in Egypt.

Jews for the security of this Money pawned to the Turk, the Pyx and Host
(that is the body of Christ Transubstantiated in the Eucharist) as his chiefest
Jewel, Du. Serres Hist. in Lud. 9.
which he should be most careful to redeem. Hence in perpetual memory of this
conquest, we may see a Wafer-cake and a box, always wrought in the borders of
that Tapestry which is brought out of Egypt.

Hence Jews sailed to Ptolemais, being forsaken of the Pope, Friends,
Subjects, Brothers. Alphonse and Charles, though sent into France to solicit
his suit, and to advance his ransom with speed, yet being arrived forgot the
affliction of Joseph. Blanch, the King's Mother, having gathered a considerable
sum of money, and shipped it for Palestine, a Tempest in a moment cast that
away, which her care and thrift was many months in getting. His Queen Margaret
was with him, which somewhat mitigated his grief. Here she bore him a child,
which because another Benoni, or son of sorrow, was called Tristram.

King Jews being an excellent Antiquary, and Critic on sacred Monuments, much
employed himself in redeeming of old sacred places from the tyranny of Time and
Oblivion.

Mean-time, in his Kingdom of France, happened this strange accident. An
Hungarian Peasant, who is said to be an Apostate to Mahomet, and well learned,
gathered together many thousands of people, pretending they had intelligence
from Heaven to march to the Holy Land. These took on them the name and habit of
Pastorelli, poor Shepherds, in imitation be like, of those in the Gospel, who
were warned by Angels in a Vision to go to Bethlehem.

Being to shape their course into Palestine, they went into France. They
pillaged and killed the poor Jews as they went. Magdeb. Cent. 13. ca. 16. Col.
698.
But at last near Bordeaux sixty thousand of them were slain, and the rest
dispersed. A Rhimer of that Age made this Epitaph on them.

M. semel, and bis C. L. I. Conjungere disce,
Duxit Pastorum soeva Megaera Chorum.
Learn to put together well,
What M C C L I. do spell.
When some Devilish Fiend in France,
Did teach the Shepherds how to dance.
Anno 1254. Jews returns into France, being laden with Debts to his Italian
Creditors. He made an ordinance for the banishment of common Whores out of all
Cities and Towns, to be done by his Judges and Officers, and their goods to be
seized by them.

After fourteen years Interregnum Pope Urban IV. appointed Charles Duke of
Anjou, younger Brother to King Jews of France; King of Sicily and Jerusalem.
Charles subdued Maufrid, and Conradin his Nephew, and possessed Sicily, but for
the gaining of Jerusalem, he never regarded it, nor came thither at all. Hugh
King of Cyprus, was crowned King of Jerusalem.

In the Year 1253. was great contention between the Masters of Sorbon in Paris,
and the preaching Friars, who were so increased in number and honor, becoming
the Confessors and counselors of Kings, that they would not be subject unto
the former Laws and Customs. The Schoolmen convened, and were content to want
somewhat of their weekly portion to satisfy the Court of Rome, from which the
Friars had obtained their privileges.

About this time or a little before, arose a strife between the gray Friars,
and Prelates, and Doctors of Paris, about nine conclusions, condemned of the
Prelates to be erroneous.

1. Concerning the divine essence, that it cannot be seen of the Angels or men
glorified.

2. Concerning the Essence of the Holy Ghost.

3. Touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, as he is love.

4. Whether men glorified shall be in coelo empyreo: or, in coelo Chrystallino.

5. That the evil Angel at his first Creation was evil, and never good.

6. That there have been many verities from the beginning, which were not of
God.

7. That an Angel in one instant may be in diverse places.

8. That the evil Angel never had whereby he might stand; no more had Adam in
his state of Innocence.

9. That he which has more perfect strength of nature working in him, shall
have more full measure of necessity to obtain Grace and Glory. To which
Articles the Prelates answering, did excommunicate the same as erroneous.

The Abbot of St. Denis having extorted great sums of Money out of his Abbey,
to present unto the Pope as others did, Math. Paris.
in hopes one day to be made an Archbishop, King Jews, as Patron of that
Abbey, compelled him to re-pay the said sum out of his own purse.

Whilst this King was gone to the Holy War, the Nobles of France, finding
themselves vexed by the Pope, made a league, and set forth a Declaration,
against him, where they say (among other things) that the Clergy (pointing at
the Pope) swallow up and frustrate the jurisdiction of Secular princes, so as
by their Laws, the children of slaves, pass judgment upon Freemen and their
children, whereas by the secular Laws of our Kings and Princes, they ought
rather to be judged by us.

Another piece of their Declaration runs in this manner. All we, the prime Men
of the Kingdom, Math. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 798. and Math. West. li. 2.
perceiving out of our deep judgment; That the Kingdom was not got by Law
written, nor by the Ambition of Clergymen, but by the sweat of War, do Enact
and Ordain by this present Decree, and by joint Oath, that no Clerk nor Layman
shall sue one another before the Ordinary, or Ecclesiastical Judge, unless it
be in case of Heresy, Marriages, and Usury, upon pain of confiscating all
their goods, and the loss of a limb to the transgressors thereof; for which,
certain Executioners shall be appointed, that so our jurisdiction being
resuscitated may revive again: and those who have enriched themselves by our
poverty (among whom God for their pride has raised up profane contentions)
may be reduced to the State of the primitive Church; and living in
contemplation may show us those miracles, which are fled out of the World long
ago; and we in the mean time lead an active life as it is fitting. The
Historian adds, the Pope having heard these things, sighed with a troubled
mind, and desiring to appease their hearts, and break their courage, after he
had admonished them, he frighted them with threats but he did no good for all
that.

Tho. Fullers holy War. li. 4.
The Christians were now plagued with Bendocdar, the Mammaluke Prince in Egypt,
who succeeded Melechem, and every where raging against them, either killed or
forced them to forswear their Religion. The City of Joppa he took, and burnt,
and then won Antioch, slaying therein twenty thousand, and carrying away
captive an hundred thousand Christians. These woeful tidings brought into
Europe, so wrought on the good disposition of Jews King of France, that he
resolved to make a second Voyage into Palestine to succor the Christians.

And to that end he provideth his Navy, and is accompanied with Philip and
Tristram his Sons, Theobald King of Navarr, his Son-in-Law, Alphonse his
Brother, and Guido Earl of Flanders: there went also Edward, eldest Son to
Henry III. King of England.

Jews having now hoised up sail, it was concluded, that to secure and clear
the Christians passage to Palestine from Pirates, they should first take the
City of Carthage in Africa by the way.

This Carthage long wrestled with Rome for the Sovereignty, till Scipio crushed
out her bowels with one deadly fall. Yet long after the City stood, before
utterly demolished: at last by the counsel of Cato it was quite destroyed, it
being within a days Sail from Rome. Out of the ruins of this famous City,
Tunis arose, which was not then considerable in bigness, great only in
mischief, being seated betwixt Europe, Asia, and Africa, and so became a worse
annoyance to Christian Traffic, than a whole Country of Saracens elsewhere,

The siege of Tunis being begun, the Plague seized on the Christian Army, Sir
Walt. Ralegh Hist. part 1. li. 5. ca. 3.
whereof thousands dyed, among others Tristram, King Jews his Son: and he
himself of a Flux followed after. Many good Laws he made for his Kingdom: that
not the worst, He first retrenched his Barons power to suffer parties to try
their Titles to Land by duels. He severely punished Blasphemers, searing their
Lips with an hot Iron. And because by his command it was executed upon a rich
Citizen of Paris, some said he was a Tyrant. He hearing it, said before many, I
would to God that with searing my own Lips, I could banish out of my Realm all
abuses of Oaths. He loved more to hear Sermons than to be at Mass, yet was he
somewhat superstitious, as appears by some Instances.

For about the year 1240. Baldwin keeping by force the Empire of
Constantinople, which the French, and other pilgrims of Syria had surprised,
and held it by right of convenience, being in great want of Money, writ to King
Jews IX. that the Holy Crown of Thorns of our Savior was found, and if he
would help him with a sum of Money, he would send it to him. This King being of
easy belief treated with the said Emperor for a great sum of Money, and
bought that crown, which was put in the holy Chapel of Paris with great
solemnity.

Shortly after the Venetians having bought a piece of the true cross (as they
said) for two thousand and five hundred pounds, sold it again to the same King
Jews for double the price. The King himself carried it bare-headed and
barefoot to our Lady of Paris: and the Pope gave to it forty days of pardon.

His body was carried into France there to be buried, and was most miserably
tossed. He was Sainted after his Death by Pope Boniface VIII, and the 25th. day
of August (on which day in his first Voyage to Palestine he went on Ship board)
is consecrated to his Memory. Tunis was surrendered on conditions; the French
return home, whilst Prince Edward valiantly sets forward for Palestine.

Philip the third, called the bold, or the Hardy, succeeds to the Kingdom of
France. At the return of Philip, Anno 1271.
Queen Isabel his Wife dies in Sicily. And his Uncle Alphonse with his Wife
the Countess of Toulouse, dye soon after at Bologne, without any children, so
as according to the contract of the Marriage, the Earldom of Toulouse, should
be incorporate to the Crown.

Richard Son to Henry King of England, is traitorously slain by Guy of
Montfort, the Son of Simon (of whom we have spoken) walking in St. Laurences
Church at Viterbo, a City of the Pope's.

Pope Clement IV. (born in Languedoc) being dead, the Cardinals disagree about
the Election of a new Pope, and continued in this contention two years, nine
months, and one day, as Platina reports.

The causes of so long a dissension are variously reported by several
Historiographers. But the chief were as follow. Hist. of Cardinal^ part 3. lib.
1.


The first and most forcible of all, was the contrariety in the Natures of the
Cardinals which were present at the Election at Viterbo, who were eighteen in
number; all obstinate and untractable, and had sworn each of them never to
yield to his companion in the least.

All of them believed themselves worthy of the Papacy, and every one negotiated
for himself, without speaking a word of other pretenders, so that it was not
possible among eighteen several competitors, to come to any resolution. But
that impediment being removed, in which the Cardinals continued obstinate for
above ten Months, there arose another which lasted above a year, and was the
second occasion of the tediousness of the Election, and that is, that the
Cardinals were divided into two Factions, one of them Italians the other
French. These would have a Pope of their own Nation, and the Italians would
have him of theirs; neither of them complying with the other, and the number of
the French being equal to the Italians, there being no way to gain the two
thirds of their Votes, they remained diverse weeks obstinate, and doing nothing
but the heaping dissension upon dissension.

The other reason was, that this delay growing tedious to the Princes, and
particular to Philip King of France, and Charles King of Sicily, these two
Princes resolved to come in person to Viterbo, and solicit the Cardinals to
expedite the creation of the Pope. Upon this occasion the Cardinals which were
adherents to these two Crowns, having notice of their Resolutions, would do
nothing till they were arrived: who when they did come, served for nothing but
to protract the election, though their desire was to hasten it; each of them
recommending different persons. The Princes finding all their intercessions
ineffectual, returned as they came, leaving the whole business to the Cardinals.

In the first assembly after the Kings were departed, John Cardinal of Porto,
observing the pertinacity of the Cardinals, whilst they were together
invocating the Holy Ghost, cried out publicly, and with a loud voice. My
Lords! let us uncover the Roof of this Chamber, perhaps the Holy Spirit will
not come where we are through so many Roofs. It would be necessary to have a
Holy Ghost for every one, seeing there is no two will agree: The Holy Ghost
descended upon the Apostles, because they were met together with one mind: but
how can we expect him that are so strangely divided?

At length the Cardinals being weary of going up and down to the places of
their Assemblies, and doubting by their delay to bring in some new schism into
the Church, two thirds of the Cardinals agreed in the Election, of Tibaldo
Visconte, a Milanese, Archdeacon of Lodi, who was called Gregory the tenth,
not yet returned from his Voyage into Asia, whither he was sent by Innocent IV.
upon whose Election, Cardinal Giovanni del Porto made these Verses.

Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
The Cardinals at odds, and out of hope,
Archdeacon Tibald was created Pope.
Gregory endeavoring to make peace between the Genoans, and Venetians, who had
been at Wars one with another for several years together, went into France in
the year 1273. where he gave beginning to the Council of Lions; Philip King of
France was present at that Council, with an infinite number of Noble and
Learned persons, both French and English. He called four Bishops from Germany,
four from England, four from France, two from Spain: from Sicily, from the
Kingdom of the Church, Hungary, Dacia, Bohemia, Poland, Sweden, Spottiswood
Hist. of Chapter of Scotland. lib. 2.
Norway and Scotland, from each of these one. There were two Patriarchs,
fifteen Cardinals, five hundred Bishops, and one thousand mitred Prelates,
besides the King of France, the Emperor of Greece, and many other Princes.

1. In this Council the first proposition was for the Holy War, and for it they
decree, that a tenth part of all Benefices in Christendom (the privileged
Churches not excepted) should be paid for six years. That all Penitentiaries,
or Confessors should urge offenders to assist that holy business with their
wealth and riches: and that every Christian, without exception of Sex or
Quality, should pay a penny yearly during that space, under pain of
Excommunication.

2. For remedying abuses in the Church, it was ordained. Petr. Church Hist.
Cent. 13.
1. That no procurations to Bishops, nor Archdeacons should be paid, unless
they do visit the Churches in their own persons. 2. No Churchman should
possess more Benefices than one, and should reside at the Church he retains.
3. None of the Clergy shall without the Pope's license, answer the impositions
which shall be laid upon them by any Prince or State. 4. The mendicant Friars
shall be reduced to four Orders, the Minorites, Predicants, Carmelites, and
Hermites of St. Augustine, who shall continue in their present Estate, until
the Pope shall otherwise think good. 5. A prohibition was made, to admit or
advise any new order, besides these named. Here also was decreed the Union of
the Greek and Latin Church, and the peace betwixt the Princes of Christendom.

But many of these Statutes in a short time turned into smoke, pluralities
being of new dispensed, with the clause of non obstante, which then first came
in use. The Orders of Friars and Monks were restored one by one. The
Cistertians redeemed their liberty by payment of 500000 Marks.

The Bernardines paid 600000 Crowns, and other Orders made their composition.
Whereby it appears, that the Statutes which were enacted, were only devised
to raise sums of Money, and not of any purpose to redress their abuses. This
Pope advanced the Dominicans highly, even to the wearing of red hats.

In that Council of Lions, Canons were made for the manner of electing the
Pope: for from Sylvester's time, unto this Gregory's Popedom, they were not
used to be shut up in a conclave; but if they were in Rome, the Electors met,
either in the Church of St. John Lateran, or of St. Peter, or in some other
place as occasion offered: if they were out of Rome, they met in the Cathedral
of the place where they were, or in some other Church more convenient. But the
Electors many times regarded not expedition in their Elections of the Pope,
Hist. of Cardinals part 3. lib. 1.
whilst they had liberty to command, to go and come as they thought fit,
therefore the invention of the conclave by Gregory, was rationally thought very
good and necessary.

There were likewise established by the said Gregory, several Laws and Orders
for the conclave, which were afterward by several Popes reduced into better
form, till that in process of time they were reduced into that which I shall
insert in this place.

The principal Laws which are usually observed in the Creation of the Pope.
1. That the Election be made in a proper and convenient place, and ordinarily
there where the last Pope dyed. If that cannot commodiously be done, let it be
made in that City, to whose jurisdiction that place does belong, provided it be
not under interdiction: for in that case they are to choose another City in the
same Diocese, or at least not far off, etc.

2. That after the death of the Pope, there shall be no discourse of the
Election of a Successor, till ten days be past, in which time the absent
Cardinals are to be expected; and the nine days obsequies for the deceased Pope
be celebrated with due respect, by all the Cardinals that are present in the
place.

3. That no absent Cardinal shall send his Vote in any manner whatsoever: by
which it is intended, they shall be deprived of their Voice as often as they
are absent from the Election.

4. That the nine days ceremony for the death of the Pope being over, the Mass
Dello Spirito santo solemnly said, and the prayer de eligendo Pontifice
recited, let all the Cardinals which are present in the palace, which shall be
called, the Conclave,, (which is to be in a secure place, close in all parts,
and well guarded) be shut in, with two or three servants only, for their
necessities. Let it not be lawful for any to enter after the conclave is shut
up, nor for any to come forth, except in the case of infirmity. And if any be
obliged to go in or out, let it be by consent of the whole College. Nor is
this conclave to have any Wall or partition, to distinguish one chamber from
another: but let there be certain traverses of Linen or cloth, to divide
their Lodgings, and they to be given to the Cardinals by lot, to prevent all
controversies for place.

5. That it be not only unlawful to Elect those that are absent, but that it be
not permitted to the Cardinals to choose any but one out of their own Order, and
of those that are present in the conclave.

6. If the Election be made in Rome, the place, the Gates and Doors of the
conclave shall be well guarded. The first Guards are to be kept by the
Soldiers of the Pope's ordinary guards. After them by the Barons of Rome, and
the Ambassadors of Princes, who are all to be sworn in the conclave it self
before it be shut up, That they will keep the said guards faithfully and
diligently; and last of all in the nearest places to the door of the conclave,
by the Bishops and Conservators of the City. If the Election be made out of
Rome, the guard of the conclave is to be made by the Temporal Lords of that
place, with the same formality and Oath as in Rome. The Guards are to prevent
any violence shall be offered to the freedom of the Cardinals Votes; to observe
what provisions come in, that there be no Letters conveyed in them: and if any
such be found, let them be consigned to the Marshal, to be kept till the
conclave be finished. That they take care that the Cardinals be not incommoded,
that they be all ready at their beck; and in case of delay, that they force
them (first with entreaties, and afterward with threats) to hasten the
Election. Those who are appointed to guard the conclave, are to preserve it
from all violence and disturbance.

7. That the Cardinals may not go out of the conclave, or adjourn their
Assembly to any other place for any person whatsoever, the Election being
ended, then they may go forth; if otherwise they should go out, let them be
forced back again by the guards of the conclave.

8. That those Cardinals who come after the conclave is shut, and before the
Election of the Pope, may enter and give their Voices as the rest. And that no
Cardinal can upon any occasion or pretense whatsoever (although he be
excommunicated) avoid being present at the Election, and giving his vote. But
all this is to be done by the consent of the whole College, and not of the
Governor of the conclave only.

9. That three days being past after their entrance into the conclave, if in
that time the Pope be not chosen, the Prelates and Barons of Rome, and such
others as are deputed guards to the conclave, may require an account of the
Cardinals transactions within, and restrain them of their variety of dishes,
reducing and lessening them by degrees, according as they find the Election
delayed.

10. That in the time of the Election, no person whatsoever, whether Secular or
Ecclesiastic, is to give, promise, or entreat, thereby to incline the hearts
of the Cardinals to their private desires, under pain of the Pope's
Excommunication, etc.

11. That no person be declared or elected Pope, if he has not first two whole
parts in three of the Voices of the Cardinals which are present in the
conclave, which Votes are to be given in secret, and afterward read publicly,
that all persons may take notice who is chosen.

12. That after the death of the Pope all Magistrates and Ecclesiastical
Offices are to cease, except such as are in the persons of the Cardinals, which
are perpetual. Which Offices are to remain unexecuted; all but the Office of
the chief Penitentiary, and the Chamberlain.

13. That there be a Governor of the conclave, that he be a worthy person, and
of good qualifications; that he be chosen by the body of the Cardinals before
they enter into the conclave; whose Office it shall be to give seasonable
orders, that things may go within as they ought to do, and that the Cardinals
may not want any thing convenient.

14. That an Oath be given to the Cardinals, to keep secret all the
transactions and argumentations of the conclave, relating to the Election; that
it be not permitted to any body to bear Arms in so sacred a place, nor to
revenge any injury whatsoever, either with words or deeds, but that they bear
all things patiently, and endeavor to avoid that mischief.

Thus Gregory being pleased with the Introduction of this form into the
conclave, dismissed the Council of Lions. Then he began his journey, in order
to his journey into Italy: and refusing to pass by Florence (lest he should be
obliged to take off the interdiction) he took his way toward Arezzo, in which
place he arrived, fell sick, and dyed, Anno 1276.

Afterward when the Emperor Paleologus dyed, the Grecian Priests would not
that he should be buried in any consecrated place, because he had consented in
the Council of Lions, to an Union of the Greek and Latin Churches.

Papon titre de la jurisdiction. temporelle. art. 1. Er titre de Dismes art. 9.
We read in an ordinance made by King Philip the third, Anno 1274. that if one
Layman sell unto another Layman, the Tithes which he has bought of a Clerk,
and there arise a suit about the price, the cognizance thereof does not belong
to the Ecclesiastical Judge. And it is one of the privileges of the Gallican
Church, that the Pope cannot by any Proviso's about Benefices or otherwise,
derogate from, or prejudice Lay foundations, and the Rights of the Lay-patrons
of the Realm.

There is also a decree of this King Philip, dated Anno 1274. which prohibits a
Bishop the granting the seizure of the moveable goods of a certain Clerk,
condemned in a personal Action, considering that those Goods were not within
his Episcopal Jurisdiction. There is also a prohibition to Ecclesiastical
Judges to cause any execution to be made of the immovable goods of any Clerk
condemned in a personal Action; because the immovable goods are out of his
Episcopal jurisdiction. According hereunto a certain Bishop of Paris was
declared not to be admitted into the Court, in a pretendure which he made of
the power of arresting certain Moneys belonging to a Clerk inhabiting in
certain Lands, subject to the jurisdiction Royal, and he was cast for
attempting it by an Arrest of Paris.

Jews, the eldest Son of King Philip dies, with apparent signs of poison.
Queen Mary; his Mother-in-Law, and Peter de la Broche (chief Chamberlain to the
King, and his Treasurer, being the Queens favorite) is accused for this Fact:
and being imprisoned he confesses the crime, and accuses the Queen, as having
poisoned Jews by her command. La Broche also is found guilty of Treason, by
his Letters having given Intelligence to the King of Castile of the Estate of
France, being then no friend to the Crown: for which he was hanged.

Mary denies the Fact by Oath. The King for want of proof sends a Bishop and an
Abbot to a Witch in Holland. They at their return absolve the Queen by her
report, but they free her not from the jealousy of the French, nor in the
King's conceit.

Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure, two learned Schoolmen, dyed Anno 1274. Jews,
Bishop of Toulouse, Son to Charles the second, King of Sicily, and Apulia, dyed
also.

After the death of Pope Gregory X. the first conclave was in Arezzo, where the
Pope dyed. The Guards lasted but one night: for the same night the Cardinals
entered, they agreed to choose Pietro Farantasio (a Burgundian and Dominican
Friar) Pope, who took upon him the name of Innocent V. Innocent was crowned in
Rome forty days after his Election.

After the death of Innocent, which happened in the year 1276. six months
exactly after his Election, Alexander V. who succeeded him, being created in
Rome, with all the formalites of the conclave, revoked the order established by
Gregory, concerning the affairs of the conclave, though in due form it had the
approbation of a general Council. Diverse other succeeding Popes were all
created according to the order observed before the time of Gregory X.

King Philip the third dies, having reigned fifteen years, and lived forty; of
his first Wife Isabel, he had Philip and Charles remaining. Philip, his eldest
Son was King of France after him. Charles was Earl of Valois, of Alanson; and
of Perch, Father to that Philip of Valois, who in his course shall succeed to
the Crown.

Friar John of Paris, a Doctor in Divinity, of the Order of predicants, wrote
about the year 1280.

Joann. Paris in Tract. de potest Regia and Papal. in pro.
In his Tract of the Royal and Papal power, he says, I am of opininion, that
truth it self has made a medium here, namely, that it is not utterly
impossible, that Clergymen have Dominion and Jurisdiction in Temporal matters;
but yet it belongs not unto them by reason of their profession, and as Christ's
Vicars, and the Apostles successors, but is convenient for them to have it by
the grant and permission of Princes, if so be they have bestowed it upon them
out of devotion, or if they have got it by other means. And in the eighth
Chapter he sets down this conclusion.

Whence it appears, that seeing Christ as Man, had no power nor jurisdiction in
Temporal matters, the Priest (be what he will) has not received any power over
them from Christ; inasmuch as he did not give unto them what he had not in
himself.

Philip the fair, now King of France was advised by the Princes and French
Barons, not to suffer the Pope to make any Ordinances belonging unto his
Kingdom, Du. Tillet en Padvis sur les libertez del eglise Gallicane p. 5.
without the Council of him and his, nor any new and unwonted thing to be
brought in thither. So says Mr. John du Tillet in his advice concerning the
Liberties of the Gallican Church. And it is the very counsel which Eudeas Duke
of Burgundy gave him, which is yet to be seen in the Treasury of Chartres.

This King loved Justice and Learning, wherein he was well instructed for that
Age. His Wife Joan builded in her name that goodly College of Navarr.

Peter Morone an Hermit, was chosen Pope, and assumed the name of Celestine V.
a Pope little practiced in politic or Ecclesiastic affairs.

The Cardinals in short time (by reason of the many errors that he fell into
by his insufficiency for the Popedom) made several Instances to him, that he
would spontaneously be pleased to renounce the Papacy, and not expose the
Church to so many perils.

Hereunto they were stirred up by the instigation of Benedetto Gaetano (who was
afterward Boniface VIII.) Who was a Cardinal of great Learning and Experience,
but so extremely ambitious of the Papacy; that he left no Stone unturned to
compass his designs. And because he saw he might easily bring it about, if
Celestine would renounce, he persuaded Celestine to resign, laying it to him as
a scruple of conscience, telling him, that at the day of Judgment it would be
imputed to him, if any ill did happen to the Church. Gaetano likewise suborned
some of Celestine's friends, to make an hole, corresponding with that part of
the chamber in which the Pope's bed stood, from whence they cried all night
long with a most dismal voice, as if it had been the Judgment of Heaven,
Celestine, Celestine, lay down the Popedom for it is a charge too great for
your abilities. Celestine hereupon resigneth the Papacy in the sixth Month
after his creation, and returned to the Cell from whence he came.

The same day in which Celestine renounced, the Cardinals without the form of
the conclave, chose the said Gaetan with open Votes. He being declared Pope,
and having assumed the name of Boniface VIII. began his Reign with so much
insolence and Tyranny, that in a short time he gained the Title of Nero II.

A great Assembly meet in the City of Gramont, Anno 1296. Where Adolph the
Emperor, Edward King of England, the Duke of Austria, John Duke of Brabant,
the Earl of Juliers, and his Son; John Earl of Holland and Henuault, Robert
Earl of Nevers, William, Henry, and Guy of Flanders, unanimously resolve to
make War against King Philip. The color was to maintain Guy Earl of Flanders,
unjustly afflicted by Philip, who had violently taken and stoll'n away his
Daughter, and detained her against the right of Nations, refusing to restore
her to her Father, It was decreed, that Guy should begin by force, and be well
seconded by the Emperor, and the English.

But before they come to Arms, Pope Boniface, should make the first point by
the luster of his Authority. This Pope commands Philip by his Nuncio to
restore to the English and Flemmings what they demanded, and for not obeying,
he cites him to appear at Rome upon pain of Excommunication. Philip sends an
honorable Embassage to Rome, by the Archbishop of Rhemes, and the Earl of St.
Paul to lay open his right against the Deputies of the King of England, and the
Earl of Flanders, who were then at Rome to complain, as being wronged.

All parties being heard, Boniface decrees, that Philip should yield unto
Edward, and to Guy all they demanded both in Guienne and Flanders, charging the
Archbishop of Rhemes, to signify this Bull unto the King upon pain of
Excommunication for not obeying.

Philip being undaunted, prepares to defend himself, invades Flanders and
defeats the Flemmings, seizes upon all Flanders, and the Earl of Flanders is
forsaken by his confederates. Guy with his children and followers are
imprisoned in sundry places in France under sure guards. Philip getting
Flanders, and uniting it to the Crown of France. He comes to Gaunt, where he is
received as their Sovereign, appointing James of Chastillon Lord of Leuse, and
Conde, for Governor and Lieutenant General, and so returns to Paris.

The people of Flanders being oppressed, revolt from Philip. All the Cities (
Gaunt excepted) make an offensive and defensive League against King Philip, and
for their Earl's delivery: At Bruges the French are slain by their Hosts. The
Nobility join with the people.

Philip prepares an Army of 40000 Men, but even at his entry into Flanders,
returns again. His sudden retreat incensed this mutinous people more, and gave
courage to their Commanders. Philip seeing his Error, raises another Army of
40000 men, and puts them under the command of Robert Earl of Artois,
accompanied with the Constable of France, and many other great Personages.

Century XIV.
THe Armies forementioned meet near unto the Town of Courtray, in a place
called Groeming. The French were defeated. Of this great Army there hardly
escaped three hundred: not one Commander escaped, and very few Noblemen. There
were taken Robert Earl of Artois, General of the Army, the Constable of France,
James of Chastillon, Governor of Flanders, John King of Majorca, Godfrey of
Brabant, and his Son the Lord of Viezon, the Earls of Ewe, la March, Damartin,
Aumale, Auge, Tankerville, and many other great Personages. Twelve hundred
Gentlemen were slain by this enraged Multitude. All Flanders now revolted from
the French. This happened in the Year, 1302. on July 11. John of Namour is
their Governor in the absence of their imprisoned Earl.

All the threats of the King of England, and the Emperor now vanished away:
only Pope Boniface had Excommunicated King Philip, and interdicted his Realm in
the hottest of these Flemmish affairs, upon this occasion.

The Christians Estate was lamentable in the East, the Tartarians increased
daily. The Pope, Anno 1301. sent Boniface Bishop of Apamea unto King Philip,
requiring him to go into the Holy Land. When the Bishop saw no appearance of
obedience, he threatened the King, that the Pope would deprive him of his
Kingdom.

Whereupon the Bishop being charged of Arrogance and Treason, and cast into
Prison, the Pope sends to him again one Peter, a Roman born (Archbishop of
Narbon) commanding him to set the Bishop at liberty, and to take a Voyage
against the Infidels, and not to meddle with the Tenths of the Clergy. Philip
answered, his troubles at home hindered him from going into the East, and
constrained him to impose a Subsidy upon the Clergy: and he was willing to
dismiss the Bishop.

The Archbishop replied, that he was ignorant of the Pope's Authority, who was
not only the Father of Christian Souls, but also Sovereign Lord in Temporal
things.

And therefore by that Authority he did excommunicate him, declaring him
unworthy to reign, and his Realm forfeited to the Pope, to invest whom he
pleased.

Moreover, he brought another Bull directed to the Prelates and Noblemen of
France, whereby he acquitted all Frenchmen, and dispensed with them as to
their Oath of Allegiance to Philip. And cited all the Prelates and Divines of
the French Church to appear before him at Rome, disanulling all indulgences and
privileges granted to the French by any Popes his predecessors.

The Earl of Artois disdaining this affront, takes the Bull and casts it into
the fire. Philip was so born out by the Peers of France, that when he demanded
their advice, how he should demean himself, and whether he should put up that
wrong; they answered, That they were ready not only to spend their goods (which
they there wholly offered unto him for that end,) but also to expose their
persons even to death for him, not refusing any torments. Adding further, and
that more plainly by word of mouth, That if the King (which God forbid) would
suffer it, or connive at it, yet for their parts they would never endure it.

Mr. John Tillet Bishop of Paris speaking of this Fact in his French Chronicle,
The impudence of this man (says he of Boniface) was wonderful, who durst
affirm, that the Realm of France was a Benefice of the Papal Majesty. But I
think them (says he) the greater fools who dispute the point, whether the Pope
has this power or no: he put our France under an Interdict for the time, but
the Bishops took the King's part.

King Philip appealed from the usurpations and insolences of Boniface VIII. to
the Sea Apostolic then vacant (as he said) and to a future Council as Platina
says in his Life. Platina in Bonifac. 8.
The States of France disanulled Boniface's excommunication. Boniface by a
glosing Letter of his written unto the Bishops, endeavors to make them
approve his unjust proceedings against King Philip: where he says among other
things; Those who hold that Temporal matters are not subject to spiritual, do
not they go about to make two Princes? He complains also of the Parliament
holden at Paris, where it was enacted (says he) by underhand and begged
voices, that none should appear before him upon the summons of the Sea
Apostolic?

Math. Westminster. li. 2. sub. Ann. 301.
He complains also of the Report which was made to that Assembly by Mr. Peter
Flotte, whom he calls Belial, half blind in body, and quite in understanding.
This was the man, who being sent in Embassage to him by King Philip, to that
saying of his, [we have both the one power and the other] made this reply in
behalf of his Master, yours is verbal, but ours is real.

This Pope will have it necessary to salvation, to believe that all the
faithful people of Christ are subject to the Pope of Rome: and that he has
both the swords, and that he judges all men, and is judged of none. This
Boniface was the Author of the sixth book of the Decretals.

King Philip sends back the Pope's two Nuncio's to Rome, and forbids the
Prelates of France to go, or send any Money to Rome. This being done, Philip
raises new forces, to return into Flanders, and subdueth the Flemmings, but by
the instance of John Duke of Brabant, he makes peace with them upon strict
conditions. During this Treaty Guy Earl of Flanders, and his Daughter do both
dye. Robert, William, and Guy, Brethren, the Sons of the Earl Guy of Flanders
were freed with all the Prisoners. Isabel the Daughter of Philip is married to
Edward the second, King of England.

This War of Flanders had wasted above three hundred thousand Frenchmen in
eleven years, during the which it continued.

Adolph was deposed from the Empire by a Decree of the Electors, and Albert of
Austria was seated in his place, who pursuing him with War, slew him with his
own hand in an encounter near unto Spire.

Albert being chosen and installed Emperor, Boniface presently seeks to win
him against King Philip. He proclaims him Emperor, and invests him King of the
Realm of France, giving him both the Title and Arms, and taking occasion to sow
division in the heart of the Realm by means of the Clergy, who by reason of
their Revenues had great power in the State. He also wrote Letters to Philip in
this manner.

Boniface Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to Philip King of Frenchmen.
Fear God, and observe his Commandmens. We Will thee to understand, that thou
art subject unto us both in Spiritual things, and in Temporal; and that it
belongs not to Thee to give any Prebend or Benefice. If thou have the keeping
of any of them being vacant, thou must reserve the profits of them to the
Successors. If Thou have given any, we judge thy gift to be void, and do
revoke all that has been done. And whosoever believes otherwise, We judge
them Heretics.

Given at Lateran, the fourth of the Nones of December, in the sixth year of
our Popedom.

Unto this Letter of the Pope, King Philip makes Answer in manner as follows.

Philip, by the Grace of God, King of France, to Boniface, calling himself the
Sovereign Bishop, little or no health. Let thy foolishness know, that in
Temporal things we are subject to no Man, and that the Gifts of Prebends and
Benefices made, and to be made by Us, were and shall be good, both in time past
and to come: and that We will defend manfully the possessour of the said
Benefices, and We think them that believe or think otherwise, fools and madmen.

Given at Paris the Wednesday after Candlemas, Anno 1301.

After these and other Writings had passed to and fro, between the French King
and the Pope, within a year and an half after, the King summoneth a Parliament,
sending down his Letters to his Sheriffs and other Officers, to summon the
Prelates and Barons of the Realm unto the said Court of Parliament according to
the Tenor of the King's Letters Patents.

Then William Nagaretta, Knight and professor of the Laws, Vid. Fox Act and
Monum. Tom. 1. p. 448.
made a large Declaration and appeal against Pope Boniface VIII. at Paris
before the King and his Council.

He taxes Boniface to be an Intruder into the Papacy, that entering not in at
the door, he is to be judged a Thief and a Robber. He declares him to be guilty
of many Heresies, and to be an horrible Simoniack. He charge him with cursing
and blasphemy, a blood-thirsty man, a destroyer of the Churches, one that is
very greedy after gold, and rooted in all sins, that he is the Abomination of
Desolation, described by Daniel the Prophet.

Then he thus speaks to King Philip, I beseech you, my Lord and King, that you
would declare thus much to the Prelates, Doctors, People and Princes, your
Brethren in Christ, and chiefly to the Cardinals and all Prelates, and call a
Council. In the which, when the aforesaid Boniface is condemned by the worthy
Cardinals, the Church may be provided of a Pastor. And I beseech and require
the said Cardinals by you, and I require them and the Church of God, that this
wicked Man being put in prison, the Church of Rome may be provided of a Vicar,
which may minister those things that shall appertain, until the Church of God
be provided of a Bishop, utterly to take away all occasion of Schism.

After this protestation of Nagaretta, immediately ensued the Appeal of the
King, pronounced and published against the said Boniface. The manner and form
is set down at large by Mr. Fox, Act and Monum. Tom. 1. p. 449. 450. This was
done, Anno 1303.

Indictione prima, June 13. on the 14th. day of the same Month of June, the
aforesaid King Philip being present, and also the Lords, Arch Bishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, and many witnesses being present, William of Plesiano Knight,
objected, propounded, affirmed, and read out of a certain paper which he held
in his hand diverse Articles against Pope Boniface, to the number of thirty,
charging him with denying the immortality of the Soul, with asserting that
Whoredom is no sin, charging him with Witchcraft, Simony, Sodomy, Murder,
Oppression, Bribery, Adultery, and many other detestable sins.

These things being thus read and done, King Philip answered, and his Appeal is
as follows.

We Philip by the Grace of God, hearing and understanding the Objections
propounded by our beloved and faithful Knight, W. of Nagaretta against
Boniface, having now the Regiment of the Romish Church, etc. We earnestly
beseech and require, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, you Archbishops, and other
Prelates here present, as Children of the Church, and pillars of the Faith,
that you would labor the calling and assembling of a Council; in which We
intend to be personally present, etc.

Then the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, answered the premises,
provoked and Appealed, etc. And made an Appellation, Agreement, and
protestation, as was contained in a certain paper, there openly and plainly
read, in Tenor and Form following.

We Archbishops of Nicosen, Remen, Senorem, Narbon, and Bishops of Landviren,
Belnacen, Carolacen, Antisidore, Meldimen, Nurmen, Chartres, Orleans, Anjou,
Constance, with many others. And we Abbots of Clugny, Proemonstrator of the
greater Monastery of the Court of St. Denis in France, St. Victor, St.
Genoveue, St. Martin, etc. and Friar Hugh, Visitor of the Houses of the Order
of Knights of St. John of Jerusalem in France, and the Father Prior of St.
Martin in the fields, etc. Hearing these things which were said, propounded,
and objected yesterday, and to day by you the Lords, Earls, and Will. aforesaid,
against Pope Boniface VIII. etc. We answer you, our Lord and King, and you, our
Lords, Earls, and William, that (the Honor and Reverence of the Holy Romish
Church salved in all points) we agree to your due Request in this behalf for
the calling of the Council, and are ready to assist to the calling together of
the said Council, according to the Decrees of the Holy Fathers, and to the
lawful Orders of the Canons, not intending by any means to make parties of this
matter, nor to stick to any that makes parties. And lest we should be hindered
by any means by the said Boniface, by Excommunication, suspension,
interdiction, deposing, deprivation, etc. And that we may sit in the same
Council to judge and do all other things that belong to the Office of Prelates;
that We, our friends, our subjects, Parish-Churches, etc. may remain safe. We
provoke, and Appeal in Writing to the aforesaid Council that is to be gathered,
and to him that shall be the true and lawful highest Bishop, and to him or them
to whom of right we should Appeal, and do earnestly require our Appellations:
committing us, our Parish-Churches, and them that stick to us; our state and
theirs, etc. to the godly defense of the aforesaid Council, and of him that
shall be true and lawful highest Bishop. And we protest to renew this
Appellation, where, when, and before whom it shall be thought meet.

This was done at Paris, at Lupara, in the Chamber of the King, many Lords, and
Earls, Knights and Clerks, and others being Witnesses.

After these things thus in the Parliament decreed, and agreed; the Prelates
consulting with themselves what to do in so doubtful a matter, and dreading the
Pope's displeasure for what was now done, to clear themselves to the Pope,
partly to certify him what was done, and partly also to admonish him what he
should do, sent this ensuing Letter to him, thus directed.

To their most Holy Father, and dearest beloved Lord, Boniface, the chief
Bishop of the Holy Romish Church, and the Universal Church: his humble and
devout Archbishops, Abbots, Priors, Conventuals, Deans, Provosts, Chapters,
Covents, and Colleges, of the Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, Regular and
Secular, of all the Realm of France, being gathered together, do offer most
devout kissings of your blessed Feet.
We are compelled with sorrow to signify unto your Holiness, that our most
dear Lord Philip by the Grace of God the noble King of France, Fox Act and
Monum. Tom. 1. p. 453. 454.
when we saw the Letters sealed and sent to him of late on your behalf by the
Cardinal of Narbo, your Notary, and by him were presented to him, and certain
others of his Barons, upon the perusing of these bloody Letters, being read
unto them sitting by him, both our Lord the King, and the Barons were highly
incensed. Then the King commanded to be called before him the other Barons then
absent, and us also to appear personally, etc. Being all thus called, and come
together, we stood before the King this Wednesday being the tenth of this
present April, in St. Mary's Church in Paris. There our Lord the King told us,
that it was signified to him (among other things) by the aforesaid Cardinal and
Letters, that for his Kingdom (which he and his Ancestors hitherto do
acknowledge they hold of God only) now ought in Temporal things to be subject
unto you, and hold of you.

And ye have called to appear before you the Prelates and Clergy of the said
Realm, for the correcting of such wrongs as ye pretend to be done to
Ecclesiastical persons, both Regular and Secular abiding within the Realm and
elsewhere, etc.

Ye are charged also for reserving, and wilful ordering of Arch-Bishopricks,
Bishoprics, and bestowing of great Benefices of the Realm upon Strangers,
whereby the decay of God's Worship has ensued, the pious wills of the godly
Founders, are defrauded of their godly purpose, the poor of this Realm are
without their accustomed Alms, the Realm is impoverished, and the Church is in
danger of Ruin, the Churches being unserved, whilst the Prophets are taken
away, the fruits of those that serve them being given unto strangers.

Also He complained of new Taxes laid upon the Churches, with unmeasurable
exactions, by which the general State of the Church is changed, etc.

Therefore he required us all, both Prelates and Barons to ordain wholesome
things, for the easing of the aforesaid grievances, and for redressing the
Realm and the French Church: and therefore we should regard to be ready with
counsel to help in season (as we are bound by the duty of fidelity) in these
things.

Then the Barons having debated together on these matters, coming to our Lord
the King, and thanking him for his laudable purpose, answered with one voice,
that for those things they were not only ready to offer to spend their goods,
but also to yield their persons unto death: adding; that if the King would
suffer these things, yet they would not.

Then our answer being demanded, we said, that we would not offend against the
liberty of the Realm, nor by any means innovate things contrary to the King's
honor in that behalf.

We exhorted him to keep the bond of Unity, which has continued until now,
betwixt the Holy Romish Church, and his predecessors; but when we were told,
that if any Man were of a contrary mind, from thenceforth he should be
manifestly counted an Enemy of the King and the Realm; we answered, that we
would help our Lord the King with due counsel and Aid, for the preserving of
his person, and of the Laws and Liberties of the said Realm, like as we are
(certain of us) by the duty of Allegiance bound to him, which hold of him
Dukedoms, Earldoms, Baronies, Fees, etc. by the form of the Oath as all others
do. Yet we requested the King that seeing we were bound to obey your Holiness,
he would suffer us to go according to the Tenor of your aforesaid calling.
Then it was answered on the behalf of the King and Barons, that in no case they
would suffer us to go out of the Realm.

Then we considering of so great an anger, and trouble so jeopardous: and also
what things are attempted against Churches and Churchmen, to spoil their Goods
and Riches, with jeopardy of life; seeing that the Laity do now abhor the
obedience of Clerks, and have taken courage to condemn the Ecclesiastical
censure and process, etc. We thought good in this point of greatest necessity
to run with sighs and tears to the Wisdom of your Holiness, beseeching your
Fatherly mildness, that some wholesome remedy may be provided in the premises,
by which the sound profitable agreement, and mutual love, which has continued
so long a time betwixt the Church, the King and the Realm, may be maintained in
that old sweet Concord, the State of the French Church may continue in godly
and quiet peace, and that ye would vouchsafe to foresee how to withstand the
dangers and offenses aforesaid, that we and our States may be provided for by
the aforesaid Commandment of your calling, by the study of your Apostolical
Wisdom, and Fatherly Live. The Almighty preserve your Holiness to his Holy
Church a long time.


In the next year, viz. 1304. about the Nativity of our Lady, came a number of
Harnessed Soldiers well appointed, sent partly by the French King, partly by
the Cardinals of Columna (whom the Pope before had deposed) unto the Gates of
Arvagium, or Anagni, where the Pope had hid himself. There Sciarra Colonna,
Brother to the aforesaid Cardinals, after many affronts done to his person and
those that were about him, and the plundering him of all his Wealth and Riches,
carried him to Rome, where at the end of 35 days he dyed of Anger, in the ninth
year of his Pontificate: so that some took occasion to say, he entered like a
Fox, governed like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog, he dyed October 11.

The Cardinals went into the conclave the 21 of the same Month, and the next
morning, they elected the Cardinal d'Ostia, called Fra. Nicholas di Treviso, of
the order of the preachers, who took upon him the name of Benedict II. but he
dyed in Perugia, in the eighth month of his Pontificate, in which City the
whole Court being at that time, it was resolved a new Pope should be chosen:
but they trifled away their time in disputes and clamours for two months.

The reason was, the Cardinals were divided into three factions: one stuck
close to Charles King of Naples, who would have a Pope according to his way:
another was for the principal Barons of Rome, and a third stood firm to the
interest of Philip King of France, who had sent no small sums of Money and
other presents to Cardinal Pietro Colonna, to the end, that with James his
Uncle, a Cardinal of the same name, they might keep up the interest of France.

At length Cardinal Peter corrupted such with his gold, as he knew were
covetous of it, feeding them on with promises besides, so that part of the
Cardinals being fast in those Chains, and part of them intimidated with the
threats of the Perugians now in Arms, Cardinal Colonna proposing the Bishop of
Bordeaux, who was a great lover of the King of France, he was chosen by common
consent, and a Courier sent post to him (who was then at his Bishopric) to
know what name he would carry: he replied, he would not change the name he was
baptized with, which was Clement, and so he was published accordingly to the
people. and called Clement the fifth.

After publication in the usual place, the Cardinals dispatched several
messengers to the new Pope, to entreat him to hasten his Journey into Italy.

Il. Cardinalismo p. 234.
But the Pope being instructed by the King of France, made answer, that the
Flock was to follow the Shepherd, and not the Shepherd the Flock, commanding
the Cardinals immediately to repair to him in France, and particularly in the
City of Poictiers, as they also did.

This Clement was the first of seven French Popes, which held the Sea one after
another, unto Urban VI. under whom the Italians recovered it again with much
trouble. These seven Popes were Clement V. John XXII. Benedict XII. Clement VI.
Innocent VI. Urban V. Gregory XI.

Clement V. being chosen Pope, he came to Lions, where King Philip received
him, accompanied with the Kings of England and Arragon in great pomp.

The Pope was on Horseback, and the King with his two Brethren on Foot, holding
the Reigns of his Horse. He was crowned in the Temple of St. Justus, where they
had built a great Theater for so goodly a spectacle. But the press of people
was so great, that the Scaffold brake, so that the multitude sell one upon
another. The Pope; King, Princes and Noblemen were all on an heap, and the
Scaffold fastened to an old Wall pulled it down. The King was hurt in the Head,
the Pope in the Foot, and the Duke of Britain slain, with many Noblemen, and
multitudes of the common people, that were smothered under these ruins. The
Pope's Crown fell from his Head into the press, where he lost a Carbuncle,
valued at six thousand florins of Gold.

Thus this feast gave no cause of joy, but was famous to posterity by this
notable accident, and by the translation of the Pope's seat from Rome to
Avignon, Anno 1305. unto the year 1379. under Urban VI. viz. the space of
seventy four years.

This unlucky pomp being ended, Clement created many French Cardinals (and not
one Italian) and removed the Court presently to Avignon. He avouched openly to
keep a Concubine, the Daughter of Count de Fuxa; he sent three Cardinals with
Senatorial power to govern Rome and Italy. He ordained, that none should use
the Title, or exercise the power of Emperor, until he were confirmed by the
Pope.

In the year 1307. a Parliament was summoned against Pope Clement by King
Philip, touching temporal jurisdiction belonging to Princes, and Ecclesiastical
belonging to the Church. Forasmuch, as Pope Clement V. extolled himself above
all Princes, as in other Countries, so also in France he extended his usurped
jurisdiction above the Princely Authority of the King, claiming to himself full
government of both the States, as well Secular as Ecclesiastical; the King
therefore directs his Letters mandatory to the Prelates and Barons of the
Realm of France, to assemble themselves together at Paris in the Year
aforementioned in the beginning of December.

At the day specified in those Letters the Prelates and Clergy assembled
themselves before the King at his palace in Paris, Fox Act and Monum. li. 2. p.
461. 462.
where after due reverence done unto the King, there sitting in his own person
with his Barons and Council about him, a certain wise and noble Lord, Peter de
Cugneriis, one of the King's Council, stands up, and makes an Oration before
the Parliament in the King's behalf. His Oration is divided into two parts. 1.
He shows, that obedience and reverence is due unto the King. 2. That there
ought to be a difference betwixt the jurisdiction of the Clergy and Laity, so
that spiritual matters should be defined and ordered by the Prelates and
spiritual men; and Temporal causes ruled and determined by the King, his
Barons, and Temporal men.

All which he proved by many reasons, both of Fact and Law. Articles against
the Clergy of France.
His Oration being ended, he repeated certain words in the French Tongue, which
imported, that the King's Will and pleasure was in some points to renew the
Temporal State and jurisdiction: and therewith he exhibited a certain Bill in
French, whereof also he gave a Copy to the Prelates, containing sixty five
Articles, which may be read at large in Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1.
p. 462. 463. 464. 465.

After he had spoken, the Prelates required to have time to answer thereunto:
whereupon the Friday next ensuing was appointed for the same, on the which day
the Bishop Edven, and the Archbishop of Senon Elect, in the name of the whole
Clergy, answered for them all be-before the King, holding his Parliament on
that day at Vicenas. They endeavor to prove, that both the Temporal and
Spiritual jurisdictions are compatible, notwithstanding the distinction of them
one from the other. Then they pro^^^d, to prove that a person Ecclesiastical,
which has Jurisdiction Spiritual, may also have Temporal jurisdiction, and
that the Jurisdictio^ Temporal may be in an Ecclesiastical person, they allege
for this the example of Melchisedeck, who was both King and Priest; and of
Samuel, who was both Priest and Prophet, and for a long time appointed Judge
over the people in Temporal matters. They assert also that Christ by his humane
nature had both powers, showing that he was a Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck: and that he had both in his vesture, and on his Thigh written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Many other places they cite out of the new
Testament.

Then they offer to prove it by the Civil Law, and by reason, and many places
in the Canon Law: they show, what privileges of this nature had been granted
to the Clergy by Charles the Great, King of France, by Jews the second, and by
other Kings of France, which privileges they offered to show. Moreover they
assert, that whatsoever things be offered up to the Church. and are converted
to the dominion and property of the same, be God's, and appertain unto him,
forasmuch as they be said to be dedicated and sanctified by him. But this
jurisdiction which is diversely converted to the Dominion and property of the
French Church, is God's, and therefore to be reserved to and for him.

They urge the King to consider, that at what time he was crowned he swear only
these things following.

1. That he would defend and maintain the Canonical Law, privilege and Justice
granted to the Bishops, and the Church, and (as much as in him lay) to enlarge
and amplify the same. 2. Also that by his Arbitriment all Christian people at
all times should keep the true peace of God and his Church. 3. That he should
forbid to all Nations, all kinds of sacriledges, spoilings and iniquities, and
that in all kind of Judgments he should will and command equity and mercy. 4.
That throughout his whole Territory and jurisdiction, he should labor to
exterminate and cut off from the Church, the noted Heretics.

They argue also, that by the possessions of the Church, many Brethren and
Kinsmen of the French Nobility be maintained: Ergo, such possessions are not to
be grudged at.

And because a Bill of many Articles was exhibited, whereof part did infringe
the whole Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to the defense thereof (they said) they
would stand to the death.

On the next Friday following, being December. 29. the Prelates assembled
themselves again together at the King's Palace in Paris, where the Lord Peter
Bertrand, Bishop of Eduen, spoke openly before the King, sitting with his
Counselors, and Barons about him. In his speech he extolled the King's
person, and his miraculous attaining to the Crown of France, adding, that he
ought to be the Champion and Defender of the Faith, all which he proved in few
words by many reasons and Authorities. Afterward he touched those propositions
which were propounded by the aforesaid Lord, Peter de Cugneriis.

He besought the King for his Souls health to maintain the rights and liberties
of the Church; desiring him to consider what commodities he daily receives by
the Church: and that his Church never failed him yet when he had need of the
Laity; showing the dangers and examples of them who did to the contrary.
Further, he entreated the King, to weigh how entirely his Lord the Pope does
love his person and Realm.

After this, in the said Session, the aforesaid Bishop of Edven, answered
particularly to the Articles exhibited by the Lord Peter in writing, to the
King and Parliament. Which because they touch more the subtilty of the Law, and
styles of the Courts, than are necessary to this our History: and because I
would not burden this Treatise with them, little profit being contained in
them, I have here purposely for brevities sake omitted them.

The next Friday after this; the Prelates assembled at Vicenas before the King
to hear their answer: Where the aforesaid Peter de Cugneriis (being Prolucutor
for the King) said that their King was to keep the rights of the Church and
Prelates, which they had by Law, and by good and reasonable custom: where
between the first and second conclusion he went about to prove, that the
cognition of civil causes ought not to appertain to the Church; for that such
things were Temporal, and ought to pertain to the Temporalty, as Spiritual
things to the Spiritualty. And besides his other reasons, he alleged the 86.
Distinct. declaring, that for this intent, the Clerks Crowns were first shaven,
in sign that they should be free from all worldliness, and forsake all Temporal
things. He added, that their Lord and King was ready to hear them, who would
instruct him of any custom, and those customs which were good and reasonable he
would observe.

The Bishop Edven answered for all the Prelates, saying that the words of the
Lord Peter engendered darkness and obscurity, and might give occasion to the
Temporal Lords to break and infringe the Rites and Customs of the Church. As to
that which was spoken, concerning the shaving of the crown, it was answered,
that the crown did betoken rule and excellency; and the shaving did signify,
that they ought not to heap up Temporal things; so as to apply their hearts
thereunto; but that the Temporal things ought to be subject to them, and not
they to the Temporalty. After diverse other speeches, the said Bishop concluded,
and besought the King, that it would please his Grace to give them a more plain
and comfortable Answer, and that they might not go away sad and pensive out of
his presence, whereby occasion might be given to the Laity to impugn the Rites
and Liberties of the Church. In the end it was answered to them in the behalf
of the King, that his mind and intent was not to impugn the Customs of the
Church.

The Sunday following the Bishops assembled themselves again before the King at
Vicenas, where the Bishop of Senon in the name of all the Prelates gave humble
thanks for it: and he besought that such Proclamations as were made to the
prejudice of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction might be revoked and repealed.
Hereunto the King himself answered with his own mouth, that they were not
published at his commandment, neither did he know of them, nor ratify them.

Moreover, the Bishop proposed, that those abuses which the Temporalty
complained of, should be so ordered and reformed, that every man should be
content therewith. Finally he besought the King, that he would give them a
fuller and more comfortable answer. Then answered the Lord Peter in the name of
the King. That if the Prelates and Bishops would see reformation of those
things which were to be amended (about which he would take respite betwixt this
and Christmas next following) his Majesty would innovate nothing in the mean
time. And if in the aforesaid space they would not correct and reform what was
amiss, his Majesty would appoint such order and remedy, that should be
acceptable both to God and his Subjects. Then the Prelates had leave of the
King to depart and went ho^^e.

A brief recapitulation of Bishop Edven's answer, with certain notes in answer
to his Popish reasons, may be read in the Acts and Monuments of the Church, p.
476. 477.

The Ecclesiastical Judges have since that time attempted to usurp this
jurisdiction over the Laity in case of Adultery, etc. but the complaint which
was made of it by Peter de Cugneriis, In Libr. compos. super facto Praelator.
on the behalf of the King's Judges (which we may read at this day extant) did
put an end to that trouble. And always whatsoever the Clergy attempted to
meddle in such matters, they have been prohibited by the Parliaments upon
Appeals, as from abuses, which have been put in against their decrees.

Pope Clement had promised unto King Philip to abolish the memory of Pope
Boniface VIII. and to anull all his Acts, but by advice of Cardinal Pratensis,
he delayed unto a general Council, and this he summoned to be held at Vienna in
France, Naucler. p. 872. and 878.
where the King required from the Pope the performance of his promise. The
Council did acknowledge Boniface to have been a lawful Pope: but they did
declare all his Acts against the King to have been unjust, and that none of
them should be prejudicial to the King, or to his Successors. In this Council
the Pope propounded the aid of the Christians in Syria, the punishment of the
Templars, and the reformation of the Church: Wars were proclaimed, and
Indulgences were offered in these words. We Will, that the punishment of Hell,
be no way laid upon him, who is signed with the Cross, granting also unto every
signed person power to pull three or four Souls out of Purgatory at their
pleasure. Hereat the Divines of Paris were offended, because it was written in
the same Bull, We command the Angels to carry the absolved Soul into Paradise.
It was then a received Article, that the Pope may command the Angels as his
Sergeants. Pope Clement granted great Indulgences to such as could not go, but
could find Money for that use; Out of an old French Chronicle.
so as he that gave a penny, was to have one year's pardon: he that gave twelve
pence twelve year's pardon: and he that would give as much as would maintain a
man going over Seas, a plenary pardon for all. The Pope appointed certain men
whom he put in trust for the receiving of this Money. Unspeakable were the sums
of Money that were given for the purchasing these pardons for five years
together. At the end whereof, when the good men were ready to go, and perform
what they had promised and vowed, the business was broke off, but the Pope kept
the Money, the Marquess his Nephew had a share of it, and King Philip the fair,
and his three Sons, who had taken up the cross to go thither in person, Edward
King of England, and other noble persons stayed at home.

In this Council it was ordained, that the feast of Corpus Christi should be
kept, with many Indulgences granted unto them who should celebrate this Feast.

In the same Council Pope Clement V. set forth a Book of Papal decrees, called
Liber Clementiarum, which was received, Symson Eccles. Hist. in Cent. 14.
allowed and ratified by this Council. Nauclerus says, that Clement before his
death repented the setting out of this Book, and commanded it to be burnt. Yet
notwithstanding the succeeding Popes, and particularly John XXII. confirmed and
Authorized the said Book again, together with the Decretals of Gregory and
Boniface, because these Books highly advanced the Sea of Rome, exempting the
Bishop of Rome from subjection to general Councils, and attributing power to
him to receive or reject the Emperor after he is chosen, comparing the Pope to
the Sun, and the Emperor to the Moon. Finally, counting it a thing necessary
unto Eternal Life, that every person be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

It was also ordained, that Schools should be erected, and foreign Tongues
should be learned, namely, the Hebrew, Chaldaick, and Arabic Languages. It was
also ordained, that the name and remembrance of the Templars should be rooted
out: which decree was put in execution by all Christian Princes.

Know then, Tho. Fuller. supplem. Hist. sacribelli ca. 1.
that about nineteen years after the Christians had lost all in Palestine, by
the cruel deed of Pope Clement V. and foul: Fact of Philip the fair, King of
France, the Templars were finally extirpated out of all Christendom.

Pope Clement having long sojourned in France, had received many great
courtesies from King Philip; yea he owed little less than himself to him. At
last Philip requested of him a boon, great enough (says my Author) for a King
to ask, and a Pope to grant, namely, all the Lands of the Knights Templars in
France, forfeited by reason of their horrible Heresies, and licentious living.
The Pope was willing to gratify him in some good proportion for his favors
received, and being thus long the King's Guest, he gave him the Templars Lands,
and Goods to pay for his entertainment.

On a sudden all the Templars in France are clapped in prison, damnable sins were
laid to their charge; as sacrificing of Men to an Idol they worshipped;
roasting of a Templar's Bastard, and drinking his Blood, spitting upon the
cross of Christ, conspiring with Turks and Saracens against Christianity, they
were charged with Sodomy, Bestiality, with many other Villainies out of the Road
of humane corruption, and as far from Man's Nature as God's Law.

The sole witness against them was one of their own Order, a notorious
Malefactor, who at the same time being in prison, and to suffer for his own
offenses, condemned by the Master of their Order, sought to prove his
Innocence, by charging all his own Order to be guilty. And he swore most
heartily to whatsoever was objected against their Order. Besides, many of the
Templars being brought upon the rack, confessed the accusations to be true,
wherewith they were charged. Hereupon all the Templars were most cruelly burned
to death at a stake through all France, with James, the Grand-Master of their
Order.

Many men accounted not the Templars Malefactors, but Martyrs. First, because
the witness was unsufficient, a Malefactor against his Judge; and Secondly,
they bring tortured men against themselves. And a confession extorted upon the
Rack (say some) is of no validity.

But being burned at the stake, they denied it at their death, though formerly
they had confessed it.

A Templar being to be burned at Bordeaux, and seeing the Pope and King Philip
looking out of a Window, Hospin. de Orig. Monach. ca. 18. fol. 193.
cried unto them, Clement thou cruel Tyrant, seeing there is no other among
mortal men, to whom I should appeal for my unjust Death, I cite Thee together
with King Philip to the Tribunal of Christ, the just Judge who redeemed me,
there both to appear within one year and a day, where I will lay open my cause,
and Justice shall be done without any by-respect. In like manner, James
Grand-Master of the Templars, though by piecemeal he was tortured to death,
craved pardon of God, and those of his order, That forced by extremity of pain
upon the rack, and allured with hope of life, he had accused them of such
damnable sins whereof they were innocent. True it is, they were generally cried
up for innocents.

But Pope Clement and King Philip, were within the time prefixed summoned by
death to answer to God for what they had done. Besides, King Philip missed of
his expectation, and the morsel fell besides his Mouth, the Lands of the
Templars which were first granted to him as a portion for his youngest Son,
being afterward by the Council of Vienne bestowed on the Knights-Hospitallers.

William Durand Bishop of Menda in Languedoc, being summoned by Clement V. to
the general Council at Vienne, to come and see what was fitting to be reformed
in the Church, made a Book de Consiliis, toward the beginning whereof he says.
It seems to be a thing considerable, and it is most expedient and necessary,
that before any thing else we should proceed to the correction and reformation
of such things as ought to be corrected and reformed in the Church of God, as
well in the head as the Members. And in the first Chapter of the third Book.
Verily, as concerning the Reformation of the Catholic Church, to bring it
about profitably and effectually, it seems expedient that it begin at the Head,
that is, at the Holy Church of Rome, which is the Head of all others. Then he
sets down in particular, such things as stood in need of reformation, notably
representing many abuses of the Sea of Rome that deserved to be corrected. But
for all his learned discourse there was nothing done therein in that Council,
Witness the Bishop of Panormo in his advice touching the Council of Basil. This
decree concerns the general Estate of the Church; and the matters belong to a
general Reformation, which may be hindered by a dissolution, as it was by the
dissolution of the Council of Vienne.

Durand further said in that Council, that the Court of Rome, and the College
of Cardinals, together with the Pope, would have a certain allowance of all
Bishops that are preferred there; it seems very requisite that this were taken
order with. For this error does much corrupt the Catholic Church, and the
common people: and the remedies which have been applied hitherto are quite
disregarded, inasmuch as the contrary is usually practiced in the Court of
Rome, as if it were no sin at all to commit Simony, or as if it were not all
one to give first, and then take, as first to take, and then to give.

The thing was taken into consideration at the Council of Vienne, so as they
were once advised, Joann. Andr. in Ca. inter coer. de offic. ordinar.
to allow the twentyeth part of all livings in Christendom to the Pope and his
Cardinals: but at last it was shifted off, without resolving upon any thing. A
Doctor of the Canon Law says, it was better for that, because their
covetousness is so unsatiable, that if that had been resolved upon, they would
have taken both.

This Bishop of Mende mentioned another abuse fit to be reformed. For, after he
had said, that every Bishop's jurisdiction ought to be preserved entire to
himself, he adds, That Ecclesiastical Benefices, which belong to the
collation and disposal of Bishops, are bestowed by the Sea Apostolic, and
others, even before they be void; and that not only in the Court of Rome, but
out of it; howbeit, the Bishops must give account of the cure, and of those
that execute them, whose Consciences they are utterly ignorant of, inasmuch as
they are none of their preferring. He would never have demanded the reformation
hereof, unless the abuse had been notorious.

Durand also persuaded the abolition of Fraternities, for two reasons, for
their dissoluteness, and for their conspiracy against superiors. It would be
also useful (says he) that Fraternities, Durand de modo celebr. concilii.
part. 2. tit. 35.
wherein both Clergy and Laity do nothing but pamper themselves with delicates,
live in dissoluteness and drunkenness, and busy themselves in diverse plots
against their superiors were abolished.

Then speaking of dispensations, he says, That the very Nerves of the Canons
and decrees are broken by the dispensations which are made according to the
style of the Court of Rome, Durand de modo celebr. council. Tit. 4. part. 1.
that they are against the common good. And citing the Authority of St. Hierom
writing to Rusticus Bishop of Narbon, he says, Since Avarice is increased in
Churches as well as in the Roman Empire, the Law is departed from the Priests,
and seeing from the Prophets.

He gives us the definition of a dispensation according to the Lawyers, which
he says, is a provident relaxation of the general Law countervailed by
commodity or necessity: that if it be otherwise used, it is not a dispensation
but a dissipation, that the question is now about the staining of the state of
the Church; that those who dispense upon unnecessary causes, do err. Lastly,
for matter of dispensation he would have that observed which Pope Leo said,
viz. That there are some things which cannot be altered upon any occasion:
others which may be tempered in regard of the necessity of the times, or
consideration of Men's Ages, but always with this Resolution, when there is any
doubt or obscurity, to follow that which is not contrary to the Gospel, nor
repugnant to the Decrees of Holy Fathers.

Concerning Exemptions, he further declares in that Council, That they give
occasion to the persons exempted to live more dissolutely, and more at their
liberty. That they take away the reverence and obedience which the exempted owe
unto their Prelates and Ordinaries, Durand de modo celebr. council. general.
Tit. 5. part 1.
and make them think themselves as good men as the Bishops, and other their
superiors. That the correction and punishing of faults and excesses is hereby
hindered and brought to nothing; That they are prejudicial to the whole Church
Catholic inasmuch as the exempted cannot be judged but by the Pope; and he
cannot do it by reason of his remoteness from them; That they rob men of the
means of doing many good works in Religion; That they are cause of many
scandals. That those to whom they are granted abuse their privileges: That
they draw after them the ruin of Monasteries, being rather a burden than an
honor or profit to them.

The same Durand maintains, that the Pope has no power to grant such
exemptions, considering that they overthrow the general order of the Catholic
Church, which proceeds from God, the Apostles, the Holy Fathers, and general
Councils, and which was approved and confirmed by Popes. That by this order,
all the Monasteries, Religious places, Abbots, Abbesses, Monks and Nuns, and
all other Religious and Ecclesiastical persons are immediately subject to the
government and guidance of Bishops within their Cities and Diocesses, as unto
their Superiors, the Apostles Successors, and such as have power and
Authority over them.

Pasquier says, there were these remarkable excellencies in William Durand: he
was a great Divine, a great Lawyer, Pasqu. Recherch. de la France li. 9. ca.
35. Leigh's Treat. of Relig. and Learning.
and an excellent Poet. He put out a Book entitled Speculum Juris, divided
into three great Tomes. As Lumbard among Divines is not usually quoted by his
own name, but by that of Master of the Sentences; so among the Lawyers he is
not quoted by the name of William Durand, but he is styled Speculator. He
delivered this Sentence about the Sacrament. Verbum audimus, modum Sentimus,
modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus.

I find this given as his Character. Gulielmus Durandus, omnis Divini Humanique
juris Consultissimus, Natione Vasco, Gallus Episcopus Mimatensis. Scripsit
Speculum juris, unde speculator est dictus. Multa profecto utilia author
monuit, and praecipue de Reformatione Papae and Cleri. Illyr. Catal. Test.
verit. lib. 16.

Jews Hutin, called Jews X. began to reign over France, Anno 1315. and dyed
Anno 1316. He left his Wife with child, who was delivered of a Son, which lived
but eight days. Jews left one Daughter named Jane, which was Queen of Navarr,
and Countess Palatine of Brie and Champagn.

Philip V. called the long, succeeded his Brother Jews, Anno 1316. He dyed in
the sixth year of his Reign, viz. Anno 1322.

Pope Clement V. dyed, Anno 1314. after whose death the Papacy stood void two
years and three months. The Cardinals at last did yield all their suffrages
unto Jacob de Ossa Cardurcensis, who afterward went up into the Papal Chair,
and said, I am Pope. This was John XXII. He was a Cistercian Monk, he sat in
that seat eighteen years.

This John believed, that the Souls do not enjoy the presence of God before the
day of Judgment. He sent two Preachers to Paris, the one a Dominican, the
other a Franciscan, to assert and maintain the same Heresy.

But one Thomas, an English Preacher, withstood the Pope; and the Pope threw
him into prison. Hereupon the French King summoned a Council unto his palace in
Vintiana Sylva, the whole Assembly subscribed against the Pope. Immediately the
King sent to Pope John to reform his error, and to set the Preacher at
liberty, which he did. Some say, that the Divines of Paris made him to recant
his error publicly.

Append. to. Martin. Polon. in Joann. 22. sub. Ann. 1317.
This John XXII. erected the Church of Toulouse in France to an Archbishopric,
divided the Diocese of Toulouse into six Bishoprics, the Bishops whereof
should be suffragans to the Archbishop of Toulouse; and turned six Villages
into Cities, viz. Montauban, Rieux, Lombez-Abbey, St. Papoul, Lavaur, and
Mirepoix. He created two Bishoprics; within the Arch Bishopric of Narbon: the
first at Limoux, whose Seat he translated to Alet not long after: the second in
the Abbey of St. Pons, setting out their Diocesses. He divided also the
Bishopric of Alby into two, and created one at Castres.

He erected diverse others besides, which are reckoned up in particular by the
Author of the continuation to Martinus Polonus.

Clement V. predecessor to this Pope, had ordained, that Emperors by the
German Princes elected, might be called Kings of the Romans, but might not
enjoy the Title or right of the Empire to be nominated Emperors, without their
confirmation given by the Pope. Wherefore because Jews of Bavaria being chosen
Emperor used the Imperial dignity in Italy, before he was authorized by the
Pope, the said Pope John therefore Excommunicated the Emperor, who often
desired of him a Treaty of peace, which the Pope refused to hearken to. At the
same time diverse learned Men disallowed the doings of the Pope, as William
Ocham, whose transactions were afterward condemned by the Pope for writing
against that See: and Marsilius Pativinus, who wrote the Book entitled,
Defensor pacis, which was put into the hands of the said Emperor; wherein the
controversy of the Pope's unlawful jurisdiction in things Temporal is largely
disputed, and the usurped Authority of that See is set forth to the uttermost.
Some Writers say, that a great cause of the variance was, for that one of the
Emperor's Secretaries (unknown to the Emperor) had likened in (diverse of his
Letters) the Papal See to the Beast rising out of the Sea in the Apocalypse. At
length when the Emperor, after much suit made to the Pope at Avignon, could
not obtain his Coronation from him, he went to Rome, where he was received with
great honor; and both he and his Wife were both crowned by the consent of all
the Lords and Cardinals there; and another Pope was there set up, called
Nicholas V.

Not long after Pope John dies at Avignon, after whom succeeds Benedict XII.
Anno 1335.

This Man was as uncourteous to the Emperor as John had been, he renewed the
curses against him, bereft him of all Regal Dignity, and by his sentence
deprived him of the Dukedom of Bavaria. Hereupon the Emperor comes into
Germany, and assembleth the Princes, Dukes, Nobles, Bishops, and other learned
men in a Council at Franckford, where he caused an injunction to be dispatched,
wherein he affirmed the sentence pronounced against him unjust, and that his
Excommunication did no way bind him.

Wherefore he commanded upon great penalties, that no man should obey his
censures and interdictions in that behalf, which injunction caused great
alterations in Germany, especially among the Clergy, some holding with the
Emperor, others with the Pope.

Dantes, a man of profound Learning, at that time wrote a Book, called, The
Monarchy, wherein he favored the Emperor; for which he was afterward
condemned, and his Book held for Heresy. And other great men wrote Books and
Treatises, defending the Pope's supreme Authority.

Charles IV. Brother to Philip the long, succeeded in the Kingdom of France,
being the last Son of Philip the Fair. He dyed Anno 1328. having reigned six
years, leaving the Crown to the second royal Branch of Capets, whereunto the
order of the fundamental Law did lawfully call them.

Philip the Hardy had left two Sons, Philip the fair, and Charles Earl of
Valois; of whom it is said, that he was the Son of a King, Brother to a King,
Uncle to a King, Father to a King, and yet no King. Philip the Son of Charles
of Valois is saluted and proclaimed King of France, and anointed and crowned at
Rhemes according to the usual custom.

Near the beginning of his Reign, De Serres Hist. in vit. Philip. de Valois.
the Courts of Parliament and all the Sovereign Judges (assembled from all the
Provinces) made a general complaint against the Clergy of France, accusing them
of sundry abuses, and namely that against the right of their charges they
intermeddled with the politic jurisdiction. The suit was vehement, and famous
for the greatness of the parties. The King to reconcile this quarrel, calls a
general Assembly of his whole Realm at Paris. The cause was pleaded before him
with great liberty by Peter de Cugneriis (this is He whom in derision they call
M. Peter Cugnet, who is in the great Temple in Paris, noted with a little
Monkey's head, placed betwixt two pillars to put out the Candles, being odious
by reason of his pleading) and as coldly defended by Peter Bertrand, both
famous Advocates in those times. The issue was doubtful, and Philip seriously
exhorted the Prelates to reform themselves; and in reforming the abuse to avoid
these popular complaints, refering the matter to a further hearing.

This Pope Benedict took from the Emperor the Senatourship of Rome: he first
took upon him to usurp the presentiments of all Bishoprics. He abridged many
unlearned men of Priesthood: He reformed many Sects of Monks: He commanded that
all his Chaplains should lie in one Dormitory together, and should have no
other Revenues than for Diet and Apparel: He published certain Acts against the
Dominicans, he kept diverse Concubines. And leaving great store of Treasure to
the Church, he dyed Anno 1342. of whom these verses were made.

Iste fuit vero Laicis mors, vipera Clero,
Devius a vero, turba Repleta mero.
Clement VI. born in Lemonia, by profession a Benedictine, called before Peter
Rogers, being Abbot of Fisca, succeeded Benedict at Avignon. This Man
Excommunicated all the Princes, Lords, and Bishops that consented to the doings
of Jews the Emperor. He made Avignon part of St. Peter's patrimony. He
ordained, that the Jubilee should be kept every fiftyeth year, after the manner
of the Jews, and so it was kept at Rome, Anno 1350.

Now there were great Wars in France, between Edward III. King of England, and
the King of France.

Robert a Frenchman by name and Nation, a Franciscan by profession, the longer
he was in that Order, he loved the Friars the worse. A Treatise in his name is
Printed with the Prophecies of Hildegardis.

Pope Clement VI. sent a Letter to the King of England in behalf of the
Frenchmen, whilst he lay at the siege of Calais, which siege he continued from
the third of September, Anno 1346. till the third day of August next ensuing,
upon which day it was yielded up to the said King Edward, and subdued unto the
Crown of England.

The King of England returns an answer to the aforesaid Letter of the Pope.
Then by the intercession of two Cardinals, Ambaldus and Stephanus, a Truce was
concluded betwixt England and France for a time.

In the year 1350. dyed Philip King of France; after whom succeeded his Son
John in the Kingdom.

Petrarch. Epist. 18. Petrarcha vir omnium soeculorum memoria dignissimus.
Pignor. Symbol. Epist. 14.
At this time flourished Francis Petrarch, a Florentine, Archdeacon of Parma, a
sententious Poet and Orator. He calls Rome the Whore of Babylon, the School
and Mother of Error, the Temple of Heresy, the nest of Treachery, and seems
plainly to affirm, that the Pope was Antichrist, declaring that no greater evil
could happen to any Man than to be made Pope. In one of his Epistles he
directs his Speech to Babylon in France, that is to Avignon; thus. Shall I
call thee a famous or infamous Whore, who have played the Harlot with the Kings
of the Earth? Indeed thou art the same that the Evangelist saw in the Spirit
sitting upon many Waters: the people and the Nations are the Waters upon which
thou fittest. Whore, know thy habit; a Woman clothed in purple and Scarlet,
and Gold and precious Stones, having a Golden Cup in her hand full of
abomination and uncleanness of Fornication: Do thou not know thy self
Babylon? unless that deceive thee which is written in her Forehead, Great
Babylon, and thou art little Babylon: little indeed in compass of Walls, but in
vices and compass of infinite lusts and passions, and multitude of all evils
thou art greatest. And what follows, agrees unto thee and no other, Babylon,
the Mother of Fornications, and abominations of the Earth. If thou will yet
dissemble, mark what follows. And I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of
the Saints, and with the Blood of the Witnesses of Jesus. Why art thou silent?
either show another drunken with this Blood, or deny that thou art drunken, if
thou can; for the Vision must be true. The life of Petrarch is written by
Papirius Massonus. Many resorted to him from France, and all Italy.

About this time Hayabad a Franciscan, preached in Avignon before Pope Clement,
that he was commanded by God to declare, Catal. Test. verit. li. 8.
that the Church of Rome is the Whore of Babylon, and that the Pope and his
Cardinals are the very Antichrist, and that his predecessors Benedict and John
are condemned. When the Pope challenged him, he said he was commanded in a
Vision to speak so, and therefore he durst not fail to speak it.

John Rochetalada, another Franciscan, preached the same, and is said to be one
of them who were burnt at Avignon. Anno 1353.

At the same time Gregory de Arimino opposed the Doctors in the Articles of
Justification by works, and of free will. At Paris he taught that man has free
will to do evil, but no good without special grace: and that we are justified
by Faith only. And he said the Schoolmen deserve to be called Semipelagians.
Andreas de Castro, and John Buridan, two famous Men at that time, agreed with
him.

Then Eudo Duke of Burgundy, persuaded the French King that he should not
receive into his Realm the new Decretals and Extravagants. His sage advice is
extant among the Records of France.

A new War arose between King John of France, and Edward the third, King of
England. The Pope sent the Cardinal of Peregort, to these two Princes (being
ready to fight) to calm this storm. John being the stronger, demanded that
Edward should give him four Hostages; and as one vanquished, should remain at
his mercy and discretion. Edward was content to yield up all that he had taken
from him, but without any blemish to his honor. Edward encourages himself,
and prepares to fight the French, and vanquisheth them at Poictiers. King John
is taken prisoner, and his Son Philip, by Edward the Black Prince, Son to
Edward the third, King of England, they are brought to Bordeaux, and from
thence sent into England, where they are lodged in the City of London, in the
Duke of Lancaster's house, under a sure Guard. Many others of the Nobles of
France were also taken Captive. 1700 Gentlemen were slain in this Battle, among
which were 52 Lords. King John continued five years a prisoner, for he was
taken in September, Anno 1356. and delivered in May, Anno 1361.

There happened in France a certain contention, between the French Prelates, and
the Friars of Paris. The French Prelates assembling in the City of Paris,
caused by the Bedles to be called together all the Students, Masters and
Batchellors of every faculty, with the chief heads of all the Religious Houses
and Friars of the University of Paris. Who being all congregated in the Bishop
of Paris his house, where there were present four Archbishops, and twenty
Bishops, the Bishop of Biture preached to the Students of Paris against the
Friars.

He told them that true charity would compel them to provide for their flocks,
to withstand errors; that they were bound to give their lives for the flock
committed to their charge.

That no Man ought to busy himself with what belonged not to his Office. For
thereby (says he) all Ecclesiastical Order is dissolved. He showed how the
Dominican and Franciscan Friars did usurp what belonged to the Prelates. They
charged the Friars for preaching against their wills throughout all their
Diocesses, and for hearing confessions, saying, that they have the Pope's
privilege to bear them out therein.

Then stood up another in the public place, and read the privileges of both
the orders, and afterward read the constitution of Pope Innocent III. written
in the fifth of the Decretals. Which constitution was repugnant and contrary to
the aforesaid privileges. Then rose up the Bishop of Ambian, a great Lawyer,
who discoursing from Article to Article, there proved by good Law, that the
said constitution stood in it is full force and vigor, and ought not to be
infringed by the Friars privileges in any part: and therefore by virtue of
that constitution, the Friars ought not so misorderly to hear confessions,
enjoin penance, and preach in Churches without special license of the Bishop
of the Diocese, and leave from the Curate of the Parish: unto whose words none
of the Friars replied at that time. So the Bishop proceeding to the conclusion,
desired the University to assist them in that case, wherein they were all
determined to stand firmly to the shedding of their blood in resisting that
intrusion of the Friars. This happened on December. 6.

The next day being Sunday, one of the Order of the Minorites, or Franciscans,
went to the Church of the Majorites, or preaching Friars, where he made a
Sermon (which was never seen before, for the one Order to come and resort to
the other) beginning in the aforesaid matter to reply, and to expound in order
through every Article, adding moreover, that they went not so far in their
privileges as they lawfully might. And said, that when they obtained those
privileges in Rome, the Bishop of Ambian was there present himself, resisting
the same with all his power: yea all the Prelates of France sent and wrote up
to the Court against the same, and yet did not prevail. For when the Friars
there declared to the Pope how far they had used their privileges, the Pope at
the same time said, Placet, showing that he agreed unto the same.

And now (says he) the Prelates demand of us to send up our privileges to the
Court, which were great folly in us; for in so doing we should give way to the
revoking the Authority which is given into our hands already. Moreover, our
Warden and Master, is now lately dead, and the Master of the Dominican Friars
here is not now present: wherefore we dare not determine in so weighty a cause
(touching the privileges of our order) without the presence of them. And
therefore we desire you of the University to hold us excused, who are not the
worst part of the University.

The next day being the eighth of the same month it was determined that one of
the Dominick Friars should preach in the Church of the Franciscan, or
Gray-Fryars, and so he did, going the same way as the other Friar had done
before in the other Church.

All the Heads of the University met together on the Vigil of St. Thomas's day
in St. Bernard's Church at the same time.

A Sermon was preached by a Divine of the University, wherein he with many
words and great Authorities, argued against them that would not be obedient to
their Prelates. The Bishop of Ambian (the Sermon being ended) prosecuted the
same Argument. And in conclusion the Friars privileges were in disputation
confuted at Paris.

Certain Articles had formerly been given out against the Friars by the
Students of Paris, why they should not be admitted to their Society.

1, Say they, our Society ought not to be Co-active, but free and voluntary.

2. Because we have often proved their community many ways to be hurtful and
incomodious.

3. Seeing they are of a diverse profession from us (for they are called
Regular, and not Scholastical) we ought not therefore to associate together in
one Scholastical Office.

4. Because they work dissentions and offenses, therefore we ought to avoid
them.

5. Because they devour Men's houses, searching and sacking the Estates and
Consciences of all persons, circumventing those whom they find easy to be
seduced, and leading them from the Counsel of their Prelates.

6. They suggest, that the Friars are false Prophets, who being neither
Bishops, nor Parish Priests, nor yet their Vicars, nor sent by them, yet they
preach (not sent) against the mind of the Apostle Romans 10.

7. Because they are so curious in searching and enquiring out other Men's
doings and spiritual demeanor: Wherefore seeing them in no order, we are by
the sentence of the Apostle commanded to avoid them.

Besides these Articles above rehearsed, certain propositions were proposed in
the Schools of Paris, solemnly to be disputed and defended against the Friars,
which were these.

1. That the begging Friars were not in a state of Salvation.

2. That they were bound to labor with their hands that could, and not to beg.

3. That they ought not to preach, or hear the confessions of any, although
they be Licensed thereunto by the Pope, or by the Diocessan, forasmuch as the
same is prejudicial to the Ministers and Priests of the Parishes.

All those aforesaid Articles and conclusions, Pope Alexander IV. had condemned
to be abolished and burnt, writing his precepts to the French King, and the
University of Paris in favor of the Friars, commanding all Liberties and
privileges to be restored to the said Friars. Another privilege was given to
the Friars by Pope Clement IV. who succeeded Alexander IV. Anno 1263.

But in the year 1281. Pope Martin IV. renewed again the Canon in behalf of the
Curates against the Friars.

In the year 1294. Boniface VIII. granted to the Friars, that without license
of Vicars of Churches, they shall first present themselves to the Prelates to
be admitted; by whom if they be refused the second time, then they upon special
Authority of this Pope shall be privileged without either Bishop or Curate, to
preach, to bury, and to hear confessions from any that shall come unto them: so
revoking all that was decreed by his predecessors to the contrary.

Anno 1303. Pope Benedict II. revoked the constitution of Boniface his
predecessor. Then followed Pope Clement V. who in his general Council holden
at Vienna revoked the constitution of Benedict his predecessor, and renewed
again the former decree of Boniface.

Upon this variable diversity of the Popes (one dissenting from and repugning
another) arose among the Divines and Schoolmen in Universities great matter of
contention, in the Universities of Oxford and Paris about the begging Friars,
some holding one way some another.

Five principal opinions be noted of learned men, who then disputing against
the Friars, were condemned for Heretics, and their assertions reproved.

The first was the opinion of them which defended that the Friars might not by
the license of the Pope and of the Prelates, preach in Parishes, and hear
confession.

Of this opinion was William de sancto amore with his fellows, who had been
condemned.

The second opinion was, that Friars, although not by their own authority, yet
by privilege of the Pope, and of the Bishop, might preach and hear confessions
in Parishes, but yet not without license of the Parish Priests. Of this opinion
was St. Bernard.

The third opinion was, that Friars might preach and hear confessions without
License of the Parish Priests; but yet the said Parishioners notwithstanding
were bound by the Canon [omnis utriusque sexus] to repeat the same sins again,
if they had no other to their own proper Curate. And of this opinion were many,
as Godfr. de fontibus: Henr. de Gandavo, Joannes Monach. Cardin. Joannes de
Poliaco. Pope John XXII. caused John de Poliaco, openly io retract in Paris.
The Assertions which he held were these.

The first was, they which were confessed to Friars, although having a general
License to hear confessions, Fox Act and Monum.
were bound again to confess their sins to their own Parish Priest by the
aforenamed Canon. The second was, that the said Canon, standing in force,
Parishioners were bound once in a year to confess their sins to their Priest.
For the doing otherwise imports a contradiction in it self. The third was,
that the Pope could not give general license to hear confessions so, but that
the Parishoner so confessed was bound to reiterate the same confession made
unto his own Curate. Which he proved by diverse places of the Canon Law.
The fourth opinion was, that the Friars by the License of the Pope and of the
Bishops, might lawfully hear confessions, and the people might be of them
confessed and absolved. But yet notwithstanding it was just, honest, and
profitable, that once in the year they should be confessed to the Curates
(although confessed before to the Friars,) because of the admininistration of
the Sacraments, especially at Easter, of which opinion was William de monte
Landuno.

The fifth opinion was, that albeit the Friars might at all times, and at
Easter also hear confessions, as the Curates did, yet it was safer at the time
of Easter to confess to the Curates than to the Friars. And of this opinion was
Richard of Armagh, Archbishop and Primate of Ireland.

In the time of Pope Clement VI. John King of France, invented the Sect and
Order of those Monks, Sympson Eccles. Hist. p. 391.
which are called Stellati, whose manner is always to wear a star upon their
Breast, signifying thereby, that there is nothing in them but the light of
perfection, and the clear shining of good works: yea, that they themselves are
the light of the World. Item, That they shall rise again at the last day all
shining and glistering, as the most clear and pleasant stars, according as it
is written, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many unto Righteousness, shall be as the
stars for ever and ever.

After the death of Pope Clement VI. succeeded Innocent VI. before whom the
aforesaid Richard of Armagh published nine Articles against the begging Friars.
This Pope builded Walls about Avignon, and founded an house of Carthusian Monks
without the City.

Pope Urban V. succeeded him, Anno 1364. Nicholas Orem made a Sermon before the
Pope and his Cardinals on Christmas-even, in which he rebukes the Prelates and
Priests of his time, declaring their destruction not to be far off, by certain
signs taken of their wicked and corrupt life. He proves the Popish Clergy to
be so much worse than the old Synagogue of the Jews, by how much it is worse to
sell the Church and Sacraments: than to suffer Doves to be sold in the Church.

In the year 1370. Peter Belfort of Lemousin, who took the name of Gregory XI.
was created likewise at Avignon, who thought good to transfer the Apostolical
Chair from Avignon back again to Rome, a thing almost incredible: for so many
French Popes succeeding one another, they had so weakened the Italian party,
that there were scarce any Italian Cardinals among them all, and of the French
there were more than twenty.

Several reasons are alleged to have moved Gregory to this resolution, but
particularly these following. The first was, that he saw all Italy in Arms, not
only by the Wars betwixt Venice and Genoa, but by a resolution several Cities
had taken to shake off the yoke of their servitude, and re-establish themselves
in a state of Liberty, which he believing to be occasioned by the absence of
the pilot from the Vessel of Rome, he began to think of resettling his
pontifical residence in Italy. The second was, That one day reprehending a
certain Bishop (his familiar) that he left the Bishopric to follow the Court,
the Bishop confidently replied. And you who are Pope of Rome, why are you in
France? Hist. of Cardin. part. 3. lib. 1.
Why are you so long from the place where your Church does lie? Others will
have it, that a Letter from St. Bridget, (whom the Pope looked upon as a true
Saint) contributed much, in which she advised him as from God, to return to
Rome. He gave order for twenty Galleys to be ready in the Rhone, pretending to
go somewhither else with them, because he suspected, that the French (who had
so much advantage by the residence of his Court in France) would obstruct it,
if they had the least notice of his removing the Sea to Rome.

But indeed they took not the least Alarm at all the preparations which were
made, as not imagining, that a French Pope would put such an affront upon his
Nation. So that they had no notice of it till the Pope was at Sea, being passed
as far as Genoa, and from Genoa to Cornetto, where, being weary of his Galleys,
he made the rest of his Voyage by Land: and being arrived at Rome, he began to
apply fit Medicines and specifical to the maladies of Italy. But he dyed Anno,
1280. of a great distemper in his Bladder, after he had sat six years in
France, and five in Italy.

It is reported, that at the hour of this Pope's Death, the palace of the Pope
at Avignon was set on fire, and could not be quenched, Bale's Pageant of Pope's.
till the greatest part thereof was burnt. Afterward ensued the greatest
schism and division that ever happened in the Popedom.

King John dyed, Anno 1364. to whom succeeded his Son Charles, the fifth of
that name. King John dyed in England: for the French King had an earnest desire
to see the King of England again, because he had so honorably entertained him
whilst he was his prisoner. So he went, and was entertained very Royally. But
shortly after, he fell sick, and dyed at London. His Body was conveyed over
into France, and buried in the Town of St. Denis, the King of Cyprus being
present at his Funerals.

Charles V. called the Wise, was crowned at Rhemes, together with his Wife, the
Daughter of Peter Duke of Bourbon. He made his younger Brother Philip, Duke of
Burgundy, who had been prisoner with his Father in England.

Many Lords in Gascoign revolted from Prince Edward unto the French King.
Prince Edward after his great victories, had carried himself roughly toward the
Noblemen his Subjects. But the French King besides his excellent Wisdom, was
also gentle and courteous, insinuating himself into the affections of all men.

The Duke of Anjou marching with his forces from Toulouse, easily recovered all
the Towns and holds that were pertaining to the English in those quarters. The
King of England lost all his whole Seignory of Gascoign, the people partly
rebelling; and partly yielding themselves willingly to his enemy. Poictiers
also yields to the French. The men of Rochel yield also unto the French.

King Charles dyed of poison taken long before. He was a Prince so wise and
politic, Frossard's chronic. in Charl. V. Anno 1380.
that fitting in his Gown at Paris in ease and quietness, he recovered many
things by counsel and policy, which his predecessors had lost in the field to
their Enemies. And among other vexations which happened to King Edward at his
last Voyage that he intended into Britain for the rescue of his men besieged,
when he was forced back by the extremity of Weather: this one thing troubled
him above the rest, that he must make war with such an enemy as never bare
Arms; nor came into the field; it is reported that he said, he never dealt with
any enemy, which used so little armor, and put him to so much trouble. For
King Charles, after he came to the Crown, never put on Armor himself, but
managing all his affairs by Wisdom and policy, committed the execution thereof
to his Brothers.

In the time of Charles V. a Book was written in France, called, The Vergers
Dream, Review of the Counc. of Trent. lib. 6. ca. 6.
first in Latin, then translated in French by his command. In the seventh and
eighth Chapter whereof the Clergyman and the Knight confer together on this
wise. I call (says the Clerk) and account the Decrees and Decretals of the
Holy Fathers of Rome to be good Law, which oblige every true Christian as a
Subject and Son of a Holy Church our Mother. To whom the Knight replyeth, If
the terms of Rome be Decrees, or Decretals, Ordinals, or Constitutions touching
the Temporal affairs of Kings, Princes, or other Secular Lords, you Clerks
among your selves shall call and account them Law, if you please. But the truth
is, That no Man can establish, or ordain any thing where he has no power nor
Authority. So as the King of France has no power to make a Law or Ordinance to
bind or tie the Empire; so neither can the Laws of the Emperor bind the King
of France and his Subjects. And a little after. I hold it therefore a frivolous
thing, and very ridiculous, that the Holy Father should make any Decree,
Decretal, or constitution about Temporal matters.

In the thirteenth years of the aforesaid Charles V. Charles IV. Emperor of
Germany came into France by Cambray, to do certain pilgrimages at St. Denis,
and elsewhere, and so was conveyed with honorable men unto St. Quintin, and
from thence to Paris.

Mathias, a Bohemian, abode a long time in Paris, and was called Pariensis, he
wrote a large Treatise of Antichrist, in which he proves that the Pope is the
Antichrist. He inveigheth against the Clergy for negligence in their callings,
and calls them the Locusts mentioned in the Revelation. He complains that
every City, and almost each man had his proper Saint or Savior, besides
Christ: the Images and Relics that are set up in Churches to be adored, he
calls the Invention of Antichrist. He says, the worship of God is not tied
to persons, places, nor times; he rebukes the Cloysterers for contemning the
Laymen, and calling themselves the only Religious; he refuteth the merit of
works, and calls them the cause of salvation, sine qua non. In the end he
prophesied, Catal. Test. Verit.
That God will once again send Godly preachers, who in the zeal of Elias, will
openly disclose Antichrist unto the eyes of all the world.

After the death of Pope Gregory, the Church began to be miserably torn with
new schisms, which began to arise betwixt the French and Italian Cardinals,
each Nation choosing it is own Pope, and in it is own manner. The French not able
to digest the affront they received from Gregory, in transporting the Sea from
France into Italy, departing privately from Rome, they removed to Fondi; and
being arrived there, they used many invectives and Satyrs against Urban VI.
whom they had already with the Italian Cardinals elected in Rome. They
pretended, that they were forced to it by the people of Rome, otherwise it was
never their intention to make an Italian Pope.

For these reasons, the Chair (in their Judgments) being vacant, by the favor
of Joan Queen of Sicily, who was their friend, Il. Cardinalismo part 3. lib. 1.
they chose another Pope, one Roberto, a Cardinal, with the Title of the Holy
Apostles. He was of Geneva, and particularly of the Ancient Family of the
Conti: in that City he took upon him the name of Clement VII. From Fondi,
Clement removed with his Cardinals to Avignon, where he was obeyed by the
French and Spaniard. These disputes lasted long; the Legitimate Pope at Rome,
and and the Antipope at Avignon, firing their Bulls upon one another, and
sending them forth into all parts of the World. The adherents of both sides set
forth several defamatory Libels, calling one another Schismatic, Heretic,
Tyrant, Thief, Traitor, Wicked, Sower of Sedition, Son of Belial, and such like
Stuff: of which there are two Treatises extant at this day; one of them written
by Dr. John de Ligni, in favor of Urban against Clement, and the other by the
Abbot of St. Vast in favor of Clement against Urban.

Whilst Clement was contriving which way to remove the Pope who resided in
Rome, he dyed, Anno 1392. and was buried in Avignon.

He being dead Boniface IX. who was Pope at that time in Rome; writ a Fatherly
Letter to the French Cardinals exhorting them to desist from their Schism, and
return to their obedience to the Holy Mother the Church, of which he was (he
said) the lawful Head. But the French laughing (as it were) at such
persuasions, chose a successor to Clement, which was Pietro della Luna, who
took the name of Benedict XIII. who had argued very much in Clement's
justification; and that was the principal point upon which he was chosen by the
Cardinals, who concluded, that he who defended another's cause with such
ardour, would doubtless more vehemently defend his own.

Whilst this Antipope had his residence in Catalonia, in the Castle of
Paniscola, administering the Sacramentss, and conferring of dignities. He was
condemned together with the Cardinals which elected him by the Authority of a
general Council.

Afterward he assembled a Council at Perpignan, where he created several
Cardinals, and commanded them after his death to follow his orders, which were
to choose another Pope without losing of time, which they did. For this
Antipope being dead at Paniscola, the Cardinals chose one Giles Mungot, a
Chanon of Barcelona, in his place, calling him Clement IX. who at the Instance
of King Alphonso created Cardinals forthwith, and began to Act in every thing
as the true Popes use to do.

But afterward upon Pope Martin the fifth's accommodation with King Alphonso,
Giles (being commanded) renounced the rights of the Papacy, and was declared
Bishop of Majorca: and the Cardinals which he had created, were likewise forced
to renounce their Cardinalitial dignity.

Charles VI. succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of France at the Age of 12
years, he was crowned in the year 1380. married in 1384. he falls into a
Frenzy, Anno 1393. and dies, Anno 1422.

Charles the Wise, left two Sons, viz. this Charles VI. and Jews Duke of
Orleans. And Charles VI. had three Sons, Jews, John and Charles, and one
Daughter named Katherine. These three Sons were Daulphins one after another in
their Father's Life. And Katherine was married to Henry V. afterward King of
England, a mournful gage of an horrible confusion for this Realm.

Century XV.
CHarles VI. having called a Council at Paris to consult about the schism which
then was in the Popedom, Jacob. Mejer. in annalib. rerum. Flandricarum.
would not suffer the Archbishops and Bishops of Rhemes, Rhoan, Sens, Paris,
Beauvis, and some others, to assist there, because they were Benedict's
partisans, by reason of the great courtesies they had received either from him
or his predecessor.

In a Decree made February 18. 1406. we find a complaint by Charles VI. They
take occasion to reserve the First Fruits in the vacancies, and to extort great
sums of Money, whereby the Kingdom is exhausted; and to thrust themselves upon
the Popedom, for to enrich both them and theirs. And when there is any question
(says he) of preferring men to elective dignities, they never used those ways
which ought to be observed, and which are appointed to examine and try them.
Whence it comes to pass, that it being not possible that the Pope should know
all Men, and the state of the Churches, he admits diverse into those dignities
who are unworthy of them, and sometimes such as are unknown to him but by their
money. He adds, They insert diverse clauses in their Bulls, which are
sometimes inextricable: they make diverse Rules besides the Law, or else quite
against Law, which they revoke at their pleasure; insomuch that the most
clear-sighted cannot discern who has best right among diverse pretenders. Hence
arise infinite Suits in Law, which they must prosecute out of the Kingdom with
great expense and charges.

In another Decree, made the same year, he accounts this among other
extortions, Imposing Tenths, and other Subsidies at their pleasure, without
ever consulting the rest of the Bishops about it, in the raising whereof there
is no mean observed either of Justice or equity: It was then ordained, that
none should pay Tithes to Popes nor Cardinals.

And in another Decree made in March, Anno 1408. mention is made of certain
presidents by Charles VI. established at a Council at Paris.

Not long ago (says he) it was proposed and demanded by our Attorney General
at a Council holden at Paris, consisting of the Bishops and Clergy, of the
Churches within our Kingdom, and Daulphiny, where our Cousin Jews, King of
Sicily; our eldest Son Duke of Aquitain and Viennois; the Duke of Bourges our
Uncle by the Father's side; the Duke of Burgundy our Cousin, and the Duke of
Burbon our Uncle by the Mother's side, did preside for us, that the Pope's
exactions and other grievances formerly rehearsed might be utterly abolished.

We read of another Decree made afterward, wherein complaint is made by the
same King Charles VI. That an infinite deal of Gold and Silver, and Rents were
transported out of the Kingdom and the Province of Daulphine, to the prejudice
of the ancient Customs, and the undoing of the Realm; to the irreparable loss
and damage of the Commonwealth, and the miserable desolation of the Churches,
as well such as were of Royal Foundation as others. And elsewhere he
complains, That certain Collectors, and other the Pope of Rome 's Officers
particularly for his Moneys have of late oppressed the Church and Churchmen of
our Realm and Province of Daulphine, by an insufferable slavery, in seizing
upon the Goods of the Bishops and Clergymen, both Regulars and Seculars,
presently upon their Decease; An Edict was made discharging the payment of
Annates.

Pope Urban VI. being dead in Rome, after he had managed the Popedom for eleven
years, with little satisfaction either to the people or Clergy, the Cardinals
created Boniface the ninth, in the 33. year of his Age, who showed much
prudence in the whole course of his Papacy. He sat fourteen years, and nine
months, and dyed Anno 1405.

Guilel. Noubrigensis. li. 4. ca. 1.
King Charles VI. bestirred himself to remove the schism which was between
Benedict XIII. and Boniface IX. and to dispose all the Princes of Christendom
for the same design, according to the Testimony of an English Historian. He
heard with patience (says he) the Legates of either Pope: but by the advice of
his Divines he would not submit himself, neither to the one, nor to the other.
He rather thought on a means whereby he might relieve the Church, by removing
out of her all matter of dissension. Having therefore sent his Ambassadors to
the Emperor, as also to the Kings of England, Bohemia, and Hungary, he
conjured them not to be wanting to the public good and tranquillity. He
persuaded Wenceslaus the Emperor to come to Rhemes, where a general Council
was held on that occasion.

I find another Ordinance of the same King Charles VI. made by the counsel and
assistance of the Lords and Clergy of France, Vid. Libell. de Eccles. Gallic.
in Schismat. p. 15.
wherein he says, That the Royal power is ordained of God for the preservation
of the Church, and that the Kingdom of Heaven increases by means of the
Earthly Kingdom, when those which destroy the Church are crushed by the rigor
of Princes. That the sacred Canons will have recourse to be made unto Princes,
when such things are committed by great men in the Church, and that according
to the opinion of Holy Doctors the Pope ought not to be obeyed in such things
wherein the state of the Church is notoriously disturbed. And in another
Ordinance of April 17. 1410. These things being considered that it belongs unto
us who are the Guardian, Protector, and Defender of the Churches of our
Kingdom, and of Daulphine, and who have ratified and approved the Statutes and
Ordinances aforesaid, made in the Council aforesaid, to cause all this, and all
that follows upon it to be kept inviolable, etc.

There is an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris toward the latter end of this
King's Reign, wherein it is said, that Pope Benedict and his Officers should
from thenceforth give over and abstain from the exaction of Annates in the
Kingdom of France, and the County of Daulphine.

The same Charles VI. being excommunicated by Benedict the XIII. put the
bearers of his Bulls to the Armende honoraire: So they call this ignominious
kind of punishment.
Honorable Amends, making them to be carried in Tumbrels, apparelled in
painted Coats, with paper Mitres upon their heads, and the Pope's Bull
represented in their hands, and his Arms reversed. All which was done by the
advice of his Princes, Lords, and the Prelates and other Ecclesiastics of his
Kingdom, together with the Parliament and University of Paris, as appears by
the Acts published concerning this particular.

After the death of Pope Boniface IX. the Cardinals created Cosmo di Sulmona
Pope, who took the name of Innocent VII. he lived but two years after, and dyed
in a time when all Italy was in an ill condition.

Whilst this schism continued, Three Princes in France (who by reason of the
King's indisposition did then govern that Kingdom) viz. the Dukes of Berry, of
Burgundy, and of Orleans, went all of them together to Pietro di Luna (who was
called Benedict XIII.) to Avignon, beseeching him to provide against this
disorder, by renouncing the Papacy; urging, that it was much better to have the
public interest take place than the private; and the rather because he had
promised in his Election to lay down, whenever things should be adjusted with
Rome.

They also promised him, That that Pope, which should be made in Rome after
Innocent should do the like, every one believing, that if these two favorites
(one of France, the other of Italy) were dispossessed of the power of the Keys,
which they both exercised at that time, a third ought to be created, who should
be the certain and undoubted Pope.

Benedict replied, that he could not without offending God, consent to the
counsels proposed for his renouncing the Church, and abandoning the flock of
Christ, which by the common consent of so many good and worthy persons and
Electors, was committed to his custody, being unwilling to bring a thing in
question which he had so legally obtained. And for what respected the taking
away the schism, and restoring concord to the Church, it pleased him very well,
and he would condescend to it with all his heart, provided a secure place were
chosen, in which every one might speak his mind freely. For his own part he
swore, that in case the schism could not be taken away by any other means, that
he would renounce the Papacy upon condition the other at Rome would do the
same; otherwise it was to no purpose to solicit it.

The Princes understood Benedict's mind, and how little he was disposed to an
accommodation, and among themselves consulted of some way to bring him over to
their desires. Benedict fearing some violence, fortified himself in his palace,
and was besieged there the space of five or six months.

But being weary of so long and close a confinement, he embarked in the Rhone
upon certain Galleys (which he had caused to be put in order for such an
enterprise, whilst he was besieged in his palace) and in them he escaped into
Catalonia, which was his own Country.

Some say, that these three Princes discoursed in this manner with Benedict at
the importunity of the French Cardinals, who hated the said Benedict, because
he was a Catalonian, not a Frenchman.

The Italian Cardinals, and the Cardinals of other Nations which were present
in Rome, after the death of Innocent, being entered into the conclave, in a
place near St. Peter's, they swore all of them solemnly upon the Holy
Evangelists, which their Dean held in his hand, that they would every one
renounce the Papacy if they were chosen, so that the French or Catalonian
Antipope renounced his Anti-Papacy first.

The cause of this Resolution was to satisfy the French, who having introduced
the custom of creating of Popes according to their own mode, it seemed
impossible to turn them out of that way with reputation, unless the Italians
resolved to do the same; and the rather, because Benedict declared, it would be
in vain to think of a remedy for the scandal of the Church, without a
renunciation of both the Popes; whereas if they renounced, another would be
chosen out of the whole College of Cardinals, that would be true and undoubted
Pope, whom the Princes and people would readily obey.

Angelo Corraro, a Venetian, was chosen in Rome; he was Cardinal of St. Mark,
and assumed the Name of Gregory XII. Before he came out of the conclave, they
made him promise under the hand of the Notary in writing, to observe what he
had promised and subscribed with his own hand; and at last gave him an Oath.
But the place where these two Popes were to meet being in dispute, and they not
like to come to an agreement; both Gregory and Benedict alleging a thousand
difficulties, the French Cardinals resolved to abandon Benedict, and the
Italians Gregory, and to declare them breakers of their Faith.

The Cardinals both of Avignon and Rome, being met at Pisa, did by common
consent deprive Gregory and Benedict, all the rest of the Nations concurring
with them, except Catalonia, and the hither part of Spain, the King of Scots,
and the Count of Armignac, who were favorers of Benedict.

But in despite of their contradictions, they chose Pietro Filardo, a Friar
Minor, and Archbishop of Milan, who took upon him the name of Alexander V. a
name suitable to his Actions, for which reason it was pleasantly said by
himself, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope.

Gregory hearing that Alexander was created Pope, and understanding what
sentence the Cardinals had passed against him and Benedict, fled toward
Romagna, urging and insisting (wheresoever he came) upon a general Council. He
stayed at Rimini for a time, where he was magnificently entertained by Carlo
Malateste.

Benedict having held a Council in the City of Perpignan, by the intervention
of his own friends, retireth again for his greater security into his Castle of
Paniscola, where he had been long before.

But though these two Anti-Popes had been deprived by the Council of Pisa, yet
they desisted not from their Papal, and Ecclesiastical functions.

They created Cardinals, and particularly Gabriel Condolmero was created
Cardinal, who was afterward Eugenius IV.

Alexander lived not above eight months Pope, he dyed in Bologna. Then the
Cardinals chose Baltasar Cossa (a Neopolitan) Pope, who would be called John
XXIII.

Christendom being weary to see so many schisms on foot, was contriving which
way to put an end to it. Therefore by the orders of all Nations, John was cited
to appear at a general Council.

He sent two Cardinals immediately to negotiate with the Princes of Germany and
of France, about the choice of a fit place for the celebration of a Council. At
length Constance was pitched upon as the most convenient City of all. At the
time appointed, they met, and John among the rest, who carried along with him
certain men very Learned, with whom he held the Germans for a long time in
variety of disputes.

But the Emperor Sigismund arriving at the same time many great delinquencies
were objected against John, who being conscious of their truth, and fearing
corporal punishment, as well as to be deprived of the Papacy, fled out of
Constance, in the disguise of a Footman, and retired to Shaffusen, a City
belonging to Frederick Duke of Austria, whither diverse Cardinals of his
creation fled also.

John being recited by the Council, fled to Friburg, to be under the protection
of the Duke of Burgundy. But he was taken, and by order of the Council
imprisoned in the Isle of St. Mark near Constance. Above forty Articles were
proved against him; and all the Fathers concurring in the sentence, John was
legally deposed, and the sentence sent to him to subscribe, which he willingly
did.

Then was he delivered unto Ludovico Bavaro, to be kept in safe custody. Three
years he continued a prisoner in the castle of Haldelberg. In this Council a
Decree was published, that a general Council lawfully assembled was above the
Pope.

Gregory came not to the Council, but sent by Carlo Malatesta to the Council to
let them understand his willingness to renounce. Gregory was hereupon declared
Legate Della Marca, and went to his charge, but he dyed soon after at Ricanati
of discontent. John and Gregory being removed, there remained a third still,
which was Benedict XIII. who declared that he would never renounce. Hereupon
Sigismund the Emperor went in person to the Kings of France and of England, to
advise with them about forcing Benedict to a renouncing also: Sigismund having
received a satisfactory answer from these two Princes, he went to Narbon, and
discoursed personally with Ferdinand King of Arragon, whose Subjects paid
obedience to Benedict.

But Benedict still alleged, that he was the true Vicar of Christ, saying,
that Constance was not a place convenient for the liberty of an Ecclesiastical
Council, seeing that John had been condemned and deposed from the Papacy, by
those very persons who had been formerly his Friends, and received him to the
Pontifical dignity.

The Princes of Spain observing the pertinacity of Benedict, concurred with the
opinion of the Council, which was managed by five several Nations, viz. Italy,
Germany, England, France, and Spain. What these Nations had done was approved,
and published by a Trumpet, or a public Notary. Then Benedict's cause being
discussed, he was at last deposed, and declared void of the Papacy, no
reckoning being made of the absent Scots, and Count d'Armignac, who continued
their obedience to him. About this time John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, his
Disciple, were condemned and burnt for Heretics.

On November. 8. Anno 1417. thirty two Cardinals entered the conclave, with thirty
others for the several Nations, which is six a piece, and on the 11th. of the
same Month, which was the Feast of St. Martin, about three in the Morning,
Cardinal di san Gregorio (called Oddo Colonna before) was created Pope, with
great satisfaction to the people. The Emperor presently went into the
conclave, and having thanked the Cardinals kissed the Pope's Feet. The Pope
embraced him, and thanked him for his great industry in that affair. This Pope
would needs be called Martin, because his Election happened on that Saint's day.
Then all the French Cardinals left Benedict, and came in unto Martin; the
Scots, and d'Armignac did the same, and all Christendom except Paniscola which
remained divided.

Martin being desirous to put an end to the Council, Anno 1418. he made a
public Assembly; after which by common consent, but especially of Sigismund,
Ibaldo Cardinal of St. Vito, by order from the Pope, pronounced these words of
dismission, Domini ite in pace, and so all had liberty to depart.

Then Martin hastened to Rome, traveling by Milan as the nearest way. He sat
fourteen years, and dyed of an Apoplexy, Febr. 20. Anno, 1431.

When Benedict had sat thirty years, and was dead, his Cardinals chose Pope
Clement VIII. but he compounded with Martin, and so the schism was ended.

Henry V. King of England had invaded France, and soon after at the Battle of
Agin-Court ten thousand Frenchmen were slain. Anthony Duke of Brabant, with
his Brother Philip Earl of Nevers, were also slain by the English Bow-men.
These were Brethren to John Duke of Burgundy. Charles Duke of Orleans, and
Jews of Burbon: the Earls of Richemont, Ew, and Vendosme (the strongest
pillars of the Orleans faction) with many other Noblemen and Gentlemen were
taken prisoners, and carried into England. Jews the Daulphin dies soon after
this defeat.

The Emperor Sigismund comes into France, making show of the great desire he
had to make a peace betwixt the French and the English.

The English take all Normandy, and Rhoan is besieged and taken, and all the
Isle of France yields to King Henry, even to the Gates of Paris.

France was now strangely divided into diverse factions. The King's Authority
were for the Queen and the Burgundian. Piccardy, Burgundy, and many other Towns
in Bry, Champagne, and Beausse, obeyed them absolutely after the great
massacres that had been lately done in Paris. Only Sens adhered to the Daulphin
Charles.

The Prince of Orange (of the Burgundian Faction) makes War in Daulphine and
Languedoc, to cross the affairs of Charles, who notwithstanding had the
greatest part of the Country at his devotion, with the friendship of Avignon,
and the Earldom of Veness. The English possessed all Normandy, and a great part
of Guienne. But Rochel, Poictiers, St. John de Angelo, Angoulesm, Fontenay, and
some other Towns acknowledged the Daulphin.

All Anjou was his, Avergne, Berry, Burbonois, Forest and Lionois obeyed him.
He likewise took upon him the Name of Regent.

The Duke of Britain leaves the English, and joins with the Daulphin. The
people grow in dislike with the Duke of Burgundy, and the Parisians mutiny
against the Burgundian faction, and kill his Servants.

At length a peace is made betwixt the Daulphin and the Burgundian, Anno 1419.
but soon after the Daulphin causes John Duke of Burgundy to be murdered in
his presence. This John had slain Charles Duke of Orleans traitorously, and now
he is treacherously slain by Charles the Daulphin.

Philip Son to John Duke of Burgundy, stirs up great troubles against Charles
the Daulphin in revenge of his Father 's death. By his means Isabel, an unkind
Mother, makes War against Charles her Son, and peace with Henry V. King of
England, then a Capital Enemy to the State. She gives him her Daughter
Katherine in Marriage, and procures King Charles VI. her Husband to declare
Henry his lawful Heir, and to disinherit his only Son Charles, from the Realm
of France.

But in the midst of these occurrences, Henry V. dies, in the vigor of his
age and spirit on the last day of August, Anno 1422. and Charles VI. the French
King, dyed fifty days after, on the 22. of October the same year.

After his Funerals, Henry VI. an Infant, Son to Henry V. is proclaimed King of
France, and after is crowned King at Paris.

Charles VII. after the decease of his Father Charles VI. took upon him the
name of King of France, notwithstanding the pretension of the English: He was
21 years old when he began to reign, and reigned 39 years. The beginning of his
reign was troublesome, till he was installed King, and thereby acknowledged of
all the French.

Afterward he reduced the Cities subdued by the English to his obedience,
beginning with the City of Paris, and so proceeding to the rest of the Realm,
expelling the English from all, except Calais. In the close of his Reign he had
many Domestical discontents, which hastened him to his Grave, after the happy
events of all his difficulties.

At this time flourished John Gerson, a divine of Paris, he was present at the
Council of Constance, and in some written Treatises highly commends the
decree, Bishop J^el's preface to his defense of his Apol^gy. Bishop Bedel
Waddesw. ^e^^. p. 107.
that the Bishop of Rome should be subject to the Council: and says, The thing
is worthy to be written in all places for a perpetual memory. He was the most
learned Man of his time, and the only Doctor and Leader of the Council of
Constance. He was counted a subtle disputer, and profound School-Doctor. One
calls him the learned and devout Chancellor of Paris.

He was much acquainted with Temptations, and wrote a Book de variis Diaboli
tentationibus. He was surnamed Doctor Christianissimus. His works are Printed
in four Volumes; his French works are mentioned by Antoine du Verdier in his
Bibliotheque. Gerson de defect. Viror. Eccles. ca. 52.


In his Treatise de defectu virorum Ecclesiasticorum, he sets down such things
as ought to be reformed in the Church, and among others, mentions this, That
known Men, and such as are most fitting, be Elected out of the same Country:
that strangers in manners, language, and education, be not sent and set over
Churches.

And in his Book of Ecclesiastical power, Gerson lib. de Eccles. potest.
after he has spoken of the diverse abuses of the Popes, he adds, What shall
we think is to be said of an infinite number of such like things that are done,
casting aside all care and regard of all Spiritual and Divine matters, which
concern the Christian Faith and Religion? What think you? What shall we say for
the present of that so easy a dispensation as they speak of, granted by the
Pope and the Prelates over lawful Oaths, reasonable Vows, for the excessive
plurality of Benefices, the general non obstantes of Councils, the privileges
and exemptions against common right? Who can number all the ways whereby the
force of Ecclesiastical (yea of Evangelical) Discipline is enfeebled, consumed,
and quite annihilated?

He adds the cunning and glozing flattery of Vp-starts, whispering the
Clergy, but especially the Pope in the Ear. Oh how great is the height of your
Ecclesiastical power! O sacred Clergy! all secular Authority is but a Toy in
comparison of thine, seeing that as all power is given to Christ, both in
Heaven and Earth, so Christ has bequeathed all to St. Peter, and his
Successors.

So that Constantine gave nothing to Pope Silvester, which was not originally
his own; but only restored unto him what he unjustly detained from him. Again,
as there is no power but is of God, so there is nothing Temporal or Spiritual,
Imperial or Regal, which is not of the Pope, upon whose Thigh God has Writ,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. So as to dispute his power is a kind of
Sacrilege.

To whom no Man may say, why do you so? Although he should exchange, purloin,
or sell all the Temporals, the Goods, Lands and Lordships of the Church. Let me
be a Liar if all these things be not written by such as seem to be wise men in
their eyes; and if they have not been believed also by some Popes.

Stephanus Paschasius in his Icones has these Verses of Gerson.

Quid potuit Sorbona, doces meritissime Gerso;
Tu magni Gerso luxque, decusque Chori.
At the same time flourished Nicholas de Clemangiis, a Master of Paris, and
Archdeacon of Baion, a man pious and Learned, one calls him one of the most
Learned and Eloquent Divines of his time. He wrote a Book of the ruin and
reparation of the Church. Nic. de Clemang. de ruin. and repar. Eccles.
Of which I shall set down some passages in general terms. First, (says he,
let us speak of the Head; upon whom all the rest depends. He afterward adds,
For the supreme Bishops, who by how much they see themselves ranked above
others in greatness, and Authority, by so much they labor the more to
overthrow them, out of a domineering humor for the enlarging of their primacy
and supreme power, considering that the commodities of the Bishopric of Rome,
which is very large, and above any Kingdom (though it has been sufficiently
curtailed by their negligence) can no way suffice to maintain the greatness of
their State, which they have purposed to raise high enough above all the Kings
and Emperors in the World, have cast themselves into those flocks of others
that abound in breeding, in Wool and Milk. He afterward specifies the
looseness, the luxury, vanities, worldliness, Clemang. lib. de lapsu and
reparat. justit. p. 10.
rapines, vexations, usurpations, oppressions, and other such like abuses and
vices of the Popes and their Courts. In another Book of his he shows, that
the Court of Rome has infected France, by coming there, specifying all the
vices and blemishes that are communicated unto it, and those not a few.

There was a time (says he) when the Apostolic Bishop, being vexed with the
Tyranny of the Italians, made choice of France for his seat, and for all the
Court of Rome, supposing he could not find assured refuge elsewhere: to whom I
could with (says he) the strength of France had not proved a Staff of a Reed,
as it was a long time before foretold that it should. What was it else that
brought France upon the sudden into these miseries, making her fall away from
eminent glory which made her flourish above all other Nations, but that
degenerating from those Ancient virtues which adorned her with such an
excellency of Honor, she is changed from Valor to cowardice, from diligence
to sloth, from honesty to ignominy, from gravity to a wanton lightness; from
temperance to luxury; from courage to presumption; from liberality to
covetousness, and unrestrained spoiling, from order to confusion, from zeal of
the public good to private gains, from correction and discipline to a general
impunity and license of all wickedness and mis-demeanours, and from Justice to
all iniquity.

And elsewhere he complains thus, So the Church which Christ has taken for
his Spouse without blemish disfigured by this horrible villainy, Tract. de
praesul. p. 66.
is now the shop of all Pride, of all Trading, filching and stealing; where the
Sacraments are hung out for a show, and all the orders, even the Priesthood it
self: where favors are sold for silver, dispensations for not preaching,
licenses for non-residence: Where all Offices and Benefices, yea even sins are
bought and sold: Lastly, where Masses, and Administration of the Lord's body
are set to sale. Would any Man have a Bishopric? let him provide his Money,
and that no small sum, but a great one for so great a Title: and let him not
stand upon emptying his purse, for the purchase of such a Dignity, seeing he
will quickly fill it again, and that more soundly than he could do by many
sorts of Merchandise. Does any desire a Prebend, a Provost's place, or some
other dignity? it is no matter for knowing his deserts, his Life and
Conversation; but so many Crowns as he has in his Chest, such hopes may he
conceive of compassing his desire. For what should I speak of poor folks, who
are accounted unprofitable in all things, and unworthy of all charge or
government, and who have no other hopes but to wax old, and pine away in misery
disrespected and despised? What should a poor Man go to Market for with an
empty pouch, when he has nothing to buy the Wares with?

And in another place speaking of the Popes, he says, They have arrogated unto
themselves the right of disposing of all Churches, in all places as far as the
Christian Religion reaches, of all Bishoprics and Dignities, which are
conferred by election, voiding and disanulling the Decrees formerly made by the
Holy Fathers, with so much care and commodity, that so they may by this means
fill their own Budgets the better. And since this custom was used, there have
been none but Dunces, Worldlings, Money-men, and such as were raised to those
Dignities by Simony. And again, To the end that the Rivers of Gold derived from
all parts, may flow unto them in a fuller stream, they have taken away the
power of presentations, and the liberty of bestowing and disposing of
Benefices, by any means whatsoever, from all Diocesans, and lawful Patrons,
forbidding them upon pain of Anathema, rashly to presume (for so their Writs
run) to institute any person into a Benefice within their jurisdiction, till
such time as some one be presented to it, to whom by their Authority they have
granted it.

And again (says he) What greediness is this (speaking of the Cardinals) to
hold such a number of repugnant and incompatible Benefices? They are Monks and
Chanons, Regulars and Seculars. Under the same habit they enjoy the Rights,
Degrees, Offices, and Benefices of all Religions, of all Orders, of all
Professions; not two or three, but ten, twenty, an hundred, two hundred, yea
sometimes five hundred, and upwards: and those no petty ones, nor contemptible,
but of the best and fattest. And how great a number soever they have of them,
they are never content, but still would have more. They are daily suing for new
Graces, new Grants. Thus they catch up all the Vacancies, and go away with all.

Charles VII. now King of France, was so distressed, that he had only two
entire Provinces left him, viz. Gascoign and Languedoc, and his enemies were
about them: and all the rest was possessed by the English, who (besides) had
besieged the City of Orleans, and brought it to that pass, that the highest
hopes of those therein, was to yield on good terms. Three French Noble men
conclude to set up a Virgin, called Joan of Arc, to make her pretend that she
had a Revelation from Heaven, to drive all the English out of France.

By the mediation of the Lord of Baudricourt, she is brought to the presence of
King Charles, whom she instantly knew, though never seen before, and at that
time of set purpose disguised. To the King she says boldly, That this was the
time wherein the sins of the English, and the sufferings of the French, were
come to the height, and she appointed by the God of Heaven, to be the French
Leader to conquer the English.

Ever after she went in Man's clothes, being armed Cap-a pe, and mounted on a
brave steed. No sword would please her, but one taken out of the Church of St.
Katherine at Firebois in Tourain. Polid. Virgil in Henr. VI. p. 471.
Her first service was in twice victualling of Orleans, whilst the English made
no resistance.

Under her conduct, the French drive away the English from Orleans. Hence she
marched on into other Countries, which instantly revolted to the French Crown.
The English in many skirmishes were worsted and defeated with few numbers. The
French following their blow in one twelvemonth recovered the greatest part of
that the English did possess. This was done, Anno 1429.

But this Joan of Arc after the Coronation of King Charles at Rhemes, seeking
to surprise St. Honories Ditch, near the City of St. Denis, she was not only
wounded her self, but also lost a Troop of her stoutest Soldiers, and not long
after, nigh the City of Compiegne, was taken prisoner by the Bastard of
Vendosme, who sold her to the Duke of Bedford, and by him she was kept a
prisoner a twelvemonth, and burnt in Rhoan, being condemned by the English for
a Witch.

The pragmatick Sanction of King Charles VII. was made in a Synod assembled at
Bourges, consisting of Archbishops, Bishops, Chapters, Abbots, Deans,
Provosts, and other Ecclesiastical persons, together with Doctors of Law,
Divine and humane, and other Learned Men of the Realm, and also of the chief
Lords of France, and others of the King's Council, about receiving the Councils
of Constance and Basil. The Sanction has this complaint; The Prelates, and
other ordinary dispensers, as also the Patrons, are deprived of their right,
the Hierarchy of the Church is confounded, and many other things are committed
contrary to the Laws of God and Man, to the loss of Souls and the oppression of
the Churches of our Realm. The Council of Basil did provide a remedy against
this abuse, and the pragmatick after it, but so as the Popes have cast off the
yoke of it, having disanulled almost all the Decrees of that Council.

Du. Moulin contr. Porron. li. 3. cap. 37.
The Popes for a long time branded all the French for Heretics, by reason of
that pragmatick Sanction.

Pope Martin V. dyed, Anno 1431. whom Eugenius IV. succeeded, who was deposed by
the Council of Basil, assembled by himself to reform the Church. In the place
of Eugenius, the Council chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy, who called himself Felix.
But Eugenius brought against Basil the Daulphin of France, who was afterward
Jews XI. who in all things opposed his Father Charles VII. and his
confederates. He brought four thousand horse against Basil to break the
Council; which yet he could not have effected, had not the pestilence within
Basil, forced the Fathers of the Council to separate themselves, after they had
condemned Eugenius as an Heretic, and unworthy to govern the Church.

But Eugenius took Arms, and being held up by Princes, maintained himself
against the Antipope Felix, who after he had been five years Pope, retired to
Ripaille, a pleasant house in Savoy, there to lead a private Life. So the
Popedom remained in the hands of a Man deposed by a Council assembled by the
Pope himself, where Bishops met out of all parts of the Roman Church. Note,
that after this deposition, he created many Cardinals and Bishops, whose Office
was null, since they were created by an Usurper, who had by force maintained
himself in the Office of a Pope after his deposition. And yet those very
Cardinals, created by this Usurper of the Popedom, are those very men that
elected the Successors of Eugenius, Nicholas, and Pius the second, from whom
is descended the succession of the Popes of our time, as the learned Dr.
Du-Moulin has well observed.

The Archbishop of Lions in the Council of Basil did declare, that in the time
of Pope Martin, Fox, Act and Monum.
there came out of France to the Court of Rome, nine millions of Gold, which
was gathered of the Bishops and Prelates, besides innumerable sums of the poor
Clergy, which daily without number ran unto the Court of Rome, carrying with
them all their whole substance. The Archbishop of Turenne said also at Basil,
that three millions of Gold came unto Rome in his time, within the space of
fourteen years, from the Prelates and prelacies, whereof no account could be
made, besides the poor Clergy, which daily ran to that Court.

The Emperor Sigismund required Peter de Aliaco, Chancellor of Paris, and
Cardinal of Cambray, to put in form some Articles concerning the Reformation of
the Church, that might be propounded to the Council of Constance
aforementioned, which he did. In that Book he insisteth on four things. 1. He
propounds, that general and Provincial Councils be kept, especially General,
for amending all persons and estates. 2. That for Reformation of the Roman
Court, it is sufficient that there be but one Cardinal out of every Province,
because the Cardinals are the causes of Schisms. 3. That Prelates be not chosen
young, imprudent, nor ignorant. 4. He requires the reformation of Monks,
speaking against their multitude and diversity, he taxes the Romish Court,
that they despise Divines, and advance only such as can bring them in gain. He
complains also of Pagan abuses, and Diabolical superstitions at Rome. But
(says he) as there were seven thousand who never bowed to Baal, so we may be
confident, that there are some who are desirous of the Churches Reformation.

Alanus of Chartres, Secretary to King Charles VII. wrote a Book in French,
entitled the Courtier, in which he extolleth the single life of Priests.

Libel. de Stat. Eccles. Gallic. in schismate. p. 75.
This King Charles VII. in the Ordinance made, Anno 1422. thus complains.
Diverse of our Subjects, and others by virtue of resignations, or Apostolic
Bulls, do take, and receive, and endeavor to get and obtain Benefices within
this Realm, and take possession of them, and labor to summon, or cause to be
summoned, our Liege-Subjects unto the Court of Rome, or before some
Commissioners or Delegates appointed by our Holy Father, which is downright to
oppose the Church and Clergy.

The Council which was begun at Ferrara, Anno 1438. and continued at Florence,
Panormit. in Tract. de Council. Basil. Circa princip. number. 6.
was never received and approved of in France. The Bishop of Panormo says, the
King of France did expressly forbid upon great penalties, that any of his
Dominions should go to Ferrara, to celebrate the ecumenical Council. Charles
VII. tells some Cardinals downright so, who were sent Ambassadors from
Eugenius, and were come to Bourges to get him to accept of it; and among others
to present him with this Article. That since such time as it was translated to
Ferrara, the King should reject the Council of Basil, and receive the Council
of Ferrara with the Acts thereof.

Whereto he made Answer, after six days deliberation with his Prelates, and
others assembled at Bourges. That he had received the Council of Basil for a
Council indeed; that he sent his Ambassadors thither; that many things were
there wisely determined, concerning Faith and Manners, and such as he liked
well of: but for that of Ferrara, he never did, and never would take it for a
Council. This Charles favored Pope Eugenius, but so as that he professes he
will stand to the Decrees of the Council of Basil.

James de Paradiso, of Chartres, who wrote a little after the Council of Basil,
Jacob de Paradiso. in lib. de Sep. ^em. statib. Eccles.
says. Seeing we hold it possible to proceed to a Reformation as well of the
Head as of the Members, by such as have Authority and Presidency both Spiritual
and Temporal, it must be either by one Man or more. That it should be by one
Man is against all reason, how eminent soever he be for his virtues, his
knowledge, his worth, although be he renowned for his miracles, nay in my
opinion not by the Pope himself alone. For there are so many Canons, Decretals
and Constitutions made by them already, as are good for naught but filling up
Parchment to no purpose, without working any Reformation. Besides, seeing it is
evident, that his own Court stands in great need of Reformation, as has been
well known by the common cries of the last General Councils; which Court of his
if he either cannot or will not reform, which he covers under his Wing, how is
it credible that he should reform the Church, which is of so large an extent?
Besides, it may be objected to him, Apply the salve to your own sores first as
being the Head; for when that is cured, you may with less difficulty cure the
Members; wherefore Physician heal thy self. Unsavory salt is not good for
seasoning. Wherefore (by the just judgment of God) his Decrees are scarce well
received yet, nor ever will be till he have reformed himself and his
Dependents. And verily I think the chief cause of the deformation in the Church
is the wound in the Head, which has need to be cured in the first place.

And anon after, Wherefore it seems to me an incredible thing, that the
Catholic Church should be reformed, unless first the Court of Rome be so, but
as the World goes now, we may see what an hard thing that is. Those who have
the Presidency in Councils on the Pope's behalf, when they see that matters in
the Council make against their Masters and them, what can be expected from
them, but that they will withstand the Decrees of such Councils with might and
main, either by dissolving them, or sowing dissentions in them; and so the
thing shall remain unperfected, and we driven to return to the old Wilderness
of Error and Ignorance: Every body knows this to be true, unless it be some
one happily who is not experienced in time past. The Tragedy which was acted in
our Age at the Council of Basil does sufficiently prove it, as they knew well
who have laid down the story before our eyes.

At this time flourished the Panormitan Abbot, the most famous of all the
Canonists. In the Council of Basil forenamed, Amadeus, Archbishop of Lions,
and Primate of all France, a Man of great Authority, being touched with the zeal
of Faith, which he saw there to be suppressed, said, Most Reverend Fathers, I
do see here a new sort of Prelates come in, which unto this present have kept
silence, and now begin to speak. Is not this like to a Miracle? I would to God
they came to defend the truth, and not to impugn Justice.

The Cardinal of Arles required that the Concordat of the twelve men should be
read; and many whispered him in the Ear that he should go forward. Then
Panormitan as soon as the Concordat began to be read, rising up with his
companions and other Arragons, cried out with a loud voice, saying: You Fathers
do contemn our Requests, you contemn Kings and Princes and despise Prelates. It
is not for you to conclude: We are the major part of the Prelates, we make the
Council, and it is our part to conclude, And I in the Name of all other
Prelates do conclude that is to be deferred. Then there was such a rumor in
the Council, as is wont to be in Battles with the sound of Trumpets, and noise
of Horsemen, When two Armies join; some cursing that which Panormitan went
about, others allowing the same.

Then Nicholas Amici, a Divine of Paris, said; Panormitan, I appeal from this
your conclusion to the judgment of the Council here present; neither do I
affirm any thing to be ratified which you have done, as I am ready to prove, if
it shall seem good. Many grave and Ancient men exhorted Panormitan to give over
his conclusion. But neither the Fathers of the Council were determined to
depart without a conclusion, neither was Panormitan minded to alter his intent
and purpose.

Then Thomas Rhedon, a French Carmelite, was a famous Preacher: he preached in
England, France and Italy; and in his Sermons said, Rome is the mother of
Abominations: the Church has great need of reformation; Prelates should leave
their pride and luxury, and follow the example of Christ and his Apostles.

For such preaching he was burnt at Rome by the command of Pope Eugenius.
Mantuan de vit. beat. ca. ult.
Baptista Mantuan speaking of this man's Death, says, Ah mad envy, what do
thou? Thou have not killed him, for his Soul cannot dye: but by hurting his
Earthy body, he is the sooner partaker of Eternal Life.

Stephen Brulifer, a Doctor of Sorbon, and a Franciscan, taught in his
Lectures, and maintained in disputes, that neither the Pope nor Council can
make any Statute or Article to bind the Conscience of a Christian; Fascicul.
rerum expet. fol. 164.
that all their Authority consists in urging of obedience unto God's word, in
preaching it, and administering the Sacraments which he has instituted, so that
they bring nothing without his command. He called justification by merits a
devilish. Doctrine since the Lamb of God was sacrificed, and has satisfied
God's Justice for us. The Doctors of Sorbon would not suffer him among them.
But he went to Diether Bishop of Mentz, which had been deposed for speaking
against the Avarice of Rome, and was restored.

Antonius de Rosellis, was a famous Reader of the Laws at that time, and writ
several Treatises against the Pope.

About this time lived also Wesselus Gantsfort, a Master in the University of
Paris, Petries* Church Hist. Cent. 15.
who for his free speaking and writing was forced to return to Groaning, his
Native Country. Then he lived in the Monastery of St. Agnes Hill near Swol,
where he taught many young men, and had correspondence with sundry Learned men.

Charles VII. dyed July 22. Anno 1461. Jews XI. his eldest Son succeeds him
in the Kingdom.

The late King Charles willing to follow the Council of Basil, had summoned a
Parliament at Bitures, where by the full consent of all the States in France
both Spiritual and Temporal, a certain constitution was decreed and published,
called the Pragmatick Sanction, wherein was comprehended, briefly the pith of
all the Canons and Decrees concluded in the Council of Basil, of which
constitution I hinted before. The same the said King Charles commanded to be
observed and ratified inviolably throughout all his Realm, for the Honor and
increase of Christian Religion for ever. Now King Jews XI. successor to
Charles, had promised before (being Daulphin) unto Pope Pius the second (called
before Aeneas Sylvius) that if ever he came to the Crown, the aforesaid
Pragmatick Sanction should be abolished. Pope Pius hearing him to be crowned,
sent unto him John Balveus a Cardinal with his Letters Patent, willing him to
be mindful of his former promise. The King hereupon directed the Pope's Letters
Patent with the said Cardinal to the Council of Paris, requiring them to
consult upon the cause.

The matter being proposed in the Parliament House, the King's Attorney named
Joannes Romanus, a learned and eloquent Man, proved the said Sanction to be
profitable, good, and necessary for the wealth of the Realm, and in no case to
be abolished. Unto whose sentence the University of Paris adjoining their
consent, Du. Tillet en son advis sur les libertez de l'Eglise Gallic.
did appeal from the attempts of the Pope to the next general Council. The
Cardinal fretting thereat, returned to the King, his purpose being not
obtained. And the same King Jews, Anno 1463. to secure himself from the
censures of the said Pope, with the advice of his Parliament, ordained an
Arrest, that the Cardinal of Constance should be punished, because he had
resisted the Rights and Authorities of the King, says Mr. John du Tillet.

King Jews XI. caused a Council of the Gallican Church, and all the
Universities to be assembled in the City of Orleans, to be more fully informed
in the business of the Pragmatick Sanction; at which, Peter Duke of Burbon,
Lord of Beaview, presided instead of the King.

And the Court of Parliament in those Remonstrances which they made unto King
Jews, among other inconveniences, which they urged would follow upon the
abrogation of the Pragmatick Sanction, say, By this means Strangers would be
preferred by the Pope, and not the Natives of the Country, wherein the
Benefices lie; not of the same qualities and conditions with the Country:
Whereupon would ensue questions and controversies betwixt the Churchmen or
Seculars, to the great hinderance of salvation of Souls; and irreverence of the
blessed Sacraments.

The Parliament of Paris in the Remonstrance made by Jews XI. touching the
defense of the Pragmatick Sanction, has inserted this Article; Item, It
belongs to our Sovereign Lord the King, who is the principal Founder,
Guardian, Protector of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, when she suffers
in her Liberties, Remonstr. de la cour de Parlem. de Paris. Art. 3.
to assemble and call together the Prelates, and other Clergymen as well
within this Realm, as of Daulphine, and in the same Assembly and Congregation
of the Gallican Church so called together, there to preside, and provide a
remedy against such attempts as may be prejudicial to the said Liberties.

We find an Ordinance made, (relating to Abbeys, Bishoprics and Benefices,) by
the same King, Anno 1464. which runs in this strain. Howbeit that by
Privileges Express, and Ordinances Royal, no Man can have any Elective
Benefice within our said Kingdom, and Daulphine, it concerns us much, that the
Bishoprics, Abbeys and other Dignities, and elective benefices, be furnished
with able and known Men, such as will comply with us, and be firm and sure for
us, especially such as hold the said Benefices, and by reason of them diverse
places and Fortresses, for which diverse duties and services belong unto us from
them: Yet notwithstanding our late pious Father granted the said favor and
Patents so plentifully, and to all manner of Persons of what Nation, Kingdom,
or Religion soever they were, without distinction; that many under shadow and
pretense of these Licenses and Patents, have insinuated and intruded themselves
into the said Dignities, and elective Benefices of our said Kingdom, and do
hold them; Howbeit many of them are Strangers unknown, and not to be trusted by
us; and such as neither can nor ought to perform those Duties and Services,
which they are bound to do unto us by reason of the said Benefices.

In this Century flourished Stephen Pasquier, a learned Frenchman, a notable
moral Philosopher, Ludov. Jacob. de Clar. script. Cabilon.
a Man well skilled in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and in all the liberal
Sciences. He has published also Icones, Epigrams, and Epitaphs, and several
other works. He has written an excellent Treatise in French, styled, La
Recherche de la France.

After the death of Pope Nicholas V. which happned in the year, 1455. tne
Cardinals entering into the conclave made four factions, eleven of them
pretending to the Papacy themselves, and yet there were but XV. for any one.
After this there began strong practices in the behalf of Cardinal Bessarion, a
Grecian, of Constantinople, an opposite to the Latin Church. He had disputed
much against purgatory unleavened bread, and against the very person of the
Holy Ghost, who (he asserted) proceeded from the Father alone, and not from the
Father and Son.

Cardinal Bettone, Archbishop of Avignon, labored to frustrate that
enterprise, who thus expressed himself.

Most Illustrious Lords, shall we prefer a Grecian to the Latin Church, and
establish a Neophite in the highest place of the Vatican? 11 Cardinalismo.
part. 3. lib. 1.
Who can assure us his conversion is true? Heterodox opinions in matter of
Religion, though renounced and altered with the Tongue, do yet leave a
muddiness and disturbance upon the heart. Shall we give the Keys of Heaven to
him, who for so many years, and with so many Arguments denied that there was a
purgatory? Shall we make him Head of the Catholic Church who opposed it with
so much boldness? Is the Church of Rome so poor and indigent, that there cannot
be one person found out who was born in her bosom, and is worthy of the
Government of the flock of Christ? What will the rest of the Nations say, to
see us go up and down begging our Popes of this Country, and of that? Rouse up
your selves most noble Companions, and permit not a thing so scandalous in the
Church of Christ. I am sure of this, He which is a Friend to Christianity, will
not give his voice for such a Pope.

These words being spoken with great energy, had such an effect upon the
Cardinals, that they chose Cardinal Alphonso Borgia, of the City of Valenza in
Spain, who took the name of Calixtus III.

He lived three years, and dyed August 6. 1458. and on the 20th. of the same
Month, Cardinal Aeneas Piccolomini of Siena, was created Pope by 18. Cardinals
which were present in the conclave, in which there were but two competitors for
the Papacy, viz. Cardinal Rotomagensis and Aeneas aforesaid: so that for the
four days time in which it was debated in the conclave, they had no other
difficulty but to make choice of the one or the other of these two.

It was strange to see each of these two persons driving on his own promotion,
magnifying his own virtues, and debasing the qualifications of his Adversary.

Rotomagensis in this manner went from one Cardinal to another, saying, What
have ye to do with Aeneas? How can ye think him worthy of the Papacy? What
passion blinds you, so as to confer an office of that import upon a gouty
Beggar? Where is his Knowledge? Where is his Learning? Will ye make him a Pope
because he is a Poet? It is not long since he came out of Germany; and may he
not be likely to transfer the Sea into Germany? I should not have ambition'd
it, had I not seen a person stand for it of much weaker parts than my self.
Besides, I am the Ancienter Cardinal of the two. And I believe you think I have
parts and Learning enough to govern the Church of Christ. Moreover, I am of
Royal extraction, and have wealth, friends, and faculties wherewithal to
accommodate and alleviate the necessities of the Church: and upon my Election,
the many Benefices I hold will be divided among you.

The Cardinal of Avignon pursued the interest of William Rotomagensis, not so
much as he was a Frenchman, as because upon the promotion the Church of the
said William, he hoped, with his Palace and Chancery would fall to him. He
assembled therefore certain Cardinals in an house of Office, as in a secret
place in the night, and agreed with them about the way how William should be
chosen. The Cardinal of Bologna discovered the business to Aeneas after
midnight.

In the morning early Aeneas went to Cardinal Roderigo, a Spaniard, and one of
the conspirators for Rotomagensis, who had received a promise in writing from
the said William, and the Cardinal of Avignon, that the Chancellourship should
not be taken from him.

He excused himself to Aeneas that he had concurred, because he certainly
believed he would be chosen, and he was unwilling to hang off, and lose his
Chancellours place. Aeneas answered, will you then sell your Vote, and by
Simony run your self into the displeasure of God? Do you take so little care
then to obtrude a youth upon the Vatican, and one that is an enemy to your
Nation? Know that the Chancellourship which is promised to you, is promised
likewise, and confirmed to the Cardinal of Avignon: and can you think that a
French Pope will do more for a Spaniard, than for one of his own Nation. But
Roderigo Borgia gave him not a word.

So Aeneas departing found out the Cardinal of Pavia, who was one of the
conspirators likewise, and accosted him in this manner. I hear you resolve to
choose Rotomagensis Pope: you ought to be ashamed to degenerate so much from
Cardinal Brando your Uncle, who with so much labor and sweat tired himself
out, to transfer the Pontifical court from Germany to Rome: and you that are
his Nephew would transport it from Italy into France. Surely Rotomagensis will
never give the Italians the precedence before the French, and yet you an
Italian will confederate sooner with France than with your own Country. Can
you have the heart to see your self a slave to the French, when it is in your
power to make the French obedient to our Nation?

Cardinal Pavia replied, that he did not believe that the French had any
thoughts against the profit of the Church, they having given with so much
generosity most of the Provinces it possessed, and they would not probably take
away that which they had so lately given. To which Aeneas replied thus.

But suppose that should be, ought it not to stir up your heart against
Rotomagensis, to consider the infamy of his manners, who is given to all
lasciviousness. You have often told me, you would sooner dye, than give your
voice for Rotomagensis. What is the reason of so great a change? Is he in the
twinkling of an eye become an Angel of a Devil? Or are you become a Devil of an
Angel?

Pavia was astonished at these words, and wept, replying, All that you say
Aeneas is true: But I have past my word to make Rotomagensis Pope, and if I do
not, I shall be held infamous, and a Traitor. To which Aeneas answered. Things
stand so, that which way soever you turn you, you cannot avoid the blemish of a
Traitor: It is in your power whether you will betray Italy and your Country;
or betray him, and be faithful to your Country and Italy.

With these words Pavia was overcome, and resolves to betray Rotogamensis. Then
meeting with Cardinal Pietro di Santa Maria nova, and other Italian Cardinals
in the Cardinal of Genoa's chamber, they all resolved to prefer Aeneas before
any body else.

Rotomagensis fearing things would not happen as he expected, seeing Aeneas
going toward the Schedule, he said to him with an humble voice, Aeneas, I
recommend my self to thee: remember me I beseech thee, and have compassion on
me. Aeneas answered him only thus, Poor Worm, thou mistakest in recommending
thy self to me. The Scrutiny being published, it appeared, that Aeneas had
three voices more than Rotomagensis, but they could not obtain their two
thirds, this astonished the French Cardinals.

The Cardinals Roderigo and Santa Anastasia declared Aeneas with a loud voice,
which Cardinal Prosper Colonna observing, being ambitious to have the honor of
making the Pope (forasmuch as there wanted but one voice) arose, took his way
toward Aeneas, and though he was restrained by Cardinal Niceno, and
Rotomagensis he cried aloud* I join my self to Cardinal Aeneas, and do make him
Pope. This being ^^^^d by the rest of the Cardinals, they all threw themselves
down at Aeneas's Feet, saluted him Pope, and confirmed the election afterward
with the usual suffrages. Then Cardinal Bessarion apologized for himself to the
new Pope, and for all the rest of the Cardinals who had favored Rotomagensis.

To whom Aeneas; I assure you, you shall be all equally dear to me; for I
acknowledge my Election, not from this person, or from that, but from God, and
the whole body of the College inspired by the Holy Ghost, from whence all
perfection comes.

The States assembled in the City of Tours, in a bill which they presented to
King Jews XI. among other things, say, That if the King do not undertake to
defend them, considering the quality of their persons, the power and Authority
of the Holy See Apostolic, they shall not be able to resist the usurpations
and impeachments which any Subject of the Realm, and others ambitious of
preferment, will make against the Electors, which have the right of Election,
or ordinary Donation by Apostolic censures. And by this means all this Kingdom
(which is already at a low ebb, and very poor) shall be stripped and dispoiled
of that little Money which remains of the former Exactions.

In one Ordinance of this King Jews we find these words. It is a strange thing
(says he) that the unjust exactions of the Court of Rome should be suffered;
such as their expectative Bulls, and other like knacks, their Money for
vacancies, which is levied contrary to the holy Canons and Decrees, and
contrary to the determination of the Catholic Church, and sacred Councils,
that what is so gotten may be employed in purchasing of Earldoms and Lordships,
to bestow upon people of mean condition, and to prefer them without any
precedent merit, without any service or use which they can do to the Church, or
for the defense of the Faith.

At this time lived Philip de Commines Knight, he was born at Commines a Town
in Flanders. In his youth he served Charles Duke of Burgundy, and afterward
Jews XI. King of France, who employed him in his most secret and weightyest
affairs. He has written the History of France, under Jews XI. and Charles
VIII. his Son. He wrote so plainly of the greatest affairs of State, that Queen
Katherine de Medices used to say, that he had made as many Heretics in
State Policy, as Luther had done in Religion. Stephanus Paschasius has this
Epitaph of him.

Gallorum, and nostrae Laus una and gloria gentis,
Hic Cominoee jaces, si modo forte jaces.
Historiae vitam potuisti reddere vivus,
Extincto vitam reddidit Historia.
Le recueil. des ^^^i^^nances de ^^^^an^^. ^o^n. (...) ^i^^e De l'^^^^lt.
We find certain proviso's made by King Jews XI. taken out of an Ancient
Register.

Jews by the Grace of God King of France, to our welbeloved and faithful
Counselor the Bishop of Limoges, and to our Trusty and welbeloved the Dean
and Chapter of Limoges aforesaid, and to every one of you, as well jointly as
severally, sends greeting.
Whereas our Truly and beloved, the Chancellours, Presidents, Masters of
Ordinary Requests for our Household, Counselors, Registers, Notaries, together
with our Advocates, and Attorney General for our Court of Parliament, every Man
in his place and Office are appointed and ordained to wait continually upon the
employment and administration of our said Court, and the administration of
Ju^^^^ Supreme and Capital for our said Realm, which is a very ^^^dable th^^
commendable and necessary for us, our Subjects, and the ^^^le Comm^^-wealth of
this our Kingdom, in which our Court, the ^^^^^s and Liberties of the Church of
France, whereof we are the Guardian and Protector, are preserved.

And for this reason our said Court does consist in part of Counselors and
Officers, which are Clergymen, and Ecclesiastical Persons. And in
consideration of the great, and laudable services of the said Chancellor,
Presidents, Masters of Requests, Counselors, Registers, Notaries, Advocates
and Attorney, they or others by their nomination, by means of the intercession
of our Predecessors to the Prelates, and other Patrons and eonferrers of
Benefices, have been preferred unto, and generally provided of Church Livings,
which the said Prelates, or others the Patrons, or bestowers of the same, have
freely conferred upon them, or have presented them unto the said Patrons in
favor and consideration of us, and their own great and commendable services as
aforesaid. Which said Chancellor, President, Master of Requests, etc. since
our coming to the Crown, nor a long time before, have not had any such
preferment upon our entreaty and request to the said Prelates, Patrons, and
Collatours, as they were wont to have. And for this Reason the said Court has
with our leave and License, made a certain Roll, wherein every one of them are
presented and nominated, or have presented and nominated others in their stead,
each one to some other preferment belonging to you, or other the Collators and
Patrons of the Benefices of our said Realm.

And whereas our Trusty and Welbeloved Counselor, Mr. German Chartelier, has
nominated his Son unto one of your Collations, and presentations, We entreat
and require you, to give, present, and bestow upon the said Mr. German
Chartelier, the first Benefice that shall be void within your Disposal,
Collation, or Presentation, as our said Counselor shall require, or cause you
to be required thereunto, hoping that you will not make any denial of this our
Request, which it most just and reasonable, but will obey it: especially
considering, that our said Chancellor, Presidents, Masters of Requests, etc.
are employed daily, and in continual trouble about the maintenance and defense
of the Rights and privileges of the Churches of our said Realm, and the
administration of Justice to our said Subjects: signifying unto you, that you
shall herein do us such an acceptable favor, as nothing more, by means whereof
we take you and your affairs into special recommendation.

Given at Mascon, August 18. in the sixth year of our Reign, thus subscribed.
By the King. In the presence of my Lord Cardinal D' Amboise Legate in France,
and others. Robertet.
Sealed with yellow Wax, with the King's broad Seal.




There is in the same Book an exemplification of the privy Letters, which the
Court of Parliament writ to the Prelates about these nominations, the Tenor
whereof is this.

Reverend Father in God, We send greeting to you,
It has pleased the King to grant unto the Presidents, Counselors and other
Officers of this Court, his Letters and nomination to some Benefices, which are
in the hands of some Collatours and Patrons of this Realm, and among others to
our Brother, such a Counselor of our said Sovereign in this Court, to the
Benefices which are in your gift and disposal. Wherefore we earnestly beseech
you, that in obedience to the said Letters, and in consideration of the deserts
of our said Brother, you would bestow upon him the first Benefice that falls in
your gift, being by him required thereunto. And in so doing you shall do us a
most acceptable courtesy, for which we shall take your affairs into special
Recommendation. Reverend Father in God, we beseech the blessed Son of God to
grant you your desire.

Written at Paris in the Parliament, under the Seal thereof, September. 7. The
Men celebrating the Parliament. And this Annotation is written in the Margin.
Antiquitus fiebant aliter.




Voyez le recueil Du Fontan. les grand. ordonnances. Tom. 4. Tit. ^. cap. 1.
The said King Jews XI. in an Ordinance of January 8. 1475. makes this
Narration. When any Questions or differences come upon us, as well concerning
the state of the Church of our Kingdom, as other our affairs, we that ought to
have recourse to them, cannot be assisted, aided, or advised therein by reason
of their absence, where we and the Commonwealth are oftentimes much interessed.

Then after this he ordains in this manner.

We Will, Ordain, and declare by these Presents, that all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Prelates, and others, that hold any Dignities within our
Kingdom, and do reside out of the bounds thereof, and out of our Obedience: Do
Return and Repair within five months after the publication of these Presents,
unto their Benefices within our sald Realm, or unto some one of them if they
have any more, and there make continual Residence, there to celebrate and
continue divine Service as belongs unto them, and as they are bound to do. As
also to the end that they may serve and assist us in our Councils, and
otherwise to the behoof of us, and the Commonwealth of our said Kingdom when
need shall be. And this upon pain of being deprived of the Temporals of their
said Benefices.

Fabian's chroni.
King Jews falling into a long* and and grievous sickness, gave much Alms: and
in the Church of St. John Baptist in Paris, he founded certain Priests to sing
Masses for him perpetually, for whose maintenance he gave of yearly Rent a
thousand pounds of Paris Money: So he remained in a languishing, condition
three years before he dyed.

He dyed August 30. 1483. and his Son, Charles VIII. succeeded him in the
Kingdom, Charles being crowned at Rhemes, was from thence with pomp brought to
Paris. A general Parliament was held at Tours, where the Pragmatick Sanction
was restored to use it as they had accustomed.

In the year, 1494. this King Charles VIII. carried an Army of fifty thousand
of Foot and Horse out of France into Italy, and in two months space, he became
Lord of the whole Kingdom of Naples, except some little Towns on the Seaside,
which held for King Ferdinand.

The Pope seeing the success of King Charles, makes a League with the Emperor
Maximilian, and the Venetians. Into this League also entered Jews Duke of
Milan, notwithstanding that by his procurement King Charles took occasion to
come into Italy. King Charles having Intelligence of this League, resolves to
leave such forces in the Kingdom of Naples, as might be sufficient for the
defense thereof, and with the rest of his Army to return into France; and
marching toward Rome, he gave the Pope to understand, that he came to do his
duty to his Holiness. Pope Alexander not daring to abide his coming departed
from Rome, wherein, and in other of the Pope's Towns, the King's Troops did
much harm.

The French King departing from Rome, continues his journey toward France.
Coming near to Parma, passing the River Tarro, he met a great Army of his
Enemies, whereof Francis Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua was General, with whom
they came to a Battle, in which there dyed a thousand Men of both sides, Anno
1495. But after some Treaties between the two Armies, the French in a night
went toward Aste, where the King remained certain days, and a Peace was
concluded between him and the Duke of Milan; and Jews Duke of Orleans rendering
Novarra, King Charles returned into France, and Ferdinand King of Naples
recovered that Kingdom.

Concerning the abuses of the Court of Rome, among the Statutes of this King
Charles VIII. I find in a Statute of February 18. 1496. this complaint. Some
years ago the Popes of Rome, in despite and contempt of the Decrees of Ancient
Fathers and General Councils, have brought all Ecclesiastical Dignities,
Cathedral and Collegiate under their disposal, and all other of greatest value
next after Bishoprics: Review of the Counc. Trident. li. 2. ca. 6.
they have granted Livings in reversions upon the Vacancy to any that would sue
for them; which has been the occasion for one to thirst after the death of
another. They have invented abundance of tricks, whereby they have utterly
annihilated the power and Authority of the Bishops, Chapters and Colleges,
insomuch that there is none now, that has the power to present to a living.

In the Year, 1498. King Charles VIII. dyed of an Apoplexy at Amboise. In him
failed the direct Line of the Kings of France, descended from Philip of Valois,
and the Crown fell to the collateral Line, of the which the nearest Prince of
the Blood was Jews Duke of Orleans and Valois, who succeeded in the Kingdom of
France. He was an excellent Prince, of a liberal Nature, affable, temperate,
and of great moderation, and was happy in his Reign. Who subdued under his
obedience, Milan, with Lombardy, and Genoa with her two Rivers, East and West,
together with the Islands of Corsica and Chio, reconquered and divided the
Realm of Naples, with the King of Spain, but in the end lost it by his
Treachery, suppressed the Pope's insolency, and defeated the Venetians. He was
crowned in the Abbey of Saint Denis in France, on the first of July following,
and on the next day made his triumphant entry into Paris.

Century XVI.
Jews XII. after he had worthily performed the Funerals of his Predecessor,
he first purchased the love of the Noblemen of his Court, maintaining every
man in his State and Dignity, and the Magistrates in their Office. He sought to
cut off the tediousness of Suits; he freed his Subjects from the third part of
the Subsidies which oppressed them: he put the Men at Arms into Garrisons,
reducing them to the Ancient Discipline of War. He made many good Laws against
the abusive charges in the pursuit of Justice: neither did he ever publish any
Edict before it was confirmed by the Judgment of Sovereign Courts.

De Serres Hist. in vit. Ludovici. XII.
His Decrees contained some limitation of the privileges granted in old time to
Universities, the which they abused to the oppression of the people. The
University of Paris opposes against the publication thereof, and many infamous
Libels were published against the King and the Chancellor of Rochefort. The
Scholars flock together, resolving to abandon both study and the exercise of
Learning. John Cave being Rector, forbids the Regents to read any more, and the
Preachers to preach, until the University had recovered her Ancient
privileges. The King hereupon draws many Men at Arms into Paris, and in
Parliament confirms the abovenamed ordinances by an Edict.

The Rector fearing a check, keeps all the Scholars within their Lodgings, and
revokes the commandment he had given. John Standon, a Doctor of Divinity, one
of the chief of the Faction, was banished the Realm. Thomas Warnet of Cambray
(who in preaching had railed against the King's Authority) banished himself.
All things being thus settled, Jews takes upon him the Title of Duke of Milan.
He puts away Joan his Wife, and marries with Ann, the Widow of the late King
Charles.

Our Ladies Bridge at Paris fell, threescore houses were ruined with it, and a
great number of persons were swallowed up in the River.

As touching the privileges of the Kings of France, we find, when the
Parliament of Paris gave their opinion, and all the Chambers met together about
receiving the Cardinal of Amboise, and the qualifications that should be put to
his faculties (which was on December. 11. 1501.) the Laws of the Land and the
Liberties of the Gallican Church were represented at large, among which this
was one, That the King of France cannot be excommunicated, that his Kingdom
cannot be put under an Interdict, as is collected out of the Ancient Registers.

In the beginning of this Century, Mr. John le Maire one of the French
Historians wrote his Book of Schism, and therein gives us to understand, that
there were endeavors then for the Reformation of the Church. Every good
Christian (says he) ought to pray to God, that the two last Councils of the
Gallican Church, may engender one great, Universal, and general Council of all
the Latin Church, to reform that Church, as well in the Head as the Members; so
as the general Councils use to do. And that if it be not kept at Lions, it may
be kept in some other place most expedient and necessary for the public good:
which may be very well done at this present, considering the great peace, amity
and union which is betwixt the two greatest Potentates in Christendom, the
Emperor and the King, together with a third confederate in the League, the
Catholic King Ferdinand of Arragon, who ought altogether to reform the abuses
of the Church of Rome. Which Reformation must of necessity be made.

Thus he speaks of the aforementioned Pragmatick Sanction. Forasmuch (says he)
as the Pope's are not content, that the Pragmatick Sanction be in force,
although it be founded upon the Holy Canons, Le Maire en la 2 part. de la
differ de schisms.
and Authorized by the Council of Basil, but it derogates from the unsatiable
covetousness of the Court of Rome, therefore they say it is a pure Heresy.

In the time of this King Jews XII. lived Robert Gagwin, who wrote the French
History. Erasmus his intimate Friend, calls him a most discreet
Historiographer: he compares him to Salust and Livy, Au^erti Miroel* Elog. Belg.
for purity of speech and composition of his History. He was also a good Poet,
and an excellent Orator, and a Man well skilled in all polite Learning. He was
sent Ambassador by the King of France into England, Italy, and Germany.

About this time flourished Jacobus Faber, skilled in all Learning, and
especially in Divinity. Farel and Calvin were his Scholars. Illyr. Catal. Test*
verit.
Sleidan says, he suffered great persecution for the truth, from the Masters
at Paris.

He was very low, of a modest countenance, and a sweet disposition his mind
wholly estranged from all injustice. I find him thus characterized.
Celeberrimus nostri seculi Philosophus, Belg. quinimo and totius Galliae unum
decus. Primus apud Gallos (ut Cicero apud Romanos) Philosophiam rudem and
impolitam cum eloquentia junxit. Est in dicendo sublimis, in sententiis gravis,
in attentione exquisitus, in compositione diligens ac curiosus. Trithem. de
Viris. Illustrib.

Jodocus Clichtoveus, a most learned Man of Paris, was contemporary with
Jacobus Faber.

De Serres Hist. in vit. Ludov. XII.
King Jews and the Emperor being at variance, a Treaty was agreed on, and for
this Treaty the Cardinal of Amboise, Lieutenant General for his Majesty at
Milan. went to the Emperor to Trent, where first they Treated of the marriage
of Charles the eldest Son to the Archduke Philip of Austria, with Claude, the
only Daughter of Jews XII. then about the calling a General Council to reform
the Church, not only in the members, but even in the Head doubtless there is
small assurance in the friendship of Princes, who thirst after nothing but
their own greatness.

Moreover, seldom shall we see any thing succeed well with them, who have
colored their passions with the name of the Church, and the Reformation
thereof, which they did not really intend. And likewise all the malicious
practices, and School-tricks of a Cardinal, (whose ambitious spirit gaped after
the Popedom) what could they produce but smoke for France, and combustion for
Italy?

The Archduke Philip with his Wife, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and
Isabel Queen of Castile, passed through Paris November. 25. and from thence to
Blois, where the King and Queen remained, where they concluded the marriage of
their children. But Man purposes, and God disposes.

The Duke of Milan was soon after made Prisoner by the Treachery of the
Suissers: Cardinal Ascanius leaves Milan abandoned, but he is betrayed, and led
prisoner to Venice: but the French King sent for him to Venice, and not only
the person of the Cardinal was delivered to him, but also all those of Milan
that were taken with him. The City of Milan, which had revolted from the
French, sent speedy Ambassadors to the Cardinal D' Amboise to solicit for
pardon. He received them into grace, and pardoned the Rebellion in the name of
the King, but under this bond, to pay three hundred thousand Ducats, of the
which the King afterward discharged them in a great part. He pardoned also
other Towns that had rebelled, which he taxed according to their Quality,
making the Victory profitable, and the transgressions of the Offenders an
increase of the King's Treasure.

Ludovicus Sforza Duke of Milan was carried to Lions, where the King was at
that time: and entering the Town at noonday, Guicciardin's Hist. li. 4.
multitudes of people flocked to see a Prince who from such greatness and
Majesty was fallen into so great a misery. And not obtaining leave to be
brought into the King's presence, which he much desired, he was conveyed within
two days after to the Tower of Loches, wherein he remained prisoner ten years,
even to the end of his Life. The Cardinal Ascanius followed him a little after,
but he was both received with more honor and humanity, and graciously visited
by the Cardinal D' Amboise, by whose intercession he was sent to the great
Tower at Bourges, a prison more honorable, wherein the King that sent him had
before been restrained two years in captivity.

Pope Alexander VI. being dead, Anno 1503. Pius III. was chosen, but he dyed
within 27. days. Then was Julius II. chosen, a Man froward, cruel, factious and
turbulent.

Anno 1506. the French King, albeit the year before he was much discontented
with the Pope, for that he had disposed and inducted the Benefices which were
void by the death of Cardinal Ascanius, and others in the Duchy of Milan,
without his participation: and for that also in the creation of other
Cardinals, he had refused to call the Bishop of Achz, Nephew to the Cardinal D'
Amboise; and the Bishop of Baieux, Nephew to Monsieur Trimoville; being
earnestly solicited by the King, who in those regards had caused to be
sequestered the fruits of the Benefices, which the Cardinal S. P. ad Vincula,
and others of the Pope's Amity possessed in the State of Milan. Yet the King on
the other side judged it necessary to re-enter into reconcilement with the
Pope, to whom after he had released all the sequestrations, he sent the Bishop
of Sisteron, the Pope's Nuncio, to negotiate with him many plots against the
Venetians, to whom he knew the Pope could not but continue to bear an ill will,
for the desire he had to recover the towns of Romania.

The Bishop of Sisteron being received and heard with gladness agreeable to the
nature of his desire, was dispatched, and sent back again with diligence, to
solicit between them a reunion and amity: wherein the better to dispose the
mind of the King, and the Cardinal D' Amboise, he promised by writ (which the
said Nuncio carried with him) the Dignity of Cardinal to the Bishops of Achz
and Baieux. Yet notwithstanding in so great an heat of forwardness, he entered
oftentimes into many doubts and difficulties, either for a certain hate he had
conceived against the French King, at such time as himself fled into France to
avoid the trains laid for him by Pope Alexander; or for that it much
discontented him to be as it were drawn by compulsion by the power and
importunity of the French King, to transfer to the Cardinal D' Amboise the
Legation of the Kingdom of France: or lastly, for that he suspected lest the
said Cardinal (who aspired to the Popedom) not having patience to tarry for his
Death, would seek to climb up to it by ways sinister and extraordinary. These
things made him often to waver in his Resolutions, determining not wholly to
join with the French King; and yet without his conjunction, he knew it was
impossible, that at that time any thing of consequence should succeed with him.

Pope Julius resolves to recover Bolognia by force of Arms, for a hatred newly
kindled against John Bentivoglo, because in the time of his adversity, when he
durst not abide in Rome; and seeking safety in Cento, a Town of his Bishopric
in Bolognia, he was driven to flee away by night, hearing a bruit published
that he should be apprehended prisoner at the instance of Pope Alexander.

The Pope took Cesena and Forolivio, from Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope
Alexander VI. He expelled the Family of Bentivogli out of Bononia: he
excommunicated the Venetians, and gave their Lands to the first that could take
them. King Jews XII. overthrew the Venetians at Abdua: and albeit he gave the
greatest part of his purchase unto Julius, yet he envyeth the prosperity of
Jews, and combined again with the Venetians, to expel him out of Italy.

Anno 1510. died the Cardinal D' Amboise, Uncle to the Lord of Chaumont, a man
of a great spirit, and well experienced in affairs: but with the service of his
Master, he did not forget the content of his own private ambition.

The Pope renews the War against those of Ferrara, and seeing himself unable
to prevail with his Temporal Forces, he excommunicates Alphonso of Este, and
all those who were or should come to his succor, namely Charles of Amboise,
with all the chief of the French Army.

De Serres Hist.
This furious course made King Jews to assemble all the Prelates of his Realm
at Tours, with the most famous Doctors of all his Universities, as well in
Divinity, as in the Civil and Canon Laws, who resolve upon eight notable
conclusions against the Pope.

Eight conclusions made by the French against the Pope at Tours.
1. That it was not lawful for the Pope to assail any Temporal Princes by force
in their Territories not belonging to the Church.

2. That it was lawful for any such Prince, for the defense of his Subjects and
Country, not only to repel this injury by force, but also to invade the
Territories of the Church possessed by any such Pope, not with an intent to
hold them, but to the end (the Pope being dispossessed thereof) he should have
no more means to molest his Estate; seeing the Pope had through the aid of the
said Prince recovered the same Lands usurped before by certain Tyrants.

3. That for so manifest a wrong and unjust attempt, any such Prince might
withdraw himself from the Pope's obedience, for the defense of his Temporal
Estate, seeing he had stirred up many other Princes and Common-weals to invade
the Dominions of the said Prince, who deserved reward and love from the
Apostolical See.

4. That this substraction being made, they should observe in France the common
and Ancient Law, and the Pragmatick Sanction enacted at the Council of Basil.

5. That any such Prince might by force defend another Prince, his confederate,
and of whom he had lawfully taken the protection for those Seigneuries which he
had long enjoyed with a just Title, seeing this consederacy had been made with
the consent of the said Pope, who (as the chief) was comprehended therein: and
that this Prince allied according to the form of the League, had given aid for
the recovery of the patrimony of St. Peter.

6. That the Pope pretending any thing due for any Rights belonging to the
Church of Rome, and the Prince on the other side challenged to hold of the
Empire, and should refer this controversy to the censure of indifferent
Judges, as Equity required; that in this case it was not lawful for the Pope
without further knowledge of the cause, to make War against any such Prince,
which if he did, the said Prince might oppose his Forces with other Princes his
confederates, so as that right had not been possessed by the Roman Church
within an hundred years.

7. That if the Pope would not accept this honest and lawful offer, but
contrary to order and right should give sentence against any such Prince,
maintaining his right not to depend upon the Church; neither he nor any other
by opposing should incur the censure of that sentence, seeing that Prince had
no free access, neither to go nor send to Rome to defend his Rights.

8. That if the Pope unjustly (the due course of Law not observed) should by
main force pronounce any censures against any such Princes, their Allies and
Subjects, resisting in such a case, the sentence were of no force, neither
could it be by any means binding.

The King hereupon sent Ambassadors to Pope Julius in the name of the French
Church, to admonish him, that leaving his designs, he should attend to peace,
and reconcile himself with the aforesaid Princes, and upon refusal they should
summon him to call a Council according to the Decrees of the Holy Council of
Basil. But the Pope despises all.

Then the Emperor's and the King of France his Deputies, assisted by the
Cardinals of St. Croix, St. Malo, Baieux, Colense, Albret, and many others on
May 19. 1511. publish a general Council to be held at Pisa for the first of
September following, the which City was lately returned to the obedience of the
Florentines.

To cross this Council, the Pope (following the advice of Anthony de Mont of
St. Sansovin, one of the eight Cardinals newly created at Ravenna) appointed a
general Council on May 1. at St. John de Lateran in Rome. And to keep the
King's forces quiet, he colourably gave ear to a peace, which the Bishop of
Tivoli his Nuncio, and the King of Scots Ambassador treated for him with the
King, and the Cardinals of Nantes and Strigonium with the Pope.

But Julius having been sick, and being freed from the fears of death, he makes
a new League with the Senate of Venice, and the King of Arragon against the
French: to maintain (as he said) the union of the Church, to defend it from
apparent Schism, and to recover all such places as depended either mediately or
immediately upon the Church.

The first day of September being come, the Cardinals Attorneys in their names
do celebrate the Acts appertaining to the opening of the Council at Pisa.

The Pope being wroth, declared Florence and Pisa subject to the Ecclesiastical
censure, by virtue of the Bull of the Council which he had caused to be
published: and he pronounced the abovenamed Cardinals void of the Dignity of
Cardinals, and subject to the punishments of Heretics and Schismatics.

The Florentines and Pisans appeal from this curse to the Holy Council of the
Universal Church. At the first Session the Cardinals call the Clergy to assist
in the Cathedral Church: but not one appears: the Priests deny their
Ornaments to the Cardinals offering to celebrate the Mass, and shut the Church
doors; so that the Cardinals fearing they should not remain safe in Pisa,
decreed to have the Council transported to Milan.

They found the like difficulties at Milan. The Clergy abstain from saying
Service, as before accursed persons; the Commons curse them and openly deride
them, especially the Cardinal of St. Croix, chosen President of the Council.
This dealing of the Milanois, made them to transport the Council to Lions,
where Julius was suspended from his Popedom: and prohibitions were made
throughout all France, not to send any Money to Rome, nor to bring any Bulls
from thence. Hereupon Pope Julius did not only excommunicate all the French,
but also granted Bulls of pardon to any one that should kill a Frenchman,
giving the Realm of France, and that of Navarr (in hatred of John of Albret,
allied to the King, and at the persuasion of Ferdinand King of Arragon) in prey
to the first conqueror.

But King Jews XII. beat the Pope in a Battle near Ravenna, which beating
wrought this effect, that the King was sued to, Vid. Nich. Gyles in the life of
Jews XII. fol. 134 and 135.
and received with as many spiritual graces as he was pleased to have, and the
Kingdom of France was reconciled unto his Holiness. But soon after by Treachery
the French King loses the whole Estate of Milan. Maximilian, Grand child to
Jews Sforza, is restored, and named Duke of Milan. And Navar is usurped by the
King of Arragon. Pope Julius dies, February 21. Anno 1513. and John Cardinal
of Medicis succeeded him, who was called Leo the tenth. The same year dyed Ann
the French Queen, and the next year Jews King of France marries the Lady
Mary, sister to Henry VIII. King of England.

But as Jews pleased himself exceedingly in the excellent beauty of his new
Spouse, behold a Fever accompanied with a flux of blood frees him from the
cares and troubles of this World. So Jews dyed, on January 1. 1514. greatly
lamented of all his Subjects.

Francis, the first of that name, succeeded him in the Kingdom: he was before
Duke of Valois, and Earl of Angolesm, Son to John Earl of Angolesm, who was the
youngest Son of Jews Duke of Orleans, (murdered by the Burgundian at Paris,
in the time of Charles VI.) who was also the youngest Son of King Charles V. He
was anointed at Rhemes being 22. years old.

William Budeus, born at Paris, was Secretary to King Francis the first, and
keeper of his Library, and afterward his Counselor, Illyr. Catal. Test*
Verit. li. 19.
and Master of Requests. His Commentaries upon the Greek Tongue, his Epistles,
Philology, his Commentaries upon the Pandects, and other of his works, show his
great knowledge in the Greek and Latin Tongues. In those things which he wrote
before the preaching of Luther, he does sharply and largely accuse the Pope,
Prelates, and Popish priests, especially in his Book de Ass which was
published, Anno 1513. He thus describes the State of the Church at that time;
saying, Montacut. Analect. exercit. 5. Sect. 4.
The Clergy are worse than the worst of the people in all kind of Vice and
wantonness: Prelates are ignorant, and enemies of Learning, having no respect
to the salvation of Souls, but rather thrusting them down to Hell by their
false Teaching, and wicked example.

He was a Man of great Learning, and worthy to be had in perpetual memory: for
this cause especially, that He and Cardinal Bellay, Leigh's Treatise of
Religion and Learning. l. 3. c. 8.
Bishop of Paris, did counsel and persuade this King Francis to do a most noble
Act, that is, to appoint great stipends for the Readers of Tongues and good
Arts in Paris. Buchanan has this distich of him.

Gallia quod Graeca est, quod Graecia Barbara non est; Buchan. li. 2. Epigram.

Vtraque Budaeo debet utrumque suo.
Stephanus Paschasius in his Icones has these Verses of him.

Et Latiae nobis debent Graiaeque Camenae:
Laudem utram quaeras, magnus utraque fui.
He dyed at Paris, Anno 1539.

The several courses King Francis took for the restoring of Learning in France,
Antoin du Verdier mentions in his learned preface to his Bibliotheque: and in
his Book he says, he was deservedly called, The Father of Learning, because he
founded Colleges in Paris for the instructing of youth in the Hebrew, Greek and
Latin Tongues, and gathered together Learned men of good life out of all parts
of the World, to read publicly in the University of Paris. Thevet and
Postellus traveled into the East, to procure him rare Books for his Library.

Through long use and custom he had acquired much knowledge: for Dining and
Supping, his talk was commonly of Learning, and that most eagerly, using many
years for the same purpose James Coline, a Learned man, and in the vulgar
Tongue most eloquent: and after him Peter Castellan. Of these two he had
learned whatsoever was written in the Books of Poets, Historiographers, and
Cosmographers. Moreover, he attained to a perfect knowledge of whatsoever
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Leigh of Relig. and Learn.
Pliny, and such other like, have written of the nature of Plants, Herbs,
Beasts, Metals, precious Stones, and by daily use and hearing, did remember
them. He used also to confer much of the Mathematical Sciences, and often to
reason out of the Scriptures. In his own Tongue he was always accounted right
grave and eloquent. Throughout Greece and Italy; Sleid. Comment. li. 19. p. 283.
he had those that sought and copied out for him the works of old Writers, and
he made a great Library, the keeper whereof was Castellan.

William Bellay was a man of much honor and virtue, and a special Ornament of
the French Nobility, by reason of his notable Learning, Eloquence, Experience,
and singular Dexterity in all affairs.

Andrew Thevet was Cosmographer to the King of France. He has written an
Universal Cosmography in French in two Tomes, in Royal paper, in which he does
not only rehearse what he learned from the Books of others, but what himself
had seen by traveling almost over the World, and by viewing all the Seas: so
that some think there is no thing more learned, and more orderly disposed. He
has also written, Les vies des hommes illustres, the lives of Illustrious men
in French, in a great Folio with their pourtraicts.

Bibliand. de at. Comm. on n. lingu.
William Postellus was a good Linguist, but he was little better than mad, for
he held that Adam's Soul was in him, with many other gross opinions. Bibliander
makes honorable mention of him, because he was the first Christian man that
published the rudiments of the Arabic Grammar. There are these works of his:
De Linguarum 12 Differentium Alphab.
Clavis absconditorum aeternae veritatis.
De Phaenicum Lit.
De Orbis Terrae Concordia.
De Etruriae Origin.


Peter Castellan was Bishop of Orleans, a Man highly esteemed in France at this
time for his excellent Learning. Tur^eb. advers. li. 24.
He has written four Books de esu carnium.

Marguerite, Queen of Navarr, was Sister to Francis the first. There are her
Memoires. In the Epistle to the Reader are these words, Que Rome vante taut qu'
il luy plaira les Commentaires de son premier Empereur, La France a maintenant
les Memoires d'une grande Roine qui ne leur cedent en rien. Her poetical works
are joined together.

Clandius Espencaeus, a Doctor of Sorbon flourished at this time. None of the
Divines of Paris had a greater concourse of all Degrees and was more admired
for his frequent Sermons to the people than He. There are many questions
concerning Religion, discussed by him in Latin and French with great sub^ilty.

He was very eloquent. His Commentaries upon Timothy and Titus, are well
approved. In his Comment on Titus he proves by many good Authorities that
Clergymen are subject to Secular Princes, and owe all honor unto them as to
their Lords.

On the same Epistle he sets down a List of the many tricks and devices of the
Court and Chancery of Rome, invented merely for catching of Money; where he
puts in among the rest expectative graces or reversions, secret reservations,
bestowing of Benefices upon the first comer, uniting of many Benefices to one
Chapel, Prebend, or other Benefice, Mandates, preventions, propinations, small
or ordinary services, conditional resignations, detaining of all the revenue in
lieu of pension, and a number of such like things which were not heard of for a
long time in the Church, and which would be strange news to Peter and Paul, if
they should come into the World again.

This learned Divine has spoken much of these things.

And those that desire further to be informed herein, I will refer to the Book
entitled, Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae, Printed at Paris by Toussaint Denis,
Anno 1520.

And yet this is nothing in comparison of the Penitentiary Tax, Printed with
the same book, where every sin, every crime, how heinous soever, has it is
price set; so that to have a License and impunity for sinning, there needs no
more but to be rich; to have a pasport to Paradise, both for a man's self, and
for his misdeeds.

But that which might make Rome blush (if there were any shame in her brow) is,
that pardons and indulgences are denied to the poor and indigent, who are not
of means sufficient to raise these criminal and incestuous impositions.

It may seem that the Bull of Pope Leo X. added at the end of the Concordat,
and confirmed by the Letters of King Francis I. has derogated from the
Pragmatick Sanction. But that Bull was never received and approved in France,
Petr. Rebuff. in Concord. Rubric. de m^ndat. Apostol.
as Mr. Peter Rebuffus does testify. This constitution, (says he) as being
about a money-mater, was never received by the Inhabitants of this Kingdom. Nor
is it comprehended within the Concordate; nor the King's Declaration concerning
it verified in the Court of Parliament.

In the year, 1516. Pope Leo X. under pretext of collecting money to wage War
against the Turk, sent Indulgences through all Christendom, granting pardon of
sins both for guilt and punishment unto all which would give Money. Tecelius
exposes these Indulgences to sale in Germany, and Luther writes against the
abuses of them, some write against Luther, and others defend him.

Luther proceeds, and writes against other corruptions of the Church of
Rome, and many are enlightened by him. Charles V. being Emperor, calls a Diet
at Worms, and thither is Luther summoned Anno 1521. who stoutly defends his
Doctrine, and many Priests began to preach, and even in Worms after they had
seen the constancy of Luther, they receive the preachers of the Gospel; and
because they could not have the liberty of the Churches, they set up a portable
pulpit, and heard the preachers in many places of the Town until the year 1525.
The Gospel was preached in Saxony, and embraced there, as also at Halberstat,
Hamburgh, Pomerania, Liveland, and many other places.

Charles Duke of Savoy was desirous of truth and purity, Luther understanding
it by Annemund Coot a French Knight, writes unto him a confession of Faith to
confirm him in the zeal of piety. In the closure he says, Well! Illustrious
Prince, stir up that spark which has begun to kindle in thee, and let fire
come from the house of Savoy, as from the house of Joseph, and let all France
be kindled by thee; yea, let that Holy fire burn and increase, that at last
France may be truly called for the Gospel's sake the most Christian Kingdom.

In the year 1523. the Gospel began to be openly preached in France at
Gratianople in the Daulphinate by Peter Sebevilla. Zuinglius by writing
encouraged him to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, and sound forth the Gospel
in France.

At the same time in Melda about ten miles from Paris, was Bishop William
Brissonnet; he was a Lover of Truth and Light, he passes by the Monks, and
sought learned Men to teach the Gospel. So from Paris, he calls Jacobus
Faber, William Farel, Arnold, and G^rard Red, who did most fervently instruct
the people in the truth.

But the Bishop's courage was soon abated by terrible menaces of the
Sorbonnists, nevertheless the word of God was planted in the hearts of many,
and by the wondrous counsel of God from the persecution of that one Church many
Churches through France were planted, for both the Teachers and hearers were
spread abroad.

After Martin Luther had opened the way in Germany, John Calvin born at Noyon
in Piccardy, a Man of a great wit, marvellously eloquent, and generally
Learned, departing from the Faith then generally held, proposed in his Books
which he published in Print, and in his Sermons which he preached in diverse
places in France, one hundred twenty eight axioms (so he called them)
disagreeing from the Roman Church.

The French Wits, curious by Nature, and desirous of Novelties, began at first
rather for pastime than through choice to read his writings, and frequent his
Sermons. But as Davila, a Papist, observes in his History of the civil Wars of
France, as in all business of the World it uses often to fall out, that things
beginning in jest, end in earnest; so these opinions sowed in God's Church,
Davila Hist. of the Civil Wars of France lib. 1.
so crept up (says he) that they were greedily embraced and firmly believed by
a great number of people and persons of all qualities, insomuch that Calvin
came to be reverenced of many in a short time, and believed for a new
miraculous Interpreter of Scripture, and (says my Author) as it were a
certain infallible Teacher of the true Faith.

The foundation of this Doctrine was in the City of Geneva, situate upon the
Lake Anciently called Lacus Lemanus, upon the confines of Savoy; which having
rejected the Government of the Duke and Bishop, to whom formerly it paid
obedience under the name of Terra Franca, under pretext of liberty of
conscience, reduced it self into the form of a Commonwealth. From thence books
coming out daily in print, and men furnished with Wit and eloquence insinuating
themselves into the Neighbor Provinces, who secretly sowed the seeds of this
new Doctrine, in progress of time, all the Cities and Provinces of the Kingdom
of France were filled with it, though so covertly, that there appeared openly
only some few marks and conjectures of it.

This began in the time of King Francis the first, who though sometimes he made
severe resolutions against the preachers and professors of this Doctrine, yet
notwithstanding being continually busied in Foreign Wars took little notice
thereof.

Peter Viret was an eloquent French Divine, whom Calvin desired for his
Colleague. His French Books are mentioned by Antoine du Verdier in his
Bibliotheque.

William Farel was also a learned Divine of Geneva. He has written De Vray
Usage de la Croix, and other Books.

Upon Calvin, Farel, and Viret, there is this Epigram of Beza.

Gallica mirata est Calvinum Ecclesia nuper,
Quo nemo docuit doctius.
Est quoque te nuper mirata, Farelle, tonantem,
Quo nemo tonuit fortius.
Et miratur adhuc fundentem mella Viretum,
Quo nemo fatur dulcius.
Scilicet aut tribus his servabere testibus olim,
Aut interibis Gallia.
Stephen Pasquier a French Writer and a Papist, does much extol Calvin's piety,
wit, and learning. Recherch. de la France. li. 8. ca. 55.

John Clerk was apprehended at Melden in France, Anno 1523. for setting up upon
the Church-door a certain Bill against the Pope's pardons lately sent thither
from Rome; in which Bill he named the Pope to be Antichrist. For which he was
three several days whipped, and afterward had a mark imprinted in his
Forehead, as a note of infamy. His mother being a good Christian-woman (though
her Husband was an Adversary) when she beheld her Son thus grievously scourged,
and ignominiously deformed in the face, did boldly encourage her Son, crying
with a loud Voice, Blessed be Christ, and welcome be these prints and marks.

After this execution and punishment sustained, the said John departed that
Town, and went to Rosy in Brie, and from thence to Metz, where he was taken
for casting down Images: and there his hand was first cut off from his right
Arm: then his Nose with sharp pincers was violently pulled from his Face; after
that both his Arms and his paps were likewise plucked and drawn with the same
Instrument. He quietly endured these Torments, in a manner singing the Verses
of the 115 Psalm, Their Idols be Silver and Gold, the work only of Man's hand:
The rest of his body was committed to the fire, and therewith consumed.

Anno 1525. Doctor John Castellan, after he was called to the knowledge of God,
he b^came a true preacher of his word in France at Barleduc, also at Vittery in
Partoise, at Chalon in Champagne, and in the Town of Vike, which is the
Episcopal Seat of the Bishop of Metz in Lorrain. After he had laid some
foundation of the Doctrine of the Gospel in Metz, in returning from thence he
was taken prisoner by the Cardinal of Lorrain's servants, and carried to the
Castle of Nommenie: from thence he was carried to the Town and Castle of Vike,
always constantly persevering in the same Doctrine. He was degraded by the
Bishop of Nicopolis, and condemned to be burnt quick: which Death he suffered,
January 12. 1525. with that constancy, that not only many ignorant people were
thereby drawn to the knowledge of the truth, but also multitudes which had
tasted thereof in some measure already were greatly confirmed by his constancy
in his Death.

Then Wolfgangus Schuch, coming to a certain Town in Lorrain, called St.
Hippolitus, and being received in the Town for their Pastor, labored by all
means to root out of the hearts of the people Idolatry and superstition.
Hereupon Duke Anthony Prince of Lorrain, threatens the Town of St. Hippolitus.
Wolfgangus humbly wrote to the Duke in defense both of his Doctrine and
Ministry, and of the whole cause of the Gospel: and having confuted the Friars
in disputation, he was condemned to be burnt. Shortly after his death, the
Commendator of St. Anthony of Vienna, who sat as spiritual Judge over him, and
gave sentence of his condemnation, fell down suddenly and dyed. In like manner
his Fellow, which was Abbot of Clarilocus, suddenly at the coming of the
Duchess of Denmark into the City of Nancy, being stricken with sudden fear at
the noise of Guns, fell down and dyed.

In the beginning of the year, 1525. was the Battle of Pavia, where Francis I.
the French King was taken Prisoner, and carried to Madrid in Spain, but after
many Months confinement he is enlarged, and returns into France.

The Pope understanding the King was set at Liberty, sent to congratulate with
him, and to make a confederation against the Emperor. Hist. Council. Trid. li 1.
The which being ratified in Cugvac, May 22. 1526. between Him, that King, and
the Princes of Italy, under the name of the most Holy League, the Pope
absolveth the French King from the Oath taken in Spain, for the observation of
the things agreed upon.

Now follows a Table of French Martyrs. Fox, Act and Monum.

1. JAmes Pavane, Schoolmaster at Paris, Anno 1524. being first taken by the
Bishop of Meaux, was compelled by Dr. Martial to recant. Afterward returning
again to his confession, he was burnt at Paris, Anno 1525.

2. Dionysius de Rieux at Melda, or Meaux, was burned at Melda, for saying that
the Mass is a plain denial of the Death and Passion of Christ, Anno 1528. He
had often in his mouth these words of Christ. He that denies me before Men,
him will I also deny before my Father.

3. Joannes de Cadurco, Batchellour of the Civil Law, for making an exhortation
to his Contrymen of Limosin, was accused, taken, degraded, and burnt.

4. John Burges Merchant, the receiver of Nantes, Bartholomew Mylen a lame
Cripple, Henry Poille of Couberon, Catella a School-Mistress, Stephen de la
Fogge Merchant, were condemned and burned in Paris, Anno 1533. Henry of
Couberon had his Tongue bored through, and with an Iron wire tied fast to one
of his cheeks, and so was burned with the other, as is aforesaid.

5. Alexander Canus a Priest for the confession of the true Religion, was also
burnt at Paris, Anno 1533.

6. John Pointer, a Chyrurgeon, because he would not do homage to a certain
Idol at the commandment of a Friar that came to confess him, his Tongue was cut
off, and then he was burned at Paris.

7. Peter Gaudet, a Knight sometime of Rhodes, after long torments was burnt
for the defense of the Gospel, Anno 1533.

8 Quoquillard was burnt for the Testimony of Christ's Gospel at Bizanson in
Burgundy, Anno 1534.

9. Nicholas Scrivener, John de Poix, Stephen Burlet, were burnt on the same
account in the City of Arras, Anno 1534.

10. Mary Becaudella was burnt at Fountains, for finding fault with the
Doctrine of a Gray Friar, in the City of Rochel, Anno 1534.

11. John Cornon, an Husbandman of Mascon, one of such wisdom, that he
confounded his Judges, was condemned by them, and burnt, Anno 1535.

12. Martin Gonin in Daulphine, being taken for a Spy in the Borders of France
toward the Alps, was committed to prison. In his going out, his Jailer espied
about him Letters of Farellus and Viret. Wherefore being examined of the King's
procurator, and the Inquisitor touching his Faith, after he had rendered a
sufficient reason thereof, he was cast into the River and drowned.

13 Claudius Painter, a Goldsmith at Paris, going about to convert his
Kinsfolks, was by the Parliament of Paris condemned to have his Tongue to be
cut out, and then to be burned, Anno 1540.

14. Stephen Brune, an Husbandman at Rutiers, was condemned to be burnt at
Planvol, Anno 1540.
where the wind arose, and blew the fire so from him, as he stood exhorting the
people, that he there continued an hour in a manner unharmed; so that all the
Wood being consumed, they renewed the fire with other Faggots, and Vessels of
Oil, and yet could he not with all this be burned, but stood safe. Then the
Hangman with his pike thrust him through the belly and the guts, and so threw
him down into the fire, and burnt his body to Ashes, throwing away his Ashes
afterward into the Wind.

15. Constantine, a Citizen of Rhoan, with four others, were condemned to be
burnt, and put in a Dung-cart, who rejoiced that they were reputed as
excrements of this world: but yet their death was a sweet odor unto God, Anno
1542.

16. John du Beck Priest, for the Doctrine of the Gospel was degraded and burnt
at Troyes in Champagne, Anno 1543.

17. Aimond de Lavoy, a preacher of the Gospel in Anjou, after nine months
imprisonment at Bourdeaux, being put to cruel torments, he was first strangled,
whose body was afterward consumed with fire.

18. Francis Bribard, Secretary to Cardinal Bellay, was also burnt for the
defense of the Gospel, his Tongue being first cut out, Anno 1544.

19. William Husson an Apothecary, for scattering Books concerning Christian
Doctrine, and the abuse of humane Traditions, had his Tongue cut out, and was
afterward burnt at Rhoan. Delanda a Carmelite Friar, one of his persecutors,
was afterward converted, and preached the Gospel, Anno 1544.

20. James Cobard, a Schoolmaster in the City of St. Michael in Lorrain, was
burnt for the Truth, Anno 1544.

21. Peter Clerk Brother to John Clerk aforementioned, and 14. more who dwelt
at Melda, were burnt, Anno 1546.

22. Peter Chapot was strangled and burnt at Paris. Saintinus Nivet, and
Stephen Polliot were also burned at Paris, Anno 1546.

23. John English, was burnt at Sens in Burgundy, being condemned by the high
Court of Paris, Anno 1547.

24. Michael Michelot, was burnt at Warden by Tourney, Anno 1547.

25. Leonard de Prato, going from Diion to Bar in Burgundy with two false
Brethren, and talking about Religion with them, was bewrayed of them, and
afterward was burnt, Anno 1547.

26. John Taffington, Joan his Wife: Simon Marshall, Joan his Wife: William
Michaut, James Boulerau, James Bretany. These seven being of the City of
Langres, for the word of Christ were committed to the fire, who dyed
comfortably, Anno 1547.

27. Michael Marshall, John Camus, Great John Camus, John Serarphin were burnt
the same year in Paris.

28. Octavian Blundel, a Merchant of precious Stones at Paris, was also burnt
for his profession, Anno 1548.

29. Hubert Burre, a young Man a Tailor of nineteen years was burned for the
Gospel at Diion.

30. Florent Venote, a Priest at Paris, after four years and nine hours
imprisonment, having endured many torments, at last when there was a great Show
in Paris at the King's coming into the City, and diverse other Martyrs in sundry
places of the City were put to death, he having his Tongue cut out, was brought
to see the execution of them all; and last of all was burnt in the place of
Maulbert, Anno 1549.

31. Ann Aubert, a Widow at Orleans, Anno 1549. going to Geneva, was taken and
brought to Paris, and by the Council there judged to be burnt at Orleans.

32. A poor Tailor at Paris, dwelling in St. Anthonie's street, who boldly
defended the Gospel before the King and his Nobles: he was burnt in the
presence of the King, his strength and courage in suffering did greatly
astonish the King and others, Anno 1549.

33. Claudius Thierry was apprehended coming from Geneva, and was burned at
Orleans, Anno 1549.

34. Leonard Galimard was burnt at Paris the same year.

35. Macoeus Morcou was burnt in Troyes, Anno 1549.

36. John Godeau, and Gabriel Beraudinus were burnt at Chamberiace.

37. Thomas Sanpaulinus, after cruel wracking was burnt in Paris, Anno 1551.

38. Maurice Secenate was burnt in Provence, Anno 1551. Joannes de puteo,
sir-named Medicus, was also burnt at Vzez in Provence the same year.

39. Claudius Monerius was burnt at Lions, he was meek and learned: some of his
Judges wept at his death, while he was in prison he wrote certain Letters, but
one especially very comfortable to all the faithful. He also wrote the
questions and interrogatories of the official with his answers likewise to the
same, which being summarily contracted, you may read in Mr. Fox. Act. and
Monument. Vol. 2. p. 137.

40. Renate Poyet, Son of William Poyet, which was Chancellor of France, for
the sincere profession of the Gospel, was burnt at the City of Saulmure, Anno
1552.

41. John Joyer, and a young Man his Servant, were burnt at Toulouse.

42. Hugh Gravier a Schoolmaster, and after Minister of Cortillon, was burnt
at Burge in Bresse, a days Journey from Lions. Martial Alba, Peter Scriba,
Bernard Seguine, Charles Faber, Peter Navihere, five Students of the University
of Lausanna were burnt at Lions, Anno 1553. Peter Bergerius, shortly after
suffered the same Martyrdom at Lions. Stephen Peloquine, and Dyonisius
Peloquine Brethren suffered at Ville Franche about Lions in the same year.

43. Jews Marsacus, Michael Gerard, Stephen Granot, suffered also at Lions,
Anno 1553. Matthew Dimonet Merchant suffered there also. At his burning he
spoke much to the people, and was heard with great attention.

44. William Neele an Austin Friar, suffered at Eureux in France. Simon Laloe
at Diion. The Executioner called Justus Silvester, seeing the faith and
constancy of Laloe, was converted: and he with all his Family removed to the
Church of Geneva.

45. Nicholas Nail, a Shoo-maker was burnt at Paris, and Peter Serre a Priest,
was burnt at Toulouse, Anno 1553.

46. Stephen King, and Peter Denocheus were burnt at Chartres Anno 1553.

47. Antonius Magnus was burnt at Paris, Anno 1554.

48. William Alencon, a Bookseller, and a certain Clothworker were burnt at
Montpelliers, Anno 1554.

49. Paris Panier, a godly Lawyer for constant profession of the Gospel was
beheaded at Dola, Anno 1554.

50. Peter du Vall, Shoo-maker, after grievous wrackings was burnt at Nismes
Anno 1554.

51. John Filieul, Carpenter: Julian le ville Point-maker, were burnt at
Sanserre, Anno 1554.

52. Dyonisius Vayre, leaving his Popish Priesthood went to Geneva, where he
learnt the Art of Book binding, and many times brought Books into France.
Afterward in the Reign of Edward VI. King of England, he preached the word in
Jersey: but after his death, thinking to return again to Geneva, he came with
his Books into Normandy unto a Town called Fueille, where he was taken with his
Books, and after the suffering most cruel torments was burnt at Rhoan.

53. Thomas Calbergn at Tourney was burnt, Anno 1554.

54. Richard Feurus a Goldsmith, born at Rhoan, after he had been in London,
where he first tasted of the Gospel, he went to Geneva, where he remained nine
or ten years. From thence returning to Lions, he was apprehended, and
condemned. Then he appealed to the High Court at Paris: where in the way as he
was led to Paris, he was met by certain whom he knew not, and by them taken
from his Keepers, and so set at liberty. Anno 1551.

After that continuing at Geneva for the space of three years, he came into
Daulphine, and there as he found fault with the Grace said in Latin, he was
detected, and apprehended. The next day he was sent to the Justice, from him to
the Bishop: who ridding their hands of him, he was brought to the Lieutenant,
who sent his Advocate with a Notary to him in Prison to examine him of his
Faith: for which I shall refer the Reader to Mr. Fox. Act. and Monum. Vol. 2.
p. 146. 147. 148. He was sent back to the Bishop's prison, and from thence
shortly after to Lions, where he had his Tongue cut out, and then was burnt.

55. Nicholas du Chesne, suffered at Ory near Bizancon, Anno 1554.

56. John Bertrand; Keeper of the Forest of Marchenoir, was burnt at Blois,
Anno 1556.

57. Peter Rousseau, after three wrackings, had his Tongue cut out, and a ball
of Iron put in his mouth. He was drawn upon an Hurdle all broken to the fire,
where he was lifted up into the Air, and let down thrice. And when he was half
burnt, the ball fell from his mouth and he with a loud voice, called on the
name of God, saying, Jesus Christ assist me: so he dyed.

58, Arnold Moniere, and John de Cazes, were burnt at Bourdeaux, Anno 1556.

59. Philip Cone, James his fellow, Archambant Seraphon, Mr. Nicholas du
Rousseau were burnt at Diion, Anno 1557.

60. Philip Hamlin suffered at Bourdeaux.

61. Nicholas Sartorius, at Oest near Piedmont, Anno 1557.

62. George Tardiff, with one of Tours a Broiderer, Nicholas a Shoo-maker at
Jenvile, suffered at Tours.

I must now return back to the Reign of King Francis I.

The Lutherans having presented a confession of their Faith, the Princes of
Germany being assembled before the Emperor in a Hall ( Anno 1530) capable to
receive 200 persons, Hist. Council. Trident. li. 1.
it was read with a loud voice. And the Cities which followed the Doctrine of
Zuinglius, presented apart the confession of their Faith, not differing from
the former but only in the point of the Eucharist. The confession of the
Princes was afterward from this place called, the Augustan Confession. The
Pope's Legate would not censure the confession, but gave order that a
confutation thereof should be read, and no Copy given.

The Pope was displeased with the Emperor, for meddling in Religion, but
especially for promising a Council.

He writes to all Princes, that he would call a Council, though he never meant
it: and his collusion is discovered by many. The Protestants likewise do write
to all Princes, praying them not to believe the calumnies raised against them,
and to suspend their Judgments, until those that are accused have place to
acquit themselves publicly. And therefore they will desire the Emperor, that
he will call a godly, and free Council in Germany, as soon as might be, and not
use force until the matter be disputed, and lawfully denied.

The French King answered with very courteous Letters, in substance giving them
thanks for communicating unto him a business of so great weight.

He showed them that he was glad to understand of their innocence, and did
approve the instance they made, that the vices might be amended, wherein they
shall find his will to concur with theirs; that their requiring a Council was
just and holy, yea necessary, not only for the affairs of Germany, but of the
whole Church, that it was not necessary to use Arms, where the controversies
may be ended with Treaties.

The Emperor promises the calling of a Council within six months. The Pope
resolves to make an Alliance with France to be able to withstand the Emperor.

After the Assembly of the Protestants at Smalcald, the French King Treats
with the Landgrave of Hassia, at the Pope's request about the Council. The Pope
is displeased for the proposal of Geneva, for the place of the Council. Anno
1534. Pope Clement VII. dies, and Cardinal Farnese is created Pope, and named
Paul III. He makes a show that he desires a Council: he persuades the
Cardinals to reform themselves.

The custom is, that in the first days the Cardinals obtain favors easily of
the new pope. Therefore the Cardinal of Lorrain, and other French, in the name
of the King, desired him to grant to the Duke of Lorrain the nomination of the
Bishoprics, and Abbacies of his Dominion. The Pope's Answer was, that in the
Council which should be called shortly, it was necessary to take away the
faculty of nomination from those Princes that already had it: which was some
blemish to the Popes his predecessors, who had granted them.

A Bull is made for the convocation of the Council at Mantua, May 27. 1537. The
Pope prays the French King, and all other Kings and Princes to be there in
person.

The Protestants approve not the Bull of convocation.

The Duke of Mantua makes a Grant of his City, and afterward recalleth it. The
King of England opposes the Council by a public manifest.

Then the Pope sent out a Bull for the convocation of the Council at Vicenza.
The Legates went to Vicenza at the time appointed; and the Pope to Nizza in
Provence at the same time, to speak personally with the Emperor and the French
King, which he gave out was only to make peace between those great Princes,
though his principal end was to draw the Dukedom of Milan, to his own house,
Anno 1538.

The Council intimated is suspended during pleasure.

The Emperor gave order for a Diet to be held in Germany, where Ferdinand
thought good, inviting the Protestant Princes to be there in person, and
promising public security unto all. Cardinal Farnese hearing of this
conclusion made without his knowledge, went immediately away: and passing by
Paris, obtained of the French King a severe Edict against the Lutherans: which
being published was executed in that City, and after through all France with
much rigor, King Francis commanded that all should be appeached who had Books
differing from the Church of Rome, that made secret Conventicles; that
transgressed the commandments of the Church; and especially that observed not
the Doctrine of Meats; or prayed in any Tongue but the Latin; and commanded the
Sorbonnists to be diligent Spies against them. Afterward understanding the
Emperor's cunning, who assayed to incite the Pope against him, he caused the
Lutherans to be really proceeded against, and commanded that a form to discover
and accuse them should be instituted in Paris, proposing punishments to the
concealers of them, and rewards to the Delators.

This was done, Anno 1542.

The Emperor gave diverse orders to the Prelates of Spain, and the
Low Countries; and commanded that the Divines of Lovain should assemble
together, to consider of the Doctrines which were to be proposed; which they
reduced to XXII. heads, without confirming them by any place of Scripture, but
explicating Magisterially the conclusion only

The French King also Assembled at Melun, the Parisian Divines, to consult of
^^^ necessary positions of the Christian Faith, to be proposed in the ^^uncil,
where there was much contention. For some desired to propose the confirmation
of whatsoever was constituted in Constance and Basil* and the re-establishment
of the Pragmatick Sanction. And others doubting that the King would be offended
by destroying the Concordat, made between him and Leo (which would necessarily
follow) gave counsel not to set that disputation on foot.

And afterward, because there were diverse opinions in that School concerning
the Sacraments; unto which some gave effective Ministerial virtue, and others
not, every one desiring that his opinion should be an Article of Faith, nothing
could be concluded, but that they should keep themselves within compass of the
XXV. heads published two years before.

The Council is appointed to be in Trent, and thither the Legates are sent.
While they meet in Trent to convince Heresies by a Council, in France they did
the same by force of Arms, against a small remainder of the Waldenses,
Inhabitants of the Alps of Provence, who (as has has been said before)
maintained a separation from the Sea of Rome, with diverse Rites and Doctrine.

These Men after the Reformation of Zuinglius, enlarged their Doctrine by his,
and reduced their Rites unto some form at the same time when Geneva embraced
the Reformation.

Sentence was pronounced against these many years before by the Parliament of
Aix, which had never been executed. The King now commanded to execute the
Sentence.

The President mustered together as many Soldiers as he could in the places
bordering upon them, and in the Pope's State of Avignon, and went with an Army
against these poor Creatures, who had neither Weapon nor thought, otherwise
than by flight to defend themselves, those that could. They went not about to
teach them, or by threats to make them leave their Rites and opinions; but
first of all filling all the Country with Rapes, slew as many as stood to
their mercy, because they could not fly, without sparing young or old. They
rather razed the Countries of Cabriers in Provence, and of Merindol in the
County of Viinoisin belonging to the Pope, and all other places in those
Precincts. More than 4000. persons were slain. They that fled to the Woods and
Mountains, partly were famished, partly otherwise slain, partly sent to the
Galleys: twenty five persons that fled into a Cave near the Town of Mussy were
smothered to death with smoke.

Certain of the Helvetians sued unto the French King to favor the Waldenses,
but no entreaty would serve. But the bloody Tyrant Minerius the Governor of
Provence, escaped not the just Judgment of God: for God smote him with a
terrible Disease, and he felt as it were a fire burning him from the Navel
upward, and the lower parts were rotten and consumed away with Vermin, with an
extreme stink, and profusion of Blood in place of his Urine, and so with great
torments he ended his wretched Life.

Jews de Vain, Brother-in-law to the said Minerius, the President, and also
the Brother, and the Son-in-law to Peter Durant, Master Butcher of the Town of
Aix, these three did slay one another upon a certain strife that fell between
them. And upon the same day the Judge of Aix, who accompanied Minerius in the
same persecution, as he returned homewards going over the River of Durance was
drowned.

By an Ordinance of this King Francis I. dated January 15. 1546. the Visitation
of the Hospitals and other charitable places, is committed to the Judges Royal,
Voyes le recueil des ordonnances fait par Fontanon. Tom. 4. Tit. 27 des malad.
and Hospit. ca. 4
Ordinaries of the place where such Hospitals are situate. All Governors and
Administrators of Hospitals, or other charitable Foundations, shall be
compelled by our Judges of the places next adjoining to give up their accounts
of the Revenues and Administration of the said Hospitals, by what Title soever
they hold them; together with the Charters and Titles of their Foundation, if
they have any, within two months after the publication of these presents. Whom
we Command, and expressly enjoin, every one respectively within his Precincts
and Jurisdiction, that immediately after the publication of these presents,
they visit the said Hospitals and charitable Foundations, Orontius Fineus was
professor of the Mathematics at Paris at this time.
to enquire of the Revenue, Estate, and reparation of the places, and the
number of beds, and poor people whom they shall find there.

There were four Stevens, Frenchmen, Henry the Father, and Robert his Son,
Henry, Robert's Son; and Paul the Son of that Henry, all learned Men, and
Printers.

Robert Stevens, not only Printed, but made many excellent works himself. His
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae is incomparable. Antoine du Verdier in his
Bibliotheque commends him and this Work. Gesner Bibliothec.
Dictionarium seu Latinae Linguae Thesaurus, non singulas modo Dictiones
continens, sed integras quoque Latin and loquendi and scribendi formulas, ex
optimis quibusque Latinae Linguae Scriptoribus. Opus excusum parisiis apud
Authorem, divisum in Tomos tres. Anno 1542.

He published an Edition of the Latin Bible, wherein he had conferred the
copies that were in use at that time with some old Manuscripts, and according
to them he amended some errors. The University took this ill, that he had
attempted to change the Translation. He defended himself that he had changed
nothing, but had Printed according to old Copies which he had by him. His
answer was tolerable in the Judgment of reasonable men.

Nevertheless, they pursue him before the Court of Paris, and do petition that
he may be burnt. In respons. Rob. Steph. ad censuram Theologot. Paris. page 109.
But their petition was burnt. Then he printeth the Bible, retaining the
corrupt Translation: and in the Margin he adds the words of the Manuscripts
with Notes, showing the Copies whence he had these words. These do accuse him
before King Francis and his Council, but were put to shame and silence.

Then he Printed the ten Commandments in great Letters, and in such a form,
that they might be fixed upon Walls of Houses for common use: and so did he
with a sum of the Bible. This did provoke them yet more, especially because he
had Printed the second Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thy self any
graven Image, etc. And they accuse him. But the King gave him a Warrant to
reprint, both the Ten Commandments, and the sum of the Bible, both in Latin
and French. They summoned him to appear before them, saying, that his work was
worse than the Teaching of Luther. Fifteen persons did approve him, and added
their seals unto his attestation. So the most of them seeing the King's
Warrant, and that attestation, were ashamed, and their Deputies did assoil him.
R. Stevens did first distinguish the Verses of the Bible with Arithmetical
figures.

Henry Stevens, his Thesauri Linguae Graecae, and his other works, show his
great abilities. Scaevola Samarthanus in his second Book of Epigrams, has
these Verses. In Gellii Noctes Atticas ad H. Stephanum.

Quis Stephanum esse neget Phoebi de semine cretum?
Obscuris adfert noctibus ille diem.
Henry Stevens, Robert's Son, made also the Greek Concordance. Beda's Works
were Printed in three Tomes at Paris, Anno 1545.

At this time flourished Francis Vatablus, Regius Prefessor of the Hebrew
Tongue in Paris. King Francis ordered him to expound the old Testament out of
the Original, and his Hearers did write his exposition and his Annotations. The
King's Printer deals with the Hearers, and receives from them a new
Translation, which he printeth with the old Translation, and with the
Annotations. This work being perfected in the year, 1545. he shows it unto
some of the University, entreating them to show him, if any part thereof had
not been rightly observed by the Hearers, to the end if there be any thing
amiss, he may amend it. They do approve the work, and assure him, that no evil
could proceed from the Lectures of Vatablus. But the Books being sold, some
observed, that the Translation and the Annotations were contrary unto the
present Doctrine of the University, and therefore the Books should not be sold
seeing they were Printed without the knowledge of the Faculty.

The Printer goes unto the Court, and shows Peter Castellan Bishop of
Mascon, that the University was offended, and intend to hinder the selling of
his Books. He seeing the Bishop doubtful what advice to give, says, if the
Divines will give him their censure, he is willing to Print it with the Bible,
and he will neither be ashamed, nor take in ill part, to advertise the Reader
of whatsoever error is in the Book.

This overture did please the Bishop, and he relates all unto the King, who
wills the Bishop to write in his name unto the University, that they shall
revise the Translation and the Annotations, and note what does not please them,
and subjoyn unto every fault a reason of their Judgment; and deliver their
censure to be printed either apart, or with the Bible.

Castellan writes so unto them, and they promise to obey. But they were often
required to deliver their censure: They evade it; and send unto the Divines of
Lovain, entreating them to reckon that Translation among the Heretical and
forbidden Books.

The King was informed of their shifts, and of that Letter: Wherefore he
orders the Bishop to require them again. After diverse exhortations to this
purpose, they send fifteen places which they had marked. The Bishop conferreth
with their Deputy Gagneius upon these Instances, and writes a large Letter unto
them commending the Annotations, and showing what course they should observe in
their censure.

They were the more enraged at that commendation, and would not go on in their
censure, but would have the Book to be condemned which they had declared
Heretical. Then the King sent his Letters Patent, and sealed, charging them to
proceed in their censure, and to deliver it unto his Printer. They do still
refuse, and at that time King Francis dies, viz. on March 31. Anno 1547.

His Son King Henry II. who succeeded him, sends the like charge unto them on
August 16. 1547, They return Answer, that they shall perfect their censure
before November 1. But then in place of the censure they send a supplication,
craving that the Books may be forbidden, because he is a Sacramentarian, and
had written that men's Souls are mortal.

The Printer is informed of it, and addresseth himself to answer before King
and Council. Then they return unto Paris. But he shows how false their
calumnies were.

At that time they sent unto the King forty six Articles which they had
collected. It was told unto their Deputies that they had spoken of some
thousands of Errors, and were these all turned to forty six? They answered,
the University had more, but had not as yet put them in form.

The Printer returns to Paris, chiding some of the Divines for accusing him
falsely.

The Printer craves of the King protection from the malice of his Enemies. The
King grants it under his Seal. This storm being over, he gathers fifteen old
Manuscripts of the new Testament in Greek, and printeth it with the diverse
lections on the Margin, and gives the first copy unto Castellan.

The Pope sends into France Jerome Boccaferrius a Roman, Cardinal of St.
George, in show to condole with the King for the death of his Father, and to
give him joy of the beginning of his Kingdom, but with commission to make
confederation with him. The Pope gave the Legate most ample power to grant the
King all his demands in matter of Benefices, without regarding the Decrees of
the Tridentine Council: a strong Alliance is made between the Pope and the
French King, and two Cardinals are created at the King's instance, viz. Charles
of Guise, Archbishop of Rhemes, and Charles of Vandosme, of the Blood Royal.

The Cardinal of Guise, made an open discourse in public consistory in the
name of the French King, showing, Hist. Council. Trident, li. 3.
that King Francis had never spared any cost or danger to maintain the liberty
of other Princes.

In conformity whereof Henry not degenerating from the virtue of his Ancestors,
as soon as he had left to mourn for his Father's death, was willing to declare
his observance toward the Sea of Rome. That the merits of the Kings of France
were famous, and exceeds all those of other Nations. But this was above all
which the King now does, promising all his Forces to preserve the Papal
Dignity, now when it is so contemned. He prayed the Pope to receive the King
for his Son, and to promise to himself all assistance from him, and to take
care that the Church should receive no damage nor shame, in regard that from
small beginnings great factions have risen, which have brought the Popes into
great calamities. He exemplified in many Popes afflicted, who were defended and
raised by the Kings of France, concluding, that the present King will not yield
to his Ancestors in preserving the Dignity of the Apostolic See.

In the year 1549. The French King making his first entry into Paris, caused a
solemn procession to be made, and published an Edict, wherein he signifies
that he received the protection of the Catholic Religion, and of the Sea of
Rome, and the care of the Ecclesiastical Order, and that he abhorred the Novity
of Religion, and testified unto all his will to persevere in the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, and to banish the new Heretics (so he called the
Protestants) out of all his Dominions.

He caused this Edict to be printed in French, and sent it into all parts of
his Kingdom. He gave leave also to his Prelates to make a Provincial Assembly
to reform the Churches: Which being known at Rome, was thought to be a bad
example, and might be a beginning to make the French Church independent of the
Church of Rome.

He caused also many Lutherans to be put to death in Paris, himself being
present at the Spectacle: and in the beginning of the next year, he renewed the
Edict against them, laying grievous punishments upon the Judges, who were not
diligent in detecting and punishing them.

Pope Paul III. dies, Anno 1549. the Cardinals were divided into three
factions about the choice of a new Pope, Imperialists, French, and dependents
on the dead Pope, and by consequence, on his Nephews. Hist. of Cardin. part 3.
li. 2.
They made agreement among themselves, that nine Cardinals should be named, of
each Faction three: but that the nomination should be made by two only of the
Faction of France; and that afterward it should be lawful for the Imperialists
to take one of the said nine at their pleasure, and that the rest should be
obliged to concur.

Of the French Faction accordingly were named, the Cardinals of Lorrain,
Tornon, and Bellai.

Of the Imperial Faction Theatino, Monte, and San Marcello, and three others of
the other Faction, Salviati, Ridolfi, and Trani. The Imperialists refused all
the nine persons which were named, which gave great offense to the other two
Factions, insomuch that it was proposed by the French to the Farnesians, to
unite among themselves, and to choose a Pope in spite of the Imperialists. But
they could not agree in the choice of their persons, because there were several
Cardinals among the Farnesians, who were much obliged to the Emperor, and much
afraid of his displeasure.

But after a tedious discussion of the Cardinals for the space of three months,
during the vacancy of the Sea, Gio Maria del Monte was created Pope on
February, Anno 1550. by the name of Julius the third. And now the Faction of
the Nipotisme was introduced into the conclave, having over-powred the Factions
of the Emperor and King of France, with no small reputation.

The Council having been translated to Bolonia, the Emperor having protested
against it, the Pope deliberates about the remitting of it to Trent. The French
King offered to the Pope whatsoever he was able to do for him, promised to
assist the Council, and to send the Prelates of his Kingdom, and all favor and
protection for the maintenance of the Papal Authority.

The Book of Francis Duraneus a learned Lawyer, entitled De Sacris Ecclesiae
Ministeriis came forth, Anno 1551.

At this time a War was denounced against King Henry the second by the Pope and
the Emperor, and that upon an unjust quarrel. He gave some hopes (says
Onuphrius) of composing the differences in Religion, Onuphr. in Julio 3.
when at the request of the Emperor, he declared by his Bull in the first year
of his Popedom, that the Council should be continued at Trent at the beginning
of the next May. And presently after he adds, he unwittingly put himself upon
the War of Parma, and thereby set all Italy, nay all Europe on fire.

The first Session of the Council on May 1. 1551. and the second upon the first
of September were only for Ladies, for there was nothing done. King Henry II.
set forth an Edict at the same time, dated the third day of September the same
year, containing a restraint of transporting Gold and Silver to Rome: where he
sets down at large the occasions of the War of Parma, begun by the Pope. And
among other things he says. Which holy Father upon a sudden fit of Choler, had
caused a certain company of Men of War, both Horse and Foot to be levied and
set forth: and also enticed and persuaded the Emperor (with whom we were in
good Terms of Peace and Amity) to take Arms, to aid his forces in the design of
the recovery of Parma. And after he had harassed and laid wast all things
whatsoever he pleased in the Country of Parma, Edict du Roy Henric. 2. imprime
a Paris l'ann 1551.
he caused his said Forces to march toward the Territories of Mirandula: which
has for a long time, even during the Life of our late most Honored Lord and
Father, been in the known protection of the Crown of France, which he
beleagured, using most incredible and inhumane cruelties toward the
Inhabitants of the said Territory; yea such as Barbarians and Infidels would
not have used the like: giving the World to know very stoutly that he meant
them to us, who have not deserved any such things at his hands, or the Holy See.

There were six Sessions holden in the time of that War, those two
forementioned, and four more: in two whereof the most material points of Faith,
of Manners and Church Discipline, were discussed and determined, as those of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Transubstantiation, Penance and extreme
Unction; as also about the Jurisdiction of Bishops, where many blows were
struck at the Liberties of the French Church, and the rights of the Crown.

Another Edict of King Henry II. was made at the Camp near Weldenaggbes, May
21. 1552. and Printed at Paris the same year. From this time till the beginning
of the year, 1560. the Council of Trent did nothing. What time Pope Pius IV. as
soon as he got into the Chair, sent forth a Declaration for the continuation of
it against Easter Day the next year.

The French King makes preparation for a National Council, and protests
against the Council then assembled in Trent. Jacobus Amiotus, Hist. Council.
Trident. li. 4.
Abbot of Bellosana appeared in the name of the French King, with Letters of
his Majesty, which he presented to the Legate, desiring they might be read, and
his credency heard. The Legate receiving them, gave them to the Secretary to be
read.

The Superscription was, Sanctissimis in Christo Patribus Conventus Tridentini.
Much fault was found with the word Conventus. The Bishop of Mentz said, if they
would not receive a Letter from the King of France, who called them,
Sanctissimus Conventus, how would they hearken to the Protestants, who called
them Conventus Malignantium? Then the King's Letter was opened and read.

The French King dismisseth the Pope's Nuncio: but fearing that by his
dissension with the Pope, those that desired change of Religion would make some
innovation, or that himself might come into the bad opinion of his people, as
if his mind were averse from the Catholic Faith, and perhaps to open a way for
reconciliation with Rome, he made a most severe Edict against the Protestants,
confirming all the other which he had published before, adding greater
punishments, more ways to discover the guilty, and greater rewards to the
promoters. Hereupon many were apprehended, condemned and burnt, as I have
showed before in the Table of French Martyrs, concluding it at the year 1557.

On the fifth of September, 1557. in Paris, at night about two hundred persons
were assembled in an house to celebrate the Communion, which being discovered
by the common people, the house was assaulted, and some fled, but the women and
weaker sort were taken, and seven were burnt, and the greater part of the
others reserved for the same punishment to be inflicted when the accomplices were
found out. The Suisses made intercession for these, and the King gave order
that the proceeding against them should be moderate, but the Pope is angry with
the French King, for using any moderation.

But the number of the Protestants, being now increased in France, their
courage increased also. And there being a custom among the people of Paris in
the Summer Evenings, to go out of the Subburbs of St. German in great
multitudes, to take the Fresco, and to solace themselves with diverse kinds of
sports, those of the new Religion instead of doing so, began to sing the Psalms
of David in French Verses.

(...)
The multitude first laughed at the Novity; then leaving the sports joined
themselves unto the singers. And the number of those who came to that place
began to increase more than usually. The Pope's Nuncio told the King of this
Novity, as of a thing pernicious and dangerous, because (said he) the
Ministeries of Religion, usually celebrated in the Church in the Latin Tongue
by Religious men only, were put into the mouth of the common people in the
vulgar Language, which was an invention (said he) of the Lutherans, telling him
that if he did not resist the beginnings, all Paris would be Lutheran. The King
gave order that the principal Authors should be proceeded against, wherein
they went not very far, having found Anthony King of Navar and his Wife in that
number. But for hereafter it was forbid upon pain of death.

The King now understanding that some of the Parliament were Protestants, in a
Mercurial (so they call the Judicature instituted to examine and correct the
actions of the Counselors of Parliament, and Judges of the King) held in
Paris, June 15. 1558. where they were to treat of Religion, after the
congregation was assembled, entered in person. And having commanded them to
prosecute the things begun, Claude Viole one of them, spoke much against the
manners of the Court of Rome, and the bad customs grown to be pernicious
errors, which have caused the new Sects.

Therefore it was necessary to mitigate the severe punishments, until the
differences of Religion were removed, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline amended
by Authority of a General Council, the only remedy for these evils, as the
Councils of Constance and Basil have judged, commanding that one should be
celebrated every ten years.

His opinion was followed by Ludovicus Faber, and some others, Anno du Bourge,
did add, that many villainies were committed condemned by the Laws, for
punishment whereof, the rope and fire were not sufficient, viz. frequent
blasphemies against God, perjuries, Adulteries, not only secret, but even
cherished with impudent license; making himself to be plainly understood, that
he spoke not only of the Grandees of the Court, but of the King himself also:
adding that while men lived thus dissolutely, diverse Torments were prepared
against those who were guilty of nothing but of publishing to the World the
vices of the Church of Rome, and desiring an amendment of them.

In opposition of all this, Egidius Magister, the prime President, spoke
against the new Sects, concluding that there was no other remedy, but that
which was formerly used against the Albigenses, of whom Philip Augustus put to
death six hundred in one day, and against the Waldenses, who were choked in
the caves, whither they retired to hide themselves.

All the voices being given, the King said, he had how heard with his own Ears,
that which before was told him; that the contagion of the Kingdom does hence
arise: that there are in the Parliament who do despise the Pope's Authority,
and His: that he well knows they are but few, but the cause of many evils.
Therefore he exhorted those who are good Subjects to continue in doing their
duty: and immediately gave order that Faber and du Bourg should be imprisoned,
and afterward caused four more to be apprehended in their houses.

But at the same time (as if there had been no danger at all) the Ministers of
the Reformed (for so the Protestants are called in France) assembled in Paris
in the Suburbs of St. German, made a Synod, in which Francis Morellus the chief
man among them was President, ordaining diverse constitutions; of the manner of
holding Councils, of removing the domination in the Church; of the Election and
Offices of Ministers; of censures; of Marriages, of Divorces, of degrees of
consanguinity and affinity, that throughout all France they might not only have
an Uniform Faith, but Discipline also. And their courage did increase, because
the same of the severity used in France coming into Germany, the three
Electors, and other Protestant Princes, sent Ambassadors to the King to
dissuade him from that rigor against the professors of their Religion. But
the King (though he gave them a courteous Answer, yet) remitted nothing of the
severity, but after the Ambassadors were gone, he deputed four Judges, of the
body of the Parliament, in the causes of the prisoners, with the Bishop of
Paris, and the Inquisitor Anthony de Mocares, commanding them to proceed with
all expedition.

Nicholas Clinet, one of the Elders of the Church at Paris, and Taurin
Gravelle, a Lawyer, and Advocate in the Court of Paris, and elder of the same
Church, were both burnt at Paris.

Bartholomew Hector was burnt at Thurin. Mistress Philippa de Luns was
strangled at Paris, Anno 1558. after she had a little felt the Flame with her
Feet and Visage.

Of the same company was also Nicholas Cene a Physician, (Brother to Philip
Cene abovementioned and Martyred at Diion) and Peter Gabart, which two were
brought forth to their execution, October. 2. They were holden long in the Air,
over a small fire, and their lower parts burnt off, before that the higher
parts were much harmed with the fire. Nevertheless these Holy Men ceased not in
all these torments to turn up their eyes to Heaven, and to show forth infinite
Testimonies of their Faith and constancy. In the same fire many Bibles and
Testaments were burnt.

Among diverse young Scholars and Students that were in the little Castle with
Peter Gabart, there were these two, viz. Frederick Danville, and Francis
Rebezies, neither of them being past 20 years of Age. How valiantly they
behaved themselves in the cause of Christ what conflicts they had, disputing
with the Doctors of Sorbonne, what, confessions they made, their own Letters
left in writing do make Relation: these valiantly suffered Martyrdom.

Crispin. li. 6. and comment Gallic. de Statu Relig. and Reipub.
Rene Seau, and John Almerick, were almost wracked to death in prison; and
afterward both of them dyed in prison. John Bordel, Matthew Vermeil, Peter
Bourdon, Andrew de Fou at the Country of Bresil, were also Martyrs.
Villegaignon, Lieutenant to the French King, brought three of them to the top
of a Rock, and there being half strangled, without any Judgment, threw them
into the Sea. The fourth, viz. Andrew de Fou, he caused by manifold
allurements, somewhat to incline to his sayings: so he escaped the danger, not
without a great offense taken of a great part of the Frenchmen in that
Country.

Benet Romain, a Mercer at Draguignan in Provence, was wracked and burnt.

Francis Civaux, who had been Secretary to the French Ambassador here in
England in Queen Mary's time, after being desirous to hear the word of God,
went to Geneva. Also he was placed to be Secretrary to the Senate of Geneva,
where he continued about the space of a year. Having then certain business, he
came to Diion, where he was betrayed by a Priest, apprehended, and carried to
prison, and within seven days after was first strangled, and then burnt.

Peter Arondeau of Rochel was burnt quick at the place called St. John in
Greve, at Paris. The Heroic constancy which God gave him and wherein he
endured victorious unto death, was a mirror of patience to Anne du Bourg,
Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, and to diverse other then prisoners, and
was to them a preparation toward the like death, which shortly after they
suffered.

Thomas Moutard was burnt at Valenciennes. Diverse others also suffered
Martyrdom at Paris for the profession of the Gospel.

Philip the second, King of Spain, after the death of his Wife, Mary Queen of
England, was married to Elizabeth eldest Daughter to King Henry II. Philibert
Emmanuel Duke of Savoy married with Marguarite the King's only Sister: and
Charles Duke of Lorrain, with Claude, a younger Daughter of Franoe.

The King yielded to Philip all that he had taken from him, as well on this
side, as beyond the Mountains. To the Savoyard he restored Bresse, Savoy, and
Piedmont: to the Genevois the Isle of Corse, and about four hundred places
more, conquered during the late fatal Wars, which had made so many Provinces
desolate, ruined so many Castles, Towns and Villages, drunk up so much
Christian blood, and slain so many millions of Men of all qualities, retaining
nothing but the Territories of Boullen and Calais.

The prisons were now full of the Protestants: the Marriages of the King's
Daughters and Sister were solemnized with all the pleasures and sports that
could be devised. The Court exceeded in sumptuous Plays, Masks, Dances, and
Bon-fires: the people expressed public joy by reason of the peace, with loud
acclamations in these ceremonies. But this pleasant Comedy was converted by a
sad Catastrophe, into a mournful Tragedy. The King on June 10. Anno 1558. would
be one of the Challengers at the Tilt in St. Anthonie's street, being seconded
by the Dukes of Guise and Ferrara. And to run his last course in favor of the
Queen his Wife, he sent a Lance to the Earl of Montgomery. The Earl excuses
himself to run against his Majesty. But having a second charge from the King to
enter the List, he runs, and breaks his Lance upon the King's cuirass, and with
a splinter thereof (his Bever being somewhat open) strikes him so deep into the
eye, as on July 10. he dyed at his house of Tournelles in the 42 year of his
Age.

The King when he caused Faber and Anne du Bourg, to be imprisoned, vowed to
see them burnt within few days if they persisted in their opinion, but he was
prevented by death.

The King's death in France, which the Reformed did ascribe to miracle,
increased their courage, though they durst not show themselves openly in Paris.
For his Son Francis the second, the new King, after he was consecrated at
Rhemes, September. 20. gave order to prosecute the process of the Counselors
who were in prison, and deputed the president of St. Andreas, and the
Inquisitor Antonius Democares, to discover the Protestants.

The Judges having gained some of the common sort formerly professors of that
Religion, had notice of the places where they secretly assembled. Therefore
many both men and women were imprisoned, and many fled, whose goods were
confiscated after a citation by three Edicts. And the example of Paris, the
same was done in Poytou, Toulouse, and Aix of Provence, by the instigation of
George Cardinal of Armignac, who not to abandon that enterprise, would not go
to Rome to the election of the Pope, using all diligence, that those who were
discovered might be apprehended. The professors of that Religion being stirred
up hereby, and imboldened, because they knew they were many, sent about many
writings against the King and Queen, and those of Lorrain, (by whom the King
was governed) Authors of the persecution, intermixing some points of Religion,
which being willingly read by all, as things composed by public liberty, did
imprint the new Religion in the minds of many.

In the end of the process against the Counselors, after a long contestation
all were absolved, except Anne du Bourg, who was burnt on the eighteenth of
December, not so much by the inclination of the Judges as by the resolution of
the Queen provoked against him, because the Protestants did divulge in many
writings and Libels spread abroad, that the late King had been wounded in the
eye by the providence of God, for a punishment of his words used against du
Bourg, that he would see him burnt.

But the death and constancy of a man so conspicuous, did make many curious to
know what Religion that was, for which he had so courageously endured this
punishment, and made the number increase.

There was a great conspiracy in many parts of France, into which many were
entered, and the major part for cause of Religion* disdaining to see poor people
drawn every day to be burned at the stake, guilty of nothing but of zeal to
worship God, and to save their own souls. To these were joined others, who
thinking the Guisards to be the cause of all the disorders of the Kingdom,
judged it an Heroic Act to deliver it from oppression by taking the public
administration out of their hands.

Both these cloaked themselves with the cover of Religion, to gain more
followers: and the better to confirm their minds, caused the principal Lawyers
of Germany and France, and the most famous Protestant Divines to publish in
writing, that without violating the Majesty of a King, and Dignity of the
lawful Magistrate, they might oppose with Arms, the violent Domination of the
house of Guise, who offended true Religion and lawful Justice, and kept the
young King as it were in prison.

Great tumults of the people were raised in Provence, Languedoc, and Poitou;
whither the preachers of Geneva were called, and came willingly. By whose
Sermons the number of Protestants did increase.

This general combination made the Governors of the Kingdom resolve, that
there was need of an Ecclesiastical remedy, and that very quickly, and a
National Synod was proposed by the whole Council. The Cardinal of Armignac
said, nothing was to be done without the Pope, to which opinion some few
Prelates did adhere. But the Bishop of Valence said, that France had Prelates
of it is own to regulate the causes of Religion, who best knew the wants of the
Kingdom, that it would be a great absurdity to see Paris burn, having the
Rivers of Some and Marne full of Water, and to believe that water must be
brought from Tibur to quench the fire. The resolution of the Council was, that
there being need of a strong and sudden remedy, the Prelates of the Kingdom
should assemble to consider of these things, and April 10. the Synod was
intimated for the tenth of September.

A Currier was dispatched to Rome, to acquaint the Pope with this Resolution.
The Pope blames the King for pardoning Heretics, and will not approve the
National Synod: but sends a Nuncio into Spain to dissuade it. And the King of
Spain disswadeth the French King from the National Synod. Therefore he
dispatched away Antonio di Toledo, Prior of Lions, to pray him not to go on
herein. The assaulting of Geneva was proposed. But this proposition was not
well taken in France, because it would make the Protestants unite themselves.
Besides, none going to that War, but the Catholics, the Kingdom would be left
open to the opposites.

The French King answered, that he would not make a National Council to
separate himself, but to unite to the Church those that went astray, that a
general Council would more please, and in likelihood be more profitable, if his
urgent occasions would suffer him to expect the time, which must needs be very
long: that the National Council which he desires, shall depend upon the
Apostolic See, and the Pope, which shall cease when the General shall be
assembled, and shall incorporate with it. And that his deeds may answer to his
words, he desired the Pope to send a Legate into France, with power to assemble
the Bishops of the Kingdom, and to settle the affairs of Religion.

The French King does not think Trent a fit place for the Council; nor that the
Doctrines already discussed there should be maintained without re-examination.

This troubled the Pope, who thought it did not proceed from the King's own
motion, but from the Protestants.

The Protestants were formerly called Hugonots, because the first conventions
they had in the City of Tours, (where that belief first took strength and
increased) were in certain Cellars underground, near Hugo's gate, from whence
they are by the vulgar sort called Hugonots.

Theodore Beza, a man of great eloquence, and excellent Learning, having by his
Sermons drawn many to embrace the Reformed Religion, even many of the chief
Nobility and greatest persons of the Kingdom, their Assemblies and Sermons were
then no more celebrated in Stables and Cellars, as in the Reign of King Henry
second, but in the Halls and Chambers of the best Gentry, and most eminent
Nobility.

Beza's Translation of the new Testament, and his accurate notes upon it, have
made him famous.

His French Psaltery was so well liked, that it was well Translated into the
German, Bohemian, English, Scottish, and many Languages: and it is both in use
and esteem with all the Orthodox Churches, Thuanus says, that Beza would
repeat whole Psalms in Hebrew, and whatever Chapter one could name out of
Paul's Epistles, he would rehearse it all in Greek, for the things he had
formerly learnt, his Judgment failed him not.

He lived eighty six years, and toward his latter end he began to forget what
he had spoken. His French works are mentioned by Verdier in his Bibliotheque.
His Latin are known.

News was brought unto the Pope, that his Subjects of Avignon had taken up Arms
against him, accounting his succession unlawful; because that Country was not
justly taken from Raimond, Count of Toulouse; concluding also that the
Ecclesiastics cannot by the commandment of Christ, possess any Temporal
Dominion. And resolving to rebel by the means of Alexander Guilotimus a Lawyer,
they put themselves under the protection of Charles de Montbrun, who being in
Arms for Religion, was much followed in Daulphine. Charles entering the
Territory with three thousand foot, made himself Lord of the whole Country,
with much joy of the Inhabitants. James Maria, Bishop of Viviers, Vice-Legate
of Avignon, made opposition, and very hardly kept the City. The Pope therefore
sent Cardinal Farnese to defend the City. But the danger was moderated, because
Cardinal Tornon (whose Niece Charles had married) made him desist; and go to
Geneva, by promising restitution of his Goods confiscated for Rebellion; and to
be recalled shortly with liberty of Conscience, if he would go out of France.
So the Pope's Territory, deprived of that protection, did remain in subjection,
but full of suspicions, and ready to embrace every Novity.

Davila says, that Godfrey de la Bar, Sieur de la Renaudy, Davila Hist. of
the Civil War's of France.
is made head of the conspiracy aforementioned, who was one of a desperate
fortune, with whom many others joined themselves; some led by Conscience,
others thrust on through desire of change; and many also invited by the natural
humor of the French Nation, who cannot endure to live idly.

To those of best quality among these he gave several charges to raise men, and
to bring them to a place appointed, dividing to all their several Provinces. To
the Baron of Castelnaw was committed the care of Gascoign.

To Captain Mazares the charge of Bearn; To Mesny the Country of Lim^ges; To
Mirabel Xaintonge: To Goccaville Piccardy; To the Sieur de St. Mary Normandy,
and to Montejan Britany: Men, who as they were all of Noble Families, so were
they of known courage, and reputed principal leading-men, in several Cities,
and their own Countries where they lived.

All these departing from the Assembly at Nantes, a City in Britany, and
returning every one with great expedition to the Province allotted him, in a
few days working with wonderful secrecy, brought a great number of people of
several conditions to be at their devotion.

The Conspirators prepared a great multitude, who should appear before the King
without Arms, to demand that the severity of the Judgments might be mitigated,
and Liberty of Conscience granted, designing they should be followed by
Gentlemen, who should make supplication against the government of the Guisards.

The Conspiracy was discovered, and the Court retired from Blois an open place
to Amboise a strong Fortress. This troubled the Conspiratours, who while they
were thinking of a new course, some of them who took Arms were beaten and
slain, and others taken and sentenced to dye: and to appease the tumult, pardon
was granted by the King's Edict, dated March 18. to all, who simply moved with
zeal of Religion, had entered into the conspiracy, so that they disarmed within
24 hours.

Then the King forbad all Assemblies for Religion, and committed to the Bishops
the hearing of the causes of Heresy.

An Ordinance was made by the States at Orleans, Anno 1560. in the short Reign
of King Francis the second, Ordonnance des Estats d' Orleans l'Ann. 1560. Art.
5.
That the Abbots and Curates who hold many Benefices by dispensation, or reside
upon one of their Benefices requiring actual service and residence, shall be
excused from residence upon their other livings. Always provided, that they
depute sufficient Men for their Vicars, of a good life and conversation: to
every one of whom they shall assign such a portion of the revenue of the
Benefice, as may suffice for their maintenance. Otherwise in default hereof, we
admonish and enjoin the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese to take order for
it, and most expressly command our Judges and Proctors to assist them therein:
to cause the Temporalties of such Abbeys or other Benefices to be seized upon
without dissembling, a Month after they shall have warned and required the
Prelates, and other Titulars, to reside, or cause some to reside upon their
Benefices, and to fulfill the contents of this present Ordinance.

Another Ordin^nce was to this effect, That a Prebend, or the revenues thereof,
shall be assigned for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster, who shall be bound in
the mean time, to teach all the youth of the City Gratis, without any wages.
Which Schoolmaster shall be chosen by the Archbishop, or Bishop of the place,
calling in the Canons of the Church, together with the Mayors, Sheriffs,
Counselors, or Capitons of the City, and to be put out by the said
Archbishop or Bishops, with the advice of them aforesaid.

Here I will set down the Indulgences granted to diverse Churches, Brother-hoods
and Hospitals, granted by diverse Popes, and Printed about this time at
Chartres, by Philip Hotot. I shall transcribe the whole.

1. The Statutes and Ordinances of the Worshipful Fraternity of the most
blessed Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, newly founded and erected in the Church
of St. Hilary of Chartres, together with a summary of the Pardons and
Indulgences given and granted by our Holy Fathers the Popes, and by our Holy
Father Pope Paul the third of that Name, confirmed to the said Fraternity, and
all others of like denomination, as well at Rome, as out of Rome, erected or to
be erected. Which Statutes and Ordinances, by virtue of taking put of those
Bulls made thereupon by Authority of Pope Julius III. of that name. Given at
Rome, May 6. 1550. shall be observed, and kept in manner and form following.

The Pardons, Indulgences, and Jubilee, and plenary Remissions, granted to such
as visit the Altar, where the blessed Sacrament and precious Body of Jesus
Christ, is placed in the said Church of St. Hilary upon the days in the year,
and according to the manner and form hereafter declared and expressed, to the
end that every Christian desirous of his Salvation, may purchase and come by
them.

And first of the Declaration of the Indulgences given and granted to the
Brethren of the said Fraternity found in the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres,
verified, approved and confirmed for ever, but made valid by our Holy Father,
Pope Julius III.

The Indulgences granted to the Hospital of St. James in Augusta.

The Indulgences granted to the Church of St. John of Florence. and to the
Company and Society of the said Nation, and of St. Cosmas, and Damianus of Rome.

The Indulgences granted to the Society of the Holy Camp of Rome.

The Indulgences granted to the Brethren and Sisters of St. Savior, ad Sancta
Sanctorum.

The Indulgences granted to the Company of the Charity of Rome.

The Indulgences of the great Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, of the Order
of St. Austin of Rome.

The Indulgences of our Lady del Popolo of Rome.

The Catalogue and Declaration of the Indulgences aforesaid, and the Names of
the Popes that granted them, and the days upon which they may be had.
First, our Holy Father Pope Leo, has granted to all, and every one of the
said Brethren, which shall be present at processions, and other Divine Service
celebrated upon Corpus Christi day, remission of all their sins, provided they
be confessed and penitent, or have a full resolution to confess themselves at
the times appointed by our Holy Mother the Church.

Plenary Pardon to those of the Brethren that shall name the name of Jesus at
the point of Death.

Item, He has granted a plenary Pardon to all such of the Brethren of the said
Fraternity, as shall name the name of Jesus at the point of Death, and they
shall be partakers of all the good works of the whole Church Catholic.

Plenary Pardon upon all the Feast-days of our Lady, upon All Souls day, and
upon St. Philip and James day.
Item, He has granted to every one of the said Brothers and Sisters, who upon
any of the Feasts of our Lady, upon All Souls day, and upon Philip and James
day, from the Vespers of the Eves, until the Vespers of the said days, shall,
being confessed and penitent, visit the great Altar of St. Hilary, upon which
the most precious blessed Sacrament is set, plenary Pardon of all their sins
upon every one of the said days.

Plenary Pardon upon all the second days in June, and upon the sixteenth of
July.
Item, Pope Sixtus, has given and granted to every Brother and Sister that
shall visit the said Altar, upon the second day in June, and the sixteenth day
of July every year, for every of the said days a plenary remission of all their
sins.

Plenary Pardon to the Dead.
Item, He has granted to every Brother that shall give any Alms, or offer any
sacrifice, according to his means and ability, by way of suffrage for the Soul
of any one deceased, that he shall obtain plenary Pardon for the sins of him so
deceased.

Plenary Pardon upon our Ladies day in mid- August which is the Assumption.
Item, Pope Gregory has given and granted to every Brother that shall visit
the Altar of the blessed Sacrament in the said Churth of the said St. Hilary
upon our Ladies day in mid- August, etc. plenary remission of all his sins.

Plenary Pardon upon the Feasts of our Lady, and the Octaves of them, etc.
Item, he has given to all the Festivals of our Lady, and the Octaves of them,
and to every Feast of the Apostles, plenary pardon of all their sins.

Easter Day, and eight days following.
Item, Pope Innocent has granted to the said Brothers and Sisters, upon
Easter Day, and eight days following, four thousand eight hundred years of
Quarantains, and remission of the third part of all their sins.

Twelfth-day, and the Octaves of that Festival, and the Nativity of our Lady.
Item, He has granted to Twelfth-day, and the Octaves thereof, five thousand
years: to the day of the Nativity of our Lady, and the Octaves of it thirty
thousand years of true pardon.

Ascension-day, and the Octaves thereof.
Item, Pope Clement V. has granted to the said Brothers and Sisters upon
Ascension-day, and the Octaves thereof two thousand years of true pardon.

Pope Boniface VIII. has granted to the said Brothers and Sisters upon the
said Ascension-day, and the Octaves thereof, two thousand years of true pardon.

All Saints Day.
Item, Pope Bennet XII. has granted to the said Brothers upon All Saints Day,
three thousand eight hundred Quarantains of true pardon.

Plenary Pardon upon all the Festivals of our Lady, to those that shall visit
the Altar upon which the blessed Sacrament stands in the Church of St. Hilary.
Item, Pope Sixtus IV. has granted to the said Brothers and Sisters, that
shall visit the said Altar in the Church of St. Hilary, on which the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar stands, upon any of the Festivals of our Lady, from
the first Vespers to the second, plenary pardon of all their sins.

All the Saturdays in Lent.
Item, He has granted to the said Brothers, which shall visit the said Altar
all the Saturdays in Lent, for every day a thousand eight hundred years of true
pardon.

From Thursday in Mid- Lent till Low-Sunday.
Item, He has granted to the said Brothers and Sisters, visiting the said
Altar as before, from Thursday in Mid- Lent, till Low-Sunday, for every day a
thousand eight hundred years, and two thousand Quarantains of true pardon.

The day of entrance into the said Fraternity.
Over and above the said Pardons and Indulgences so granted as abovesaid, our
Holy Father Pope Paul III. does give and grant, as appears by his Bull, plenary
Indulgence and remission of all their sins in manner of Jubilee, to every one
that shall enter into the said Fraternity, and shall be confessed and penitent
for his sins upon the day of his entrance, and shall have received the most
blessed Body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Plenary Pardon three times in their Life.
Item, He gives and grants moreover to every one of the said Brothers and
Sisters plenary pardon, and Indulgence of all their sins thrice in their Life,
upon what day and hour they please.

To all that accompany the Body of our Lord, when it is carried to Sick Folk.
Item, He grants an hundred years of pardon to all that shall accompany the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, when it shall be carried to sick folks, and as
much to those who cannot go themselves, but shall send one of their Servants
with a Candle; and to those that can neither go nor send, if they say one
Paternoster, and an Ave-Maria, to every one an hundred years of true pardon.

To those that shall visit the Church of St. Hilary every Friday.
Item, He grants to the said Brothers and Sisters, which shall visit the said
Church, and the said Altar of St. Hilary every Friday, and shall devoutly say
one Paternoster and an Ave-Maria, in honor of the most blessed Sacrament of
the Altar, ten years, and ten Quarantains of true pardon.

Of choosing their Confessor.
Item, He has given and does give to every one of the said Brothers and
Sisters license to choose three times in their life, any Priest, Secular or
Regular for their Confessor, who shall absolve them from all sins, how heinous
soever; yea, though they be reserved to the Holy See, always excepted such as
are contained in the Bull which is read at Rome upon Maundy Thursday.

For visiting the aforesaid Altar every day in Lent.
Item, According to the privileges granted in the Hospital of the Holy Ghost,
and other places particularly mentioned, at which the stations both within the
City of Rome, and without the Walls of the said City are appointed to be, our
said Holy Father, does give unto all the said Brothers and Sisters which shall
visit the said Altar, upon which the blessed Sacrament of the Altar rests in
the Church of St. Hilary aforesaid, upon the days following.

Imprimis, The first day of Lent, three thousand years of true pardon, and
plenary remission of his sins over and above.

Thursday, Ten thousand years. Friday, Ten thousand years.

The first Sunday in Lent, eighteen thousand years of pardon, and remission of
all sins to boot.

Monday, Ten thousand years, and a plenary Indulgence.

Tuesday, Twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and remission
of the third part of their sins, and the delivery of one Soul out of purgatory.

Wednesday, Twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains and remission
of the third part of their sins.

Thursday, Ten thousand years of true pardon, and remission of all their sins.

Friday, Thirteen thousand years of true pardon, and plenary remission of all
their sins.

Saturday, Twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and besides
remission of all their sins.

The second Sunday in Lent, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
Quarantains.

Monday, Ten thousand years of pardon, and remission of the third part of their
sins.

Tuesday, Ten thousand years.

Wednesday, Ten thousand years.

Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, to each day ten thousand years. And besides on
Saturday remission of all their sins, with the deliverance of one soul from the
pains of purgatory.

The third Sunday in Lent, Ten thousand years, and twenty eight Quarantains of
true pardon, and deliverance of one soul out of purgatory.

Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, on each day ten thousand years.
Saturday ten thousand years, and plenary remission of all their sins.

The fourth Sunday, remission of all their sins, and deliverance of one soul
from the pains of purgatory.

Monday, Ten thousand years,

Tuesday, Ten thousand years, and remission of the third part of all their sins.

Wednesday, Ten thousand years, and remission of the third part of all their
sins.

Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, on each day ten thousand years.

The fifth Sunday, which is the passion Sunday of our Savior, twenty seven
thousand years, and as many Quarantains, with remission of the third part of
all their sins: and these pardons they may get twice a day, visiting the said
Altar as aforesaid.

Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday ten thousand years.

Friday, The deliverance of one soul from the pains of purgatory.

Saturday, Twelve thousand years of pardon, and deliverance of one soul out of
purgatory.

The sixth Sunday being Palm Sunday, twenty five thousand years, and forty
eight Quarantains of true pardon, and besides remission of all their sins. Upon
this day they may get the said pardons twice, as was said of the former Sunday.

Monday, twenty five thousand years, and remission of the fourth part of all
their sins, and besides plenary remission of all their sins.

Tuesday, twenty eight thousand years, and plenary pardon of all their sins,
over and above.

Wednesday, Eighteen thousand years.

Thursday, Twelve thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and remission of all
their sins.

Good Friday, a great number of Pardons and Indulgences, and plenary remission
of all their sins.

Saturday before Easter, two and twenty thousand years, and forty eight
Quarantains of pardon, and plenary remission of all their sins.

Easter Day twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains of pardon, and
plenary remission of all sins.

Easter-Monday the same as on Easter Day.

Easter-Tuesday, Ten thousand years.

Wednesday, fifteen thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and the
deliverance of one soul out of purgatory.

Thursday, Fifteen thousand years, and plenary remission of all sins.

Friday, Fifteen thousand years.

Saturday, Fifteen thousand years, and plenary remission of the third part of
all their sins. And they may have them twice a day as before.

Low-Sunday, Fifteen thousand years, and plenary remission of the third part of
all their sins. And they may get them twice a day.

To those that shall assist at Masses, Services, and Processions.
Item, He gives unto all the Brothers and Sisters of the said Fraternity, that
shall assist at the Service and processions made in the Church of St. Hilary in
Chartres, in honor of the blessed Sacrament, to every one an hundred years of
true pardon.

The Stations after Easter in the said Church of St. Hilary, doing as is set
down before, and visiting the said Altar of the blessed Sacrament.
Imprimis, St. Mark's day, eighteen thousand years, and as many Quarantains.

Ascension-day, twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains.

Whitsunday, twenty eight thousand years, and plenary remission of all sins.

Whitsun-Eve, fifteen thousand years, etc.

Whitsunday, Twenty eight thousand years, etc.

Whitsun-Monday, remission of all sins.

Tuesday, Twenty three thousand years.

Wednesday, Twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and remission
of the third part of their sins, and the delivery of one soul out of purgatory
beside.

The Stations of Advent in the said Church of St. Hilary.
The first Sunday in Advent, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
Quarantains, and remission of the third part of all their sins.

The second Sunday, eleven thousand years, and plenary remission of all their
sins, granted by St. Silvester.

The third Sunday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and
plenary remission of all sins.

The fourth Sunday, eleven thousand years, and plenary remission of all sins.

St. Stephen's day, and St. John's day, twenty eight thousand years, and as
many Quarantains, and full remission of all sins. Innocents day, fifteen
thousand years, and as many Quarantains, and remission of all sins.

On New Years day, twenty five thousand years, and plenary remission of all
sins. Twelfth-day, twenty eight thousand years, as many Quarantains, and
plenary remission of all their sins.

Septuagesima Sunday, eleven thousand years, and forty eight Quarantains, and
the remission of the third part of their sins, with the delivery of one soul
out of purgatory.

Sexagesima Sunday, thirteen thousand years, and forty seven thousand
Quarantains, and remission of the third part of their sins.

Quinquagesima Sunday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many Quarantains of
true pardon.

And the said Pardons and Indulgences here abovementioned, are granted only to
the Brothers and Sisters of the said Fraternity which shall upon the days
aforesaid every year visit the said Altar in the said Church of St. Hilary of
Chartres in France, upon which the blessed Sacrament and precious body of Jesus
Christ is placed.

Medard Thiersault, Priest, Licentiat in the Laws, Chanon of Chartres,
Official, and Vicar General, both in the Spiritualty and Temporalty of the
Reverend Father in God Monsieur Jews, by the Grace of God Bishop of Chartres:
To all and singular, the Parsons and Vicars, of the Churches within the City of
Chartres, sends greeting, etc. Pope Paul the third, did heretofore of his own
proper motion, for the honor of the blessed Sacrament, grant unto the Brothers
of the Fraternity of the blessed Body of Jesus Christ, in the Minerva of Rome,
certain Indulgences, plenary remission of sins; and other graces, the good
devotion, and upon petition of the faithful Christian Brothers. Which
Indulgences and plenary remission of Sins, our holy Father Julius III. Pope, to
the end that all Christians might come devoutly, and honor the blessed
Sacrament, of his own Authority has willed and decreed, that they be of
perpetual force and efficacy. And these Indulgences and other graces aforesaid,
at the instance of the most noble Personage Mr. Christopher de Herovard, the
Lieutenant General of the Most Christian King, within the Bailiwick of
Chartres, has granted them to the Brothers and Sisters of the Fraternity of
the blessed Body of Jesus Christ, heretofore erected and instituted in the
Church of St. Hilary of Chartres: always provided, that like grace and gift was
not formerly granted to any other Church of the said City of Chartres. And
forasmuch as we have viewed the contents of the said Indulgence, in the public
Instrument out of the Copy of Dominick Bishop of Hostia, Cardinal of the h^ly
Church of Rome, by Title Traven, Dean of the sacred Apostolical Col^ege,
Protector and Patron of the Fraternity of the blessed Body of our Savior,
founded in the Church of our Lady of Minerva, of the order of Friars Predicants
in the City of Rome, in manner of an exemplification, published, drawn, signed
and sealed by Genese Bulter Secretary to the said Fraternity. Given at Rome,
May 6. 1550. And furthermore, whereas by a certain declaration made unto the
Court of Rome, by the command and with the leave of the Reverend Father in God,
the Lord Bishop of Chartres, and as it seems to us truly and lawful^y made;
that it is certain the like grace was never granted to any other Church in the
City of Chartres. Wherefore we command you to publish, and cause to be
published in your Churches the said Indulgences, and the exemplifications of
the Letters aforesaid according to their form and tenure. Giving leave to the
said Christopher de Herovard, to cause the said graces and Indulgences to be
published within the City and Church of Chartres, whether by Siguis's or
otherwise the same Herovard shall think good.

Given at Chartres under the seal of the Chamber of the said Bishop of
Chartres, Anno 1550. July 31. Subscribed. P. le Seneux.




Pope Pius IV. in his Bull of the publication of the Council of Trent, which
was for the continuation of it, bearing date December 30. 1560. shows in
effect, that it was begun, continued, and ended among the troubles in France
and Germany. And (as Sleidan says) Sleidan. l. 16.
as soon as new broils were raised in the neighboring parts of Germany, and a
great war was kindled in Italy and France, the Council was afterward suspended
and adjourned.

After the suppression of the Conspirators forementioned, in a secret Council
held in the Kings chamber it is resolved to punish the favorers of the
Conspiracy. And to get the Favorers of the Hugonots into their power, it was
resolved to call an Assembly of the States, at which among others the Princes
of the Blood are to assist.

But the Queen Mother and the Guises doubting more than ever new Insurrections,
the Prince of Conde who was as a prisoner is discharged of his Guard, and set
at liberty. He presently departed from Court, and went into Bearn to the King
of Navarre. The Constable, the Admiral of France, and the rest, were
entertained with kind Letters and Commissions and Charges of trust.

The dissensions and suspicions of the Grandees in France increasing, on the
21. of August the King called a very great Assembly at Fountainbleau, The
Assembly at Fountainbleau.
in which the necessities of the Kingdom were declared by the Chancellor,
which he compared to a man sick of an unknown disease. Afterward Jasper
Coligni gave the King some Petitions, which he said, were delivered to him by a
multitude of people, when he was in Normandy. The sum of them was, That the
faithful Christians dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom did pray his Majesty
to look on them with a favorable eye: that they desired a moderation of their
punishments until their cause were heard: and that they might make public
profession of their Religion, to avoid suspicion by private Assemblies.

Then John Monluc Bishop of Valence showed, That the principal remedy of these
distempers was to fly unto God, to assemble godly men out of the whole
Kingdom, to find a way to root out the vices of the Clergy, to forbid infamous
and immodest Songs, and instead of them to command the singing of Psalms and
holy hymns in the vulgar tongue: and if the common interpretation be not good,
to take away the errors, suffering that which is good to be used by all.

Another remedy was, the General Council, always used to compose such
differences; saying, That if a General Council could not be obtained, they were
to assemble a National: that they did grievously err, who troubled the public
quiet with Arms upon pretense of Religion: that their error was as great who
condemned to death those who adhered to the new Doctrine, only for the opinion
of piety, who dying constantly, and contemning the loss of their goods, stir up
the minds of the multitude, and make them desirous to know, what Faith that is
for which they endure so great punishment. Charles Marillac, Bishop of Vienna,
spoke in the same manner, adding, That the disease of France was so sharp, that
there was no time to call a Physician from far: therefore they were to call a
National Council.

Coligni added, that requiring those who gave him the Petitions, to subscribe
them, he was answered, That five thousand men would subscribe if there were
occasion.

Francis of Guise concerning the point of Religion, said, he referred himself
unto the judgment of learned men; but protested, that no Council should make
him decline one jot from the old belief.

The Cardinal of Lorain said, That the Petitions presented were most proud, and
that to grant the Orators public Exercise, were to approve their Doctrine: he
said, that the greater part used Religion for a pretense: and therefore his
opinion was, they should be proceeded against with more severity, mitigating
the punishment of those who assemble without Arms, only for Religion,
instructing and admonishing them: and to this purpose to cause the Prelates to
reside, hoping that by these remedies they would need neither National nor
General Council.

A Decree was made the 27. of that month, That there should be an Assembly of
the States at Meaux the 10. of December: and if the General Council shall not
be called suddenly, the Bishops shall assemble on January 13. to treat of
celebrating a National: in the meanwhile the punishments for cause of Religion
were suspended, except against those who took up Arms.

The Pope hereupon wrote to Cardinal Tournon, to hinder the meeting of the
Bishops, and if he could not, to return to Rome. The Pope makes show to call a
General Council suddenly. He received answer from Tournon, that having tried
all means, he was not able to remove the King or any of his Council, nor could
hope for any better success hereafter. The Pope's secret purpose was to avoid
the Council, or to defer it, but makes a contrary resolution against his Will,
and is much troubled with the occurrences of France. A Currier went in haste to
Rome out of France, with protestations from the King, that if the General
Council were not called, he could no longer defer the National: adding, that if
any place in France were chosen for the meeting of the Council, it should be
most secure.

Then the Convocation of the Council was published in the Consistory, the Bull
whereof was entitled, Of the Intimation of the Council of Trent: the Latin
word was Indictionis. Vergerius wrote a Book against this Bull.

At this time News came to Rome, that the French King had imprisoned the Prince
of Conde, and set a guard upon the King of Navarre, which pleased the Pope
much, as a thing that might hinder the National Council. Saga servant to the
King of Navarre, is taken at Estampes with diverse letters about him, and being
tortured confesses certain practices against the Crown. The Prince of Conde
had attempted to possess himself of Lions, but without success. The Governor
of the City condemned many of the Hugonots to be hanged, and the rest he sent
alive to the Court, who served afterward to confirm the Depositions of the
Prisoners against the discontented Princes.

The King departs with his Guard from Fountainbleau and summoneth the States
to meet at Orleans, where the first thing that was done was to make a
profession of their Faith. Which being set down by the Doctors of the Sorbon,
conformable to the belief of the Roman Church, and publicly read by the
Cardinal of Tournon, President of the Ecclesiastical order, was by a solemn
Oath approved and confirmed by every one of the Deputies: because none should
be admitted into that General Assembly, either unwittingly, or on purpose, that
was not a true Catholic.

Then the High Chancellor in presence of the King proposed those things which
were necessary to be consulted of for the reformation of the Government. But
this was the least thing in every man's thought, for the minds of all men were
in suspense about the Prince of Conde's imprisonment, who being interrogated,
excepts against his trial, and appeals to the King: but the Appeal is not
accepted: and he was declared to be held as convict, because he had refused to
answer the Delegates. So they proceeded judicially, until the very last
pronouncing of sentence.

The Commissaries having pronounced the sentence against the Prince of Conde,
the King one morning being under the Barbers hand, was on a sudden taken with
an Apoplexy, and laid by his servants on his bed, and on December. 5. he died.

Charles IX. brother to Francis, and second Son to the Queen, succeeded to the
Crown, being yet but about eleven years old: in regard of his Minority the
Government fell principally upon the King of Navarre as first Prince of the
Blood. Navarre did almost openly favor the new Religion, and was wholly
governed by the Counsel of Jasper Coligni the old Admiral, who made profession
of it: so that the Protestants were more confident to obtain liberty of
Religion, as they desired. They assembled almost publicly. Hereupon the King's
Mother and the chief of the Council, resolved to hold the States at Orleans,
and begun to do it on the 13. of December, where the business of Religion was
debated. The Chancellor showed, That there was need of a Council, which the
Pope had promised: and that in the mean time it was not to be tolerated, that
every one should shape out his own Religion, and bring in new rites at his
pleasure. He said, That it was necessary that the names of Lutherans, Hugonots
and Papists (no less factious than those of the Guelphs and Gibilines) were to
be taken away; and Arms to be taken against those who cover their avarice,
ambition, and desire of innovation with the cloak of Religion. John Angelo,
Advocate in the Parliament of Bordeaux, spoke much against the bad manners and
discipline of the Clergy. James Earl of Rotchford said, That all the present
evils did arise from the large donations made by the King and other Grandees to
the Churches, especially of jurisdictions: in the end he gave a Petition in the
name of the Nobility, demanding to have public Churches for their Religion.

Jacobus Quintinus, a Burgundian, spoke for the Clergy: he said, The States
were assembled to provide for the necessities of the Kingdom, not to amend the
Church which cannot err, though the Discipline in some small part may somewhat
need reformation. He said, That they that demand Churches apart from the
Catholics, are to be punished as Heretics; and that the King ought to force
all his Subjects to believe and live according to the form prescribed to the
Church: that those who have forsaken the Kingdom for Religion, ought not to be
suffered to return: that those who are infected with Heresy, ought to be
proceeded against Capitally: that the Ecclesiastical Discipline will easily be
reformed, if the Clergy be freed from payment of Tenths, etc. In the end he
demanded, that all privileges of the Clergy should be confirmed, and all
grievances removed.

The King ordained, That the Prelates should prepare to go to the Council of
Trent: commanded, that all that were in prison for Religion should be set at
liberty, their offenses until that time pardoned, and their goods restored. The
Pope sends a Nuncio to the Queen Mother, praying her to be careful of the
Religion in which she was born and bred, and not to suffer Schism to arise by
too much license, nor to seek remedies elsewhere for the present and imminent
evils, but from the Church of Rome, for which end the Council was intimated.

The Prince of Conde was set at liberty, and by an Edict in the Parliament of
Paris absolved from the imputation laid upon him, and the Sentence declared
null and irregular, which was pronounced against him, by the Judges Delegates,
as incapable of judging the Princes of the blood.

In France, though the Queen and Prelates did desire to satisfy the Pope in
referring the causes of Religion to the Council, yet a Congregation of Prelates
was put in order, at which the Pope is offended, and sends for Legate the
Cardinal of Ferrara into France, giving him four particular Commissions, viz.
to favor the Catholics, and oppose the Protestants: to divert the National
Synod, and Assembly of the Prelates: to solicit the going of the Prelates to
the Council: and to cause an abrogation of the Constitutions made in matters
Ecclesiastical.

Afterward, it was ordained in France that the Bishops should meet in Poisy on
August 10. The Colloquy of Poisy in France.
and that the Protestant Ministers should have a safe conduct to come thither.
At the time prefixed the Prelates assembled in Poisy, the Cardinals of Tournon,
Lorain, Bourbon, Anno 1561.
Armagnac, and Guise, many Doctors of the Sorbon, and other Divines sent for
from the most famous Universities of the Kingdom. There appeared for the
Protestants, Theodore Beza, Peter Martyr, Francis de Saint Paul, John Raimond,
John Virel, with many other Preachers, which came, some from Geneva, some out
of Germany and other neighboring places, in number fourteen. These gave a
Petition to the King, which had four parts. 1. That the Bishops might not be
Judges in that business. 2. That the King with his Councillors would preside.
3. That the Controversies might be decided by the word of God. 4. That what
should be agreed on and decreed, might be written by Notaries elected by both
parties. The Queen would have one of the four Secretaries of the King to write,
and granted that the King should preside, but so, that this should not be
committed to writing, alleging that it was not fit for them, nor profitable
for the King, considering the present times. Before the Parties were called to
the combat, the Prelates made a Procession, and did all Communicate, except
the Cardinal Chastillon, and five Bishops. The others protested one to another,
that they meant not to handle points of Doctrine, nor matters of faith.

The second of September they began in presence of the King, Hist. Council.
Trident. li. 5.
Queen, Princes of the blood, and the King's Councillors, together with six
Cardinals, and forty Bishops. The King spoke, desiring them to labor to
compose the differences of the Kingdom, and not to depart till that were done.
The Chancellor speaks more largely to the same purpose. The Queen commands
Beza to begin. Who having prayed on his knee, and recited the profession of his
Faith, complained that they were accounted seditious, and perturbers of the
public peace, though they had no other end than the glory of God, nor desired
to assemble themselves but to serve him, and obey the Magistrates appointed by
him. Then he declared in what the Protestants agree with the Church of Rome,
and in what they dissent: he spoke of faith, of good works, of the authority of
Councils, of sins, of Ecclesiastical Discipline, obedience to Magistrates, and
of the Sacraments: and entering into the matter of the Eucharist, he spoke with
such heat, that he was commanded to conclude. And having presented the
Confession of his Churches, and desired it might be examined, he made an end.
Cardinal Tournon disdaineth at Beza's speech. The Queen answered, that nothing
was done but by the advice of the Princes of the King's Council, and the
Parliament of Paris, not to change or innovate any thing in Religion, but to
compose the differences.

The Assembly being dissolved, the Bishops and Divines consulted what to do.
The Congregation being again assembled the 16. of the month, the Cardinal of
Lorain makes a long Oration for the Papists, to whom Beza was willing to
answer, but was not suffered. But on the 24. day in another Assembly Beza spoke
of the Church, and of the conditions and authority thereof, showing they may
err, and the dignity of the Scripture.

Espenceus answered, he had always desired a colloquy in matter of Religion;
and abhorred the punishments the Protestants had endured: but he much wondered
by what authority the Protestants were called into the Ecclesiastical
Ministry, who had laid hands on them to make them ordinary Ministers? and if
they pretended an extraordinary vocation, where were the miracles to
demonstrate it? Then he treated of Traditions, showing that many things are
believed by Tradition only, as the Consubstantiality of the Son, the Baptizing
of Infants, and the Virginity of the Mother of Christ after his birth. He
added, that no General Council was ever corrected by another in point of
Doctrine. Diverse Replies and Disputations passed on both sides, so the Colloquy
was put off till the next day.

In which Beza, who began to speak, provoked the Bishops. For having justified
his vocation to the Ministry, he discoursed of the vocation of those Prelates,
showing what Simony was committed: and passed from thence to the Article of the
Eucharist. The parties not being able to agree, a Spanish Jesuit having
reproached the Protestants, did reprehend the Queen for meddling in matters
which belonged not to her, but to the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops. Finally,
not being able to conclude any thing by this manner of parley, it was ordered,
that two Bishops and three Divines of the most moderate, should confer with
five of the Protestant Ministers, to see if they could find out a way to make
an agreement. But this does as little good as the former: so an end was put to
the Colloquy.

The Pope was glad to hear that the Colloquy was dissolved without doing any
thing, and much commended the Cardinal of Lorain, and Tournon more. The zeal of
the Jesuit pleased him. He said the Oration of the Chancellor was heretical
in many parts, and threatened to call him into the Inquisition.

The Cardinal of Ferrara had been received by the King and Queen with much
honor, and acknowledged for Legate of the Apostolic See. But the Parliament
having discovered, that among his Commissions, one was to desire a revocation
or moderation (at the least) of the things accorded in the States of Orleans
concerning the distribution of Benefices, and particularly the paying Annates
to Rome, and sending money out of the Kingdom to obtain Benefices there, or
other favors, did immediately publish the Decrees, which had hot been
published until that time, under the date of September 13. that the Cardinal
might not obtain his purpose, and did resolve not to give the Legate lieve to
use the faculties given him by the Pope. For the custom of that Kingdom is,
that a Legate cannot exercise his office, if his faculties be not first
presented, and examined in Parliament, and regulated by a Decree thereof, and
confirmed in that form by the King's Brief: So that when the Bull of the
Faculties of the Legation was presented to be approved, it was refused by the
Chancellor and Parliament. Besides, Pasquins were made and spread abroad,
concerning the loves of Lucretia Borgia his Mother, and Pope Alexander VI. his
Grandfather by the Mother's side, with repetition of the obscenities, divulged
throughout all Italy, in the time of that Popedom, which made the Cardinal
ridiculous to the people.

The first thing he undertook, was to hinder the preaching of the Reformatists,
who after the Colloquy did practice it more freely than before. To gain
reputation he made acquaintance with the Nobles of the Hugonots, and went to
their feasts, and sometimes was present at their Sermons in the habit of a
Gentleman. But this displeased the Court of Rome.

The Queen Mother understanding that the King of Spain took the Colloquy in ill
part, sends an Ambassador into Spain to excuse it.

After the Colloquy was ended, and the Protestants departed, the Prelates
remained, and treated of the Communion of the Cup; the Bishop of Valence with
consent of the Cardinal of Lorain, proposing, that if it were allowed, the
increase of the Protestants would be interrupted. But the major part would not
consent it should be done, but by grant, or (at least) by favor of the Pope.

Lieve is given to the Legate by the King's Brief to exercise his faculties,
which the Chancellor refuses to subscribe, according to the style of the
Kingdom; Yet was it subscribed by the Queen, the King of Navarre, and by the
principal Officers of the Kingdom. For this favor, he began to think well of
the Communion of the Cup, and to write thereof to Rome. In conclusion of the
Assembly at Poisy, the Prelates granted power to the King to sell an hundred
thousand crowns of the yearly rents of the Lands of the Church, so that the
Pope would allow it.

The Legate informs the Pope, that there are but two ways to preserve
Religion in France. One, to give satisfaction to the King of Navarre, and to
interest him in the defense of it: the other, to grant the people generally the
Communion sub utraque specie. And the French Ambassador desires the Pope to
grant the Communion of the Cup to the French men. The Pope gives a favorable
answer, for which afterward he was sorry, and at length resolves not to grant
the Communion of the Cup to the French.

At the same time when the Petition of the French Prelates was published in
Rome, News came out of Germany, that the same men had sent to the Protestants
there to persuade them to persevere in their Doctrine, promising to favor them
in the Council of Trent, and to draw other Prelates to do the like, for which
they are suspected in Trent and in Rome.

The Nuncio resident in France, returned to Rome, who having related the state
of that Kingdom, the Pope wrote to the Legate, that he should represent to the
King's Council, that the Council in Trent was to be celebrated for France only;
because neither Italy nor Spain had need of it, and Germany did refuse it, and
tell them, that therefore it did concern them to promote it.

Hist. Council. Trident. li. 5.
But the bad conceit which the Court of Rome had of the French, was increased by
an advice sent from Paris, that the Parliament had with much solemnity
condemned to recant, one John Tancherel, a Bachelor of Divinity, because with
intelligence of some Divines he had proposed and defended public questions,
That the Pope, Vicar of Christ, is Monarch of the Church, and may deprive
Princes who disobey his commands, of their Kingdoms, States and Dignities; who
being accused, cited, and having confessed the fact, did fly. And the Judges
(as in a Comedy) caused the Bidel of the University to represent his person,
and to make a public satisfaction and recantation, forbidding the Divines to
dispute such questions hereafter, making them go to the King to ask pardon for
having suffered so important a matter to be disputed on, and to promise to
oppose themselves always against that Doctrine. For which the French men are
much censured in Rome. The Pope promises a reformation in the Court, and
hasteneth the opening of the Council.

John Fernelius was a learned French man and Physician to Henry the second King
of France. Medicinam Vniversam doctissimis and politissimis scriptis complexus
est. Thuan. Hist. Tom. 1. li. 21.

About this time also flourished Andrew Tiraquel, an excellent Lawyer. He is
styled by Conradus Ritterhusius, Varro ille Gallicus. He has written well upon
Alexander ab Alexandro his Book Genialium dierum. What Alexander has written
briefly, and without mention of Authors, he has illustrated with his
Commentary, and showed to whom he was beholden for what he had. Thuanus thus
extols him. Cum vario literarum genere excultus, tum celeberrimus nostra aetate
Juris-consultus.

Julius Caesar Scaliger died near this time at Again in France. He was thirty
years old before he fell to study, yet was a singular Philosopher, and an
excellent Greek and Latin Poet. Vossius calls him naturae miraculum, Voss.
instit. orat. Li. 4. ca. 11.
and says thus, Vir ille nunquam sine laud dicendus, vir ad unguem factus.
Lipsius highly admires him. He was an excellent Historian, and great was his
skill in Physic, and his Practice therein was happy. A Noble and learned pen
does thus commend him.

Non hunc fefellit ulla vis recondita Steph. Boethius Senator Burdigalae ad
Vidum Brassacum Praefidem.

Salubris herbae, saltibus siquam aviis
Celat nivosus Caucasus, seu quam procul
Riphaea duro contigit rupes gelu.
Hic jamque spectantes ad orcum non semel
Animas repress^t victor, and membris suis
Haerere succis compulit foelicibus,
Nigrique avaras Ditis elusit manus.
On Snowy Caucasus there grew no root
Of secret Power, but he was privy to it;
On cold Riphaean Hills no Simple grew,
But he the force thereof and virtue knew.
Wherewith (applied by his successful Art)
Such sullen Souls as would this world depart,
He forced still in their bodies to remain,
And from death's door fetched others back again.
His skill in Physiognomy was wonderful. But his excellent Parts were attended
with prodigious Pride.

His Son Joseph Scaliger was one of the great lights of France, and Holland
too. One says thus of him. In antiquos Scriptores nimium petulans and
protervus. Montacut. Exercit. 2. sect. 10. For variety of Learning and Skill in
the Oriental Languages (besides his acuteness in Chronology) he exceeded his
Father. In the first Volume of the Lord of Plessis his Letters and Memoirs,
Casaubon relating to him Scaliger's death, Julius Scaliger Vir incomparabilis
nisi Josephum genuisset. Meric. Casaub.
says, This loss of so Learned a man, wrought in him an incredible grief, and
that he for his particular had lost another Father. Monsieur du Plessis
likewise condoles with him in so great a loss, and says, That Scaliger indeed
made one of the integral parts of the better Learning of this Age. Thuanus
honorably mentions him in his History, Leighs Treat. of Relig. and Learnin^.
li. 5. ca. 12.
and in the first book of his Commentaries De vita sua says, he continued in a
league of friendship with him thirty eight years. And says also, That in all
that while in which he was acquainted with him, he never heard him dispute of
the Controverted points of Religion, or that he was accustomed to write to
others about them.

Adrian Turnebus was Professor of Philosophy and Greek in Paris under King
Charles IX. Thuanus calls him grande nostri seculi ornamentum. Illa aeternitate
digna Advers^ria. Thuan. Hist Tom. 2. li. 36.
He was admirable both in the Greek and Latin Languages, and in knowledge of
all Antiquity, as his Books entitled Adversaria do evidently testify: of which
H. Stephanus thus speaks. Vtinam non tanta brevitate in suis Adversariorum
libris esset usus. Paulo enim luculentior and plenior quorundam locorum
explanatio, and majorem illi operi gratiam laudemque conciliasset, and lectori
multo magis satisfecisset. Stephanus Paschasius in his Icones says thus of him.

Quicquid in arcano condebat avara vetustas,
Turnebus tacitis eruit e latebris.
He has rectified Plinies Preface to his Natural History by Ancient Copies,
and added Annotations upon it. He has commented also upon Horace's first Book
of verses, and upon his obscurer places.

Vide Lectium de vita Sadeelis et scriptis.
At this time flourished Anthony Sadeel. Anthony Bourbon King of Navarre greatly
respected him, and was wont to hear him Preach. His friends in France were
especially Beza, Hottoman, Goulartius, Faius and others.

John Auratus, Regius Professor in Paris for the King of France, was much
respected by Charles IX. and was the chiefest Poet of his time. He was most
skilful in Greek and Latin. Some of his Poems are published.

Papyr. Masson.
Auratum nemo te dicat, magne Poeta,
Aurea namque tibi Musa leposque fuit.
Antoine de Chandieu was a learned French Divine. Beza highly commends his Book
of the Marks of the true Church. There are other works of his also, viz. De
l'unique sacrifice, Contre les traditions. Beza gives him this character. De la
trefare erudition, piete entiere, diligence incroyable, and dexterite
admirable. Beze Epistre au Roy devant son Traicte Des Marquis De l'Eglise
Catholic.

Andreas du Chesne was the King of France his Geographer: he has put out
diverse French Books. Gilbert Genebrard was a Divine of Paris, and the King's
Professor of Hebrew. He was a most petulant writer. By whom says B. Andr.) it
is verified, that much Learning and railing may be accidents in one Subject.

Papyrius Massonius was such a writer of the French Chronicle, as Cambden of
the English. There are four Books of his Annals. One speaks thus of him. Non
tam undiquaque Pontificius, quin vero Pontificum vitia libere fateatur. Mortoni
causa Regia, cap. 3. Sect. 19.

Jacobus Cujacius was a great light of France. His Life is written by Papyrius
Massonius. He is praised by Peter Faber (whose Master he was) as the greatest
Lawyer of his time. Pasquier says, In many Universities of Germany, when those
in the Chair allege Cujacius and Turnebus, they put their hands to their hats
for the respect and honor they bear them. He was thought to be somewhat
inclinable to the Protestant Religion. But when any Theological question was
asked him, he was wont to answer, Nihil hoc ad Edictum Praetoris.

John Passeratius was a learned French man, the King's Professor of Eloquence
in Paris, an excellent Orator and Poet. He has put out Orations and Prefaces,
a Commentary on Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius, Varia Opuscula. His French
Works are mentioned by Antoine du Verdier in his Bibliotheque.

At the same time lived Dionysius Lambinus, a Learned French man: he has
Commented well on Lucretius, Horace, Plautus. Turnebus often makes honorable
mention of him in his Adversaria.

The Queen of Navarre, Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and the Duchess of
Ferrara, having for many Months made request that places should be allowed to
the Protestants for their Sermons and Ceremonies; and all these, and many more
Grandees even in the Court it self making Profession thereof, the inferior
Protestants Assembled themselves apart: whereupon dangerous Popular tumults
were raised in many parts of the Kingdom with slaughter on both sides. Two
diverse tumults were raised by Sermons, one at Dijon, the other in Paris.
Hereupon the Presidents of all the Parliaments were called, and certain
Councillors Elected to deliberate what was best to be done. All these being
Assembled at Saint German, where the Chancellor told them, That the
differences in Religion should be referred to the Prelates: but when the Peace
of the Kingdom is in question, this could not belong to the Ecclesiastics, but
to those whom the King would appoint to consult of it. That this Particular was
then to be considered of, whether it were good service for the King to permit
or prohibit the Congregations of the Protestants, wherein they were not to
dispute which Religion was the better, because they took not in hand to frame a
Religion, but to put in order a Republic. In the end they concluded that the
Edict of July was to be remitted in part, and the Protestants to have lieve to
Preach. The Edict contained many Points. That the Protestants should restore
the Churches Possessions, and other Ecclesiastical goods usurped. That they
should forbear to beat down Crosses, Images and Churches upon pain of death.
That they should not Assemble themselves to Preach, Pray, or Administer the
Sacraments in public or in private, by day or by night within the City. That
the Prohibitions and Punishments of the Edict of July, and all others made
before, should be suspended. That they shall not be molested in their Sermons
made out of the City, or hindered by the Magistrates. That none shall
scandalize another for Religion, or use contumelious words of Faction. That the
Magistrates and Officers may be present at the Sermons and Congregations. That
they shall not make Synods, Colloquies, or Consistories, but with lieve, and in
presence of the Magistrate. That they shall observe the Laws for Feasts, and
Degrees prohibited for Marriage. That the Ministers shall be bound to swear to
the Public Officers, not to offend against this Edict, nor to Preach any
Doctrine contrary to the Nicene Council, and the Books of the Old and New
Testament. This was Registered and published by way of Provision, with this
express Clause and Condition, Until such time as the General Council, or the
King himself should order it otherwise.

The Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Cardinals (among which the Cardinal
of Tournon was lately dead) with the Marshals of Brisac and St. Andre being
discontented hereat left the Court, contriving how they might hinder the
execution of the Edict, and oppose the Protestants. But because they saw, that
whilst the King of Navarre stood united with the Regent, they had no right to
intermeddle with the Government of the Kingdom, therefore they proposed to
themselves to dissolve that Union. And knowing, that the Queen intended to
continue with the same power till her Son came of Age, they thought it more
easy to gain the King of Navarre, who was already much averse to the
Protestants Religion by reason of the different opinions he found among them
about the Points in Controversy. And now the King of Navarre joins himself
with the Duke of Guise and the Constable. These three the Hugonots called the
Triumvirate. Queen Joan was highly displeased at this so unexpected
deliberation of her Husband, and leaving the Court, carries with her Prince
Henry, and the Princess Katherine, her Children (whom she brought up in
Calvinism) into Bearn, being determined to separate her self from the Counsels
and conversation of her Husband. The Queen Regent was also terrified herewith,
and in opposition to the Triumvirate joins with the Prince of Conde and the
Admiral. The Prince of Conde takes upon him openly to Head the Hugonots, who
ardently desire to revenge his past affronts upon those that were his chief
persecutours. His power and boldness was moderated by the wise Counsel of the
Admiral of Chastillon. Their Authority led after them, being of the same Faith,
the Prince of Porcien, the Count de la Roch-fou-caut, Messieurs de Genlis, de
Grammont, and Duras; the Count of Montgomery, the Baron des Adrets, Messieurs
de Bouchavane, and Soubize, and many other the Principal in the Kingdom. Thus
upon a sudden the King of Navarre went over to the Popish party, and Queen
Katherine (though dissemblingly) took upon her the Protection of the
Protestants. The King of Navarre staying in Paris, labors to hinder the
Assemblies of the Protestants, to diminish their force and credit, and finally
to take away their liberty of Religion.

The Prince of Conde being likewise in Paris, Davil. Hist. of the Civil Wars of
France. lib. 3.
on the contrary encourages the Preachers, and (as he could) enlarges their
license and liberty. The King of Navarre deliberating to drive the Prince of
Conde out of Paris, for this purpose sends for the other Popish Lords to Court.
The Duke of Guise makes a journey thither, and passing through Vassy, his
Servants heard a noise of Bells; and having asked what was the reason of it,
answer was made, That it was the hour wherein the Hugonots used to Assemble at
their Sermons. The Pages and Lacquies of the Duke that went before the rest of
the Company, moved with the Novelty of the thing, and a curiosity to see (for
then those Congregations began first to be kept in Public) with jesting
speeches and a tumult went toward the place where the Hugonots were Assembled
at their Devotion. Who understanding that the Duke of Guise, their great
Persecutour, was there, and seeing a great Troop come directly toward them,
inconsiderately fell presently to gather up stones, and began to drive back
those that advanced first to the place of their Assembly. By which injury the
Popish party rashly betook themselves to Arms. The Duke putting himself in the
midst of them, was hit with a blow of a stone upon the left cheek, which bled
much, which caused him to withdraw from the hurly-burly. His followers
impatient of such an affront done to their Lord, with their firearms presently
assaulted the house whither the Hugonots retired to secure themselves, killed
above sixty of them, and grievously wounded the Minister; who climbing over the
Tyles saved himself in some of the adjoining houses. The tumult being ended,
the Duke of Guise called for the Officer of the place, sharply reproving him
for suffering such a pernicious License to the prejudice of Passengers. He
excusing himself as unable to hinder it, by reason of the Edict of January,
which tolerated the public Assemblies of the Hugonots, the Duke no less
offended at his answer than at the thing it self, laying his hand upon his
Sword, replied in choler, This shall soon cut the Bond of that Edict, though
never so binding. From which words many afterward concluded, that he was the
Author of the ensuing War.

But the Hugonots incensed by this Chance, now full of rage, stirred up such
horrible tumults and bloody Seditions, that (besides the slaughter of men in
many places) the Monasteries were spoiled, Images thrown down, the Altars
broken, and the Churches defiled. The people in all places ran headlong to take
Arms; and the Heads of the Factions went about gathering Forces, preparing
themselves for a manifest War. And now each Faction desired to draw the King to
their party, and to possess the Persons of the King and Queen. But the
Catholics prevent the Hugonots, and lead them both to Paris from
Fountainbleau. The Prince of Conde therefore possesses Orleans, and prepares
for the War. The Popish Lords under the King's name likewise raise an Army.
Many writings are published on each side, and both Armies go into the Field.
The Queen Mother labors for a Peace. To this end she comes to a parley with
the Prince, but without success: notwithstanding she continues to Treat of an
Agreement, which at length is concluded. But the Prince by the persuasion of
the rest, again takes Arms, purposes to assail the King's Camp by night, but
misseth of his design. Forces come to the King's aid out of Germany, and many
thousands of Swisses, whereupon the Prince is forced to retire unto the Walls
of Orleans, where being unable to keep the Army together, he divides it. He
sends for succor from Germany and England, consents to give Havre de Grace
to the English, and to receive their Garrisons into Deipe and Roven, to obtain
aid from them. The King's Army takes Blois, Poictiers, Tours, and Bourges,
besieges Roven and takes it, and sacks it, where Anthony King of Navarre
received a Musket shot in the left shoulder; which breaking the bone, and
tearing the Nerves, he presently fell down on the place as dead, and died
shortly after.

Succors come to the Prince of Conde out of Germany, with which being
reinforced he makes haste to assault Paris: The King and the Queen arrive
there with the Army: and the Prince after many attempts is necessitated to
depart. Both Armies go into Normandy, and there follows the Battle of Dreux, in
which the Prince of Conde is taken Prisoner on the one side, and the Constable
on the other. The Duke of Guise being Victorious, lays siege to Orleans, and
is ready to take it, and is treacherously slain by Poltrot, Sieur de Mereborn,
of a Noble Family, near Angoulesme. He feigns to forsake the Protestant party,
leaves Orleans, insinuates himself into the Duke of Guises Court: and whilst
the Duke gives order for an assault, shoots him in the shoulder, whereof he
dies. Poltrot aided by the swiftness of his horse, saved himself in the
neighboring Woods, and the Duke being carried to his Lodging, died three days
after of his hurt. Poltrot was taken, and being taken, was by sentence of
Parliament publicly quartered.

After the death of the Duke of Guise an accommodation followed: Conditions of
Peace were conluded at Orleans March. 18. 1563. viz. That all those that were
free Lords over the Castles or Lands that they possessed, not holding of any
but the Crown, might within their jurisdictions freely exercise the Reformed
Religion; and that the other Feaudataries, who had not such dominion, might do
the same in their own houses, for their Families only, provided they lived not
in any City or Town. That in every Province certain Cities shall be appointed,
in the Faux-bourg whereof the Hugonots might Assemble at their Devotion. That
in all other Cities, Towns and Castles, in the City of Paris with the
jurisdiction thereof, and all places whatsoever where the Court resided, the
exercise of any other but the Romish Religion should be prohibited. Yet every
one to live free in his Conscience without any trouble or molestation. That the
Professors of the Reformed Religion should observe the Holy Days in the Roman
Calender, and in their Marriages the Rites and Constitutions of the Civil Law.
That all the Lords, Princes, Gentlemen, Soldiers and Captains should have a
full Pardon for all Delinquencies committed during the time of the War, and
every one to be restored to his charges, goods, dignities, privileges and
prerogatives. That the Germans should be sent away, and have safe conduct out
of the Kingdom: and that it should be in the King's power to recover all his
places, Towns and Castles from any person that should withold them from him.

This Capitulation being published in the Camp, and in the Court, on May 18.
the Prine of Conde and the Constable came out of Prison; and Andelot delivered
the City of Orleans into the Queen's hands: and the Kings Army recovereth Havre
de Grace from the English. The King comes out of his Minority. The Queen uses
diverse artifices to work the discontented Princes to her will. The King and
Queen make a general visitation of the whole Kingdom. And from Bearn they went
to Lions, in which the Hugonots had so great a party. And considering the
importance of the place, the neighborhood of Geneva and Germany, they resolved
that a Citadel should be built between the Rhosne and the Saone (two great
Rivers that run through that Town) whereby to bridle the people, and secure it
from the treachery of its neighbors. Which being then begun, was afterward
brought to perfection by the diligence of Monsieur de Loss newly put into that
Government. From Lions the King being come to Valence in Dolphine, he caused
the City to be dismantled, and built there a new Fortress: that Town having
ever been a receptacle for those that were in Rebellion.

From Lions they went to the Castle of Rousillon, where there was an Interview
between the King and the Duke of Savoy. From thence they went to Avignon, where
the King and Queen gave answer to the Pope's Ambassy, showing that they were
ready to extirpate Calvinism, and to cause the Decrees of the Council of Trent
to be observed in their Dominions. Then they came to an Interview with the
Queen of Spain at Baionne.

By an Ordinance of King Charles IX. Anno 1563. it was Decreed, that none
should be admitted to sue, by virtue of the privilege of his Clergy, to be
sent back to the Ecclesiastical Judge in any Case whatsoever whether Civil or
Criminal, unless he were a Subdeacon at the last: which is as much as to
exclude simple shavelings, whether they be married or no.

I find an ordinance of the same King made at Mante on Sep. 10. 1563. which
speaks of defamatory Libels, placards, pasquils, and such like things in matter
of Religion: and as for the point of jurisdiction ordains as follows,
Commanding all publ^que Magistrates, Commissaries of the Country, and other
our officers whom it may concern, to have regard hereunto; charging our
Proctors in every place and Advocates to do their endeavor herein (all other
business laid aside) to the finding out and punishing such faults as they shall
find concerning this particular. And afterward they are commanded to observe
the said Ordinance punctually, and proceed against the breakers hereof by the
punishments there assigned, peremptorily without observing the ordinary forms
of Justice.

For as much as many large Indulgences are most commonly granted to
Fraternities, as appears by diverse of the Pope's Bulls, King Charles IX.
required in his demands of the Council of Trent, a reformation of the abuses of
such Fraternities. The Council found nothing to be corrected in them, but
tacitly confirmed them, by ordaining, That the Administrators of them shall
give account of their administration every year unto the Ordinary. They were
wary enough to touch upon that point, seeing it directly concerns the Pope's
authority. By means of these Indulgences, and the superstition which he uses
in them, he gains millions of men unto himself, who devote themselves so much
unto him, for the special favor which they suppose they receive by the means
of these Indulgences, that they do not acknowledge any other superior.

The Ambassadors of this King Charles sent to the Council of Trent, had such
Articles as these given them in their Instructions; as concerning the
reformation of the Court of Rome, Excommunications, the restoring of the Cup,
marriage of Priests, Prayers in a known tongue: and to demand that Psalms might
be sung, the Sacraments administered, and a Catechism made in the vulgar Tongue.
And besides, to assist all such as should require a just reformation in all
other matters. The originals of these instructions were signed by King Charles,
the Queen Mother, Natalis Comes li. 14. Hist. sui temporis.
the Chancellor of the Palace, and diverse others. Hereupon the King of France
his Orator said, when they proposed these demands, That they did wonderfully
agree with those of the Emperor, and for that reason they had deferred the
Proposal of them: supposing that if the other were assented unto, they should
also be satisfied. But perceiving the lingrings and delays that were used in
that behalf, and withal pressed by the Letters of the King their Master, they
were constrained to make a motion of them. They required further, that all
Mandates of provision of Benefices, all Reversions, Re-assumptions,
Resignations, holding of Livings in Trust, and Commendams might be quite taken
away, as contrary to the Decrees, and that resignations in Favor might be
banished the Court of Rome, as forbidden by the Sacred Canons. That a course
might be taken for instructing the people what they ought to believe concerning
the Worship of Images, and to clear it from all superstitions and errors, if
any were crept into it. And the like Essay to be made about Indulgences,
Pilgrimages, Relics of Saints, and Fraternities: that not only the ancient
form of public Penance might be restored in the Church for heinous and public
offenders, but also public Fasts for the appeasing of God's wrath. That
general Councils might be holden every ten years: that for abrogating of suits
about Benefices, that distinction of Petitory and Possessory might be taken
away: or rather for the utter extinguishing of such Suits, that Bishops might
be enjoined to bestow them not upon such as seek after them, but on those that
are worthy of them and avoid them: and for certain proof of their Merits to
make them Preach sometimes; and those such as have taken some Degree in the
Universities, upon whom only Livings might be conferred by the consent of the
Bishop and people.

Augustine Marlorat, one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church at Rhoan in
France, was taken by the Guisians, and hanged upon a Gibbet there before our
Ladies Church. He was a man excellently learned, and of an unblameable Life,
who had the testimony even of the Papists themselves, that in his Sermons he
never uttered ought tending to Sedition or Rebellion. He has written upon
Genesis, Isaiah, and the Psalms, and an Ecclesiastical Exposition upon the New
Testament, which has been well esteemed of.

Clement Marot was a famous French Poet. Pasqu. Recherch. de la France, li. 7.
ca. 5.
He turned fifty of David's Psalms into French Meter, which are read with
admiration of his excellent Wit. He set them forth at Geneva, for he might not
safely longer abide in France for suspicion of Lutheranism.

Marcus Antonius Muretus was a very eloquent and diligent Writer. Scarce has
he passed by any Latin Author, either Historian, Orator, or Poet, which he
has not explained, amended, and restored to his purity, either with his
Commentaries, Scholia, or Notes, Terence, Petronius, Tibullus, Catullus,
Propertius, Seneca, Salust, Tacitus. His Book of diverse readings shows how
Learned he was. His excellent Orations show his great Eloquence. Gesner
mentions his Latin works, and Antoine du Verdier his French. Thuanus styles
him, Magnum non solum Galliae nostrae, sed ipsius Romae lumen: not only a great
light of our France, but also of Rome it self.

About this time Father Edmond in a Book of his Printed at Paris by Sebastian
Nivelle, and by him dedicated to King Charles IX. with this Inscription, The
Pedagogue of Arms, Le Pedagogue d'Armes, ca. 8, and 9.
to instruct a Christian Prince to undertake a good War well, and accomplish it
with success, to be Victorious over all the Enemies of his State, and of the
Catholic Church] gives such Rules as these. That Wars have been always
accounted not only profitable, but necessary. That the Pope is bound to take
Arms against Heretics. That to a Monarch undertaking such a War, a man cannot
urge any of his former Edicts or Ordinances. That no man (how Potent soever he
be) can Contract with an Infidel, or one that has revolted from his
Conscience. He gives this reason. For what King is there, how redoubted soever
he be, that can (without falsifying his Oath made to God) permit and give lieve
to the Enemies of all truth, and condemned by the general sentence of all the
world, to sow heresies in his Countries, and allure souls? He adds further,
That what conditions of Peace soever he can grant unto his Rebels in this case,
will not endure long. But it will behove him not to awake such strong and
Potent Enemies. That to make a Peace with them at last, he must resolve to make
a good War. And anon: As often as by the Articles of Peace license is granted to
every man to adhere to which of the two opposite Parties he please without
being offended at it, it is all one, in my opinion, as if one should cast a man
into the fire, and forbid him to burn himself.

In the seventh Chapter he says, If such persons were Infidels or heretics I
would never excuse the Monarch, that having sufficient means in his own hands
should not assay by all ways, even of fact, to reclaim such a Kennel, or drive
them far out of his Country, out of the Territories of Catholics. And so much
the more roughly ought he to proceed against them, as he knows them perverse in
all respects, and of the Hugonote stamp, which should be accounted the most
pernicious, most devilish upholders of lies, that ever rose up against the
Church. Thus he.

Waseri Comment. ad Mithrid. Gesneri.
In this Age flourished Gulielmus Sallustius Bartassius, and excellent French
Poet. Ille Poetarum Gallicorum Coryphaeus Sallustius, Barthasii Dominus, cujus
Poemata apud exteros etiam in laud sunt. He is translated into many Languages.
He may be read in Latin, French, Italian, English, Dutch. Pasquier shows,
that the French Poets imitating the Latin, have often equalled and sometimes
exceeded them. Antoine du Verdier, and Thuanus do commend him.

Near this time also lived Guido de Bres, a holy Martyr. He has written
against the Anabaptists in French, of the Authority of the Magistrate, and the
immortality of the Soul.

Johannes Quiquarboreus was Professor of Hebrew and Chaldee to the French King
in Paris. There is his Chaldee Paraphrase with Scholia upon Ruth, Lamentations,
Hosea, Joel, Amos.

Franciscus Rabeloesus was a witty, but Atheistical French writer, and Doctor
of Physic.

Robert Constantine was Beza's great friend: he was (says Thuanus) trium
linguarum peritissimus, most skilful in three Languages, especially in Greek
and Latin. He lived till he was a hundred and three years old, his Senses of
Body and Mind being perfect, and his Memory strong. These are his Works.
Nomenclator insignium Scriptorum, Dictionarium abstrusorum vocabulorum, Lexicon
Graeco-Latinum.

John Croy was a learned French Divine. He has written a Treatise entitled,
Observationes Sacrae and Historicae in novum Testamentum. That B^^k, and his
Specimen conjecturarum and observationum in quaedam loca Origenis, Irenaei,
Tertulliani and Epiphanij, etc. and his French Book entitled, La verite de la
Religion Reformee, declare him to be a good Linguist, and a General Scholar. He
has written a Book against Morinus, not yet published, but commended and
quoted by those who have perused it. John Morinus was a learned Papist. There
are his Exercitationes Biblicae de Hebraeo Graecoque Textu. Exercit.
Ecclesiasticae.

In the late Progress of King Charles IX. was discharged all Preaching and
exercising of the Reformed Religion in the Towns of France, wherein it should
happen the King to be, during the time of his Progress.

Many new interpretations of the Edict of March were invented, whereby the
liberty granted to the Protestants was utterly infringed.

The Prince of Conde having heard that the Kings of France and Spain had made a
League for the rooting out of the Protestants, addresseth himself to the King
on the behalf of the Protestants, Symson Eccles. Hist. li. 1. Cent. 16.
complaining, that contrary to the Edict of March they were injured and cruelly
slain, demanding redress for the foresaid injuries, and that they might have
liberty to enjoy their Religion without molestation. The King hearing of the
Prince's coming (being with four hundred Armed men) with all expedition and in
great fear hastens to Paris, and caused the Parisians to give thanks to God, as
if he had been delivered from a great peril and imminent danger.

After this the second War for Religion brake forth. The Prince of Conde
approached with an Army to Paris, and distressed it for want of food. The
Parisians under the Conduct of the Constable sally out of the Town, and come to
Saint Denis where the Prince of Conde's Army lay. There the Admiral put the
Parisian Soldiers to flight, and the Constable was shot by a Scottish Soldier,
of which wound he died shortly after.

After the Battle the Prince of Conde marched toward Lorain to join with the
German Army, Which was to be sent for his succor from the Count Palatine of
the Rheine, under the Conduct of Cassimire's Son. This German Army joined with
the Forces of the Prince of Conde at Pontamonsou, a Town in Lorain on the River
Mosel. Being thus conjoined, they march to Chartres and besiege it. The danger
of Chartres brings on a new Treatise of Peace, which at last is concluded. The
Armies are disbanded, and the Towns by him subdued are delivered into the
King's hand, the German Soldiers were dismissed, and every man returned to his
own house. But this pacification was but a subtle snare to entangle the
Protestants withal: for the Protestants were compelled to lay down their Armor
when they entered into the Towns where they dwelt, and strictly commanded to
remain in their houses, being not permitted to visit one another.

In all the parts of the Country great cruelty was used and many cruelly
butchered, so that within the space of three months more than three thousand
were slain by the Sword. All means also were sought to intercept the Prince of
Conde, the Admiral Andelot, and other principal Personages. The Prince of Conde
and the Admiral fly with their Wives and young children to Rochel. God's
Providence so conducted them, that albeit all the Bridges and Passages were
strictly kept, yet God provided a Foord in the River Loyre near unto Sanser,
which was unknown before, neither was any passage found to be there two days
after. By this way they passed safely to Rochel.

The Prince of Conde had sent letters to the King, greatly complaining of the
Cardinal of Lorain, who abused the King's Name and Authority, and so
maliciously sought the lives of the King's innocent Subjects for their
Religion, expressly against the King's Edict of Pacification, which had been
sealed with the King's own hand-writ, and ratified with his Oath. To those
Letters no answer was given, but all the Country was in Arms, and the Duke of
Anjou Brother to the King was made General Commander of the Army.

The Queen of Navarre on the other part, adjoined herself and her Forces to the
Prince of Conde; and from Britany came Andelot and his Forces, who passed the
Loyre by a certain Foord not known before, and unpassable afterward; no less
miraculously than the Prince of Conde and his Family had done in another place
of the same River before. After whose coming Angolesme was besieged and taken
by the Prince of Conde. Likewise Acierius brought with him to the Prince out of
Dolphine, Provence and Languedoc twenty three thousand men.

The Duke of Anjou was come with his Army to Poictou, and pitched his Camp at
Castellerault near to the River Vienna. The Prince of Conde and the Admiral
daily provoke him to fight, but he politickly delayeth. The Duke of Anjou
receiving aid from Germany forces the Protestants to fight. A Battle was
fought at Blansac, wherein the Prince of Conde was taken and slain, and two
hundred more of the Protestants, and forty taken Prisoners. The Admiral led the
rest of the Army back to Saint Jande-Angeli. Soon after Andelot died at
Sainetes, to the great grief of all the Army: his body being opened was found
to be poisoned.

The Queen of Navarre comforted the Army of the Protestants. And her Son the
young King of Navarre, with the Prince of Conde's Son took upon them the
Government of the Army, and sent Count Montgomery to relieve the Town of
Angolesme, which was then besieged by the Duke's forces, at whose coming the
siege was raised.

Then the Duke of Bipont comes from Germany to aid the Protestants, and takes
the Town of la-Charity in Burgundy, and dies within two days after, having
appointed Wolrod Count of Mansfelt to be General in his room. In this Army were
seven thousand and five hundred horse-mem, and six thousand footmen, besides
two thousand French horsemen, who came in their company, and ten Ensigns of
footmen. The Prince of Orange with his Brothers Lodowick and Henry, were also
in this Army.

In the Country of Poictou the Princes had taken many Towns, and Poictiers was
besieged by them, but they were forced to raise the siege. At length both
Armies met and joined in a Battle near Montconvire, where the Duke of Anjou had
the Victory. Hereupon all the Towns which the Protestants had taken in Poictou
were recovered by their Enemies. St. Jan-Dangely was also besieged and
surrendered. At the siege of this Town Martiques, Governor of Britany, was
slain. This Martiques persuaded la Matpinolis to yield the Town to the King:
and desired the Town to remember the Battle of Montconvire, wherein their
strong God had forsaken them, and said it was time for them to sing, Help us
now O God, for it is time. Not long after this proud Blasphemer felt that this
strong God was living, able to help the weak, and confound the proud.

The Princes now resolve to make Languedoc the seat of War, because the Town of
Nimes was lately surprised by the Protestants, and many Towns in that Country
favored their Religion.

This occasioneth a new Edict of Pacification to be set forth, granting liberty
of Religion to the Protestants again, and for their further security the
keeping of four Towns during the space of two years, viz. Rochel, Cognack,
Montallan, and Caritea. Thus was an end put to the third Civil war in France.

About this time was a notable Suit of those who with a presumptuous and
partial Title termed themselves, of the society of Jesus, decided in the Court
of Parliament, Steph. Pasquier pleading against them for the University of
Paris, a most grave Advocate of so rare a Cause, and M. Peter Versoris for
their Company. Their pleadings are read, and their beginnings, and first entry
into France, their advancement, and all that concerns their Sect, is so
learnedly expressed in an Epistle of the fourth Book of the said Pasquier, and
in his pleading, as it is needless to insert here.

Then the King offers his Sister in Marriage to the King of Navarre, and
passing to Bloyes sent for the Queen of Navarre, whom he received so
courteously, that the Queen was fully persuaded, that this Marriage would be a
more sure pledge and bond of constant peace. The Admiral also was sent for, and
met the King at Bloyes, whom the King seemed highly to honor. The Admiral and
other Nobles are solicited to be present at the Marriage.

The Queen of Navarre, as she was busied in making preparation for the
Marriage, died hastily by the scent of empoisoned Gloves, which she received
from an Italian the King's Unguentary. But the Marriage was celebrated
notwithstanding on August 18. Anno 1572.

Soon after, viz. August 22. the Admiral, as he went from the Louvre to his
house, was shot with two or three bullets in his arm. This was taken in ill
part by the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, desiring liberty to depart
from Paris. But the King with so many attestations protested his dislike in
that matter, and that he would diligently search out and severely punish the
Authors of that deed, that in some part he quieted the minds of the
complainers.

The King likewise came to visit the Admiral, pitifully lamenting the chance
that was fallen out, affirming the dishonor to be done to him, although the
Admiral had received the hurt. He would also have had the Admiral transported
to the Louvre for his better security, to which the Admiral seemed unwilling.
Therefore the King appointed some of his own Guard to attend upon the Admiral's
house, and the Protestants were required to prepare their Lodgings near to the
Admiral's house, to be a Guard unto him, in case any commotion should happen in
the Town.

The Massacre of Paris August 24. Anno 1572.
All this was done under deep dissimulation, to put the Protestants in security,
that they should not once imagine of the Tragedy that was to come. The night
after was the appointed time for the horrible Massacre of the Protestants that
were in Paris. THe Duke of Guise went from Court, with order from the King to
find President Charron Provost des Merchans, the chief Head of the people of
Paris, giving him direction to provide 2000. Armed men, who should wear every
one a shirt-sleeve upon their left arm, and white Crosses in their hats, which
upon notice given were presently to execute the Kings commands. That he should
cause to be in readiness the Sheriffs ( Echevius they call them) of the several
Wards, and that upon ringing of the Bell of the Palace-clock, lights should be
put in every window through the Town: which things were all presently
performed: the Dukes of Montpensier and Nevers, with many other Lords of the
Court took Arms, all the Guards being in Arms at the Gate, and in the Court of
the Louvre. At the prefixed hour the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Aumale, and
Monsieur d'Angolesme, Grand-Prior of France, the King's Bastard-Brother, with
other Commanders and Soldiers to the number of 300. going to the Admiral's
house, forcibly entered the gate of the Court, kept by a few of the King of
Navarre's Halberdiers, and the servants of the house, which were all killed
without mercy.

The Lords stayed below in the Court, and one Besme, a Lorainer, and Achille
Petrucci, a Gentleman of Siena, one of those Strangers which he maintained,
with Colonel Sarlabous, and the other Soldiers, went up to the Admiral's
chamber. He hearing the noise, got up, and kneeling down, leaned against his
Bed, when seeing Cornason, one of his servants come frighted in, he asked him
what noise it was; who answered, My Lord, God calls us to him, and ran out
hastily at another door. They presently entering, Besme ran him into the Breast,
and the rest when they had made an end of killing him with their Daggers, threw
his body out of the window into the Court, and presently it was dragged into a
stable. In the same Palace were slain Teligny, the Admiral's Son-in-Law, and
Guerchy his Lieutenant, who wrapping his Cloak about him died fighting
manfully, Colonel Montaumar and Raura Son to the Baron des Adrets, with all the
rest that had relation to him.

Then the Colonel of the King's Guards called the Principal Hugonots that were
in the Louvre one by one, who being come in the Court, were all killed by the
Soldiers that stood in two long Ranks with their Arms ready for that purpose.
There died the Count de la Roch-fou-caut, the Marquess de Renel, Piles who had
gallantly defended Saint Jean de Angeli, Pontbreton, Pulviault, Bandine,
Francourt Chancellor to the King of Navarre, Pardillan, Lavardin, and others
to the number of 200.

Then at the ringing the Bell of the Palace-Clock, they fell a killing the
Hugonots throughout all the Lodgings and houses where they were dispersed,
making an infinite slaughter of them without any distinction of Age, Sex, or
Condition.

The King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were kept in the King's Chamber
during the Massacre, and after are kept Prisoners. They are threatened, except
they will renounce that Religion which they professed, they shall surely die.

The King of Navarre requested the King to regard that new bond of friendship
that was bound up between them, and not to urge him so strictly to forsake that
Religion wherein he had been trained up from his youth.

The Prince of Conde added, that his life was in the King's hands, to dispose
of it as it pleased him. But as for his Religion he had received the knowledge
of it from God, and he would not renounce it for any fear or danger of this
present life.

Some of the Protestants then lodged in the Fobers of S. German, as Count
Montgomery, and the Vidame of Chartres, for intercepting of whom the King had
given command to the Dean of Gild of Paris, to have in readiness 1000. Armed
Soldiers. But these Soldiers were not in readiness; so they escaped. The Duke
of Guise, the Count of Angolesme, and others, pursued them to Montfort, which
is eight leagues distant from Paris, but could not overtake them, and so
returned back again to Paris. Besides the Nobility, more than ten thousand
persons were slain, whose bodies were laid on heaps upon carts, and cast into
the River Seine, which was colored red with the blood of the slain.

Peter Ramus was slain at this time: he was the King's Professor of Eloquence
and Philosophy at Paris, in the 36. year of his age. In the 21. year of his age
he published a Logic with animadversions upon Aristotle. Being murdered, his
body was reproachfully dragged up and down the streets, and many of his works
unperfected there perished. Jacobus Pascharius has these Verses of him.

Fertilior quavis cum sit sacer arbore Ramus;
Arboris hic dignus nomine Ramus erit.
Dionysius Lambinus, a very learned man, was also slain in this Massacre.

John Mercer, a learned Protestant, a man well skilled in the Hebrew tongue,
and Hebrew writers, succeeded Vatablus in the Profession of the Hebrew tongue
at Paris. He escaped at the cruel Massacre at Paris, being thrown into the
River, and after put forth his learned Commentary on Genesis.

Peter Merlin, a godly and learned French Divine, who was Beza's Scholar, was
miraculously preserved in that Massacre.

In many other Towns there was a general slaughter of Protestants. So that
within the space of a month more than thirty thousand were reckoned to be
slain. To all this Tragedy was added the defection of Rozarius, a Preacher at
Orleans, by whose Apostasy, example, and persuasions the King of Navarre and
the Prince of Conde were induced to renounce the Protestant Profession for a
time. Yet afterward this same Rozarius, being gravely admonished of the
vileness of his Apostasy, departed out of France into Germany, and writ
Letters to the Prince of Conde, wherein he acknowledged his error, begged
mercy of God, for that he had been a snare and stumbling block unto him. I read
in the life of the learned Dr. Peter du-Moulin the elder, that his Father
Joachim du-Moulin, See the Life of Dr. Peter du Moulin written by his Son.
was called to be Minister at Coenures near Soissons, Anno 1570. The Protector
of that Church was Monsieur d'Estree, called since Marquis de Coanures, who
then professed the Protestant Religion. But when he heard of the great Massacre
of Paris, August 24. 1572. and that the like was to be speedily executed over
all France, he presently forsook the Protestant Profession, and to approve
himself a true Convert, expelled the said Joachim du-Moulin out of Coenures.

Then was the good man in great extremity, and in this general Massacre the
murderers were seeking for him. And how to dispose of his Wife and four little
Children he knew not. At last this he did, he left his Children with a Woman of
contrary Religion half a mile from Coenures. Himself with his Wife fled to
Muret, a Town belonging to the Prince of Conde, and so to Sedan, with the Duke
of Bovillon of the house of de la March, who passed that way flying from the
Court. The Murderers that were sent to kill Joachim and his Family (for they
spared neither Age nor Sex) found the Woman's house where the Children were
left. Ruffina, the Woman to whom the Children were committed, hid the Children
in the straw of a Bed, the ordinary bottom of beds of the lower sort in France,
and laid a feather-bed and a blanket over them. Scarce had she laid the
blanket, when the Murderers came into the room, and searched it, but looked not
in the Bed. Peter then under four years of age, not liking to be thus laid up
would cry; but his Sister Esther then seven years old, who had been made
apprehensive of their danger, stopped his mouth with her hand, whereby she made
him struggle, and to make some noise; which to drown with another, Ruffina
pretending to reach something upon a shelf made the Pewter fall, and then took
it up again with much rustling till the Murderers were gone. As soon as they
were out of doors, she ran to help the Child, whom she found well-nigh
smothered with the stopping of his wind: but he soon recovered, and the
Children were kept safe in her house till their Parents sent for them. Thus God
does many times preserve the infancy of his servants from the rage of Satan and
the world.

The day before that terrible execution, the King dispatched Posts into diverse
parts of the Kingdom, commanding the Governors of Cities and Provinces to do
the like: but this Commission was performed with more or less severity
according to their several inclinations: for the same night at Meaux, and the
days ensuing at Orleans, Roven, Bourges, Angiers, Toulouse, and many other
places, but above all at Lions, there was a most bloody slaughter of the
Hugonots. On the other side, in those places where the Governors were either
Dependants on the Princes, or followers of the family of Montmorancy, the Order
was but slowly and remisly executed. And in Provence the Count of Tend refused
openly to obey it, for which cause being a while after at the City of Avignon,
he was secretly made away, and (as it was believed) by the King's Commission.

The third day after the death of the Admiral, the King accompanied by all the
Princes and Lords of his Court, went unto the Parliament, where he pretended,
that he had miraculously discovered the conspiracy of the Admiral and his
Accomplices to take away his life, and not his alone, but the lives of the
Queen Mother, and the Dukes of Anjou and Alan^ou, his Brothers, and even the
King of Navarre's also, who because he was alienated from their party, was
esteemed no less their enemy than all the rest. He gave order it should be
recorded among the ordinary Acts of that Court, that whatsoever had befallen
the Admiral and the rest of his faction, either in Paris or any other part of
the Kingdom, was done by his will, order, and express Commission.

Then he commanded them to proceed to the examination of Prisoners, to defame
the memory of the dead by laying open their Rebellions, and by inflicting such
punishments upon them as the strictness of the Law required. And lastly, he
caused to be published, not only in the Parliament, but likewise in all the
Streets of Paris, that they should desist from further effusion of blood. The
Parliament condemned Briquemald, and Cavagnes, two Protestant Noblemen. They
labored by torturing them to extort from them a confession of the
fore-alledged Conspiracy. But the Noblemen died constant in the true Faith,
without any confession of such Treason as was alleged. They were publicly
torn with Pincers, and their bodies quartered. Notwithstanding they were not
ashamed in their names after their death to publish a confession of horrible
Treason, which they never confessed whilst they were yet alive.

Davil. Hist. of the Civil Wars of France. lib. 5.
The King commanded also a Statue of the Admiral's to be broken in pieces, and
burned, declaring him a Rebel, a disturber of the Kingdom, an Heretic, and an
enemy to all good men. The Magistrates also sentenced the Hostel de Chastillon
to be razed to the very ground, and all his Posterity to be deprived of
Nobility, and made incapable of bearing any Office or possessing any goods in
the Kingdom of France. The King therefore dispatched his Grand-Provost, with
all diligence to seize upon his Wife and Children. But his eldest Son, with the
Widow-Lady his Mother-in-Law, the Wife of Teligni, and Monsieur de la val, the
Son of Andelot deceased, were already fled secretly to Geneva: and the better
to avoid their danger, went to live among the Swisses in the Canton of Bearn.
The younger Children were condemned to death in their tender years, coming to
that end, which in the variety of worldly affairs accompanies the ruin of
great Families.

At the same time this execution was done in Paris, la Charity, which was still
held by the Protestants, was surprised by the Gens d'Arms of the Duke of Nevers.

The Town of Rochel was the Town of greatest importance of all the rest of the
Towns, that were yet in the hands of the Protestants. The King with a mighty
Army besieged it by Sea and Land, which siege began in the Month of December,
and endured until the Month of July next following. Anno 1573.
The mavelous providence of God was seen in this siege, for God sent a number
of Fishes, called Surdonnes, to the support of the poor, during the time of the
siege; and at the end of the siege the Fishes were found no more in that coast.

Sanserre, a Protestant Town, after eight Months siege was forced to surrender
to Castrius, the King's Lieutenant in those parts.

Upon the ninth day of May 1572. Henry Duke of Anjou, was with a general
consent chosen King of Poland. Wherefore, he having long besieged Rochel, and
seeking to come off from that siege with such moderation, that his reputation
might be safe, and the minds of his new subjects not unsatisfied, from whom he
endeavored to remove all suspicion of his taking away their liberty of
Conscience, he proceeded not so violently against the Protestants, who now
being quite tired out, desired peace. This was favored by the Duke, and the
City was yielded upon these conditions: That the King should declare the
Inhabitants of Rochel, Nismes, and Montauban, to be his faithful Subjects,
pardoning all faults whatsoever had been committed by them during the Civil
War. That in those three Cities he should allow the free and public exercise
of the Reformed Religion, they meeting together in small numbers, and without
Arms, the Officers appointed for that purpose being there among them. That in
all other outward matters (except Baptism and Matrimony) they should observe
the Rites and Holy Days observed and commanded by the Church of Rome. That the
King should confirm all the liberties and privileges of those three Towns, not
permitting them to be in any part diminished, altered, or violated. That the
Rochellers should receive a Governor of the King's appointment (but without a
Garrison) who might freely stay there, inhabit, go, and return into the City at
his pleasure. That they should be governed by the Laws and Customs with which
they had been governed under the Kings of France ever since they were Subjects
to that Crown. That they should not lend any aid to those which should continue
up in Arms, though of the same Religion. That the use and exercise of the
Catholic Religion should be restored in those Cities whence it had been
taken, leaving freely unto the Churchmen, not only the Churches, Monasteries
and Hospitals, but likewise all the Profits and Revenues belonging to them.
That all Lords of free Manours through the Kingdom might in their own houses
lawfully celebrate Baptism and Matrimony after the manner of the Protestants,
provided the Assembly exceeded not the number of ten persons. That there should
be no Inquisition upon men's consciences, and that those who would not dwell in
the Kingdom might sell their Estates and go live where they pleased, provided
it were not in places that were enemies to the Crown: And that for the
observing these Articles, the said three Cities should give Hostages, which
should be changed every three Months, and always should follow the Court. When
these conditions were established, and the Hostages given, which by the Duke
were presently sent to the Court, Monsieur de Byron, the Governor appointed by
the King, entered Rochel with one of the public Heralds, took possession of
the Government, and caused the Peace to be Proclaimed. After which the Duke of
Anjou (now King of Poland) having dismissed the Army, went with a Noble Train
of Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, unto the City of Paris, where assuming the
title of his new Kingdom, and having received the Polish Ambassadors, he
prepared for his journey to go and take possession of the Crown,

All the Protestants dwelling in Languedoc, Dolphine and Provence, were offered
those conditions which the Rochellers had embraced. But they craved liberty
first to assemble themselves together before they should give their answer.
Which being granted, and the Assembly convened at Miliald, they craved these
Conditions, viz. That in every Province of France two Towns might be granted
unto the Protestants for their further security, and those Towns to be kept by
the Guards of their own Soldiers, and have all their pay out of the King's
Treasury: and that liberty should be granted to all that were of their
Religion, to exercise the same freely, without any exception of places. Also
that all those that should be found guilty of the horrible Murders committed
at Paris August 24. should be severely punished.

The Queen Mother when she had read the Conditions which were required, said
with great indignation, That if the Prince of Conde had been in the midst of
France with twenty thousand Horsemen, and fifty thousand Footmen, yet would
he not have required the half of those conditions. This great boldness of the
Protestants, put the Enemies in suspicion that the Nobles of France were
confederate with them.

About the same time Count Montgomery had returned out of England and taken
some Towns in Normandy, but soon after he was besieged in Donfront, a Town of
Normandy, where he is taken and sent to Paris, and condemned to death. This is
that Noble man who had slain King Henry the second with a Spear, whom King
Henry would not suffer to be harmed for it. But when he came into the hands of
this cruel woman he must die. She caused diverse of the Nobility to be
imprisoned, and spared not her own Son the Duke of Alancon. The Prince of Conde
conveyed away himself secretly into Germany.

In November following after the bloody Massacre a new Star was seen in the
Constellation of Cassiopeia, which continued full sixteen Months, being carried
about with the daily motions of the Heaven. Theodore Beza wittily applied it to
that Star which shone at the Birth of Christ, and to the murdering of the
Infants under Herod, and warned Charles IX. King of France, who confessed
himself to be the Author of that bloody Massacre at Paris, to beware, in this
Verse.

Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente cave. Cambden's Hist. of Qu. Elizab.

And thou bloody Herod, look thou to thy self.
And he was not wholly deceived in his belief, for in the fifth Month after the
vanishing of this Star, King Charles died of a bloody Flix. As he had caused
much Protestant blood to be shed, so in his sickness before his death, great
store of blood issued out by vomiting, Thuan. Hist. li. 57.
and by other passages of his body in the two last weeks of his sickness, and
in his bed he could have little rest, but horribly Blasphemed the name of God,
which he had accustomed himself unto even from his Childhood. Such was his
unquietness and affrightments in the night, that he endeavored to appease it
by Music.

Andrew Melvin has these Verses to Charles IX. dying with an unusual Flux of
blood.

Naribus, ore, oculis, atque auribus undique and ano,
Et pene erumpit qui tibi, Carle, cruor:
Non tuus iste cruor, Sanctorum at caede eruorem
Quem ferus hausisti, concoquere haud poteras.
In those Verses are comprised both the cause and manner of his death. He died
May 30. 1574. before he was full five and twenty years of Age.

As soon as Henry King of Poland heard of his Brother's death, he returned
privily and speedily, and was Crowned King of France.

Michael Hospitalius, Chancellor of France under Charles IX. Thuan. Tom. 3.
lib. 56.
was removed from the Court, and made a Prisoner as it were, only because he
opposed those wicked Counsels against the Protestants in the Massacre at Paris.
Beza mentions him in his Icones illustrium virorum. And Grotius styles him,
Grot. Praef. ad Poem.
Vnicum aevi nostri decus, the only ornament of our Age. There are these of his
Works published. Six Books of Epistles in Latin Verse. De Caleto expugnato.
Epistola and carmen cum aliis. In the Preface to his Epistle one says, it
appeared by a most Ancient Coin, that he much resembled Aristotle. Summum illum
omnium Philosophorum principem Aristotelem sic ore toto retulit, ut alterius ex
altero Imago expressa videri posset.

At this time flourished Michael Montanus, or Michael de Montaigne, Knight of
the Noble Order of St. Michael, and one of the Gentlemen in Ordinary to the
French King Henry III. his Chamber. His elegant Books of Miscellanies written
in French, are by him modestly styled Essays, or Moral, Politic and Military
Discourses. He has thereby gotten a great opinion of his Learning and Wisdom,
and Rome has chosen and adopted him for one of her Citizens.

Charles, Cardinal of Lorain, dies December 23. 1574. of a Frenzy in the midst
of a cruel tempest, and violent whirlwind which uncovered the houses, and
loosened the bars of Iron in the Carthusians Covent in the Suburbs of Avignon.

According to the advice of the Queen Mother, the King assaults the Protestant
Towns in Provence, Languedoc and Dolphine. Lusignan was besieged, and yielded
upon Composition. Pousin is besieged, and taken: but the Town of Libero in
Dolphine, though besieged, was not taken. In Languedoc, D'anville, although he
was of the Roman Religion, yet had joined himself to the Protestants, and took
Aques Mortes, a Town of great importance in those Parts, with many other Towns.
In Dolphine Mombrim was chief Commander, and had great success in his attempts.
But in the end being sore wounded he was taken beside ^ia a Town in Dolphine,
and by the Commandment of the King and Queen Mother was carried to Grenoble,
and there was executed in the sight of the people.

The Prince of Conde had required help of Casimire the Son of Count Palatine,
who had also condescended to succor the Protestants. The Conditions they
agreed on were these. That they should not lay down their Arms until that
liberty were obtained to the Protestants fully to enjoy their own Religion. And
likewise that Casimire should have the Towns of Metis, Tullion, and Verdum in
his hands, besides other Towns in all the Provinces of France, which the
Protestants were to require for their further assurance, and as pledges of the
King's fidelity and faithfulness to them.

The Army of the Germans and French entered into France under the Prince of
Conde and Casimire, and came forward to Charossium, a Town in Bourbon, not far
from Molins, where Alancon the King's Brother joined with them: and the whole
Army conjoined, was found to be of horsemen and footmen thirty thousand. The
King of Navarre at the same time departs from Court, and returns into his
own Country. The Army draws near to Paris, but at length was concluded upon
certain Conditions. That Casimire should receive from the King a great sum of
money instead of those Towns which should have been put in his hands: and that
liberty should be granted to the Protestants to exercise their own Religion
openly and freely without exception of places; the Court and the City of Paris
with a few leagues about only excepted. They were also declared to be capable
of places in Parliament, and Courts of Justice: and all Judgments which were
made against them for any enterprise whatsoever, were declared void; the cruel
day of St. Bartholomew disavowed; and for better assurance and performance of
these conditions, they had eight Towns delivered unto them, with the Conditions
of their Governments. Aques Mortes, Benecaire, Perigneux, Le mas de Verdun,
Nions, Yissure, La grand tour. The Edict of Pacification was Proclaimed May 10.
1576. and an end was put to the fifth Civil War in France for Religion.

By the Bull of Pope Gregory XIII. sent into France Anno 1575. we may see all
the Judges Royal both superior and inferior utterly despoiled of the
Cognizance of criminal Causes. The Sixteenth Article is this, Vide Collect.
diversar. constitut. Romanor. Pontif. in fine. Et Eclogam Bullarum and motuum
propriorum. p. 316.
We Excommunicate and anathematize all and every one the Magistrates,
Counselors, Presidents, Auditors, and other Judges, by what name soever they
be called, the Chancellours, Vice-Chancellours, Notaries, Registers, and
Executors, their servants and others which have any thing to do, in what sort
or manner soever, with Capital or Criminal Causes against Ecclesiastical
persons, in banishing or arresting them, passing or pronouncing sentence
against them, and putting them in Execution, even under pretense of any
privileges granted by the Sea Apostolic, upon what causes, and in what tenor
and form soever, to Kings, Dukes, Princes, Rcpubliques, Monarchies, Cities, and
other Potentates, by what name and title soever they be called, which we will
not have to be useful to them in any thing, repealing them all from henceforth
and declaring them to be nullities.

The twelfth Article speaks on this sort. We Excommunicate all and every the
Chancellours, Vice-Chancellours, Counselors, Ordinary and Extraordinary, of
all Kings and Princes, the Presidents of Chanceries, Councils, and Parliaments,
as also the Attorneys General of them and other Secular Princes, though they be
in Dignity Imperial, Royal, Ducal, or any other, by what name soever it be
called; and other Judges, as well Ordinary, as by Delegation: as also the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Commendatories, Vicars, and Officers, who by
themselves or by any other, under pretense of Exemptions, Letters of Grace, or
other Apostolical Letters do summon before them our Auditors, Commissaries and
other Ecclesiastical Judges, with the causes concerning Benefices, Tithes, and
other spiritual matters, or such as are annexed to them and hinder the course
of them by (...)-authority, and interpose themselves to take Cognizance of them
in the quality of Judges.

This is not all, for in the following Article he goes yet further, striking an
heavy blow at the Ordinances of the French Kings. Those also which under
pretense of their Office, or at the Instance of any man whatsoever, draw before
them to their Bench, Audience, Chancery, Council, or Parliament, Ecclesiastical
persons, Chapters, Covents, and Colleges of all Churches, or cause them to be
brought in question before them, or procure them directly or indirectly, under
what color soever, beyond the appointment of the Canon Law: Those also which
ordain and set forth Statutes, Ordinances, Constitutions, Pragmatiques, or
other Decrees whatsoever, in general or in special, for any cause or color
whatsoever, even under pretense of Apostolical Letters, not now in practice, or
repealed; or of any Custom or Privilege, or any other manner whatsoever: or
that make use of them when they are made and ordained, when by them the
Ecclesiastical liberty is abolished, impaired, depressed, or restained in any
manner whatsoever, or who do any prejudice to our Laws, and those of our See
directly or indirectly, implicitly or explicitly.

See yet another which follows after this. Those likewise who do any ways
hinder the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates superior and inferior,
and all other ordinary Ecclesiastical Judges, in the exercise of their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction against any person, according as the Canons, the
sacred Constitutions of the Church, the Decretals of General Councils, and
principally that of Trent do ordain. There is further in the same Bull some
Excommunications against those which appeal from the Pope's Sentence to General
Councils: Against those that hinder Clergy or Laymen from going to plead at
Rome, which is a remarkable thing. Against Kings and Princes which make the
fruits of Ecclesiastical Livings to be sequestered upon any occasion whatsoever,
which concerns the right of the Crown. Against those which impose any Tenths,
Subsidies, or other Taxes. All this was levelled against the rights of the
King, and the liberties of the Gallican Church.

Rebuff. in praxi benefic. de union. benef. number. 28.
A Bull had been granted by Pope Alexander VI. in the year 1500. for the union
of the Parish Church of Doway, with the Chapter of the Cathedral-Church of the
same place. But the Parliament of Paris upon the appeal, Papon. lib. 3. tit. 8.
art. 2.
as from abuse, exhibited from the Curate of Doway, to stop the Execution of
it, disannulled the union by an Arrest of the first of May 1575. because there
wanted a Writ for Commission In Partibus. Diverse other unions besides have been
declared to be abusive, because they were made without the consent of the
Lay-Patrons; and the Bulls have been annulled* as well by the Parliaments, as
by the Grand Council.

King Charles IX. in his demands of the Council of Trent, required a
reformation of the abuses of Fraternities. That Council found nothing to be
corrected in them, but tacitly confirmed them, by ordaining, That the
Administrators of them shall give account of their Administration every year
unto the Ordinary. We read, that Leagues and Monopolies, and Conspiracies
against the State, have been hatched in such Fraternities as these, and that
disorders and other unlawful things have been committed among them. They have
been prohibited in all well policied Kingdoms and Commonwealths; and
particularly in France: where we must observe, That as they have been
Instruments of trouble and dissoluteness, so they have been judged hurtful to
peace and concord. And for that reason they are condemned by the Edicts and
Declarations of the French Kings, as the Mothers, or (at least) the Companions
of Conspiracies. For they are so joined together by the same Ordinances, as in
that of King Henry III. of September 1577. And all Leagues, Associations, and
Fraternities, made or to be made, under any pretense whatsoever, to the
prejudice of this our Edict, shall be utterly void and of no effect. And in
that of the same Prince given the 20. of December in the same year. We expressly
forbid all our said Subjects, of what quality soever they be, to begin, make,
or prosecute any League, Association, or Fraternity among themselves, to the
prejudice of our said Edict of Pacification.

The forty fourth Article of the Conference of Flex says in express terms. All
the foresaid ( viz. Provosts, Majors, Consuls, Sheriffs of Towns, etc.
mentioned in the former Article) and other Subjects whatsoever of this Realm,
of what Condition soever, shall depart from, and renounce all Leagues,
Associations, Fraternities and Intelligences, as well within the Realm as
without.

Duke Casimire had no sooner turned his back from France, but they began to
find the Peace to be counterfeit, being made only to disarm them, and to divide
the Commanders. The Prince of Conde first felt the breach of these Promis^s.
They deny him his Government of Picardy. Peronne is seized upon. Diverse
enterprises upon the Princes person, make him to leave the Duke of Alancon, and
to retire into Guienne to the King of Navarre, (who had before declared himself
for the Protestants,) and whom those of Rochel received into their Town with
much honor on June 28. All such of his Train a^ they suspected were excluded.

Upon denial of Peronne, the King granted to the Prince the Town of S. Jean
d'Angeli: but the Inhabitants had a Watchword, and a mutual Oath (after the
manner of a private League, made by sixty Gentlemen of Poitou, who would have
no exercise of any Religion but the Catholic) to maintain one another, and not
to give access to any one of what Religion soever, to the end their quiet might
not any way be disturbed. The Prince finding this repulse, caused some Captains
to enter secretly, and so assured himself of the place. But finding this place
too weak for the assurance of his Person, in the end of October he takes
Brovage, a strong place near unto Rochel.

The Protestants complain unto the King, that in diverse places they are
disturbed in the exercise of their Religion, granted by the Edict. That many
Preachers move the people to Sedition. That the Chambers of both Religions are
not erected, and that justice is denied them. That both great and small bandy
against them. And they produce ample proofs of these complaints.

Now those of the house of Guise studied to discover those terrible Projects
which they had long hatched. Their chief designs were to overthrow the
succession brought in by Hugh Capet in the full assembly of the States, and to
cause the naming of a Successor to be subject unto the said Estates; to cause
the Princes of the blood that should oppose against the Decrees of the Estates,
to be declared incapable to succeed unto the Crown. And the residue, of what
qualities soever, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, to be degraded of their
Dignities: the money growing of their Confiscations to be employed for the War,
and their Bodies to be executed. To make the Estates protest to live and die in
the Faith set down by the late Council of Trent, to cause it to be signed in
the open Parliament. To revoke and disannul all public Edicts, in favor of
the Protestants and their Associates, and to pursue them to the death that
should hinder the extirpation of Heresies. De Serres Hist. in vit. Henry III.
To cause the King to revoke the Promises made unto the Protestants; and to
prescribe a certain time unto their Associates, in the which they should
present themselves before the Ecclesiastical Judges to be absolved; and then to
be sent unto the King, to purchase pardon of the Crimes committed against his
Majesty. To cause the King to make the Duke of Guise his Lieutenant General, A
League of the Guisian Faction.
a Person fit to encounter the Rebellion of Princes, that should seek to hinder
the effect of the precedent Articles. To cause Judges to be appointed to
examine the crime committed by the Duke of Alancon, declaring himself Chief of
the Heretics. To cause the said Duke to come to Court, with the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, and to seize upon the said Duke, King, and
Prince, and all their Accomplices. That the Captains that should be under the
Duke of Guise, should put all Protestants and adherents to the Sword, both in
the Country and in Walled Towns. To subdue the revolted Princes. To be Masters
of the Field: To block up the Towns that were opposite, and to put all to fire
and sword that should make head against them. Then to take exemplary punishment
of the Duke of Alan^on (now henceforth to be called the Duke of Anjou,) and his
Accomplices. Then by the Pope's consent to put the King and Queen into a
Monastery, as King Pipin in former time had done Childeric: and in favor of
the Roman See to abolish the liberties and privileges of the French Church.

These high projects were hearkened unto, received and favored in the Court of
Rome. The Articles of this Association were first drawn at Peronne in Picardy,
but disguised with goodly shows to blind them that would examine them more
exactly: which were, To maintain the Law of God, to restore the holy service
thereof. To preserve the King and his Successors in the Estate, Dignity,
Service, and Obedience due unto him by his Subjects. To restore unto the
Estates of the Realm their Rights, Preheminencies and Ancient Liberties. And
for the execution of these Articles, a certain form of Oath was propounded,
inflicting pains of eternal damnation to the Associates, that for any pretext
whatsoever should withdraw themselves from this League; and a Bond for such
should be enrolled, to employ their goods, persons, and lives, to punish, and
by all means to ruin the enemies and perturbers thereof, and to punish them
that should fail, or make any delays by the Authority of the Head, as he should
think good.

This being done, many Posts went to and fro carrying the news of these
designs. They cast many Libels through the Streets in many great Towns. They
murmr that the Protestants are too much supported by the Edict. And under
this plausible name of the Church, the people give ear to such as are ready to
thrust them into Mutiny. The King was daily advertised of these things. But on
the other side he hated the Protestants, and sought to ruin them by degrees,
but not by any Instruments without his Authority. His Mother likewise hated
them to the death. She causes the Duke her Son to come to the Court, and the
King to be reconciled to him.

The King calls an Assembly of the States at Bloyes, where Peter d'Espinac
Archbishop of Lions, and the Baron of Senecey are Speakers, the one for the
Clergy, the other for the Nobility: and both conclude a public Exercise of one
only Religion in France. Peter Versoris, Advocate in the Court of Parliament in
Paris, Orator for the third Estate, insists on the Union of all the Kings
Subjects in one Religion, but by mild means and without War. The King seemed to
incline only to alter some Articles in the last Edicts of Pacification, and not
to abolish it quite.

But at length the King consents to root out all other Religion but the
Popish, to banish all Ministers, Deacons, and Overseers of the Reformed
Religion, and yet to take all his other Subjects of the said Religion into his
protection, attending that by better instructions they might be brought into
the bosom of the Church. But the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the
Marshal of Montmorency, d'Anville, and other Noblemen, both of the one and the
other Religion, refusing to assist at this present Parliament, conclude a
nullity of all that was Decreed to prejudice the Edict of Pacification,
protesting to maintain themselves in the Rights, Liberties and Freedoms which
the last Edict had granted them. The King of Navarre beseeches the Estates by
the Duke of Montpensier (who was sent unto him) not to infringe the Edict of
Peace; but to suffer the Protestants to enjoy that which had been so formerly
granted. He desires time to attend the opinion of an Assembly of those of his
Religion, and of the Catholick-Associates which was to be shortly made at
Montaubon.

The Prince of Conde answers more sharply, That he does not acknowledge the
Assembly at Bloys for the Estates of the Realm, but a Conventicle of persons
corrupted by the sworn enemies of the Crown, who have solicited the abolition
of the Edict to the subversion of the Realm. That he has always honored the
Clergy and Nobility, but he pities the people, whom this Assembly at Bloys
sought to ruin.

The chief of the Politics declare, that they adhere not to any other Religion
than that of their Fathers, but they are against the taking from the
Protestants the public Exercise which had been so solemnly allowed them. The
Duke of Montpensier (being returned) persuaded to have the Edict confirmed.
John Bodin, a man famous for Learning and experience in State Affairs, one of
the Deputies of the Commons of Vermandois, shows to the Assembly how ruinous
and fatal the new taking up of Arms would be, repeating from the beginning all
the dangers and miseries of the late Wars, which made a deep impression on the
minds of the third Estate. But the other Orders being biased and pre-ingaged,
it was determined by plurality of voices, that request should be made unto the
King, to establish only the Romish Religion in the Kingdom, and to exclude for
ever all Communion with the Hugonots. Nevertheless Bodin procured certain words
to be entered in the Records of the Order of Commons, to certify their desire
of unity in Religion without the noise of Arms, and the necessity of War.

This Bodin was a man eminent as well among Protestants as Papists, though
himself professed the Romish Religion. His Learning and skill in Politics,
appears in his great Book de Republica. Thuanus highly commends his writings.
Possevine dislikes his Methodus Historica, because he makes such honorable
mention of the Protestants there. Some commend his Theatrum Naturae, for a
choice piece, a Book full of natural curiosities.

The King gives notice to his Governors, and publishes by his Letters
Patents, that he is resolved to grant the Estates their requests touching the
Exercise of one only Religion. And thus the sixth Civil War begins in Guienne.

During the Parliament the Deputies of the Low Countries demand succors of the
King, and the Duke of Anjou for Pfotectour of their Liberties against the
insolences of the Spaniards. Anjou is now declared the King's Lieutenant
General. They deliver him a mighty Army, with which (contrary to the Oath taken
by him in the observation of the accord, and promise passed with the Prince of
Conde and Duke Casimire) he besieges and takes La-Charite by Composition, and
Ysoire in Avergne by force, where the blood of the Inhabitants shed without
pity by the Duke of Anjou, confirmed the Protestants in the bad opinion they
had conceived of him.

The Duke of Mayenne sends forth a Navy to Sea under the Command of Lansac,
which coming before the Isle of Re, retired, seeing the Islanders resolved to
fight if they approached. The Rochellers Arm seven Ships, those of the Islands
five, entreating aid from Holland and Zealand, to withstand the force of the
Fleet. The Nobility invite all others to charge themselves willingly for the
maintenance of this Army. Mayenne assaulteth Brovage, a little square Town
built in a Marsh, recovered out of the Sea, fortified during the third Peace:
and after the Rochellers had cut off six hundred of his men, the Town for want
of victuals entered into Capitulation, and departed August 28. 1577. with their
Arms and Baggage, leaving the place at the Duke's devotion. But a Peace was
concluded at Poictiers, and was in the end of September Proclaimed with great
joy of either party. This last Edict cut off some Articles of the former, made
no mention of Strangers, left their consciences free, yet without exercise of
Religion, but in Towns and places where then it was publicly used: in the
houses of Gentlemen Feudataries or (as they call them) de Haute justice, free
admission was given to every body: but in the houses of private Gentlemen, not
above the number of seven was allowed, and in a prefixed place in every
jurisdiction and Baily-wick, except in Paris and ten Leagues about it, and two
Leagues compass from the Court, wheresoever it should be.

But the Marshal D'anville (who every day withdrew himself further from the
Protestants) ceased not to prosecute those by whom he pretended to be injuried
in Languedoc, under color of reducing the places of his Government under his
own Command. Nor did the Sieur des Diguieres in Dolphine dare to trust the
Peace, nor hazard himself upon the King's word, remembering what had befallen
Monbrun, in whose company he had made War, and therefore still continued Armed
for his security. And the Papists when they saw the Protestants meet at their
Sermons, could not suffer them without murmurings and detractions, which
occasioned many contentions, and sometimes dangerous bloody accidents, whereby
a great part of France (though the Peace was made) continued still in broyls
and insurrections.

About that time the King created two Mareschals, men valiant in War, and very
prudent in Government, viz. Armand Sieur de Byron, and Jaques Sieur de
Matignon, men free from the Interests of the Duke of Guise, depending wholly
upon the King's will. And Renato di Birago, the High Chancellor, being made
Cardinal, Philip Hurault, Viscount de Chiverny is chosen in his place.

In the year 1579. the King shows himself in public for a mirror of
Reformation and Piety: he builds many Monasteries, Chapels, and Oratories,
undertakes many Pilgrimages on foot, confirms the brotherhood of Penitents,
erects tne Order of Jeronomites, is daily conversant with the Capuchins and
Fucillans, called Jesuits, and by their instructions erects many
Congregations. He carries a Crucifix and Beads in Procession, with a Whip at
his Girdle. He causes many Books of Devotion to be Printed: And leads a Life
more befitting a Cloister than a Court. He institutes the Order of The Knights
of the Holy Ghost, binding them to Conditions which carry a strict bond to the
Church of Rome.

The Duke of Anjou dies, and now the King of Navarre is by quality the first
Prince of the Blood, and first Peer of France, and most part of France cast
their eyes upon him as upon the Sun rising.

This amazeth the Duke of Guise and his adherents, they assemble the Heads of
their house at St. Dennis, and endeavor to renew the Catholic League, which
before was almost laid aside: for seeing that the King balanced the forces
very carefully with those of the Hugonot Lords, and that he would not suppress
that party, which (as they believed) he might easily have done, and that under
several pretenses he divested all the dependants of both Factions of their
places and honors, to bestow them upon such as should acknowledge them merely
from himself, they were the more highly incensed. Nor could it satisfy them to
see the King taken up with Religious thoughts, and addicted to a quiet unactive
life: for they knowing his nature, wherewith they had been conversant from his
very Childhood, interpreted that course of life to subtle deep dissimulation.

Wherefore the Duke of Guise, a man of a very quick insight, discerning
judgment, and high thoughts, determined to prevent, and not stay to be
prevented. In which resolution he was seconded by his Brother Louis the
Cardinal, a man of an high spirit, and great wit, as also by Henry of Savoy
Duke of Nemours, and Charles Marquess of San-Sorlin (both Sons of Anna d'Este,
and therefore his Brothers by the Mother) Charles of Lorain Duke of Aumale, and
Claude his Brother, a Knight of Jerusalem, Charles of Lorain Duke d'Elbeuf,
Emanuel Duke de Mercure, and his Brothers. Only Charles Duke of Mayenne
proceeded more slowly than the rest, who thinking how dangerous it would be to
hazard their safety by rash resolutions, advised them to proceed with more
patience, and more respect toward the Lawful possessour of the Crown. But the
Duke of Guise resolute in his thoughts, by the Authority of his Person,
Vivacity of his courage, and Eloquence of his Language, drew all the rest to
his Opinion; and excluding his Brothers advice settled all his thoughts upon the
machinations of the League, for the establishment whereof, dissembling his
discontents no less than his jeolousies and private interests, he made show of
stirring only for the respects of Religion, and the general good, making an ill
interpretation of all the King's actions, and with many arts and circumstances
aggravating that danger which he pretended hung over the Catholic Religion in
France.

He grounded his fears upon the death of the Duke of Alancon, and the Queens
barrenness, which in the space of ten years had had no Son, whereby the King
dying without heirs of the house of Valois, the Crown fell to the Princes of
Bourbon, and in the first place to the King of Navarre, whom he termed a
relapsed Heretic, and an open enemy to the Roman Religion. He urged, that his
coming to the Crown, would be the universal ruin of Religion, and the total
Conversion of all France to the Doctrine and Rites of Calvin, and therefore
showed how all good Catholics were obliged to look to it in time, Davil Hist.
of the Civil Wars of France, lib. 7.
and to prevent the terrible blow of that imminent subversion. He showed, that
when sometimes he had been constrained to make War against the King of Navarre,
he employed the Marshall de Byron, who (though a Catholic in outward
appearance) was yet by many former proofs known to be a favourer of the
Hugonots, and interessed in their Factions, that therefore he had lately taken
Geneva into his Protection, showing clearly to all the world how little he
esteemed the Catholic Religion, and how much he was inclined to the enemies of
the Bishop and See of Rome. That therefore he had excluded all the Catholic
Lords from any access to the Court, or administration in the Government;
particularly those who had spilt so much blood for the preservation of the
Kingdom and Religion; and had brought in a new people that were privy to his
designs, and friends to the House of Bourbon. That therefore he deprived all
the old Servants of the Crown of all their Offices and Honors, of the most
Principal Governments, and most suspected Fortresses, to put them into the
hands of men that were Catholics in show, but really partial to Heretics, and
inwardly adherents to the King of Navarre. He added, that notwithstanding the
King's public shows of Devotion, yet in his private Lodgings he gave himself
over to the unbridled lusts of the flesh, and to the perverse satisfying of his
loose depraved appetite. From which things set forth with many specious
reasons, he concluded it was time to unite themselves for their own defense,
and to destroy those designs before they were brought unto perfection.

Now the Duke of Guise by means of the Preachers and Friars in Pulpits and
other places of Devotion, labors to insinuate the Catholic League into the
People.

Among these the chief were Guilliaume de la Rose, a man of great eloquence,
who came afterward to be Bishop of Senlis; Jean Prevost, chief Priest of S.
Severin, an eloquent and learned man; Jehan Boucher by birth a Parisian, and
Curate of S. Benet's Parish in the same City; one Poncet, a Friar in the Abbey
of S. Patrick at Melun; Don Christin of Nizza, in Provence, and Jehan
Vincestre, all famous Preachers. And finally, most part of the Jesuits. And as
these prosecuted the business of the League in Paris, the same was done at
Lions by Claude Mattei, a Priest of the same Society at Soissons, by Matthew de
Launoy Canon of that Cathedral: at Roven by Father Egide Blovin of the Order of
the Minims; at Orleans by Bourlate a very noted Divine; at Thoul by Francois de
Rosier, Archdeacon of that Church, and an infinite number of others dispersed
through the several places of France, who by their Credit and Eloquence,
sometimes in their Pulpits, sometimes in the Congregations of the Penitents,
sometimes in their secret conferences at Confessions, did allure the people,
and entice them to enter into that Combination; which it is likely very many
did, out of a respect to Religion, believing that thereby the Calvinists would
utterly be rooted out, and the Authority of the Church be restored to its
pristine greatness. But many entered into that League invited by other ends, and
drawn to it by different hopes, or else necessitated by their particular
interests, though all shrouded themselves under the same cloak of the
preservation and maintenance of Religion. Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, the
third Brother of Anthony King of Navarre, and Louys Prince of Conde deceased,
and Uncle to Henry the present King of Navarre, is desired for the Head of the
League, a man always most observant of the Romish Religion, and an open enemy
to the Hugonots. Then the Preachers did publicly in all places term the King a
Tyrant, and favourer of Heretics; the people did applaud them, and from this
deadly hatred which they had conceived against the King, his Council and
favorites, sprung that fury which soon after was dispersed over all the body
of France.

On July 15. 1582. Renauld of Beaune, Archbishop of Bourges, and Primate of
Aquitain had then spoken at Fountainbleau in this sort. The whole Church
Christian and Catholic assisted by the Legates and Ambassadors of the
Emperor, of this your Kingdom, and of all other Christian Princes; Did call,
assemble, and celebrate the Council of Trent, where many good and wholesome
Constitutions, useful for the Government of the Church, were ordained. To which
Council all the Legates and Ambassadors did solemnly swear, in the behalf of
their Masters, to observe and keep, and cause it to be inviolably kept by all
their Subjects: yea even the Ambassadors of this your Kingdom solemnly took
that Oath. Now it is received, and observed by all Christian Catholic Kings
and Potentates, this Kingdom only excepted, which has hitherto deferred the
publication and receiving of it, to the great scandal of the French Nation, and
of the Title, MOST CHRISTIAN, wherewith your Majesty and your Predecessors
have been honored; so that under color of some Articles touching the liberty
of the Gallican Church, the stain of Schism rests upon your Kingdom among
other Countries. Wherefore the Clergy does now most humbly beseech your
Majesty, that you would be pleased to hearken to this publication, and make an
end of all to the glory of God, and the union of his Church.

There was a Nuncio from the Pope who arrived in France in the beginning of the
year 1583. who prosecuted this matter with great vehemence: yet for all this he
could not move King Henry III. at all, the King of Navarre having written to
King Henry III. concerning it, the King of France made him this answer.

Brother, Those that told you, that I would cause the Council of Trent to be
published, were not well-informed of my intentions, for I never so much as
thought it. Nay, I kiow well how such publication would be prejudicial to my
affairs, and I am not a little jealous of the preservation of my Authority, the
privileges of the Church of France, and also of the observation of my Edict of
Peace. But it was only proposed unto me, to cull out some certain Articles
about Ecclesiastical Discipline, for the Reforming of such abuses as reign in
that State, to the glory of God, the edifying of my Subjects, and withal the
discharge of my conscience: A thing which never touches in those Rules which I
have set down in my Edicts for the Peace and tranquillity of my Kingdom, which
I will have inviolably kept on both sides.

On October 14. 1585. the Bishop and Earl of Noyon in the name of the Clergy
assembled in the Abbey of St. German near Paris, presented to the King a Book,
written by the advice of the Prelates of the Council of Trent. They told him,
They brought unto him the Book of the Law of God, which they humbly entreated
him to receive.

The Provincial Synod held at Roven made this instance to the same Prince.
After that a good number of Bishops and Proxies for those that were absent,
together with Ecclesiastical Person^, from all quarters of our Province of
Normandy, were met in our Metropolitan Church at Roan, they tendered nothing
more than earnestly to solicit the publishing and promulgation of the Council
of Trent within this Realm. Wherefore this our Assembly by common consent, have
resolved to present their humble Petition to our most Christian King in like
manner as was formerly done by the States of Bloys, and the Clergy conv^^^^^ at
Melun, that he would be pleased for proof of his true Piety and Religion, to
enjoin the publication of the said Council, whereby the maintenance of the
Church is well-provided for, which is observed to be daily impaired and abated.

And the Provincial Council of Aix in Provence, Anno 1585. Petition the King at
the beginning of the Acts, That he out of his singular Piety, would command the
Council of Trent to be published, which had so exactly provided against all
dangers, wherein the Christian Commonwealth was then impugned.

We must not think, that these earnest solicitations which the French
Ecclesiastics here made, did proceed so much from them as from the Pope. One
argument hereof which may be alleged, is this, that they were not now
interessed herein; for most of the Decrees which concerned them, were admitted;
and there was no default in the observation of them, unless it were on their
part: and one company of them were inserted in the Edict of Bloys, the rest in
diverse other Provincial Councils holden afterward in France, the Canons
whereof are to be seen in Print; at Roven 1581. at Bourges 1584. at Tours 1585.
and at Aix in Provence the same year.

The better to countenance the League forementioned, it is presented to Pope
Gregory XIII, that he might bless it. The Pope was well-pleased they should
attempt any thing against the Protestants, but he did not approve those Popular
Rebellions which were made against a most Christian King, neither would he be
the firebrand of a War which he could not quench; and so he sent the Deputies
back without any answer.

The King of Navarre causes the Deputies of the Protestants to assemble at
Montauban, to resolve of the means to maintain themselves, if the League
(abusing the King's name and authority) should seek to offend them. The Duke of
Espernon goes also to the King of Navarre, to confer with him privately in the
King's name.

The chief of the League presume, That the King means to Arm, and to employ the
King of Navarre's Forces against them. They send forth many Commissions in the
King's name, that what they did might be thought as done for his Majesty's
service. The King in the end of March disavows them, and forbids all Leavies of
men of War. The King made no War but by writing, seeking first by gentle means
to pacify them; Hed^clares the Zeal he has always born to the Catholic
Religion and the necessity that forced him to a Peace. Then having promised to
restore the Church to her beauty, to content the Nobility, to ease the people;
he entreats, conjures, exhorts, and commands all Clergymen, Gentlemen,
Parliaments, and Towns Corporate, to abandon all Leagues and Associations, and
to unite themselves under his obedience.

The King of Navarre likewise sets forth a Declaration: and whereas he was
accused of Heresy, he answers, That he was born under the toleration of two
Religions in France: That he will leave that wherein he was bred, when by a
Lawful Council they shall show him another truth than that which he believes.
He says, he is not relapsed, seeing he was not fallen from his first Opinion.
That he is no enemy to the Catholics, for that when the Edicts had granted
Liberty of Conscience, he presently laid down Arms. That in all places he
maintains his Subjects in the same Liberty as he found them after the decease
of his Mother. That he has requested of the King a prolongation of the Towns
which he holds for assurance of the last Edict, and will deliver them before
the time, so as the League lay aside Arms, and yield unto the King the places
they had seized. That whereas they declare him incapable of the Crown, it
touches him very near; yet does he think least of it, hoping that God by his
bounty will long preserve the King for the good of his Realm, and will give him
issue to the grief of all his enemies.

The Queen Mother (accustomed to fish in troubled waters) winkt at the Duke of
Guise. She was contented the Duke should terrify the King, to make him abandon
the Protestants, and to force him to banish his new Minions from Court, who had
brought her in disgrace with the King her Son. Her ambition moved her hereunto,
rather than any desire she had to advance the Duke, and to bring disorder and
confusion into the State, and to stand alone in the midst of these furious
tempests.

The Heads of the League march with an Army of 12000. men to Verdun, a City
upon the Confines of the Duke of Lorain, which they take. And the Duke of Guise
being entered the City, drove out the Governor with all his adherents, and
placed Guittald in his place. The City of Thoul drove out the King's Officers,
and freely gave up it self into the hands of the League.

The City of Marseilles rises in favor of the League, but the Conspirators
are suppressed by the rest of the Citizens. They call the Grand-Prior of
France, Governor of that Province, who was then at Aix, at whose coming
(though with but 200 Horse) the Fort de la Guard was taken, and in it the
Consul Daries, and Captain Chabanes, who the next morning were executed, by
which severity the City was kept under the King's obedience. The same happens
at the City of Bordeaux.

Lions, Bourges, and many other places in the Kingdom, side with the League.
The King labors to disunite the League, by drawing many particular men from
that party, as also the City of Lions: but seeing his design succeeds not to
his mind, he resolves to Treat an agreement with the Confederates. The
Queen Mother goes into Champagne to confer about it with the Duke of Guise, and
Cardinal of Bourbon. And after many Negotiations the Peace is concluded.

The King by his Edict of July 18. revokes all other Edicts in favor of the
Protestants, he commands their Ministers to depart the Realm, and all his
Subjects within six Months to make profession of the Romish Religion, or to
avoid the Country. He approves the Leaguers Arms, as Levied for his Service,
allows of their pretexts, and by secret Articles concluded at Nemours, contents
them in all matters, only with this condition, to leave the League, and
instantly to lay down Arms. Yet would they have in their power the Towns of
Chalon, Verdun, Thoul, S. Disier, Reims, Soissons, the Castle of Dijon, Beawne,
Rue in Picardy, Dinan and Coneq in Britain. They caused the King to pay one
thousand two hundred and six crowns, and two third parts for the Strangers
which they had Levied. They had a discharge for vast sums which they had
taken upon the General Receipts. They obtained an hundred thousand crowns to
build a Citadel at Verdun, and entertainment for Guards on horseback for all
the Lords of the League. This Peace had made a great breach in the King's
Authority.

The King of Navarre, seeing this Cloud ready to break upon his party,
complains that the King has Armed his enemies with his own forces and
Authority, against his Estate, his blood and himself. He lays open by a
public Declaration the causes which made the League to take Arms, the vanity
of their pretexts, the fruit which all France may expect by the Treaty of
Nemours, etc. He protests by a Lawful and necessary defense to maintain the
fundamental Laws of Families, and the Estate and liberty of the King and the
Queen his Mother.

Gregory XIII. being dead, Pope Sixtus V. his Successor, casts out his
lightning against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, he
Excommunicates them, degrades them from all Dignities, especially their
pretensions to the Crown of France, exposes their Persons and Countries as a
prey to such as should first seize on them. The Court of Parliament declares
the Pope's Bull to be void. The Princes likewise protest against it, and appeal
from it as abusive and scandalous unto the next free and General Council.

The King of Navarre causes the Pope's Bull to be answered, and his appeal to
be posted up in Rome it self on November 6. in the night. He writes to all the
States of the Kingdom of France, exhorting them not to suffer the rights of the
Succession of the Crown of France to be decided in the Consistory of Rome. Many
Volumes were written against and in favor of this Bull by the chiefest Wits of
Europe.

King Henry the third caused some Orders to be cried down in the City of Paris,
because he was certified of the Conspiracies which they made against the State:
it being notoriously known, that the League was sworn in Toulouse by the black
Penitents, and that as many of these Orders as are in France, did all conspire
to the like ends.

The French Exiles, who dwelt at Mompelgart in the Duchy of Wortemberg, did in
the year 1586. first solicit the Divines there, and then the Duke Frederick,
That there might be a public Conference between the German and French Divines
about some Controversies between them. They assemble in March: the Duke was
present all the time. On the one side was Jacob Andrews Chancellor of Tubing,
Luke Osiander of Wortemberg, Osiand. Epit. Eccles. Hist. C^nt. 16. lib. 4. cap.
23.
and two Civilians from the Duke. And on the other side were Theodore Beza, and
Anthony Faius from Geneva, Abraham Musculus, and two Civilians from Bern, and
Claudius Alberius from Lausanna. Many were the Hearers. The Articles of which
they were to Dispute, were, 1. Of the Supper of the Lord. 2. Of the Person of
Christ. 3. Of Images, Temples, and such like things. 4. Concerning Baptism. 5.
Of Predestination.

The first day, viz. on March 21. Those of Wortemberg gave in writing Theses of
the Lord's Supper, showing that all do agree that All do eat Christ's flesh,
and drink his blood spiritually: all do condemn the renting of Christ's flesh
with men's teeth; as also Transubstantiation, and Physical or Local presence. So
that the only Question is, whether in the Supper the very body and blood of
Christ, be verily and substantially present, and be distributed and received
with the Bread and Wine by the mouth of all them who receive the Sacrament,
whether worthy or unworthy, believers or not believers, yet so that the
believers only receive comfort, and the unbelievers do eat to their own
damnation?

We hold the affirmative (say they;) that is, by those Words [In, with, and
under the Bread,] Petr. Eccles. Hist. Cent. 16. part. 3.
we understand nothing but that they who eat that Bread, and drink that Wine,
do receive Christ's body and blood with the Bread and Wine. 2. By the words
[Substantially, Essentially, Really, and Orally,] we mean no other but the very
eating and presence of his body and blood. 3. They argue from the truth of
Christ's words, [This is my body,] and the Almighty power of Christ, seeing his
words declare his will, and by his power he can give his body unto all
Receivers. 4. The manner how the worthy and unworthy receive Christ's body, is
not expressed in Scripture; and we say, it is supernatural and incomprehensible
by the wit of men, and should not be disputed, nor curiously searched.

These Theses were given unto Beza, as it was appointed, and the next day he
brought his answer and Propositions. The Sum is, 1. A Sacrament in the strict
sense, is a sensible thing appointed (by Divine institution) to be separated
from common use to signify spiritual and holy things: and this signification
consists not in a bare representation, whereby the mind is admonished to
conceive the thing signified (this is the use of Pictures) but on God's part:
with the signs is also a very giving of those things which are signified and
offered unto our souls. 2. We teach, that according to Christ's Institution, by
the Bread is signified Christ's body, by the Wine his blood: by brea^ing of the
Bread and pouring out of the Wine are signified those grievous torments which
he suffered for us in his body and soul: by outward giving the Bread and Wine,
the spiritual giving the things signified by Christ unto our souls: by outward
taking the signs is signified the spiritual receiving of Christ by Faith
Sacramentally and truly. 3. The Sacramental union of the signs and things
signified consists in a mutual relation, as is now said: for the verity of
Christ's body (which is local, and circumscribed both before and after his
glorification) cannot consist otherwise. Again, many passages of Scripture that
show the true and Physical ascending of Christ from the Earth, and his
returning from Heaven unto judgment, do confute the Doctrine of
Consubstantiation. 4. When the word Sacrament is taken in a more large sense,
it consists of two things, one Earthly, another Heavenly. We teach, That
Earthly things are received by Earthly Instruments, viz. the Hand and Mouth;
but the Heavenly things are apprehended only Spiritually by Faith: because
albeit Christ's body is a truly Organical body, yet analogy requires, That such
as the nourishment and end thereof is, such also must be the manner of
receiving it. But the nourishment and end thereof is spiritual, that is, they
concern our spiritual union with Christ, and eternal life through him.
Therefore the manner of receiving those must also be spiritual, by the proper
Instrument of the soul, which is Faith. And therefore seeing the bodily
receiving of the signs, is a pledge of the spiritual receiving, these words,
[Eat and Drink] as they are properly spoken of receiving the signs, so are they
spoken figuratively of the thing signified, viz. by a Sacramental Metonymy,
whereby that which agrees unto the signs, is spoken of the things signified,
and so both those receivings cannot be by the mouth. Again, if the substance of
Christ's body were received bodily, it should remain in the faithful at least,
and they should become the substantial or bodily members of Christ, and so the
Church were not his mystical body, but a body verily and substantially
consisting of the substance of his body, and of the bodies of all Believers. 5.
The proper effect of the Supper is the salvation of the worthy Communicants by
confirming their spiritual union in Christ: and another effect (but by
accident) is the condemnation of them who come unworthily, that is, ignorant of
this mystery, or merely incredulous and without repentance; and this
condemnation proceeds not from the Supper, but from the unworthy using of it.

Then unto the question (as it was propounded) Beza answered negatively, not
denying that the body of Christ is truly offered unto all that come, but to be
received by Faith, and not by the Mouth: and albeit the whole Sacrament be
tendered unto all that come, yet unbelievers receive only the signs, and they
are guilty of Christ's body and blood, not which they have received, but which
they have contemned. Unto the two arguments he answered, we deny not the truth
of Christ's words, but we expound them according to the Analogy of Faith
contained in the Creed, unto which Faith Consubstantiation is contrary. And
although Christ, as he is God, is Almighty, yet his Manhood is not Almighty:
and as he is God he cannot do what he has not decreed to do, or what is
contrary unto his decree; not because he is not Almighty, but because to change
his Will (and so to be mutable) is not a power, but an infirmity. But God has
ordained, that Christ's body should be local and circumscribed, etc. On this
Article the Disputation continued three days, the one pressing the truth of
the words, This is my body: and Beza urging the Analogy of Faith, and the like
phrase of other Sacraments. Neither of the two would yield.

Then they passed unto the Article of the Person of Christ. Those of Wortemberg
agreed that the Son of God has assumed the nature of man, and became like unto
us in all things except sin: that he has assumed this nature into the unity of
his Person; and he is one person; so that the two natures are most strictly
united, not by confusion or commission, or absorption, or transmutation of
either of these natures before nor after his ascension: for unto the perfect
Person of the Mediator both natures are required, neither can the properties
of the one nature be the properties of the other; for then would follow an
abolition of one of these natures. Also the properties of the humane nature are
the gifts that were given unto him without measure, by which he excels all
men and Angels: In the Person of Christ is a Communication of properties,
whereby the properties of both natures are spoken of his person; and the
properties of the one nature are given unto the other, by that Doctrine which
is called Doctrina idiomatum. So when it is said, the Son of God communicates
his properties unto the assumed nature ( viz. his Omnipotence, or Omnipresence)
it is not meant as if he poured into the assumed nature (as a thing is poured
from one Vessel into another) his properties; as if humane nature by it self,
or of it self, or considered in abstracto without his person, had proper
Omnipotency: neither may we think that his humane nature is made an infinite
substance, or uncircumscribed, or extended unto all places, etc. When we speak
of the real communication of properties, we mean not that one nature passes
into another, but we oppose real unto verbal communication, which makes only
names common unto the natures.

Then the question is, whether for the Personal union there be a real
communication of properties between the two natures in his Person; or that the
one nature communicates its properties unto the other, and how far this
communication is extended? We believe (said they) that upon the Personal union
follows so real a communication of properties, whereby the Son of God
communicates unto the assumed nature his omnipotence, omnipresence, etc. by
which communication the Godhead becomes not weaker, but his humane nature is
exalted, and not abolished, as is the union of the body and soul, and the fire
and iron. They said, that the humane nature is Almighty, because the Scripture
ascribes to him as he is Man, all Power, etc. They added, This our Mediator is
to be adored with all Religious worship according to both natures, for we have
not two Christ's; but of whole Christ it is said, Let all the Angels worship him.

On the morrow Beza answered thus, There is ambiguity in the word
Communication; it signifies the Personal union, and also the effects of it. We
believe (says he) a real communication, that is, an union of natures: in which
union both natures remain distinct, both in their own properties; and therefore
that communication is not so much as verbal, but is as false, as if you would
say, his Humanity is become his Deity. Although all the properties of the Deity
may be attributed unto Christ-man, that is, unto his Person even named by his
Manhood, or in concreto, as we say, The Man Christ is Almighty and eternal: but
neither may the natures be spoken one of another, neither the properties of the
one be given to the other. For this is a sure rule, In the Personal union both
natures remain distinct, and they both distinctly do what is proper unto them.
Briefly, as there are two natures in Christ, distinct in number, and not
separated one from the another, so there are two wills, and two workings or
operations, but one work as there is but one Person. We profess also that
Christ reigns now, and has all Power both in Heaven and in Earth according
to both natures, but not praesenter in respect of his flesh; for now (as the
Apostle says) we are strangers from Christ, and he desired to be out of the
body, that he might be with Christ. And it is said, he will come again, viz.
bodily, and visibly. Lastly, in that one adoration of our one and only
Mediator according to both natures, we divide not the Person, but we
distinguish the natures: for the Word is the true and absolute object of our
adoration, and adoration is due unto God only. But we exclude not that flesh
from our adoration, lest (with Nestorius) we divide his Person; yet so, that we
worship that flesh not in it self, but respectively as it is the flesh of the
Son of God. They disputed on this Article other three days, but no agreement.

On March 27. Those of Wortemberg gave their Propositions of Popish Churches,
Images in Churches, etc. They agreed, That these are in themselves indifferent,
if the abuses be shunned.

Then they gave Theses of Baptism, whether Baptism is the Laver of Regeneration
in the holy spirit? or whether it be only a sign signifying and sealing
adoption? The Wortembergers said, It not only signifies and seals adoption,
but it is the very Laver of Regeneration. They enlarged hereupon. Beza gave his
answer in writing, viz. That the Sacraments are not bare signs, but the
efficacy of the Holy Ghost should be distinguished from the power of the water,
as they are distinguished by John Baptist in Matthew. 3. And he declares the
words of the Institution, and the effect of Baptism. Jacob Andrews held there
is but one Baptism, because St. Paul says, one Baptism. Beza said, there is an
outward and an inward washing. And he rebuked the Wortembergers, because they
did not call the blood of Christ the thing signified in Baptism. They asked
whether Infants have Faith? Beza denied, and the other affirmed it. They
questioned whether the Elect being sanctified may lose faith? Beza denied. They
asked what hope may Parents have of their Baptized Children? Beza said, All
should hope well, but we are not Prophets to foretell, that this or that Child
shall be a good or bad man.

Concerning Predestination, Those of Wortemberg said, God from all eternity not
only foresaw the fall of man, but has also foreknown and chosen them that
shall be saved, and has appointed them unto salvation, that is, that they
should be saved by Christ; for the election was made in Christ. The number of
them who shall be saved is certain with God. So the question is (say they)
whether God has Predestined his Elect unto life; so that he in his hidden
and absolute judgment has appointed the most part of men unto eternal
damnation, that he will not have them to repent, nor be converted and saved? We
believe (say they) that such Decree cannot be showed by Scripture. They reject
those Propositions, that Reprobation is the most wise purpose of God, whereby
from all eternity he has constantly Decreed, without all unrighteousness; not
to show love on them whom he has not loved, that unjustly condemning them he
might declare his wrath against sin, and show his glory. The cause of the
Decree of Election or Reprobation, is his eternal favor toward them who at his
pleasure are appointed unto salvation, and his eternal hatred of ill, ordaining
whom he pleases unto condemnation. But why he has appointed these men rather
than those unto salvation or damnation, there is no other impulsive cause but
his will, etc. Beza answered thus, What ye deny, [That the vessels of wrath, as
well as the vessels of mercy, were ordained from eternity,] we do affirm, not
only because there is a like reason of contraries, and the very word Election
proves it, but also it is declared by the express word of God, Romans 9.11. And
this is so far (said he) from any ground that man can challenge God of
unrighteousness, that he were not unjust though he had condemned all men,
seeing we are all by nature the Children of wrath, and he is debtor to none. We
say further, that their Condemnation, who in the eternal Decree are left in
their corruption, is not rightly attributed unto this Decree: for albeit that
which God has Decreed cannot miss, but shall come to pass; and so they who
perish do not perish without this Decree: yet the cause of the execution or of
their condemnation, is not that Decree of God, but their natural corruption and
the fruits of it, from which it pleased God to exempt them only whom he has
chosen to salvation. That there ever was, and is a great a number of them that
perish, the matter it self shows: and Christ says, Few are chosen, few do
enter in at the strait gate.

Lastly, that God will not have them to be converted, and saved, it is not to be
understood as if they were willing, and God resists their desire; but that
they will not be converted, nor can they will, being forsaken of God, and left
in impenitency. He answered also to the Objections. Then they came to that
question, whether Christ died for all men? Jacob held the affirmative, and Beza
the negative.

Prince Frederick now thought it time to close, seeing no hope of agreement:
Osiand. Cent. 16. lib. 4. cap. 23.
he exhorted them to give one another the hand of Fraternity, and to abstain
from bitter writings, until God shall give them more cause of Peace. Jacob
answered, seeing they have accused us of gross Errors, how can we acknowledge
them as Brethren? Beza said, seeing you refuse to give us the right hand of
Fraternity, neither acknowledge us as Brethren, we do not regard your hand of
friendship. So the Conference was ended March 29.

Anthony Faius one of Beza's assistants in this Conference, was a French
Divine. He has written these Works. In Epist. ad Romanos: In Priorem ad
Timotheum. In Ecclesiastem. Enchiridion Theologicum. De Vita and Obitu Theod.
Bezae. Emblemata and Epigrammata Miscel.

Abraham Faius, his Son, has put out a Book, entitled, Linguae Gallicae and
Italicae hortulus amoenissimus: and horarum subcisivarum libri duo.

Now the King begins a War against the Protestants in Guienne. The Castle of
Angiers is suddenly taken by the Hugonots without much difficulty. Angiers is a
City situate on this side the Loire, in a sweet fertile Country, well peopled,
famous for the study of the Law, and commodiously seated to fall into all the
Provinces of Gallia Celtica, which largely invirons it on every side. But this
Castle of Angiers was recovered by the Catholics before it was relieved, and
the Prince of Conde not knowing what was done, coming to relieve Angiers, was
defeated.

The King sets forth diverse Armies, one under the Duke of Mayenne: the
Marshall de Byron marches with another Army into Xantonge. The King sets
forth two other Armies, one under the Duke of Joyeuse in Avergne, the other
under the Duke of Espernon in Provence; he himself goes to Lions. Then the
Protestant Princes of Germany raise a mighty Army to relieve the Hugonots. They
send an Embassy before unto the King of France, which increases the
discontents, and hasteneth the taking up of Arms. The King seeks to persuade
the King of Navarre to turn Catholic, and come to Court: he sends the
Queen Mother to Treat with him in Poictou about it. Those of the League are
highly displeased and murmr at it. And from that occasion the union of the
Parisians is fomented, who provide, and Arm themselves secretly. They plot to
surprise Bolougne in Picardy, but the business is discovered, and the Town is
saved.

The Duke of Guise being up in Arms in Burgundy and Champagne, takes Ausonne
and Rocnoy, and besieges Sedan. The Queen Mother returns from the King of
Navarre to Paris, but without effect. The King makes a new Protestation not to
Tolerate the Hugonots any longer. He unites himself with the Catholic League
to oppose the German Army. He sends the Duke of Joyeuse into Poictou against
the King of Navarre, who coming unexpectedly, cuts off two Regiments of the
Hugonot Infantry.

The Duke of Guise draws his Army together to advance against the Germans in
Lorain. The King levieth Swisses, and raises great Forces for the same
purpose. The Count of Soissons, and the Prince of Conti go over to the King of
Navarre's party. The Duke of Lorain united with the Duke of Guise opposes the
entry of the Germans into his Country. They meet at Pont St. Vincent, but give
not Battle. The Germans pass on into France; the Duke of Guise follows them,
and the King with his Army advances to hinder them from joining with the King
of Navarre, who advancing in the mean time to meet the Duke of Joyeuse, passes
the River Drongne. The Armies face one another at Coutras, and fight with all
their Forces, where the Duke of Joyeuse lost both the Battle and his life.

On the other side the Duke of Guise fights with the Germans at Villemory, and
Auneau, and makes a great slaughter of them. The King following the Victory
comes up close to the enemies Army. The Swisses yield themselves unto him, and
the remainder of the Germans disband, and betake themselves to flight. They are
followed and defeated in many places. The Duke of Bovillon with a few horse
making his escape by the way of Roane and Lionois, after many dangers gets
to Geneva, where he died within a few days after, leaving his Estate to his
Sister, whom he recommended to the care of the Duke of Montpensier. The Sieur
de Chastillon, having often fought with the Forces of Burgundy and Lionois with
great success and valor, got at last into Languedoc, and retired himself into
his wonted Government in Vivarez. The Sieur de Clervant, hid among the Swisses
that went with a safe conduct, escaped in their company to Basil. The Prince of
Conti with a few Horse, lurking in remote places, got at last unknown to his
own house: and the other Commanders taking several ways ran very various
fortunes. The Reiters divided themselves into two parts, one with the Baron
d'Oeneaw, and Colonel Damartin passed through Savoy, where being shrunk to the
number of but five hundred, they were pillaged by the Duke's Forces. The other
with the Baron de Bouck, passing through Burgundy to the Confines of the County
of Mombelliard, was followed by the Marquess Du-Pont, and the Duke of Guise, by
whom being overtaken without the Borders of France, they were all cut in pieces
in many several encounters. These Heads of the League also sacked and burned
the Towns and Castles of that Country. The Germans sick with Fevers, and
weakened with bloody-flix, falling down by the Highways, and in the Towns as
they passed, were miserably slain by the Country People. Eighteen of them who
were left sick in a poor Cottage in Burgundy, had their throats cut with a
knife by a Woman, in revenge of those losses she had sustained.

The three thousand Swisses which were gone into Dauphine, under the Command of
the Sieur de Cougy, to join with Lesdiguiers, These Swisses accompanied with
four hundred French Musketeers, as they passed the River Isare, were assaulted
by Monsieur de la Valette, Brother to the Duke of Espernon, with the Cavalry of
Provence, and by Colonel Alfonso Ornano of the Isle of Corsica, with the
Infantry of Dauphine, and so furiously charged there, that all the rest being
slain upon the place, only sixty of them escaped from so great a slaughter.
Whereupon also the Sieur Lesdiguiers himself was forced to seek security among
the Mountains.

Then the King returned to Paris armed, and entered as it were in triumph on
December 23. 1587. but the whole glory redounded to the Duke of Guise, who
being become admired, was celebrated by the tongues and pens of all his
adherents.

The Duke of Guise causes a writing to be presented to the King in his own
name, and the names of the other Heads of the League, wherein they demanded in
substance: That he would unite himself truly with them, and sincerely make
himself Head of the League, to the extirpation of the Hugonots. That he should
put those persons from the Court, from his Counsels, and from their Offices,
who should be named by the Catholic Princes as ill-affected to Religion. That
he would make the Council of TRENT to be received and observed through the
whole Kingdom, only excepting those things which did prejudice the prviledge of
the Gallican Church. That he would grant some places which should be thought
fit, unto the confederate places for their security, wherein they might keep
Garrisons, and make necessary Fortifications at the expense of the Crown. That
he would maintain an Army about the Confines of Lorain, under the Command of
one of the Confederate Princes, to hinder the incursions of Foreigners. That he
would cause all the Estates of the Hugonots to be confiscate and sold,
wherewith the expenses of the late Wars might be satisfied.

The end of the demand was only to make the King contemptible, suspected to
favor the Hugonots, and furnish the League with an occasion and pretense to
take up Arms, and prosecute their begun designs, while the prosperity of their
Fortune lasted. The burdens which the War, the maintaining of so many Armies,
and his profuse manner of spending, daily increased, had lost the hearts of the
people to the King. The noise of the Duke of Guise's Victories had obscured the
Majesty of the King's name, his obstinate favor to his Minions, had alienated
the minds of his most ancient and devoted Servants: and the people of Paris
swayed by the ambition of the Council of Sixteen in that City constituted by
the Guisians, could no longer endure Government.

The City was full of infamous Pamphlets, Politic Discourses, Satirical
Verses, and Fabulous Stories, which for the most part abusing the name of the
Duke of Espernon, redounded to the disgrace of the King. On the other side
every corner of Paris resounded the praises of the Duke of Guise, celebrated in
Verse and Prose by many Writers, with the titles of the new David, the second
Moses, the deliverer of the Catholic People, the Prop and Pillar of the Holy
Church. The Preachers filled the peoples ears with wonders of this new Gideon,
come into the world for the desired safety of the Kingdom. Which things spread
from the City of Paris, diffused themselves into all the Provinces, which
received the same impressions, as well to the King's disadvantage, as in favor
of the League.

The King declares the Duke of Espernon, Admiral of the Kingdom, and Governor
of Normandy, to the great discontent of the Duke of Guise. The Council of
Sixteen informs the Duke of Guise, That they had twenty thousand Armed men in
the City at their devotion, ready to be put upon any enterprise. That they were
divided into sixteen Squadrons, to every one of which they had appointed a
Commander, and that the rest of the people would (doubtless) follow the stream
of the Chief men.

Henry, Prince of Conde, was poisoned at St. Jehan d'Angely by his own
servants, and died, under whom the Protestants conceived great hopes: and his
death raised the affliction of that party to the greatest height.

The Duke of Guise wrote to the Sixteen to lessen their number, and reduce it
but into five quarters, to which they should appoint a place, where they should
meet at the sign that should be given, and that they should dispose things in
such a manner, as might breed neither disorder nor confusion. He sent them five
Commanders to order the five quarters, viz. the Count of Brisac, the Sieur de
Bois, Dauphin, the Sieur de Chamois, the Sieur d'Esclavoles, and Colonel St.
Paul, to whom the Sieur de Meneville was added, who had been a chief Instrument
in that business. These entered openly into Paris, under color of private
affairs, and being lodged in those quarters of the City which were appointed
them, frequented the Court, leaving the care to Meneville to bring the matter
to its conclusion.

The Duke of Aumale is in readiness with five hundred Horse to assist the
Conspiracy of the Parisians. The Conspirators resolve to make use of the
occasion which the time of Lent would afford them, to seize on the King's
Person then, when with the Duke of Espernon he should be in Procession as he
was wont, in the habit of a Penitent among the whipping Friars, neither
accompanied by his Guards, nor the ordinary retinue of the Court, and to shut
him up with strong Guards in a Monastery. After which the Duke of Aumale's five
hundred horse and his other Forces should presently come in, and take
possession of the principal places, and keep them guarded till the arrival of
the Duke of Guise.

But Nicholas Poulain, who was privy to all this Conspiracy, reveals the whole
Plot to the High Chancellor, and confirms it also to the King himself, who
hereupon feigned himself not well, and so forbear to go to any spiritual
exercise with the Fraternity of the Penitents. The King had no Forces
sufficient to bridle the Parisians, whereupon the Queen said in the Italian
tongue, Bisogna coprisi been il viso inanzi che stuzzicare il vespaio. He that
will stir up a Wasps nest, had need to cover his face well; and then means
would not be wanting to suppress the Conspirators.

But the King to make himself sure of the Conspiratours, blocks up the passages
about Paris, to keep victuals from thence. The Council of sixteen begin to
suspect, that their Plot is discovered, and the Heads being dismayed send for
the Duke of Guise to Paris: the King sends a command unto the Duke of Soissons,
not to come to Paris, but he comes to Paris at noon on May 9. 1588. followed
only with eight Gentlemen. He lights at the Queen-Mother's Lodging, and goes
with her to do his duty unto the King. The people follow him by troops with
great joy, crying, God save the Guise, God save the Pillar of the Church. He
makes his reverence to the King, lays open the causes of his coming, justifies
his actions as well as he could, and so withdraws till the King had dined. They
meet both after dinner at the Queen-Mother's Lodging: the King full of fear and
jealousy, the Duke with a resolute countenance. The next day the Archbishop of
Lions (the chief Pillar of the League) arriveth: the Duke's friends and
servants enter: The Sixteen bring and carry away sundry intelligences.

The King commands the Marshal de Byron to draw his Guards of Swisses and
French out of the Suburbs into the City, and Lodges them in diverse quarters.
The people grow amazed; the chief of the League terrify them with the
apprehension of a spoil; they shut up their shops, and leaving their traffic
betake themselves to Arms.

The Parisians raised at the Ringing of the Bells, make Barricado's cross the
Streets; and blocking up all the King's Corpse de Guard, come up to the Louvre.
The Swisses were presently assaulted in St. Innocent's Churchyard, where 36.
of them being slain in the first onset, the rest yielded themselves without
resistance, and with great violence were pillaged by the people. All the other
Guards, of the Chastelet, the little Bridge, the Butchery, and the Townhouse,
were assaulted at the same time, the Swisses being in the same manner disarmed,
and made Prisoners at the peoples discretion. They made the French Guards to
put out their matches, and lay down their Arms, and kept them in that manner
till they had further order.

The Duke of Guise seeing the City in his power, and the King (as it were) a
Prisoner, cease to prosecute the forcing of the Louvre, and appeaseth the
people, but gave order that the Barricado's should be continued, That the
people should be every where in a readiness with their Arms, that the Guards
should be kept with great care; expecting some body: should come from the King
(besieged and straightened) to make an overture of some agreement.

The Queen Mother goes to the Duke of Guise in her Sedan, being denied passage
in her Coach, confers with him, but brings nothing but complaints and
exorbitant demands. While the Queen Mother returns to the Duke of Guise, and
treats with him, the King with sixteen Gentlemen leaves Paris, and retires to
Chartres, where the people receive him with as much affection, as the Parisians
had done the Duke of Guise. The King at his departure from the Louvre (turning
at Chaliot toward Paris) said, De Serres Hist. in vit. Henry III.
O disloyal and ungrateful City, a City which I have always honored with my
constant abode; which I have more enriched than any of my Predecessors, I will
never enter within the compass of thy Walls, but by the ruin of a great and
memorable breach. Cursed likewise be you all, for whose content I have
purchased the hatred of so many.

The Duke being angry at the news of the King's sudden departure, labors to
secure his absolute power in Paris, and seizes on the Bastille. The Capuchins
are sent in Procession unto Chartres to mitigate the heat of his fury. The
chief of the City also go to beseech him to return to Paris. Seven demands are
made by the League, viz. the extirpation of Heresy by his Majesty's Forces, and
the holy union: the banishment of the Duke of Espernon, and of his Brother de
la Valette; War in Guienne by the King in Person, and by the Duke of Mayenne in
Daulphine, Abolition of the tumults of Paris: confirmation of Offices chosen
for Civil Causes since the Barricado's: a restoring of the goodly and ancient
Ordinances of the Realm; and an abolition of parties, gifts, and abuses brought
in by Espernon, and la Valette.

The King determined to give outward satisfaction to the Duke of Guise and the
League, knowing that Peace would never be granted, unless he consented to
remove from the Court the Duke of Espernon. Who coming to Court, being not
received by the King with his wonted favor, quits his Government in Normandy,
and retires to Angolesme, where by a Conspiracy of the Citizens his life is in
great danger. He was accompanied by the Abbot del Been, who was no less
persecuted by the League than He. This retreat removed all impediments that
might have hindered Peace.

Now the conclusion of the Peace was easy: for on the one side the King
granted all that the League asked for, or pretended to. The conditions of
Peace, were almost the same that were contained in the writing framed at Nancy,
with the privity of the Duke of Lorain, which had been presented to the King in
the beginning of the year. That the King should again declare himself Head of
the Catholic League: he promises never to make a Peace nor Truce with the
Hugonots, nor any Edict in their favor. He shall by a public Edict oblige all
Princes, Peers of France, Lords and Officers of the Crown, Towns, Colleges,
Corporations, and the whole people to swear the same: and bind themselves with
a solemn Oath never to suffer any one to reign, that was not of the Romish
Religion: and that for time to come none should be admitted to Offices, Places
and Dignities in any part of that Kingdom, but such as were Catholics, and
made profession of their Faith according to the Doctrine of Sorbon, and the
Belief of the Church of Rome. That the Council of Trent should be received and
observed through the whole Kingdom, upon the conditions and exceptions formerly
mentioned; the privileges of the Gallican Church being within three Months to
be declared by a Congregation of Prelates, and the King's Council, with diverse
other Articles.

The Articles concluded and confirmed, the King presently sent forth his
Letters Patents into all Provinces; and several Bailages, to appoint the
Assembly of the States in October following at Blois, a place far from Paris,
where the people were at his devotion, far from any commerce or intelligence
with the League, and near those Towns which were held by the Hugonots.

The Duke of Guise goes with the Queen Mother to Chartres unto the King, and
is received by him with great demonstrations of honor in appearance. The King
causes the Edict of the union to be published in his Council, and sworn to by
every one; and the War against the Hugonots to be openly Proclaimed; for the
prosecution whereof two several Armies were appointed: one in Dauphine under
the Duke of Mayenne; the other in Poictou, under Ludovico Gonzaga Duke of
Nevers. The King gives the Duke of Guise the General Command over all the men
at Arms, of the Realm. This (though not the name and title, yet) in effect was
the Office and charge of Constable. He makes the Cardinal of Guise Legate of
Avignon, the which he promises to obtain for him of the Pope. He determined to
give the Seal unto Peter of Espinac, Archbishop of Lions. He declares the
Cardinal of Bourbon first Prince of the blood. And the King's late Counselors
are dismissed the Court.

But two things trouble the League; one i^, the news of the defeat of the
Spanish Armado at Sea by the English; the other is, that the King will not
return to Paris, howsoever they importune him.

Pope Sixtus V. writes congratulatory Letters to the Duke of Guise, full of
praises, comparing him to those holy Macchabees, the Defenders of the People of
Israel, and exhorting him to continue successfully, and gloriously to fight for
the advancement of the Church, and the total extirpation of the Hugonots. Which
Letters (to increase the Duke's Fame) were by his dependants caused to be
Printed and divulged in Paris with as much applause in the people, as anger and
trouble in the King, who could not be pleased that another should have more
Credit and Authority in his Kingdom than himself.

The Assembly of the States meet at Blois at the time prefixed, viz. on October
16. After dinner all being met in the great Hall of the Castle, the King sat
down in a Throne raised by many steps from the Earth, and covered with a rich
cloth of State. The Queens, Princes, Cardinals, Peers, and Officers of the
Crown, sat upon Seats fitted for that purpose in two long rows on the right
hand and on the left; and between them in the inner part of the Theater sat
the Deputies according to the Ancient pre-eminence of their degrees: and the
Duke of Guise as Grand-Mastre with the Staff of Office in his hand, sat down
upon a Stool at the foot of the State on ^he right hand; and on the left sat
the Sieur de Monthelon, who represented the Person of the High Chancellor of
the Kingdom.

The King begins the Assembly with an elegant Oration; wherein attesting the
earnest desires of the good of his people, and showing the dangerous condition
wherein intestine discords had involved the Crown, he exhorted every one to lay
aside their passions, to forget their enmities, to reunite themselves sincerely
under his obedience, forsaking all novelties, condemning all Leagues, etc.
which had disturbed both him their Lawful Sovereign, and the peace of the
Kingdom. For as he pardoned all that was past, so for the time to come he would
not endure it, but account it as an Act of absolute Treason. That as he
resolved to persecute and tread down Heresy, to favor those that were good,
to restore the splendor and force of justice, to advance Religion, to uphold
the Nobility, and to disburden the Common people; so he earnestly prayed and
conjured every one of them to assist him with their good Counsels and sincere
intentions.

This speech of the King's stung the Duke of Guise to the quick, and all those
of his party. He caused his Speech to be Printed, which served much to excuse
those things which followed afterward. After the King's Speech followed the
Oration of Monthelon, who prosecutes and amplifies the King's Speech. To which
the Archbishop of Bourges answered for the Order of the Clergy, the Baron de
Seneschay, for the Nobility, and the Prevost des Merchands of Paris, for the
third Order of the Commons. The Tuesday following, the King and the States
swear in solemn manner to perform the Edict made before of persevering in the
Romish Religion. The Archbishop of Bourges showed the States the greatness and
obligation of the Oath which they were to take. Beaulieu, the new Secretary of
State, enrolled an Act of that Oath, in memory of so solemn an Action. After it
was done, they gave thanks to God publicly in the Church of S. Saveur.

The Proposition of receiving the Council of Trent, made in the Assembly of the
States, is generally rejected. The King is requested to declare the King of
Navarre incapable of the Crown, and all others suspected to be Hugonots: and
after much opposition he coldly consents unto it, and gives unto the Deputies a
Protestation which had been presented unto him from the King of Navarre: who,
having called a Congregation of those of his party at Rochel, had caused a
writing to be printed, wherein he demanded the execution of those Edicts and
Grants which had been so often made to those of his party: the Convocation of a
National or universal Council, wherein he might lawfully be instructed in those
things that were controverted in matter of Faith: and finally, he protested to
count invalid whatsoever should be determined against him in that Assembly at
Blois. To which Propositions of the King of Navarre, the French King added,
That if justice requires, no man should be sentenced or condemned without being
summoned, or without hearing his defense; it was not good to Decree so heavy a
sentence, without giving him warning to answer for himself, and without hearing
his reasons whatsoever they were.

The King seeing the obstinacy of the States, and their resolution against the
King of Navarre, procures an absolution at Rome for the Prince of Conti, and
Count Soissons, of the House of Bourbon, which much troubles the Duke of Guise.

The King being no longer able to bear the insolences of the Duke of Guise,
resolves upon his destruction: and to bring the matter the better to pass,
(seeming (as it were) to be stirred by devotion) determined to remove to a
Cell, meaning there to be confessed, and receive the Sacrament. He called into
his Chamber four of his Council, such as he best trusted, to whom he discovered
the injuries and indignities he had received of the Duke of Guise, his extreme
ambition; the danger himself stood in by the Treasons continually practiced by
the said Duke and his Confederates against his Person. He told them he was
determined to have the Duke slain as a Traitor, which was consented to. The
evening of the 22. day of December being come, the King commanded Monsieur de
Larchant, one of the Captains of his Guard, to double them the next morning,
and to keep the Hall door, after the Lords of the Council were gone in; but
that he should do it in such a manner, as the Duke of Guise might not suspect
any thing, which was done.

In the morning the King made himself ready before day, Davil Hist. of the
Civil Wars of France l. 9.
under color of going Personally to the Council, and pretending he should stay
there many hours, dismissed all his Servants: and in his closet there only
remained Revol Secretary of State, Colonel Alfonso Corso, and Monsieur de la
Bastide, a Gascon, who were all commanded by him to stay there. In his Chamber
was St. Pris, one of his old Gentlemen-waiters; in the Wardrobe the Count de
Terms, Great Chamberlain, and in the Antichamber two Pages, an Usher that
waited at the Council-chamber-door, and Lognac, with eight of the five and
forty, to whom the King had with very great Promises signified his pleasure,
and found them most ready to obey his command. At break of day the Counselors
met, and went into the Great Hall.

The Duke being come into the Council, sitting near the fire, fell into a
little swound, but quickly recovered. Secretary Revol came into the Council out
of the Antichamber, and told him the King would have him to come unto him in
the Closet. The Duke arose, and entered into the Antichamber, which presently
being locked after him, he saw there only eight Gentlemen of the King's Guard
which were well known unto him: and as he went from thence into the Closet, he
stretched forth his hand to lift up the hanging of the door: but at that instand
S. Malin, one of the eight, stabbed him into the neck with a Dagger, The Duke
of Guise Slain.
and the rest presently fell upon him on every side: and after many wounds
given him in the head, being at last struck by Lognac (upon whom he had most
violently thrown hlmself) he fell down at the door of the Wardrobe, and there
expired. The Cardinal of Guise, and Archbishop of Lions are made Prisoners, as
also all the Lords, and other chief adherents of the Duke of Guise, with Anne
d'Este, Duchess of Nemours, and Mother to the Guises. Pelicart, the Duke of
Guise's Secretary, was likewise taken, with all the writings which belonged to
his Lord: among which they found many Letters, containing diverse practices
within and without the Kingdom, the accounts of money which he had received
from Spain, to the sum of two millions of Ducats. Many whom the King desired
to get into his hands, escaped the fury of that present revenge. The body of
the dead Duke being laid up in a green cloth, was carried by the door-keepers
into the great room beyond the King's Closet, and there laid till further order.

Then the King sent Revol to the Cardinal-Legate to give him notice of all that
had passed, and to entreat him to meet him at Mass, showing how great a desire
he had to be excused to the Pope. Then having caused the doors to be opened and
every one to be admitted into his Chamber, he said with a loud voice, That from
thence-forward he would have his Subjects learn to know and obey him, that
every one therefore from that time should forget stubbornness and Rebellion:
for he would be a King not only in words but in deeds also. So with an angry
look, and sour countenance, he went down the stairs into his Mothers Lodgings.

The Queen having been ill, lay in her bed when the King came unto her, to whom
the King said, This morning I have made my self King of France, having put to
death the King of Paris. The Queen replied: You have made the Duke of Guise to
be slain, but God grant you be not now made King of nothing. Have you foreseen
the mischiefs that are like to follow? Two things are necessary, Speed and
Resolution. So being much afflicted in mind and with the Gout, she held her
peace. And the King went to meet the Legate, that they might go to Mass
together; and before Mass the King discourses long with the Cardinal of
Moresini about the Duke of Guises death. The King seeing that the Legate showed
no trouble at the imprisonment of the Cardinals, Commands that Jews of
Lorain, Cardinal of Guise, be also put to death. And Du-Gast, Captain of the
King's Guard causes the Cardinal of Guise to be slain by four Soldiers Armed
with Partezans. His body was carried to the same place where the body of the
Duke his Brother lay. The King doubted, that if their bodies were seen, they
might occasion some tumult: and therefore having by the Counsel of his
Physician caused them to be buried in quicklime, within a few hours all their
flesh was consumed, and afterward the bones were secretly interred in an
unknown place.

The Duke of Nemours escaped out of Prison on the fourth day. And Anne d'Este,
Mother to him and the dead Princes of Lorain, was also voluntarily freed by the
King, and diverse others were set at liberty. The Cardinal of Bourbon, the
Prince of Janville (now Duke of Guise) the Archbishop of Lions, and the Duke of
Elbeuf, are all put into the Castle of Amboyse. The Archbishop of Lions being
often examined, would never answer, alleging that as Primate of all France, he
had no other Superior but the Apostolic See.

Charles Duke of Mayenne, third Brother to the Guises, being advertised of the
death of his Brothers, flees from Lions, unto Dijon, a place under his
Government. In his valor and wisdom all the foundations and hopes of the
League were now reduced. The Queen Mother died on January 5. 1589. in the
seventieth year of her age.

After the death of the Duke and Cardinal of Guise, the City of Orleans took
Arms, suppressed the King's Magistrates, and assaulted the Fortress. The
Citizens of Chartres did the same, though in the late commotions it had been of
the King's party.

At Paris, the Council of the League being come together in the midst of the
City full of tumults, resolved to send for Charles Duke of Aumale, who flying
from the States at Bloys, out of a certain presaging fear, had stayed in Paris,
and that very day was retired to his devotions to the Covent of Carthusians
hard by the City; at whose arrival all the multitude ran to his house, though
late at night, spending the time only in lamentations.

The next day the whole City being in grief, they dispatched divine service
quickly, and from the Churches being come to the Townhouse, the same Council
met again there, at which were present the most noted Citizens, and many also
of the Magistrates; some drawn by an anxious curiosity; some driven by the fear
of being torn in pieces by the fury of the multitude; and some came to find
remedy against the unbridled rashness of the common people. But it was all in
vain. Charles of Lorain, Duke of Aumaele, being made Governor of Paris by the
City, Arms the people, and orders them regularly under Commanders. The Preacher
from their Pulpits trumpet out the praises of the Duke of Guises Martyrdom, and
detestations of that slaughter committed by the King. Upon December 28. the
Council of Sixteen caused a writing to be presen^ed to the College of Divines,
called the Sorbonne, in the name of the Provost and Eschuins of the City,
wherein relating how much the Lords of Guise deserved of the Catholic Church,
and their being murdered by the King as Protectors of the Faith, They demanded
whether he might not Lawfully be said to have forfeited his Crown, and whether
it were not Lawful for his Subjects (notwithstanding their Oath of Allegiance)
to withdraw their obedience from him, as a Persecutor of the holy Church, who
had embrued his hands in the blood of a Sacred Cardinal.

The College of Sorbonne, declares Henry III. to have forfeited his Right to
the Crown, and his Subjects free from their Oath of Allegiance. The Kings Arms
and Statues are thrown down; the Navarrists and Politics are slain: many quiet
men left their houses in those tumults to save their lives. All the Streets
were full of Arms, noises, and confusions, and the meanest people raging
against the marks of Royalty, committed intolerable insolences. The Preachers
aggravated the Parricide committed by the King, and all places were full of
Libels both in Verse and Prose, which contained and amplified the same things
several ways.

By the advice of the Council of Sixteen all the Counselors of Parliament and
Officers who adhered to the King, are imprisoned in the Bastille. And the
Parliament being afterward assembled to the number of 160. they with a Public
Declaration assented to the deposing of the King, and to the freeing of the
City, and substituted new men in the places of those whom they had put out and
imprisoned. They also made a Decree to unite and combine themselves for the
defense of Religion, calling that League the Holy union.

At the insurrection of the Parliament and City of Paris, the greatest Cities
and most Warlike People of France, took Arms likewise, and made a General
Commotion; so that the party of the League was not only grown very great by the
conjunction of the principal Cities, but was also strengthened by the abetting
of the Nobility, in whom for the most part the Forces of that Crown consist.

All the Provinces of the Kingdom were divided and dismembered, Cities were
against Cities, Castles against Castles, Lords, Gentlemen, and meaner persons
against one another: the Laws were trodden down, the bond of common Charity
broken, the Magistrates driven away from all places, and a most cruel Civil War
with fire, slaughter, blood, and rapine, was begun, so that all commerce being
broken off, the ways beset, the Gentry and Commons Armed, and even the very
Clergy encompassed with Guards and weapons, sometimes under the names of
Hugonots and Catholics, ^andes Blan^hes
sometimes of Royalists and Leaguers, sometimes of the holy union and White
Forces, sometimes of Navarrists and Lorains, they were as with a fatal general
Frenzy bent upon the destruction of their common Country.

The King dissolved the Assembly at Bloys, but many of the Lords, as soon as
they were departed from Bloys, joined again to the party of the League. Pope
Sixtus V. being told of the Cardinal of Guise's death, is highly offended, and
answers the King's Ambassadors very sharply, who come to excuse it to him,
and chooses a Congregation of Cardinals, who were to consult about the affairs
of France.

The King writes kind Letters to the Duke of Mayenne, promising him very great
things: but the said Duke (notwithstanding the King's promises) being persuaded
by Madam de Montpensier, his Sister, makes himself Head of the holy union, and
gave order to the Sieurs de Rhosne, de S. Paul, Chamois, and d'Eschavoles, to
recruit their Regiments of French foot, and began to summon the Nobility and
Gentry his dependents, and to win the hearts of the people in every place. On
February 15. the Duke came to Paris with 4000. Soldiers, and 500. Gentlemen;
there he is declared Lieutenant General of the Crown of France. On February 22.
the Duke took possession in the Parliament of his extraordinary dignity, having
taken a public Oath for the defense of the Romish Religion against every one,
to preserve entire the State belonging to the Crown of France, to defend the
privileges of the three Orders, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, and to
cause the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom to be observed, as also the
authority and power of the Parliaments. After which Oath many Prayers and
Processions having been made, he chose and appointed the Council of the Union,
consisting of forty of the most eminent persons of the League, which with his
assistance, was to treat of, and to conclude all the most weighty affairs; the
Council of Sixteen being nevertheless left, and particularly appointed for the
special Government of Paris.

Now the Duke of his Forces began to form an Army, and in every Province he
allotted both Forces and Commanders to order the affairs of the League, and to
make war against those who were of the King's party. He dispatcheth Ministers
to Rome to confirm the Pope's inclination, who afterward publishes a Monitory
against the King of France, and foments the League exceedingly.

The King being necessitated to make War, agrees with the King of Navarre, and
concludes a Truce with him. The Spanish Ambassador leaves the Court, and
goes to reside in Paris with the Heads of the League. The Pope's Legate
departs also, and not having been able to persuade the Duke of Mayenne to
consent to Peace, goes out of the Kingdom. The War begins furiously in every
place. The King of Navarre grants Liberty of Conscience in those places he had
taken, and publishes a Manifesto, offering to take Arms against those that
rebelled against their natural King. The Duke of Espernon after the death of
the Guises returned to his former greatness with the King. Captain Du-Gast, who
killed the Cardinal of Guise, treats about an accord with those of the League
by the persuasion of the Archbishop of Lions.

The Truce was concluded by the Kings of France and Navarre upon these
Conditions. That the public exercise of the Romish Religion should be restored
in all places held by the Hugonots, without any exception. That the goods of
the Clergy should be restored to them, wheresoever they were, and that all
Prisoners which were in their hands should be set at liberty. That the King of
Navarre should be obliged to serve the King Personally with 4000. Foot, and
1200. Horse, wheresoever he should be Commanded; and that all the Cities, Towns
and places of his party should observe the Laws and Constitutions of the
Kingdom, obey the Parliament and the King's Magistrates; and on the other side
that the King of Navarre should receive the City of Saumur, and keep it in his
power, to have a Pass over the River Loire; which yet he would be obliged to
restore at the King's pleasure without any contradiction. Which Capitulations
after they were agreed upon and ratified, Beaulieu the Secretary of State
delivered up Saumur to the King of Navarre, who gave the Government thereof to
Sieur du Plessis Mornay, his old Confident. The same truce was made in Dauphine
between Colonel Alfonso Corso on the King's part, and Monsieur de lesdiguiers,
for the King of Navarre; and they united their Forces for their common defense.
The Protestants rejoiced exceedingly at this reconciliation, magnifying their
Faith and Obedience toward the King, to the confusion of those who till then
had published and defamed them as tumultuous and disobedient Rebels.

The King receives an aid of money from the Great Duke of Tuscany, and sends to
the Swisses and Germans to assist him with Forces both of Horse and Foot. He
calls all the Presidents and Counselors of the Parliaments of Paris, Roven,
and Dijon, who were fled from the popular fury, resolving that the Parliament
of Paris should reside in Tours, that of Roven in Caen, in the same Province of
Normandy, and that of Dijon at Chalons, and then by a sharp Edict declared them
all Rebels, who being chosen to the dignity of the Parliaments, should continue
to reside in those Cities and places which had withdrawn themselves from his
obedience, and forbad all men to have any recourse to them to seek for justice,
declaring all sentences to be void, which they should pronounce under the name
and title of Parliament. The same declaration he made against the Duke of
Mayenne, against the Duke of Aumale, and others. Then having appointed
Governors in all Provinces he gave Commission to make Levies, to draw
Soldiers together, and that the War should be begun in every place.

The Parisians at the news of the Truce between the King and the Protestants,
besides many public signs of contempt, forbid the King to be prayed for any
longer in the Canon of the Mass.

The Duke of Montpensier begins the War against those of the League, defeateth
the Gautiers in Normandy, and the Count of Brisac's Forces, who came to divert
the siege of Falais. The Duke of Mayenne takes Vendosme, and the Count de
Brienne Prisoner. An interview was had between the French King and the King of
Navarre at the Parc du Plessis without the Walls of Tours. Mayenne assaults the
King's Army at Tours, where they fight a long time. The King himself orders and
disposes his Soldiers, puts himself among those that fight. But Supplies
coming from the King of Navarre, he gives off the enterprise.

The Duke of Aumale besieges Senlis: Monsieur de Longueville goes with small
Forces to relieve it, and raises the siege with a great slaughter of the
Leaguers. Aumale fights, and loses the day with his Artillery, Baggage, and
thirty Colors.

Monsieur de Sancy having raised great Forces in Switzerland, and begun the War
with Savoy, marches toward Paris against the Leaguers, whither the King was
also advancing. But the Count de Soissons being assaulted by the Duke de
Mercoeur, is taken Prisoner. The Sieur de Saveuse going with 400. Horse to join
with Mayenne, is routed by the Sieur de Chastillon, and taken Prisoner.

The King takes Gergeau and Piviers. But Chartres set open their Gates; and
having driven out the dependents of the League, received the King with all his
Army.

The Pope by Monitory declares the King liable to censure, if within sixty
days he releases not the Prelates, and does not penance for the Cardinal of
Guises death. The King being troubled at it fasteth forty hours: he said, he
thought it hard, that he who had ever fought and labored for Religion, should
be rashly Excommunicated, because he would not suffer his own throat to be cut
by the Arms of his Rebellious Subjects: and that those who had sacked Rome, and
kept the Pope himself Prisoner, had never been Excommunicated. The King of
Navarre being present answered: But they were Victorious: Let your Majesty
endeavor to Conquer, and assuredly the censures shall be revoked; but if we be
overcome, we shall all die condemned Heretics.

The King taking Estampes, hangs the Magistrates, and gives the pillage of the
Town to the Soldiers. Montereau was also taken by Storm, and sacked. Poissy
yielded it self, and now the King was Master of that spacious Bridge, which
there gives passage over the Seine. Here Montpensier joined with the King's
Army. Pointoise was after a bloody assault also forced to yield. The next day
the foreign Army arrived at Poissy-bridge, there the Swisses join with t e
King. All the Bridges being lost, all the neighboring Towns surrendered, all
the passages of the River stopped and the City straightened on all sides, there
was no other hope left but what the presence of the Duke of Mayenne and of the
Army afforded, which was all shut up within the Circuit of the Suburbs of Paris.

The City of Paris being much straightened and under great terror (a thing well
known to the King by the frequency of those who ran every hour from the City to
his Camp) upon the last day of July he would needs Personally view the Enemies
Posts, resolving on the 2. of August to assault their works on every side. In
his return toward S. Cloud stopping his Horse upon an hill, from whence he saw
all the City distinctly, he brake forth into these words. O Paris, thou art the
head of the Kingdom, but an Head too great, and too Capricious; it is necessary
by letting blood to cure thee again. I^ hope that within few days here shall
be neither walls nor houses, but only the very footsteps of Paris.

But now there was in Paris one Jaques Clement, a Friar of the Order of S.
Dominick, born of mean Parents in a Village called Sorbone, in the Territory of
the City of Sens, a young man about twenty two years of age, and always
thought by his fellow-Friers, and others that knew him, to be an half-witted
fellow, and rather a subject of sport, than to be feared. This fellow resolves
to hazard his life to kill the King, whom he called by the name of Tyrant, and
to free that holy City (as he said) from Sennacheribs violence: with which
resolution he went to Doctor Burgoine Prior of his Covent, and imparted this
damnable project to him; to Father Commolet, to other Jesuits, and to the
Heads of the League, all of them encouraging him to this devilish design, with
promise of Abbeys and Bishoprics if he escaped, and if he died in the action
to be made a Martyr, and have place in heaven above the Apostles.

To that end he goes from Paris having gotten a letter of credit from the Count
of Brienne, who having been taken at S. Ovyn, was still Prisoner in the City,
assuring him, that he was to speak with the King about a business of infinite
importance. Upon the first of August in the morning, the Friar being brought in
to the King, gives him the letter from the Count de Brienne, which the King
read: and having bid him proceed to tell his business, he feigned to feel for
another paper to present it: and whilst the King stood intentively expecting
it, he having drawn his knife out of his sleeve, struck him on the left side of
the navel, and left all the blade buried in the wound. The King feeling the
blow, King Henry III. is killed by James Clement a Friar.
drew forth the knife, and in drawing of it made the wound wider, and presently
struck it himself up to the haft in the Frier's forehead, who at the same time
( la Guesle running him through with his sword) fell down dead: and was no
sooner fallen, but Momperat, Lognac, and the Marquess de Mirepoix, Gentlemen of
the King's Chamber, who were present at the fact, threw him out of the window,
where by the common Soldiers he was torn in pieces, burnt, and his ashes
thrown into the River. The King was carried to his bed, and sending for the
King of Navarre, he committed to him the care of the Army. He told him, it
custom of killing Kings should grow in use, neither should he be long secure.
He exhorted the Nobility to acknowledge the King of Navarre to whom the Kingdom
of right belonged. His Confessor absolved him and gave him the Sacrament the
same night. And having embraced the King of Navarre, having called his
Chaplain, he in the presence of them all rehearsed the Creed after the use of
the Roman Church: and having crossed himself, began the Miserere, but his
speech failing him in these words, Read mihi laetitiam salutis tuae, he died,
having lived 36. years, and Reigned 15. and just 2. Months. In his death ended
the Line of Kings of the house of Valois, and the posterity of Philip III.
Surnamed the Hardy; and by virtue of the Salique Law the Crown devolved to the
Family of Bourbon nearest of the blood, and descended from Robert Count of
Clermont, the second Son of St. Jews.

Here let the Reader be advertised, that when the Jesuits have made choice of
an Instrument for that King-killing service, that they intend to set him about;
they do not put him upon it till they have first raised and fitted his spirit
for the service by this means. First they bring him to a very private place in
a Chapel, or Oratory, where the knife lies wrapped up in a cloth with an Ivory
sheath, with diverse Characters, and Agnus Dei's upon it. They draw the knife,
and bedew it with holy water, and hang upon the haft of it some Beads
consecrated, with this Indulgence, that so many blows as he gives in killing
the King, so many souls shall he deliver out of Purgatory. Then they give the
knife to him, commending it to him in these words, O thou chosen Son of God,
take to thee the Sword of Jephte, Sampson, David, Gideon, Judith, of
Macchabees, of Julius the second, who defended himself from the Princes by his
sword. Go, and be wisely courageous, and God strengthen thy hand. Then they all
fall upon their knees with this prayer: Be present, O ye Cherubims and
Seraphims, be present ye Thrones, Powers, holy Angels fill this Vessel with
glory, give him the Crown of all the holy Martyrs; he is no longer ours but
your companion. And thou, O God, strengthen his arm, that he may do thy will,
give him thy helmet, and wings to fly from his enemies, give him thy
comforting beams, which may joy him in the midst of his sorrows. Then they
bring him to the Altar, where is the Picture of Jaques Clement, who killed King
Henry III. the Angels protecting him, and then they show him a Crown of glory,
and say, Lord respect this thy arm and Executioner of thy justice. Then four
Jesuits are appointed privately to talk with him, they tell him, that they see
a Divine luster in his face, which moves them to fall down and kiss his feet;
and now (say they) he is no more a mortal man. They envy his happiness, every
one sighing, and saying, Would God I were in your room, that they might escape
Purgatory, and go immediately into Paradise. But if they perceive him to
shrink, and to be troubled, after all this they will sometimes affright him
with terrible apparitions in the night; and sometimes have the Virgin Mary, and
the Angels appear, etc.

After the King's death the Image and Portraicture of the traitorous Monk who
killed the King, by the commandment of the chief of the League, was most
artificially framed in brass, and other painting^, wherewith they garnished
both their houses and their Churches. Then was he Canonized, and among the
Superstitious prayed unto us as a Martyr, whom they called by the name of St.
James Clement.

Henry King of Navarre succeeded Henry III. in the Kingdom of France. The Duke
of Mayenne (not daring to take upon him the title of King) caused it by public
Proclamation to be given to Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, then a Prisoner, and
coined both Gold and Silver with the Picture of King Charles X. And disguising
the usurpation of his authority, he accepted the title which the General
Council of the union gave him, of Lieutenant General of the State, and Crown of
France.

The Duke of Luxemburg told the new King, that the Princes, Lords, and Officers
of the Crown, together with the Catholic Nobility that was in the Army, were
ready to acknowledge him King of France, to serve him against every one, since
God and nature had called him to the Crown by a lawful succession: but withal
they besought him he would be pleased to turn to the Catholic Religion, to
take away the pretenses of his enemies, and the scruples of his servants.

The King gives them thanks, telling them how ready he was to requite their
duty and fidelity, both in public and in particular; but desired they would
not think it strange, if he did not so presently satisfy their first requests,
because the quality of the thing demanded, required a convenient time of
advice, and the ripeness of a grounded resolution. That he set a greater value
upon his Soul and Conscience than upon all earthly greatness. That he had been
bred in the Reformed Religion, but nevertheless he would not be obstinate. That
he was ready to submit himself either to a General or National Council, and to
the instructions which without palliating the truth, should be given him by
learned conscientious persons. That he had a firm resolution to endeavor the
satisfaction of his Subjects; but that conjuncture was not proper to put his
good desires in effect, lest his action and declaration should seem feigned,
and extorted by force, or else persuaded by worldly interests. Wherefore he
entreated them to stay till a fit opportunity; and if in the mean time they
desired any condition or security for the maintenance of the Catholic
Religion, he was ready to give them all the satisfaction they could wish for.

After their departure the Sieur de la Nove, a Protestant, tells the King, he
must never think to be King of France if he turn not Catholic.

At last it was concluded, that the King taking a prefixed time for his turning
to the Romish Religion, he should secure the State of the Catholic Religion,
and that upon those terms they would receive and follow him. And at last a
writing was mutually agreed on between both Parties, whereby the Popish
Princes, Lords, and Officers of the Crown, Nobility and Soldiery on the one
side, swear fidelity to the King; and on the other side the King swears to the
maintenance of the Popish Religion. The Duke of Espernon standing upon
precedence, will not sign the writing, but departs from Court. Many Lords, and
a great part of the Soldiers, following the Duke of Espernon's example, leave
the Camp, so that in few days the Army is decreased to half the number. Many
of the Protestants also disbanded out of anger and discontent, and returned in
great abundance to the Cities of their party.

The King raises the siege from Paris, and divides his Forces into convenient
places. The Cardinal of Bourbon is taken out of Chinon, and removed to
Fontenay, a stronger place, where he is kept with stricter Guards.

The Duke of Luxembourg is sent Ambassador to the Pope by the Catholic
Royallists: and the King appoints the Assembly at Tours, which is made the
Head-quarter of his party. The body of King Henry III. is laid in the great
Church of Compeign, with very little Pomp, and such as the necessity of the
times, would permit by King Henry IV. who went toward Normandy with all
possible speed. The King's Army is reduced to but 6000. Foot, and 1400. Horse,
yet he marches with good success as far as Diepe, where he fortifies his
quarters, possessing all places of advantage.

The Duke of Mayenne being come before the King's trenches, draws his Army in
Battalia; but the King's Soldiers coming only to skirmish, no Battle
follows. They that were in the League making signs of coming over to the
King's party, are received by them at the Maladery, but being entered in an
hostile manner fall upon them that had brought them in, and make themselves
masters of the place: whereupon both Armies join Battle, and the King being
relieved by Monsieur de Chastillon, recovereth the trenches, and the Duke of
Mayenne marches from Diepe with his Army.

The King came to Amiens, the chief City of Picardy, where he was entertained
with very great pomp, being met without the Gates by all the Citizens, who
presented unto him a Canopy of State to be carried over him, as the custom is
to do unto the King, but he refused it, giving great testimony of his prudence
and moderation by an act of so great modesty.

Whilst he stayed at Amiens, Elizabeth Queen of England, first sent him twenty
thousand pounds Sterling, with Powder, Munition for War, and certain Ships also
to serve at his command: and causing a general Muster to be taken in most of
the Shires of England, she sent 4000. English Soldiers, and 1000. Scots very
well appointed, and furnished. All the money he presently distributed among his
Soldiers. The General of the English was the Noble Peregrine Barty, Lord
Willoughby, which Forces were again recruited with a supply of three thousand
Foot, which were sent into Britany, under the Conduct of that Son of Mors, Sir
John Norris. These joining with the Prince of Dombes, General of that Province,
did many worthy exploits for the French King.

The King now marches toward Paris, having in his Army 20000. Foot, 3000.
Horse, and fourteen great Pieces. He assaults the Suburbs of Paris upon
All-Saints-day, and taking them gives the Pillage to the Soldiers. In the
assault above 900. Parisians were slain, and more than 400. taken Prisoners,
among which Father Edmond Burgoine, Prior of the Covent of Jacobins, who being
convicted by witness to have publicly in the Pulpit praised the Murder of
Henry III. and to have counseled and instigated the murderer, comparing him
also in his Sermons after the fact to Judith, and the dead King to ^olofernes,
and the City delivered to Bethulia, he was by Judgment of the Parliament of
Tours Sentenced to be drawn in pieces by four Horses, his quarters burned, and
his ashes scattered in the wind. Which Sentence was some few months after
severely executed.

Yet notwithstanding the pillaging of the Suburbs, charge was given not to
violate either Churches, Monasteries or other Sacred places: which was so
exactly observed, that Masses were said that day in all Churches, as if there
had been no such business; and all the Romanists in the King's Army were
present at them celebrating that Holy Day with great rejoicing.

But at the arrival of the Duke of Mayenne, the King leaves the Suburbs of
Paris, and coming to Estampes, he causes it to be dismantled. Many successes
happened to the King's party through all France. The King takes Vendosme, and
gives the pillage to his Soldiers, condemns the Governor to death, for his
unfaithfulness: and Father Robert, a Cordelier, who had there publicly
commended the King's murderer, and with his Sermons excited the people.

At this time flourished Lambertus Danaeus, a French Divine of Orleans. Quin
and Lamb. Danaeus vir san^ apprime eruditus, and de instruendis aliis optime
meritus, Physicam suam Theologicam, tam ex Veteri quam novo codice non in utili
labor exstruxit. Tych. Brah. Ep st. Astron. lib. 1.

Henry IV. is acknowledged King of France with public solemnity at Tours; he
defers the Assembling of the States: and in short time makes himself Master of
all the Towns and Fortresses of Normandy.

The Pope resolves to send aid to the League against the King. He declares
Cardinal Henrico Gaetano Legate to the League of France. He appointed moreover
a select number of Prelates to accompany the Legate, men of good Learning, and
experienced in the matters of Government, among whom were Lorenzo B^anchetti,
and Filippo Sega, who after were Cardinals, Marco Antonio Mocenigo Bishop of
Ceneda, a man well versed in affairs, and highly esteemed by the Pope,
Francesco Panigarola, Bishop of Asti, a renowned Preacher, and Robert
Bellarmine a learned Jesuit. To the choice of these men the Pope added Bills
of Exchange to the Merchants of Lions for three hundred thousand crowns, with
Commission to the Legate to dispose of them according to occasion, but
particularly to spend them for the infranchisement of the Cardinal of Bourbon,
upon which he showed his mind was fixed more than upon any other thought
whatsoever.

But the Pope by letters from the Duke of Luxemburg, found, that what the
Agents of the League had represented to him, was vain: whereupon the Pope gave
Orders and Commissions to his Legate, to show himself no less Neutral in the
secular pretensions of the Princes, than most zealous concerning Religion, and
not to value one Frenchman above another, provided he were obedient to the
Church, and generally liked by the Kingdom: and that he should not show himself
an open enemy to the King of Navarre, so long as there was any hope he might
return into the bosom of the Church.

But these advertisements were very contrary to the principal scope of the
Embassy, which was to uphold the Catholic party of the League, as the
foundation of that Religion in France, so that the substance of the business
changed in the variety of circumstances, did so disturb the Execution, that it
was afterward governed more by the diversity of accidents than by any
determinate resolution.

The Cardinal-Legate being come into France, required Colonel Alfonso Corso,
not only to forbear molesting Grenoble and Valence, (which Cities alone held
for the League in Dauphine) but also that as a Catholic and stranger, he
should forsake the King's party, and join with the union. But he answered, that
he was indeed a Catholic, and an obedient Son to the Sea of Rome in spiritual
things; but that having made his Fortune as a Soldier, in the service of the
King of France, he could not desist from following him, but was bound to do
what he could in the affairs of the Prince whom he served. This answer troubled
the Legate, and the rather, because being come to Lions, he found the business
of the League in great disorder by the King's prosperous success. The Count of
Brisac, appointed at first to meet the Legate, and sercure his passage; was
forced to face about, and employ himself in the affairs of Normandy. The Duke
of Nevers invited him to come into his State, where standing Neuter, he might
freely take those ways as might appear most convenient to him. On the other
side the Duke of Mayenne ceased not to solicit him to come to Paris, showing
him that without the authority of his name, and those helps which were hoped
for from him, the League was in danger to be dissolved, and subdued by the
King's Forces; and all the rest of the Kingdom would remain oppressed by the
Hugonot's party.

The Legate having overcome many difficulties, arrives at Paris, where he
caused the Pope's Breve of the 15. of October to be published, wherein after an
honorable commemoration of the merits of the Kingdom of France toward the Sea
of Rome, etc. He attested, that he had chosen Cardinal Gaetano Legate to the
Kingdom of France, with power to use all means fitting, to protect the
Catholic Religion, to recall Heretics into the bosom of the Church; to
restore the Peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom; and finally, to procure that
under one only good, pious, and truly Catholic King, the people of France
might to the glory of God live in quietness and tranquillity, after so many
calamities of War. Wherefore he prayed and exhorted all the Orders and Degrees
of France to persevere in the Catholic Religion, and to labor to extinguish
and root up the evil of Heresy, to cut off the occasions of discord; and that
particular enmities, quarrels, and Civil Wars being laid aside, they should
resolve to yield obedience to a lawful truly Catholic King, and the Divine
worship being restored under his shadow, to live in charitable union and
concord.

Two different Declarations followed upon the publication of this Breve; one of
the Parliament of Tours, by which all persons were forbidden to obey or
acknowledge the Legate: the other of the Parliament of Paris, by which all were
exhorted to receive the Fatherly love of the Apostolic See, and to give due
Reverence to the Legates admonitions. After which contrary Declarations, many
Learned men fight for their Factions with their Pens, as the Soldiers with
their Swords.

Aid being desired by the League from the King of Spain, the Sieur de la Mothe
refuses to advance beyond the Frontiers of France from Flanders, unless the
King of Spain be declared Protector of the Crown of France, with authority to
dispose the chief part of the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Dignities, which
Prerogatives they called, las Marcas de Justitia, marks of justice.

The Duke of Mayenne will not hearken to an agreement with the King. The
Archbishop of Lions, lately imprisoned at Amboise, being newly set at liberty
by Captain Du-Gast for a great sum of money, and come to Paris, is made High
Chancellor to the Duke of Mayenne, and President of the Council. The Pope's
Legate grants unto Mayenne the three hundred thousand crowns brought for the
enlargement of the Cardinal of Bourbon.

Mayenne besieges Meulan, a small place, but seated upon the pass of the River
Seine, at the entering into Normandy, which therefore next to Pointoise,
hindered the bringing of Victuals to Paris: where after 25. days siege, news
came that the Old Castle at Roven, was seized by some Seditious persons, which
caused him to raise the siege, and march to Roven to appease the troubles.

On the other side the King besieges Dreux, and the Duke of Mayenne being
joined with the Spanish supplies from Flanders, marching toward Dreux,
resolves to fight.

The German Infantry raised for the King of France, turn for the League under
the Command of Colonel S. Paul. The Army of the League had in it four thousand
five hundred Horse, and twenty thousand Foot.

The King's Army was but three thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot.

The King's Army being refreshed they marched toward the field of Yvry,
appointed by the King for the place of Battle. Here the Armies joined, wherein
the King obtained a great Victory. The King all Armed on Horseback visits
every Division with great diligence, and exhorts his Soldiers with great
vehemence. At last, standing still at the head of the main Battalion, joining
his hands, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, He said so loud, that he was
heard by many, O Lord, thou know the intentions of my heart, and with the
eye of thy Providence, thou piercest into my most secret thoughts. If it be
best for this People that I should attain the Crown, which belongs to me by
right, do thou favor and Protect the justice of my Arms. But if thy will has
determined the contrary; if thou take away my Kingdom, take away my life also
at the same time, that I may shed my blood fighting at the Head of those who
put themselves in danger for my sake.

At the end of which words there arose in the Front of the Battle a loud
acclamation from those that heard him, with an unanimous cry of vive le Roy:
which being taken and redoubled from Squadron to Squadron through the whole
Army, gave an happy beginning to the Battle. The Cavalry of the League being
defeated, save themselves by flight. The Swisses laying down their Colors and
Arms upon the ground, had quarter given them by Marshall de Biron. The Germans
who having been raised by the King's money, had revolted to the Duke of Lorain,
were all put to the sword. The French Infantry that yielded, had their lives
given them. The Duke de Mayenne fled toward Dreux, and having entered the Town,
broke up the Bridge before his own people were all come, which was the reason
that multitudes of them (the King's Army pursuing them) were miserably drowned.
The Reiters of the League fight till they are all destroyed. There died that
day above six thousand of the League, among which were the Duke of Brunswick,
the Sieur de la Chastaigneray, and the Count d'Egmont, who was cut in pieces
with all his Lanciers. Diverse Lords, with 204. Ensigns and Cornets were taken
by the King, with all their Canon and Baggage. On the King's side there were
but 500. slain. This Battle was fought on March 14. 1590.

The news of this defeat came the next day to Paris, whereat every one was
afraid. But on March 16. Father Christino de Nizza took an occasion to
discourse on those words [Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten.] And in the Pulpit
tells the Parisians of the defeat, and by his Eloquence prevails so on them,
that they resolve to endure any thing for the Catholic Religion, without
fearing the heavy trial of a future siege, or Famine. The same did William
Rose, Boucher, Prevost, and all the other Preachers; and last of all Francesco
Panigarola, who, though he Preached in the Italian Tongue, was much followed by
reason of the same of his Eloquence.

After the yielding of other places, Melun is taken by the King's Army, a
little Town, but well Fortified, seven Leagues distant from Paris, through
which run two Currents of the River Seine, and therefore is divided into three
parts by the stream, and only joined together by Bridges.

The Sieur de Villeroy being come to Melun to treat an agreement with the King,
persuades him by many reasons to turn Catholic, and propounds a Cessation of
Arms. He was sent by the Duke of Mayenne unto the King. To which the King gave
a large answer. And as to the point of Religion, he said, he had already
contented those Catholics that followed him, who were many, of great wisdom
and strength, and very great extraction, to whose determination he thought all
the rest might accommodate themselves. M^rc Antonio Mocenigo, Bishop of Ceneda
treats with the Marshall de Biron, and propounds a Cessation of Arms, but it
is rejected.

All hope of Truce failing, the Parisians prepared for a strict siege from the
King's Army. The people was already disposed by the long exhortations of their
Preachers, and solicitations of those that Governed, to endure the siege:
being wrought upon by the frequent Decrees of the Sorbon, and by the
Declarations and Protestations of the Cardinal Legate, that an agreement could
not be treated with the Heretics without damnation. Hereby men's minds were so
confirmed, that some were put to death for saying, it was better to make peace
with the King, than starve with hunger. The Duke of Mayenne by many Letters
assured them that he would relieve the City within a few weeks.

To increase this inclination in the people, a solemn Procession was made, by
Order from the Cardinal Legate, to implore Gods assistance in those
necessities: in which Procession, the Prelates, Priests, and Monks of the
several Religious Orders, walked all in their accustomed habits, but besides
them, they were Armed also openly with Corslets, Guns, Swords, Partezans, and
all kind of Arms offensive and defensive, making at once, both a show of
devotion, and constancy of heart prepared to defend their lives; which
heightened the courage of the common people.

After this Procession, they made another of all the Magistrates of the City:
and among the Ceremonies of it, the Duke of Nemours their Governor, and other
Commanders of the Soldiers, and Magistrates of the people, swore publicly in
the great Church, to defend the City to the last man, and never make an
agreement with an Heretic Prince, for any danger or calamity whatsoever should
befall them. The King drew nigh to Paris, and shuts up the passages of the
River of Seine on every side, and the City is in great scarcity for want of
Victuals. Cardinal Gondy, Bishop of Paris, gives way that the Church Plate
should be turned into money, for the relief of the poor: and the Cardinal
Legate distributed among the poor 30000. crowns extorted from the Pope with
much ado. The Ambassador Mendoza promised sixscore crowns a day in Bread. The
Dutchesses and the richest Lords sold their household stuff, jewels, and
Ornaments, to relieve the urgent necessities of the common people.

During this siege the Cardinal of Bourbon dies at Fontenay, which produces no
alteration at all: only the Duke of Mayenne invites the Deputies of the
Provinces to Meaux, to choose another King.

The Duke of Mayenne having met the Duke of Parma at Conde, obtains of him
1500. Spanish Foot, toward the relief of Paris. In that populous City the
Famine was so sore, that within the space of three Months more than an hundred
thousand died in it.

The Duke of Parma comes with an Army to relieve Paris; at his arrival at
Meaux, he joins with the Duke of Mayenne. The Abbot del Been dies, a man of
great ability in State affairs, at which the King is troubled. Upon August 30.
the King rises from the siege of Paris. While the two Armies lie still
observing one another, the Parisians furnish themselves with some Provisions.
The King sends a Trumpet to the Duke of Mayenne to challenge him to fight. The
Duke of Parma draws his Army into Battalia, as if he would give Battle, goes
away suddenly to Lagny, and deceives the King. The Duke of Parma takes Lagny
before the face of the King's Army, whereby the passage of the River Marne
being freed, upon September. 6. great store of victuals enter into Paris.

The King withdraws his Army, and marches toward St. Dennis. He gives a
Scalado to the City, which proves ineffectual. The Duke of Parma takes
Corbeil, and so absolutely frees Paris from want of Provisions. The Duke of
Parma marches away into Flanders in good order. The King assaulteth Clermont,
takes it and sacks it. The Duke of Parma departing leaves aid of men, and
promises supply of money to the League. The King marches toward Picardy.

Grenoble in Dauphine after a long siege returns to the King's obedience. The
King assaulteth Corby, and takes it.

The Parliament of Bordeaux, who with much ado had been brought to the King's
obedience, make complaints for the King's persevering in Calvinism. The King
studieth how to conserve the affections of those of his party, and to keep them
in obedience. He recalls the Duke of Espernon to the Army, and other Popish
Lords to reconcile them unto him.

The Viscount of Turenne obtains of Queen Elizabeth of England, that she should
send the King one hundred thousand crowns. That she should send 6000. Foot into
Bretagne, for the relief of the Prince of Dombes. That along with him she
should send Horatio Palavicino a Genovese (who for Religion was fled into that
Island) to persuade the States of Holland, and the Princes of Germany, to
assist the King with men and money on their Part. She promised likewise, that
if the Duke of Parma should return again into France, she would assist Grave
Maurice, and the Hollanders, to make a strong diversion, by entering into
Brabant and Flanders.

Now the party of the League make a disgust against the Duke of Mayenne, which
is fomented by the Spaniards. And the Lords of the house of Lorain grow jealous
one of another; and the Duke of Nemours lays aside the Government of Paris. The
Duke of Mayenne dispatcheth President Jeannin to the King of Spain, and the
Sieur des Ports to the Pope to solicit aid.

The Chevalier d'Aumale goes to surprise S. Dennis, and without resistance
enters with all his men: but the Governor with only thirty Horse charge and
routs the Enemy, and d'Aumale being thrust through the throat falls down
dead. Those that were curious observed, that he fell dead before the door of an
Inn, whose sign was the Espee Royale, a Sword embroid^red with golden
Flower-de-luces, and that his Body being laid upon the Bier in the Church of
the Friars of St. Dennis, his carcass the night following was all gnawed and
mangled with Rats.

Pope Gregory XIV. assigns fifteen thousand crowns by the Month for the
service of the League: and Marsilio Landriano, a Milanese, is chosen Legate for
the Kingdom of France. Chartres is besieged, and surrendered to the Baron de
Biron. The Duke of Mayenne receives Chasteau Thierry with the composition of
twenty thousand crowns.

Then the Popish Princes and Noblemen following the King did solicit his
Majesty to turn to the Romish Religion. Anno 1591.
The Petitions made to the King to provide for his dutiful Subjects of both
Religions; to prevent the new attempts of the Pope and his adherents, to the
prejudice of the Crown of France, were the cause of two Edicts made at Mante in
the beginning of July. The one confirmed the Edicts of Pacification made by the
deceased King upon the troubles of the Realm, and dissannulled all that passed
in July 1585. and 1588. in favor of the League. The other showed the King's
intent to maintain the Catholic Religion in France, with the Ancient Rights
and Privileges of the French Church. The Court of Parliament of Paris,
resident at Chalons and Tours, having verified these Edicts, had dissannulled
all the Bulls of Cardinal Gaetan's Legation, and other Bulls that came from
Rome on March 1. the Proceedings, Excommunications, and Fulminations, made by
Landriano, terming himself the Pope's Nuncio, as abusive, scandalous,
seditious, full of impostures, made against the holy Decrees, Canonical
Constitutions, approved Councils, and against the Rights and Liberties of the
French Church.

They Decree, that if any had been Excommunicate by virtue of the said
proceedings, they should be absolved; and the said Bulls and all proceedings by
virtue thereof burnt in the Marketplace by the Hangman. That Landriano the
pretended Nuncio (come privily into the Realm without the King's leave or
liking) should be apprehended, and put in the King's Prison. And in case he
should not be taken, he should be summoned at three short days according to
the accustomed manner, and ten thousand Franks given in reward to him that
should deliver him to the Magistrate, Prohibitions being made to all men to
receive, retain, or lodge the said pretended Nuncio upon pain of death. And to
all Clergymen, not to receive, publish, or cause to be published any
sentences, or proceedings coming from him, upon pain to be punished as
Traitors. They declared the Cardinals (being at Rome) the Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Clergymen, which had signed and ratified the said Bull of
Excommunication, and approved the most barbarous and detestable Parricide,
traitorously committed upon the Person of the late deceased King Henry III. to
be deprived of such Spiritual Livings as they held within the Realm, causing
the King's Proctor General to seize thereon, and to put them into his Majesty's
hand: forbidding all persons either to carry or send Gold to Rome, and to
provide for the disposition of Benefices, until the King should otherwise
Decree.

Du recueil de l'Histoire de la ligne.
That of Tours added this clause to the Decree. They declared Gregory, calling
himself Pope, the fourteenth of that name, an enemy to peace, to the union of
the Roman Catholic Church, to the King and to his Estate, adhering to the
Conspiracy of Spain, and a favourer of Rebels, culpable of the most inhumane,
and most detestable Parricide committed on the Person of the most Christian and
Catholic King Henry III. of famous memory.

The Parliament of the League did afterward condemn and cause those Decrees to
be burnt at Paris, which were made against the Bulls and Ministers of the
Romish See. So one pulled down what another built up.

The Cardinal of Vendosme begins to raise a third party of Catholics, to make
himself Head of them, and thereby to bring himself to the Crown. Scipio Balbani
is sent to Rome by the Cardinal of Vendosme, to treat with the Pope, and to
communicate his design unto him. The Cardinal of Lenoncourt gives the King
notice of the designs of the Cardinal of Vendosme. The High Chancellor
thereupon persuades him to turn to the Romish Religion.

Charles Duke of Guise having been long kept Prisoner at Tours, escapes at
noonday, and flees to Bourges, and then meets with the Duke of Mayenne. The
Council of Sixteen falls into an emulation with the Parliament of Paris, and
with the Council of State chosen by the Duke of Mayenne. Brigard, who had been
imprisoned upon suspicion of Plots against the League, being escaped, the
Judges that made his Process, are by the people in Arms tumultuously put in
Prison, and by the Council of Sixteen are caused to be strangled in the close
Prison, and the next day their bodies are hanged at the Greve with infamous
writings on their Breasts.

The Duke of Mayenne posts to Paris to appease this tumult, and causes
Louchart, Auroux, Hamelin, and Emmonot, four of the chief of the Council of
Sixteen which were most guilty, to be strangled. The King marches into
Normandy, lays siege to the City of Roven. The Duke of Parma with the Spanish
Army marches to relieve that place. They fight at Aumale, the King is wounded,
his men routed, and he is put hard to it to save himself. Villars, the
Governor of Roven, sallying out enters the trenches, and gains the Artillery.
The Duke of Parma retiring, the King returns to Roven and renews the siege.
The Duke of Parma also returns to bring relief: and the King's Forces being
wasted, he rises from the siege, and marches to the Banks of the River of
Seine.

Those of the League begin to think of a peace. The Catholics of the King's
party are displeased, that the peace should be treated by the Sieur de Plessis,
a Hugonot.

The Marshall de Biron is killed with a Canon shot before Espernay. The King
wept bitterly at the news of his death. The Baron de Biron, to revenge the
death of his Father, scales a great Tower at Espernay, and takes it, but is
sorely wounded; and the Town is delivered up into the hands of the Duke of
Nevers, Governor of that Province. August 9. 1592.

Now the King desires a reconciliation with the Catholic Church by way of
agreement, not by way of pardon. The King takes Dreux, and being constrained by
the importunities of his own Catholic party, who threaten to forsake him,
resolves to change his Religion. And being instructed by the Archbishop of
Bourges, by Rene Benoist Curate of S. Eustache of Paris, and of some other
Doctors, desires to be admitted into the bosom of the Romish Church. And on
July 25. he went to Mass at St. Dennis, and made a public and solemn
Profession to the said Arbhbishop, assisted by Charles Cardinal of Bourbon
Archbishop of Roven, and Nephew to the deceased; nine Bishops with many other
Prelates and Religious men; protesting to live and die in the Romish Religion,
swearing to defend it against all men. Having made profession of his Faith, he
performed all Ceremonies requisite in so solemn an Act: and then he received
absolution and blessing, with wonderful joy and acclamation of the people.

Presently after this Act, the King sent the Duke of Nevers, the Marquess of
Pisani, and Henry of Gondy Bishop of Paris to the Pope to yield obedience by
them to the Sea of Rome, to beseech him to allow of his Conversion, and to
countenance it with his own blessing.

Whilst Elizabeth Queen of England, upon account of Religion, did with so great
expenses relieve the French King, a strong rumor was spread in England, that
he either would, or had already changed his Religion; hereupon was Thomas
Wilkes sent over into France to understand the certainty thereof. But before
his arrival the King had made a public Profession of the Popi^h Religion at
St. Dennis (as has been before expressed) although some Papists of Religious
Order^ at that time plotted against his life. But he ingenuously declared unto
Wilkes the causes that moved him to forsake his Religion. And Morlante the
French Agent in the mean time tells the Queen all the very same things, and
with fair and specious words offers her all kindness in the King his Masters
behalf.

The Queen being much troubled and disquieted in mind, snatched up her Pen, and
a while after sent this Letter to him. Alas! what deep sorrow? Cambden hist. of
Q. Eli^abe^h.
what vehement grief? what sighs have I felt at my heart for the things which
Morlante has told me of? Alas! is the world come to this pass? Was it possible
that any worldly matter should make you quit the fear of God? can we expect any
happy issue of such a fact? or could you think that He who has hitherto with
his own right hand upholden and preserved you, would now forsake you? It is a
very dangerous thing to do evil that good may come of it: Yet I hope a sober
spirit will put you into a better mind. In the mean time I will not omit to
make it a principal part of my prayers, the recommending you to God, beseeching
him, that the hands of Esau may not lose you the blessing of Jacob. Whereas you
do Religiously and solemnly offer me your friendship, I know to my great cost,
I have well deserved it: neither should I repent that, had you not changed your
Father. Verily, from henceforth I cannot be your Sister by the Father: for the
truth is, I shall ever more dearly love and honor my own Father than a false
and counterfeit one, which God knows very well; who (I beseech him) bring you
back again to a better mind. Subscribed,

Your Sister, if it be after the old manner: as for the new I have nothing to
do with it. Elizabeth R.




Yet notwithstanding a Contract was made between him and the Queen at Melun in
the Month of August, to make War offensive and defensive against the Spaniards
And the Queen recommended again and again the Reformed Religion, and the
Professors thereof to his Care and Protection by Sir Robert Sidney. He
promised, That as he had been hitherto their Protector, so he would not for
the future fail them, though most of the Nobler sort of them had forsaken him.

On August 26. Peter Barrier, born at Orleans, was taken Prisoner at Melun,
where the King then was, by the discovery of a Jacobin Florentine, to whom he
had confessed himself in Lions. He confessed, that seduced and persuaded by a
Capuchin of Lions, and afterward confessed by Aubry Curate of St. Andrews des
Acts at Paris, by his Vicar, and by Father Varade a Jesuit, he was come
thither expressly to murder the King. The Priest revealing this Crime, incurs
no Ecclesiastical censure. The wretch was found seized of a sharp knife with
two edges. He was pinched with hot Pincers, his right hand burnt off, holding
the said knife, his arms, legs, and thighs broken; and his body burnt to ashes,
and cast into the River.

Upon a general surceasing of Arms the King assembled some of the chief of the
Realm at Mante, especially to hear the complaints of such as stood in doubt of
the King's change in Religion, and were grieved at diverse contraventions of his
Majesty's Edicts, whereby they suffered wrongs in all Provinces. For the
Partisans of Spain continually exclaimed of the incompatibility of two
Religions in France, and many were of opinion, That the King ought not to be
admitted, but he should promise expressly to banish all such as made Profession
of any other Religion than that which he did embrace; or at least to abolish
all public Profession. But the King employed all his care to unite his people
in concord.

Vitry desiring to be the first that should re-enter under the King's
obedience, as he had been the first that had separated from it, brought back
the City of Meaux. Aix, Lions, Bourges, and Orleans, surrender to the King.

On the 22. of March, the Parliament, the Provost of Merchants, and the
Sheriffs, having disposed the City of Paris, received the King, maugre the vain
endeavors of some remnant of the faction of the Sixteen. The Duke of Mayenne
was gone into Picardy: and Brissac, to whom he had committed the Government of
Paris for some Months past, having taken it from the Count of Belin, broke his
faith with him, believing he ought it rather to the King than to him.

The King had a little before caused himself to be anointed at Chartres, with
the Cruise of St. Martin of Tours. The City of Rhemes was yet in the hands of
the League: but he would no longer defer his Coronation, because he knew that
That Ceremony was absolutely necessary to confirm to him the affection and
respect of his people. It was wonderful, how that there being four or five
thousand Spaniards engarrisoned in Paris, and ten or twelve thousand factious
persons of the Cabal of the Sixteen, who all cruelly hated the King, he could
nevertheless render himself Master of it without striking stroke, or without
shedding blood. His Troops having by intelligence seized on the Gates,
Ramparts, and public places, he entered triumphantly into the City by the new
Gate, by which Henry III. had unhappily fled six years before, and went
directly to Nostredame to hear Mass, and cause Te Deum to be sung. Afterward
he returned to the Louvre, where he found his Officers and his Dinner ready, as
if he had always remained there.

After Dinner he gave the Spanish Garrison a safe conduct, and a good Convoy,
to conduct them as far as the Tree of Guise in all security. The Garrison
departed about three a clock the same day of his entrance, with twenty or
thirty of the most obstinate Leaguers, who chose rather to follow Strangers,
than obey their natural Prince.

The same day that he entered into Paris, the Cardinal de Peleve Archbishop of
Sens, a passionate Leaguer, expired in his Palace of Sens. The Cardinal of
Placentia, Legate from the Pope, had safe conduct to retire home, but he died
by the way. Brissac for recompense had the Staff of Marshall, and a place of
honorable Counselor to the Parliament. D' O was replaced in his Government
of Paris, which he had under Henry III. but he died soon after.

That part of the Parliament which was at Tours, was recalled; and that which
was at Paris re-inabled (for it had been interdicted) and both reunited
conjointly to serve the King.

By noon of that day in which the King entered Paris, the City was every where
peaceable; the Burgesses in a moment grew familiar with the Soldiers; the
shops were opened, and the Artificers wrought in them. And the calm was so
great, that nothing interrupted it but the ringing of the Bells, the Bonfires
and the Dances which were made through the Streets, even till midnight.

Balagny with his City of Cambray, turns to the King's side. In like manner
Amiens, Beauvais, and Peronne, renounced the League. Yea the Duke of Guise
compounds with the King, and brings the Cities of Rhemes, Vitry, and Mezieres,
under his obedience, who in recompense of it, gave him the Government of
Provence, from which he was obliged to withdraw the Duke of Espernon, because
the people, the Parliament, and the Nobility, had taken Arms against him. The
Duke of Lorain also made his peace with the King on November 26.

Now the Court of Parliament revokes and disannuls all other Decrees, Orders,
or Oaths, given or made since the 29. of December 1588. to the prejudice of the
King's Authority and the Laws of the Realm. And especially they disannulled all
that had been done against the honor of the deceased King, as well during his
life, as after his decease, commanding to inform of the detestable Parricide
committed on his Person, and to proceed extraordinarily against such as should
be found culpable. They revoked the Authority given unto the Duke of Mayenne
under the Title of Lieutenant General of the Estate and Crown of France,
forbidding all men to acknowledge him in that quality, or to yield him any aid
or obedience, upon pain of High Treason. They likewise enjoined the Duke of
Mayenne upon the like pains to acknowledge Henry IV. of that name, for King of
France and Navarre, and their King, and to yield him the obedience of faithful
Servants and Subjects. And to all other Princes, Prelates, Noblemen, GeBtlemen,
Towns, Commonalities, and private men, to forsake that pretended Faction of the
League, whereof the Duke of Mayenne had made himself the Head, and to yield
unto the King obedience and fealty, upon pain to the said Princes, Noblemen,
etc. to be degraded of their Nobility and Gentry; and they and their posterity
declared base, with confiscation of Bodies and Goods: and the razing of their
Towns, Castles and places, that should infringe the King's Ordinances and
Commandments. Moreover they decreed, That the 22. day of March should be for
ever celebrated, and the same day a general Procession should be made after the
accustomed manner, where the said Court should assist in their Scarlet Robes,
as a remembrance to give God thanks for the happy reduction of this said City
to the King's obedience.

Now one John Castle, Son of a Merchant-Draper of Paris, about the end of the
year 1594. having thrust himself with the Courtiers into the Chamber of the
fair Gabriella, where the King was, would have struck him with a knife into the
belly; but the King then bowing to salute some one, the blow chanced on his
face only, piercing his upper lip, and breaking a Tooth. It was not known for
the present who had struck it: but the Count of Soissons seeing this young man
affrighted, stopped him by the Arm. He impudently confessed that he had given the
blow, and maintained that he ought to do it. The Parliament condemned him to
have his right hand burned, his flesh torn off with red hot Pincers, and after
to be torn in pieces by four Horses, burnt to ashes, and cast into the wind.

The Jesuits, under whom this Miscreant had studied, were accused for exciting
him to this Parricide. Among other things he heard the Fathers of that Society
to say, That it was lawful to kill the King, That he was Excommuncated out of
the Church, that he was not to be obeyed nor taken for their King, until such
time as he was allowed by the Pope.

Therefore the Parliament Decreed, That the Priests, Scholars, and all others,
terming themselves of that Society of Jesus, (as corrupters of Youth) should
depart within three days after the publication of the said Decree, out of
Paris, and other places where they had Colleges, and within fifteen days out
of the Realm, upon pain after the same time to be punished as guilty of high
Treason. The house of Peter Castle, the Father of this Parricide, standing
before the Palace, was razed, and a Pillar erected, containing (for a perpetual
monument) the causes of that ruin.

Among the writings of John Guignard of Chartres, were found certain scandalous
libels against the King, for which he was executed. And one Francis Jacob, a
Scholar of the Jesuits of Bourges, had lately said he would have killed the
King, but that he held him for dead, and that another had done the deed.

Anno 1595.
The Duke of Mayenne and Nemours yield unto the King, and are received unto
Grace. The King of France is now admitted to a reconciliation with the Church
of Rome, upon these conditions, and in these words. He shall abjure all
Heresies, and profess the Catholic Faith in such form as shall be here done by
his Ambassadors. He shall introduce the Catholic Faith into the Principality
of Bearn, and shall nominate Catholic Magistrates in the said Province: he
shall procure within a year the Prince of Conde out of the hands of the
Heretics, whom he shall cause to be instructed and brought up in the Catholic
Religion. The Decrees of the Council of Trent shall be published and received
throughout the whole Kingdom of France. He shall nominate to the vacant
Churches and Monasteries such as are Catholics, and free from all suspicion of
Heresy. He shall do his best endeavor, that the Churches and Clergy be
invested anew in their Livings that have been seized upon without any judicial
proceeding. In bestowing of Magistracies and Dignities, he shall take care that
Catholics only be preferred, and that Heteticks (as near as may be) may be
expelled. The Concordates shall be observed, and all abuses removed which have
crept in contrary to the same. The absolution in France granted by the Bishops,
shall be condemned. He shall write letters to all the Princes of Christendom,
wherein he shall give notice of his Conversion, and profession of the Catholic
Faith. The Pope granted his Absolution on September 16. by the Negotiation and
pursuits of d'Ossat, and du Perron, his Procurers in the Court of Rome. These
were afterward upon his recommendation honored with Cardinals Caps.

After a War between the French and Spaniards, a Peace was concluded between
France and Spain, Anno 1598.

Then the French King, who had hitherto flourished in Martial glory, having now
his thoughts wholly settled upon peace, did so promote the welfare of France,
(which had run headlong to ruin for many years through the storms of Civil
War) by maintaining and supporting Religion, as well the Roman as the Reformed,
reviving the Laws, cherishing Learning, restoring Trade and Commerce, and
beautifying the Kingdom with splendid buildings, that he far surpassed all the
Kings that were before him.

In the year 1599. the King's Sister, the Lady Katherine de Bourbon, was
married to the Duke of Bar, Son to the Duke of Lorain. The Reformed Religion,
in which she had been bred, she would not change, by reason (as she said) of
her deceased Mother Queen Joane of Navarre, whose life and actions were held
worthy to be imitated, as who had preferred safety of Conscience before
assurance of honors and greatness, yea, than life it self: Being accustomed to
say to them on her part, that Arms should not be laid down, but with these
three Conditions, either an assured Peace, an absolute Victory, or an honest
Death. The Marriage was consummate in the King's own Cabinet, by the Archbishop
of Roven, at the King's special Command, to avoid greater inconvenencies.

She cordially affected that which did concert the Liberty of Conscience
throughout all France, often beseeching the King to let her see the assurances
thereof whilst she was in France, and not to suffer his Edicts to remain
without execution being Proclaimed, and without a durable observation being
executed.

She used to be attended in her house by the Ministers of Paris, who served her
by turns every one a quarter of a year. Being then to go into Lorain with her
Husband, the Church appointed Monsieur de Montigni an Ancient Minister, to
attend her in that journey. But M. Peter du-Moulin then coming to Paris, the
Old Gentleman desired to be excused; and that the new Minister, as fitter to
travel by reason of his age, might be chosen for that service. To which motion
the Princess presently inclined, having a special liking to Du Moulin. See the
Life of Dr. Du Moulin w^itten by his worthy Son.
He took then that journey, and because the Princess was entertained in Bishops
Palaces and Abbeys; he did officiate in the Palace of the Bishop of Meaux, in
that of the Bishop of Chalons, and in the Abbey of Joverre.

The Harbingers of the Princess being come to Vitris le Francois, a Town of
Champagne, addressed themselves to the chief Magistrate of the Town, to prepare
quarters for the Princess and her Court. Since Du-Moulin's establishment at
Paris, till the death of the King's Sister (which was five years after) he made
a journey into Lorain every Spring, either with her, or to her: and having
served his quarter at her Court, returned to Paris: there the Princess was most
part of the year.

Those of the Reformed Religion made many and great complaints, that the King's
Edicts were not kept nor observed; that they were not provided of all things
necessary for the exercise of their Religion, the liberty of their Consciences,
and safety of their persons and fortunes. That they were excluded from all
charges and Offices in the State, justice, treasure, and policy, to the great
prejudice of their Children, etc. The end of all their Assemblies was to obtain
an Edict from the King, so clear and plain, as they should not be constrained
to sue for any other. Then the King made an Edict at Nantes, and signed it
after he had reduced that Province to his obedience, containing a Declaration
of the Edicts of Pacification, and of the troubles grown in France for matter
of Religion, the which though granted in April 1598. was not allowed in the
Court of Parliament of Paris until the 25. day of February following, by reason
of the many oppositions and difficulties that were made against it. The Duchess
of Bar, would not go out of Paris before it was confirmed, such was her zeal
and affection in that matter, as in all other affairs of that nature.

And for the better satisfaction of the Protestants in matters of justice, it
pleased King Henry IV. to erect a Chamber in the Court of Parliament of Paris
purposely for them. It consisted of one President, and Sixteen Counselors:
their Office to take knowledge of all the Causes and Suits of them of the
Reformed Religion, as well within the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris,
as also in Normandy and Britain, till there should be a Chamber erected in
either of them. There were appointed also two Chambers in the Parliament of
Bordeaux and Grenoble, and one at Chasters for the Parliament of Toulouse.
These Chambers were called les Chambres de l'Edict, because they were
established by a special Edict at Nantes in Britain.

The Duke of Joyeuse wallowing in sensual pleasures, being at Paris, after he
had taken his leave of the Ladies, and some other friends, becomes a Capuchin.
The King commended his resolution, and dining one day where there was only the
Duke of Mayenne, l'Esdiguiers, and himself, he said, That in the world there
were men of all conditions and qualities to be found, but they should hardly
find four so different as they were, Whereof there was, a Sinner converted, a
Leaguer repented, a Capuchin diverted, and a Hugonot perverted.

Century XVII.
THe Pope pressed King Henry to make his Sister turn Catholic, and the King to
please the Pope used his utmost endeavors for it, employing the most learned
and subtle of his Clergy to seduce her, especially Du Perron, then Bishop of
Eureux, and Father Cotton. These two had several bickerings with the Learned
Du-Moulin, who in his Book entitled, the Novelty of Popery opposed to the
Antiquity of true Christianity, gives an account of an occasional encounter of
his with M. Du Perron. But they had another, which was a pitched field. It was
at the Court before a few, but Grave and Select assistants. After some dispute,
when Du Perron gave back to the force of an Argument, and was at a loss, some
body hid behind the hangings cried up One. And when the like happened to him the
second time, the same voice cried up Two, and so till Five. Upon which Du
Perron complaining of interruption broke the Conference.

One Beaulieu Bouju, a young Clergyman, having got some Manuscripts of Du
Perron about the Eucharist, made use of them to write against Du Moulin, who
thereby was provoked to answer him, and confute him. There are Letters extant,
and Printed among Du Perrons Works, wherein he chides that same Beaulieu Bouju,
both for stealing, and more for ill using his meditations, and tells him in
substance, that though he could get his weapon, yet he could not wield it.

King Henry IV. to satisfy the Court of Rome, and the French Clergy of the
care he took of his Sister's Conversion, would often desire her to hear the
Sermons of his Chaplains; which she would not yield unto, till once being made
sensible how the King's credit was interessed, that she should once at the
least, hear one Court Sermon, she condescended so far to the request of a King
and a Brother, as to promise to hear Father Cotton; who therefore was appointed
to preach before the King and her immediately after Du Moulins Sermon, and in
the same Room: for those two contrary services were performed in the same Room
every Lord's day morning, as long as the Princess lived, and was at the Court.

The Princess, to strengthen her self against that assault, gave notice of it
to Du Moulin, and after his Sermon brought him into a private Room, whence he
might hear the Jesuits Oratory. His Subject was the dwelling of the Holy Ghost
in the Soul, and he made his entry into that matter after this manner. I went
once (says he) to visit the Hospital of Fools, where a grave old man received
me kindly at the door, and went about with me to show me the distracted
persons, and inform me about their several kinds of folly. Here is one (said
he) that thinks himself made of Snow, and will not come near the fire for fear
of melting. This thinks himself metamorphosed into an earthen Pitcher, and will
not suffer any to come near him for fear of being broken with a knock. These
four think themselves top full with the spirit of Prophecy: one will be Elias,
another Jeremiah, another Daniel, another St. Paul. But I that am the
Holy Ghost (said he) can assure you Sir, that they are all either Fools or
Impostors, for I never sent them. The like folly is to be seen among those of
the pretended Reformed Religion. There you shall find wise and Religious
Princesses [intimating the King's Sister] Wise and valiant Treasurers
[intimating the Duke of Sully] Wise and valiant Generals of Armies [intimating
the Duke of Bovillon] Wise and learned Counselors of State [intimating Mr. Du
Plessis Mornay] All wise in all things, but that they think they have the
Holy Ghost, but have it not. The Sermon was suitable to the Preface, and
wrought an answerable effect in the Hearers, making them all merry, but no
Converts.

The worthy Dr. Peter Du Moulin, Son to the said Du Moulin, tells us in his
life, that in the end of the year 1601. time and place being appointed for a
Conference between Du Moulin and Cayer, sometimes a Minister, and then a Doctor
of Sorbon, Cayer put off the meeting several times till the King's Sister going
to Lorain, took Du Moulin along with her. In his absence Cayer put forth a Book
with this Inscription, A Conference by Ministers granted, and by them refused.
In which Book he accuses Du Moulin of deserting his Cause, and running away.
But Du Moulin being returned in May to Paris, the challenge was renewed on both
sides. So they met on May 28. 1602. in an house next to the King's Sisters
house. The Conference held a fortnight. They had Scribes on both sides;
multitudes of hearers, and good order kept.

The Questions agitated Propounded by Cayer himself, were, Of the Sacrifice of
the Mass; of the Adoration of the Prope, and of the veneration of holy Images.
Cayer was assisted with two Doctors, Carmelites; Du Moulin had no assistant.
Toward the midst of the Conference the Faculty of Sorbon grievously censured
Cayer for ill defending the Catholic cause, and suffering the Adversary to
wade too deep into questions: and the Bishop of Paris forbad him to sign that
which he had indicted to the Scribes.

The Doctors of Sorbon perceiving that the more the Conference continued, the
more their Cause was discredited, came in a body to the King's Advocate in the
Court of Parliament, to complain of that Conference, saying, that it was a
pernicious thing, tending to Sedition; that they had contrived how to break it,
and that the effects of it would shortly appear. This hindered Du Moulin from
coming to the ordinary place, where he was before Cayer. The Master of the
house would have kept him out: but Cayer coming soon after, the door was opened
to him; and the people pressing in after him, Du Moulin got in with the Crowd.
There they considered how to get another place for their meeting. But the
Conference being discountenanced by Authority, no body durst offer his house
for it. So the parties agreed to continue the Conference in writing, and to
publish nothing but by mutual consent. But Du Moulin asked two Conditions, upon
which Cayer brake. The one that the Conference should be limited, and that it
should not be permitted to make replies in infinitum, but Cayer would have no
limitation. The other, that Cayer should sign the Acts of that Conference till
that day, which Cayer utterly refused, saying, It was enough that it was
subscribed by the Scribes. When Du Moulin represented to him, what disgrace he
put upon himself and his Cause, and challenged him; Cayer answered, that he
cared not for the talk of the people, nor for challenges. And to get out of
that mire he moved a question to Du Moulin, whether he could tell after what
manner of Creation the Angels were created. Du Moulin knowing that this was
their last meeting, answered, that the Question in hand was only of subscribing
the Acts. But Cayer refusing turned his back, and said, you shall hear of me:
and so went away, to the great scandal of the Romanists there present. A
Protestant made the company laugh, saying, that Cayer was not yet of Age to
sign.

Thus was the Conference broken, to the great satisfaction of many faithful
souls, and the instruction of many ignorant Papists, who since gave glory to
God by an open Profession of the truth.

The Acts of the Conference are extant, published by Archibald Adaire a
Reverend Bishop of Scotland.

The Doctors of the Faculty of Sorbon stung with the ill success of this
Conference, provoked him to another, in which the body of the University took
interest. They were to oppose three days upon what points they thought best:
and Du Moulin was to oppose three days also, and choose what points he
pleased. He was then Respondent for three days, and found in the Dispute that
blessing of God which never was wanting to him in the defense of his truth.
After the Dispute of the third day, he being returned home, and retired to his
study, a man in a Priest's habit came in the dark evening up the stairs, and
knocked at his Study door. When Du Moulin had opened it, the man thrust the door
with all his strength to have rusht in: and Du Moulin with all his strength (in
which he was inferior to few men of his size) kept him out, and called for
help. The man hearing some stirring below, ran hastily down the stairs, and so
into the Street. It is supposed upon probable ground, that the man was come to
kill him before he presented himself to be opponent according to the Covenants
of the Conference. But on the next morrow he met with a Prohibition from the
King to continue that Conference any longer. These passages raised his
reputation very high, whereby God was glorified, his Truth confirmed, and his
Church edified and increased with many Converts.

The last sickness of the King's Sister gave a great exercise to his zeal and
industry, whereby he did faithfully and constantly assist her in that
extremity. Du Perron did his utmost to pervert her and to fright him away. When
she drew near to her end, Du Moulin standing by her Bed side, Du Perron came,
and said, he was sent by the King, and would remove him by plain force. But Du
Moulin held fast the Bed-post. And when Du Perron told him he was to take place
of him in all Companies, Du Moulin answered, that his place was before Du
Perron's at the Princesses Beds side, and in that service. He added, that he
believed not that the King would offer violence to his Sisters Conscience,
appealing to her self, and beseeching her Highness to declare her pleasure. She
declared that she would die in the Reformed Religion, and that she would have
Du Moulin to stay by her. Whereupon Du Perron withdrew, and the good Princess
persevered in God's truth to her last breath. The King wished she had died in
the Roman Profession, and did all he could without violence, to pleasure the
Court of Rome in that point.

A little before there was a Conference between the Bishop of Eureux and Philip
de Mornay Lord of Plessis Marly, Governor of Saumur, in the presence of the
King, Princes, and Officers of his Crown, Counselors of State, and other
Noblemen of Mark. It was touching a Book which Monsieur du Plessis had
published of the Institution of the Lords Supper, and against the Mass, wherein
the Bishop did tax him to have falsified many Authorities. Whereupon Du Plessis
presented a Petition unto the King, that his Majesty would be pleased to
appoint Commissioners to examine every passage of Scripture cited in his Book.
The King yielded to this Conference, referring the care thereof to his
Chancellor. The Commissioners appointed for the Catholics were Augustus
Thuanus, President of the Court of Parliament at Paris: Pithou, Advocate in the
Court, and Fleure, Schoolmaster to the Prince of Conde, in whose absence came
Martin the King's Physician. And for the other, the President of Calignon,
Chancellor of Navarre, in whose place entered De Fresnes Gavay, President of
the Chamber of Languedoc, and Isaac Casaubon, his Majesty's Reader for the
Greek Tongue. All men of great Learning and well skilled in the Tongues.

This Conference began on May 4. in the Hall at Fountainbleau, De Serres Hist
in Henry IV.
in the midst whereof was a Table of a reasonable length. At the one end sat
the King; on his right hand the Bishop of Eureux, and on the left right against
him Du Plessis. Pasquier, Vassaut, and Mercier, Secretaries of the Conference,
were at the lower end of the same Table. Somewhat higher on the right hand sat
the Chancellor and the Commissioners. Behind the King stood the Archbishop of
Lions, and the Bishops of Nevers, Beauvais, and Chastres. On the King's left
hand were the four Secretaries of State. Behind them which conferred, were the
Dukes of Vaudemont, of Nemours, of Mercoeur, of Mayenne, of Nevers, of Elbeuf,
of Aiguillon, and of Janville, the Officers of the Crown, Counselors of
State, and other Noblemen of quality.

All were commanded to keep silence. The King said, that the Dispute was not
betwixt party and party, but particular betwixt the two Conferents; not for any
question of Right and Doctrine but for the literal truth of some passages. He
desired they would treat with all mildness and moderation; without any
bitterness or passion, but that of the truth: Declaring moreover, that he did
not mean that this Dispute should in any thing alter or disquiet the peace of
his Subjects, as the Chancellor did then Declare unto them at large by the
King's Commandment.

After the first days Conference M. Du Plessis fell very sick, so as they
could proceed no further. The King did write the same day unto the Duke of
Espernon what had past in the Conference, and showed by his Letter what his
judgment was. My friend, the Diocese of Eureux has vanquished that of Saumur.
Wherewith Du Plessis was discontented, so that in a Discourse Printed soon
after touching this Conference, he termed this Letter A spark of fire, and
said, That the Bishop of Eureux Fly was made an Elephant.

Some Months after, Canay, one of the Commissioners, and President in the
Chamber of the Edict at Castres, a man learned in Philosophy and the Tongues,
and well read in the Church History, left his Profession of the Reformed
Religion, and became a Romish Catholic.

Philip Mornay, Lord of Plessis, his work concerning the truth of Christian
Religion, was written in French against Atheists, Epicures, Paynims, Jews,
Mahumetists, and other Infidels, began to be translated by Sir Philip Sidney,
and at his request finished by Arthur Golding: He published a Treatise
containing the reasons why the Council of Trent could not be admitted in
France. He was sent by the King of Navarre to the National Synod of Vitray in
Bretagne, where he was joyfully received by the whole Company. He was likewise
present in the General Assembly of the Protestants held at Montauban by the
King's permission, Anno 1584. Where he was desired by the Assembly to draw up
the form of their Complaints against the violation of the Edict for Peace;
which He together with the Count de la Val presented afterward to the King at
Blois.

When the League of the House of Guise brake forth, which was formed first
against the King, under pretense of the Defense of the Catholic Religion; and
afterward declared against the King of Navarre and the Protestants: That
famous Declaration in the name of the said King was Penned by Du Plessis. In
the following Civil Wars for Religion, he did many important services for the
King of Navarre and the Protestants, both with his Sword and Pen, having
answered a virulent Book, published by the League against the King of Navarre,
called the English Catholic. In the year 1590. he built a Church for the
Protestants in Saumur, and obtained a Grant from the King for the instituting
an University there, which was afterward confirmed by a National Synod held in
the same place. Anno 1593. he wrote a large Letter to the King, who then had
changed his Religion; desiring the continuance of his favor to the
Protestants, and withal expostulating that sudden change. Anno 1598. he Printed
his Work of the Lords Supper. The Jesuits of Bourdeaux Petitioned the
Parliament there that it might be burnt.

Jacobus August. Thuanus is a most faithful Historian. He wrote an History of
things done throughout the whole World from the year of Christ 1545. even to
the year 1608. in a most elegant style. He is highly commended by diverse
Learned men. Suae aetatis Historiam summo judicio and fide, sine odio and
gratia, ad Dei gloriam and publicam utilitatem, prudentissime conscripsit: opus
and styli elegantia, and gravissimarum rerum copia ac majestate cum quibus^is
sive veterum, sive recentium in eo genere scriptis conferendum. Lans. Orat. pro
Gallia. Inter multa quae in te admiratura est posteritas, ego illud unice
obstupesco, unde tibi modo in fori arce, modo in summa Republica versanti
otium, unde vis indefessa animi, ut res tot ac tantas aut scribendas
cognosceres, aut cognitas scriberes. Grot. Epist. 16. Jac. Aug. Thuano. Quem
ego virum divinitus datum censeo saeculo isti in exemplum pietatis,
integritatis, probitatis. Casaub. Epist. Append. Vir, immortali laud dignus,
and Historicae Veritatis lumen. Montac. Antidiat. Vir non minus eruditione,
quam officij dignitate Nobilis, and siquis alius, Very studiosus. Morton. Causa
Regia.

Isaac Casaubon was a great Linguist, a singular Grecian, and an excellent
Philologer. He has written in twelve Books of his Exercitations,
Animadversions on those twelve Tomes of Baronius his Annals. Scaliger in an
Epistle to Casaubon commends his Bok de Satyra; and in another his Theophrastus
his Characters. He is thus styled by Salmasius, Incomparabilis Vir, and seculi
sui decus immortale, Isaacus Casaubonus, nunquam, sine laud nominandus,
nunquam satis laudatus. Salmas. Praefat. ad Hist. August. script.

The Marriage between the King and Queen Margarite being pronounced void, and a
Contract past between him and Mary of Medices, the Duke of Florence's Daughter:
She being blessed of Aldobrandino the Pope's Legate at Florence, went from
thence, and arrived at Marseilles, from whence (being every where Royally
entertained) she came to Lions, and there after eight days stay met with the
King, where in St. John's Church the Nuptial solemnity was performed to this
Couple by the Legate. On September 27. 1601. the Queen was delivered of a Son
which was named Jews. The King blessing him, put a Sword in his hand, to use
it to the glory of God, and the defense of his Crown and people. The Pope sent
presently unto the King and Queen, to congratulate with them of this Birth, and
to carry unto the young Prince swaddling bands, bearing clothes, and other
things blessed by his Holiness.

Then the Pope granted a Jubilee, and pardons to all the French that should go
visit the Church of St. Croix at Orleans, doing the works of Christian Charity.
An infinite number of people went thither from all parts of France: the King
and Queen went thither with the first, and gave means to help to build this
Church, which had been ruined during the fury of the first Civil wars. The King
laid the first stone of this building.

Then the King did forbid the superfluous use of Gold and Silver in Lace, or
otherwise upon garments: and made an Edict also against Usury; and another
against Combats.

Not long after, the Duke of Biron's Conspiracy was discovered, who was
sometimes heard say, he would die a Sovereign. Refusing to submit himself to
the King's Clemency, he is seized on at the King's Chamber door, and (his Sword
being taken from him) is carried Prisoner to the Bastille. There uttered he
those passionate words, That if they desired to put him to death, they should
dispatch him; that they should not brag they had made him to fear death; that
they should speedily drink themselves drunk with the blood which remained of
thirty five wounds, which he had received for the service of France. The King
sent his Letters to the Court of Parliament to make his Process. In the end
being found guilty, the Chancellor pronounced the sentence of death, whcih was
inflicted on him in the Bastille, which he took most impatiently.

King James of happy memory, before his coming to the Crown of England, sent
expressions of Royal favor, to the Consistory of Paris, who chose the
forementioned Du Moulin to address their humble thanks by Letters to his
Majesty. And when his Majesty published his Confession of Faith, against which
Coeffeteau (since Bishop of Marselles) writ an eloquent Book, Du Moulin
undertook the defense of the King's Confession, and wrote a French Book with
that Title, which was most welcome to the King, and to the English Clergy: and
his Majesty made Royal and bountiful expressions of his acceptance. And because
other Adversaries (besides Coeffeteau) had writ against the King, Du Moulin
wrote another Book in his defense in Latin, entitled, De Monarchia Pontificis
Romani.

The Duke of Bovillon having been accused by those which had been examined in
Council upon the Conspiracies of the Duke of Biron, being sent for, refuses to
come to the King: but afterward in the year 1606. he made his peace, and came
to the King being then at Dunchery on April 11. The King with the Queen,
Princes of the blood, and other Officers of the Crown, entered into Sedan, where
he was joyfully received by the Duke being Prince of Sedan, and Protector of
the Protestant Church there. The King promised that the Church of Sedan should
suffer no alteration, but enjoy the liberty of their conscience.

In the year 1603. the Duke of Savoy had an enterprise upon Geneva: his men on
scaling Ladders mounted the Walls undescried, surprised the Soldier that stood
Sentinel, got the word of him, and slew him, being also Masters of the Streets
about two hours. But they were disappointed: thirteen were by the Townsmen
taken alive (among whom was the Baron of Attignas) which were condemned to be
hanged, whose heads (with the heads of those that were killed, in all seventy
seven) were set upon the Gallows, and their bodies thrown into the River of
Rhosne, for which deliverance they made a solemn thanksgiving to God,
concluding a peace with the Duke in July the same year.

The same year the King being at Metz, there came unto him four Jesuits, to
obtain their re-establishment in France.

In October there was a National Synod held at Sap by those of the Reformed
Religion, which Treated touching Doctrine, Discipline, and the Government of
Churches.

The King made Monsieur Alexander (his Bastard Son) of the Order of the Knights
of Malta. A great number of Commanders and Knights being assembled at Paris,
where he was invested into the Order in the Augustines Church by the
Grand-Prior of France, who set upon his Breast a Plastron of black Satin, with
a white Cross: So the Ceremony ended with great joy and sounding of Trumpets.
The new Knight feasted the Grand-Priors of France and Champagne, with the
Commanders and Knights at the Temple.

The King having promised to restore the Jesuits, Father Cotton came to Paris
by his Majesty's Command, with Father Armand the Provincial, and Father
Alexander: and the King grew presently into such a liking with Father Cotton,
as he did nothing but he was called, and in the end his Majesty granted their
return upon certain Conditions: and the Edict made for their establishment,
(notwithstanding any oppositions made unto the Court to hinder the confirmation
thereof) was confirmed in the beginning of the year 1604. and their Colleges
were restored at Lions, Roven, Bourges, and Dijon. The Signeur of Varenne,
(Controller General of the Posts, and now Governor of the Town and Castle of
Angers, who loved them of this company) besought the King to build a new
College at La Fleche in Anjou, with privileges like to the other Universities
of that Realm, the which the King made of a Royal Foundation, and gave them his
own House with Pensions, for the instruction of a good number of young
Gentlemen, whom his Majesty would have bred up, and instructed there in all
Professions, Tongues, and Exercises.

But Father Cotton returning one night somewhat late (about the end of
February) and passing by the Street of the new Bridge, to go unto the Louvre,
there were certain Pages and Lacquies, which calling for him at the door of the
Coach, wounded him with their Rapiers, giving him one great wound in the
shoulder going toward the neck and throat, whereof he was soon after cured.
There was great search made for this attempt. Some were taken and examined.
Cotton requested the King to pardon them, yet were they banished the Court, and
forbidden ever to come there upon pain of death.

In the year 1606. the King made special orders on the behalf of those of the
Reformed Religion, enjoining them to carry themselves according to the Edict of
Nantes, avoiding all occasions of scandal.

About Easter this year were such violent winds and storms throughout all
France, as the tops of houses being cast down, many were slain and sore hurt in
Paris. Not long after there was a violent Plague in the same, and in the
beginning of the following year.

In the year 1608. were the Jesuits admitted into Navarre and Bearn, whereat
all the Judges and Officers of the Country were discontented, as who hated the
Jesuits above all Creatures living; and had in former times put them to death
like Spies, if they found any within their limits.

The Prelates of France in like manner Petitioned the King once again, that the
Decrees of the Council of Trent might be observed.

On April 11. Anno 1609. there was a Conference between Monsieur Du Moulin,
lone of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Paris, and Father Gontier a
Jesuit, being seconded by the Baroness of Salignar: after which it was bruited
abroad, that Gontier had confuted Du Moulin in diverse points which the
Protestants held, Gontier himself writing a specious Letter to the King to that
effect. Du Moulin finding his Reputation touched, and the truth misreported,
was forced to publish a true Discourse of the whole Conference.

In the year 1610. another attempt against Geneva was discovered, whereof the
Author was ^analis, one of their own homebred and native Citizens, a man not
meanly reputed of, both for his knowledge in Physic and the Languages: whereof
being found guilty, and of another before, he was condemned, and his body
broken, and so laid half dead on a wheel unbound, he was cast from thence to be
burned in a fire under him.

On May 13. the Queen was solemnly Crowned at St. Dennis by the Cardinal of
Joyeuse. On Friday May 14. the day after the Queens Coronation, the King was
treacherously murdered by the cursed hand of a bloody villain.

The King being advertised of some ominous influence and Prediction which did
threaten him that day, went to see Mass with great devotion. At his return they
brought him some of his Children, among the rest the Duke of Anjou whom he
dearly loved: but being then very pensive, he commanded they should carry him
to breakfast. Then being very sad he cast himself upon his bed to sleep if he
might: but not being able to take any rest, he fell upon his knees, and began
to pray. Then he lay down again, and prayed again, and thus he did three times.
In the end he went and walked in the Gallery till dinner time. After dinner
many Noblemen came into his Chamber, and began to tell some tales to make him
laugh. Having smiled a little with the rest (being naturally of a pleasant
disposition) in the end he said, We have laughed enough for Friday, we may well
weep on Sunday. Hereupon he caused some to go to the Arsenal at four of the
clock. Whereupon, they say, that the Duke of Vendosme told him, that he had
been warned to beware of the 14. day: yet making no account thereof, he went
down into the Court, where a man of a mean condition entertained him a quarter
of an hour. Then he went into his Coach by the Duke of Espernon (who sat in
the first place of the Boot on the King's right hand) Montbazon the Marshal of
Lavardin, la Force and Praulin, being followed by two Footmen, and one of his
Guard on Horseback, having commanded Monsieur de Vitry, and the rest of his
Guard to stay behind.

Being between the Drawbridge and the Port, a miserable wretch, Francis
Ravillac, born at Angoulesm, by Profession a Lawyer, watching his opportunity,
drew near unto the Coach on the right side, thinking his Majesty had been there;
but seeing he was on the left hand, and hearing them command the Coachman to
drive on, he went the nearest way by narrow Lanes, and met with the Coach again
in the Street called Ferroniere, near Innocents Church, where staying to make
way for a Cart to pass, the King leaned down on the one side toward the Duke
of Espernon, pressing him to read a Letter without Spectacles. Montbazon with
the Marshall de la Vardin was in one of the Boots, who turned toward them; and
one of the Footmen was busy in tying up his garter on the other side; so that
this Monster had the opportunity to stab the King in the left Pap; but the
wound was not great. Whereupon crying out, O my God I am wounded, he gave him a
second blow which was mortal; the knife entering between the Fifth and Sixth
Rib, it cut asunder the Vein leading to the heart. And the wound was so deep,
that it entered into Cava Vena, the which was pierced; wherewith the King did
presently spit blood, losing all apprehension and knowledge for any thing they
could perceive: who being carried back into the Louvre, was laid upon a Couch
in his Cabin^^, where presently after he gave up the ghost. After whose death
the Queen Mother was declared Regent in France; by whose Commandment the King's
heart was delivered to the Jesuits, to be laid up in their College of la
Fleche, as the King himself had long before resolved. The first Edict at Nantes
was also confirmed, for the entertainment whereof a Declaration was made by
Jews the young King.

The Murderer being arraigned was put to the Rack on May 25. and on the 27.
had the Sentence of death given against him. His execution was after this
manner. He was brought out of the Prison in his shirt, with a Torch of two
pound weight lighted in one hand; and the knife wherewith he had murdered the
King, chained in the other. Then was he set upright in a Tumbrel or dung Cart;
and so he was conducted with a good Guard to our Ladies Church, where he did
penance. After this he was accompanied to the place of Execution by two Doctors
of Divinity, who still persuaded him to save his soul from everlasting
punishment by revealing his Associates; the which he would not. In this manner
he was carried to the Greve, where there was a strong Scaffold built for his
Execution. At his coming up on the Scaffold he crossed himself, in token that
he died a Papist. Then was he bound to an Engine of wood: which done, his hand
with the knife chained to it (wherewith he had slain the King) was put into a
Furnace then flaming with Fire and Brimstone, wherein it was in a terrible
manner consumed; and yet he would not confess any thing, but cast forth
horrible cries like a soul tormented in Hell. Then the Executioners having made
Pincers red hot in the same Furnace, they did pinch his Paps, the brawns of his
arms and thighs, with the calves of his legs, and other fleshy parts of his
body, pulling out collops of flesh, and burning them before his face. Then they
poured into those wounds scalding Oil; Rozen, Pitch, and Brimstone melted
together. After which they set a hard roundel of Clay upon his Navil, having an
hole in the midst, into the which they poured molten Lead; yet he revealed
nothing, but roared out most horribly. Then they caused four strong Horses to
be brought to tear his Body in pieces. But these Horses could not of a long
time pull him asund^r (though another very strong Horse was put in the place of
one of the four, who strained but faintly) until they were constrained to cut
the veins under his arms and thighs, by which means his body was the easier
torn in pieces. Then the enraged multitude pulled this dismembered Carcass out
of the Executioners hand, which they dragged up and down through the dirt: and
cutting off the flesh with their knives; the bones which remained were burnt at
the place of execution, and the ashes scattered in the wind. His Father and
Mother were commanded to depart the Land, and never to return again. His
Brethren, Sisters, Uncles, and others his Kinsfolk, enjoined to take another
Name. His goods were declared forfeited to the King, and the house where he had
been born to be beaten down.

This wicked Parricide confessed no other motive of his Crime, but the Book of
Mariana, a Spanish Jesuit. Which Book by a Decree made by the College of
Sorbonne, and confirmed by a sentence from the Courts of Parliament, was for
that cause by a sentence condemned to be publicly burnt before our Ladies
Church in Paris.

After the execution of Ravillac, there was a foul imputation laid on the
Jesuits; and many condemned them as Abettors and favorers of the Murderers
of Princes: for which cause Father Cotton employs all his Wit and Eloquence to
wipe it off, in whose behalf the Bishop of Paris wrote, which (as a Preface)
was prefixed before his Declaration, and Printed.

But the Learned Du Moulin put forth that famous Book, called Anticoton, in
which he proved that the Jesuits were Authors of that horrible Parricide.
Though he put not his name to it, yet the Jesuits soon knew that it was his
Work, and made an answer to it directed unto him, because there was in the
Anticoton an Anagram, of Father Cotton, which fathered the King's death upon
him thus. PIERRE COTON.
PERCE TON ROY.
They also made this Anagram upon Du Moulin's name, PETRUS DU MOULIN.
ERIT MUNDO LUPUS.
With these Verses. Petri hostis Petrus christi insidiatur ovili,
Quo deglubere, quo dilaniare queat,
More Lupi: and vere Lupus est, cui nomen and omen,
Et mores insunt ingeniumque Lupi.


Which Verses Du Moulin answered thus, Quisquis es insulso qui fundis acumine
versus,
Hellespontiaco victima digna Deo:
Quam frustra vacuum scalpsisti sinciput? o quos
Risus H^^rida vox semilatrina movet!
Dum tua men^ ^arie turbata elementa pererrat,
Et spargis virus nomen in innocuum:
Quin and in hoc casu quaedam est industria, dum tu
In laudem imprudens nomina nostra trahis.
Namque Lupo cohibemus equos, agitator equorum
Improbioris equi comprimit ora lupo.
Qui in gyrum cogit, facilique peritus habena
Compositos gressus agglomerare docet.
Ergo lupus mundo est, qui fraenans ora lupato
Dura, per errorum devia monstrat iter.
Nec mirum si nos, Papalis verna culinae,
Si ciniflo Satanae dixerit esse lupos.
Cum Christum Satanam Pharisaeus dicat apella,
Nemo bonus secum mitius optet agi.
Ergo Dei servum vanis latratibus urgens,
Meque lupum appellans desinat esse canis.


At this time flourished Jacobus Sirmondus, a Learned French Jesuit, he was
Confessor to King Jews XIII. Dallaeus says he was a most Learned and most
diligent man, Natione Gallus, Biblioth. societ. Jesu. A Philip. Alegamb. edit.
Rector olim Collegii Parisiensis, vir totius antiquitatis curiosus
investigator, and Latin Graeceque impense doctus, and in omni pene literarum
genere excultissimus, qui humaniores literas theologicas admodum decore
conjunxit.

As for his Works, there are his Eucharisticon pro Adventoria de Regionibus and
Ecclesiis suburbicariis. Censura conjecturae Anon. Scriptoris de suburbicariis
Regionibus and Ecclesiis. Propempticum Cl. Salmasio adversum ejus
Eucharisticon: and other Works of his. We owe unto him (says Dr. Du Moulin)
the Works of Facundus an African Bishop, who lived in the time of the Emperor
Justinian.

Claudius Salmasius was a Learned French Critic. Vir incomparabilis, maximus
Salmasius de primatu Papae, post quem Homerum siquis Iliada conscribere velit,
inutilem laborem suscipiet. Rivet -- Grot. Discus. Dial. Sect. 5. Vir nunquam
satis laudatus, nec temere sine laud nominandus, Claud. Salmasius. Voss. de
Orig. and progress. idol. li. 4. ca. 91. Nostri seculi miraculum, and
antiquitatis promus condus. Gul. Rivet. Praefat. ad vindic. Evang. Non Galliae
suae duntaxat, sed jam and hujus Bataviae ingens decus, atque adeo totius
Reipublicae literariae praesidium. Voss. de anal. li. 3. ca. 46. Clariss.
Salmasius notis ad Vopiscum, ubi post Guilandinum and Dalecampium in Plinium,
ac Scaligeri Diatribam adversus Guilandinum, pulchre indictaque aliis, de hoc
disserit argumento. Voss. de art. Gram. li. 1. ca. 38. Vir alioquin ad literas
summo honor tractandas, and illustrandas natus, si modestiam adhibere, and
arro^^^ti de se persuasione, ac erga alios mdlignitate excussa, mentem animi in
iis sedulo occupare potuisset. Herald. animadvers. in Salmas. observat. Ad jus
At. and Romans li. 2. ca. 7.

Desiderius Heraldus a Learned French man, has written a Comment on Martial,
and the other Books forecited, and other Learned Works.

Franciscus Vieta was a Learned French Mathematician. There are his Opera
Mathematica. Vol. 2. Relatio Calendarii vere Gregoriani, cum aliis opusc.
Vniversalium inspectionum ad Canonem Mathematicum lib. singularis. De
Aequatione, recognitione and emendatione. Thuanus thus says of him. Vir
ingeniosa and profunda meditatione, cujus vi nihil illi inaccessum in
abstnusioribus scientiis, nihil quod acumine mentis possit confici, difficile
confectus fuit. Thuan. Hist. Tom. 5. part. 2. li. 129.

Nicholas Vignerius was a Learned French Historiographer. There are To. 3. de
la bibliotheq. Hist. and other works of his. vid. Thuan. Hist. Tom. 5. li. 117.
part. 1.

His Son, Nicholas Vignerius, was a Learned Divine. He has published an
excellent Treatise in French, styled Theater de l'Antichrist; and a
Dissertation in Latin of the Excommunication of the Venetians, against
Cardinal Baronius. And Theses of the satisfaction of Christ, which Rivet highly
commends, and annexeth unto his own Disputations.

Benedict Turretine was also a Learned French man. These Books of his are
published in French. Defense de la fidelite des traductions de la S. bible
faictes a Geneve. Recheute du Jesuit Plaigiaire. Profit des Chastiments. Quod
adversus Petri Cottoni Jesuitae plagiariam Genevam, manifestum fecit, vir dum
viveret, doctissimus and accuratissimus, Benedictus Turretinus. Andr. Rivet.
Apologet. pro vera pace Ecclesiae.

The Works of Cardinal David Du Perron are in four Volumes in Folio in French.
Replique A la Response du Serenissime Roy de la Grand Bretagne. Les Diverses
Oevres, etc. Du saint sacrement de l'Eucharistie. Les Ambassades and
Negotiations. He is well answered by Du Moulin, Rivet and Blondel.

The Jesuits seek to be incorporate in the University of Paris, whom the
University opposed by all means, presenting a Petition unto the Queen Regent
against them, therein laying down at large their damnable Doctrine, and strange
Equivocations. Hereupon Factions began in Paris, some standing for, others
siding against the Jesuits. But these Clouds were quickly dispersed, and the
State preserved, for the continuance whereof Monsieuer Pasquier, one of the
Masters of Requests, a man of great Learning and Judgment, wrote unto her a
Discourse of advice.

The Abbot of Bois in his Sermons treating of the Question, Whether it be
Lawful to kill a Tyrant, and refuting Mariana's Book and others, he made an
exhortation to the Jesuits, that they should hereafter have a great care, that
no Book should be published to the prejudice of France, under the name of their
Society, nor with the approbation of their Superior, if they would not
willingly expose themselves to those dangers, which all their wisdoms fortified
with the Authority of their confident friends, could not avoid. For this did
the Jesuits complain, and informed against him, who answered for himself both
wisely and discreetly.

October 17. the young King was Crowned at Rhemes by Cardinal Joyeuze. On
November 26. the Great Chamber, the Turnelle, and the Chamber of the Edict
being assembled by a motion made by Monsieur Servin the King's first Advocate,
against Bellarmines Book touching the Pope's Temporal Power, made a Decree
against the same, whereat the Pope's Nuncio did mightily storm.

On May 27. 1611. began the Assembly of the Reformed Churches at Saumur,
whereat many Dukes and Noblemen of the Reformed Religion were present, where Du
Plessis was chosen President. Which Assembly was dissolved September 29.
Monsieur de Bullion letting them understand, that their Majesty's had given him
in charge to say, that all their just requests should be favorably answered,
and whatsoever had been promised should be paid.

The Duke of Espernon to manifest his gratitude to King Henry III. his Master
and Benefactor, begged of the Queen Regent to give him leave to perform his
Funeral Rites, he having formerly after the death of the said King, attended
his Body to Compeigne, where the misfortunes of War, and the confusions of the
times permitted not at that time the performance thereof.

The Queen readily consented to his request, so that the Duke with a great
company of Lords and Gentlemen, went to fetch the body from Compeigne, from
whence he conveyed it to St. Dennis, where it was deposited in the ancient
Sepulcher of the Kings of France. A little before his death the Duke caused a
Marble Pillar, one of the most excellent pieces of Architecture of these late
times, to be carried and set up in the Church of S. Clou, wherein he was so
curious, as to make it to be wrought in his own house, and almost in his own
sight; his design being to found a Revenue of a thousand Liuvres yearly for the
service of the Chapel where it was erected; which was also adorned with
Pictures, and paved with Marble at his own charge.

But some difficulties arising about the settlement of that foundation, which
could not be cleared before his death, the thing (to his great grief) remained
unperfect.

In the end of the year 1611. the suit between the University of Paris, and the
Jesuits was decided, Monsieur Servin concluding for the University against the
Jesuits: to whom these four Articles were propounded to be by them subscribed.

1. That the General Council was above the Pope.

2. That the Pope has no Temporal Power over Kings, and could not by
Excommunication deprive them of their Realms and Estates.

3. That Clergymen having heard of any Attempts or Conspiracies against the
King or his Realm, or any matter of Treason in confession, are bound to reveal
it to the Magistrate.

4. That Clergymen are subject to the Prince, or Temporal Magistrate.

Anno 1612. by a Decree of the Court of Parliament a certain Book written in
Latin by Gaspar Scoppius, entituted Ecclesiasticus, tending to the Rebellion
of Subjects against Sovereign Power, and containing an infinite number of
execrable blasphemies, and scandalous assertions against the glorious memory of
the deceased King Henry IV. was burnt by the Hangman publicly in the
Palace-yard.

Near this time flourished Arnald Ossat a French Cardinal. His, and Cardinal
Perron's French Letters are esteemed useful, both for the understanding of
Ecclesiastical and State affairs. He was Schola^ to Peter Ramus. One gives him
this character. Cardinalis Ossatus, Vir eruditione, prudentia, integritate,
suavitate morum eximie conspicuus. Gassend. de vit. Piereskij, li. 1.

Whilst M. Du Moulin lived in Paris, he was invited by many Universities to
accept of the Chair of Divinity; but the Church of Paris would never part with
him.

The University of Leyden did most constantly court him, considering him still
as a member of their Body. They began in the year 1611. and offered him the
place of Arminius then newly dead. And not only the Curators by frequent
addresses to the Church of Paris and to him, but the States by their
Ambassadors, and the Prince of Orange by his Letters did from time to time
demand him.

Before the death of King Henry IV. Du Plessis desired leave of that King to
retire himself, which the King unwillingly granted, withal desiring him to come
sometimes to Court. Being returned to his Government at Saumur, he began his
work of the Mystery of Iniquity, Anno. 1607. which he finished in nine Months.

Then he began to set on those great Volumes of Baronius, to which he intended
a Confutation. Du Perron was much pressed by the King to answer Du Pless^^. His
Friends told him that the Action at Fountainbleau was little to his Credit, and
if Du Plessis should die, it would be then too late to answer him, because men
would be ready to say, he durst not do it in his life time: wherefore he
promised and undertook the business: and going to Rome, sequestered himself from
other business to perform it, promising the Pope at his arrival in France to
Print his answer, which he said was risen to a great Volume. Upon his return
the King demanded of him when he would Print it? he told his Majesty that he
stayed but for some Manuscripts from Rome. Which answer the King (seeing his
delays) used as a Proverb to some undertakers, whose work went not forward,
making idle excuses to him: Yes, says the King, I see you stay for Manuscripts
from Rome too.

Casaubon, who was about the Cardinal, wrote to Monsieur Du Plessis concerning
this answer, telling him that it was finished, and that himself had seen it. Du
Plessis desired Casaubon to give him from him the same Counsel which Christ did
to Judas in the Gospel, What thou do, do quickly. But this Volume of answer
never appeared; the Cardinal after the King's murder accounting himself to be
disengaged from his promise. Du Plessis turned his Mystery of Iniquity into
Latin, which he dictated so fast, that his Amanuensis had much ado with his
pen to keep pace with him.

After the horrid Murder of the King, he took so good order as to keep the
people about his Government in quiet: and as soon as he had received an Edict
for the Regency of the Queen Mother, he administered the Oath of fidelity to all
the Clergy and People within his jurisdiction; making a speech unto them, in
which he desired them to forget the distinguishing names of Papist and
Protestant.

Afterward a dissension arose between Monsieur Du Moulin Minister of the
Church at Paris, and Tilenus, Professor at Sedan, about the effects of the
union of the natures in Christ. The making up of this difference was by a
National Synod held at Tonneinx, referred to Monsieur Du Plessis, who proved
the happy Author of a full reconciliation between them in the year 1614. Yet
had this difference like to have broke forth again the year following, by
indiscretion (or malice rather) of some particular persons, had not Monsieur Du
Plessis in time stopped its progress.

In the year 1615. King James sent by Sir Theodore Mayerne to invite Du Moulin
into England, to confer with him about a Method of uniting all the Reformed
Churches of Christendom, to which he had been often solicited by Monsieur Du
Plessis. The issue of which voyage was, That King James resolved to send
Letters to all Protestant Princes, to invite them to Union; and desired the
French Churches to frame a Confession, gathered out of all those of other
Reformed Churches, in the which unnecessary Points might be left out, as the
means of begetting discord and dissension.

Two Months before Du Moulin's coming into England, Du Perron had made an
Oration in the States assembled at Blois; where he had maintained, that the
Pope had power to depose Kings, and had used King James very ill; and having
published it in Print, he sent it to his Majesty. To answer that Oration King
James made use of Du Moulin's service for the French Language; and it was
Printed the first time in French while Du Moulin was in England in that year
1615. before it was Printed in English. The King going to Cambridge, carried Du
Moulin along with him, and made him take the Degree of Doctor.

The Doctor at his return into France Landed at Bullen, where Monsieur de
Compagnoles was Governor for the Duke of Espernon. It was the time when the
French Princes began to stir against Mary the Queen Mother of France.

And because the Prince of Conde was courting the Reformed Churches to join
with him in that design, the Doctor was suspected, as having taken that journey
to procure help from England for the Princes. Wherefore Campagnoles was charged
to arrest him at his Landing, which he did, and committed him to the Guard of
two Soldiers, seized upon his Trunks and Papers, and searched them. But after
two days, he released him, desiring him to tell no man of the wrong he had
done him.

The Doctor finding at his return, that the Protestants began to engage with
the Princes against the Queen Mother, and in effect against the King, who was
then declared Major by the Parliament, he dissuaded them from it (as much as he
could) both by Letters and Sermons. And unto him the Court was obliged, that
all the Protestant Tows on this side the Loire kept in the King's obedience. He
showed, that he did it not to serve the times, but to serve God. The declaring
of the Politic Assembly of the Protestants for the Prince of Conde in the year
1616. was the greatest error that ever they committed; and they smarted for it,
as soon as the young King had got more Age and vigor.

In the mean time Du Plessis labored much in procuring the peace of the
Protestant Churches, endeavoring to keep a good correspondence between the
King and them, which was continually ready to be interrupted: in which business
he carried himself with so much prudence and fidelity in all occurences between
them, that he was admired and praised by all. Yea, even Cardinal Du Perron
himself (heretofore one of his greatest enemies) showed him great respect in
the Assembly of States held at Roven, Anno 1617. Speaking of him in all
companies with an excess of Praises; and telling the King himself, that those
men had done him wrong, who had kept off Monsieur Du Plessis from having a
greater Power in the management of his affairs: And that his Religion ought not
to render him unprofitable in the exercise of those graces which God had given
him; and that his Majesty ought to keep him near his person so long as he
should live.

After the return of Dr. Du Moulin out of England, the Jesuit Arnoux a Court
Preacher, sent a challenge to the Ministers of Paris to appear before the
Queen Mother to give account of their Religion, preached fire and sword against
them before their Majesty's; and sent them a Pamplet full of heavy accusations.
The Doctor was charged by his Colleagues to make an answer to it: which he did,
and addressed it to the King.

In that answer by way of just recrimination he affirmed, that he had seen in
the College of the Jesuits at la Flesh, a Picture of the Martyrs of their
Order; and in that rank some Traitors who had been executed for conspiring
against the Life of their Kings. That the maxims of the Jesuits were
pernicious to Kings, whereas the Doctrine of the Protestants maintained their
Life, their Authority and their States.

And the Pastors of the Reformed Churches taught their people fidelity and
obedience to the King. Then he represented the many Perils and Combats which
the Protestants had sustained for the defense of King Henry IV. till they had
brought him to the Crown. Of which services they that had been the King's
enemies received the reward. This answer of the Ministers was presented to the
King by the Duke of Rohan. See the Life of Dr. Du Moulin.
This bold address to the King irritated the great Officers of the Crown, of
whom not a few, or their Fathers, had been of the party of the League. The
Jesuits therefore letting their challenge fall, indicted the Ministers of
Treason, although all the ground they could find for it was, that the Ministers
called the Reformed Churches their people, as if they had pretended some
Sovereignty over them. The Ministers being summoned before the Council, the
indictment of Treason was not much urged, as being but a Cavil. After grave
Admonitions and high threatenings by Chancellor Bruslart, they dismissed them.

That challenge of Arnoux, and a Pamphlet of his against the confession of
Faith of the Reformed Churches in France, occasioned the Doctor to write his
Buckler of Faith.

A Jesuit came to the Doctors Study to dispute with him. Monsieur de Monginot,
a famous Physician, was present at the Conference, whereby he was converted,
and set out an excellent Book of the reasons why he abjured Popery. He had many
encounters; and to relate all his Conferences might fill a great Volume. Scarce
was he a week without one, while he lived in Paris, and some of them were very
long. He was the object of the public hatred of the Romanists. His name was
the general Theme of Libels cried up in the Streets, of railing Sermons in all
Pulpits, and of the curses of ignorant Zealots.

The Popish Clergy in the year 1617. being assembled at the house of
Austin-Friers in Paris (as every two years they used to do) being to take their
leaves of the King, elected the Bishop of Air to be their Spokes-man, and to
certify his Majesty of their grievances. In performing which business, the
principal thing of which he spoke was to this purpose, That whereas his Majesty
was bound to give them Fathers, he gave them Children. That the name of Abbot
signifies a Father, and the Function of a Bishop was full of Fatherly
authority: yet France notwithstanding was now filled with Bishops and Abbots,
which are yet in their Nurses arms, or else under their Regents in Colleges.
Nay more, that the abuse goes before the Being, Children being commonly
designed to Bishoprics and Abbacies before they were born.

He also made another complaint, that the Sovereign Courts by their Decrees had
attempted upon the Authority which was Committed to the Clergy, even in that
which concerned merely Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government of the Church.
To these complaints he gave them indeed a very gracious hearing, but it never
went further than a hearing, being never followed by redress. The Court of
Parliament knew too well the strength of their own Authority: and the King was
loath to take from himself those excellent advantages of binding to himself his
Nobility, by the speedy preferring of their Children. So the Clergy departed
with a great deal of envy, and a little of satisfaction.

In the same year the States of the United Provinces desired the Churches of
England, Germany, France, etc. to send some able Divines to the Synod of Dort,
whereupon the Churches of France named four, viz. Dr. Du Moulin, Chamier,
Rivet, and Chaune. But when the Doctor was making ready for his journey, he was
forbidden by a messenger of the Council of State of France to go out of the
Kingdom upon pain of death. The like prohibition was made to the three other
Divines.

Andrew Rivet was a Godly and Learned French Divine. He has very well
expounded Genesis, Exodus, the Prophetical Psalms and Hosea, and wrote
Learnedly against the Papists in his Catholicus Orthodoxus, and against
Grotius. Criticus sacer, seu censura Patrum, Isagoge in S. Scripturam, Synopsis
doctrinae de natura and gratia. He has published other Learned Treatises in
French and Latin.

William Rivet his Brother, has also published a Learned Treatise De
Justificatione; an exact French Treatise De invocatione and adoratione
Sanctorum defunctorum. Epist. Apologet.

Daniel Chamier was also a Learned French man, who in his Panstratiae
Catholicae has so Learnedly refuted the Papists, that none of them has made
any answer to it. His Epistolae Jesuiticae, and Corpus Theologiae also show his
great abilities. There is also a Work of his in French, entitled, La confusion
des Disputes Papists, Par Daniel Chamier. And another in answer to some
questions of Cotton the Jesuit. He was killed at Montaubon with a Canon Bullet
(which had a C. on it) on the Lords day. Being asked by one before, whether he
Preached on that day? he said it was his day of repose or rest: and so it
proved, though he meant it in another sense.

In the year 1618. the Lords States and the Curators of the University of
Leyden renewed a former demand of theirs concerning Dr. Du Moulin to be their
Divinity Reader. The Learned Erpenius was sent twice into France on that
errand. And when he could not be obtained from the Church of Paris, they
demanded by the same Erpenius the famous Rivet, and had him.

The Queen Mother makes an escape from the place of her confinement, and is
received by the Duke of Espernon, Anno 1619. And being arrived at Loches, she
endeavors to justify her escape.

Cardinal Du Perron died Anno 1618. charging his friends, upon his deathbed,
then about him, to send a solemn Farewell by him to Monsieur Du Plessis, and to
manifest his sorrow for not having made a stricter League of friendship with
him, having so high an esteem of his Conscience and integrity.

The Queens affairs having ill success, all those who had engaged in her party,
were abandoned to the King's mercy: but as for her self she was permitted to
come to Court. The Duke of Espernon lays down his Arms; and the Marquess de
Valette, by the Command of the Duke his Father.

The Duke of Mayenne refuses to accept the Peace, and endeavors to engage the
Duke of Espernon in his discontents: but he refuses to stir.

In the year 1620. a National Synod of the Protestants being called at Alais in
Languedoc, Dr. Du Moulin was sent Deputy to it; and he made account in his
return to go out of the way to see Rochel. A little before he took that
journey, the Lord Herbert of Cherbury then Ambassador of England in France,
urged him to write to the King his Master, to exhort him to undertake
vigorously, the defense of his Son in Law the King of Bohemia. So the Doctor
writ to the King, and deliv^red his Letters to the Lord Ambassadour's
Secretary: then immediately he went to Alais, where he was chosen President of
the Synod.

In the mean while his Letters to King James were delivered to the Council of
State in France, how or by whom the Doctor could never learn. Scarce was he in
Languedoc, when it was concluded at Paris in the ouncil of State, that he
should be apprehended, and committed Prisoner, for exhorting a foreign King to
take Arms for the defense of the Protestant Churches. And because the Council
was informed, that the Doctor would return by Rochel (a place which then gave
great jealousies to the Court) they wouid not take him before he had been
there; the informers against him intending to make his going to Rochel an
Article of his indictment.

The affairs of Bearn were now of such a nature as that the King's presence
seemed to be very necessary there; therefore he determines to move that way,
and goes to Xantonge, and from thence passes over into Guienne. He is
magnificently entertained by the Duke of Espernon two days at Cadillac, and
departs from thence to go into Bearn. He was made believe, that the Council of
this little Country would submit to his Royal pleasure, without obliging him to
perform that voyage; but the King must undergo that trouble. He went thither,
where his presence produced the same effect it had done in other places. He
overran all this little Province, seizing (as he passed) on Navarrens the
strongest place in it, as he did also of Ortez, and Olleron, Principal Cities
of that Country. He subverted all their ancient Customs, restored the Bishop
and other Ecclesiastics to their Estates and Dignities; took away the
Administration of affairs of the Country from those of the Reformed Religion,
and re-established his own Authority: but he left the Government of the
Province in the hands of the Marquess de la Force since Marshall of France;
who impatient to see his Authority cut so short by these alterations, could
hardly forbear till the King was got back to Paris, from reducing things again
to the same posture they were in before. He therefore labored all the Winter
to drive out the Garrisons of Ortez and Olleron; so that excepting Navarrens,
which was kept by the Marquess of Poianne, whom the King had left Governor
there, he overthrew whatever his Majesty had done, shuffling all things again
into their former confusion.

During the Reign of Henry IV. who would not see it, and the troublesome
minority of Jews XIII. who could not molest them, the Protestants had made
themselves Masters of Ninety nine Towns, well fortified and enabled for a
siege. In the opinion of their Potency they call Assemblies (Parliaments as it
were) when and as often as they pleased. There they consulted of the Common
affairs of Religion, made new Laws of Government, removed and exchanged their
general Officers, the King's leave all this while never so much as formally
asked. In this licentious calling of Assemblies, they abused their Power into a
neglect; and in not dissolving them at his Majesty's commandment, they
increased their neglect into a disobedience.

The Assembly which principally caused the War and their ruin, was that of
Rochel, called by the Protestants presently upon the King's journey into Bearn.
This general meeting the King prohibited by his special Edicts, declaring all
them to be guilty of Treason; which notwithstanding they would not hearken
unto, but resolutely went on in their purposes.

Being Assembled, they sent the King a Remonstrance of their grievances, to
which the Duke L' Esdeguiers, in a Letter to them written, gives them a very
fair and plausible answer, wherein also he entreats them to obey the King's
Edict, and break off the Assembly. Upon the receipt of this Letter those of the
Assembly published a Declaration, wherein they verified the meeting to be
Lawful, and their purpose not to dismiss themselves till their desires were
granted.

This affront done to the King, made him gather together his Forces; yet at the
Duke of Lesdiguier's request, he allowed them twenty four days respite before
his Army should march toward them. He offered them also very fair and
reasonable Conditions, such almost as their Deputies had solicited; but far
better than those which they were glad to accept, when all the Towns were taken
from them. In their Assembly they made Laws and Orders, that no peace should be
made without the consent of the general Convocation, about paying of the
Soldiers wages, for the detaining of the Revenues of the King and the Clergy,
and the like.

The Synod at Alais being ended, Doctor Du Moulin hearing how the the
Protestants would keep a Politic Assembly at Rochel against the King's will,
judged that it was an ill conjuncture of time for him to go to Rochel, and took
the way of Lions. In that resolution he was guided by a good Providence; for if
he had gone to Rochel, he should have been apprehended not far from that Town
after his coming out of it. At Lions he received a Letter from Monsieur
Drelincourt Minister of Paris, which gave him notice of his danger. This
warning made him baulk the highway: yet he went to Paris, and entering the City
in the night, went directly to the Lord Herbert, who bad him to fly in haste
for his life, which was in danger by the interception of his Letters to the
King his Master. That very night without going so much as to his own house, he
went out of Paris, with his Brother Captain John Du Moulin to Lumigni, a house
of the Count de la Suze, ten Leagues from the City. Thither came two Elders of
the Church of Paris to him from the Consistory, to desire him to remove himself
out of the reach of those who waited for his life. Which he did, and the next
night traveled toward Sedan, a place then acknowledging the Old Duke of
Bovillon (a Protestant Prince) for Sovereign. To Sedan he came safe in the
beginning of the year 1621. and was kindly received by the Duke to his house
and Table.

This was his parting with the Church of Paris, where he had lived one and
twenty years. And although great means were made to appease the Court, and
albeit many years after the indictment against him was taken off, and leave was
given him to live in France, yet was it with that exception, that he should not
live in Paris.

At Sedan he was presently desired to accept of the place of Minister of that
Church, and of the Chair of Divinity, then lately left by Tilenus in
discontent, and by Andrew Melvin by death. He accepted of these places, but
conditionally, in case, that he could not obtain his restitution to Paris. He
found at Sedan much love and respect from the Prince and the Academy, as also
from the Church.

Daniel Tilenus was a Learned man. He has written Notes and Observations upon
Bellarmines Disputation, De Christo Capite; And on his Book De Summo Pontifice,
and his Book De Verbo Dei. Other Works there are of his, as, Paraenesis ad
Scotos. Amica collatio Tileni and Cameronis. De gratia and voluntatis humanae
concursu. Disput. de Antichristo. Consideratio sent. Jac. Arminii de
Praedestinatione, gratia Dei, and libero Arbitrio. Syntagma Disputationum in
Academia Sedanensi.

The Government of the Town and Castle of Saumur was continued unto Du Plessis,
until this year 1621. when the King falling into displeasure and suspicion of
the Protestants, by reason of their high deportment in the Assembly at Rochel,
displaced him at first but for three Months, with a promise of restoring him so
soon as affairs should be quieted in some measure. But these discontents
growing to an open War, he could never procure a re-establishment, though it
were continually solicited by him. Wherefore retiring himself to his House in
the Forest upon Dayure, he continued there till the day of his death, which
followed in the year 1623. there applying himself to holy meditations and
Exercises of Patience.

Doctor Du Moulin having had time and occasion whilst he was President of the
Synod of Alais, and in his long journey to it and from it, to know the evil
posture of affairs, he found himself pressed in Spirit to write to the Assembly
of Rochel: and because that Epistle is a piece that gives much light to the
History of that time, and a good lesson to all that pretend Conscience and
Religion for their resistance to their Sovereign by force of Arms, I will give
some account of it in this place.

Gentlemen,
I do not write to you to pour my sorrows into your bosom, See the Life of Dr.
Du Moulin w itten by his Son.
or to entertain you with my private crosses, etc. A more smarting care has
moved me to write to you, and forced me to go beyond my nature, which was
always averse from meddling with public businesses, and from moving out of the
sphere of my proper calling. For seeing the general body of the Church in
eminent danger, and upon the brink of a dismal Precipice, it was not possible
for me to keep silence, etc. It becomes me not indeed to take upon me to give
Counsel to an Assembly of Persons chosen out of the whole Kingdom to bear the
burden of the public affairs in a time so full of difficulty: yet I think it
is useful for you to be truly informed what the sense, and what the disposition
is of our Churches, by persons that have a particular knowledge of it.

The Question then being whether you ought to separate your Assembly to obey
his Majesty, or keep together to give order to the affairs of the Churches, I
am obliged to tell you, that the general desire of our Churches is, that it may
please God to continue our peace in our obedience to his Majesty. And that
seeing the King resolved to make himself obeyed by the force of his Arms, they
trust that you will do your best to avoid that storm, and rather yield unto
necessity, than to engage them in a War, which most certainty will ruin great
part of our Churches, etc. By obeying the King you shall take away the pretense
used by those that set on his Majesty to persecute us? And if we must be
persecuted, all that fear God desire that it may be for the profession of the
Gospel, and that our persecution may truly be the cross of Christ. I can assure
you that the greatest and best part of our Churches wishes for your
separation, if it may be with the safety of your persons: yea that many of the
Roman Church desiring the public peace, are continually about us, beseeching
and exhorting us, that we do not by casting our selves headlong involve them in
the same ruin. Generally our poor flocks are frighted and dismayed, casting
their eyes upon you as persons that may procure their rest; and by yielding to
the present necessity blow away the storm hanging over their heads. Many
already have forsaken the Land; many have forsaken their Religion; whence you
may judge what dissipation is like to follow, if this exasperation go on
further. No more do I need to recommend unto you to have a tender care of the
preservation of our poor Churches, knowing that you would choose death, rather
than to draw that reproach upon you, that you have hastened the persecution of
the Church, and destroyed that which the zeal of our Fathers had planted, and
put this State in confusion, etc.

Consider then whether the subsistence of your Assembly can heal all these
sores: whether your sitting can give a shelter to our Churches, provide all
things necessary for a War, where the parties are so unequal; raise Forces, and
make a stock of money to pay them; whether all the good that your sitting can
produce, can countervail the dissipation of so many Churches that lie open to
the wrath of their enemies; whether when they are fallen you can raise them
again; whether in the evident division that is among us, you are able to rally
the scattered parts of that divided body; which if it were well united, yet
would be too weak to stand upon the defensive part.

Pardon me, Gentlemen, if I tell you, that you shall not find a^^ our
Protestants inclined alike to obey your resolutions; and that the fire being
kindled all about, you shall remain helpless beholders of the ruin you have
provoked. Neither can it be unknown to you, that many of the best quality among
us, and best able to defend us, do openly blame your actions, professing that
suffering for this cause is not suffering for the cause of God. These making no
resistance, and opening the Gates of their places, or joining their arms with
the King's, you may easily judge what loss, and what weakening of the party
that will be. How many of our Nobility will forsake you, some out of
conscience, some out of treachery, some out of weakness! Even they who in an
Assembly are most vehement in their votes, and to show themselves Zealous are
altogether for violent ways, are very often they that first revolt and betray
their Brethren. They bring our distressed Churches to the hottest danger and
there leave them, going away after they have set the house on fire.

If there be once fighting, or besieging of our Towns, whatsoever may the issue
be of the Combat or the siege, all that while it will be hard to keep the
people animated against us from falling upon our Churches, that have neither
retreat nor defense. And what order soever the Magistrates of contrary Religion
take about it, they shall never be able to compass it.

Certainly this stirring of yours is altogether unseasonable, and you set sail
against wind and tide. If any thing can help, it must be the zeal of Religion,
etc.

But in this cause you shall find that zeal languishing, because most of our
people believe, that this evil might have been avoided without any breach to
our Conscience, etc.

When I call to mind our several losses, as that of Lectoure, Privas, and
Bearn, I find that we our selves have contributed to them: and it is no wonder
that our enemies take no care to remedy our faults, and join with us to do us
harm. But hence it follows not, that we must set our house on fire our selves,
because others are resolved to burn it; or take in hand to remedy particular
losses by means too weak to redress them, but strong and certain to ruin the
general. God who has so many times diverted the Counsels taken for our ruin,
has neither lost his Power, nor altered his Will, we shall find him the same
still, if we have the grace to wait for his assistance, not casting our selves
headlong by our impatience, or setting our minds obstinately upon
impossibilities. Certainly, although our enemies seek our ruin, yet they will
never undertake it openly without some pretense, other and better than that of
Religion, which we must not give them. For if we keep our selves in the
obedience which Subjects owe to their Sovereign, you shall see that whilst our
Enemies hope in vain that we shall make our selves guilty by some disobedience,
God will give them some other work, and afford us occasions to show to his
Majesty, that we are a Body useful to his State, and put him in mind of the
signal services that our Churches have done to the late King of glorious
memory. But if we are so unfortunate, that whilst we keep our selves to our
duty, the calumnies of our enemies prevail; at least we shall get so much, that
we shall keep all the right on our side, and make it appear that we love the
peace of the State.

Notwithstanding all this, Gentlemen, you may and ought to take order for the
safety of your persons. For whereas his Majesty and his Council have said
often, that if you separate your selves, he will let our Churches enjoy peace,
and the benefit of his Edicts, etc. And whenever you Petition for your safe
dissolution, I trust it will be easy to obtain it, if you make possible
requests, and such as the misery of the time and the present necessity can
bear. And in the mean time you may advise before you part, what should be done,
if notwithstanding your separation we should be oppressed. That order your
prudence may find, and it is not my part to suggest it unto you.

If by propounding these things unto you, I have exceeded the limits of
discretion, I hope you will impute it to my zeal for the good and preservation
of the Church. And if this advice of mine is rejected, this comfort I shall
have, that I have discharged my Conscience: and retiring my self unto some
foreign Country, there I will end those few days I have yet to live, lamenting
the loss of the Church, and the destruction of the Temple, for the building
whereof I have labored with much more courage and fidelity than success. The
Lord turn away his wrath from us, direct your Assembly, and preserve your
Persons. I rest, etc.

From Sedan February 12. 1621.

Vid. P. H. his voyage to France, p. 206.
These men not only gave Audience to Ambassadors, and received Letters from
foreign Princes, but also importuned his Majesty to have a general liberty of
going into any other Countries, and assinging in their Councils a matter of
special importance. And therefore the King upon a foresight of the dangers,
wisely Prohibited them to go to any Assemblies without a particular License,
upon pain to be declared Traitors. Since that time growing into greater
strength, whenever they had occasion of business with King Jews, they would
never Treat with him but by their Ambassadors, and upon special Articles. An
ambition above the quality of those that profess themselves Sorbonets, and the
only way, (as De Serres notes) to make an Estate in the State. But the answers
made unto the King by those of Alerack and Montauban, are pregnant proofs of
their intent and meaning in this kind. The first being summoned by the King and
Army July 22. Anno 1621. returned thus, That the King should suffer them to
enjoy their Liberties, and leave their Fortifications as they were for them for
their lives, and so they would declare themselves to be his good Subjects. They
of Montauban said, That they were resolved to live and die in the Union of the
Churches; but said not for the service of the King.

This Union and Confederacy of theirs, King Jews used to call, the
Commonwealth of Rochel: for the overthrow of which he always protested, that
he had only taken Arms. On the second of April before he had as yet advanced
into the Field, he published a Declaration in favor of all those of the
Potestant Religion, which would contain themselves within duty, and obedience.
And whereas some of Tours at the beginning of the Wars had tumultuously
molested the Protestants at the burial of one of their dead, five of them by
the King's special Commandment were openly executed.

When the War was hottest abroad, those of the Reformed Religion at Paris lived
securely, and had their accustomed meetings at Charenton; so had those also of
other places. Moreover when tidings came to Paris of the Duke of Mayennes
death, slain before Montauban, and the French according to their hotheaded
disposition breathed out nothing but ruin to the Hugonots; the Duke of
Montbazon, Governor of the City, commanded their Houses and the Streets to be
safely Guarded. And when this Rabble had burnt down their Temple at Charenton,
the Court of Parliament on the day following ordained that it should be built
up again in a more beautiful manner, and that at the King's charge.

The forementioned Letters of Dr. Du Moulin being read in the Assembly at
Rochel, raised much contestation. In the end the violent Party prevaling, it
was resolved, that Monsieur de la Millitiere should write to Dr. Du Moulin in
the name of the Assembly, to desire him that he would not impart the said
Letters unto any, and to tell him that his advice was not approved. Yet his
advice was so relished by some of the Assembly, that they arose, and presently
left it, and never returned to it again.

But the violent men in the Assembly did good service to the Court by their
violence, and were feed by the Court to thrust their Brethren into a precipice,
and give to the King the long desired occasion to take from the Protestants the
places granted to them by his Father's Edict. The forenamed Millitiere was one
of those violent men, who afterward forsook his party and his Religion; and by
his working and unhappy wit he has created much trouble unto the French
Churches.

The Duke of Espernon now receives a Commission from the King to march with an
Army to reduce Bearn, (which the Marquess de la Force had excited to new
Commotions) to their duty and obedience. The Marquess having intelligence that
the Duke was coming against him, sends to divert the Duke from coming into
Bearn: but that not taking effect, he sends one Charles, the principal Minister
of Bearn unto him. This person in the quality of a Deputy from the Country, was
sent to represent to him the sterility of the Country, the poverty of the
inhabitants, and difficulty of the ways, and the resolution of the people to
make a smart resistance, should they (who were in a very good disposition at
present) be urged to the last extremes. But the Duke having flatly told him,
that the end of his Expedition was to cause the King to be obeyed, and to
chastise all those that should rebel against him, he was sent back very much
astonished at so brisk a reply.

The Bearnois now gave themselves for lost: their high vaunts but a few days
before, that they would defend their Religion and their Countries liberty to
the last man, were converted into a pannick fear; so that on a sudden whole
Cities were left desolate, men of the best quality among them, with their Wives
and Children, seeking their safety in their flight, out of a just apprehension
of all the punishments an offended Prince might reasonably inflict upon a
stubborn and mutinous people.

In this general consternation of the Bearnois the Duke drew near to Ortez, the
Castle whereof was very strong, and had of late been fortified, and furnished
with all necessaries of War, which also shut up the pass of the whole Country,
and was of so advantageous a situation, as was very easy to be defended. But
those within no sooner heard that the Duke h^d sent for Cannon from Navarrens
to force them, but they presently surrendered without staying till they could
be brought up.

The Marquess de la Force having intelligence of the surrender of Ortez, made
haste to be gone: and the Duke immediaetly advances from Ortez to Olleron,
where some Fortifications had lately been made, which were also at his
appearing deserted, without the least show of opposition.

At length the fear of the Duke's severity, that had before frighted every one
from his habitation, being converted into an absolute confidence in his
Clemency and goodness, every one returned to his own home. The Cities which at
his coming had been almost totally deserted, were on a sudden re-inhabited,
insomuch that from that time forward all the Duke had to do, was only to
receive the tenders and protestations of their obedience, and to set down Rules
for their Civil Government, which were ordered with much wisdom and justice. He
took such care to reconcile the interests of Religion, that both parties were
satisfied with the equal shares he divided betwixt them in the public
administration. And all this was performed in less than three weeks time; his
journey thither, his stay there, and his return thence, being in all not two
month's expedition.

The Marquess de la Force had fled from Pau in so great haste, that he had left
his Wardrobe, Cabinets, and Papers at random, of all which the Duke took care
to have an Inventory taken, leaving them safe, sealed up, in the custody of a
person in whom he knew the Marquess reposed an entire trust.

Now the Duke retreats out of Bearn to St. Jean d'Angeli, a Protestant Town in
France. In this Town, one Mr. Welsh a Scotch man, was Preacher to the
Protestant Church, where his Ministry was blessed with much success. That Town
had been twice besieged: and God so ordered things, that the King did parley
with the Town on favorable terms, and did only himself with his Court come
into the Town without doing any violence. On the following Lord's day some of
the Protestants in that place fearing Mr. Welsh his hazard, earnestly desired
him not to Preach, the Court being there: but he adventured to Preach the word
unto his people, and on that day had a great Auditory both of friends and
others; but in Sermon time a Great man of the Court, with some of the King's
own Guard, were sent to bring him forthwith before the King. Whilst he was
entering the Church, wherein he found some difficulty by reason of the
multitude, Mr. Welsh turned himself toward that entry, and desired the people
to give way to one of the great Peers of France, who was coming in. But when he
drew near the Pulpit to execute his Commission, by putting force upon Mr.
Welsh, he did with great authority speak to him before all the people, and in
the name of his Master Jesus Christ charged him not to disturb the worship of
God; whereat the Nobleman was so startled, that he sat down and made no
further trouble.

The Sermon being ended, Mr. Welsh with much submission went to the King, who
was then greatly incensed; and with a threatening countenance asked what he was;
and how he durst Preach Heresy so near his Person, and with such contumacy
carry himself. To which with due reverence bowing himself, he did answer. I am
(Sir) the Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, whose Truth I Preached this
day; which if your Majesty rightly knew, ye would have judged it your duty to
have come and heard.

And for my Doctrine, I did this day Preach these three Truths to your people.
1. That man is fallen, and by nature in a lost condition; yea by his own power
and abilities is not able to help himself out of that estate. 2. That there is
no salvation, or deliverance from wrath by our own merits, but by Jesus Christ
and his merit alone. 3. I did also Preach this day the just liberties of the
Kingdom of France; that your Majesty owes obedience to Christ only, who is
Head of the Church; and that the Pope, as he is an enemy to Christ and his
Truth, so also to the Kings of the Earth, whom he keeps under slavery to his
usurped power. Whereat the King for a time keeping silence, with great
astonishment turned to some about him, and said, Surely this is a man of God.
Yea, the King did afterward commune with him, and with much respect dismissed
him.

The year following, whilst the differences between the King and the Protestant
party did grow, the City was again besieged, taken, and in part sacked, as Mr.
Welsh had publicly foretold; at which time the King passed a strict order,
that none should in the least wrong Mr. Welsh, or any thing that belonged to
him, under highest pains, and did after give a safe conduct to him for
transporting himself into England, where de died.

The Duke of Espernon having now received the Command of the Army, sets down
before Rochel at the end of July: but the taking of this City was reserved for
the King himself.

Whilst the Duke lay before Rochel, the King had with extraordinary vigor
prosecuted his designs in Guinne, where he had compelled most of the places
possessed by the Protestants in that Province to submit to his Power. He had
reduced Berg^rac, St. Foy, Puimirol, Tournon, Monstanquin, with several others:
besieged and taken Clerac, and at last laid siege to Montauban, though herein
he had not been so succesful as in his other enterprises: so that the year
ending with this variety of accidents, his Majesty was constrained to return to
Paris, where he abode until the ensuing Spring.

The Winter being scarce over, Monsieur Soubize having fortified himself in the
Isle of Ree, and some other Islands of Poictou, thought the difficulty of their
access would protect him from the Royal power: but the King passed over the
marshes, and gave him so notable a defeat, that he could not of a long time
after recover that blow, nor put himself again into any tolerable posture of
War.

In the beginning of the year 1622. the Count of Soissons had the charge of the
Army which lay before Rochel, conferred upon him: and the Duke of Espernon is
sent to lay siege to Royan, which is a little City built upon a very high Rock
by the Sea side, inaccessible on that side toward the water, the height whereof
breaking off the impetuosity of the winds, at the foot of the Precipice
affords a very secure harbor to so many vessels as it could contain. This
harbor was defended by an ancient Castle raised upon the eminence of the Rock;
and in the midst of it a little way was levelled, that led to the harbor by one
of the Gates of the City. On that side toward the Land the situation was more
even, but there also so well Fortified, that it was thought to be one of the
most tenable places for its Circuit in France. And it was almost without danger
to be defended, forasmuch as after their outworks should be taken (which could
not be till after a long siege) the convenience of the Sea, and the vicinity of
Rochel, rendered their retreat at any time so easy and so secure that it was
to be defended to the last extreme.

But by the Dukes admirable Conduct, and the valor of his Soldiers, this
place was in a few weeks reduced to the King's obedience.

The King's Army now marches into Guienne, where at his Majesty's arrival he
found Monravet taken by the Duke d'Elboeuf; and Themeins after a long and
obstinate resistance surrendered to the same Duke. Le Mont de Marsan with
several other considerable places were also reduced to his obedience by the
Marquess de la Force, de Lusignan, and de Castelnau de Chalosse, who had taken
them in.

His Majesty passed speedily from Guienne into Languedoc. Nigripolisse, a
little Town of Queren upon his way, was so impudent as to stand a siege; but it
was soon taken by assault, and there the Soldiers showed the very rigor of
severity, which either a barbarous Victor could inflict, or a vanquished people
suffer: for they spared neither man, woman, nor child, all equally subject to
the cruelty of the sword and the Conqueror: the Streets paved with dead
carcasses; the channels running with the blood of Christians; no noise in the
Streets but of such as were welcoming death, or suing for life. And when the
Soldiers had made the Women the subjects of their lusts, they made them after
the subjects of their fury: in this only pitiful to that poor and distressed
Sex, that they suffered them not to survive their honors. Such of them who out
of fear and faintness had made but little resistance, had the favor to be
stabbed: but those whose virtue and courage maintained their bodies valiantly
from the rape of those villains, had the secrets of nature filled with
Gunpowder, and so blown into ashes. St. Antonin having after a siege
surrendered to mercy, the neighboring places thought it convenient to fly to
the King's Clemency, to evade the trial of his victorious Arms.

Then the King besieges Montpelier, and after much blood spilt the Duke of
Rohan was glad to make use of a juncture wherein his party had some little
advantage, to procure a more favorable peace, which was accordingly signed
before Montpelier, October 22. 1622. and Calonges surrendered up the place to
his Majesty's hand, who if he had by his courage won himself a great
reputation in the siege, he obtained no less by his ingenuity in the handsome
manner of his submission to the King. The King made his entrance into the City,
and having taken order for the defense of the City, he returned toward Paris:
and in the year 1623. the Duke of Espernon arrives at Paris with a numerous
train, where he was received by the King and the Queens with great kindness.
All his accounts, and the other affairs that most required his presence at
Paris, were in less than four Months dispatched, so that toward the latter end
of April in the year 1624. he began to think of his return into Guienne.

Cardinal Richlieu was after his departure made Prime Minister of State, who
soon shows himself to be opposite to the Duke.

The peace that had been concluded before Montpelier in the year 1622. Vid. The
Hist^ry of the life of the Duke of Espernon. part. 3.
had hitherto continued the affairs of the Kingdom in some repose: and although
those of the Reformed Religion expressed some dispositions to a new Commotion,
there was as yet no manifest breach. Soubize, by an attempt made upon the
King's Shipping at Blavet, made the first breach. All the rest of the party
broke into Arms at the same time, and the Duke of Rohan, who had long been
known to be the Head of that party, stirred them into insurrection. A
promptitude in his Partisans so much the more to be wondered at, as he
commanded a sort of people whose obedience was only voluntary.

Montauban was one of the Cities not only of Guienne, but also of the whole
Kingdom, that engaged the deepest in this revolt, the Inhabitants whereof by
having had a siege raised from before their Walls, and by having baffled a
Royal Army, even when animated by the presence of the King himself, began to
think themselves invincible, and their City a place not to be taken.

The King therefore sent order to the Duke of Espernon to take Arms, which he
did, and laid waste the Country about Montauban. Many smart engagements there
were, with great loss of men on the side of the besieged, who made a vigorous
resistance. Many lamentable objects were every where to be seen: from Picqueros
((...) place famous for having been the King's qu^rter during the siege of
Montauban, and from whence the whole Plain betwixt the Rivers Tarn and Vairan
lay open to the view) so soon as the obscurity of the night gave color to the
fire that had been kindled by day, one might have seen a thousand fires at
once: the Corn, Fruit Trees, Vines and houses were the aliments that nourished
this flame.

Soubize in the mean time endeavors to divert the Duke from his enterprise by
Landing three thousand five hundred Foot, and some few Horse in the lower
Gascony in the Country of Medoc. This little Country (which is almost all the
Duke's) environs a great part of the Metropolis of Bordeaux, extending it self
to the very Gates of the City: but Soubize was shamefully repulsed; his Forces
routed; the few that escaped the Victors hands with much ado recovered their
Ships, leaving their dead, their Arms, Artillery and Baggage, as infallible
testimonies of a total defeat.

About the year 1623. the famous Book of Cardinal Du Perron against King James
of famous memory, came forth. That Book was extolled by the Romanists with
great brags and praises. His Majesty being especially interessed and provoked
by that Book, was pleased to recommend the confutation of it to his old
Champion Dr. Du Moulin, who undertook it upon his Majesty's Command. And that
he might attend that work with more help and leisure, his Majesty invited him
to come into England. And together being moved with compassion by the
adversities the Doctor had suffered for his sake, he offered him a refuge in
England, promising to take care of him, and to employ him in one of his
Universities. He accepted that Royal favor. He set out of Sedan in March 1624.
and went to Bruxels and Antwerp, and so to Holland: whence after some days
stay at the Hague with his worthy Brother in law Doctor Rivet, he took Shipping
for England. He was graciously received by his Majesty.

God visited him with a grievous sickness, by an heavy oppression in his
Hypochondries, with an inflammation of black choler, which seldom let him
sleep, and kept him in perpetual agony. Yet even then he spent much time in his
great work against Cardinal Du Perron, and preached often in the French Church.
In the depth of his pain and anguish he was beyond measure afflicted with the
persecutions that ruined the Churches of France, and the divisions then
increasing in the Churches of England.

There was at London at that time the Marquess d'Effiat, See the Life of Dr. Du
Moulin.
extraordinary Ambassador of France, a zealous Papist, who upon a false
information of Fisher and other Jesuits that were about him, that Doctor Du
Moulin by his long watchings and other melancholy fumes, was decayed in his
Intellectuals, did maliciously invite him to his house, to engage him in a
Conference, and insult over his weakness. After dinner the Ambassador desired
him to hear a Scottish man, who would tell him the reasons that made him leave
the Protestant Religion to embrace the Catholic. The Scottish man then
assisted by Fisher, and others of his sort, made an elaborate Discourse half an
hour long of the Church of St. Peter's Primacy, of succession of Chairs, and
the like. When he had done, the Doctor resumed all his points and allegations
in the same order, and answered them with his ordinary vigor, and presence of
wit. And because the principal matter in question was about the Marks of the
true Church, he maintained that the Profession of the true Doctrine was the
Mark of the true Church: and thence took occasion to lay open the foulness of
the errors of Popery with so much pregnancy, that the Ambassador a Choleric
man, rose from his seat in great fury, and gave many foul words to the Doctor,
who thereupon went out and returned home.

But the Ambassador sent his Coach to him the next day, and invited him to
dinner. And after dinner the Scottish man spoke again of the same points: and
when the Doctor in his answer had turned his Dispute against the grossest
errors of Popery, incompatible with the true Church, Fisher would have taken
the Scottish man's part: but the Ambassadour's passion gave him no time to
answer, but broke vehemently out, saying, that he could hear no longer that one
should revile before him the Catholic Religion, and maintain to him that he
did wilfully damn himself, his Wife and his Children. Then the Doctor went out
of his house.

Soon after King James fell sick of the Sickness whereof he died. That death of
his Royal Patron, and the Plague raging in London, soon persuaded the Doctor to
return to Sedan. The labor of the journey, and the intolerable heat of the
season increased his sickness: which to heal, the Physicians of Sedan made him
drink Spaw-waters, which were bro^ght to him from Spaw to Sedan. These waters
brought him to a most violent Fever, and the Fever consumed all those humors
and winds that oppressed him, and left him in health. So he returned to his
former Function in the Church and University, serving God with cheerfulness and
assiduity, and blessed with great success. He lived at Sedan thirty and three
years from his return into England unto his death, without any notable change
in his condition, but one of public concernment by the miserable change of the
Duke of Bovillon.

That Duke being Prince of Sedan, the Protector of a flourishing Protestant
Church, and the refuge of many oppressed Protestants in France, was perverted
by falling in love with a beautiful Lady, a Subject born of the Spaniard, and a
Papist of the deepest Jesuitish dye, which seduced and turned him both to the
Romish Religion, and to the Spanish Party. Soon after the Duke declared himself
a Papist, to the incredible loss of the Protestant Party.

Sedan was grown by the persecutions in France. The greatest number and the
richest sort, consisted of the Posterity of persons that had transported their
Families and their Estates to Sedan, during the Wars of Religion; and that
place was a refuge at hand for the Protestants when any trouble arose in
France. This change therefore in the Prince wrought a great consternation in
the people of Sedan, and a great grief in the generality of all the French
Protestants. Which the Duke of Bovillon perceiving; and judging, that as they
lived at Sedan upon the account of their Religion, they might retire from it
upon the same account, he called the Church and the University, and told them,
that he would lend them the same Protection as before, and innovate nothing.
Only whereas he gathered the Tithes of his Dominions, and therewith gave wages
to the Ministers, Professors, and Regents, as also Stipends to the Priests;
now the Priests must have the Tithes as their ancient right, and he would pay
to the Ministers, Professors, and Regents, their ordinary Stipends out of his
own Estate.

Sedan enjoyed that rest for a year or two, till the Duke won by his Wife to
forsake the Protection which he enjoyed under the King of France who paid his
Garrison, agreed with the Spaniard to put himself under his Protection, to turn
out the French Garrison and receive his: Which Plot being discovered by some of
Sedan, was made known to the French Court, and such order was taken, that the
Duke's design was prevented, Himself, his Lady, and all his Retinue, were
turned out of Sedan, and are kept out of it to this day, and the place
continues under the subjection of France.

This year the Inhabitants of the Valtoline were much distressed. The Valtoline
is a Country situate at the foot of the Alps, not unlike a great ditch,
separated by the high Mountains from the Grisons, and those which are on the
Coast of Italy. It is not of very large extent, not above twenty Leagues in
length, and one in breadth, but is very fertile, and of great importance,
serving as a Gate to the Spaniards and Venetians, to bring Forces out of
Germany into Italy, as well to defend as to increase their States. The
Venetians were not ignorant of it, when they were embroiled with Pope Paul V.
Anno 1603. They made a League with the Grisons, who are natural L^^ds of it, to
have free passage through it, as their occasions should require, though France
had the only power to dispose of it, according to the Treaty made with them by
Jews XII. and renewed by Henry IV. Anno 1602. during the time of his own life,
the life of Jews XIII. and eight years after his decease.

Which Alliance with them gives great offense to the Spaniards, which caused
them to make another League with the Grisons, to whom the same passages were
assured for the safeguard of Milan. But after a long Treaty made in the year
1613. these two new Alliances were overthrown, and that of France re-setled,
which was not for any long time: for from the year 1617. to the year 1621.
there were nine insurrections among them. At last the Valtolines made a general
revolt, and at the persuasion of the Governor of Milan, massacred all the
Protestants they met with. In July 1620. the Governor of Milan sent them
Soldiers, and builded them Forts in their Valley.

The French King then being engaged in re-taking those Towns which the Hugonots
had gotten into their possession, could not succor the Grisons with his
Armies, but sent the Marshal de Bassompiere, extraordinary Ambassador into
Spain, in his name to demand that the Valtoline might be restored, and all
things replaced into their former state. It was obtained, and accordingly it
was signed at Madrid in May 1621. on condition that certain great liberties
might be accorded to the Catholics there; and with a Proviso, that the Cantons
of the Swisses and the Valtolines should incline the Grisons to consent, to
what had been agreed upon.

But the Spaniards procured the Catholic Cantons to deny their consents, which
being wanting they would put off the execution of the whole Treaty* and
moreover made one at Milan with the Deputies of the Grisons* and unto others
with the same Grisons and the Archduke Leopold, by which they got great
advantages in those Countries, and so kept to themselves the power of passing
any Forces through that Country.

France never made any difficulty of according to any thing which might
contribute to the exercise of the Catholic Religion in the Valtoline, or for
security of all such as made profession thereof. But they would never agree to
those demands which the Spaniards made concerning the having of passages, with
so much peremptoriness. During which time Pope Gregory XV. died, and Urban
VIII. being set in his place, proposed new Articles of Accommodation, which
comprised as much as could be of advantage for the Church and Catholics, which
were readily accepted of by France, but as stoutly rejected by the Spaniards,
for that it did not grant to them the enjoyment of the passages. Then Cardinal
Richlieu advised the King not to stand dallying upon the means of a Treaty, as
formerly, but forthwith to make use of his Arms to reduce t^^m to terms of
justice. The King resolves to send the Marquess de Coenures to the Cantons of
the Swisses for the Grisons affairs, at the same time that the Sieur de Bethune
was dispatched toward Rome. His instructions were; first to reunite all the
Swisse Cantons with his Majesty, to dispose the Catholics to give their assent
to the Treaty of Madrid, and to epsy, if in this reunion there might not some
way be found out, for to re-place the Garrisons into the Sovereignty of the
Valtoline. The second was to be kept private if the first took effect; else he
was commanded to encourage the Grisons to rise, who should receive assistance
from his Majesty, of such Troops as should be necessary, according to such
orders as should be received.

Then the French King, Duke of Savoy, and Commonwealth of Venice, made a
League for the restitution of the Valtoline.

The Marquess de Coenures takes the field to make himself Master of the Forts
in the Valtoline, which were all taken in the three first Months of the
following year. New Orders are sent to the Marquess to prosecute his Conquests
there. The Pope seems to the Cardinal de la Valette and the Sieur de Bethune,
to be very angry that the King should attempt upon the Forts in the Valtoline
which were in his keeping, and sends the Sieur Bernardino Nary to his Majesty,
to testify to him his great discontent at it

The King of Spain to break the League between the French King, the Duke of
Savoy, and the Venetians, negotiates another between himself and the Princes of
Italy. The Spaniard spreads abroad defaming Libels against the League of
France, Venice, and Savoy.

Those great losses which the Protestants had sustained for some preceding
years in Bearn and Languedoc, always kept them waking, especially after the
Peace of Montpelier; they well perceiving, that those small ^outs which they
had suffered, did threaten their Party with an utter destruction.

The Spaniards therefore labored very much to get the Sieur de Soubize and
Rohan (who were the only eminent persons) to Command their Arms. Their design
took effect. These two Brothers being met at Castres, resolved to raise those
of their Party; the one by Sea at Guienne, and the other in Languedoc. The
attempt upon the Fort of Blavet (otherwise Port S. Jews) of which we have
spoken before, was an effect of that resolution, as also the endeavors of the
Duke and Duchess of Rohan began at the same time in Languedoc to draw in more
Towns in to their Party.

But the Marquess de Ragny was sent in all haste into Languedoc with certain
Regiments to oppose the first Commotions; and to employ many persons of
discretion to assure himself of the Counsels of the chief Towns, and by this
means most of them kept within their duties.

Soubize published a Manifest, which sounded an Alarm to all the Protestant
Party, making them to believe that their utter ruin was concluded on in the
King's Council. That the loss of their Religion was inevitable, if they did not
defend themselves by Arms: and that the raising of Fort Saint Jews built by
Rochel, was a sign of it. He suggested to them, that the Catholics were of
opinion in most of their Bcoks, that they were not obliged to keep Faith with
Heretics.

Most were taken with these reasons, because the Duke of Rohan clapped into some
Towns certain Gentlemen and Captains of his own Religion, to encourage them,
and to stir up the Popular Ministers, who after this looked for nothing but
when to rise; not considering that the insurrections which they were carried
to, were contrived by the Spaniards, who pretended not to make use of them, but
only to divert and draw off the King's Arms from Italy.

That fomentation which the Spaniard gave to the Hugonots, whereby to force the
King to draw off his Army from the Valtoline, obliged the French King to do the
like by the Spaniard in assaulting the Commonwealth of Genoa.

The Pope sends the Cardinal Barbarino in the quality of a Legate into France,
to negotiate the Peace between the French King and the King of Spain.

The Hugonots by the Spaniards instigation arm themselves very potently against
the French King. The Duke of Rohan took the Command upon himself of those
Forces in Languedoc, Soubize those in Poictou. Although Soubize had been
repulsed from before the Port of Blavet, yet by that means he made himself
master of six great Ships which were the King's, and the Duke's of Nemours,
which gave him opportunity of doing very considerable damages.

He had formerly got together about eleven Ships of War, and many Shallops and
small Boats, and with these roved up and down the Coasts of Poictou and
Guienne, as has been before hinted at.

The Duke of Rohan got together about two thousand men near Castres. He gave
out that the Rochellers had taken Arms, and sworn a League with the Churches of
his Party, that he might by this pretense get a like interest in some other
Towns which he had an eye upon. And accordingly he went to Puilaurens, Ruel,
Soreze, St. Paul's, Leviate, and Briteste, and made the Consuls swear to the
Confederacy; afterward he came to the Gates of Lavaur to surpr^z^ it, but his
design took no effect.

The Count of Carmain Governor of Foix got into Ruel and Soreze, after the
other had forsaken them, and so dealt with the Consuls, that they confessed
their faults, and protested not to take part with him any more. A Process was
made in the Parliament of Toulouse against him and all his Adherents.

The Marquess de Cragny and the Count of Carmain marched against the Duke: and
whilst those who made the first Encounter were at it; the rest got into Vianes,
who were however so closely pursued by the Marshal's Forces, that the Regiment
of Normandy was hard at their heels, entering into the Town with them. Thus he
remained Master of Peyresquade, where there were about one hundred and fifty of
the Rebels Soldiers killed and hurt; all which the Duke of Rohan beheld from a
Fort in Vianes where he then was, from which time forwards he began to despair
of doing any great matters for the future, especially since he saw himself so
closely followed; and that the Cardinal had taken such a course in Languedoc,
that the King could have raised more men in twenty four hours than the Duke in
a whole month.

Soubize finding little assurance on the main Land, had fortified himself in
the Isles of Ree and Olleron: it was the more important to remove him thence,
because otherwise it would be impossible to reduce Rochel unto its obedience,
so easily and abundantly might he recruit them with necessaries from those
fertile Islands: but the Duke of Montmorency the King's Admiral made himself
Master of the Isle of Ree, after a three days Combat with a great deal of
obstinacy on both parts. The Duke of Montmorency Landed at Olleron, where he
met with no resistance.

The Sieur de Soubize haying withdrawn himself into England, lived at a House
called Burgate in Hampshire, near the New Forest, for diverse years after. The
whole Province was now settled in quiet both by Sea and Land, of all which King
Jews was informed, who received the news with much joy.

Cardinal Barbarini Legate from the Pope arrived in France and came to
Marseilles, where he was received with great honor, (...) also at Lions
according to the Orders sent by the King. He came to Paris on May 21. and
entered in great pomp. He is bound by the Laws of the Kingdom, before he
officiate the Function of a Legate, to present the Brief which the Pope has
given him for the employment to the Parliament of Paris. The Pope having
omitted in this Brief to give the King the title of King of Navarre, the
Parliament refused to acknowledge it, and obliged him not to proceed any
further in the business till that were amended.

The Legate coming to Paris, alighted at St. James de Haut-pas, where the
Clergy of the City, the concourse of the Court, and other Officers to the
number of twelve thousand, went to salute him, and receive his Benediction.
After this the Prelates of Paris came to pay their respects to him. There was a
little dispute in what habit they should appear before him, the Legate desiring
they should be in their Rochets and Camall covered over with a Mantlet, as a
mark that they had no power in his presence. But the Prelates refusing to stoop
to this Order, it being contrary to the Rules of the French Church, took a
middle course. They went so habited to salute him, and accordingly accompanied
him in the Cavalcade to Nostre-Dame, whither being come, they took off their
Mantlets: but all was done under a Proviso, of saving their ancient right.

He proposed to the King what the Pope had given him in charge.

He urged the King in general terms to peace; to restore things in the
Valtoline to their former state, as they were before the Army of the
Confederate Princes entered into it, and desired him to grant a Cessation of
Arms in Italy.

The King answered to the three Propositions, That he was ever inclined to
Peace, and that he would still be induced to it, provided it were for the
public safety, and honorable for him and his Allies. That as to what
concerned the Valt^line, the late Treaty of Madrid had made provision for all
those difficulties which have risen ever since, and that he desired the
execution of it. As to the Cessation of Arms, that he could by no means hearken
to it, because of the great prejudice it would be to himself and his Allies,
and the great advantage those of the adverse Party might make out of it.
Thereupon the Legate unexpectedly departs from the French Court, and goes
toward Rome.

The Hugonots now begged his Majesty's pardon by their Deputies, whom they
sent unto him to testify the sense they had of their fault, and to assure him
of their future fidelity and obedience. His Majesty was well pleased with it;
and the Deputies coming to him at Fountainbleau about the end of August whilst
the Legate was there, there was no kind of acknowledgements and submissions
which they did not make, both in behalf of themselves, as also of the Duke of
Rohan, and the Sieur de Soubize, who sent to supplicate him by their particular
Deputies, that he would be pleased to employ them in the War of Italy, that
they might testify by their passion to serve him, that there was not any
danger by Sea or Land, to which they would not che^rfully expose themselves, to
contribute to his glory. Having made their speeches, they presented the paper
of their Complaints, which they said were grounded upon several Graces which
had been conferred upon them by the Edict of Nantes, and several other grants.
The King received it, and appointed it to be examined.

After the paper of their grievances had been examined, the French King
confirmed to them whatever had been granted to them by the Edict of Nantes,
granting them free liberty for the exercise of their Religion in such Towns
where they had Churches and Churchyards, and an Act of Oblivion for any thing
done in the War: but be would not consent to the demolishing of Fort Jews, as
being of great importance for the keeping of Rochel in awe and obedience.

These favors were accepted by the general Deputies of the Protestants in the
name of all their Towns, excepting those of Rochel, Montauban, Castres, and
Milhaud, who having been gained by the Duke of Rohan and Sieur de Soubize; and
finding that their Leaders had obtained only a single Pardon, without any other
advantage, and without being employed in Italy, according as they desired, they
entreated his Majesty upon other pretenses, that he would be pleased to grant
some time, till their two chief Officers, and those four Cities, were joined
with them. The King granted to them that delay, upon condition it were not over
long, who presently sent away the heads of those resolutions which had been
taken.

But the Duke of Rohan excuses himself from accepting those Articles which
were granted to those of his Party. He did his utmost to surprise some places
in Languedoc. He made an attempt upon Tillet in Albigeois. He had some time
before caused the Towns of Masdazil, Pamiers, and several other of Foix, to
revolt, from which places he sent out his Scouts, who committed great havocks
in the plain Country. But the Marshal de Themines, and the Count de Carmain
fell upon the Hugonots, charged and killed many of them, and took diverse places
from them, some by storm, some by composition. Hereupon the Duke of Rohan went
to the Assembly at Milhaud, where he made those of his Party send a Currier to
the King, to accept of the Articles of Peace which his Majesty had granted to
them. His Majesty confirmed them, though they had rendered themselves unworthy
by their new Acts of Rebellion. But it was necessary so to be, for the better
opposing of the enterprises of Spain, though Rochel was still excepted, by
reason of the little inclination they had testified of keeping themselves
within their duty.

Then the Bishops and Clergy of France assembled at Paris. The chief intent of
their meeting was for the renewing of that Contract which they made every tenth
year with the King, for the payment of those Rents which are imposed on them.
They also condemned certain Libels sent abroad by the Spanish ambition, which
had been sent into France. They condemned the Authors of them as enemies to
the public quiet, and seducers of the people to Sedition. And they granted to
the King Six hundred thousand crowns upon the Churches o^ France, as a
Contribution toward the Wars in which the State was engaged, as also to
preserve the Catholic Religion in its splendor, and to maintain the glory of
the Crown.

But many sordid spirits grudged at it, who considering but one of those ends
for which Lands were given to Churches, began to oppose it; as if the Church
(which is part of the State) were not bound to contribute to the good of those
Corporations of which they were members; and as if the public necessities were
not more considerable than the private profits of some particular people, who
often employ their Revenues to bad uses.

The Cardinal now endeavors the procuring of Peace for those of Rochel. And
the same reasons which inclined his Majesty to show his Clemency to the rest of
that party, did also persuade him to do the like to those of Rochel. The King
consented that the Town should be delivered into the hands of the Corporation,
on condition that they kept no Ships of War: that they observed those Orders
for traffic which were established in the rest of the Kingdom. That they
should restore to the Ecclesiastics all the goods which had been taken from
them. That they should suffer the Catholics to live freely and quietly in the
exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, and in the enjoyment of those goods
which appertained to them. That his Majesty should leave what Garrison he
thought fit in Fort Jews, and the Islands of Ree and Olleron, only promising,
that he would settle such a course in it, as those of Rochel might receive no
trouble by it, either in their Commerce, or in the enjoyment of their goods.
These Articles were agreed on about the beginning of February, An. 1626.
and the next day the General and particular Deputies ratified and confirmed
them.

King Jews made a severe Edict against Duels, and took a solemn Oath not to
show any favor to those who should break it.

About this time there arose very great Disputes in the University of Paris,
especially between the Doctors of Divinity, about a certain Book composed by
Sanctarellus a Jesuit, which treated of the power Popes had over Kings: which
Book had been approved by their chief President, by the Pope's Vicegerent, and
by the Master of the holy Palace.

His Doctrine was, That Popes had a power of direction, or rather correction
over Princes, that they might not only Excommunicate them, but deprive them of
their Kingdoms too, and absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance,
whether it were for Heresy, Apostasy, or any other great public crime;
whether it were for the insufficiency of their persons, or for their not
defending the Church, and that the Pope might at last give their States to such
as he should think fit.

For the present it made a great noise among the Doctors, and was opposed by
several Books which then were published. The whole Body of Divines did condemn
it: some indeed of the old League seemed to favor it. But the Parliament
called the chief of the Jesuits before them, and obliged them to sign a
Declaration, by which they should condemn the said Book; and to cause another
of the like to be subscribed by all the Provincials and Rectors, and by Six of
the most ancient of every one of their Colleges in France; and so ordered the
Book to be burnt by the common Hangman, with prohibition to the Stationers to
sell any of them.

At this time there were Combinations of diverse Grandees of the Court against
the King and State. Madam de Chevuruse being discontented that her private
intelligences with the English Ambassador were so publicly taken notice of,
did not a little promote the undertakings, by her animating of Monsieur the
Grand Prior, and Chalais, to execute it, both which were engaged by love to
her; as also that the Colonel d'Ornano abusing Monsieur's goodness, and the
credit which his place gave him, did absolutely divert him from the Marri^ge
which his Majesty had so earnestly desired should be celebrated.

The Cardinal discovered, that Chalais was one of chief Instruments of the
Enterprise, and that Colonel Ornano was the Ringleader of the Plot. That their
chief end was to unite all the Provinces so close together, that they might
enforce his Majesty not to remove any thing from the Court, and withal to
permit them to live in the same licentiousness that they had a long while
formerly enjoyed. That to this effect, they endeavored the breaking of the
match between Monsieur and Mademoiselle de Montpensier, and to bring on that of
Mademoiselle de Bourbon, which would more nearly engage Monsieur to their
Interests; or else to persuade him to marry some other stranger Princess, which
might be a means to shelter and defend their designs, by the forces and
assistances, which they might reasonably expect from such a Family. That this
once effected, they intended the Count de Soissons should Marry Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, that the Houses of Guise and Bourbon might be united together, and
in this manner they would in a moment huddle up together all the leading potent
persons of the Court.

The Marshal de Ornano is arrested at Fountainbleau, and carried Prisoner to
the Castle of Bois de Vincennes, where he died a few months after of a stoppage
in his Bladder.

The Cardinal beseeches the King to permit his retirement from the Court. And
the King causes the Duke de Vendosm, and the Grand-Prior of France, his
Brother, to be imprisoned at Blois.

The Marriage of Monsieur and Mademoiselle de Montpensier was celebrated soon
after to the quiet and content of the whole Kingdom.

Chalais, the Master of the King's Wardrobe, is arrested from the Chamber of
Justices at Nantes, who condemned him of Treason, and sentenced him to be
beheaded; which was done accordingly. Then was the Sieur de Baradas removed
from the Court, who had been much in favor with the King.

About the end of this year great differences arose between the Bishop and the
Officers of Verdun. This being a Frontier Town, was then looked upon as
considerable, in regard Monsieur de Lorrain seemed to be active, and able to
attempt something upon France, which obliged the King to go on with a design
which he had long before resolved of, the building a Citadel there.

The Abbey of S. Vannes was ever reputed the most fit place of all the City for
that purpose: whence it happened, that in the Charter of the said Abbey there
had been diverse Articles concluded between the Bishop of Verdun and those to
whom that place has ever belonged, in which they bound themselves to build
their Church in some other place, if it should be found necessary to make use
of some part of it for the raising of a Citadel. However the lines were so
contrived, that the Church was saved: but that of the Capuchins was forced to
be taken down, which was afterward done, and rebuilt in another place.

Now the Bishop of Verdun being Lorrain's kinsman, was wholly moved by him; so
that not considering what dependence he had upon the King, he suffered himself
to be engaged by the Duke, to prevent the building of the Citadel. On December
30. he published a Monitorium, fixed upon all public places, against all such
as should labor about it. This proceeding was looked on as a strange thing by
the King's Officers.

The Sieur Guillet presently called a Council of his Majesty's Officers of the
Town, to consider of what was to be done, where it was concluded to tear down
such Papers as had been any where posted up, and to set others in their places
of a contrary tenor in the King's behalf, which was presently done. The Bishop
offended at it, thundered out an Excommunication the next day against Guillet,
which he fastened in diverse places: and having given order to his Vicars not to
act any thing in prejudice to his pretended authority, he departed from Verdun,
and rode Post to Cologne. In the mean while the Sieur Charpentier his Majesty's
President in Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, being acquainted with the whole
proceeding, he declared the said Monitorium to be abusive and scandalous, and
commanded it to be torn and burnt by the Hangman. That the said Bishop should
be sent Prisoner to Paris. That his Benefices in the mean time should remain in
his Majesty's hands, and that he should pay a fine of ten thousand livres for
his said fault. This Judgment was put in execution with the usual form,
excepting only as to the Bishop's being sent to Paris; so that he resolving not
to suffer himself to be thus despoiled of his goods, thought it his best course
to send to the King to pacify him, for his rashness: he also gave order to one
of his Vicars to absolve the Sieur Guillet, and to license the going on of the
Fortifications.

In the year 1627. those of Rochel, could not endure to see the Articles of
Peace which the King had accorded to them, put in execution: they could not
permit that the Rules of Commerce observed over all France, should be taken
notice of among them. The cutting off of that absolute authority which they had
made use of in the Isles of Ree and Olleron, and other places bordering upon
their City, was looked on as an outrage. The exercise of the Catholic Religion
amongst them, was esteemed as a great slavery, and a rigorous constraint
imposed upon that whereof they made Profession. They complained of those
Soldiers in Fort Jews, and the Isles of Ree, and Olleron, left there only to
prevent their relapsing into their former insolences, as a most unsufferable
Tyranny. They resented his Majesty's Commissaries Acts in order to the
execution of the Treaty, as so many unjust attempts upon their Liberties. With
these complaints they filled their Manifests.

They made use of these Motives to persuade the rest of the Hugonot Towns to
revolt, to form themselves into a Commonwealth, and to obtain that by force
from the King, which with justice they could not expect.

The Duke of Rohan discontented for that he had made no advantage by the Peace,
did not a little foment those Mutinies of the Rochellers; to which end he
underhand sowed divisions among the Consuls of the chief Hugonot Towns in
Languedoc, and some he made for his own Party, but his design took little
effect in those parts.

The French King animated by the sage Counsels of Cardinal Richlieu, resolves
on the siege of Rochel, and from that time forwards preparations were made in
all the adjacent Provinces of Warlike Ammunitions, great store of Cannon were
sent beforehand toward the place, that they might be in readiness when time
should serve. Diverse means were thought on, to block up the Channel, and to
begin with those of less charge to prevent greater expenses, in case they might
do the work. Private Computation was made of what Horse and Foot would be
requisite to invest the place, and secure the neighboring Isles. And every
thing was disposed to the best advantage for the carrying on of the siege.

The Duke of Lorrain comes to the King at Paris, to complain of his Majesty's
actions toward the Bishop of Verdun his Kinsman. He was answered, that Bishops
being his Majesty's Subjects owe respect and obedience to him. That when they
fall off from their duties, it is the more just to punish their faults. That
enjoying their Temporal States only in order to the Oath of Allegiance, which
they all swear to his Majesty, they do most especially deserve to be deprived
of them when they break their said Oath. That his Majesty was more especially
concerned to maintain his right in Verdun, which was a Frontier Town, and
likewise because the Bishop had attempted against his Royal Authority in
hindering the building of the Citadel, though it were a thing only relating to
the Sovereignty, and in which he was not at all concerned.

But this was not the chief end of his journey. He pretended to do homage in
his own name to the King for the Duchy of Bar, as appertaining to him in Fee,
and not in right of his Wife. But he therein met with greater obstacles, than
in that of the Bishop of Verdun. The Duke obtained his request for the Bishop,
upon condition he should revoke the Censures against the King's Officers, and
for the future should comport himself with more moderation. The Duke willingly
became bound for his performance, and the King discharged the seizures, and
settled all things in their former state.

The English and others endeavor now to divert the French King from his
resolution against Rochel. On July 28. 1627. the English Fleet arriveth before
Ree. They Landed ten thousand men. The Sieur de Thoyras, was then Governor of
the Citadel St. Martin in the Isle of Ree; Rostaincler; the Baron of Chautail,
Navailles, and diverse other Gentlemen and light Horse, and about one hundred
and fifty French Soldiers resisting the English, were slain in the encounter,
most part of the Officers being wounded. Fifteen Officers of the English Army
were said also to be killed, besides diverse Lieutenants and Ensigns. They
likewise lost one of their Colors, and had five or six hundred killed and
wounded.

The Duke of Buckingham stormeth the Citadel of St. Martin, but could not take
it. The Cardinal sent to Bayonne for fifteen flat Vessels called Primaces,
built both to sail and row withal, and very fleet and able to endure a storm.
In the end of August Captain Baslin who Commanded these Primaces, came with
them to the Sands of Olonne, where the Abbot of Marsillac received him
joyfully: and his Vessels being well stored with Victuals and Ammunition, he
lent him Sixscore men of the Regiment de Champany, with some Volunteers. On
September 5. he set sail in the head of his little Fleet about six a clock at
night. Soon after he knew that he was near the English Fleet, he spread abroad
his great Sails, and was easily discovered. But the Primaces going very swift
could not be stopped by the English Vessels. They went without loss; only some
Sails and one or two Masts were shattered, and one shot through with a Bullet.
Baslin having thus passed the English, fell upon the Barricado which they had
made to hinder Relief: which consisted of great masts linked together with Iron
Chains, and tied with Cables fastened to great Anchors. But many of the Primaces
by reason of their lightness and swifness passed over: the rest lighted on a
certain place, where the foregoing night a Tempest had broken part of their
Barricado, through which they passed without difficulty, so that about two in
the night they ran a shore near one of the Bastilions of the Citadel, a place
where the English could not hurt them. The Relief was great both for their
reputation and assistance. Ten other Pinnaces were got from Bayonne, which the
Count de Grant-mont rigged out, and sent under the Command of Captain Audum.
October 4. they came on the Sands of Olonne. They were soon laden, and
accompanied with twenty five other little Vessels. Three hundred Soldiers went
aboard them, and sixty choice Gentlemen. Upon October 6. they put off. Two
days past (the wind changing) before they came to Ree, and that by day too.
The English Fleet engaged them in a rough Fight. But their courage surmounting
their danger, twenty nine of the Vessels got clear to the Citadel, where they
ran ashore: on Friday morning October 8. five of their Vessels were forced to
give back. One only, in which were the Sieurs de Beaulieu and Razilly, was
taken by the English. Who were so incensed at it, that they made in twenty four
hours above two thousand great shot upon the Port Saint Martin, so that there
were only five Pinnaces and one Traversin in condition to sail. But the Vessels
were unladed, and the Gentlemen and Soldiers safely landed in the Citadel.

The French King having been sick, after his recovery comes to Rochel to drive
the English out of Ree. The Duke of Buckingham resolves to make his last
attempt upon the Citadel of St. Martin. The English began an assault, but were
repulsed. It is said, that the besieged took all the Ladders of the English,
fifty Prisoners, of which were diverse Captains and Officers, that they had
killed four or five hundred, without losing above eighteen or twenty men, and
some few wounded, among which were the Sieurs de Sardaignes, and Gran Val, who
being shot through the bodies died within a few days after. The English
doubting their Trenches would not secure them, forsook the one half of them,
and shortly after resolved to go back for England.

The Marshal de Schomberg shortly after landeth there with fifty Barques about
three in the morning, without being discovered by the Enemy. These being
conjoined with other Soldiers fell upon the English, and routed them. Their
Horse were lost in the Marish. Their Cornet and twenty four Colors, and four
Cannon were taken. About five hundred were killed on the place, besides those
that were drowned in the Sea. Many Gentlemen of quality and Officers were
killed. And (as the French History says) three thousand Arms were taken in the
Field, and above one thousand five hundred Soldiers laden with the spoils.

It is reported that the English scarce carried off one thousand men, the rest
being either dead with sickness, or killed: and most of them also died soon
after their return into England, by reason of the discommodities they there
endured.

After the King had obtained this signal Victory against the English, he bent
all his thoughts toward the besieging of Rochel. The order of the whole
Circumvallation was prescribed by his Majesty. He raised thirteen Forts, and
several Redoubts upon the Trenches, the Circuit of which were three Leagues or
thereabout, all out of Musket or Falcon shot, but not of Cannon. This
Circumvallation being finished cut off all relief by Land, and shortly after
they were blocked up by Sea too.

At this time the Duke of Rohan finds means to make an Assembly in the Ville
d'Vsez, where diverse of their Deputies met together: and as he had no less
Eloquence than Courage, he persuaded them to whatever he had a mind to. They
approved of those succors which he had negotiated in England as just and
necessary; and they assured him not to enter into any Treaty of Peace with his
Majesty, without the Consent of the English, and his own in particular.
Whereupon they deputed some of the chief of their Party to go to the Towns of
Languedoc and Guienne: they also wrote to those of Dauphine and Vivarez, to
encourage them to unite with them for the good of the Cause. They drew up the
form of an Oath to be sworn by the Consuls, the Governors of Towns, Lords, and
Gentlemen, who would engage with them. An union very strange, which divided
Members from the Head, and so separated Subjects from their Prince.

After the Duke of Rohan had used all his devices, and seen the English Land at
Ree, he took up Arms and appeared in the Field. He summoned the Duke of Savoy
to send those Forces which he had promised: but he could not obtain them. All
that he could draw from him was a promise of fifty thousand crowns. Those Towns
which were delivered up to him, were Nismes, Uses, St. Ambrose, Alets, Anduse,
le Vignan, St. Hippolite, St. Jean de Grandamenque, Samens, la Salle, and other
smaller places: and with those Forces drawn together he took during this year
Realmont, Renel, Naves, Mazares, Pamiers, Castres, Soyon, and other Towns upon
the Rhofere, and in Vivarez; and more he had done if the Cardinal under the
King's Authority had not prevented him. It cannot be imagined with how much
care and trouble he kept those together who were engaged in his Party; how low
he was fain to stoop to work upon the meaner sort of people; how many
impertinencies he was forced to bear, how many inconsiderate discourses he was
necessitated to hear, and to how much constraint he was compelled to subject
himself. He has since protested to diverse of his friends, that there is no
care like that of retaining a mutinous people in that order, which is necessary
for him to make them follow, who would raise any advantage to himself by their
revolt.

Then the King by the advice of Cardinal Richlieu, sent the Sieur Galland,
Privy Counselor to his Majesty, toward those Hugonot Towns which the Duke of
Rohan had attempted to revolt, that he might confirm them in their obedience.
This man was one of their own Religion, which gave the King reason to hope they
would be directed by him. Having received his Commission, he went directly to
Montauban, the chief Town of their Party next unto Rochel, and by which most of
the other Towns would be guided. Upon his first arrival be called the
Inhabitants together, he gave them his Letter of Credence writ by his Majesty
to them, and began to confirm them in their obedience. He laid before them the
duty of Subjects toward their Prince; the miseries and calamities which they
had suffered whilst they fell off from their obedience: he represented to them
the disasters which would inevitably fall upon them if they should revolt: he
informed them of the small reason they had to believe the Duke of Rohan's
promises, or the aid of the English Fleet, which (he said) could not hinder the
relieving of the Isle of Ree. His words so wrought on them, that they
subscribed a Declaration which they delivered to him, in which they professed
to live and die in that Loyalty which they owed unto his Majesty. And all the
other Towns unengaged in the revolt did the like. And his Prudence was so
successful, that the Towns of Briateste, Castres, Pamiers, Puylaurens, Mazares,
St. Amand, Cabarede, Mazares, Masdazil, Arlat, and many others, made the like
declarations under their hands and Seals. But the misfortune was, that having
left diverse Factious Spirits of Monsieur de Rohan's Party in Castres, Pamiers,
and some other of those Towns before named, they remained not firm to those
resolutions he had insinuated to them, by which means the Duke of Rohan soon
after became Master of them,

The King unable to stop the D. of Rohan's proceedings by fair means, makes use
of force. He commanded an Army to be raised, and committed the Conduct of it to
the Prince of Conde, sending him a Commission of Lieutenant General of his
Forces in Languedoc, Dauphine, Guienne, and Lyonnois. He divided the Army into
two parts, the Prince of Conde had the better half, the other being committed
to the Duke of Montmorencie's care, then Governor of Languedoc. Soyon, a
strong place upon the Rhone, was assaulted, and in two days forced to
surrender. The Prince also stormed another little Town near to Saint Aubin, and
put all the Soldiers in it to the sword. Then they marched against certain
places which the Duke of Rohan had resolved to defend, but the fear which the
Inhabitants and Soldiers apprehended on sight of the Army, made them open
their Gates, so they entered without resistance.

Then they became Masters of Corconne and Aubenas. Montmorency pursued the Duke
of Rohan, and constrained him to flight: he maintained the fight about two
hours, and saw about an hundred of his Soldiers killed, fifteen of his Guard,
seven or eight Captains slain, and diverse others wounded. In fine he saw at the
years end, that he had very little advanced his design.

The Rochellers now send to the King of England to demand succor. Rochellers,
and the Command to be given to the Earl of Denbigh.

The King goes from Rochel to Paris, to dissipate those Factions, which began
to rise thereabouts, by the Hugonots in Picardy, Champagnie, and Brie. Richlieu
Commands the Army in his Majesty's absence. The English Fleet being now
ready to hoise sail for Rochel, the King resolves to return thither. The
Rochellers are summoned by an Herald to surrender to the King: but their minds
and answers were full of insolency, so that the King bent all his thoughts to
prepare for the fighting with the English Fleet at their first coming. About
the eleventh of May they were descried two Leagues off the point of Coreille.
An order was resolved on by the King, assisted with his Generals and Sea
Captains, and so delivered to the Commander of Valencay, who distributed it
among the Officers.

The English attempt to relieve Rochel, but in vain; and when the Rochellers
were embarked, after the exhortations of their Ministers, and their Captains
had solemnly sworn to pass the Bank in spite of all opposition, or die in the
attempt, they were struck with such faint-heartedness, that not a man durst
stir his hand: and Vincent their Minister could no longer speak unto them, as
himself confessed in a Letter to a friend of His.

The English Fleet now departs, whereupon great dissentions arise among the
Rochellers. Then the King sent another summons to them to yield. Breton,
Herald at Arms, was commanded to do it in form, with his Coat of Arms, who
went into the City, required them to lay down their Arms, assured them of
Pardon for their past Crime, and threatening them with the contrary in case they
should now refuse it. But they being animated by their Preachers, the Town
continued obstinate in their insolences.

After a feigned Treaty between the King and the Rochellers, the Town was
reduced by Famine to extreme miseries.

The Cardinal persuaded his Majesty to settle diverse Catholic Preachers in the
Hugonot Provinces, and wrought upon the Duke of Tremoville to forsake the
Protestant Religion.

The Rochellers when they saw there was no hopes of succor from the English,
and that they died by thousands of the Famine, made diverse proposals of
accommodation. Since the last six months there had died about ten thousand of
the Famine.

The Cardinal declared to them, they must not think of any other condition,
than absolutely to submit to his Master's will. At last they chose twelve of
the principal among them, most of which could hardly creep, to beg his
Majesty's pardon, to assure him that they would live and die in the obedience
which they owed to him, without demanding any other conditions, than what his
Majesty should please to give them. The King granted them the pardon which they
desired, and the Sieur of Herbaut Secretary of State, read the Patent to them,
by which his Majesty pardoned their Rebellion, discharged them of all Acts of
Hostility, ordained that they should be restored to their goods, granted them
the Exercise of their Religion in the City, and commanded that all the
Soldiers in the City should enjoy the same Grace: and that the chi^f Captains
and Gentlemen should go out with their swords by their sides, and the Soldiers
with Cudgels in their hands: but first they were to swear never to bear Arms
against his Majesty's service.

Rochel yielded up to the King.
Upon October 30. the Duke of Angolesm, the Marshal de Scomberg, the Sieurs de
la Curce, Vignolle, Hallier, St. Chaumont, and diverse other Lords, fourteen
Companies of the Regiments des Guardes, and six of Swisses, began about six in
the morning to enter into Rochel. The King placed himself upon the Fort de
Beaulieu to see the Forces march into the Town. They who Commanded these
Forces, seized on all the Gates of the Town, the Ramparts, Cannon, and
Munition, and sent away the Soldiers, the English by Sea, and the French by
Land, who looked more like ghosts than men. There were as many Citadels as
Gates, and as many Castles as Towers, and this was it that made the City be
esteemed impregnable, especially seeing it had an outlet by Sea, which could
never have been broken up, but by his Majesty's extraordinary power and
prudence; yet all served but as Trophies raised to his Majesty's glory.

On November 1. the King made his entrance into the City. Those poor Creatures
of the City prostrated themselves as he rode by them, that they might the more
acknowledge the mercy he had showed them. He had his Arms on, and rode in on
Horseback without any Ceremony; only four Companies of his Guards, two of
Swisses, his two Troops of Light Horse Armed Cap-a-pe; his Dragoons and the
Lifeguard marched before him, all the Nobility following him, without any
order, to avoid the disputes of Precedence.

Administrat. of Card. Richli^u.
The Inhabitants cast themselves on their knees, as his Majesty passed along the
Streets, crying, God save the King, who has been so gracious unto us. And he
frequently saluted those who seemed to be of the better sort among them. But
those submissions and acknowledgements were much more increased, when they
received the ten thousand Loaves of Bread, which the King distributed among
them the same day, together with diverse other Alms. But when they saw, that
there came three thousand Carts laden with Wheat and other Provisions into the
Town, with a proportionate number of Beasts and Cattle, which his Majesty
commanded to be brought and sold at the usual rates of the Army, they then
confessed, that he knew how to pardon as well as to vanquish.

The King alighted at S. Margarite's Church, which had been Consecrated by the
Bishop of Bordeaux, and where the Cardinal had with diverse Ecclesiastics that
morning celebrated Mass by way of doxology for that happy Victory. He was
received by the Archbishop, assisted by the Clergy and diverse other Religious,
who sung the Te Deum; and the King himself also sang it with great devotion.
About two days after the King caused the Host to be carried in Procession,
which was performed with a pompous Devotion. He also wrote to the Archbishop of
Paris, that a public than^sgiving might be made: and himself returning to
Paris passed by Nostre Dam des Ardilliers, that there he might pay his Vows:
for to his Devotions there he ascribed his first Victories, as that of the
relieving Ree, upon which the whole success depended.

The King before he left Rochel, published a Declaration, wherein was
contained, that the Roman Catholic Religion should be freely Exercised there,
both in the City and Government of Aulnis. That the Churches which had been
lately destroyed thereabouts, should be re-edified, and restored to them in
whose Possession they formerly were, together with all their appurtenances.
That a sufficient maintenance should be given to such Curates as had not means
to live on, out of those lands which belonged to the Townhouse. That the
Religieux de la charity and les Religiouses Hospitaliers, should be
re-established in the Hospitals of the Town, to attend upon all sick persons.
That a Cross should be raised in the Castle-yard, at the Foot of which an
Inscription of the taking the City should be inscribed; and that every first of
November a Procession general should be made, to give God thanks for his
mercies. That the Churchyard Consecrated in the Lands of Coreille, where those
of the Camp, who died during the siege, had been buried, should still be
conserved to that use. That a Covent of Religieux Minimes should be built
there, who might pray unto God for them, and perpetuate the memory of the thing.

The King took this course to keep Rochel in obedience. He deposed the Mayor,
and discharged the Shrievalty and Commonalty of the Town without hopes of
restoration. He ordained that the most Seditious persons of the City should
forsake it, and among others Guison Mayre, Godefray, Salebret, and
Deserbrieres, not so much as excepting the Dame de Rohan, who was carried to
Niort, by the Sieur de Lannay Lieutenant des Gardes des Corpse. Next, he revoked
all the Privileges and Charters heretofore granted to the City. He commanded
the Walls, the Ramparts, and the rest of the Fortifications to be razed, and
the Ditches to be filled up, leaving only the Towers de S. Nicholas, de la
Chains, and de la lantern standing, with that part of the Wall toward the Sea,
to preserve the Town from Pirates. He appointed also, that no stranger should
have an House or Family in the Town, without his Majesty's permission had and
obtained: or that any Heretics (as the Protestants were called) should return
to their former dwellings. And for the better keeping them in their obedience,
he ordained that there should be an Intendent of justice in the City, Country,
and Government of Aulins, who should see the Execution of his Ordinances, and
have an eye to that which concerned his service, all which was inserted in the
said Declaration.

He then commanded the Inhabitants to be disarmed, and that certain Regiments
should remain in the Town until it were quite demolished. After all these
things he returned to Paris, where he was magnificently received, the Companies
of the City making Orations unto him. The expenses of the Siege of Rochel, are
said to have amounted unto forty millions of Livres.

Then Monsieur the Prince, the Dukes of Montmorency and Vantadour, who
Commanded his Majesty's Forces in Languedoc, became Masters of the Field, and
before the end of the year repossessed themselves of all those places in a few
days, which were capable of being forced.

Italy, commits the Government of the State to the Queen his Mother. And before
he goes into Piedmont, he compels the Hugonots in Languedoc, to lay down
their Arms, and to declare in form before his Parliaments and Judges, that they
will live in all duties and obedience hereafter. His Majesty caused his
Declaration to this purpose to be read in Parliament, himself being present,
which put a stop to all the Hugonots affairs, until after the taking of Suze.

Whilst the King is in Italy, the Duke of Rohan takes Arms in the Sevennes. And
with the assistance of the Cities of Montauban, Nismes, Millaut, Castres,
Privas, Vsetz, and some others, had got such a body of an Army together, as
therewith he hoped to maintain himself in that little angle of the Kingdom; and
either presently to obtain some advantageous Conditions, or to expect a more
favorable time for the re-establishment of his depressed Party.

In the mean time he treated secretly with the King of Spain, from whom he had
also obtained a promise of some supply of money. But the King who had
intelligence of his practice, returning with the same celerity out of Italy
into France in the most violent heats of Summer, with which he had passed out
of France into Italy in the greatest extremity of Winter, presented himself
before Privas (one of the Hugonot Cities) in June, which at his first coming he
carried by assault: after which Aletz, another of the same Principles,
surrendered without resistance.

The Duke of Rohan observing what a terror the taking of these two places had
infused into his whole Faction, and knowing on the other side that a Peace with
Italy and England was already conclued, began to apprehend at last he should be
totally deserted by all his Confederates and Friends, and left alone to bear
the shock of all his Majesty's Victorious Arms; which made him in time
seriously apply himself to his mercy, to avoid the severe effects of his
justice.

A Peace was concluded in July 1629. with the Duke of Rohan, which all the
other Cities of his Party likewise accepted, except Montauban, which for some
days stood out, but afterward was surrendered to Cardinal Richlieu, who
settled all things in peace, to the great happiness of the King and the whole
Kingdom.

The next year the French King procured from the Pope the Cardinals Hats to be
bestowed on the Archbishop of Lions, Monsieur Bagni the Pope's Nuntio.

Now new stirs are at Court occasioned by the discontents of the Queen Mother
and the Monsieur. The Queen Mother professes open hatred to the Cardinal: she
directly opposes all his Counsels, which how well soever they succeeded, she
still found matter enough to render them suspected to the King, and to
discredit them by sinister interpretations.

The Duke of Savoy was grown by this time sensible of the dishonorable Peace
he had concluded at Suze; to which the loss of Montferrat stuck mainly in his
stomach. The Duke therefore seizes upon all the French in his Territories, not
so much as excepting the Merchants and Religious Orders. The Marshal of Crequi
hereupon advances to Pignerol with one thousand Horse, six thousand Foot and
some Cannon, and reduced the Town and Citadel to the obedience of the French
King. And the passages from France to Piedmont were open after the reducing of
certain Towns of the Duke of Savoy. In short time the King makes himself Master
of all Savoy.

The Cardinal offered all sorts of submission to the Queen Mother to reconcile
himself to her favor, but all in vain, she was still so implacably bent
against him, that the Peace of Italy being now concluded, and the time come
wherein the King had promised her to remove the Cardinal, she was importunately
instant with the King for the accomplishment of his Royal word. At last the
order was signed for the Cardinal's removal.

The Cardinal withdrawes himself a little time from the Court, but by the
advice of the Cardinal de la Valette restores himself again with the the King;
and so the Queen Mother not only fell from her hopes, but also from her credit
with the King, whereupon she departs out of France, and goes to Bruxels.

Monsieur the King's Brother requesteth the Parliament to indict the Cardinal,
so does the Queen Mother. But the King justifies Richlieu by his Letters and
Declarations.

Espernon stops the progress of a new Insurrection by dismantling several
strong Cities of the Hugonot Party, as Millant, St. Afrique, Pont de Camares,
Saint-Rome, Tarn, and several other places.

The King of Sweden having invaded Germany, the French King makes an Alliance
with him; he establishes a Chamber of justice in Paris, who give judgment
against several persons. Then is the Cardinal Richlieu created Duke and Peer of
France.

The French Protestants had obtained permission by the King's Breviate about
the beginning of this year to make a National Assembly of their Ministers of
France for the maintaining of their Order and worship. The Cardinal was of
opinion that his Majesty should require them to meet at Charenton, because
being within his view, they would have the less freedom to renew such Cabals as
they had formerly made in their Assemblies of Guienne and Lauguedoc. This Order
was followed, and the Sieur de Galland, Counselor to his Majesty, was sent to
be President in the King's behalf; his Loyalty was not to be suspected; and
they were obliged to accept of him in regard of diverse authentic testimonies
which made appear, that this Order was conformable to that of Councils
assembled in the Primitive times, which they professed to honor. The King
especially commanded him to be careful, that no Proposition were made which did
not concern their Faith or Discipline: to silence them in his Majesty's name,
in case they should discourse of any other affairs, and to establish such Rules
as the Cardinal had proposed to keep that Party in submission: To this end he
used his utmost Prudence and Loyalty, he persuaded them to enact, that there
should not any more National Assemblies be made, but in the presence of a
Commissary from the King, who might (by testifying their obedience) be a means
of continuing them in quiet. Besides, he induced them to resolve upon the
absolute excluding of all Stranger Ministers, this being intended of all that
were not natural French, and to inhibite their Ministers from leaving the
Kingdom without his Majesty's License, by this means to prevent all
intelligences, associations, and correspondencies with the enemies of the
State, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and his Majesty's particular
prohibitions. In fine he used so much prudence, that they required their
Ministers not to intermeddle in any affairs Politic or Military, and condemned
a Book of Berraut Minister of Montauban as erroneous, because he maintained
that Ministers had a particular call from God to bear Arms. Diverse Ordinances
were made there for the subsistence of their Party.

The Emperor of Germany sends Cardinal Pasman to Rome, French King's
Alliance with the King of Sweden.

The French King having lately been in Lorrain, The Administ. of Card. Ric^^eu.
after his return the Cardinal undertook to compose a difference between the
Bishops and Friars, which had made a great noise for sundry ages together. The
Friars relying upon their privileges obtained from Rome, pretended to have
power both to Preach and confess, without permission from the Bishops. And the
Bishops unto whom all people within their Diocese are subject by common right,
did perpetually thwart that pretension. They could not down with the Friars
Privileges, alleging they ought to be declared void, as being repugnant to
the Primitive Constitutions of the Church. This quarrel had been especially
fomented during the last year, by reason some Books had been published in the
name of the English Catholics, which preferred the Monastical life before that
of the Prelates, and seemed to imply that Friars were more necessary, at least
more useful, to the Church than the ordinary Pastors. Was it probable that the
whole Society of Friars would relinquish the Privileges they had obtained from
the Sea of Rome? On the other side, what reason was there, that the Prelates
should have so little Authority over them in Administration of Sacraments, and
the Word of God; seeing of old Friars were only mixed among the Laity, and
addressed themselves unto the Bishops Congregations, to receive the Sacraments
from their hands, or those who executed their charge? The Cardinal took upon
himself to end this difference, though he was at that time employed in the most
important affairs of Christendom.

He therefore caused the Superiors of the Orders to come before him one by
one, well knowing, that to negotiate such a business in a public Assembly
would be a labor in vain. He was a person well versed in all Antiquities, and
accordingly he represented to them, how that in the first institution of Monks
they were Consecrated unto God by the mediation of Bishops, who received their
Vows, instructed them, and directed their Consciences. He laid before them the
Original of the whole affair, and showed them, how that the Son of God had
subjected all those who sold their goods and followed him, unto the Apostles,
whose Successors the Bishops are, whereupon they making a strict profession of
leading an Evangelical life, were more particularly obliged to observe the
Order established in and by the Gospel: not that he would question the validity
of those exemptions granted from the Sea of Rome, unto which he owed much more
respect and obedience, than to debate the Ordinances thereof; yet that he must
needs inform them, that they could not be dispensed with from following the
Order established by Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, in Administering the
Sacraments and Word of God. That in fine, themselves could not deny, but they
were obliged to relinquish some part of their pretensions for the avoiding of
trouble to the Church, which was likely to ensue upon this account, and whereof
the Hugonots discoursed with much freedom. That this peace would be more
acceptable to God, than all the advantages it could otherwise procure unto
particular persons. That it would tend unto their honors, by testifying unto
the world the moderation of their minds, and humility of their spirits, and
that the world would esteem the better of them. That he should not willingly
propose, that the Bishops should have ordinary jurisdiction over their persons,
or power to visit their Monasteries; but that leaving them full liberty to
execute their Monastical Functions, it seemed fit unto him, that they should
not refuse to be dependent upon them in matter of Administing the Sacraments,
of Thanksgiving and Penance (as he called them) of Preaching the Word; and to
admit them to have power to repeal this Privilege which was derived from them,
according as the Council of Trent had prescribed.

Accordingly each one addressed himself to observe the Cardinals directions:
and although some unreasonable persons began at first to create some
difficulties, yet his prudence soon prevailed over them, insomuch that they
could not be thought the same men, who had so lately and so stiffly maintained
their Independence on their Ordinaries. He caused a Declaration to be drawn,
wherein they acknowledged themselves incapable to Preach without Examination,
License, and approbation from their Bishops first had and obtained, and that
the said Bishops might at any time revoke the said Licenses: withal, that they
neither could nor ought to hear the Confessions of Secular men without
approbation; which the said Bishops might likewise repeal, in case of any
incapacity, or public scandal. Every one subscribed thereunto.

The Bishops dispatched Copies thereof into all parts: and thus the Cardinal
ended a difference which had made such a noise so many Ages together.

The Duke of Montmorency having raised some stirs, was encountered by the
Mareshal de Scomberg, defeated and taken Prisoner. The Parliament of Toulouse
by the King's appointment having made process against him with all legal
proceeding, condemned him to be beheaded. The Cardinal de la Valette besought
the King to allow him a Confessor. And the King gave order to the Marshal de
Breze, to conduct Father Arnoux superior of the Jesuits, to assist him.
Having made his Confession, and communicated, he made his will; he bequeathed
unto Monsieur the Cardinal one of the rarest Pictures of France, representing
Saint Sebastian dying. He was executed in the Court of the Townhouse, where
the King commanded it to be performed.

The Duke of Montmorency had acquired so great credit in Languedoc, that he not
only drew off diverse men of quality from his Majesty's service, but several
Bishops also, and persuaded seven or eight to subscribe unto the Declaration of
the States. Some recanted what they had done; and became conformable to what
the King had ordained in his Declaration; but others stood out in their
Rebellion, among whom were those of Alby and Vsez, who had delivered their
Cities into Monsieur's hands, of Nismes, who would have done the like, of
Alets, and S. Pont, well-willers to the Rebellion, either by raising of Forces,
or Provisions to be sent to places already revolted.

The Archbishop of Narbon, President of the States, had not been defective in
endeavoring to divert them from their designs, representing to them how
contrary it was to their Profession, which tended to procure Peace, and to show
examples of obedience unto others.

The King finding them who should have preserved the people in obedience both
by exhortation and example, to excite them to Rebellion, could not put up such
disorders, but appointed Collectors in their several Bishoprics to receive
their Revenues, and to employ them in reparation of Religious houses and
Episcopal Sees: and thinking it improper to entrust the care of Souls with such
disloyal persons, he procured a Breviate from the Pope, addressed to the
Archbishop of Arles, the Bishops of St. Flour, and St. Malo, to draw up their
Process against them. The Bishops of Alby and Nismes were deposed, death
preventing the Bishop of Vsez from receiving the like punishment. The rest were
restored to their Bishoprics, there being not evidences sufficient to condemn
them.

The Duke of Espernon had been advertised, that it was principally the
Archbishop of Bordeaux who had exasperated Cardinal Richlieu against him, and
who had rendered his visit at Bourdeaux (when he went to see him attended by his
Guards) suspected to him. The Hist. of the Duke d'Espernon. Lib. 10.
A thing, that had offended him to the last degree, and he had publicly
complained of that proceeding (for his passions were never concealed) which was
also reported to the Archbishop, who was at this time obliged to come into his
Diocese to make some residence there. He departed therefore from Court, and
took the way of Guienne.

The Archbishop being on his way toward Bordeaux, turned a little out of the
ordinary Road to go into a Territory belonging to his Bishopric, called
Monravel, where being arrived, he was informed, that one of the Dukes Guards
had been assisting in the Execution of some Acts of justice, wherein he was
himself immediately concerned, and which would otherwise perhaps have met with
some opposition. He therefore sent a Gentleman to the Duke, to return his
thanks for so opportune a kindness. What ever the design of this Complement
might be, it was very ill received. The Duke made answer to the Gentleman who
came from the Archbishop, that thanks were neither necessary nor due to a
person, who had no design to oblige: That if any thing by his orders had been
done to his Master's advantage, it had been done upon no other account than the
mere consideration of justice, without any respect to his friendship; and so
dismissed him.

The Archbishop sent to Court to acquaint the Cardinal what had passed between
the Duke and him, and to receive instructions from him, how he was to behave
himself, if matters should grow to a greater height between them. To which the
Cardinal's answer was, that he assured him of a powerful Protection: whereupon
the Archbishop engaged in the Aff^ir to such an height, as even to be himself
the Aggressor, at the first dash giving him very sensible and public affronts.

The Duke of Espernon had in Propriety, as Lord of the Manor of Puipaulin,
the Royalty of the Clie of Bordeaux (which is the Fish Market there) so as that
he might l^wfully forbid any to enter thereinto whom he had no mind to admit.
He therefore commanded the Archbishop's Officers one fifth day to be excluded,
that they might be constrained to take their Fish without the Bar, with the
rest of the people. These men refused to receive it after that manner, and
otherwise they could not have it. The Duke also knowing it would be brought in
from other places, caused his Guards moreover to watch all the avenues to
hinder it, by whom some were turned back that would have done the Archbishop
that service; and in the end some of his own Domestics were very roughly
handled.

The Archbishop by public declarations complained of the violence had been
offered to him by a sort of men purposely set on to do it, describing them by
the name of the Russet Cassocks, which was the Duke's Livery, demanding of the
Magistrate protection, and aid to oppose them, and protesting to retire with
his Clergy if they would not provide for his safety.

Then the Duke commanded the Lieutenant of his Guards, the next day after the
Archbishop had exhibited this injurious Bill against his Guards, to go with all
his Soldiers to present himself before him, and to ask of him, if among all
those he knew any one man who was likely to commit an unhandsom action? The
Lieutenant did as he was commanded, and waited near to the Archbishops Palace,
his return from the City; who seeing him come in his Coach, presented himself
to speak unto him. The Archbishop seeing so many Soldiers attending the
Lieutenant, commanded his Coachman to drive on:

The Lieutenant with his hat in his hand was urgent with the Archbishop to hear
him, assuring him he had nothing to say that could any way offend him. But all
was in vain, the Coachman was still called unto to drive on. The Lieutenant
called in the end to one of his Companions to lay hold on the reins, and ^o
stop the Horses: which being accordingly done, the Archbishop immediately went
out of his Coach, crying out there was violence offered to his Person, and so
retired himself into his House.

The Archbishop in the afternoon of the same day, being October 29. summoned in
all the Orders and Societies of Ecclesiastics in the City, he there exposed
before them the open violence he pretended had been offered him. Most of the
Clergy fired by his Rhetoric, concluded upon an Excommunication: and upon
November. 1. he thundered out his Excommunication against the Lieutenant of the
Guards, and all his Companions, and tacitly against the Duke himself. Cardinal
Richlieu endeavors an Accommodation betwixt them, but in vain.

The Duke of Espernon calls an Assembly of several Learned Divines in his own
house, and all the Professors of the Canon Law, to have their advice upon this
Censure. The most part of them were of opinion, That there was some Exception
to be taken against the Censure, and said, that all the forms being not
observed, they thought that those against whom it was pronounced, were not
obliged by it. The Duke presently published their opinion by sound of Trumpet;
at which the Archbishop was so incensed, that he cited these men to appear
before him.

The Doctors surprised at this Citation, fly to the Duke's Protection, who
issued out an Ordinance, wherein he prohibiteth all sorts of persons, of what
quality or profession soever, to meet in an extraordinary Assembly, either in
the Archbishop's Palace, or elsewhere, without his special License, excepting
nevertheless the Religious and Ecclesiastics immediately belonging to the
Congregation of the Archbishop, and whose Counsels he customarily made use of,
for the better ordering the Discipline of his Diocese.

The Archbishop issued out a sentence against all those who had been of that
opinion which the Duke had published, whereby they were interdicted their
Charges and Ecclesiastical Functions, prohibited to Preach the Word of God, to
hear Confessions, to Administer Sacraments in the Diocese of Bordeaux,
Commanding the superior Provincials to chastise them, and expel them out of
the Covents of Bordeaux. By the Sea of Rome all Prelates are inhibited to make
any Censures against Religious Orders, upon penalty of drawing that
Excommunication on their own heads, which they intended to inflict upon others.

The Religious hereupon appealed from this sentence to the Pope. But the
Archbishop assembled the Superiors of the Religious houses in his Palace to
condemn that opinion which they had given in favor of Naugas the Lieutenant.

The Duke hereup^n placed the Archers of the Watch of the City upon all the
Avenues and Gates of the Archbishop's Palace, to hinder such as would obey the
Archbishop's summons. The Archbishop having notice hereof, immediately puts on
his Pontifical Robes, and causing himself to be followed by some
Ecclesiastics, together with what people he had about him, went on foot out of
the House, crying out in the Streets as he passed along, To me my People, There
is no more liberty for the Church. In this posture he went to several Religious
Houses of the City, gathering after him a great number of people (who ran from
all parts to the novelty) as he went along, and in the end returned back
toward his own Palace, without being able to raise any commotion in the City.

Whilst these things were in doing, the Duke was at the Capuccines, in one of
the remotest parts of the City, and having news brought him by two Presidents
of the Parliament what had passed, the Duke speedily mounted his Coach,
following that way the Archbishop was gone, having in company with him the
Count de Maille, and the Commendator de la justice. The Duke's Coachman drove
on through all till he came near the Archbishop's Palace, where he overtook him.

The Archbishop still continued on his pace; the Duke demanded of him by what
Authority he stirred up this Commotion in his Government? he was by the
Archbishop interrupted, who cried aloud, Strike Tyrant, thy blows will be to
me Flowers and Roses, Thou art Excommunicated. In this bustle the Duke catching
him by the hand, lifted it up twice or thrice, and set it against his Breast.
But the Archbishop with his hat on still provoking him with injurious language,
the Duke with a Cane he had in his hand touched the brim of his hat and thrust
it off his head to the ground, telling him at the same time, he did not know
the respect he ought him. But if the Reverence to his profession did not
restrain him, he would make him know it. Then the Duke being returned to his
own house, the Archbishop forthwith repaired to his Church, and pronounced the
sentence of Excommunication against him, and all that were with him.

The Archbishop sends away a dispatch thereof to the Court, wherein he gives
the Cardinal an account of the violence that had been offered to him, at which
the Cardinal was highly incensed. The Court sides with the Archbishop, and the
Parliament of Bordeaux also, who draw up an information against the Duke.

The Duke likewise sent to the King informations of what had passed, whereupon
the King sent Order to the Archbishop, to take away the interdiction; and to
the Duke to depart out of his Government, and retire to his house of Plassac,
which is out of the Diocese of Bordeaux, to expect the Pope's resolution, to
whom the decision of that Controversy belonged, seeing they had appealed to
him, which hung in suspense about five or six months.

After the Dukes retirement to Plassac, Bordeaux goes to Paris, who being
arrived in Court, all the Prelates who were then in Paris, assembled after an
usual manner, to deliberate among themselves what was best to be done in the
Archbishops behalf: Which convocation the Duke having notice of, he sent to
them his absolute submission to the Church.

The Duke de la Valette, who was returned back to Court, demanded Audience in
the Assembly in the name of the Duke his Father. Which being granted, he there
laid down such reasons before them, that of five and twenty Prelates which were
there present, thirteen were of opinion to take upon them the quality of Judges
under the good pleasure of the Pope and the King, the Duke having absolutely
submitted himself to their determination. But this resolution was not for the
gust of the Court.

They assembled then again at the Palace of the Archbishop of Bordeaux, and
from thence sent a Deputation to the King, wherein the Archbishop of Arles was
to speak for the rest. The Bishop in his Oration used all the odious terms he
could invent, to possess the King with the highest sense of the Duke's
misdemeanour. Upon which occasion Caspian Bishop of Nantes, one of the most
virtuous Prelates of his time, cried out, That if it were possible for the
Devil to submit himself to God Almighty, to such a degree as the Duke did, he
would infallibly obtain pardon for all his offenses: and that notwithstanding
the Church denied this pardon to a Christian, who had ever served God and his
Church.

Upon the Complaints of the Clergy preferred to the King by the mouth of the
Archbishop of Arles, the Cardinal who was present at the Council, was of
opinion, That upon the Duke's single confession contained in his answer, he
ought to be reputed Excommunicat^: and as so, that the King ought to declare
him lapsed from all his Offices and Dignities, till by virtue of his Absolution
he should be reunited to the Church.

The Duke now sends his Secretary from Plassac to Rome to procure his
Absolution. But so many rubs from France were laid in his way, that four whole
months were lapsed before the Duke could receive his Absolution.

The Duke's Absolution being resolved on, and order given to the Archbishop to
give it him, and the day for Absolution being appointed, the Duke of Espernon
attended by the Duke de la Valette, and several persons of quality, went to
Coutras, whither being come, the Archbishop who was already there, accompanied
with his Ecclesiastics, went first to the Church, where the Duke following
after, and presenting himself before him, kneeled down upon a Velvet Cushion
laid ready for that purpose. In this posture, and in the presence of five
Counselors of the Parliament of Bordeaux, who were by the King's order to be
assisting at this Ceremony, the Archbishop pronounced his Absolution in these
words.

Et Ego Authoritate Ecclesiae, and ea qua fungor, absolvo te a vinculo
Excommunicationis, quam incurristi, quia immunitatem Ecclesiae meae
Metropolitanae perfregisti, manum armatam militum, ut me currumque meum in via
sisterent, misisti: Statione disposita Palatium nostrum vallasti;
Jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam violasti; eamque tibi arrogasti: Nos, Clerumque
nostrum insignibus, and indignis contumeliis affecisti: In nomine Patris, and
Filii, etc.

Though the Duke was no great Latinist, he had nevertheless so much, as to
understand many words of this Absolution, by which he observed they were not
according to the ordinary style of the Church. The Duke after his return
received by an express Currier from Court, his Majesty's orders to return into
Guienne to his former Government. And it happened well not to the Duke alone,
but as much also to the Province, and to the whole Kingdom, that the Duke was
at this time restored to his Command.

Bordeaux by reason of the Excise upon Victuallers. The Duke opposes the
Seditious, forces diverse Barricado's, wherein diverse of his men are slain and
wounded, and beats down their Barricado's, and reduces the City to its
obedience to the King. The whole Province of Guien except Montauban, brake out
into open Arms, committing everywhere all the barbarous Acts of an inhumane
fury. The Duke sends his orders into all parts of the Province, which a little
quiets them.

The commotions of the City were no sooner appeased, but that madness diffused
it self into the Villages of the adjacent Country. The Boors in great numbers
got into the Suburb of Bordeaux, called S. Surin, to which place the Duke's
house was near enough for him to hear their Clamours, and from his
Chamber-window that looked into the fields to see the fires they had kindled in
several houses, of which the greatest part were miserably consumed. The Duke
being under great indisposition got out of his bed, mounted to horse by night,
and with forty or fi ty Gentlemen, his Guards, and some of the Town-Companies,
went out toward these Mutineers. They had fortified themselves in several
places of the Suburb, had Barricado'd the Church, and made a show of defending
themselves. But at the Duke's arrival they almost all disbanded and ran away,
none save those in the Church making any resistance, who also at the first
Volley discharged upon them fled after their fellows; forty or fifty of them
were slain by the Cavalry pursuing them, at whose death the Duke was greatly
afflicted. The report of this execution dispersing it self in a moment
throughout the whole Province, caused a calm everywhere.

Now the Cardinal de la Valette, Son to the Duke of Espernon, was sent at the
head of a great Army into Germany, the Command whereof was equally divided
between him and Duke Weimar: The Duke of Espernon was dissatisfied that the
Cardinal de la Valette advanced into the Church by his Learning, Birth, and
Fortune, to so eminent a degree of dignity and reputation, that should wholly
have applied himself to her service, that he should hazard his life in so
dangerous a profession. He ever apprehended it would be fatal to him, and
therefore had done all he could to dissuade him from it, employing also the
endeavors of several his most intimate friends and servants, but all in vain.
Either the humor of the time, the inclination of his Son, the necessity of his
destiny, or all together still prevailing with him above the fears or foresight
of so affectionate a Father.

In the mean time the Duke of Rohan was fallen from Lorrain into Alsatia, where
he took Ruffach by storm. Then Commissary Bullion had private directions to go
along with Monsieur de Land Ambassador and Governor of the French Forces
which were in Rhetia, to the enterprise of the Valtoline. The French Forces
marched toward the Mountain Spluga, and came to Chiavena, advanced to Riva, and
passing over Sassocorbe, (which is a Rock between the Mountain and the Lake, by
which way they are to pass who will go from thence by Land into the Valley,
which is a very strait passage) they came to Traon, not meeting with any
hindrance. For the State of Milan wanting necessary Forces for maintaining it
self, was rather thinking upon self defense, than how to set upon another. And
because the French men's design was to shut up all passages into that State, in
such sort as it should be impossible for the Emperor to send them any succor
by the way of Tyrol, the Duke of Rohan came thither on April 24. with two
Regiments of Switzers, and five Companies of Horse, and made himself Master of
the rest of the Valley. But after Rohan had held it diverse months, the Grison
Colonels and Captains laying claim to much money; and others who were destined
to have the Government, claiming the restitution of the Valtoline according to
promise, they mutiny'd, and betaking themselves to Arms throughout all Rhetia,
they secured the Duke of Rohan in the Fort of Maynfelt, and enforced the French
to forsake them, and to return to their own King's dominions.

Then the Grisons entered into this Valley, and recovered their liberty. Rohan
not being able to escape from Coira, whither he was brought from Maynfelt as an
Hostage, remained there until such time as his men were gone out of Rhetia.

The death of the Duke of Rohan.
Afterward Duke Rohan wounded in the Battle of Rinfield dies. He was a Duke and
Peer of France, being bred up in the Wars under King Henry IV. he attained to
such experience, as following the opinion and Party of the Protestants, he was
by them chosen to be their General, in which charge he always stoutly behaved
himself till such time as he got his Pardon from King Jews XIII. Of a civil
and courteous deportment to all persons: of a sharp wit, wary in his
proceedings, and in his Counsels well advised. He was free from pride and
ambition, Noble in his expenses, contemning an increase of wealth and riches.
He died to the great grief of Duke Weimar, and all the other Commanders, and of
all the Protestants.

In the year 1637. Francis Cupif, a Doctor of Sorbon, was converted to the
Reformed Religion, whereupon the faculty of Theology pronounced this rigid
decree against him.

Howel's Hist. of Jews XIII.
It is very properly, and with great reason, that the Apostle ranks Heresies
among Crimes and carnal sins, because we often perceive that by a secret
judgment of God, those use to fall and tumble into them, who swelling with the
vanity and confidence of their own sense, or walking according to the flesh,
suffer not themselves to be led by the spirit of God, nor believe that they are
tied to any rule, but they taste nothing but what pleases man as he is a
sensitive Animal. Whereof Francis Cupif of Angers, whom the sacred Faculty had
nourished before in her bosom, and at last unhappily received into the number
of her Doctors, to the great scandal of all good men, and the applause of the
enemies of the Cross of Christ, has lately given an horrid and most deplorable
example. For according to the honor that was conferred upon him in our School,
not minding the law he had received from so good a Mother, which might have
drawn down upon his head all graces from God and men; and having quite forgot
the Oath he had made so often, and whereunto according to ancient institution all
new Graduates, and all such who are promoted to the degree of Doctorships are
solemnly obliged; He is miserably fallen (said they) from the holy Catholic
Church, whereby he has drawn upon himself the loss of his soul before God,
shame and infamy before men, and malediction from all parts; This imprudent Son
is become the grief and sadness of his Mother, then, when by a perfidious
prevarication abjuring the true Doctrine, he has most impudently turned
Heretic, giving up his name to impiety and falsehood. But whence can it
proceed, that he should so easily fall into so fearful a precipice, but from
the natural presumption of his own judgment, and from the ardour of unbridled
pleasure, etc? Whence it comes to pass, that being blinded, and walking
continually according to his own covetousness, having shaken off the sweet and
light Yoke of Jesus Christ, he is become a voluntary slave to Heresy, which is
the height of all sins. It being therefore true, that as the Christian
Emperors said, Whatsoever is attempted against Divine Religion, becomes
injurious to all: with greater reason the Sacred Faculty of Theology has
believed, That the wrong which is done Jesus Christ, and to the Catholic Faith
by this degenerate Child, did concern her so far as to pronounce a grave
Censure according to the atrocity of the Crime, against such a notorious
infamy, and to separate him totally from Her, and her Nursery, though it be
nothing at all to be feared that such Bastard Plants will take any deep roots.
Cursed be thou degenerate Child, which go on after thine own Counsel, not
according to mine, which warpest a web, but not by my direction, which do add
sin to sin, which go down to Egypt, and to the Synagogue of Satan, and
consultest not with me, nor remembrest my Precepts. Thou have rejected my
Discipline, hoping for succor in the help of Calvin and his followers, and
have confidence in the shadow of Egypt, that is to say, in the Conventicle of
Heretics: but this imaginary strength shall become thy confusion; and the
confidence of this shadow which thou followest, in despising the Body of the
Orthodoxal Church, shall turn to thy shame. So Anathema was pronounced, and
publicly fixed up against him.

The Queen of France was brought to bed of a Prince on September 5. 1638. at
St. German de lay, he was born in the twenty third year after the Marriage of
the King and Queen. The King upon news thereof, threw himself upon his knees
before a Crucifix, and returned humble thanks and acknowledgements to God for
his so great goodness toward him.

All France was full of jollity, as they expressed by their voices, gestures,
and actions. Yea this gladness dispersed it self up and down all places of
Christendom (that were Friends to France) and struck a kind of wonderment into
the world.

In Rome there were diverse inventions, and curiosities found out to express a
congratulation. Before the French Ambassadour's Palace (who was then the
Marshal d'Estre) there was a triumphant Obelisk with the Arms of France, and
this Ostentous Inscription underneath.

Ludovico XIII.
Christianissimo Galliarum and Navarrae Regi,
Qui
Pullulantem per avita regna Haereticum Hydram
Petulantem in orb Christiano novum Geryonem
Herculea clava compressit:
Aras per impietatem eversas,
Principes per Tyrannidem oppressos,
Armata pietate restituit
Aequissimi Herois Justitiae debito.
Delphino,
Inter aurealilia nascenti,
Inter paternos l^uros vagienti,
Futuro futurorum monstrorum Alcidi,
In afflictorum subsidium,
In Tyrannorum excidium,
In liliorum aeternum germen,
In Ecclesiae invictum columen,
E coelo in terris stupenda ratione demisso,
Plausus, acclamationes, Trophaea
Futurae gloriae argumenta, Praesentis laetitiae monumenta,
Attollit, adjungit, erigit,
Franciscus Hannibal Estraeus, etc.
For public arguments of joy, Prisoners and Galley-slaves were released. Two
were ennobled in every Generalty throughout the Kingdom. And four Masters were
created in every Trade throughout France, with diverse other privileges
afforded to them of Paris.

In the year 1640. a great combustion happened in Catalonia, which grew so
furious, that the Viceroy with his Wife and some of his Family were murdered,
and his house burned to the ground. This tumult by degrees turned to an
absolute revolt from their Sovereign natural King, insomuch that they fled to
France. The French quickly hearken unto them; so there was a Treaty at Narbon,
whither they sent twelve persons of quality for Hostages; and an Order issued
out, That He should be branded with an hot Iron, who spoke of any accommodation
with Castile. It was agreed on, that upon putting themselves under the Royal
Protection of the most Christian King, he should furnish them with an Army of
six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, to be maintained by the Catalans.
Hereupon three Commissioners were sent to Paris, one for the Clergy; another
for the Nobility, and a third for the Gentry and Commonalty.

The chiefest Incendiaries were the Preaching Friars and Monks, who in lieu of
obedience and conformity to Government, and compliance with the King, having so
many Irons in the fire, did teach, and obtrude to the people nothing more than
common Privilege, and resumption of Liberty, whereby the affection of the
Vassal was withdrawn from his Prince.

There came a Messenger of State to Paris, who brought news of the Great Turks
death in the flower of his youth, though of a robust constitution. He died by
excess of drinking some sorts of Wine, wherewith he was used to be often
distempered, not withstanding the strict Law of Mahomet, who often Preached
this Doctrine, That there was a Devil in every berry of the Grape; and
therefore absolutely interdicted the use of Wine in his Alchoran.

Soon after Don John of Bragansa was (upon a general revolt of the Portugueses)
within less than a month fully settled in the Kingdoms of Portugal and the
Algarves, without any opposition at all. This Revolt of Portugal was no great
news to the French Cardinal, who had his spirits walking there, as well as in
Barcelona, and every where else.

The Spanish Ambassadors negotiate at Rome, that the Duke of Bragansa be
Excommunicated for an Usurper. If this had taken effect, it had made the King
of France incapable to assist him being an Excommunicated person. But France
had such a powerful Faction in the Consistory, and the Pope was such a friend
to the French, that the Catholic King could do little good in this point.

Then was France blessed with another Masculine Royal Offspring, the Duke of
Anjou.

In the year 1642. Mary de Medices, Queen Mother, and Dowager of France,
expired at Colen. She had been Regent of France many years, during which time
she discovered great abilities transcending her Sex. She was afterward twice
in Arms against her Son; and she came at length to conceive such a Junonian
indignation against the Cardinal Richlieu, who had been chief of her Counsels,
and her Creature afterward in point of greatness (for she first preferred him
to the King) that the breach could never be made up between them. And she was
used to say, that the worst thing she ever did was the advancement of Richlieu.
In the sense of this indignation she forsook France, and drew a voluntary Exile
upon her self. She first retired to Flanders; thence she removed to Holland,
thence to England; and her last retirement was to Colen, where she died.

The Cardinal of Richlieu was sick that time that the Queen Mother died at
Colen: yet he forced himself to creep to the Altar, and officiated many
Church-duties for her soul. From that time he was never perf^ctly recovered,
and now more like a Skeleton than his Eminence, being carried upon the
shoulders of men, has houses broken down to make him room to come in at, so
much French blood lost at home, so much shed in the field, disquiets and
dejects his spirit, now imprisoned in a languishing body. Cinque-Mans the Grand
Constable, and de Thou late Master of Requests were apprehended at Narbon the
very day that the King had but in the morning embraced and kissed Cinque-Mars,
and had talked very courteously to de Thou. The ^ame was done to de Bovillon,
at Casailles.

The Prisoners are brought to Lions, where by chosen Judges they are condemned,
and upon a Scaffold beheaded. De Bovillon got off with the surrender of Sedan.

At length Cardinal Richlieu's scarcely breathing Corpse, nothing benefited by
the Waters of Borbogne, is brought to Paris, he died in the end of the year
1642.

Richlieu was no great Zealot in his own Religion, but as he made it
subservient to his political ends: nor would he ever employ any Jesuit: He had
a moderate opinion of the Reformists, which made him to be called the Hugonot
Cardinal. And he would have often in his mouth this saying, Maneat moralis
benevolentia, inter discordes sententia. Yet he wrote a Book against them,
which is extant. He did them more mischief by Complementing with them, than by
combating.

He was a great cherisher and promoter of virtuous men, and would find them out
wheresoever they were, insomuch that he gave every year in Pensions little less
than an hundred thousand Franks. He erected two Academies, one in Paris, called
l'Academie de Beaux Esprits, where the Prime Wits of the Kingdom met every
Monday; and another at Richlieu, where the Mathematiques and other Sciences
were read in the French Language; the difficulty of the Latin deterring many
of them from studying other places. He did so oblige all the Wits of the
Kingdom, that they strove who should magnify him most: never were there such
hyperbolical expressions of any man, and not without some mixture of
profaneness. Some blasphemously said, That God Almighty might put the
Government of the World into his hand. That France in God, and the Cardinal's
hands were too strong. That, what the soul was to the body, the same he was to
France.

Si foret hic nullus, Gallia nulla foret. Some appropriate the reduction of the
Rochellers solely to him. Therefore to sooth him, one French Chronicle
impiously writes, that in the taking of that Town, Neither the King nor God
Almighty himself had any share in the Action, but Cardinal Richlieu. Thereupon
Another made this Distich.

Richelii adventu portae patuere Rupellae,
Christo infernales ut patuere fores.
The Gates of Rochel opened to Richlieu,
As those of Hell to Christ asunder flew.
Diverse other Latin Distichs there were of like nature. And in the French
Language there are abundance of such Hyperboles. I will instance in some.

Et si nous faisons des ghirlandes,
C' est pour en couronner un Dieu,
Qui soubs le nom de Richlieu
Recoit nos Voeux, and nos offrandres.
Another.

Heroes a qui la France crige des Autels,
Que prevois, and qui fais le bon heur des mortels,
Qui scais mieux l'advenir, que les chooses passces,
Penetre dans mon Ame, etc.
Another.

Si quelq' un dans ces verse parl^ de Richlieu,
Qui sous l'habit d'un homme il nous descrive un dieu;
Vous n' estes point suiet a l'humaine impuissance, etc.
A Royal Chronologer attributes more to him than to his Master the King
himself. He calls him the Grand Director, and most puissant Genius of France,
the perfectest of men, who does penetrate things to come, and is ignorant of
nothing: great and incomparable Cardinal, the most eminent among mortals; to
whom the ^rabbed i^ and most mysterious affairs of State are but pastimes:
visible God, and tutelar Angel of the Universe; a spirit that moves the Heavens
and and the Stars; the bliss of the world, the Supreme Intelligence, the
Phoenix of the earth, who never had, nor ever shall have his parallel.

As there were a number of such profane Sycophants among the Wits of France,
that idolized him in that manner, so there wanted nor others that aspersed him
by Pasquils and Libels.

One calls the Capuchin, the Cardinal, and the Devil, the three degrees of
Comparison.

Horel's Hist. of Jews XIII.
One has made this Epitaphical invective on him Adsta viator, quo properas?
Quod nusquam videbis, aut audies. heic legitur,
Armandus Johannes de Plessis Cardinalis de Richlieu,
Clarus Origin, magnus ingenio, fortuna eminentissimus,
Quodque mirere,
Sacerdos in Castris, Theologus in Aula, Episcopus sine plebe,
Cardinalis sine titulo, Rex sine nomine, unus tamen omnia.
Naturam habuit in numerato, fortunam in consilio,
Aerarium in peculio, securitatem in bello, victoriam sub signis,
Socios in praecinctu, cives in servitute,
Amicos in obsequio, inimicos in carcere.
Hoc tamen uno miser, quod omnes miseros fecit,
Tam seculi sui Tormentum, quam ornamentum.
Galliam subegit, Italiam terruit, Germaniam quassavit,
Afflixit Hispaniam, coronavit Briganzam, cepit Lotharingiam,
Accepit Cataloniam, fovit Sueciam, truncavit Flandriam,
Turbavit Angliam, lusit Europam.
Poeta purpuratus,
Cui scena mundus, gloria stiparium, Regia gaza Choragium fuit,
Tragicus maxim quam fabulam male solvit.
Post regnum Testamento suis distributum, paupertatem populo imperatam,
Dissipatos Principes, nobilitatem suppliciis exhaustam,
Senatum authoritate spoliatum, exteras Gentes bello and incendiis vastatas,
Pacem terra marique profligatam,
Cum fatiscente corpore, animum gravioribus consiliis aegre vegetare,
Et nullius non interesset ipsum aut vivere aut mori,
Jamque bona sui part mortuus, aliorum tantum morte viveret,
Derepente spirare desiit and timeri.
O fluxa mortalitas!
Quam tenue momentum est inter omnia and nihil?
Mortui corpus rheda extulit,
Secuti equites, peditesque magno numero
Faces praetulerunt Ephebi, crucem nemo, quia currus p^blicam ferebat.
Denique hunc tumulum implet non totum,
Quem tota Europa non implebat.
Inter Theologos situs ingens disputandi argumentum,
Quo migravit sacramentum est.
Haec te, lector volui, heic te metire,
Et abi.
Stay passenger, where hast'nest thou?
Here may thou read what thou shall not see, nor hear any where else.
Armand John du Plessis, Cardinal of Richlieu
Noble by descent, great in wit, most eminent in fortune,
And what thou may admire,
A Priest in the Field, a Divine at Court,
A Bishop without a Cure, a Cardinal without a Title, a King without name,
Yet one who was all these.
He had nature in all her numbers, Fortune in his Counsels,
The Royal Treasure in possession, security in War, Victory under his Banner,
He kept his Confederates in compass, his Contrymen in servitude,
His friends at a distance, his enemies in Prison.
In this only wretched that he made all men so,
Being as well the torment, as the ornament of his time.
He subdued France, he scared Italy, he shook the Empire,
He afflicted Spain, he Crowned Braganza, he took Lorrain,
He accepted of Catalonia, he fomented Sweden, he maimed Flanders,
He troubled England, he cousened all Europe.
A purpled Poet,
Whose Stage was the world, glory his Curtain, the Exchequer his tyring house,
His subject for the most part tragical, to which he put an ill Catastrophe.
Having turned the Kingdom to Legacies, bequeathed poverty to the people,
Dissipated the Princes, exhausted the Nobility with punishments,
Bereft the Parliament of power, destroyed other Nations with fire and sword,
Driven away peace by Sea and Land.
His body now fainting, his mind not recreable for restles^ thoughts,
When it concerned every one that he should live or die,
Being in good part already mortified, and living only in others death,
He suddenly ceased to breath, and to be feared.
O the frail things of mortality!
What a small moment is there betwixt something and nothing?
The Corpse were carried in a Chariot, Horse and Foot followed in great numbers,
Pages carried Torches, none the Cross, for the Chariot carried the public
Cross.
In fine, he hardly filled up his grave,
Whom all Europe could not fill.
He lies among the Sorbonists,
Of Dispute a mighty Argument,
Whither he is gone it is a Sacrament.
Reader, this is all I would have with thee,
Hereby measure thy self, and be gone.


He died at Paris December 4. 1642. in the 57. year, and third month of his Age.

After the decease of Richlieu, Cardinal Julius Mazarin, a Gentleman of an
ancient Roman Extraction, was put to sit at the Helm. He together with Leo
Bouthiller Chavigni, and Soublet Noyer, both Secretaries of State, were the
Cabinet Counsel to the King. Mazarin was a bosom friend, and a great intrinsic
Confident of Richlieu before, who had imparted his designs, infused all his
Maxims into him, and opened unto him all the Arcana Imperii. He had been an
active Political Instrument employed by the Pope before in sundry Treaties, and
difficult traverses of State, wherein he had good success, and in all his
negotiations he was discovered to be a Person of excellent address and rare
endowments.

Five months after the death of Cardinal Richlieu, the King fell sick at S.
German's, and died on May 14* 1643. the same month, the same day of the month,
and about the same hour of the day that his Father died thirty three years
before, but with this mark of difference, that the one went out, the other was
sent out of the world about the same time. His bowels were presently carried to
be interred at Saint Dennis, whither his Body followed after in the height of
all solemnity and magnificence that his Queen could devise, whom he left Regent
of the Realm.

He was a great Zealot in the Religion and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome.
When the Queen found her self quick, he caused a solemn Declaration to be
published, wherein he made the blessed Virgin Protectress under the holy
Trinity of all his Estates, all which he consecrated to her: and for an
immortal Mark of this Consecration, he commanded the great Altar in the
Cathedral Church of Paris to be built anew, with the Image of the Virgin, which
should hold in her Arms that of our Savior; and the K. to lie prostrate before
the Son and Mother, offering them his Crown and Scepter. The Archbishop of
Paris was enjoined to Commemorate this Declaration once every year upon
Assumption-day at the Altar in the Morning; and that in the Evening a general
Procession should be made, wherein the Provost of Paris, and all the Sovereign
Companies should be assistant with the Court of Parliament. This Command
extended to all other Archbishops and Bishops throughout France, that they
should in every Cathedral Church erect one special Altar to the Virgin Mary for
this end, and in commemoration of this Act to pepetuity.

One Instance more I shall add of his Zeal to the Romish Religion. When the Old
Marshal de la Force a Protestant, was admitted to see him a little before he
expired, he told him on his deathbed, That he thought God Almighty suffered
him (meaning the Marsh^^) to live so long upon Earth expecting his Conversion,
as he had done that of Lesdiguiers.

He put out sundry Proclamations against Swearers, against Pride in apparel, as
also against Duels: and the last was so strict, That both the appellant and
defendent whosoever did survive, should suffer death without mercy, and be
deprived of Christian burial, but both rot upon the Gallows with their heels
upwards.

Here I shall put down a List of diverse Books that were Printed in France for
sundry years past.

Francisci Garciae Evangelicus concionator, Printed at Lions, Anno 1622.

Petri Damiani Cardinalis opera, Printed at Lions, 1623.

Bibliothica Veterum Patrum Graecorum, Printed at Paris, 1624.

Deus, Natura, and Gratia, by Saint Clara, Printed at Lions, 1625.

Puteani Commentaria in summam D. Thomae, Printed at Toulouse, 1627.

Biblia Septuaginta cum Graeco Testamento Graec. Lat. in three Volumes. Printed
at Paris, 1628.

Biblia Vulgata, Printed 1628.

Bibliotheca Ordinis Praemonstratensis per Job. le Praige, Printed at Paris,
1633.

Ludov. Dolae de Concursibus Dei and creatura, Printed at Lions, 1634.

Concilia Generalia Graec. Lat. ten Volumes, Printed at Paris.

Franc. Lanovii Chronicon generale ordinis Minimorum, Printed at Paris, 1635.

Didacus Baeza de Christo figurato in Vet. Testam. Printed at Lions, 1636.

Francis Hallier de sacris electionibus and ordinationibus, at Paris, 1636.

Historia Ecclesiae Gallicanae, at Paris, 1636.

Franc. Bouquet de Pontificibus Romany e Gallia oriundis.

Jacobi Sirmondi propemptrion contra Eucharist. Cl. Salmasii.

Jac. Sirmundi opuscula Dogmatum veterum Scirptorum.

Andrew de Saussay Martyrologium Gallicanum, at Paris, 1637.

Mart. Bonacinnae opera omnia, Printed at Paris, 1638.

Jacobi Saliani Annals Ecclesiastici.

Steph. Fagundez in Decalog. at Lions, 1640.

Theses Theologicae Protest. Academiae Salmuriensis, at Saulmur, 1641.

H^ttingeri Historia Ecclesiastica, five Volumes complete.

Hottingeri Analecta Historico-Theologica, Octavo.

Afterward Anno 1646. there was published Annalium Ecclesiasticorum Epitome,
at Roven.

Novissima Galliae Concilia a Tempore Concilii Tridentini, ad Annum 1646, at
Paris.

Jews XIV. the present French King succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, being
about five years old.

Mazarine casting with himself what is hutful and profitable, past this
sentence upon the Clergy.

These are his words counselling the Queen Regent: The Sacred Order for these
many years has had but a thin harvest of excellent Persons, however it come to
pass. Men follow after nice Questions, live idly, do not embrace serious
Studies. All is done with pomp, nay if any Sermons be to be made, and the very
venerable sacrifice offered. Of their Office they lay claim to nothing but
their Rents: the duty of Preaching, which is the principal dignity of a Bishop,
they quit to any one though never so insufficient. They think themselves Bishop
enough, if they can but ride in fine Coaches with their Arms set on, outvie
one another in rich Liveries and Lacquies, and punish with rigor those that
transgress in the least matters. Perpetual haunters of Ladies Couches, not
without undervaluing the Pastoral staff. This is for the most part, for there
are some that lead holy and unreprovable lives. He that shall take offense,
will own himself not to be one of these, but those other. So much power has
Religion over the minds of men, that as often as among men in holy Orders any
eminent virtue has got up, and overcome the common seize and the vices
of mankind, it is adored like a Deity. At that time that company was of no
weight nor moment in France, said Mazarine.

There was Francis Paul Gondy, by extraction a Florentine, but born in France,
Abbot of Rhetz, afterward Coadjutor to the Bishop of Paris, Archbishop of
Corinth, one that if occasion had offered, would have aspired high, as Cardinal
Mazarine confessed he was persuaded. Over and above an honorable Family, he
had eloquence and learning with promptness of spirit.

All was now prosperous and quiet in France, whose power reached over Almania
from the Mazelin Brink beyond the Rhine. By the Victory at Norlingue, the parts
confining on the Danube, were afterward invaded, and terror struck on all
sides. In Spain by seizing Tortosa and Flix the French got to the River Iber.
Their Fleets ranged over the Mediterranean and Ocean.

All Italy, from the Pope (who then was Urban VIII) to the least Princes, bore
reverence. The Dukes of Savoy, Mantua, and Modena, then rather Instruments of
French slavery, than free Princes. The Kings of Sweden and Denmark, boasted of
their friendship: the Pole sued for it. The Electors of Germany sought to
interest themselves in their favor. Portugal rent from Spain, depended on the
looks of France, whose Yoke Catalonia had put on, being weary of the Spanish
Dominion. The Low Countries stuck close to them: All Europe with astonishment
stood gazing at such a state of the French affairs: nothing was then wanting to
complete their happiness besides moderation, and the art enjoying it.

Paul Gondy designed Archbishop of Paris, is consecrated of Corinth (it is the
Bishop of Rome's practice, that so the whole world may be thought depending on
the Vatican Oracle, to exercise his authority even upon the dissenting parts.)
That day was first occasion of much ensuing mischief.

Ferraro Pallavicini, a Canon Regular, a Parmesan, of a Noble house, sharply
inveighing in libellous Pamphlets against the practices of the Roman Court,
lost his Head at Agivnon in France, and gave instance how unsafe a thing it is
to touch upon the Roman State in writing, though never so truly.

The Divisions of Italy being closed up, Pope Urban VIII. died July 29. 1644.
after he had sat twenty one years and some months.

Then Gio Battista Pamphilio, a Noble Roman, was Proclaimed Pope, after the Sea
had been vacant 45. days. He assumed the name of Innocent the Tenth.

The Hist. of Cardinals part. 3. lib. 2.
This Election was not at all displeasing to the French, though they were not a
little displeased at Cardinal Antonio, who for his own private Interest had by
his reiterated instances persuaded that Crown to the exclusion of Pamphilio,
and afterward consented to it contrary to the King's order, and without
expecting the return of the Currier, which was dispatched to that Court, that
they might consult upon the business. For which the French King though fit to
degrade Cardinal Antonio from the honor he possessed of being Protector of
France, and to take away his Royal favor from Teodoli, and the Marquess of San
Vito his Brother, and to recall his Ambassador San Simon into France, to render
an account of his proceedings; yet in the mean time the most Christian, King
failed not with all actions of goodness and generosity to endeavor a
correspondence with the Person and House of the new Pope, giving him to
understand that the chastisement of the aforesaid persons, proceeded from the
aversion they had to his Election: or at least for that they had persuaded that
Crown to his exclusion, with arguments much contrary to the truth.

About the end of the year 1646. died Henry Bourbon Prince of Conde, not yet
sixty years old. Nothing was more methodical than the whole course of his life:
every action had its proper season, and each year they returned in their due
Periods, as by a Calendar.

The young King fell dangerously sick of the small Pox, but he recovered, and
grew up under the instructions of Hardovin Perefix Abbot of Beaumont, a man of
a pleasant gravity and wisdom, afterward Archbishop of Paris, who might have
been styled the King's Seneca, but that he happened upon a Trajan.

In the year 1647. Whores and Bawds of all sorts were banished out of Paris;
not by an Act of Parliament, but by an Order of the Provost Marshall.

A Writer of that story says, It was a shameful thing to stir those matters,
which having been stirred would have stunk filthily; and to be fierce against
poor Whores, when Noble Ladies did prostitute themselves without punishment.

Now Mazarine furnished a Library in favor of the Studious with Books to be
read over in many ages. One might behold shelves raised up to the top of the
Roof, where through a luxUry of literature was set up a learned Pile not as
Ornaments of a Palace, but as Instruments of Wisdom, not ranked for a show, but
for use.

In the year 1648. a Civil War in France was unfortunately commenced, and all
France was set in a combustion. At the same time a malignant Star did influence
many Kingdoms, as England, Naples, Catalonia, Portugal.

Great commotions were in Paris. Peter Seguier Chancellor of France, is
dispatched to the Parliament, to carry them the King's Orders, or in truth, to
try what was their intention.

He was like to be torn in pieces by the Rabble. But Milleray on Horseback with
Dort, break through the Seditious crew, and having rescued the Chancellor from
that imminent danger, convey him back safe to the Queen in a Coach half-torn,
the Guard being frighted, and some of them slain. The Sedition breaks out
farther, and the madness of the people rises to higher exasperation.

F. Paul Gondy, designed Archbishop of Paris, (commonly styled Coadjutor) in
his Pontifical Robes, carrying with him a veneration as he passed along the
Streets, moderated the people with Language and gesture. Some there were that
taxed Gondy, as if in his heart he had been somewhat favoring alterations.
However the matters were in truth, that was the first day of Gondy's
withdrawing, and the cause of all those evils, which that Prelate eminent in
Mind, Birth, and Merits, fell into afterward: from this time he shall be ever
after called the Archbishop of Corinth.

Mazarine took care to have the King conveyed to Ruel, two miles out of Town,
under pretense of taking the Air. The Ringleaders of the Sedition fretted, and
could not digest to have the King rescued from their fury. The first remarkable
Act of the retirement to Ruel, was the imprisonment and banifsment of Chavigny.

Here begins a general storm to gather over Mazarine. Orleans steps in as a
Mediator between Court and Parliament. Conde returned from the Campaigne,
elated with his fresh Victory, at first dealt roughly with the Senate,
afterward flattered their Loaders: pretended at least to Constable or Admiral.
Longueville instigated his Brother-in-Law, boasting that he had obtained Havre
de Grace, the famous strength of Normandy, so taking occasion to fall from his
former Party. The Archbishop of Corinth put Longuevillo on to such courses,
upon a vain expectation, as if he should be declared by an Act of Parliament
Prince of the blood. Anne Bourbon, the, Wife of Longueville, was of great
moment to the Faction: she carried along with her the Archbishop of Corinth,
the Duke of Retz, her Bro^her Conti, with Rochfoucault, who was then that
Ladies Cabinet Counselor. Those all pretended the public and private good.
That their Tyranny must be abated with Arms, who had put the King upon cruel
Counsels, and rendered the Princes odious to him, and suspected.

The Queen sees her self struck at through the sides of Mazarine. She composeth
her mind, recollecting her thoughts how to provide for the future. Mazarine
applies his mind to an accommodation. The substance of the Articles was, That
many Taxes were to be abated in Towns and Country: The Provinces were to be
eased of them by the Masters of Requests: no man might be kept in Prison above
the space of one natural day, without answering to his charge in the House:
which was eagerly disputed and approved even by the Court Party. Chavigny is
released, and turns aside to Tours. Thus the first heat of Paris was assuaged.
About the end of October the King returns to Paris.

But the Faction having got strength through his Majesty's Clemency, and the
obtaining their Petitions, as being now established by Law, makes the former
concessions but a step to higher demands. The Parliament boiled up with new
designs. The storm of envy discharges it self on Mazarine: it is openly cried
out, That the Axe must be laid to the root; the Stranger must be expelled out
of the Kingdom. At length the Thunderclap broke over the head of Mazarine. He
is Voted in a full House guilty of High Treason, and the disturber of the
public Peace. Every Age, Condition, Sex, is commanded to assault, shoot, or
stab him: Whoever harbored him in the same house with them, should be guilty
of the same Crime with him. In the City came out diverse libels against Mazarine.

On December 26. Monsieur du Bosquet (heretofore Lord Chief Justice in the
Province of Languedoc, as also for that of Guienne) had the Bishopric of
Lodeva bestowed upon him by his Majesty, and was transmitted into holy Orders,
and after consecrated by the Archbishop of Narbonne, having for his Assistants,
the Bishops of Beziers and Alez.

Then was a Letter sent from the Court of Parliament at Paris, to all Majors,
Bailifs, Sheriffs, and other public Officers in the Kingdom of France, craving
of them to aid and assist the City of Paris with such Provisions whereof it
might stand in need, and with supplies of men and other Warlike necessaries,
to preserve the City for his Majesty's service. They declared, that Mazarine
as an utter enemy to the Kingdom, sought by all means, yea by open violence and
force of Arms, to suppress the King's Authority, that of their Court, with the
public liberty. And to that effect had caused the City of Paris to be
invested, and the King to be conveyed from thence at two of the clock in the
morning. Upon the news of these combustions in Paris at Rome, Monsieur Mazarine
wrote to his Son the Cardinal, telling him of his faults, and giving his
Fatherly advice.

The Court now between Paris and Roven (the two most powerful Cities of the
Kingdom) was distressed with the want of all things, especially of money, the
Aids coming in but slowly from all parts. The City Militia grew every day more
unwilling to submit to Orders: and all people were full of murmuring
complaints. Thereupon the Archbishop of Corinth gets up into the Pulpit at St.
Paul's, and says; I would have had you in safety; I would have had you
Victorious; and the goodness of the cause had acquitted you, unless your
repentance and tameness did plead guilty. Then having inveighed much against
the Government and Mazarine, he comes down out of the Pulpit: and having put
off his Mitre and Surplice, he puts on his Armor. Often he sallied out of
the Town to charge the Enemy, without any regard to his Function. Great uproars
and tumults followed; but at St. Germans the principal Lords of the King's
Council did earnestly treat of Peace with the Parliaments Commissioners,
Mazarine being excluded, as already pre-condemned by public Acts, some
Courtiers driving that way, that they might engross to themselves the honor of
having procured the quiet of the State. The Queen opposed it strongly, and at
length when he was taken in March 11. 1649. the Articles were agreed to the
great joy of the Common people. That an Act of Oblivion for past miscarriages
be made. That all things be restored to their former estate. That the King be
brought home again to Paris. Taxes to be diminished. A Treaty of Peace with the
Spaniard consented to: and some Worshipful Member of the House for Age and
Experience, be joined in the transaction, to see it concluded upon good and
firm terms.

The Sedition at Paris was scarce quiet, but the Faction works in new Plots.
There is a Rising in Provence, and especially in Guienne against their
Governors, which Conde underhand abetteth. Conde, Conti, and Longueville, are
imprisoned. Thrice they alter their Prison in thirteen months. Various
transactions passed in the mean time in Normandy, Burgundy, and Guienne. Great
contests there were either about releasing or detaining the Prisoners. The
Cardinal and the Slingers fell at odds, so as to betray one another, and treat
with the Prisoners about Marriages, and in a manner sharing the whole Kingdom.
At length a Peace is concluded and published on August 2. 1650. and all things
are settled in Guienne. The King enters the City of Bourdeaux with a Guard of
four thousand choice men. The Cardinal had Lodgings with the King in the
Archbishop's Palace. Espernon the cause of the Insurrection, was excluded, who
might by his single virtue purchase a Government. The Life-Guards were
dismissed, and the King trusted himself to the Guard of his Subjects. Which
took much with their Ambitious temper. The Court parted from thence. The King
stayed at Fountainbleau, all being in an uproar in Paris; at his success in
Guienne, the Faction were enraged.

On November 15. 1650. Conde, Conti, and Longueville, were conveyed in eleven
days journey through the midst of Normandy to Havre de Grace, where they were
kept in close custody. Harcourt secured the conveyance with four hundred Horse,
and the like number of Foot.

On February 6. 1651. in a dark night the Cardinal Incognito, in a disguised
habit guarded by about 200. Horse, riding himself on horseback, retired to St.
Germans, Harcourt beating the way. He pursues his journey through the midst of
Normandy to Havre de Grace with a pompous train, gazed at by all the people as
he passed along. Mazarine having disposed his Cavalry into the neighboring
Villages, enters into Havre de Grace with his retinue of menial servants. He
goes into the Castle alone with only two others, he delivers the Queens Letters
to the Governor for the releasing of the Princes, which was done accordingly.
Longueville went out first, then Conti, and both of them leaped into Grammont's
Coach. Conde staid a little while after with the Cardinal in the Prison
Chamber, where they had Conference together.

The enlarged Princes return to Paris, where the Soldiery at the sight of
Conde weep for joy. Great was the concourse of the City, and so great was the
joy, as though the Pillars were restored to the Kingdom.

Mazarine withdraws from France, and comes in safety to Brovel, the Palace of
the Elector of Cologn. Thence he writes to the Queen, and the Count de Brienne,
his Majesty's Secretary. This Letter being read with an audible voice in the
Privy Council, brought some to relent, but exasperated more. Mazarine is Voted
in a full house guilty of High Treason, the disturber of the public peace, and
enemy of France. Strict prohibitions are made, that no French man should hold
correspendence with him, imposing a severe penalty on all that should presume
to transgress.

Mazarine was in ill condition, against whose return were strict Ordinances, to
which the Queen Regent gave her assent: nay by Act of Parliament, not only
foreign but home-born Cardinals and Ecclesiastics, in what degree soever
dignified, are rendered incapable of being admitted Members of the King's
Council. No man can pay a divided Allegiance to his natural Sovereign, and the
Bishop of Rome. For Cardinals, if the account be rightly cast up, are but
Curates in Purple. They should attend the Consistories, and over-see their
Flock, the charge whereof cannot be neglected without the hazard of souls.
Corinth drew against the Bill, that only foreigners should be excluded from the
Government, lest his expected Hat not being lined with that Ministry to which
he aspired, might be depressed by his meaner contemplations.

Obusson, Archbishop of Yverdon, in behalf of the Clergy made an eloquent
Oration for the privileges of the Church, but without success. Yet the
reputation of Obusson grew by this means higher, and paved him a path to future
preferments. The main scope of his Oration lay in amplifying the obligations
that Cardinals had laid upon France, whose good services were conspicuous all
over the World. The Parliament answered, that the same Cardinals were
insatiable in Ambition and Covetousness. This (said they) is incident to
Ecclesiastical dignities, a slighting of heavenly matters, and an affectation
of domineering on earth, and eminency over great Princes, in all which they
write after the Copy, and come as near as they can to the Roman Court,
overcoming all the world in pride. They added, that they turn the greatness
they have received against their very benefactors, and aim at nothing less by
their Canonists and Emissaries, than the total suppression of the Secular
power. That if their immoderate advance proceed, the Authority of Churchmen
will become Empress of the world, and the Secular power must be its Lacquey,
which is scandalous.

The Queen tolerated these and such like disorders, and others cherished them.
The Parliament condemned them as prejudicial to their Authority. The Princes
could not well digest the hardiness of the Parliament of Paris. The Council of
the Nobles slighted both Court and Parliament, and joined with the Clergy.
Conde removes diverse Ministers of State. He takes the Government of Guienne,
rejecting his present one of Burgundy. He withdraws from Court. The Civil
commotions break out afresh, and a third Bourdeaux war arises. Now Mazarine is
revoked upon this ground, to succor the King, who was again distressed by the
faction.

The day of the Kings Majority approached; The King with the Queen Regent came
into the Parliament on September 7. 1651. with a solemn pomp. The Queen having
made a short recital of her Regency, delivers up her Government to her Son.

The first Action of the new King was to fall on Conde's Forces at Marle, Guise
and Vervain. They were partly routed, and some slain; part under the command of
Tavan recovered Stenay. From thence was the rise of the Civil War.

Then did Corinth compass that Hat so often promised, and so often put by;
which Pope Innocent granted, not so much for gratifying the King, as the
eclipsing Mazarine, by setting up an equal to him in dignity. No longer is he
called Corinth, but de Rhetz shall he be hereafter called.

The King leaving St. Germans, goes and falls upon Conde's Forces at Estampes.
They having barricadoed up the place, make a stout defense, and elude the
assaults of Thurenne, who upon the approach of the Lorrainer is forced to draw
off, and convey ths King to Corbeil. The Armies meet, and fight from five in
the morning till five in the evening with great fury. There were slain on both
sides men of quality, besides an innumerable company of common soldiers. The
port of S. Anthony being clear, Conde with his mangled Retinue comes into the
City. Conde draws off into Flanders. And Mazarine counterfeits a departure into
Spain, to divert the blame of the troubles upon Conde alone: The faction
declines: The King returns to Paris. Orleans withdraws without waiting on
the King.

De Rhetz is imprisoned at Vincennes. He was brought to Nantes, and he escapes
from thence, and afterward assisted at Rome at the election of Pope Alexander
VII. Then returning to France, he voluntarily laid down the Archbishopric of
Paris to gratify the King: he lives quietly, in splendor suitable to his
disposition.

Mazarin after his return pursues nothing so eagerly as the peace, setleth
France, makes a peace with Cromwell, and reduces his enemies to extremities.

Montauban, accusing them for beating a Priest, and making a tumult, to the
breach of the Kings peace. The King upon the complaint of the Clergy appointed
Monsieur Melian master of Requests, by special commission to go and make
enquiry at Montauban, touching the truth of what passed there between the
Protestants and the Catholics. Whereof the Deputy of the Protestants residing
at Paris being informed, he addressed himself to Monsieur Melian, and gave him
an account of all passages according to the testimonies and depositions that
had been already taken about me business: as how that they were most of them
Papists that were in the Tumult at the death of the Woman. And in ease this
were not true, then he desired himself might suffer the same punishment that
the ^ffenders do deserve. In the mean time he prayed the said Commissioner,
that the Protestants might have a full and fair hearing from him, when he
should arrive at Montauban.

In August 1656. the Assembly of the Clergy sitting in Paris, they resolved
that the Deputies of the Province of Paris should go to Court, to represent to
his Majesty the state of the Church of Paris, and the great need that there was
of his countenance and direction to put all things in order.

The Deputies of the said Assembly having conferred with the Chancellor, and
the other Ministers of State there residing, could not then come to any
conclusion upon those pretensions which the Clergy alleged against those of
the Reformed Religion. And therefore the Archbishop of Sens, the Bishop of
Montpelier, and two Abbots, spent some time at Court to solicit the King to
put forth some Declaration in favor of the Clergy and Catholic Religion.
Madam, the Duchess of Orleans arrived at Chartres to perform a Vow which she
h^d made, which was, that once every year she would visit the Church of
Chartres, there to make her devotion.

On August 9. the Deputies of the Assembly of the Clergy went with the
Chancellor, to consider of the differences and quarrels which they had against
those of the Reformed Religion, the King having deputed the Chancellor to join
with them in the examination of that business.

In the same month the Bishhop of Chartres died at Paris. He had been
Confessor to Cardinal Richlieu.

It was then affirmed by letters from Paris, that the King had consented to a
declaration drawn up in favor of the Clergy and Catholics, to be presented to
the Parliament for their verification, revoking his declaration of the year
1652. which was made in favor of the Protestants.

The Abbot of Marolles was apprehended, and sent prisoner to the Bastille for
words spoken against Cardinal Mazarine.

Christiana, late Queen of Sweden having renounced the Protestant Religion, and
revolted to the Catholic Religion, came into France, and on September 4. 1656.
lodged at Fontainbleau, where she was complemented with an Oration by the Sieur
Hambrocus, the Kings Professor extraordinary for the Hebrew, Syriack, and
Arabic Tongues, he being presented to her by the Duke of Guise. On the sixth
she was at the House of Monsieur Hesselin, who entertained her with all manner
of divertisements in that most delicious place. On the seventh she was at
Conflans in the house of the Duke of Richlieu; where she was likewise very
nobly treated by the Duke and Duchess, who at night gave her a Comedy. On the
eighth she made her entrance into Paris on Horseback, passing through ten
thousand Citizens who stood in Arms to receive her. Before her went an hundred
Switzers of the Kings Guard, with drums beating. At the Gate of S. Anthony she
had a speech made her by the Sieur de Seve, Provost of Merchants, in head of
all the companies of the City. Then she marched on (with a Canopy carried over
her, the great Guns being discharged, and the Streets all adorned with rich
hangings) toward the Church of Nostre-Dame. At the entrance whereof she was
entertained with an Oration by the Dean, all the Clergy giving attendance, and
then passing to the Quire, they sang Te Deum with admirable music: after which
she was most magnificently conducted to the Louvre.

The Archbishop of Roven having most unjustly prosecuted an Advocate of that
Parliament, called Monsieur de Cognard, a Professor of the Reformed Religion,
for writing a Book by order and with approbation of the Synod of Normandy, in
answer to a book full of calumniations and falsities, written by a Physician of
that place, who from a Protestant had a little before turned Papist: And the
said Archbishop by his violent persecution having obliged the said Cognard to
leave this City: by a just judgment of God, who uses ordinarily to punish men
in the very things wherein they have sinned, He the said Archbishop fell into
the same pit which he had dug for another, having at Roven published a most
dangerous Pamphlet, containing this seditious doctrine, That it is lawful to
fall on the Heretics; and granting either by his Archiepiscopal authority or
otherwise, an Indulgence or Pardon of an hundred years to any one that should
fall on any pretended Heretic. This cursed doctrine coming to the knowledge of
the French Court; and the dangerous consequences of it having been there
seriously weighed, the King sent order to the Duke of Longueville, Governor of
that Province, to apprehend the said Archbishop: but he timely hearing of it,
ran away, and absented himself from thence.

An English man was imprisoned at Bourdeaux, having been taken as he was
endeavoring to seduce diverse persons to turn to the Sect and Opinions of the
Quakers, a thing not heard of in France before that time.

Great talk was in Paris of a Miracle, which (they say) happened in the Monastery
of Port Royal in that City, upon one that was a Pensioner belonging to that
Monastery, who was said to have been cured of a Fistula in the eye, called
Fistula lachrymalis, by the touch of one of the thorns, which the Priests say
was taken out of the Crown of our blessed Savior: But how it came into France
I cannot tell you. And albeit in this prying age the Church of Rome has not
been very forward to broach any new miracles, especially on this side the
Alps, yet this has been much cried up. The Grand Vicar of the Archbishopric
of Paris was the first that was Patron of it, and afterward it was approved by
the Curat of S. Severin the present grand Vicar, assisted therein by five
Doctors of the Sorbon, and a public mass and thanksgiving was celebrated for
it. Hereupon many were drawn to the said Monastery to be cured by the holy
Thorn.

The Assembly of the Clergy lay so heavy with their importunities upon the
King, that it was yielded at length, that a Declaration should be issued forth,
contrary to the sense of former Declarations, which were made in favor of the
Protestants. Hereupon the Parliament of Toulouse proceeded so far, as to
ratify the said Declaration against the Protestants of France, and ordered
that two Counselors should go into upper and lower Languedoc, to put it in
Execution; and to cause such Churches to be demolished as had been built since
the Wars.

Soon after the Bishop of Soissons died, a Prelate of much reputation, who had
served King Henry IV. in the quality of Almoner. He was promoted to the said
Bishopric in the year 1623. He had the honor to consecrate the present King
at his Coronation. Since the Declaration forementioned, another Declaration of
the French King was published at Paris in behalf of the Protestants, intimating
that the Edict of Nantes should be punctually observed: and that two
Commissioners, one Protestant, one Papist, should repair to the places where
any innovations, or contraventions had been made, to reform the same.

Some Bishops of the Assembly of the Clergy, viz. those of Montauban and Alby,
represented to the said Assembly, that the answer made in the behalf of the
Protestants to the late speech of the Archbishop of Sens, ought to be burnt, as
a Book pernicious and injurious to the King, as they reported; and other
Bishops affirming the contrary, for the proving of the truth, the same answer
was read in their Assembly by the Secretary from one end to the other: and upon
reading of it the Assembly concluded, that there was no just ground therein to
complain of it to the King; and so the said Assembly dissolved without
prosecuting the business any farther at that time.

Not long after, a certain Popish Priest discoursing one day with a French
Protestant, with design to draw him over to the Church of Rome; he thought he
had brought him into a very hopeful way, when the Protestant had told him, that
all the Protestants in France would submit themselves to the Pope, if the Pope
would submit himself to the Councils: to whom the Priest replied, it will be
necessary then that a Council be called, and such rules established by common
consent, as shall be thought necessary for the Government of the Church. To
which the Protestant replied a little fiercely, How will the Pope observe the
Decrees of a Council, that cannot be kept from violating the Precepts of the
Gospel? but if you will undertake to bring the Pope to a submission to them, I
do not question to convert all of my Religion to the Pope: for to tell you the
truth Sir, I hold one as feasible as the other.

After the taking of Dunkirk by the English and French, and put into the hands
of the English, Crequi is sent Ambassador to O. Cromwell, with Mazarine's Nephew
in his pompous train: Cromwell died not long after.

Diverse places in Flanders were surrendered to the French: but amidst these
prosperous successes the French King falls into a Fever at Calais, judged to be
mortal. Supplications were made for him at all Altars, and prayers for his
recovery were publicly enjoined. Mazarine day and night sat by his bed side,
to make him governable in taking Physic, which he would taste himself, either
to take off the unpleasantness, or to make proof of it. The eleventh day
accounted Critical, the King seemed at the point of death, could scarcely life
up his eyes, that now appeared almost set in his head. His Majesty having
Antimony with judgment given him by Geunault, recovered; and being conveyed to
Paris, paid his Vows in Nostre-Dame Church. An heart of massy Gold was hung
upon the wall as an oblation: afterward to confirm his health, he removed to
Fontainbleau. Mazarine stayed some time behind to advance the siege of
Graveling. The taking of Graveling was the last Monument of the French glory
before the conclusion of the peace.

At twenty four Sessions the business of the peace between France and Spain was
completed, and at length on November 7. 1659. the Articles agreed on by the
two Ministers, were signed, and published.

The Cardinal at Toulouse rendered the King and Queen an account of the peace
concluded, whereat they received much satisfaction.

From hence the Court made a Progress into Provence (till the King of Spain
should come with his daughter, who was to be married to the French King) to
compose the disorders at Marseilles, which had broken out about the Privileges
of their Consuls.

Gaston Duke of Orleans, born of Henry IV. and Mary Medices, only Brother of
King Lewis XIII. having laid down the Civil Arms, would pass off the
discontents that were rifsn in his mind for the ill success of his design, by
retiring to Blois. On a sudden he turns Antiquary and Herbalist; he delighted
in Dogs and hunting, and ranging the Woods. He hears Masses frequently, sets
all the City of Bloys into a Religious humor: openly professes himself a
devout Votary. Among these and the like courses he fell sick, and having
Antimony unduly administered, within a Week dies of a Lethargy. The Corpse of
Gaston is deposited at St. Denis among the Tombs of his Ancestors with a
private burial.

The Kings of Spain and France meet, and the French King is married to Maria
Teresa, daughter to the King of Spain. The Gospels were laid on Stands on both
sides with a Crucifix. The Kings kneeling swore upon them, that they would
religiously observe the Articles of the peace concluded, which were at the same
moment read by the Secretaries.

These Kings having left the Island where they met, they were thus parted,
never more to return to the sight of one another. At St. John de Luz, next day
a solemn Wedding was kept with unusual splendour. Then without any stay, that
barren coast and unhospitable quarters are abandoned. The King and Queen stay a
while at Fontainbleau, thereby giving the Parisians respite to provide for the
pompous solemnity. The King with the Queen Confort hastens his entry into Paris.

The entry was next to a triumph. In a Domo set up in the Suburb of St.
Anthony, both their Majesty's were congratulated by the several Orders coming
forth decently marshalled. First came the Ecclesiastics carrying Images with
them, and Antique Gods of rude workmanship. The Tradesmen followed in their
several Companies. Then proceeded the Magistrates; and afterward the
Parliament in their Robes. Next the Chancellor laid over with Gold, the Masters
of the Requests guarding the Royal Seal, charged upon an Horse laden with
trappings. The Soldiers and the Heralds in rich Coats. All had spotted Plumes
in their Hats. The Captains marched in the Head of their Companies with the
Ensigns. All sorts of riches are displayed, and the ornaments of the City are
brought forth to grace the public joy. A Coach embellished with all the badges
of Majesty is brought to the Queen; she is set in it alone. The King would not
go in a Coach, but mounted on a gallant Steed, rode before. The Princes on
Horseback followed immediately after. In the way all along as they came were
Quires of excellent Musicians, resounding cheerful Airs in Consorts of
Instrumental and Vocal Melody. The new married Couple came amidst this Pomp to
the City-Gate. At the entrance was set up aloft an Image of Peace, holding
forth diverse Verses in its right hand. They proceeded from the Port through the
High-Streets of the City unto the Louver even tired with joy.

Scarce were six months expired after the Entry of the King, when Mazarine was
taken desperately with all the symptoms of extremest pain. His Liver and Lungs
distempered, caused a general feebleness in all his limbs. The Physicians
discovering there was no hope of his recovery, he retireth to Vincennes, there
to dye. The King commanded he should be left to his rest, and disturbed with no
business. He is reported to have suggested many things of the various Schemes
of Policy to the King, who commonly sat by his bed side. Many secrets he
instilled into the King, and wisely admonished him, That himself would
undertake the Government of his State, and not create a public jealousy by
ill-chosen Favorites. That he should have the same Genius, and the same Divine
assistance of his counsel, as he had to obtain his Victories. As they were thus
discoursing together, many times he fainted away: All hope being past, the King
departed. The same settled look which the Cardinal had when he was well,
accompanied him at his departure.

He adopted Du Port, the only Son of Meillcray into the Privileges of his
blood, to whom he gave his Niece in marriage, and conveyed to him his Name and
Arms, being for his merits taken into equal dearness, as if he had been his own
Son. He advanced his Nephew Mancini in Lordships, Riches and Governments. These
were to share equally. Of his Attendants and Menial Servants, scarce was any
left without a Legacy.

He ordered the building of a College for the training up the youth of the
gained Provinces, to have this Motto, A Monument of the Empire enlarged.

He particularly recommended John Baptista Colbert, whom he loved for his many
good qualities, unto the King. Having a vast quantity of Jewels, he distributed
them among diverse persons. To the Prince of Conde, in testimony of injuries
forgotten, he gave a Diamond of no mean price. To the King he left eighteen
that were inestimable, styled Mazarines, to propagate his Name and Renown to
posterity. He dyed on March 15. in the year of his life 59. of his power 18.

He was observant of the Romish Religion, as to the Externals of it. Being near
his end, he solemnly received the Eucharist, and with a devout Litany received
Extreme Unction: and further requested, that Masses might be said for him. All
was diligently performed in the Temples, and the Host exposed upon the Altars.
Supplications were made before all the Saints. Zealous he was for the Sea of
Rome beyond measure; and at his earnest request, the Pope's Nuntio blessed him.

After the death of Mazarine, the King's Cabinet Counselors were Michael
Tellier, Hugh Lyonne, both Secretaries of State, and John Baptista Colbert,
Lord Treasurer, men of great fame and virtue.

At the end of the month of July 1661. Nicholas Fouquet was arrested as he
returned from the Kings Council. He was carried into the Castle of Angers, from
thence to Vincennes, and at last to the Bastile. His penalty at last was
banishment.

The French and Spaniard having sent their Ministers into England, there arose
a contention in London between Estrade the French, and Batteville the Spanish
Ambassador, whose Coach should take place in the proceeding. Batteville with
his company falls violently upon the Attendants of Estrade, and wounds his
Coachman and Horses, and some of his Servants. The French King discharges his
indignation upon Batteville, and banisheth Count Fuelsaldagne from the Verge of
the Court, not respecting his integrity, and that he had been Conductor of the
Queen, who was the Pledge of Peace. He also denied Caracene (that was
discharged of the Government of the Low Countries) a passage through France;
moreover he orders the Archbishop of Yverdon (who was then at Madrid upon the
Kings account) not only to demand of King Philip himself, that Batteville might
be punished according to the hainousness of the offense: but to cut off all
contention about precedence for the future, that the Spanish Renunciation of
all Priority might be established by a public Act.

The Marquess Fuentes is now sent to Paris with a great Train. The King causes
the Popes Nuntio, the Ambassadors of Venice, Sweden, Savoy, the United
Provinces, and all Foreign Ministers, to be present; as also the Peers of the
Realm, the Chancellor, and four Secretaries, to register it. In this concourse
Fuentes thus spoke to the King. There being nothing more upon the King my
Masters heart, than Religiously to observe the Laws of Consanguinity, He has
sent me hither with a charge to confirm them, which at his Personal presence he
established with his Royal mouth. His Person I sustain this day, not
representing a King, that knows not to yield, but a Father, whose spirit only
nature works to a compliance. He has thought fit voluntarily to quit to you
those Transitory honors which he has enjoyed so long, since shortly death is
liks to put a period to them: These Gallantries may become your Age. Such
youthful Ambition an old man, and your Father-in-law envies not. The London
outrage has sunk deeper into his, than your heart. He could not more
effectially redress it, than by punishing the Author. The revocation of
Batteville, is a public declaration of inflicting punishment on him. But what
could have been added more to this, than to lay strict injunctions, that his
Ambassadors for the future, do not contend with yours about precedence? This is
the occasion of the Embassy, which I the rather perform, because the Peace
lately concluded, is hereby confirmed. May it stand in full force to all
Generations.

The King receiving satisfaction in his due honor, gave him a nod when he had
concluded his speech. He advised the Ambassadors to be mindful of what had
passed, and to report to their respective Princes what they had seen and heard.

Now Dunkirk by contract is delivered up by the English into the hands of the
French.

A Book had been published, entitled, The Journal of Monsieur de St. Amor, D.
of Sorbonne, containing a full account of all the Transactions both in France
and at Rome, concerning the five famous Propositions controverted between the
Jansenists and the Molinists, from the year 1646. till 1653. and an addition
was made to this Journal in the year 1662. The same year the King by
Proclamation commanded the Tenets of the Jansenists condemned by Pope Innocent
X. and Alexander VII. Franc. Albici was employed by Pope Innocent X. in the
business of the Jansenists, which he transacted so well, that the Pope made him
a Cardinal in the year 1654.
to be abolished. The Jansenists received their denomination from Cornelius
Jansen Bishop of Ypres, who about the fortieth year of his Age put out a Book
about Grace and Free Will.

About this time an affront is offered unto Crequi the French Ambassador at
Rome. The Corsi (the Soldiers that are the Popes Guard) upon pretense of some
trivial quarrel with Crequi's Pages, shoot Pistolls in at his windows, set upon
his Wives Coach as she is coming home, and offer all sorts of injuries,
trampling upon the Sacredness of the Embassy. Crequi departs from Rome
unsatisfied, and the Corsi triumph.

Hereupon the King his Master applies himself to the College of Cardinals for
redress; and his Letter was exactly as follows.

Cousin,
THe assault that was made the twentieth current upon the person of my Cousin
the Duke of Crequi, my Ambassador Extraordinary, his Lady, and all the French
the Corsi of Rome could meet with in the Streets that day, is an enormity so
great in all its circumstances, that perhaps in no time nor place, even among
the Barbarians themselves, can an instance be found, in which the jus Gentium
has been with so much inhumanity violated and abused. And forasmuch as your
Eminence is a member of that sacred body, that is, the natural Council of the
Popes, I have charged Monsignor Burlemont, Auditor of the Rota, to wait upon
you in this conjuncture, and acquaint you with my resentment of so great an
offense, to the end, that by your interposition (which I doubt not but you will
willingly undertake as far as you shall be able) I may receive a satisfaction
adaequate to the quality and extravagance of the affront. But if your Eminences
good offices should happen to be ineffectual, they shall not be imputed to me
(after this application) whatsoever mischiefs or calamities shall happen,
assuring my self I shall be excusable both to God, and to man, whatever the
consequences be. And thus referring the rest to what Monsignor Burlemont will
present to you by word of mouth, I beseech God, my good Cousin, to preserve you
in his holy favor.

St. Germans en ley, August. 20. 1662. LEWIS, De Lominie.


This Letter was read, and deliberated in the Sacred College, and the
Cardinals answer to the Kings Letter was as follows, Most Christian and most
Royal Sir,
I Am very sensible of the transcendent favor your Majesty has done me, in
vouchsafing to impart to me your resentment for the unhappy accident between
the Corses and certain of the Duke of Grequi's train; besides the honor you
have done me by the benign confidence expressed in your Letter, and by the
mouth of Monsignor Burlemont, your Majesty also has given me occasion with all
reverence to represent the great displeasure conceived by our whole Court, but
more especially his Holiness, in whose heart there is already so great an
impression and augmented by so many glorious actions, so many perpetual
testimonies of your valor and piety, in demolishing the Garrisons of
Heretics, and shutting their Chuches in palces under their Command. So that
his Holiness could not evidence with more paternal demonstration, the disgust
that action has given you, which he has not only declared publicly in his
Briefs upon that occasion, but in the Consistory also, and in his private
discourse, but much more in his actions, bending all his thoughts to your
Majesty's satisfaction, as he has always designed. I hope therefore your
Majesty, with your wonted generosity will reflect upon the just motives, and
remain satisfied even for the entire quiet and consolation of your servants,
among which I being not inferior to any in point of observance, neither have
failed, nor will fail in my obedience to your Majesty, nor in employing my self
to the utmost of my abilities in your Majesty's service. On the other side
likewise I shall rejoice, if in your Majesty's Resolutions, your Majesty's
Royal Bounty and Prudence does mroe and more appear: So that to make me
perfectly happy, there remains nothing but your Majesty's fresh commands, which
I most obsequiously do beg of your Majesty, and make my most humble obeisance.

Rome, 24. September. 1662.



The Count de Brienne was sent by the King of France to the Popes Nuntio at the
French Court, to Command him to leave Paris, and to retire to Meaux, and not to
stir from thence till further Order from his Majesty, pretending it aa an
expedient to secure his person against some such tumult as happened in Rome.

Piccolomini replied with all possible respect, that he would obey his
Majesty's Order, but he desired first to be heard, and went therefore that very
night to Court. But being heard by no body but Monsieur Lion, he declared the
sentiments of the Pope, the order he had taken for the punishment of the
offenders, the demonstrations of kindness the Pope had made to the
Ambassador, endeavoring with all the Art of Rhetoric to clear the business,
and by contrary Relations to what came before, to let him understand he could
not receive a relegation. The next morning the Nuntio retired to St. Germans,
and stirred not out of the Castle, that he might not seem to disobey the Orders
of the King. Monsieur Tellier came to speak with him by his Majesty's
permission. But being stiff and inflexible to the ^^quests of the Nuntio, who
by all his submissions, by laying before him the reflection the ill usage of
his person would have upon me Church, not being able to prevail for the
protraction of his departure, as soon as he was returned to his house, he wrote
this Letter to him.

Most excellent Sir,
I Can by no means admit that the Kings relegation of me is a favor. If it be
said, that it is in order to my security, how great a reflection will it have
upon the Grandeur of his Majesty, when it is reported that an innocent person,
and his Holiness Nuntio could not be safe in Paris? Let it be Lawful therefore
for me with all due reverence and submission to say, that indeed it is at the
Kings pleasure to retain or command me whither he pleases. But it is not in my
power to consent without particular Commission from his Holiness, or at least
an apparent neccessity for me to do it. His Majesty cannot ascribe it to any
want of profound obedience in me, which for my part I shall always show with
the greatest demonstration of humility and service I am able: and therefore I
conceive he cannot in justice impose any penalty upon a Nuntio, for so
contingent an accident, especially his Holiness having already declared his
resolution to chastise the offenders, and begun to execute that resolution. I
hope your excellence will have so much compassion, as in this case to endeavor
the protection of,

Yours, and.


The Nuntio persisted, that there ought to be an apparent and precise necessity
for his departure, and accordingly he received letters from Monsieur de Lions
with reiterated orders from his Majesty, for his removal to Meaux: so that all
the Intercesision of foreign Ministers, who endeavored to mitigate the
business, being in vain, by their advice he went out of Paris, but went
(instead of Meaux) to Saint Dennis, that he might not seem to consent to his
dismission: and by the mediation of the Ministers about the King, and the
interposition of foreign representatives he obtained, that his resolution was
allowed at Court without further irritation to his Majesty.

On September 7. the Nuntio found himself beset by a party of forty Soldiers
on horseback, drawn by order out of his Majesty's Musquetoons, who guarded
all the passages into the Covent of the Dominicans, where he Lodged, and
accompanied the Nuntio and all his servants whenever they went forth. He
complained to the Court of this Action; (...) he was answered, that they knew
nothing of it. The Nuntio dissembling the business, pretended to take no notice
of it, but gave Order that the Soldiers as strangers should be invited to
dinner, and to what civilities the House could afford. But they refused the
invitation with reciprocal civility.

The same night there arrived a Courrier to the Nuntio from Rome with the Popes
first Breve written to the King, with more distinct information of what was
part against the Delinquents thereby the Popes Orders, as the price that was
set upon their Heads, the deputation of two Congregations, the visit Cardinal
Chigi made to the Duke of Crequi, and a long Letter of narration to Monsieur de
Lion.

The next morning the Nuntio dispatched it to Monsieur Lion, with a Billet of
his own, desiring him to present this Breve to his Majesty, to give him an
account of the rest, and to prevail that the Nuntio might be admitted, to speak
with him himself. Monsieur de Lion receiving the Billet, carried both the one
and the other to his Majesty, expecting what he would command. After he had
read the Breve to his Majesty, he returned him this answer, That he should read
the rest of the dispatch that day to the King. And accordingly he appointed a
Conference with the Nuntio at Turenne, whither the Nuntio passed the same night
attended with forty Musketeers.

The Conference was long, the Nuntio laying before him, what upon the
foundation of truth, reason and the paternal inclination of his Holiness, was
like to appease his Majesty. The Sieur de Lion assured the Nuntio, that the
King at the reading of the Breve, expressed much satisfaction, to see his
Holiness so well disposed to an Accommodation; and at last it was concluded,
that on Sunday 10. of December, he should have an answer. The Nuntio had
intelligence that the Breve being read in Council they began to be appeased.

But at the same time a Gentleman arriving from the Duke of Crequi, with advice
that he was Commanded out of the Popes Territories, incensed his Majesty so
much, That as soon as he was gone out of the Council, Orders were dispatched
immediately to the Nuntio to depart that Kingdom the next day. And albeit he
sent another Breve from the Pope, and an answer to de Lion from himself, there
was no further Treaty to be had.

The Letters from the Nuntio to Lion and Teller, were not opened at all. The
Nuntio departed under the Conduct of fifty Musketeers on Horseback, twenty
five before his Coach, and as many behind, not suffering him to discourse with
any body, forcing him to march ten Leagues a day, and carrying him every night
out of the Road, without acquainting him which way he was to pass. In ten days
time he arrived in Savoy, and stayed there for some time in the Chambery, till
he could receive further Order from his Holiness, to whom he had given
particular advice of all that had passed.

The King of France took into his power Avignon, a City of the Popes in France,
threatens to use extremity, and prepares an Army against Italy. After diverse
Treaties it was concluded at Pisa, That for the appeasing the Kings wrath, the
Corsi be perpetually banished from Rome. That a Pyramid be built for an
everlasting Monument of the Action. And that a Legate a Latere be sent also to
the King in submissive terms, to give satisfaction for the hainousness of the
fact. Which was decently performed by Cardinal Chigi, the Popes Nephew.

At the time that accident happened to the Duke of Crequi in Rome, among all
the Cardinals there was none that stuck so zealously to the French party as the
Cardinal de Retz: to the admiration of every body, that a person that had been
turned out of his Church, and other Benefices, had been imprisoned, persecuted,
and banished, should appear with such ardour in the defense of that interest
that was the cause of his troubles: and (which is worse) resolved never to
re-admit him to the Dignities he had lost. The King of France unwilling to let
the constancy or generosit, of de Retz, with which he maintained the just
privileges of his Crown, to go unrewarded, he admitted him again into his
favor, which he enjoyes to this day (if he be yet living) but with some
conditional limitations, as retaining still in his mind the prejudice he did
formerly to the Crown, though he often declared, that all his designs were
against Mazarine.

Afterward Carlo Roberti a Roman, was created Nuntio, and sent into France.
And though the gross of the quarrel forementioned was composed by the Treaty at
Pisa, yet there were certain relics remaining, that without good managing
might have unravelled all again. Therefore above all the Pope gave Roberti in
charge, that he should (as much as in him lay) redintegrate into the favor of
his Majesty, and the principal Officers in his Court the opinion that Chigi had
lost in France; and that he should endeavor to make them appear innocent, and
full of affection for that Crown. Pope Alexander VII. in his last promotion
made him a Cardinal with the rest of the Nuntio's, and sent him his Cap to
Paris. Before his Nuntiature into France, this Prelate, was much inclined to
the Interest of Spain: but when he began to be acquainted with the French Kings
entertainment, and the civility of the French Court, he changed his mind, and
followed the humor of the French.

Afterward certain Jesuits disobliged by some check which they had received
in Paris about the Jesuit Anthony Sancterelli's Book, de Haeresi, Schismate,
Apostasia (in which he spoke to the disparagement of the power of Princes, but
magnified and exalted the power and Authority of the Pope) fell publicly to
maintain before the Kings face the question of the Infallibility and
inpeccability of the Pope.

The French Divines thought themselves concerned for the honor of the Crown,
and conservation of the ancient privileges of their Church, to answer them
with a most just and well-grounded Censure, wherewith they rigorously condemned
the doctrine of the Jesuits, as too remote from the general opinion, and of
great prejudice to the Sovereignty of Princes.

Pope Alexander VII. having notice of what passed, testified to King Jews, his
dislike of this proceeding. The King recommending the examination of the matter
to the wisdom of the Parliament of Paris, they upon mature deliberation
concluded, that the Popes Infallibility was not to be admitted in France, as
being an innovation, and inconsistent with the ancient privilege of the
Gallican Church: and therefore they saw no reason to admit a new opinion, known
only to such as depended on the Court of Rome, and reject that which was of
greater antiquity, and had been owned by so many Popes. Which determination so
netled his Holiness, that he fell immediately to his Bulls, and with great
threatening and curses forbad the Printing or reading of the abovesaid Censures.

Among other expressions in his Bull, there were these, Praefatas censuras uti
praesumptuosas, temerarias atque scandalosas. It was very well known, that
those Censures were made by the Sorbonists, Il Cardinalissimo.
the King's principal Divines, by the Parliament it self; which is as much as
to say, by the King himself. Notwithstanding the Pope spares not any revilings,
but throws forth peals of invectives indiscriminately, as if from a Pope
nothing is injurious. This is the respect the Popes bear to the most Christian
King, and to such a State as France.

Jews Duke of Vendosme, a French man, is descended from a Natural Son of King
Henry IV. who Marrying with Frances of Lorrain, Duchess of Mercoeur, had this
Jews by her. He had no great enclination to the Ecclesiastical habit, his mind
running more after Matrimony, and the affairs of the world. Accordingly when he
arrived at a competent Age, he Married a Niece of Cardinal Mazarine's, hoping
by means of his favor to open a way to some honorable employment. This Lady
lived not many years with the Duke her Husband, to whom she left two hopeful
Sons.

This Lord being a Widdower, changes his mind, being now altogether for the
Ecclesiastical habit; not in any penitential way, but only to capacitate him
for the Cardinalship, which he always aimed at. Finally, the French King
according to the Prerogative of his Crown, being to nominate a person in the
last promotion of Pope Alexander, presented this as a person of great Merit,
and fit to be an Ornament both to the Cap and College: and the rather because
in his Viceroyship in Catalonia, and in his Government of Provence, he had
showed great diligence in his Majesty's service.

A few days after he had received his Cap, the tidings of the Popes
languishing condition arrived: so that with directions from the King, he parted
immediately for Rome, to be present at the new Conclave, where he met exactly
with all the rest of the French Cardinals.

In the year 1667. Pope Alexander VII. dies, and Clement IX, succeeds him.
The Election being made, the Cardinal of Vendosm (who in this Conclave had
behaved himself with great prudence, and perhaps more than was expected by the
elder Cardinals, that had been a long time acquainted with the Intrigues of the
Conclaves) prepared for his return into France: but first he recommended to his
Holiness the Interests of his Master, particularly in the business of the
discameration of Castro, according to the Treaty at Pisa, in which it was
Articled, that Castro should be delivered. The Pope sent a Bull to Cardinal
Vendosme, declaring him Legate a Latere, and thereby qualifying him for that
Function.

Here follows a Relation of the Present Estate of the Reformed Churches in
France, translated out of French, and published Anno 1668.
I Shall only in brief relate the proceedings of the Adverse party against them.

The first and most considerable Mean used against them by the Popish Clergy is
that of Commissions.

For under pretext of executing the Edict of Nantes, and the Decrees made in
consequence thereof, and providing against the breaches of the same, they have
engaged the King to send Commissioners into all Provinces. For clearing
whereof, we must remember that Henry IV. of happy memory, having found it
convenient (for the quiet of his Subjctes) to make this Edict as a particular
and irrevocable Law, did send Commissioners into all the Provinces to execute
the same, and after those Commissioners had established all things in due form,
they returned their Executions into the hands of the King, to serve as a Rule
in all future debates, which could arise on that subject.

These Commissioners (although the Hugonots have usurped nothing since the
first execution of the Edict, but on the contrary have sustained innumerable
losses) have now altogether perverted the business: for concealing the first
execution of the Edict, they have compelled all the Reformed Churches within
the Kingdom to appear before those Commissioners, and to reproduce their
Titles, to verify their Right for the public Exercise of their Religion, and
to be judged a second time, as if the Edict had never been put in execution.
And albeit particular Churches produce Acts made in their favors by the first
Commissioners (Executors of the Edict) yet those new Commissioners without any
regard thereof reject the same as utterly invalid.

The Council past an Act Anno 1662. by which it was Ordained, That the
Protestants shall not be admitted before the Commissioners to prove the Rights
for the Exercise of their Religion by Inquests or Witnesses, even although the
Witnesses be Roman Catholics. Now, beside that this manner of probation was
never rejected, yet are they deprived of the only Mean which in most places is
left them to justify their Titles. For during the late Wars, many Churches
being pillaged or burnt, they cannot otherwise evidence their possession, than
by the testimony of Ancient men yet alive, who can depose the condition wherein
Affairs stood in the years 1596. and 1597.

Moreover, each Province has two Commissioners, one a Papist, the other a
Protestant. And from the Popish Commissioners what justice can they expect?
They (in effect) proceed according to the instructions of Menier the Jesuit,
who has Printed a Book, wherein fastening impertinent Expositions upon the
plainest terms of the Edict, and changing his Majesty's Authentic and Royal
Words into Jesuitical Equivocations, he has perverted all things according to
his own inclination. So that their strongest reasons are scorned, and their
best Titles rejected as Trifles, whilst the false Allegations of their
Adversaries are admitted as the best of Arguments. And they condemn some
Churches, which produce the like and much better Titles, than those alleged by
some other Churches, whose Privileges they have ratified.

And for the Protestant Commissioners, what justice or protection can they
expect from them, because the greatest part of them are chosen by direction and
recommendation of the Popish Prelates. And some of those Commissioners have
parted, or shared the places of Public Worship between the Papists and the
Protestants. And this sharing of Churches is always determined in Council, by
advice of the Popish Commissioners, their Protestant Colleagues being never
either called or heard; and hereupon the Hugonots have lost three parts of four
of all their Churches. And a multitude of Acts have been published by the
Council, which have been very grievous to them.

One Act has bereaved them of the liberty of praising God, May 6. 1659. and
March 17. 1661.
by forbidding the singing of Psalms, even privately in their houses, though it
be an eminent part of Christian Worship.

Another Act compels them to bury their dead clandestinely, Aug. 7. and
November 3. 1664.
and in the night, forgetting that the very Heathens had respect to the Tombs
of their enemies, etc.

Another has divested Protestant Magistrates (whatever be their charge or
quality) of the privilege of presiding in their Courts. October. 5. 1663.


Another has taken away all means of instructing and educating their Children,
Feb. 26. 1663.
leaving them at most (and that only in some places) the smaller Schools, where
is only taught to Read, Write, and Count.

Another has restrained the liberty of Printing any Books in favor of their
Religion, Jan. 19. 1663.
by imposing upon them a necessity of obtaining Licenses from the Kings
Council, which cannot be had.

Another ordains Parents to give Pensions to their Children who change their
Religion; Declar. O^tob. 24. 1663. and Act of Council Jan. 30. 1665.
even although the said Children will not dwell with them: as if Paternal
Authority were nulled by Childrens Apostasy.

October. 5. 1663.
Another prohibits the exercise of Charity toward their Brethren, who are in
want.

Another discharges payment of debts by those of the Commonalty who shall turn
Papists.

Feb. 22. 1664.
Another prohibits Ministers to Preach without the place of their Residence;
thereby depriving the Hugonots of the benefit of Annexations; that is, the
privilege of one Ministers supplying two Churches, which singly are not able
to afford a competent maintenance.

Sep^. 13. 1660.
Another deprives them of the liberty of their Classical meetings in the
Intervals of Synods, whereby the Exercise of Discipline is restrained, etc.

October. 5. 1663.
Another prohibits the Censuring of Protestant Parents by the Parochial
Eldership, or otherwise, for sending their Children to be educated by Jesuits
or Popish Tutors.

Sep^. 18. 1664.
Another gives liberty to Priests and Friars to enter the houses of Protestants,
and to come to their Bed-sides when sick or dying, to solicit them to change
their Religion. And after their death, they carry away their Children,
alleging falsely, that their Parents at their death gave some sign of
willingness to embrace the Romish Religion.

June 30. 1663.
Another makes it Criminal in Ministers to style themselves Pastors, or
Ministers of the Word of God. They forbid Ministers to wear a long Garment,
that they might have nothing to distinguish them from the Common people.

And in the Declaration Declar. 1663.
of pretended Relapses, it is Ordained, That those among the Hugonots, who have
once embraced the Popish Religion, shall never again return unto them, under
pain of perpetual banishment from the Kingdom. This is utterly to destroy all
liberty of Conscience.

They seem also to forbid them all hope of being heard in their own defense.
And there is little hope of being heard at the Council it self, where all their
Affairs have their last Appeal and audience. For it has often come to pass,
that the Protestant Deputies sent by the Provinces and Cities to plead their
Cause, have been expressly commanded to return, without so much as only liberty
to appear. And some have spent six months, some a whole year to procure an
hearing, whilst the Acts sued against them by the Catholic Clergy have been
obtained in less than twenty four hours; and in fine after a thousand cares,
they have only had the grief to return to their Provinces, with the news of the
loss of the Cause which they solicited.

The Clergy also do endeavor to intimidate and affright the Protestant
Ministers: some they have violently silenced: others they seek to ensnare on
every hand: some they criminally indict for very trifles, some are b^nished,
others are transported whither their Adversaries please: and they vex them so,
to the end no man may be willing to embrace the calling of a Minister.

Those Cities where Protestants for number are most considerable, seem to be
the principal Object of their Enemies fury. Of these Montauban, Rochel, and
Milan, (formerly three flourishing Cities) are now brought very low, and
exposed to sufferings of diverse kinds.

Their Adversaries vex them also with Civil and Criminal Lawsuits, as well
against the Body of their Church, as particular persons, sometimes in the name
of the Kings General Atturneys, or their Substitutes: sometime in the name of
Diocesan, or Monastic Attorneys, or their Chapters: and all this frequently
for things utterly false; as that they have spoken irreverently of the
Sacraments, or such like gross impostures: for proving of all which, they never
want suborners and false witnesses. And if at any time the Forgery be
discovered, the Judges seldom punish the Authors: or if they inflict any
punishment at all, it is but such as through the slightness thereof, gives
greater liberty and encouragement to such persons; whereof there are many
notorious Instances.

A liberty is also granted to Priests and Monks (whose nature without
encouragement is forward enough) to insult over the Hugonots, to commit all
manner of violence without fear of punishment, yea and to execute the
conciliary Acts against them, as they have done in Poictou, where the Priests
have in diverse places demolished Churches, dug up and searched the very
lowest stones of the foundation, broke open Chests, carried away the poors
moneys, pulled down particular men's houses, and the Castles of the Protestant
Gentry, abusing them with injurious words and most violent actions.

They also take strange ways to make Proselytes: for neglecting instruction
and good example (which are the only proper and lawful means of gaining souls
to God) they only use promises, threatenings, and labor to catch men by diverse
kinds of snares.

They also deprive the Hugonots of all means of acquiring a Livelihood, and all
hopes of preferment, there being no admittance of them into any public Office
(except those of the Chambers of the Edict) no, not so much as to the petty
Offices of a Notary, Attorney, or Sergeant, nor yet to learn Arts and Trades.

The Relator concludes thus; Unless we be wilfully blind, we cannot but see,
that they design to drive us (by despair) into some Insurrection. But that we
shall never do; preferring rather to suffer the greatest extremity, and our
very blood to be shed, than in the least to violate the respect which we owe to
our Prince. And if they cannot overcome our Patience (as assuredly they never
shall) then their Resolution is, by continual importunity to prevail with his
Majesty to drive us out of the Kingdom. But we hope the King is so good and
just, that he will never gratify them in such a thing without a Parallel. And
if we should be called to such a Trial, we hope God will give us such strength
and courage, as without Regret to abandon our native Land, that we may serve
Him, wherever his Providence shall call us. And this in effect is the general
resolution of all the PROTESTANTS within the Kingdom.

Since the writing the precedent Relation, which is but an Epitome of some of
the Principal matters translated out of French, and Printed by A. Maxwell, Anno
1668. there lately came to my hands a Pamphlet, which contains a Narrative of
the present deplorable estate of the Protestants in France, which declares
(among diverse other things) the proceeding of the Parliament at Roven, against
the Lady Bauroger and her Daughters, and Mr. Le Moine Pastor of the Protestant
Church at Roven, occasioned by the flight of Mademoiselle Darques out of France
into England. I shall refer the Reader for fuller satisfaction therein to the
foresaid Narrative, lately Printed at London.

Here follows a List of the Protestant Churches that have been demolished.
Anno 1661. BY a Decree of March 24. St. Bazil in the Diocese of Mompellier was
demolished.

Anno 1662. By a Decree of July 21. Lucque: and twenty three Churches by a
Decree of August 23. in the County of Gex were demolished. viz. Gex. Chalez.
Peron. Divone. Grilly. Crassy. Pougny. Colonges. Farges. Cessy. Crequi.
Soverny. Coulez. Versoy. Crosset. Chevry. Poully. Meyrin. Vergnier. Pregny.
Saconnay. Thoiry. St. Gian.


Anno 1663. Aubisson by a Decree of January 11. In Provence thirteen Churches
by a Decree of March 4. viz. Lants. La Cast. Gignac. D' Ongles. D' Oppedettes.
Signarques. Roquesin. Gordes. La Bastide. Des Gros. La Breoulli. Souliers.
Montagnac by a Decree of June 15.


Eighty nine Churches condemned by six Decrees October 5. in the Diocese of
Vsez, Nismes and Mande, scil.

Bellegarde in the Diocese of Nismes: Marvejols les Gardon Hommiers.
Puechredon. Lougrian. St. Nazaire des Gardies. Orthou. St. Jean de Serres.
Cezas. Cambo. Massilargues les Anduze. Dourbies. Aguzan. St. Bresson. St.
Benezet. S. Savior de Pourcils. St. John of Criculon. Gatuzieres. St. Bonet de
Salendrengues. Gaujac near Anduze. St. John de Baussels. Lauvejol. Vabres.
Candiac. Massanes. Liove. Bragassargues. Brouzet. Rouret. St. Julien de la Nef.
Roquedun. Courbes. Sendras. St. John du Pin. Marvejols in Vaunage. Boardie in
the Diocese of Vsez. Benezet. Concoules. S. John of Corargues. Villefort.
Combas. Youset. Mejane. St. Hippolite de Caton. Castelnau. Desplane, Mouteils.
Martinargues. Fone on the Lussan. St. Bazil of Vsez. Brueys. Roubiac. Serignac.
Avejan. Caunes. Ozou. S. Martin of Valgalges. Gadargues. Megrane. Arlande.
Montagnac. Versevil. Move. Poguadoresse. St. Victor of Malcap. St. Stephen of
Forvene. Foissac. Monmiraille. Fese. Maugieres. La Roviniere.
In the Diocese of Mande. Grisac. Castelbove. Balm near Barc. Monvaillam.
Mazaribal. Timelac. Mandenaur of Rousses. Fraisinet of Fourgues. St. Andiot.
St. Andre of Lancise. St. Michael of Dezee. St. Laurence of Trebe. St. Julian
of Points. Pont of Monvert. Ribautes. St. Casine. Geneyras. St. Julian of the
Neff. St. John of Rocques. La Rouviere. La Brugiere. Cincens. Bizarre.
Ardaillors. Cross. Talleyrac. Salargues. Breaw. Bouvillargues. Gueysargues.
Marignargues. Rodillan. S. Cezaire. Courvessac. Montredon. Lecques. Salinelles
the lesser. Galarques. Aperes. Buzinargues. Villatelle. Colorges. Lascours.
Cruvieres. Gujane. Crespien. Vio. Sauzet. Rochegude. Seynes. Daumesargues.
Bovisset. St. Martin of Campelade. Taraux. Fontarzche.


Anno 1664. Seyne by a Decree of May 12. Landouzy. Gercis. Sernay. Rue des
Boheins. Leval. September. 22. St. Croix de Candele. Vehaw. Vestrie. Malhaw.
October. 3. Alen on. October. 20. New-Church of Montauban. October. 29. The Church at
Nismes. November. 28.


Anno 1665. Churches demolished in Bretagne. Jan. 19. Syon. Croissie, La
Rochebibnard. Dinan. Ploer. St. Malo. In Picardy. Jan. 27. Salonel. Canesures.
Lindeboeuf. April 23. Le Mesnil. Forty Churches demolished in Poictu by a
Decree of August 6. Belabre. Chavigni. Exoudue. St. Gelais. Courteilles. Benay.
Coube. Marcillac. Puigni. Peselechat. Parthenay. Le Vigean. St. Benoir.
Puybeliart. Lucon. La Chaune. Belleville. Poire. St. Hermine. Le Boupire.
Chantaunay. St. Giles Survye. Talmont. Mareville. La Jandoviniere. Mavilleron.
St. Fulgent. St. Jovin de Milli. Benet. La Brassardiere. Lachataigneray.
Faussay. La Buardiere. Cenay. Aubanie. Guire. La Bouchetiere. Land Blanch. La
Milliere. Boifragon. La Chapelle Temet. La Moriniere.


Many Churches have been destroyed since 1666. yet few of their names are come
to our hands, unless

In 1672. St. Andre of Beausse, December. 20.
In 1673. By a Decree, Feb. 3. Vnet. Galapian. Favillet. Aimmet. Ligneux. S.
Barthelmy de la Perch.


A Brief account of the later Councils of France, celebrated from the time of
the Council of Trent.
O lespun Council. no^iss. Galliae.
THe Heads of the Statutes of the Provincial Council of Rhemes, Charles
Archbishop of Rhemes, Cardinal of Lorrain being President.

Statute 1. Of the Residence of Curates. 2. Of the Office of a Curate in
choosing and preaching sound Doctrine. 3. Of the Office of Curates in the
Administration of the Sacraments. 4. For what ends spiritual alliance shall be
thenceforth contracted by Baptism. 5. Of the lawful times of Marriage. 6. Of
the life and honesty of the Curates. 7. Of providing fit Clerks for the supply
of Vacant Churches, who are to be examined by six Doctors, or Licentiates in
Divinity, or in the Canon Law; or other Clerks, either Secular or Regular. 8.
Of promotion to holy Orders. 9. Of the first Tonsure. No youths are to be
admitted to the first Tonsure, unless they have received the Sacrament of
Confirmation, and the rudiments of faith, and shall learn to read and write.
10. Of restoring the offices of Minor orders by the Churches, from a Deacon to
a doorkeeper. 11. Of the distinct collation of the things of the Orders, and
the qualities of those that are to be ordained. 12. That all Clerks be
appointed to some certain Church. 13. Of the Age and quality of those that are
to be promoted to the greater orders. None to be admitted to the Order of a
Subdeacon, till he be two and twenty years of age: none to the Order of a
Deacon, till three and twenty years of age: nor of a Priest till five and
twenty years of age. 14. Of the Examination of those to be promoted to the
greater Orders: concerning their persons, age, education, manners, faith and
doctrine. 15. Of the Office of a Subdeacon, and Deacon, and Priest about the
Church to which they are admitted. 16. All Orders are to be conferred Gratis.
17. Of the Visitation of Archdeacons, and the office of Rural Deans. 18. Of
the reparation of Churches, and the use of Images.
These Acts of the Council were perfected after nineteen several Congregations.

I shall omit the names of those who were either present in this Provincial
Council of Rhemes, or sent their Procuratours.

Some Decrees of the Synod concerning Marriages, and Ravishers of Women, were
approved, but not published.

I shall also pass over the procurations of the Archbishop of Rhemes, through
the Cities, Diocese, and Province of Rhemes.

The Constitutions of the Synod of Melum, Anno 1579.
1. COncerning the profession of the Catholic faith. 2. Of the diligence to be
used by Pastors against Heretics. 3. Of the punishing of rash swearers. 4. Of
Magical Arts in general, and of divinations prohibited by Law. 5. Of the
Visitation of Churches. 6. Of the Celebration of Festivals. 7. Of the
Sacraments in general. 8. Of the Sacraments in special. 9. Of Confirmation. 10.
Of the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. 11. Of the things pertaining to the
Celebration of the Mass. 12. Of Penance. 13. Of fasting. 14. Of Extreme
Unction. 15. Of Matrimony. 16. Of the Sacrament of Order. And first, of the
life and honesty of the Clergy in general. Of the causes of the reproaches cast
upon the Clergy. 17. Of promotion to Holy Orders. 18. Rules given to Bishops to
walk by. 19. Of Canonists. 20. Of Parish Priests. 21. Of Residency. 22. Of the
reformation of Regulars.
The Laws of a Seminary College, which is to be instituted in every Diocese,
according to the Decree of the Council of Trent, Sess. 23. c. 23.
Chap. 1. OF those that are to be admitted, and those that are to be
discharged. 2. Of those things which respect piety. 3. Of the things which
pertain to obedience. 4. Of the things which pertain to modesty. 5. Of the
things which respect studies. 6. Of those who shall have the charge of the
spiritual affairs of a Seminary, and things pertaining to learning, as also of
temporal things. 7. Of Hospitals for sick folks. Of a Procurator appointed for
pious causes, whom some call a Procurator of Souls. 8. Of the trimming and
adorning of Churches. 9. Of the funerals and burials of Catholics. 10. Of the
preservation of Church-goods. 11. Of the things that pertain to outward
jurisdiction.
Now concerning the Correction of public Crimes. 1. Of Whores, Bawds, and
Panders. 2. Of Concubinaries. 3. Of Usuries.


Here they pray and beseech all Princes and Magistrates, that they would use
their utmost endeavors to remedy these evils. 12. Of the office of foraneous
Vicars, and Arch-presbyters. 13. Of a Diocesan Synod, and of Synodal witnesses.
14. Of Schoolmasters. 15. Of the restraining of immoderate charges. 16. Of the
Sealings of Notaries.


The Canons and Decrees of the Provincial Council of Cambray, Anno 1565.
Chap. 1. OF the suspected and prohibited books of Heretics. 2. Of
Divinity-lectures in Chapters, and Monasteries. 3. Of Schools, and of the books
to be taught in them, and the manner of teaching youths. 4. Of a Seminary: and
of the age of youths to be admitted into a Seminary. 5. Of Doctrine, and
preaching the Word Of God. 6. Of Worship, Ceremonies, and Divine Service. 7. Of
Ecclesiastical Ministeries. 8. Of the life and honesty of the Clergy. 9. Of the
Examination of Bishops, and of the Examination of Pastors. 10. Of the
Residency of Bishops and Curates. 11. Of the residency of Pastors and their
Office. 12. Of a Visitation. 13. Of Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction. 14.
Of Matrimony. 15. Of Purgatory, and suffrages for the dead. 16. Of the
Monasteries of Men and Women. 17. Of the Saints, of their Veneration, Worship,
and Invocation. 18. Of Images: of the Images of Christ and the Saints to be
used in Temples: none of which are to be admitted without the consent and
judgment of the Bishop. 19. Of Indulgences: none are to be offered that are
new and unknown, and such only as are approved by the Ordinary.
The Decrees of the Provincial Synod of Roven, Anno 1581.
1. THat profession might be made of the faith of the one, holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, we excommunicate, and anathematize, according to the Lateran
Council (said they) all heresy exalting it self against the Orthodox and
Catholic Church: and all who do assert, and believe otherwise than the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church does believe and teach.

2. They set down a form of Profession of faith. I N. do with firm faith
believe and profess all and every thing which is contained in the symbol of
faith, which the holy Roman Church uses, etc. Concluding thus: And I most
firmly believe and embrace the Apostolic and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and
the rest of the observations and constitutions of the same Church. Item, I
admit the holy Scripture, according to that sense which our holy Mother the
Church has held and holds, whose right it is to judge of the true sense and
interpretation of the holy Scriptures: neither will I ever receive and
interpret it but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. I also
profess, that there are seven sacraments of the new Law, instituted by Jesus
Christ our Lord, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Order, and Matrimony, and that they do confer grace: and of these,
that Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, cannot be reiterated without sacrilege.
And I receive and admit the received and approved rites of the Catholic Church
in the solemn administration of all the foresaid Sacraments. I embrace and
receive all and every thing which have been defined and declared in the holy
Council of Trent concerning Original sin and Justification. Likewise I profess,
that there is offered up unto God in the Mass, a true, proper, and propitiatory
Sacrifice for quick and dead, and that in the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, there is truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood,
together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there is
made a conversion of the whole substance of the Bread into the Body, and of the
whole substance of the Wine into the Blood. Which conversion the Catholic
Church calls Transubstantiation. I confess also that under one kind only
whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is received. I constantly hold, that there
is a Purgatory, and that the souls detained there are helped by the suffrages
of the faithful. Likewise, that the Saints reigning together with Christ, are
to be Worshipped and called upon, and that they do offer up prayers to God for
us. And I assert, that their Relics are to be Worshipped. That the Images of
Christ, and the Mother of God always a Virgin, and also of other Saints, are
to be had and retained, and that due honor, and veneration is to be given to
them. And I affirm that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in the
Church, and that the use of them is very comfortable to Christian people. I
acknowledge, that the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church, is the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches. And I freely promise and swear true
obedience to the Roman Bishop, the Successor of the blessed Peter, the Prince
of the Apostles, the Successor of Jesus Christ. And I undoubtedly receive and
profess all other things delivered by the Sacred, Canonical, and Ecumenical
Councils, and especially the holy Council of Trent. Moreover I condemn, reject,
and anathematize all contrary things, and heresies whatsoever condemned,
rejected, and anathematized by the Church. And this Catholic faith, without
which no man can be saved, which I freely profess, and truly hold for the
present, the same I will retain, and profess constantly unto the end of my life
by the help of God, etc. And this I promise, vow, and swear, so help me God,
and his holy Gospels.

3. The third Decree was concerning Divine Worship in general.

4. Concerning the Sacraments. As for the Sacrament of Confirmation, it was to
be done frequently, and Gratis by the Bishops through the Towns in their
Diocesses.

5. Concerning Bishops, where diverse qualifications are pre-requisite before
any one be admitted to the Office of a Bishop.

6. Concerning the Offices of Bishops.

7. Concerning the Offices of Curates, and other Presbyters and Parish Priests.

8. Concerning Monasteries, wherein diverse Instructions and Rules are
prescribed to the Abbots and Priors, for the better governing themselves, and
their Monasteries.

9. Concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdicton.

There were also diverse Statutes made in the same Provincial Synod, concerning
the foundation of Schools and Seminaries.

The Decrees of the Provincial Council of Rhemes, Anno 1583.
1. COncerning the Catholic faith, and the reason of professing the same. 2. A
Form of Confession is set down. 3. Concerning Divine Worship. 4. Concerning the
Breviary, Missal, and Manual. 5. Concerning Festival Days. 6. Concerning
Divination by lots, and other things contrary to Christian piety. 7. Concerning
the Sacraments. 1. Of Confirmation. 2. Of Penance. 3. Of the Eucharist. 4. Of
Order. 5. Of Matrimony. Whereunto is added, the Decree of the Council of Trent
concerning the reformation of Matrimony, ex Sess. 24. -- 6. Of Extreme Unction.
8. Concerning Seminaries. 9. Of the Clergy in general. 10. Of Regulars, and
their Monasteries. 11. Of Curates. 12. Of Chapters and Canons. 13. Concerning
Bishops. 14. Concerning Simoniacks and Fiduciaries. 15. Concerning Burials. 16.
Concerning Usury. 17. Concerning Jurisdiction. 18. Concerning a Visitation. 19.
Concerning a Diocesan Synod. 20. Of a Provincial Synod.
The Decrees of the Provincial Council of Bourdeaux, together with the Laws of
the Seminaries, Anno 1583. all approved by the Pope.
1. COncerning a Confession of Faith. 2. Of those things which have respect to
Divine Worship and Religion. 3. Of Ecclesiastical Prayers. 4. Of the Breviary,
Missal, and other Books pertaining to Divine Offices. 5. Of those things which
either are to be observed, or to be taken heed of, in the holy Sacrifice of the
Mass (as they call it) and in Divine Offices. 6. Of Festival-dayes. 7. Of
Magic Arts, and other things contrary to Christian Religion. 8. Of the
Sacrament. 9. Of Baptism. 10. Of Confirmation. 11. Of the Eucharist. 12. Of
Penance. 13. Of Extreme Unction. 14. Of Order. 15. Of Matrimony. 16. Of
Bishops. 17. Of Chapters and the Canons of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches.
18. Of Parish Priests. 19. Of the Residency of Pastors. 20. Of preaching the
Word of God. 21. Of the life and manners of Clergymen. 22. Of the Examination
of those that are to be promoted to benefices with cure. 23. Of Simoniacks and
Confidentiaries. 24. Of Monasteries. 25. Of Seminaries. 26. Of the not
alienating the things of the Church. 27. Of Schools, Printers, and
Booksellers. 28. Of Hospitals. 29. Of Usuries and unlawful Contracts. 30. Of
Burials. 31. Of Jurisdiction. 32. Of a Visitation. 33. Of a Diocesan Synod. 34.
Of a Provincial Council. 35. Of Punishments.
Of the Institution and Laws of the Seminaries of the Province of Bourdeaux.
1. OF the Houses of a Seminary.] That they be built in a large and spacious
place, near unto the Cathedral Church. That there be a Chapel wherein the
Clergy may meet at prayers. That the dormitory be open and common, in which
every one may have his own bed, etc. That an Hospital be appointed in an open
place for sick folks, in which all things may be provided for the sick, with
singular piety and charity.

2. Of the manner of admitting Clerks into Seminaries.] The election and
admission of Clerks shall be in the power of the Bishop: or of those to whom
this care shall be committed by name. That out of all youths very fit youths
may be chosen, the Bishop shall cause it to be proclaimed through all the
Cities and Towns of the Diocese (especially where there are Schools) that if
any be poor, and born of lawful Matrimony, who desire to be promoted to the
Priesthood, and who have attained to the age of twelve years, and have not
exceeded the twentieth, and have made some progress in the Grammar, that they
appear to be examined at the time and place which he shall appoint them. The
Bishop shall not admit any to be examined, whom he shall behold to be maimed,
or deformed. Then shall he enquire diligently concerning the condition, estate,
manners, and religion of the Parents. And he shall try what progress the youths
have made in learning, he shall also have regard to their wit, virtue, and
disposition either to good or evil. And whom by manifest conjectures he shall
judge to be unfit for learning, piety, and the Priesthood, he shall by no means
admit into the Seminary. Before any one be admitted into the Seminary, he is to
be often admonished, that he may not be educated and nourished in the Seminary,
if he propound to himself any other kind of life, than an Ecclesiastical life.
Therefore let him by oath, vow, and holily promise, that he will never depart
to any other course of life, but will always faithfully serve the Church of
Christ in that degree and order which shall be assigned to him by the Bishop.
He shall also promise to obey the Governor of the Seminary, and his
Substitutes in all things, and that he will observe all the Laws and Statutes
of the Seminary, which shall be read unto him, etc. Let none be received till
he be instructed concerning his Bed, Gown, Cap, Wastecoat, and other Garments,
Surplice and Breviary.

3. Of the President, and Overseers of a Seminary.] None are to be admitted
into any Office in a Seminary, unless he be first diligently examined and tried
by the Bishop. Great care shall be taken, that the Governors of a Seminary be
men grave, prudent, and adorned with all kind of virtue, who by their example
and exhortations may provoke those that are under their charge to the study of
Piety and Virtue. Let all first put the confession of their faith, according to
the form expressed in the Provincial Council, in the hands of the Bishop. In
the Seminary there shall be one President of venerable gravity, and a Priest of
singular piety, whom all in the Seminary shall obey, as well in Spirituals as
Temporals. And to the President two other Priests shall be joined, whereof one
shall be an Overseer of all businesses of the Seminary: the other shall have
the care of the household affairs, and shall be called the Under-Master of the
Seminary. In the Seminary shall be so many servants as the Bishop, or those
delegated by him shall think fit. The Governors of the Seminary shall
diligently require of their Scholars a repetition of the Lecture, and direct
them in their manners and behavior. And one of them shall teach the Clerks an
Ecclesiastical Song. Let the President be daily in the Seminary, and with his
presence and care contain all in their duty: and to the Bishop let him often
give an account of the whole Seminary. Let the President have a Book in which
he may set down the names, sirnames, condition, the day and year of the
reception of all those who shall be admitted into the Seminary, and whatsoever
household stuff every one shall bring.

4. Of the Economy, or Houshold-Government of the Seminary.] A skilful
Procurator shall be set over the house in temporal matters, who shall take care
of affairs at home and abroad: he shall gather in time all the yearly rents and
profits of the Seminary: and the moneys collected he shall straightway deliver
to the President to be kept in a chest. And he shall have a Book, in which he
shall diligently and faithfully set down, whatsoever profits and moneys he
shall receive, and of whom, and for what cause, and shall note the day, the
month and the year. He shall give an account to the President of what he
receives and expendeth every month: and the President shall sign the book of
accounts with his own hand: and the same accounts shall the Bishop examine
every third month, etc. He that shall buy in food and other things, shall be
one that is found to be a man faithful and conscientious, who shall every day
receive so much money as is necessary from the Procurator, and every day give
an account to the Procurator of what is received and expended, and that
particularly and by piecemeal. The household stuff, and all the several Vessels
and Instruments of the Seminary, shall the Procurator set down in a Book, and
shall give an account of them to the Governor in the sixth month. Moderate
food, frugal, and not very delicate, shall be described by the Bishop and his
Delegates.

5. Of the Discipline of the Seminary: and first of Piety.] Let the Clerks be
excited to Piety and Religion. Let every one be raised up at four a clock in
the morning, then let them come together in one place, and with bended knees
apply themselves to Prayer for half an hour, and they shall rehearse (one going
before, others answering with a clear voice) the hourly prayers of the blessed
Virgin. They who shall be initiated to sacred orders, shall recite the Breviary
in convenient time, and with great attention. Before nine a clock in the
evening, before they lie down to rest, they shall all together rehearse the
Litanies, and by and by shall search and examine their consciences etc. Every
month shall every one confess his sins to the Priest: and being prepared let
them receive the holy Eucharist with great devotion, unless their Confessor see
cause to withold it from them. Every holy day going out two by two out of the
Seminary, and putting on their Surplices, let them come together to the greater
Mass, and Vespers, of the Cathedral-church of the City, in which the Seminary
shall be, and there let them stand and sit in places appointed for them, and
sing with the Quire; and on those days they shall be present at the public
Sermon in the same Church, or another place. The President also shall diverse
times in every month give brief exhortations to the Clergy concerning the
dignity of Virtues, and the filthiness of Vices, with the remedies thereof,
concerning blessedness, the pains of Hell, concerning death, the last
judgment. In the beginning of Dinner and Supper one of the Priests shall pray
for a blessing, and give thanks after Supper or Dinner, all modestly answering
the Priest going before them. The Psalm de profundis, etc. is to be added, and
other Collects for the Founder and Benefactors. In the time of Dinner and
Supper let one read by suggestion some Chapter out of the holy Bible, to which
may be added the reading of some pious Book, which they shall all diligently
hear, that whilst the body is refreshed with food, the mind may never be idle.
Among other Writings of Pious and Learned men, let them often read privately
and publicly that famous Epistle of S. Hierom to Nepotian, de Vita Clericorum,
that unto that Rule every one may endeavor to direct himself.

6. Of obedience, and other duties of the Clerks of the Seminary.] The Clerks
of the Seminary are to be obedient to their Governors in all things. Let none
go out of the College without leave, and a companion joined to him, with whom
let him also return back again into the Seminary. Let none send or otherwise
receive Letters, unless by the hand of the President, who shall diligently read
them, etc. None shall eat with any one without the Seminary, unless with his
Parents and Kindred, and that very seldom, and with leave; neither shall he
sleep out of the Seminary. If any go forth, and abide without, the President
being ignorant of it, he may not be admitted without consulting the Bishop,
whose right it is to appoint, whether he be to be received into the Seminary or
not. Let none touch another so much as in jest, but every where and among all
preserve modesty and gravity. Let silence every where be kept religiously, in
the Temple, in the Schools, in the Chamber, between going to and returning from
the School, and in all places let Ecclesiastical modesty appear. They shall not
discourse with those they meet, except by decent and modest salutation, which
may be done in passing by. As often as they shall go either to the Temple or
the School, they shall proceed modestly two by two, their Governor following
them to whom they are committed. When they are at study, let none speak with
other, neither in the morning before, nor in the evening after prayer. All
shall go to bed at nine a clock, and rise at four: all shall lie single in
their beds, that they may preserve their health. After Dinner, and after
Supper, they shall spend one hour in honest recreation, etc. Let them keep
their clothes, chambers, beds, books, clean: let them make up their beds early
in the morning.

7. Of their Learning.] Let all first learn the Compendium of the Catholic
Catechism so exactly, that by mutual interrogations concerning it, they may be
able to render an account of the Catholic Faith to every one requiring it. And
to that end a repetition of it shall be made twice in a Week. And when they
shall be advanced herein, let the reading of the Roman Catechism be diligently
commended to them, that from thence they may learn the higher Doctrine of the
Sacraments. Let them always keep the Law of speaking Latin, and let them be
diligent in learning their lessons, and getting them by heart in the time
prefixed, etc. Let none be absent from School in the appointed time. In the
School, let the Clerks who shall be of the same form, sit together, and
endeavor to excel others with all modesty. Let them neither buy nor have any
Books, but those whom the President shall judge to be profitable for them.
Books that are condemned by the holy Apostolical Chair, and immodest Books, let
them not so much as know them by name, much less let them dare ever to read
them. They shall be exercised in all kind of Disciplines, which do especially
help to the knowledge of Divinity, and when they shall learn more humane
Learning and Philosophy, they are to be chiefly instructed in that part of
Divinity which unfoldeth cases of conscience. Let them also learn
Ecclesiastical Books diligently, and those which they call Ritual. Let all be
exercised in their order in making Orations and Exhortations concerning the
commandments of God and of the Church, concerning the Articles of faith,
Virtues to be followed, and Vices to be shunned, or some other sentence of
Scripture, etc.

8. Of Correction.] If any be wayward, and saucy, especially who infect and
corrupt the manners of others, all endeavors are to be used, lest they bring
any detriment to the Seminary, if the Moderators are somewhat indulgent toward
them: neither are they who are of a crabbed nature long to be retained in the
Seminary, unless they shall reform them by words or correction. As they are not
to be born in a Seminary, who are ignorant and slothful, so much less they who
neglect piety, who violate the Statutes of the Seminary, who enter into society
with dissolute persons, who are delighted in the discourses of those that are
without, who are wont to whisper and backbite, etc. who art wont to lie, and
excuse their own faults, who impatiently bear punishments enjoined, who speak
or answer malapertly, undecently, or ironically. These and the like Vices are
first of all to be stopped by the whole Seminary, and sharply to be corrected,
without excepting any.

9. Of the reason of promoting Clerks, and dismissing them from the Seminary.
As often as Orders shall be celebrated, the President shall give to the Bishop
a Catalogue of those, who for their age, piety, and learning, may be promoted
to some Order.

In examinations which shall be had to vacant Benefices, the Seminary-Clerks if
they be fit, let them be preferred before all others. They shall be sent at the
pleasure of the Bishop to Churches destitute of Pastors, or to govern Schools,
or to undergo other Ecclesiastical Offices, for the necessity of times and
places. Whosoever shall be sent away from the Seminary, (for what cause soever)
let him render an account of his Office to the President, which he has
exercised at home, and restore all things to its place which have been
committed to him.

Those who have been educated in the Seminary, and without the license of the
Bishop have delivered up themselves to any place or person, or have fled out of
the Diocese in which they ought to serve the Church, shall be bound to make
restitution of that maintenance which they have received in the Seminary. They
who depart, if they come to better preferment, yet are they to remember that
they ought to be beneficial and grateful to the Seminary. Departing, let them
take their leave of the Lord Bishop, if he be in the City, his Vicars, the
President, the Priests, and the rest of their companions, and let them
earnestly entreat them all to pray for their prosperity.

The Decrees of another Provincial Synod follow, made partly at Tours in the
month of May 1583. and partly at Anjou in the month of September, I shall only
set down an Index of the Titles.
1. THe Prologue of the Synod. 2. Supplications to the Pope, and the Most
Christian King. 3. Of the care of defending the Profession of Faith. 4. A Form
of Confession of Faith is set down. 5. Of the Extirpation of Simony. 6. Of the
Sacraments and their use. 7. Of Baptism. 8. Of Confirmation. 9. Of the
Eucharist, and Sacrifice of the Mass. 10. Of Matrimony. 11. Of Order. 12. Of
the celebration of Festivals, the Veneration of Relics; and of Images. 13. Of
Ecclesiastical Discipline: the Reformation of the Clergy, as well as the
people. 14. Of Chapters, Dignities, and Canons. 15. Of Parish Priests,
Presbyters, and other Clerks. 16. Of Christ's faithful Laity.

This Synod requires Women not to go abroad, and especially not to come into
the Church, without their heads and breasts veiled. Indignum est, etc. It is an
unworthy thing (say they) that Christian women, whom it becomes to be adorned
with modesty and sobriety, to profess piety by good works, after a whorish
manner to expose themselves to the people with curled hair and naked breasts.

They forbid all temporal businesses to be done in the Church, where Prayers
and Divine Offices are to be performed. They require all Christians not to eat
without first consecrating their Table, and not to depart from Table without
pious and humble thanksgiving unto God. If any one has taken counterfeit
money, though ignorantly, and he know not the person from whom he received it,
yet he shall not presume to put it away to another, because it cannot be done
without appearance of evil. All Laics are forbidden to walk in the Church
(especially during the time of Divine Offices) under pain of Excommunication.

17. Of Monks, and Monasteries: of the manner of the admission of Novices into
Abbeys, Monasteries, and Convents. None is to be admitted to that profession
before the year of probation, and before the sixteenth year of his age. Of the
ancient Ceremonies and Customs of the Monasteries; the habits of the Monks, and
their shaving their beards, and having a round ring of hair on their heads. The
Laity are forbidden to sit among the Monks, whilst the Divine Mysteries are
celebrated. 18. Of Nuns and their Habits. A Prohibition to men to enter into
the Monasteries of the Women. 19. Of Burials. The bodies of Heretics not to
have Christian burial. Those who deny the Oblations or Legacies of the dead, or
refuse to pay them, or conceal their Wills and Testaments, or deceitfully
retain them, are to be excommunicated. 20. Of Jurisdiction and Visitation. 21.
Of preserving Church-goods, and not alienating them. 22. Of Seminaries,
Schools, and Universities.
The Decrees of the Provincial Council of Aquitain celebrated at Bituriges in
the month of September, Anno 1584.
IN the first place there is a Form of Confession of Faith, by those who were
present in this Provincial Council.

The Index of the Titles. 1. Concerning the Adoring, Worshipping, and Calling
upon God. 2. Concerning Faith. 3. Of the Preaching and Exposition of the Word
of God. 4. Of taking away the abuse of the Scriptures. 5. Of avoiding
Heretics. 6. Of Invocation of Saints, and of Festival days. 7. Of Pilgrimages
to holy places. No Clerk may presume to visit such places without having
obtained a license from his own Bishop, or his Vicar in writing; and before he
begin his journey, he is first to confess all his sins, and to receive the holy
Eucharist. None is to visit holy places out of curiosity, or out of pleasure,
or to view diverse Towns and places, but for the amendment of his life, and the
fulfilling of Vows. 8. Of Vigils and Fastings. 9. Of Churches and Temples. 10.
Of the Relics of Saints: The first Canon was, that the Bishops take care,
that the honor of Relics be preached to the people of God. That Relics are
not to be showed out of the Box, except it be done out of a solemn manner and
custom of some Church, but they are to be kept with honor and reverence. The
Relics of Saints may not be translated without the authority of the Pope, or
the Bishop, or a Council. They are to be carried by Ecclesiastical persons in
public prayers, not by Laics, unless perhaps it be granted them out of an
ancient and laudable custom of Churches and places. 11. Of Images. 12. Of the
celebration of the Divine Office, of Canonical hours, and the Ecclesiastical
Hymn. 13. Of daily distributions. 14. Of Boyes-Choristers: of their age,
manners, habit, and learning. 15. Of the Ornaments and Vessels of the Church.
16. Of Coemeteries, the care of the Dead, and of Purgatory. 17. Of Traditions.
18. Of the Sacraments in general. 19. Of Baptism. 20. Of Confirmation. 21. Of
Penance, and the parts of it. 22. Of the Eucharist. 23. Of the Mass. 24. Of
Order. 25. Of the Clergy. 26. Of Priests. 27. Of Matrimony. 28. Of Extreme
Unction. 29. Of the greater and lesser Seminaries, of Schools and Universities.
30. Of Jurisdiction. 31. Of Excommunication. 32. Of Archbishops and Bishops.
33. Of a Visitation, Procuration, and the persons to whom the power of Visiting
is given. 34. Of Canons and Chapters. 35. Of the Rectors of Parish Churches.
36. Of Benefices. 37. Of Monasteries and Religious Houses. 38. Of things
pertaining to the Church. 39. Of Blasphemies; of an Oath, and of Perjury. 40.
Of Divination by lots, Enchantments, Conjurations, and such like Superstitions.
41. Of Simoniacks and Fiduciaries. 42. Of Concubinaries. 43. Of Hospitals. 44.
Of Confraternities, and Fellowships. 45. Of Laics. 46. Of Councils.


This Council was concluded with acclamations to Pope Gregory XIII, to King
Henry III, to the Patriarch of Bituriges, and to all the Bishops that were
present in that Council, wishing them long life, and an happy return to their
Churches.

An Indulgence of forty days was granted by the Patriarch to all who were
present in this Synod, and to all people which favored so holy a work with
their wishes and prayers.

An Index of the Titles of the Decrees of the Provincial Council of Aquens,
Anno 1585.
1. COncerning the Profession of the Catholic faith. 2. A Form of confession
of faith. 3. Of the Rudiments of faith, and the Schools of Christian doctrine.
4. Of prohibited Books. 5. Of the Sacraments. 6. Of the Sacrament of Baptism.
7. Of the holy Chrisme. 8. Of Confirmation. 9. Of those things which pertain to
the Sacrament of the most holy Eucharist. 10. Of the celebration of the Mass.
11. Of the Missal and Breviary. 12. Of those things which pertain to the
Sacrament of Penance. 13. Of Matrimony. 14. Of those things which pertain to
the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. 15. Of those things which belong to the
Sacrament of Order. 16. Of the Worship of Festival days. 17. Of the life and
honesty of Clerks. 18. Of Bishops: of those things in which the Bishop out of
the Council of Trent, as delegate of the Apostolical Chair, may and ought to
proceed. 19. Of a Visitation. 20. Of Sermons, and Preaching the Word of God.
21. Of Canonists. 22. Of Chapters. 23. Of Beneficed persons, or Mansionaries.
24. Of Parish Priests, and Curates. 25. Of Residency. 26. Of Churches and their
Ordaining. 27. Of the Quire. 28. Of the Altar. 29. Of the Sacrist. 30. Of the
Coemeteries, Bell, Obsequies, and Funerals. 31. Of Processions. 32. Of
Indulgences. 33. Of Relics. 34. Of Excommunication. 35. Of those things which
pertain to the Collation of Benefices, and the preservation of rights and
goods. 36. Of a Seminary. 37. Of a Diocesan Synod. 38. Of foraneous Vicars. 39.
Of Monasteries. 40. Of Nuns, and their Vows of Chastity. 41. Of those things
which generally belong to these Constitutions.
The Titles of the Decrees of the Provincial Council of Toulouse, Anno 1590.
Part 1. 1. COncerning a Profession of Faith. 2. Concerning Bishops. 3.
Concerning Chapters. 4. Concerning Parish Priests. 5. Of Presbyters and Clerks.
6. Of Preachers. 7. Of foraneous Vicars. 8. Of Nuns.


Part 2. 1. Of Sacraments, and things belonging to the Sacraments. 2. Of
Baptism. 3. Of Confirmation. 4. Of Penance, and Confession. 5. Of the
Eucharist, and the holy Communion. 6. Of the celebration of Masses. 7. Of the
Sacrament of Order. 8. Of Matrimony. 9. Of extreme Unction. 10. Of care to be
had for the dead, and of their Funerals and burials. 11. Of the Relics, and
Images of Saints. 12. Of Indulgences. 13. Of prohibited meats and a
dispensation of them. 14. Of Holy Days and their veneration. 15. Of Vows, and
Religious Pilgrimages.


Part 3. 1. Of Churches, Chapels, Altars, and other things of like sort. 2. Of
Oratories situate in the way. 3. Of Schools and Fellowships of Christian
Doctrine. 4. Of Universities and Colleges. 5. Of Seminaries of Clerks. 6. Of
Hospitals, houses for Lepers, and other pious places. 7. Of confraternities and
fellowships.


Part 4. 1. Of Excommunication. 2. Of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the
judicial Court of a Bishop. 3. Of letting to hire, or the Alienation of
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical things. 4. Of Tenths and Oblations. 5. Of Simony.
6. Of Provisions, and renouncing of Benefices. 7. Of Residency. 8. Of a
Visitation. 9. Of the right of Patronage. 10. Of the holy Inquisition. 11. Of
prohibited Books. 12. Of Heretics, Magicians, Soothsaiers, and Astrologers.
13. Of Blasphemy. 14. Of Usuries. 15. Of pious Testaments and Legacies. 16. Of
exempt, and privileged persons. 17. Of the things which generally belong to
these Decrees.


The Admonitions of the Synod of the Clergy of France, Assembled at Paris, in
the year 1595. and 1596. sent into the Provinces of France, for restoring the
state of the Church.
The Index of the Titles. 1. DEs conciles Provinciaux, concerning Provincial
Councils. 2. De la Vacance aux Prelatures, of Vacancy to Bishoprics. 3. Des
Provisions abusives de ce temps, of the abusive Provisions of Benefices. 4. Of
Simonies and Confidences. 5. Des Syndies Diocesains: of Diocesan Commissioners.


Then follows,

Advis de l'Assemble'e du CLERGE de l'An. 1598. envoye aux Provinces, contre
les Oeconomats spirituels, and constitutions des Pensions aux persons
seculiers sur les Benefices.

The Admonition of the Assembly of the Clergy of France at Paris, Anno 1598.
sent into the Provinces of France, against spiritual Oeconomies, and Pensions
upon Benefices granted to Lay persons.

The Statutes of the Assembly of the Clergy of France at Paris, Anno 1606. for
the Administration of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
Then follow,

THe Decrees of the Provincial Council of Narbon. Which are of the same nature
with the Decrees of Diverse of the former Councils.

This Council assembled Anno 1609.

A Council Assembled at Aquens, to censure a Book De Ecclesiastica and Politica
potestate, of Ecclesiastical and Politic power.

Another Assembly of the Clergy of France met at Paris, Anno 1615. for the
reception of the Council of Trent.

A Provincial Council was congregated at Bourdeaux, Anno 1624. in the month of
September: the Decrees whereof were of the same kind with some of the foregoing
Councils.

There was also a General Council of the Clergy of France, Assembled at Paris,
Anno 1625.

Diverse Propositions were collected out of a Book set forth in English,
Entitled, Apologia pro modo procedendi Sanctae sedis Apostolicae, in regendis
Catholicis Anglie, durante persecutionis tempore; cum defensione Status
Religiosi. Auctore Daniele a Jesu.

Then follows an Epistle of the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, then
acting at Paris, to the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops through France,
concerning the condemning of two Volumes, to which these Titles are prefixed,
1. Traictez des Droicts and Libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane. 2. Preuue des
Libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane. February 14. 1639.


The first Council of the Province of Paris, under Francis de Gondy, the first
Archbishop of Paris, in the time of Pope Urban VIII. and King Jews XIII. was
celebrated in the year 1640. against a Book entitled, Optati Galli de cavendo
schismate, etc.

Whosoever shall desire to be satisfied fully concerning the French Cardinals,
I shall refer him to a Book entitled, Gallia Purpurata.

Of the Universities of France.
Paris.
PAris (the Metropolis) is the first, and most ancient University of France
Erasmus says, That Lutetia Academiarum omnium Regina, Paris is the Queen of
all Universities. The Emperor Charles the Great instituted this famous
University. Having made a League with Archaius King of Scots, he entreated that
King to send unto him Professors of the Greek and Latin Tongues, and of other
Learning for his University of Paris. Archaius sent unto him the forementioned
Alcuinus, or Albinus, John Melrose (so named from the Abbey Melrose) Claudius,
Clemens, and Anthony. Florentius reckons them among Heretics, who followed
the Greek Church, because they opposed the Romish Rites. The Kings of France
have beautified this University from time to time, with many sumptuous
Edifices, endowed it with many great Privileges and Princely Revenues. The
principal Colleges are the Sorbonne, and the College of Navarre.

King Jews IX. by the Counsel of Robert of Sorbon (which took his surname as
they say from the place of his Nativity) his Almoner and Confessor, erected a
College of Divines, which retains the name of Sorbon. Pope Clement IV.
confirmed the foundation of this College. He that answers there continues
from morning to night.

The College of Navarre was founded by Joan Queen of France and Navarre, Amo^
1304. She likewise enriched this College with an excellent Library.

The greatest part of the young Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen in France, are
customarily nourished and instructed in this College. Peter de Alliaco
Chancellor of Paris, has bestowed so much on this College, that he is
esteemed as a second founder.

Poictiers.
Poictiers is an University, especially for the Civil Law, and a See Episcopal.
It was erected under Charles VII. King of France, and confirmed by Pope
Eugenius IV. Scaliger in his Cities thus speaks of it.

Si studium est animae, veniunt a corpore vires;
Galliaque a meritis poscit utrumque sibi.
Haec studiis, aliae belli exercentur amore.
Pictavium est animus, caetera corpus erunt.
John Capnion, and Christophorus Longolius, were Professors here,

Lions.
Lions is pleasantly seated on the confluence of the Soasne, and the Rhosne,
anciently a Roman Colony (testified by many old Inscriptions) and honored with
a magnificent Temple, dedicated by the Cities of France to Augustus Caesar; now
the most famous Mart of France, and an University, which is very ancient, being
a seat of Learning in the time of Caius Caligula. For in those times before an
Altar consecrated to Augustus Caesar in the Temple forementioned, this Caligula
did institute some Exercises of the Greek and Roman Eloquence: the Victor to be
honored according to his merit, etc. The Archbishop hereof is the Metropolitan
of all France.

Angiers.
In it is an University founded by Jews the Second, Duke of Anjou, the Son of
King John, about the time that Rupertus Palsgrave of Rheine founded Heidelberg
in Germany, about the year 1346. It flourishes in the Study of the Latin
especially. Henry Valois, Brother to King Charles IX. augmented the same. He
invited thither many very Learned Scholars, among the which was Francis
Baldwin, who therein established the profession of the Civil Law. Out of this
University came Johannes Bodinus.

Avignon.
It is an ancient City of Provence situated on the Bank of Rhodanus, wherein
is an University of long continuance. In this City are said to be seven
Palaces; seven Parish-Churches; seven Monasteries; seven Nunneries: seven Inns,
and seven Gates. Pope Clement V. transferred the Papal Seat from Rome into this
City, where it remained seventy four years. It was made an University at the
time of the Pope's first settling here, and so it still continues.

Alciat the great Emblematist was here Professor, and taught the Law. Petrus
Castrensis a Lawyer, by sundry Learned Works he wrote, much ennobled this
University.

Orleans.
It is a rich and plentiful City pl^ced on the Bank of the River Loire. Some
write, That the foundation of this City was laid by Aurelian the Emperor, Anno
276. and from him was called Aurelia, which name it retains unto this day: In
this City was erected an University by Philip the fair, King of France, Anno
1312. Here the Civil Law is Learnedly professed, and this University by diverse
Learned Writers has been often entitled the Nurse or Mother thereof.

Bourges.
It is a famous University, called by Learned men the Ornament of Letters, and
habitation of the Muses. It was long since founded by a certain Duke of
Bourges, but afterward in process of time falling to decay, and being almost
utterly extinct, it was again restored by sundry Kings of France. It was
authorized and endowed with many great privileges and high prerogatives by
Pope Paul the second of that name. Here Alciate, Rebuffus, Duarenus, Hotoman,
Bonellus, and Cujacius (famous Lawyers) lived and taught with great applause.

Caen.
It is a City of Normandy, seated upon the River Orne, second in reputation of
the whole Province, and famous for the Sepulcher of William the Conqueror. An
University was erected here by Henry V. King of England, who after many
glorious Conquests achieved against the French King, he at last bereaved him
of Normandy, Anno 1418. In token and memory of which Victory, as a perpetual
Trophy and Monument of his glory, he caused to be laid in Caen the foundation
of this University. The Archbishop of Dublin was the first Reader of Divinity
there. In this University lately flourished Bochart that Learned French Divine.

Rhemes.
It is the Metropolis of Champaigne, wherein not long since was erected an
University by Charles Guise, Cardinal of Lorrain, Archbishop and Duke of
Rhemes. In this University among other Colleges, there is one appointed for
the education of young English fugitives.

The Archbisop of this See is one of the twelve Peers of France. The French
Kings are anointed at Rhemes (it is said) with the oil wherewith St. Remigius
had anointed Clovis the first Christian King of France.

Bourdeaux.
It is the chief City of Aquitain, seated on the South Bank of the Garond, not
far from the Sea, among the Marshes. An University was founded here by King
Jews XI. and a large Cathedral. Here Ausonius, that famous Poet, was born and
educated.

Toulouse.
It is the chief City of Languedoc, and one of the greatest in all France; so
ancient that some report it to be built when Deborah Judged Israel. It is the
seat of an Archbishop, and an University. Pope John XXII. first instituted the
University, which enjoys the same privileges that heretofore have been
granted unto Paris.

Nismes.
It was anciently a Colony of the Romans, now a Bishops See, where there remain
some marks of the Roman greatness, especially the ruins of a spacious Palace
built by the Emperor Adrian; in it an University was lately erected.

Montpelier.
It is a City in Languedoc, not far from the Mediterranean Sea; it is situate
on a high Mountain, as the name imports. Here is an University for the Study
of Physic, and for that very commodiously seated; the Country round about
affording great variety of medicinal Herbs. Out of this University many famous
Physicians have proceeded, viz. Gentilis, insignis Avicennae Commentator,
Falco, Argenterius, Dalechampius, Rondeletius, Valeriola, Jacobus Fontanus,
Laurentius Joubertus, Andreas Laurentius, insignis Anatomes scriptor.

Bisanson.
It is the Metropolis of Burgundy, seated between two Mountains on the Banks of
the River Doux, by which it is almost encompassed.

In the year 1540. a small University was founded here by the authority of Pope
Julius III. and the Emperor Charles V. which has since flourished exceedingly.

Dole.
It is a City in Burgundy. Anciently it was an University for the Study of the
Civil Laws; here Carolus Molinaeus publicly taught the Law. But now the
University is devoured by a College of Jesuits, who fearing lest the Doctrine
of the Reformed Churches might creep in among the people, not only have
debarred them the use of the Protestants Books, but have expressly forbid them
to talk of God, either in a good sort or in a bad.

Valonce.
It is a City in Daulphine; the chief City heretofore of the Valentini, then a
Roman Colony, now a Bishops See, and an University for the Civil Laws.

FINIS.
The Table of the First Part.
A.
ABbey of St. Badour. Page 34 Abbey of Lexovien. Page 32 Abbey of Shelles. Page
34 Abbey of St. Gallus. Page 56 Agelom a Monk of Luxovia. Page 62 Agobard
Bishop of Lions. Page 62 Agoiland the Saracen, his Treachery and Death. Page 56
Alcuinus, a Learned Man, in the time of Charles the Great. p. 41 Governor of
the Monastery of St. Martin. Page 45 Alcimus Bishop of Vienna. Page 27 Amandus
Bishop of Bourdeaux. Page 13 Amandus Bishop of Paris. Page 33 D' Amboise, and
Ascanius Cardinals. Page 185 The Bishop of Ambian, a great Lawyer, against the
Friars hearing of Confessions, etc. Page 148 The Battle at Agin-Court, where
ten thousand French were slain. Page 163 Alanus of Chartres, Secretary to King
Charles VII. Antonius de Rosellis, a famous Reader of the Law. Page 172
Andoclus a Martyr. Page 8 Angisus Abbot of Lobien. Page 56 Ambrose Ansbert a
good Writer. Page 67 Anselm Bishop of Laon, betrayeth Charles of Lorrain with
his Wife and Children unto his Enemies. Page 69 The Cardinal of Arles. Page 171
An Assembly of the Prelates at Tours, called by King Jews XII. Page 186
Aponius, a Writer of diverse Books. Page 38 Jacobus Amiotus, Abbot of Bellesona.
Page 209 Aphordisius, first Pastor of Bourges in France. Page 2 A great Army
against the Albigenses. Page 104 Arnalt, Bishop of Orleans, against the Pope's
power over the French Bishops. Page 69 Arnulph, Bishop of Metz, a Learned and
good Man. Page 32 Arnulph, a singular Preacher. Page 85 George, Cardinal of
Armignag. Page 214 Avitus, Bishop of Vienna; he converted the Burgundians to
the Faith of Christ. Page 22 Audoenus, Bishop of Roven. Page 35 Austregesil,
Bishop of Bourdeaux, Page 33
B.
BAvo, a Ro^^er, Converted by Amandus. Page 33 Cardinal Bettone, Archbishop of
Avignon. Page 174 Peter Bertrand, Bishop of Edven, his Speech. Page 136
Theodore Beza, a Learned Protestant Divine, his Works. Page 216 Frequent
Meetings of Bishops at Orleans. Page 22, 23 Bertram, an Holy Man, and singular
Writer. Page 64 Berengarius, the first that was accounted an Heretic for
denying Transubstantiation. Page 73 Bernard, a Monk of Clugny. Page 190 St.
Bernard, Abbot of Clarevaux his story. Page 87, 88, 89 Ann du Bourg, a famous
Protestant, burnt for the Truth. Page 214 William Brissonnet, a Godly French
Bishop. Page 193 Peter de Bruce, he Preaches against the Popes. Page 92 Pope
Boniface VIII. affirms that the Realm of France is a Benefice of the Papal
Majesty. p. 127. He put France under an Interdict. ibid. He investeth the
Emperor Albert, King of France. Page 128 Bruno, the Founder of the Order of
the Carthusians. Page 83 Queen Blanch worshippeth St. Edmond at Canterbury.
Page 112 William Budaeus, Secretary to King Francis I. his Library Keeper, and
afterward his Counselor, his works. Page 189 Cardinal Bellay. ibid William
Bellay, a Learned Nobleman. Page 190 Stephen Brulifer, a Doctor of Sorbon, and
Franciscan. Page 172
C.
JOhn Calvin, his Learning and Industriousness. Page 193 Dr. John Castellan, a
sincere Preacher of the Word in France, and Martyr. Page 194 The beginning of
the Cistercian Order. Page 83 Clovis I. the first Christian King of France, his
story from Page 18 ad Page 22 Caesarius Bishop of Arles. Page 22 Charles the
Great made Emperor of the West by the Pope. Page 44 He subdueth the Saxons,
and reduces them to the Christian Faith. Page 45 Claudius, Bishop of Auxerre.
Page 41 Jodocus Clichtoveus, a Learned Man of Paris. Page 184 Philip de
Commines, an Historiographer. Page 178 King Charles VII. reduces all to his
obedience, which was subdued to the English, except Calais. Page 164 When the
Cardinals were first shut up in a Conclave at the Election of the Pope. Page
120 Charles of Guise, Archbishop of Rhemes, and Charles of Vendosme made
Cardinals. Page 206 Crescens one of the first Preachers in France. Page 2
Columban, an Holy Man. Page 33 Councils at Matiscon. Page 24, 25 A Council at
Orleans. Page 23, 24 A Council at Poictiers. Page 26 A Council at Auxerre. Page
33 Councils at Cabillon, or Chalon, Page 34 and 52 A Council at Franckford.
Page 42 A Council at Mentz. Page 46 Councils at Rhemes. Page 48, 68, 69, 84, 89
A Council at Clermont. Page 80 A Council at Tours. Page 49 A Council at Arles.
Page 54 Councils at Lions. Page 57, 111 and 119 Councils at Paris. Page 58 and
Page 93 A Council at Meaux. Page 59 A Council at Pistis. ibid A Council at
Acciniacum. Page 60 A Council called by Pope John in France. Page 64 A Council
at Soissons. Page 99 A Council at Bourges. Page 106 The Council of Constance.
There it was decreed, that a Council lawfully assembled is above the Pope. Page
162 Charles the Great banisheth the Ambrosian service, and establishes the
Gregorian. Page 55 A general Complaint made against the Clergy of France, by
the Court of France, and all the Judges of France accusing them of many abuses.
Page 145
D.
KIng Dagobert built the Temple of St. Denis, which has since been the
Sepulcher of the French Kings. Page 32 Francis Duraneus, a Learned Lawyer. Page
208. Durandus, a famous Lawyer and Divine. Page 142, 143 Dionisius, Bishop of
Paris. Page 9
E.
ELigius, a Bishop. Page 35 Claudius Espencaeus, a Doctor of Sorbon, his
Learned Writings Page 191 Eucherius, Bishop of Lions. Page 15 Eustasius, Abbot
of Lexovien. Page 32 Exuperius. Bishop of Toulouse. Page 13
F.
JAcobus Faber, a learned Frenchman. Farel and Calvin were his Scholars. Page
183 Faustus, of an Abbot made Bishop of Rhegium in France. Page 20 France
divided into diverse Factions in the time when King Henry V. invaded it. Page
163 Fulco, Archbishop of Rhemes murdered in the Council of Rhemes. Page 68
Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres, a learned Man. Page 72 Fursius, Foilan, and Ultan,
built Monasteries in France. Page 35 King Francis the first, a Founder of
Learning in Paris. Page 190 A contention between the Friars of Paris, and the
French Prelates. Page 148, 149, 150
G.
GAnderious, Bishop of Lions. Page 34 Robert Gagwin, a French Historian. Page
183 John Gerson, a famous Divine of Paris, his Learning and Works. Page 164,
165 Gerebert, Archbishop of Rhemes. p. 70. He wrote the Apology of the French
Church. Page 71 Gotteschalk, his opinions. Page 63 Godfrey of Bovillon; chosen
King of Jerusalem. Page 83 Gratian, a Preacher at Tours. Page 9 Gratian, the
compiler of the Pope's Decrees. Page 101 Gregory, Bishop of Tours. Page 30 A
strife between the Gray Friars, Prelates, and Doctors of Paris. Page 114, 115
Gregory de Arimino opposes the Parisian Doctors in the Article of
Justification. Pope Gregory XII. translates his Seat back again from Avignon to
Rome. Page 152, 153 When the Gospel began to be Preached in France by Peter
Sebevilla. Page 192 Gul. de Sto. Amore, a Doctor of Paris. Page 111 Gul. de
alta Petra, Bishop of Paris. Page 108 Guilem, an Abbot, he wrote the Life of
St. Bernard. Page 92 Wesselus Gansfort, a Master in the University of Paris.
Page 172
H.
HAyabad a Franciscan, Preached in Avignon before Pope Clement, that the Church
of Rome is the Whore of Babylon, and the Pope and his Cardinals are Antichrist.
Page 147 King Henry II. killed by Earl Montgomery with a Lance. Page 213 King
Charles VI, puts the bearer of the Pope's Bulls to the punishment called the
Honorary Amends. ibid King Henry V. of England warreth in France, and dies
there. Page 164 Henry VI. an Infant, is Crowned K. at Paris. ibid Herebald,
Bishop of Auxerre. Page 62 Hildebert, Archbishop of Tours. Page 78 Hinckmarus
Archbishop of Rhemes Page 60, 61 Hinckmarus, Bishop of Laon. Page 60 Hilary,
Bishop of Poictiers in France. Page 11 Hilary, first Bishop of Arles. Page 15
I.
IRenaeus, his story. Page 6, 7, 8 Jews banished out of France, by King
Dagobert. p. 33. And by Philip Augustus. Page 93 Ivo, Archbishop of Chartres,
a Vassal to Pope Urban II. He wrote diverse Epistles to him. Page 79, 80 Joan of
Arc, her Story, her Valor, Success and Death. Page 168 Indulgences granted to
diverse Churches, Brother-hoods, and Hospitals. Page 218, 219, 220 Pope John
XXII. erected the Church of Toulouse into an Archbishopric: and divided the
Diocese of Toulouse into six Bishoprics. Page 144 King John and his Son Philip
are taken Prisoners by Edward the Black Prince, and carried into England. Page
148 James de Paradiso of Chartres, he wrote a little after the Council of
Basil. Page 170
L.
LAndilenus, Bishop of Vienna. Page 34 Lazarus, first Pastor of Marseilles.
Page 2 Good Laws enacted by King Jews IX. Page 116 A League among the French
Nobility against the Pope. Page 115 Launmarus of Chartres, a renowned Friar.
Page 22 Leporius a French Monk, a Nestorian. Page 20 A Letter sent in the name
of St. Peter. Page 39 Vincentius Lirinensis. He wrote against the Pelagians and
Nestorians. Page 18 The Emperor Jews imprisoned in the Monastery of St.
Medard at Soissons. Page 57 Lotharius becomes a Monk in the Abbey of Pluviers.
When the Pope's Legates came first to the Councils of France. Page 59 King
Jews IX. lost all his Army and himself, ^ith his two Brethren, Alphonso and
Charles, are taken Prisoners in Egypt. Page 113 The Principal Laws observed in
the Creation of the Pope. Page 120, 121 Lupus, Bishop of Troyes. Page 17 Lupus,
Bishop of Sens. Page 33 Lupus, Abbot of Ferraria. Page 63 Letters passed
between King Philip the fair, and Boniface VIII. Page 128, 129 A Letter of the
French Prelates sent to Pope Boniface VIII. Page 131, 132 Many Lutherans
commanded to be put to death in Paris by King Henry II. Page 207
M.
Claudius Mammertus Bishop of Vienna. Page 17 Margaret Queen of Navar, Sister
to King Francis 1. her memoires, and poetical works. Page 191 A Table of French
Martyrs. Page 175, ad 200 Martyrs at Lions and Vienna Page 3, 4 etc. Maurice,
Bishop of Anjou. Page 13 Martial converted diverse Provinces and People in
France to the Faith. Page 2 Rabanus Maurus, famous in the University of Paris.
Page 62 St. Martin, Bishop of Turin. Page 13 The Monastery of St. Martin near
Paris, called des Champs. Page 73 John le Mayre, a French Historian Page 183
Minerius, a cruel Persecutor of the Albigenses in the Town of Aix in Provence.
Page 203 Miximus, builder of the Micians Monastery. Page 22 Maximinus, first
Pastor of Aquens. Page 2 Maximinus, a Friar of Orleans. Page 22 John Melrose,
Abbot of the Augustinians. Page 41 Francis Morellus, President in a Synod of
the Protestants. Page 211
N.
WIlliam Nagaretta, Professor of the Laws, his Declaration and Appeal against
Pope Boniface VIII. at Paris, before the King and his Council. Page 120
Nicholas de Clemangiis, a learned Frenchman, he wrote against the abuses of
the Popes, and Court of Rome. Page 166
O.
ODilo, Abbot of Clugny, made Archbishop of Lions. Page 173 Odo, Bishop of
Baieux. Page 77 Nicholas Orem, he Preaches before the Pope and his Cardinals
at Avignon. Page 152
P.
MAthias Parisiensis, proves that the Pope is Antichrist. Page 155 The
Pastorelli, and their Destruction. Page 114 Paschasius Rathbert, Abbot of
Corbey. Page 64 Paul of Pisa, Tutor to Charles the Great. Page 41 Peregrinus,
when he flourished. Page 17 Philastrius, Bishop of Breux. Page 13 Philip the
Apostle, said first to have Preached the Gospel in France. Page 1 Postellus, a
learned Frenchman. Page 190 Peter Castellan, Bishop of Orleans. Page 191 Peter
Abailard, an Antitrinitarian. Page 100 Peter, Bishop of Clugny. Page 91 Peter,
a Monk of Paris. Page 100 Peter Cantor, he wrote against the Pope, and the
Mass-Priests. Page 101 Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, the Master of the
Sentences. Page 101 Peter de Cugneriis his Oration. Page 135 The Appeal of King
Philip the Fair against Pope Boniface VIII. at Paris. Page 130 Articles of
William de Plesiano Knight, read against Boniface VIII. at Paris. ibid. Peter
de Aliaco, Cardinal of Cambray, and Chancellor of Paris. Page 169 The
Pragmatic Sanction of King Charles VII. first made in a Synod assembled at
Bourges. Page 168 An Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, against the Pope's
exactions of Annates in France. Page 159 Projectus, Bishop of Marseilles. Page
33 The Story of Peter the Hermit, a French Pilgrim. Page 80, 81 Prosper of
Aquitain, when he flourished. Page 17
Q.
ST. Quintin, a Preacher and Martyr. Page 9
R.
REmigius, Bishop of Rhemes he baptized King Clovis, and 3000. of his Soldiers
with him. Page 20 Remigius, Bishop of Lions, he defended the Doctrine of
Gotteschalk. Page 63 Robert the Norman refuses the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Page
83 John Rochetalada Preaches, that the Church of Rome is the Whore of Babylon,
etc. and is burnt at Avignon. Page 147 Rusticus, a Martyr. Page 9 Thomas
Rhedon, a French Carmelite. Page 172
S.
SAlvianus, Bishop of Marseilles. Page 17 Solonius a good Writer. ibid
Salonius, Bishop of Vopinga. Page 26 Sagitarius, Bishop of Ebreduna. Page 26
Saturninus, the first Bishop of Toulouse. Page 9 Paulus Sergius, first Bishop
of Narbon in France. Page 2 Sebastian, a Martyr. Page 11 Sidonius Apollinaris,
first Bishop of Clermont. Page 16 Henry Stevens, and Robert his Son, Henry,
Robert's Son, and Paul the Son of that Henry, all learned Men, and Printers.
Page 204 Great contention between the Masters of Sorbon in Paris, and the
Preaching Friars. Page 114 Serenus, Bishop of Marseilles. Page 27 The Sect, and
Order of Monks called Stellati, instituted by King John. Page 152 The great
Schism between the French and Italian Cardinals, after the Death of Pope
Gregory XI. about the choice of the Pope. Page 155
T.
TRophimus, first Bishop of Arles. Page 1 Theodorus, Bishop of Marseilles. Page
30 Thevet, a learned Frenchman. Page 190
V.
VIctorinus of Aquitain. Page 21. A Synod at Verceles against Berengarius. Page
74 An Assembly of Bishops at Vicenas. Page 138 A book written in France, called
the Vergers Dream. Page 154 Peter Viret, an Eloquent French Divine. Page 194
Francis Vatablus, Regis Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in Paris, his Works.
Page 205
W.
WUlfarius, Archbishop of Rhemes. Page 48 William, Archbishop of Tire, a very
learned Man. Page 93 The Waldenses, their Original, and Doctrine. Page 96
X.
XYstus, first Pastor of Rhemes. Page 1
The end of the Table of the first part.
The Table of the Second Part.
A.
AN Assembly of the Clergy in the Abbey of St. German. page 41 A provincial
Council at Aix in Provence. page 42 An Assembly of the States at Blois. page
35, and 65 Antoine du Verdier. page 11 An Assembly of the Reformed Churches at
Saumur. page 101 A National Assembly of the Protestants. page 142 An Assembly
of the Bishops and Clergy of France, at Paris. page 128 Johannes Auratus,
Regius Professor in Paris. page 10 Anthony Sadeel, a good Preacher and Writer.
ibid Adrian Turnebus; Professor of Philosophy and Greek in Paris. ibid Andrew
Tiraquel, an excellent Lawyer page 8 Antoin de Chandieu, a Learned French
Divine. page 10 Andreas de Chesne, Historiographer to the King of France. page
10
B.
THe Abbot of Bloys writes against the book of Mariana the Jesuit. page 101 The
Lady Katherine de Bourbon, Sister to King Henry IV. married to the Duke of Bar,
she was a firm Protestant. page 85 A Woman of Burgundy kills 18 sick German
Soldiers. page 52 Briquemald and Cavagnes, dyed constantly in the Faith. page
26 John Bodin, a great Statesman, his speech and works. page 36 Renauld of
Beaune, Archbishop of Bourges, his speech. page 40 The Duke of Bovillon,
Prince of Sedan, turns Papist. page 122 Birth of the present King of France.
page 153 Guido de Bres, an Holy Martyr. page 16 Gulielmus Salustius Bartassius,
an excellent Poet. ibid
C.
JOhn Castle pierces King Henry IV. his upper Lip, etc. and is executed. page
83 Father Cotton, his ridiculous Sermon. page 88 A conference between Du
Moulin, and Cayer. page 88 Conference between the Bishop of Evereux and Du
Plessis Morney page 90 A new College built by King Henry IV. at la Flesh.
page 95 A conference between Du Moulin, and Father Gontier, a Jesuit. page 96 A
Congregation of French Prelates. page 4 A Colloquy at Poisy in France, between
the Popish Doctors, and the Protestant Ministers. page 5, 6 John Croy, a
Learned French Divine. page 10 A Conference at Flex. page 33 A Conference
between the German and French Divines at Mompelgart. page 45 A Council of
sixteen in Paris. page 53 Robert Constantine, a Learned Frenchman. page 19 An
affront put upon the Duke of Crequi at Rome, and the effects thereof. page 177,
178 Jacobus Cujacius, a great Lawyer. page 11.
D.
LAmbertus Danaeus, a French Divine of Orleans. page 71 The Death of the Bishop
of Chartres, who had been Confessor to Cardinal Richlieu. page 171 Dionisius
Lambinus, a Learned Frenchman. page 24 The French Divines answer and censure
the Book of Sancterellus the Jesuit. page 182 The Death of King Jews XIII.
page 160 Daniel Chamier, a learned Frenchman. page 107 Daniel Tilenus,
Professor at Sedan. page 104
E.
AN Edict made against Duels. page 129 Father Edmonds, Prior of the Covent of
Jacobines executed. page 70 Queen Elizabeth 's Letter to King Henry IV. upon
change of his Religion. page 80 French Exiles at Mompelgart. page 45
F.
ANthony Faius, a good French Divine, and Abraham his Son, their works. page 50
John Fernelius, a learned French Physician. page 8 A difference between the
Bishops and the Friars in France. page 143 A sore Famine in Paris. page 76
Francis Cupif a Sorbon Doctor, turns Protestant: his Censure. page 152 Fishes
called Surdonnes, sent by God's providence to the relief of the Poor at Rochel,
during the Siege. page 27
G.
THe Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Guise slain. page 59, 60 A League of
the Guisian Faction. page 34, 35 Gilbert Genebrard, a Divine of Paris. page 10
Paul Gondy, Archbishop of Corinth, and Cardinal de Rhetz. page 163 Henrico
Gaetano, sent Legate by the Pope to the League of France. page 71 The Guisian
League sworn in Toulouse, by the black Penitents. page 45 Many places in
France, side with the Guisian Faction. page 43
H.
KIng Henry III. curses the City of Paris. p. 55. he is murdered by a
Jacobine Monk. page 67 Michael Hospitalius, Chancellor of France, an opposer
of wicked Counsels against the Protestants. page 29 King Henry IV. embraces
the Roman Catholic Religion. p. 79. he is murdered by Ravillac. page 97
I.
THe Jesuits restored in France. page 95 Julius Caesar Scaliger, and Joseph
Scaliger, very learned Men. page 9
L.
A List of the Protestant Churches in France lately demolished. page 189, 190,
191 The latter Councils of France, since the Council of Trent. page 192, etc.
The Laws of a Seminary College. p. 194. and that of Bourdeaux in particular.
page 199, 200 A Letter of King Henry III. to the King of Navar. page 41
M.
CHarles Marillac Bishop of Vienna. page 2 August. Marlorat, Minister of the
Reformed Church at Roven, hanged by the Guisians. page 17 Clement Marot, a
famous French- Poet. page 17 The bloody Massacre of the Protestants at Paris.
page 23, 24 Peter Merlin, a learned French Divine. page 24 John Morinus, a
Learned Papist. page 19 Muretus, an eloquent Writer. page 17 Duke of
Montmorency beheaded. page 144 Papyrius Massonius, a Writer of the French
Chronicle. page 1^ Count Montgomery taken, and put to death. page 28 Andrew
Melvin, his Verses. page 29 Michael Montaign, his Works, and when he
flourished. page 30 Cardinal Mazarine made prime Minister of State. p. 164. he
raises a stately Library. p. 164. his Death. page 175 John Mercer, a learned
Frenchman, Successor of Vatablus, as Hebrew Professor at Paris. page 24
N.
KIng of Navar, and Prince of Conde, excommunicated by Pope Sixtus V. page 44
Their Protestation against it. ibid The King of Navar's Declaration against the
Guisian League. page 44
O.
OBusson, Archbishop of Yverdon. A Form of an Oath, propounded by those of the
Guisian League. page 35 D'Ossat and Du Perron made Cardinals. page 84 Some
Orders cried down in France, because of their Conspiracies against the State.
page 45
P.
PEter de Espignac Archbishop of Lions. page 35 Peter Verseris, Advocate in
the Court of Parliament at Paris. page 35 The Protestant Princes of Germany
raise an Army to defend the French Protestants. page 51 John Passeratius, an
excellent Orator, and Poet. page 11 Du Plessis Morney, his Story. page 103,
104, 105 Protestants disturbed in the exercise of their Religion. page 34 A
Popish Form of Profession of Faith. page 195 ad 203 The Works of Cardinal Du
Perron. page 101
Q.
JOhn Quinquarboreus, Professor of the Hebrew and Chaldee to the French King in
Paris. page 18
R.
A Relation of the present Estate of the Reformed Churches of France. page 184
ad 188 The Duke of Rohan, his military Actions in France. p. 140. his Peace
made with the King. 141 his Death. page 152 The Siege of Rochel. page 137 The
English attempt to relieve it, but in vain. ibid It is yielded to the King.
page 138 Cardinal Richlieu his death. The Characters given of him. page 156, 157
Francis Rabalaesus, a Witty but Atheistical Writer. page 19 Peter Ramus slain
in the Parisian Massacre. page 24 Rozarius, a Preacher at Orleans,
Apostatizeth, and afterward recanteth. page 24 Andrew Rivet and William Rivet,
two Godly French Divines. page 107 A Provincial Synod held at Roven. page 41
S.
SEdan, a Refuge for the Protestants. page 122 A Star seen in the Constellation
of Cassiopea. page 29 A National Synod held at Tonneinx p. 104. another at
Alais in Languedoc. page 108 Gaspar Scoppius, his Book tending to the Rebellion
of Subjects against the Sovereign power burnt by the Hangman. page 102 The
Spanish Renuntiation of all Priority to France. page 176 Claud. Salmasius, a
learned French Critic. page 100 Jac. Sirmondus, a Learned French Jesuit. p.
99. his works, page 100
T.
BEnedict Turretine, a learned Frenchman. page 100
V.
FRancis Vieta, a learned French Mathematician. page 100. Nicholas Vignerius, a
Learned French Historiographer. page 100 Nicholas Vignerius, Junior, a Learned
French Divine. page 100 The Bishop of Verdun imprisoned. page 131
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PArt I. Page 2. Line 31. read Mantz. p. 13. l. 23. 24. r. circumcelliones, p.
28. l. 14. r. Avergne, p. 31. l. 29. r. Theodorick, p. 57. l. 38. r. levies, p.
83. l. 17. r. Carthusians, p. 91. l. 20. r. his, p. 109. l. 27. r. and, p. 112.
l. 8. r. There.

Part II. p. 7. l. 11. r. leave, and l. 37. r. leave, p. 11. l. 3. r.
Undiquaque, p. 30. l. antepenult. r. peace was concluded, p. 54. l. 41. r. at
Soissons, p. 70. l. 19. r. Mars. p. 105. l. 3. r. Towns, p. 130. l. 19. r. the
chief, p. 146. l. 22. r. one Fish-day, p. 208. l. 8. r. Bells.


