THE Lovesick Spouse, OR THE SUBSTANCE OF FOUR SERMONS: Preached on Canticles
2.5. By William Gearing Minister of the Gospel.

Habet omnis amor Vim suam, nec potest vacare amor in anima amantis. August. in
Psalm 121. LONDON, Printed for Nevill Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster.
1665.

Unto the Right Worshipful, Sir THOMAS WILBRAHAM OF WOODHEY IN THE COUNTY of
CHESTER BARONET: And to the VIRTUOUS LADY, ELIZABETH WILBRAHAM, HIS WIFE.
WILLIAM GEARING Dedicateth this ensuing Discourse, AS A Public Testimonial of
his Hearty Thanks for their great respects manifested unto Him.

THE Lovesick Spouse.
CANTICLES 2.5. Stay me with Flaggons, Comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of
Love.


CHAP. I. The Introduction.
ALthough many spiritual things in this Book are lapt up in carnal expressions:
Yet there is nothing of the flesh in all this Dialogue: therefore the Jewish
Doctors would not have the common people to read this Book till they were
thirty years old, lest they should take that carnally, which is to be
understood in a spiritual and mystical sense. All delights are let into the
soul by the senses: therefore does the Spouse describe the Lord Jesus by such
things as are congruous to every sense: To the smell he is Myrrh;
Frankincense, Spikenard, and all kind of perfumes: To the taste, he is Wine,
Manna and Apples; To the eye, he is beauty and comeliness: every sense and
every affection may be fully satisfied with Christ.

In the beginning of this Chapter there is an interchangeable Discourse, or
Dialogue between the Bridegroom and the Bride. The Bridegroom speaks ver. 1, 2.
and the Bride, ver. 3, 4, 5. The Bridegroom speaks first of himself, ver. 1. I
am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys; there is a transcendent
sweetness, and an incomparable beauty in the Lord Jesus. Then he speaks of the
Church, ver. 2. As the Lilly, among Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters.
All other Assemblies compared with the Church, are but as thorns compared to a
Lilly.

Then the Bride speaks, ver. 3. she commends the worth of the Bridegroom. As
Christ esteems his Church to be as a Lilly among thorns: so she declares Christ
to be as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Forest. Christ is excellent in
himself: comfortable in his shadow or protection, and his fruit was sweet unto
her taste. In ver. 4. The Spouse sets forth the liberal entertainments which
Christ had given her. He brought me into the banqueting House, or the house of
Wine, according to the Hebrew; which may imply either the Wine-cellar, the
place where Wine is kept, or else the Banqueting House, the place where Wine
is drunk. If it be referred to the Wine cellar, then it must be applied to the
holy Scriptures, the true Storehouse of all spiritual comfort. But I rather
understand the house of Wine to be the place where Wine is drunk, understanding
thereby that communion that the Church has with Christ in his Ordinances, and
the enjoyment of all Church privileges, not only for necessity and delight,
Sola non comedit Aquila.
but even for abundance. As it is said of the Eagle; that she loves not to eat
her morsels alone; so, such is Christ's bounty, that he loves not to be in his
banqueting house alone, but brings in his Spouse to the House of Wine, there
to refresh her self abundantly.

Then the Spouse sets forth Christ's loving protection of her there. His banner
over me was Love.] The stretching out of this banner over her, denotes the
magnificence of Christ's entertainments, and the regality of his protection of
her, for defending her against all danger, and for defiance against all
enemies. The Church having now tasted of Christ's sweetness, her desire are very
suitable to his entertainments. She had ver. 3 compared Christ to an
Apple Tree, and ver. 4. compared his Ordinances to an House of Wine: therefore
she cries out in the words of my Text,

Stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love.

In which words you have. 1. The Churches importunate desire and longing for a
more comfortable refreshment of Christ's presence, Stay me with Flaggons,
comfort me with Apples. 2. The Reason of this her longing desire. For I am sick
of love. The Church is sensible of her want of communion with Christ, therefore
she is so desirous after him.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I note in the first place. Christus totus desiderabilis: Homo totus
desideria.
less then nothing; he is a depth of mercy, and we a depth of misery. The sense
of his infinite perfections, and of our numberless imperfections, should make
us the more desirous after him; he is all desirable, and we should be all
desire. Before Christ was known by the name of the worlds Savior, he was known
by that of the desired of all people. The desire of all Nations shall come,
Hag. 2.7. His Prophets honored him with this title before he was born: and he
might more truly (then Daniel) be called Vir desideriorum, a Man of desires.
Every soul that desires after any thing, is indigent; the soul that desires,
foregoes her self to seek out in another what she finds missing in her self.
Tertullian has well expressed the nature of this passion, when he says, it is
the glory of the thing desired, and the shame of him that does desire: for a
thing must be lovely to kindle our desires, (...) honor^^^ desideratae, and
dedecus desidera^tis Tertul. de p^en^tent.
it must have charms which may draw us, and perfections which may stay us, but
for certain likewise, the Will that does desire must be indigent, and must
stand in need of somewhat which makes it seek out a remedy. The heart of a
Christian has as it were, an infinite capacity, which can only be filled with
him who is summum bonum, Infinita concupiscentia existante; homines infamita
desiderant. Arist. 1. pa^it. cap. 6.
the chiefest Good; it is always empty till it get possession of Christ, all
other good things do make it but the more hungry, and not being able to
satisfy it, they irritate the desires thereof, but do not appease them: hence
it is, as the Philosopher speaks, we cannot limit our desires, but the
accomplishment of one begets another, and we run from one object to another, to
find him out of whom the rest are all but shadows.

CHAP. III.
THis shows us the reason why most people do not exercise their thoughts upon
Christ, If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God, James 1.5.
says St. James, it is not a particle of doubting whether any man did want
wisdom (for who does not?) but it implies such as want wisdom, and know they
want it; let such a one ask it of God. It is very observable that when the
sick, the blind and the lame were brought to Christ to be cured of their
maladies, he would ask this or the like questions of them, Will thou be made
whole? John 5.6. So to the blind man; What will thou that I do unto thee? Did
not Christ see the one man sick, and the other blind, and know well what they
wanted? To what end then served such questions? doubtless it was to affect them
with the feeling knowledge of their own wants: for it is sense of wants that
puts men upon desires of supply. There is a great necessity of our getting a
sensible knowledge of the want of Christ.

1. This will make every thing in Christ sweet to us: A full stomach loathes
the honeycomb, but to him that is hungry, every bitter thing is sweet: Hunger
is the best sauce; it makes every thing to relish the palate well; the heart
that is full, loathes Christ, who is sweeter then honey, and the honeycomb it
loathes his righteousness, loathes his graces, much more will it loath the
Cross of Christ, the reproaches of Christ: But oh how sweet is Christ to him
that is pincht with the want of him, and hungers after him! the reproach of
Christ is sweet, the Cross of Christ is sweet, the afflict one of Christ are
sweet; how sweet were the crumbs that fell from Christ's table to the Woman of
Canaan? The least hint of salvation, the smallest drop of mercy, a cast of an
eye from Christ, any good news or glad tidings from Christ, abundantly
refreshes the soul of a Christian in his spiritual wants. Our Savior took
care that the fragments of his broken loavs and fishes should be gathered up;
and he will have the least of his mercies to be prized, and none will prize
them, but those who are feelingly pinched with the want of them.

2. A feeling sense of the want of Christ, will put us upon importunate desires
after him; Rachels shame of barrenness made her cry out. Give me children, or I
die. Solomon says, The poor uses many Entreaties. Slight a beggar, yet he
will importune you: Beggars are homines importunissimi, the most importunate
men in the World; speak roughly to a beggar, threaten him with a cudgel, yet
he will use Entreaties; Oh Sir, have pity on me, I and mine are ready to
starve. Thus a man that is pinched with a feeling knowledge of the want of
Christ, he will lie at the door of Christ begging for mercy Lord I am ready to
perish for thirst, O thou who art the fountain of life, refresh me with some
living water; I am ready to perish with hunger, feed me with the bread of life.
By our sense of the want of Christ we see all that we have, and all that we can
do, John 16.1.
is from the fullness of Christ, Of his fullness we all receive, even grace for
grace: of his fullness of love, we receive love: of his fullness of humility, we
receive humility: of his fullness of life, we receive life. It is Christ's
fullness of oil that keeps our lamps continually burning. The sense of our want
of Christ, keeps the heart always in an humble frame, that it does not pride
it self in gifts or graces; the Soul says, what have I that I have not
received from Christ? This will always make us acknowledge our continued
dependence upon him.

3. Where men are ignorant of Christ, there is no desire after him. The whole
look not after the Physician, but the sick: They that conceive themselves sound
and well, will neglect the best Physician in the world: but how welcome is a
skilful Physician to one dangerously sick, and at the point of death: if he
hear but of such a ones name, he cries out, Oh send for him, run for him, let
him come to me with all speed, or else I am a dead man. Let a Physician put up
his Bills of admirable cures on every post, relating what great cures he has
done upon such and such persons, he has healed those that were helpless and
hopeless, etc. Those that are well, will read over the Note, and the cures, but
will not seek to the Physician. Jesus Christ (the great Physician of souls)
sets up his bills of miraculous cures, shows what great cures he has done;
he has cured the blind and the lame; he has cast out Devils, healed sinners
of all their diseases; he has healed Manasses of his Witchcraft and Sorcery,
Murder and Idolatry: he has healed Paul of his Blasphemy and Persecution:
healed Mary Magdalen, that was possessed of seven Devils: Yea, he makes
proclamation to all, that there is no Savior besides him, there is no such
Physician in heaven and earth that can do such cures as himself. I, even I, am
he that heals all your diseases: I give Manna to the hungry, living water to
the thirsty, halm to the wounded, case and refreshment to the burdened: Men
hear of these things, and read of these miraculous cures of mercy, but will not
seek to him for the cure of their spiritual maladies.

Use 2. Labor then to see a present need of Christ, I am Christ's, and Christ
is mine. Then let Satan, let the world, or his corrupt heart dissuade him and
use their most prevalent arguments to keep him from Christ, he will answer all,
as Caesar did his Mariners in a storm, dissuading him from venturing on the
Waters, Oportet navigare, non vivere, I must set sail, though I die: there is
more necessity of my sailing, then of my living: So a man fully possessed of
his absolute need of Christ, cries out, Christ is the unum necessarium, the one
thing necessary: tell me not of reproaches, of crosses, of persecutions, of
forsaking all, I must have Christ, or I am undone for ever; there is no
necessity of shunning these evils, of keeping my lusts, I must have Christ, or
I perish eternally.

CHAP. IV.
STay me with Flaggons, etc.] Mark what the Spouse says, here before my Text;
he brought me into his banqueting house or Wine-cellar, and then She cries
out, Stay me with Flaggons, etc. Hence I note,

That the more we enjoy Christ, Gadarens preferred their Swine above Christ,
because they valued them above him. Carnal hearts see no worth and excellency
in the Ordinances of Christ, they see no worth in the privileges of Christ,
they see no worth in the ways of Christ, no glory in grace, no glory in an
holy profession, no worth in his people. Greg. Homil. Maltum deseruit, qui
voluntatem habendi dereliquir. A sequentibus tanta relicta sunt, quanta a non
sequentibus desideraripossunt.
All that is spiritual, is above the ken of a carnal eye, his grace is
spiritual, his comforts are spiritual, his privileges spiritual. Carnal hearts
judge nothing excellent, but what is pompous. What the world counts excellent,
Christ calls for a forsaking of, and what the world counts dishonorable,
Christ calls for the taking it up. Therefore one of the Fathers said, that the
Apostles foregoing nothing, had yet foregone very much, since they had foregone
their own desires; and that, dispoiling themselves of a passion, which in their
greatest poverty gave them a right to all riches, they might boast to have
forsaken all things for Jesus Christ, Matthew. 19.

This shows a great difference between earthly and heavenly things: Israelites
did Manna) he soon loathes it: All vain fashions, all sensual delights and
pleasures, with which the hearts of the children of men are so much taken up,
after men have a while taken their fill of them, they soon grow weary of them,
they soon grow sick of them, though before they were sick for them; But it is
otherwise with heavenly things; we love them most, when we do enjoy them; and
do most desire them, when we have most of them. Christ is so sweet, Attonitus
novitate mali, divesque miserque. Effugere optat opes, and quae modo voverat
odit. Ovid. Mot. 11. de Mida.
that a Christian never thinks he wants him till he does enjoy him: he is so
far from thinking he has too much, that he never thinks he has enough of
Christ the more he has, the more he does desire. As for outward things, as to
the desire of them, we are often like that Prince, who repented his having
wished for riches, and was afflicted for having obtained them; his desire
became his punishment, he abhorred that which he desired, and finding himself
poor in the midst of plenty, Cui enim assecuto satis fuit, quod optanti nimium
videbatur? Senec. Epist. 118.
he prayed to be delivered from an evil which he himself had procured. Absence
of outward good things puts a valuation upon them, and their presence makes us
to despise them; they appear (as one says) great to our imagination, when they
are far off, but when they draw nearer, they lose their false greatness; all
their advantages vanish away as shadows before the Sun, and we turn our
valuation into disesteem, our love into hatred, and our desires into
detestation. Blessed are they that still hunger and thirst after Christ and his
righteousness, they shall be satisfied, Matthew. 5.6. Angels and glorified
Saints, though they are full of Christ and of God, yet they desire more of him.

CHAP. V.
I Observe further, that the Spouse is sick of love for Christ, and even
faints for him in the house Wine: Whence we may learn.

That at the time of special communion with Christ in his Ordinances,

This may give a check to those that come to the Ordinances of Christ, My
people have committed two evils; They have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, a running, streaming, and inexhaustible fountain (a million of
creatures cannot draw it dry) yet I am forsaken, Jer. 2.13.
I am undesired; I am a forsaken fountain: They choose broken cisterns, that is,
creatures which are cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water, hold no
joy, no comfort, no life; these things are desired, and all run with their
pitchers to these broken cisterns. They have committed two Evils, says the
Lord, two great evils: it is but one action, yet two great evils, an aversion
from God, and an inordinate conversion to the creature: a rejection of an
immutable God, and a choice of a mutable creature.

When we come to the Ordinances of Christ, the Lord Jesus bespeaks us, as David
did Saul, 1 Samuel 24.15. After whom is the King of Israel come out? after whom
do thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea? So Christ says, you are now
come into my presence, and pretend to draw near to me in a more solemn manner
then ordinary: After whom do your desires run out? after these dead things,
these dead dogs, these fleas, and not after me a living God? What answer will
ye make to Christ when he shall put this question to you? What evil did thou
find in me, that thou desiredst me not? How often have I gone about to melt
thee with my love, and did but look for thy desires of me, and could not so
much as obtain one desire from thee? What will the sad consequence hereof be,
but this? Christ will say to such; you have often drawn near to me in my
Ordinances, but me you affect not: the Devil, your own sins, and the curse of
God have oppressed you. I came to fave you, and have given you the means of
grace, and made a tender of my willingness to save you in the Gospel: I came to
save you out of the hands of your enemies, but you have forsaken me the
fountain of life and blessedness: And therefore now what have you to do to take
my Word within your mouths, to draw near to me, when your hearts are far from
me? Do not such perish justly, who desire not to be saved? Is any pity to be
shown to such that come to Gods Ordinances, and may have Manna, and will not?
If they will but desire after after it, they may have it: If such be starved to
death, who will pity them? They might have Living-waters, if they would ask
after them; but they will not: Do not such persons justly perish in their sins?
This then may justly check us for the deadness of our desires and affections,
when we come to converse with Christ in his Ordidances. Oh did we delight our
selves in holy exercises and holy Ordinances, how would they raise our hearts,
our desires and affections toward them? This is one end why God has ordained
Ordinances, namely to be as so many steps by which our affections may climb up
to heaven; hereby our hearts may have a strong intercourse with God, though our
persons be yet so far asunder. Therefore whenever thou drawest near to God in
any public or secret duty, let it be in hope to get nearer to God ere thou
do desist: and when you go to read and hear the Word, let it be with this
desire and prayer, that thou may there meet with something that may raise thy
affections nearer to God, and give thee a fuller taste of his love in Christ.

CHAP. VI.
STay me] The Word in the Original is in the plural number; She speaks to her
friends and companions: the faithful Ministers of Christ, and other experienced
Christians; Stay me with some comfortable Doctrines and promises, and with them
comfort and refresh my languishing spirit: the address is not directly to
Christ himself: Hence I note,

That the comforts of Christ to fainting Christians are often conveyed by the
Ministry of man; viz. that they may comfort those that are in spiritual
distress: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord, Isaiah 40.1.

God will have his people to go to Ministers for comfort, that are men like
themselves; and this is one reason why many people go heavy and sad all their
days, because out of the pride and stoutness of their Stomach, they neglect
and scorn to go to others for comfort; they hide their wounds and bleed
inwardly, because they are unwilling to lay open their sores to faithful and
learned Ministers, and experienced Christians: though the Lord he the God of
all comfort, yet for the most part, he conveyes it to us by the Ministry of
man. True it is! God sometimes does immediately comfort them that are cast
down: he can comfort without means, but he does not: but when means are
wanting, when we are debarred of comforts, then he comforts us in an immediate
way; but when means is to be had, when we may have the benefit of the Ministry
of the Word, and of the Communion of Saints, then God conveyeth comfort by
means: God will not comfort those immediately, that neglect and despise the
ordinary means of comfort: hereby God endeareth the affections of people to
Ministers, and of one Christian to another, when others can apply comfort to
them from their particular case and experience in the like kind: how welcome
are the words, and how sweet is the presence of a faithful Minister and
experienced Christian to them?

Let Ministers and Christians make it their business to comfort fainting souls.
etc. Ezekiel. 34, 4. It is to be presumed, that God that has called them to this
work, has fitted them for it: Hoord. Sermon. in Ephesians. 4.30.
Ministers are better Read then private men for the most part are; their
Calling leads them to be continually searching the Scriptures, and acquainting
themselves with the methods of Satan, and the means how to resist him, and
other holy matters which may enable them to be good Soul-Physicians. Therefore
let Ministers exercise themselves in cases of conscience, that they may have
experience in matters that concern the soul, and be able to apply seasonable
comfort to a languishing soul. -- Every private Christian, if he has the
Spirit of God, he will in some measure be enabled to comfort others. Two Irons,
if they be hot do close together immediately; So, when two godly Christians do
meet in love and fervency of affection, how do they heat and warm each other?
He that speaks experimentally to another, he speaks so feelingly, so
spiritually, so powerfully, with so much evidence and demonstration, and with
so much authority to his Brother, that it makes a deep impression upon him. A
faithful Minister, and an experimental Christian will go about the work with
love, and tenderness of affection. They that know what brokenness of heart for
sin is, will be ready to drop in oil into a wounded Conscience, and to apply
comfort to them from their own particular case. I was under the same tentations
wherewith you are assaulted; and thus I resisted and overcame them, thus I was
delivered from my doubts and fears, such a promise, such a Scripture satisfied
me: this or that gave me ease, quickened and comforted me. It is a Spiritual,
Divine, and Angelical work to be able to comfort distressed consciences: it is
Gods own work, it is he that puts joy into the heart, Psalm 4.7. He
comfort them that are cast down, he comfort us in all our tribulation: he
affects their hearts with some ravishing sense of his love and favor in
Christ. Christ has undertaken to comfort them that mourn; it is part of his
office and work to which he is anointed, Isaiah 61.1, 2, 3. It is the work of
the Holy Ghost to comfort, he is styled the Comforter; it is his work to make
them cry Abba Father, whom he brings into bondage to fear. Angels likewise do
comfort: when Christ was in an agony, an Angel came from heaven to comfort him.

2. Hence we may note that our Communion with Christ is furthered by our
spiritual converse one with another; the imparting of spiritual gifts and
comforts is a great establishment of a weak and fainting heart. Romans 1.11, 12.
Yea it is an establishment of the strongest Christian. I long to see you, says
Paul to the Romans, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, to the end
that you may be established, that is, that I may be comforted together with
you, by the mutual faith both of you and me. The greatest Apostle may be
established by the faith and experiences of the meanest Christian. God is a
free Dispenser of his gifts, and has variously distributed them, that we may
be engaged to use his bounty to the good of others, we, as good Stewards of the
manifold graces of God, should Minister the same to the use and benefit of our
brethren; we should impart to others the quicknings we have received under the
Ordinances of God, our refreshings by the promises, our enlargements after
prayer, or comforts after soul-abasements; by this means those that are (...)
and disconsolate, may be edified and comforted.

CHAP. VII.
IN the next place consider, that the Spouse here longs for Flaggons and
Apples, that is, comforts and graces together: The Spouse being in the
banqueting house, cries out, Stay me with Flaggons] that is, with Flaggons of
Wine; the Jews were wont to distribute at their Feasts and Banquets Wine by
Flaggons to their guests. When David had brought the Ark of God into his own
place, and had offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and blessed the
people, he dealt to every one a loaf of bread, a good piece of flesh, and a
flaggon of Wine. 1 Chronicles. 16.3. this is the portion of the Cup sometime
mentioned in the Old Testament, because they had a Cup or Flaggon for their
refreshment.

Comfort me with Apples.] This is of the same meaning with the former words:
Straw me a bed or boulster; so the LXX renders it: the Hebrew word Raphad,
signifies to spread abroad a bed or a boulster, as a Couch to lie on: and
alludeth to another custom of the Jews, who used at their Banquets Beds and
Couches to stretch themselves upon: So the Church being in the house of Wine,
calls for the Wine of heavenly refreshment, and to be boulstered up with
spiritual Apples, as one that is in a swooning or fainting fit. Fernelius tells
us, Fernel. de Methodo Medendi:
that Apples are Cordials, and good to comfort the heart and brain, and to
prevent swoonings; the Church in her languishing calls for spiritual Apples,
for the comforts and graces of the Spirit, with those fruits whereof she had
tasted, when she sat down under the shadow of the Apple Tree, Junius in hunc
loc.
ver. 3. Therefore Junius reads the words here; Comfort me with those Apples,
as pointing to those sweet entertainments she had, as before mentioned. Hence
note further.

That the comforts of Christ, sweetness, but those that have tasted of sins
bitterness; Christ will make thee holy, before he will refresh thee with the
comforts of his holy Spirit: he will make thee feel some bitterness in sin, for
all the pleasure thou have taken in sin; perhaps thy soul has wallowed in
sinful delights and pleasures for a long season, and now God in a way of
justice will drench thy polluted soul in the bitter waters of fears and
sorrows. God deals with those he intends truly to comfort, as Physicians deal
with those that are in a Lethargy, they cast them into a burning Fever, that
by the burning heat of it, they may dry up and waste those benumming humors;
so the Lord deals with his people that are sick of a spiritual Lethargy, he
casts them into the fire of afflictions, that he may burn up the dross of
their corruptions, that he may refine them like silver, and purify them like
gold, and then he restores their souls, and leads them to the waters of comfort.

You that are in spiritual distress, do not ye expect comfort presently; God
comes in a seasonable time: How long? how long? when shall it once be? How
long will it be ere this hard heart of thine be broken? this proud heart of
thine be humbled? how long ere thou will begin to enquire and seek after me. O
when will thou seek me? And it is just with God to make thee cry to him, how
long Lord! when will thou come in, and supp with me, and make thine abode with
me, and manifest thy self unto me? When will thou give me to drink of the
waters of life? May not the Lord say of thee, as of the barren fig tree? These
three years came I seeking fruit, and found none: and may not God justly
requite thee, and say, now for these many years thou shall seek me, ere I will
be sound of you: I waited a long time for the fruits of thy repentance, and now
thou shall wait a while for the fruit of my mercy: Because thou have rejected
the Lord tendering himself to thee, therefore now he stands at a distance from
thee: many proffers did he make to thee, but thou slightetst them; many calls
thou had from him, and would not hear them; many knocks has he given at
the door of thy heart, and begged for entrance, but thou keptst thy heart shut
still against him. Is it not equity that God should suffer thee to lie at the
door of mercy a while knocking before he opens to thee? Shall the great God
wait on thee, and thou not wait upon him? Brethren! God will humble us for our
delays, as well as for our other sins, he will humble us for the neglect of
his proffers, for the refusal of his grace so long; he will humble thee for thy
Stubbornness, for thy pride, for thy contempt and forgetfulness of him, and
then he will comfort thee in his own time and way.

CHAP. VIII.
IT is further to be noted, that the Spouse here cries out Stay me with
Flaggons.] Give me not a sip or a draught, but whole flaggons. Hence we may
observe,

That a soul that thirsts after Christ is contented with no small measures of
Christ. Dives in Hell Torments calls but for a drop of water to cool his
flaming tongue, and the Spouse in the banqueting house calls for Flaggons of
wine: our requests are many times too modest in Spiritual things, and our
prayers do come short of the Returns of them. Solomon only begs wisdom of God,
and the Lord not only gives him what he asks, but together with it gives him
riches and honor and glory: He gives us more then we can ask or think, Ephesians.
3.20.

Try whether ye have these ardent desires after Christ,

1. Occasional desires of Christ: Some have but fits or pangs of desires,
occasioned by some pang of fear or terror, as by some loss, cross, sickness,
or fear of death: when the fire of Hell flasheth in a man's face, then he will
have a flash of desires; when he is under the fear of death, then Oh that I had
Christ, as Esau longed for pottage, and then said of his birthright, I am at
the point to die, and what good will this Birthright do me? Such longings will
some men have after Christ; I am at the point of death, what good will
creaturecomforts do me. O give me of these living cordials; Stay me with
spiritual Flaggons, comfort me with these Apples. When God raises up a Storm
in the polluted consciences of sinners, this may put them into a fit of
devotion, as it did the Mariners in Jonah; but these desires usually vanish
away with the occasion; but let the Sea be calmed, and the waves still, you
shall see the profane Mariner fall to his profaneness again.

2. Disproportionable desires are successless desires; when Christ is not
desired, in quantum est appetibilis, some part of Christ is desired only:
Christ justifying, but not Christ sanctifying; Christ taking away the guilt of
sin, but not Christ dividing and divorcing the lust from the soul; they would
have these flaggons to quench their thirst, to refresh them, when they are
scorcht with the fears of hell, but care not to be washed in the waters of life
and holiness; Men desire Christ to save them, but will not have him to reign
over them; like those seven women, Isa. 4.1. that shall take hold of one man,
saying, We will eat our own bread; and wear our own apparel; only let us be
called by thy name, to take away our reproach: So these men will take hold of
Christ, yet they say, We will take our own courses: we will live as we list,
only let us be called by thy Name: and take away our reproach from us: Thus men
do in their desires divide Christ.

3. Selfish or carnal desires of Christ are wi hout success: when men desire
not Christ for Christ's sake, but for some temporal or carnal advantage to
themselves, as the Jews did follow Christ up and down by Sea and Land in City
and desert. Multitudes would follow him, but their following him but felfish;
Christ therefore upbraids them for it: You seek me for the loaves: so the
Scribe Matthew. 8. was very desirous to be one of Christ's followers; Master, I
will follow thee wheresoever thou go: but he thought to get some great
preferment by him; but when Christ tells him that the Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has not whereon to lay his
head: It is thought by all Interterpreters, that this forward man forsook
Christ; he saw more danger of parting with his estate for Christ, and his
outward comforts by following him, then he had hopes of preferment by him,
therefore he will be none of his followers. It was an old complaint; Multi
quaerunt Jesum, sed non propter Jesum, many seek after Jesus, but not for Jesus
sake; if they can be gainers by him, they will have him, but are unwilling to
be sufferers and losers for Jesus sake.

4 Mutable desires are successless desires; One of the Popes, when he was a
Monk, would often say, Panis and aquaest vita beata; But when he was Pope, he
said, Aqua and panis, est vita canis.
the desires of many men change as their estate and condition changes; Ebbing
desires after Christ, when prosperity is in the flow, and flowing desires when
prosperity is in the ebb: in a gloomy day of War Christ is desired, but not
regarded in a time of peace, in a time of sickness then Christ is longed for,
then the sick man will pray, and the Minister must pray Christ into his heart,
but let God renew his health, his desires die and languish in him: Moses and
Aaron must go and seek the Lord for Pharaoh, when any plague was upon him and
his land, but let God take it away, then Moses must see his face no more; it is
death so to do: When men are in Adversity, then none but Christ; but let their
conditions be changed, there will be a change of their desires.

4. Preposterous desires of Christ are successless desires; when Christ is not
desired chiefly, and in the first place, First, These things, then the Kingdom
of Heaven: first the World, then Christ. All the things of the world are
nothing in comparison of Christ: Why then do we set our eyes upon that which is
not? Prove. 23.5. These things are not the true blessedness; in them true
happiness does not consist: They are not bread, they cannot satisfy us: They
are not necessary, there is but one thing necessary, that is, Christ: yet this
is the course of world, most men's desires are after the things of this life,
and they never turn the stream and bent of their affections, till they are
ready to drop into the grave: we may say of late desires, as we do of late
repentance, they are seldom true, and by consequent seldom obtain Christ. Many
men are of the mind of a certain Duke of Russia, who being asked, whether he
had seen the Blazing Star in the air, answered no, I have so much to do, faith
he, here upon earth, that I have no time to look up to heaven.

6. Unactive and lazy desires after Christ are without success; the Schoolmen
term these desires, velleitates, not volitiones, which cannot be better
Englished, then by this, fain I would, but loath I am; fain I would have
Christ, but loath I am to take pains for him, or to do, or suffer, or part with
any thing for him. Men of lazy desires, are like the dry and chapt earth, it
gapes and yawns for rain, but moves not; so many men yawn for Christ, but if
God will not drop him into their mouths, they will not stir one foot for him, a
slothful man desires, and has not: He desires Christ, and mercy, but has
them not, Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful kills him; he rests in
his desires, and in his wishes for Christ, thinking he does well, if he desire
Christ, though he labor not at all for him.

CHAP. IX. 6. Properties of true desires after Christ.
NOw that ye may see what it is truly and fervently to desire after Christ, I
shall lay down these six Properties of true desires after Christ.

1. They are most importunate desires: therefore in Scripture they are compared
to the strongest desires, as to the Hearts panting after the Waterbrooks, Psalm
42.1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so does my soul pant after
thee, O God. It is compared to the longings of pregnant Women: my soul longs,
verecunde, desiderate, as some translate from the Hebrew word in Psalm. 84.2.
(...).
with a bashful and modest kind of wishing, and Psalm 119. My soul faints for
thy salvation: It even pineth away with longing: these desires are also
compared to hunger and thirst, both are importunate desires: Oh that one would
give me to drink of the water at the well of the gate of Bethlehem, said David:
a Kingdom for a cup of water, said Croesus and Lysimachus in their thirst.
Those who truly desire Christ, will he at the door of Gods grace and will never
give him rest night nor day till God give them Christ.

2. They are such desires which nothing can satisfy but the proper object,
even Christ Jesus; and in this respect compared to hunger and thirst, which
desires are satisfied with nothing, but by their proper objects: Offer Gold and
Silver, and no Bread to an hungry man; he says, Give me Bread. What good will
Gold do me, if I have no Bread? Offer such a soul that thirsts after Christ,
(as the Devil did to Christ) the glory of all the Kingdoms of the world; and
he will say, what good will all this do me? I must have Christ. Wicked men's
desires after Christ are like childrens crying for a piece of gold, when they
see it, they will make a great cry; but give them an Apple, and that stills
them: they have their fits of longing after Christ, but give them golden Apples
they are content; their desires after Christ are like Saul's Evil Spirit, a
little Music on the Harp will lay their desires flat again.

3. They are such desires as are proportionable to Christ, whole Christ is the
adaequat object of their desires, in quantum est appetibilis. Such men cry out,
O let Christ justify me, renew me, sanctify me; Grace is as much desired, as
pardon of sin; holiness as much desired as mercy: let me have Christ to rule
over me, and govern me, let him be my all in all: Thy Law (says David) is my
delight; that holy, strict commanding Law, that presses men to that which, is
most contrary to their lusts, is his desire and delight. The wicked can say,
Lord thy mercies are my delight, thy comforts, thy joy, thy salvation, are my
delight, but not thy word, nor thy holiness: let Christ be presented to him
that truly desires him any way, he cries out, O give me Christ upon any terms,
give me the cross, so I may have Christ, tell him of forsaking all, he cries
out, Farewell all things that I may win Christ.

4. They are constant desires; such a man longs for Christ at all times, he
longs for Christ as earnestly in health as in sickness, in time of serenity, as
in time of eminent danger, in time of peace, as in time of trouble, prosperity
dulieth not his desires.

5. They are such desires as are accompanied with an holy impatience of delay;
delays do not dull, but quicken a Christians desires after Christ; in this
respect they are also compared to hunger and thirst, which are impatient of
delay. Tell a thirsty man, he shall have drink the next week, he is impatient;
O says he, I must have it now, I may be dead before that time: so let Christ
go to put off such a soul, he says, I will not be so put off, Oh give me
Christ now, else I may be eternally undone: How long Lord, how long? Do not
stand off for ever; Gods momentany delays are accounted Eternal with a soul
that ardently desires after Christ; one day is as a thousand years in his
account.

6. They are such desires as carry a man through all difficulties whatsoever:
hunger will break through stone-walls, so will hunger after Christ break
through the greatest difficulties that lie in the way: When David cried out, Oh
that one would give me to drink of the waters of Beth-lehem, three of his
Worthies hearing of it, charged through an Army of Philistines, to fetch him
some of that water. Oh that one would give me to drink of these spiritual
Flaggons, says a soul that thirsts strongly after Christ. Tell him of Bears
and Lions, Bonds and Imprisonments in the way, yet through them all he will go,
that he may drink his fill out of these flaggons; but the sloathful man says,
There is a Lion in the way, and so goes not forth at all.

7. They are most industrious desires: and indeed according to a man's industry,
so are his desires after Christ; to this purpose consider,

1. That true desires do put a man upon the diligent use of all appointed means
to obtain Christ; the Spouse in this Book of Canticles was restless, till she
found him whom her soul loved; she ran up and down the Streets, charged every
one she met with, to tell him she was sick of love: a man that truly desires
Christ, will run from duty to duty, from Ordinance to Ordinance, and is very
earnest to see whether he can find Christ there; lazy desires separate the
means from the end, they desire Christ, but neglect the means, neglect the
Ordinances which are vehiculum Christi.

2. True desires do put a man upon the diligent improvement of all
opportunities: as a thriving Tradesman lays hold on all advantages and
opportunities: if he has an opportunity of doing, or receiving good, he does
not omit it.

3. It puts a man upon constant endeavors, not for a fit or a start, or for a
Mood in a good humor, but it is his constant work to make sure of Christ; as
they say of the labor of an Husbandman, it is labor actus in orbem, his work
is never at an end, so it is with him that truly longs for Christ.

4. Right desires do put a man upon present endeavors after Christ; he will
not (like the sluggard in the Proverbs) cry, Yet a little more slumber, etc. so
damnation may seize upon him like an armed man, as poverty did upon Solomon's
sluggard; but no sooner are these holy desires wrought in the heart of a
faithful Christian, but they put him instantly upon seeking after Christ; he
cries out presently to his own lazy heart, awake O my soul, and seek out for
Christ, lest thou perish eternally.

CHAP. X.
I Now come to consider the reason of the Churches importunate thirsting after
Christ. For I am sick of love.] Love, where it is strong causes a fainting or
languishing desire toward the thing beloved. Love, is of all other the most
inward and visceral affection; therefore called by the Apostle, The bowels of
Love: We read of the yearnings of Joseph's bowels over Benjamin, his Mothers
Son, and of the true Mother over her child: incaluerunt viscera, they felt an
agitation of their bowels. Love, the more vehement it is, does work the more
sudden and sensible decay and languishing of Spirits, as Amnon is said out of
wanton love to wax lean from day to day, and to grow sick for Tamar, King. 2
13. So here in Spiritual love you have the like expression: O give me Wine to
exhilarate, Reynolds Treat. de Passionibus.
and Apples to refresh those spirits, that were as it were wasted and melted
away by an extreme outlet of love, Hence I note,

vehemence, that it is even sick for the want of Christ: affections when they
are strong, will work disquiet, when they obtain not what they are earnestly
set upon; when love is hindered, it causes a soul-sickness.

In handling of this point, I will first show what Love to Christ is,

Love to Christ is a supernatural grace wrought in the soul of a Christian by
the spirit of God, Descript.
through the knowledge of God in Christ and faith, whereby we delight in
Christ, desire Union and Communion with him, wish well unto him, and rest upon
him as the chiefest good; where you have,

1. The nature of it, It is a supernatural virtue: I call it a supernatural and
heavenly love, to distinguish it from other kinds of love: there is a natural
love, Ista quam tu describis, negotiatio est, non amicitia, quae ad commodum
accedit. Senec. Epist. 9.
which is naturally imprinted in us, fastening us to those objects that are
delightful to us; this love is between Father and Child, Husband and Wife, etc.
There is a sensible love seated in the lower part of the soul, and has so much
commerce with the senses, from whence it borrows its name, as it always
makes impression upon the body, and this it is which is properly termed
passion. There is a sensual and carnal love, which may rather be called a fury
then love: there is worldly love, when men are lovers of riches, honors,
pleasures, more then of Christ: there is an immoderate self-love, when men love
their ease, credit, profit, life, more then Christ: Yea, many that pretend they
love their friends, they love them not so much for any virtue they observe in
them, as for the good they hope to reap by them. Observe a man transfixed with
any violent love, you shall find a man whose mind is bewitched, whose wit and
reason is Ecclipsed; all he beholds, thinks, and talks of, is the object of his
love: but love to Christ is of a supernatural excellency, it is a ray of
Christ's own love, therefore he calls it, his love, Continue ye in my love, John
15.

2. The efficient or worker of it, is the Spirit of God, we have it not from
Nature, but from the Spirit: love is one of fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
Neither have we it from custom, as Philosophers speak: neither is it gotten by
art or industry: It is shed abroad upon our hearts by the Holy Ghost in us,
Romans 5.5. Love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, 1 John 4.7.
Now it is above the power of corrupt nature to love Christ.

3. The object of this love, is Jesus Christ; the Spouse calls Christ, him whom
her soul loved, Cant. 3. Christ is the object, who is the Author of this love.
The objects of other loves are many times faulty and vicious; Loves fancy may
err in choosing an evil object, but here it is not so; for God and Christ are
the only objects of this love.

4. The grounds of this love: that, is, through the knowledge of God in Christ
and faith:

1. Through the knowledge of God in Christ: there must be a knowledge of Gods
love to us, before we can love him: for as a stone that lies in the bowels of
the earth, is not hot, till it be out of the earth, and the Sun first shine
upon it: so we cannot love God, till we first know his love toward us, for our
love is rather an effect, then a cause of his love, We love him because he
loved us first, 1 John 4.19. and we love not him, till he has first loved us:
If a man will love God in Christ, he must first know God in Christ; for our
love to him is grounded upon our knowledge of God in Christ.

2. A second ground of this love is faith, there must be faith to believe the
remission of our sins, and that Christ loves us in particular, before we can
truly love him. The end of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart, and
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. So that true love to
Christ must spring from faith.

Object. But it may be said, that the woman in the Gospel, had many sins
forgiven her, because she loved much, Luke 7.47. Here was her love first, then
follows the remission of her sins.

Sol. The word [Because] does not note out the cause of pardon, but only a sign
that her sins were pardoned. You are to understand it thus; it appeared that
many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much; such a man is (...) a
lover of God, because (...) beloved of God; he loves much, because much is
forgiven. This crosses the opinion of the Papists; they say, Love is the form
of faith; for they make a double love, one without faith, and such a wicked man
may have; another with faith, and such a wicked man cannot have.

Object. But they object, That which gives the operation to faith, is the form
of faith: but love gives the operation to faith; In Christ neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith working by love, Gal. 5.6.
where love (say they) gives the operation to says: Ergo love is form of faith.

Resp. Love gives the operation of faith, not qua causa, sed qua instrumentum,
not as the cause, but as the instrument: Love is not the cause of faiths
operation, but love is the instrument in its operation.

Object. But S. James says, As the body without life is dead, so faith without
works is dead, James 2.26. therefore love which makes faith to work, gives life
to it, and is the form of it.

Sol. The works of faith, as love, etc. do show there is faith, as the Spirit
shows there is a soul: if works were not, there would appear to be no true
faith.

Object. That which does perfect faith, is the form of faith; but works, as
love and other virtues do perfect faith, James 2.22. By works was Abraham's
faith made perfect.

Resp. Works do perfect faith, not in actu primo, sed in actis secundo; not in
regard of the first act, but in regard of the second, as a tree is said to be
perfected by the fruit; not that the fruit gives the essence to the Tree, but
the fruit shows that it is a perfect Tree.

5. The effects of this love follow.

1. Hereby we do delight in God; this shows, wherein true love consists.
There is always a delight and complacency in the thing beloved; we read in
this book of the Canticles, of the bed of love: the soul of a believer reposeth
it self in Christ, as in a bed of Roses: therefore his love is grounded upon
Experience; he loves God exceedingly, as best deserving love above all other,
Magnes amoris amor: Love, we say, is the Loadstone of love; they easily delight
most in him, of whom they find themselves most beloved. A carnal man says, he
loves Christ, but does not delight in him, he pretends to love him, but does
not like him, Christ is not an object suitable to his crooked heart; therefore
he often picks a quarrel with Gods dealings, as if God were engaged to him for
his love: he excepts against Gods Providence, as if it were too partial, for
giving too much to others, too little to himself: He takes Exceptions against
the Law of God, as if it were too strict, for tying him up from seeking his own
pleasures on the Lords day, and at no time suffering him to make provision for
the flesh. Can any man love Christ truly, unless he delight in him? Who can
love his Prince, and dislike his Laws, his Government? Who can love his Image,
that delights not in his person? nay, where there is dislike upon
distimilitude, there can be no true love; affection cannot subsist, nor be
constant without judgment, nor love without conformity; now where there is
true love, there is a delight in Christ, and a constant affection toward him.

2. Amor, est unio amantis ad antatum;
It makes a man desire to be united to Christ, to enjoy the comfortable
presence of Christ, to have fellowship and communion with him. Love is a desire
of Union to the person beloved. Upon the affection and liking that we take of
Christ, it will beget a desire in us to possess and enjoy him: Fruition is that
which love seeks, it is never at rest, till it can join it self to the object
that it loves; till it gets to enjoy and possess it: some have therefore
resembled love unto fire; whatsoever you cast into the fire, it is the property
of fire to assimilate it, to transform it into its own nature and likeness;
such is the operation of love, it transforms a man into the nature of that
which he loves: if it be a fleshly object that he loves, it makes him carnal;
if earthly, it makes him earthly: if heavenly, it makes him heavenly.

3. It makes a man wish well to Christ: the honor of Christ is more dear to
him then all the world, than his own life, Coeffet. Tabul. human, passion.
yea, then his own salvation, as Moses could have been even contented to have
been blotted out of the Book of life, then that Christ should be dishonored.
One defines Love thus: Love is a well-wishing, which we testify with all our
power to those to whom we are inclined, procuring them for their own sakes all
the good we think may give them content. The son of Antigonus being sick, and
none knowing what he ailed, the Physician discovered the cause of it to be his
love to his Mother-in-law; for still as she came into his presence, his pulses
fell to beat extraordinarily. Thus in our love of Christ, when we see any thing
done which makes for the honor of Christ, it will make our spirits to exult,
and our hearts to leap within us. On the other side, when we see his holy name
profaned and dishonored, his Sabbaths defiled, his Ordinances contemned, this
will fill a man that loves Christ, with an holy indignation, burst his heart
with grief, and force his tongue to speak for the honor of him whom his soul
loves. You have heard of the son of King Craesus, that was born dumb, and
never spoke word in all his life; yet in the Battle, when he saw the life of
his Father in danger, the string of his tongue suddenly burst asunder, then he
cried to the Enemy to save him, it was the King that he fought withal. As it
was with him, when he saw the life of his Father endangered; so it is with him
that truly loves Christ, when he sees the holy Name of God to be dishonored,
it goes to his heart to see it, and makes him break through all resistances of
nature, and speak then for the honor of Christ, though he never speak more.

4. The soul rests upon Christ as the chiefest good: rest is the utmost end
that love seeks after, and having gotten it, it rejoices in it without end. It
is so in Gods own love, where he loves, he does after a sort acquiescere: he
does rest pleased and satisfied with it, Matthew. 3. ult. where speaking from
heaven, and testifying of his beloved son, he says, Hic est filius meus
dilectus, and what he meant by it, the following words do declare; in quo mihi
complaceo, or inquo acquiesco, in whom I am well pleased, or do rest satisfied:
that is the sweet effect that love has: where it obtains fruition, it
receives full satisfaction Other objects do not satisfy us, and no wonder!
they be flying and transitory. What certain aim can a man take when he shoots
at a flying Fowl? Such be all terrestrial objects, when we aim at them, and
hope to catch them, as Solomon speaks of riches, they take the wings of an
Eagle, and fly away from us: Jesus Christ is an object more continuing; and
therefore gives more contentment. In setting our loves upon him we find rest
and peace: it is not so when we set our hearts upon other things, our hearts
are then full of restless agitations and motion. The inferior part of the
elementary Region that is toward the earth, is the seat of Winds and Tempests;
but the upper part that is toward Heaven, that is ever said to be calm and
peaceable; in like sort are our hearts and souls, when the love of them does
propend toward these inferior and earthly things, they be full of unquiet
agitations, tempestuous and troublesome; but when they be higher raised, viz.
to Christ and Heavenward, then they be calm and quiet; there is rest, peace,
solace, satisfaction, and abundance of tranquillity.

CHAP. XI.
IN the second place, I shall show what this Love-sickness is, and whence it
arises.

Love-sickness is a strong impulsion of love in the soul after Christ, and a
most vehement thirsting after him, upon the sense of the want of him. It is
observable, that in this Book of Solomon's Song, the Spouse is said twice to be
sick of love; once in the absence of Christ, once in his presence. In his
absence, when the Watchmen that went about the City smote her, and wounded her,
and the Keepers of the walls took away her vail from her, then she charge the
Daughters of Jerusalem thus, go tell my beloved, if ye find him, that I am sick
of love. Here likewise, in the house of Wine she is also sick of love: there is
an excitation of vehement affections to Christ sometimes through the absence of
Christ, sometimes in his presence; the one is the sickness of hope, the other
the sickness of desire? Hope deferred (says the wise man) makes the heart
sick, and desires not fully satisfied do cause a languishing in the soul; when
Christ is either wholly withdrawn from the soul, or the soul has but a partial
enjoyment of him, it causes this spiritual sickness. The want of the thing
beloved is a grievous torment to the lover, David's desire of enjoying God was
such, that it was even his death, as it were to want God, Pagnin Psalm. 84.2.
it holds forth as Pagnine observes, that David's soul either extremely desired
the Lord, or even died upon the absence of God. There is a kind of holy
Antiperistasis, a strong desire after Christ occasioned through the sense of
his absence, as we are hottest in seeking after precious things when they are
absent, and furthest from our enjoyment, absence sets love on fire: The
impression of Christ's kisses, of his spiritual embracings, and of his patient
knockings at the door of the soul, the print of his footsteps, the remainders
of the smell of his precious ointments, his shadow when he goes out of doors,
are coals to inflame the soul; then is a Christians love to Christ strongest,
his bowels move, the smell of his love, like sweet smelling myrrh is very
sweet and piercing. The Ancients in their Hieroglyphics painted Love with a
Gate or Window in his Stomach, wherein were written these two word; procul and
prope; afar off, and at hand, to show that he that is a lover, loves as well
in absence as in presence, or rather his love burns more strongly, when he is
absent from his beloved. As the Harr pants for the water brooks, so my soul
pants for thee O God, says David, Psalm. 42.1, 2. My soul thirsts for God,
even for the living God. No Beast is more thirsty by nature, than the Heart is;
and the Learned observe, it is the female kind, whose passions are more violent
than the Males: it is as if one should say, no Heart nor Hind can thirst more
after waters, than his soul did after God; and the word [panting] is to be
observed, by which David shows, that he did not only work himself out of
breath to enjoy God; but also the little breath he had, he spent it in
breathing after God; yea, that he might show his vehement desire, he again
repeats it, My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God. Moreover, he
shows his vehement grief for the want of Gods presence, My tears have been my
meat and drink continually; as if he had said, such abundance of tears fell
from him, that he might be said to feed upon them. It is an Hell upon earth to
be deprived of the presence of God in his Ordinances, for what is the chiefest
part of Hell, but an eternal loss of Gods glorious presence! and as the damned
shall weep and wail for ever, because they shall never enjoy God, so the
gracious soul will weep and wail as long as he is deprived of God in his
Ordinances here upon earth.

CHAP. XII.
IS there such a vehement love in some Christians, Jerusalem were astonished at
Paul, that he in so short a time was so zealous for Christ, that a little
before was so mad against him, that he was now become a Preacher of that says
which before he persecuted: what was it that wrought so effectually upon his
heart: it was the love of Christ. The love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor.
5.12. there was a strong and secret compulsion upon the spirit of Paul, that he
could not choose but be so affectionate toward Christ and his truth; and else
where he says, We can do nothing against the truth, but all for the truth: we
cannot but speak the things that we have seen and heard.

Try the strength of your Love to Jesus Christ;

1. It is a transcendent love: such a man loves Christ above all other things;
he can look upon all things with Paul as dross and dung in comparison of him,
he desires nothing else in comparison of him. Whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee? Psalm 73.25. God and
be only was the object of his desire? whom have I in heaven but thee? Is not
glory and happiness, joy and peace in heaven? is there not a Crown of
righteousness, a Crown of immortality and glory there? are not these things
desirable? Is not the sight of, and fellowship with Angels, and the spirits of
just men made perfect desirable? no, these are not the things which David
desires in heaven, it is God only that he thirsts for, let me have God, and
I have all things, without God and Christ, even heaven it self is not heaven:
so upon earth, are there not riches and honors, and many other desirable
things: no, says he, there is nothing on earth that I desire besides thee.
Vehement love to Christ, drives away a Christians love to other things, as the
flower of the Vine dissipates Serpents. An ancient Lover said, that Love had
made a Butt of his heart, where as soon as it had shot all its arrows, it threw
it self as an enflamed dart into the bottom of his breast, to set him all on
fire. I have read of another, that was so full of love to Christ, that when he
saw an Epistle or Letter, wherein the name of Jesus was not premised, it much
tormented him, saying Saracens had more devotion for Mahomet a man of sin,
setting his name in the front of their Letters, then Christians had for their
Redeemer: some took delight to ask him many questions: From whence come thou?
he answered, from love: Where dwell thou? in love: Whom seek thou? after
my love: he answered them nothing, but the word Love. You may set bounds and
limits to your love to the world, to friends, to one another, Amor nescit,
reverentiam, quod amat, amat, and aliud novit nihil. August.
but who can express the greatness of his affection to Christ, who is sick of
love for him? Love knows no reverence, what it loves, it loves, and it
knows nothing else; Take all from me O Lord, so thou leave me thy self, says
St. Augustine.

2. It is an elevating and transporting love. Men's hearts, thoughts and
discourses are upon the objects of their love: If a Woman love her husband, she
is ever thinking and talking of him in the time of his absence: Absence is a
short death, Se^^alt. de usu passion.
which entails upon us as much sorrow, as the presence of the beloved gives
satisfaction: Talk with a man that is Lovesick, you talk with a man that is
not at home; with a man that is absent from himself; Extasim facit amor,
amatores ^uo statu dim^vit, ^ui juris esse non s^ait; sed inea quae amant
penitus transfert. (...) de divinis nominib. cap. 4. Deplicibus desideriis nemo
incedere potest.
the soul is more where it loves, then where it dwells; a man that is
Lovesick for Christ, he passes through his ordinary employments and does
scarce heed them, he passes through the world as a man at random, he regards
not the things of the world, for Christ is gotten into his heart, and draws up
all his affections to himself. Take a man that is sick for any earthly thing,
whether of Ahabs sickness, (who was sick for Naboths Vineyard) or of Amnons
sickness, who wasted his Spirit in an impure flame, burning in lust toward his
Sister Tamar: that which the soul is sick for, it daily dreams, thinks and
talks of it; so the soul that is sick of love for Christ, will be as it were
extasied and deaded to the things below, and be wholly taken up with Jesus
Christ: He wishes that all the parts of his body were turned into tongues to
praise him, or into an heart to love him; he seems to torment himself that
there are given to him, two hands to act, two eyes to see, two ears to hear,
two feet to walk, and but one heart to love: he does not prescribe any bounds
to his love: he is troubled, that Gods greatness is so well known, his goodness
is no more loved, and that having so many subjects, he has no more that love
him: he does not prescribe any bounds to his love to Christ, but makes it his
sole desire, and wishes that his heart were dilated, that he might infinitely
love him (if it might be) who is infinitely lovely.

3. It is a pure and Virgin Love, Cant. 1.3, 4. Because of the savor of thy
good ointments, Modus amandi Christum sine medo. Bern.
thy Name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee: it
is a chaste love, not an adulterous love, a love of Christ for himself, and for
his own sake, for the savor of his precious ointments during the state of
innocence, man had no love save only for God, and nature was so well tempered
with grace, as that all her inclinations were holy: in this happy state, holy
love and self-love were as it were the same thing, but since man's disobedience,
his love altered nature, and he that looked upon the glory if God and his own
good with the same eye, began to separate them, and forgetting what he owed
unto God, he even made a God of himself; but now for a remedy of this mischief,
Jesus Christ is come into the world to banish self-love from our souls, for as
one well notes, his coming, had no other motive, nor his doctrine any other
end, then the ruin of this dreadful monster; and he admits of no disciples,
who have not changed their self-love into an holy aversion; a man cannot
therefore be a good Christian, nor can he have any strong affections to Christ,
who does too excessively love himself. Do thou love Christ for himself, or
for the loaves? Do thou find a sweetness in his person, in his doctrine, in
his offices, in his death, blood, mediation, resurrection and ascension, do
thou love him for himself, and not for any carnal respects, then is thy love a
pure and unmixt love?

4. It is an obedient love: If you love me, keep my commandments says Christ,
John 14.15. The greatest demonstration of our love to Christ, is the love that
we bear to his commandments. David cries out, Oh how I love thy Law: I love it
above gold. Many there are now a days, that profess much love to Christ,
yetthink themselves loose from his commandments: but certainly, he that does
not look on Christ as a Lawgiver, as well as a Savior, does not love him:
Indeed nothing will so enable a man to keep the commandments of Christ as Love
will do. This is love, and his commandments are not grievous: therefore says
Austin, Nullo mode sunt onerosi labores amantium; interest ergo quid ametur;
nam in eo quod amatur, aut non laboratur, aut amatur. labor August.
Love never finds difficulties: the reason why men object difficulties is want
of love. Love neither frames, nor accepts of excuses, love finds no
difficulties which it overcomes not: love charmeth troubles, mingleth pleasures
with pains, and to encourage us against all difficulties, finds out inventions
to make them either pleasing, or less troublesome to us. The troubles of men,
that love Christ vehemently, are never troublesome, and they never find pain in
serving him whom they love, or if they do, they cherish it.

5. It is a love that swalloweth up all other loves whatsoever. There are three
sorts of love; one ever good, the other ever bad; the third of its own nature
good, but accidentally made bad: and that which is ever good is this love to
Christ, which I am now speaking of; that which is ever bad, is the love of sin:
that which is of its own nature good, but accidentally made bad, is the love of
those things which we may lawfully affect, but we offend in them when we love
them disorderly or excessively; now this love to Christ swallows up the other
loves; for the one of them it quenches and quite extinguisheth it, even as
water quenches fire; there can no evil motion come into the heart, but if the
love of Christ be there it will chase it out, not at all giving it any place of
rest or residence; and for the other love, it helps to order and rectify that
too, teaching a man, if he love any such thing, yet to love it in due manner,
and in due measure, not preferring his love of that above him, for whose sake
only he must love it: be it parents or children, husband or wise, or friend, be
it credit, pleasure, or profit, ease, health life; be it what it will be, the
love of Christ ruleing in our heart, will so qualify and moderate the love of
these things, that it will make it hold its due place and proportion, ever
reserving the predominance to him, whom all creatures must serve: chiefly it
teaches us, that as God is to be loved for his own sake, so all other things
for his sake, and therefore in an inferior and secondary place: Christ must be
loved first of all, and most of all, first in time, and first in place; many
begin to look toward Christ and heaven, when they can look no way else; they
serve sin, the Devil, the world first, and themselves also before God,
reserving only the surrows and wrinckles of their old age for God, but true
Love honors Christ with its first fruits; it gives God (as I may so speak)
the Maidenhead of its love; its serves him first, and none else before him --
And as first in time, so first in place also; it lets God have the first and
best place, it lets him have the highest and chiefest room in the heart; it
gives the priority to none else, sets none before him, none equal with him;
Amor meus Deus meus.
That which I make my love, I make my God: therefore covetous men are called
Idolaters; they make a God of their money, though not because they offer
sacrifices to it, yet because their hearts and affections are set upon it; the
world has more from them then God has: but a man that loves Christ,
reserveth the first and the fattest for Gods use -- And as such a one loves
Christ first of all, so likewise most of all, as primarily, so totally, he
divides not his love betwixt Christ and others: Pharaob would have had the
Israelites, to have left their Cattle behind them, when they desired leave of
him to go and sacrifice in the Wilderness, but what says Moses? non remanebit
ungula, there shall not an hoof be left behind: so when Satan would persuade a
lover of Christ, not to give all to God, but to leave something behind for him,
and his service; he answers him no; there shall not an hoof stay behind; he
that has given us all, shall command, and have all. One of these two that
entered into the land of Canaan was Caleb, Philo Iud.
and Philo the Jew etymologyzing his name says, it was quasi Col-leb, which in
the Hebrew signifies all heart, thereby teaching us, that Christ must have all
our heart, all must be given to him, if we will enter into the heavenly Canaan.

6. This Love is such as being placed upon its object, the Lord Jesus, it will
not be willing to part with him upon any terms. What we eagerly desire to have,
we fear to lose: Quod vehementer cupis habere, times perdere.
he that loves money, oh, how loath is he to part with it? You shall as soon
wring water out of a stone, as money out of his purse; it was a sign Esau loved
not his birthright very dearly, because he parted with it so easily; but the
man in the Gospel loved his sheep well, and the woman loved her groat well,
that took such pains as they did to seek them out again when they had lost
them: Certainly Christ is worth keeping, if you have him, worth a seeking, if
you have lost him; they that love him as they should, will rather do any thing
then part with him; to others the matter is not great, whether they part with
Christ or keep him, they are indifferent; and the services they do him, they do
rather out of fashion, than out of love: he that serves a master whom he loves
not, his service is an hard task to him; but they that love him heartily, serve
him cheerfully, they will suffer no occasions to part them from him, or if at
any time they do chance to lose him, they will never leave till they have
recovered and found him: A man who loses his friend, loses one half of
himself, he is at once both alive and dead, and death accords not with life,
save only to make him more miserable: The absence of Christ is bitter to him,
to whom his presence is sweet. See how restless the Spouse was, Cant. 3. when
she sought him whom her soul loved; when she sought him and found him not, she
could never be at rest, till she had got where he was, and when once she had
him she held him; she would not let him go then till she had brought him home
to her Mothers House, to the chamber of her that conceived her. A Lovesick
soul desires nothing more then the presence of Christ, here and in Heaven:
here in the use of his Ordinances, Word and Sacraments; and they that do indeed
love Christ, do love to meet him in these; in his Word, that they may confer
with him; in his Sacraments that they may eat and drink with him. Latatur
ancilla ad vocem Petri, laetatur anima ad voeem Christi: The Damsel rejoiced at
the voice of Peter, and the soul rejoices that the voice of Christ; but these
are but his back parts, the shadow of his presence hereafter: then we shall
have his presence in glory, and this also all that love him do long for; I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all, says holy
Paul, Phil. 1.23. and says he, the Crown of life shall be given to all that
love the appearing of Christ: as if none could love him, that did not love his
appearing.

CHAP. XIII.
THe second Use is for Exhortation: He has loved us, and washed our sins in
his blood, Rev. 1.5. What was there in man that could atract Christ's love to
him? there was neither descent, nor beauty, nor parts, nor riches, not
innocence and goodness; Now that the love of Christ might be excessive, he
makes it to out run the wickedness and sinfulness that is in man: Christ is so
good, as he cannot be loved so much as he ought to be, and let a man do his
utmost, he is obliged to confess, that the love of Christ does far exceed the
greatness of man's love.

CHAP. XIV.
ARE any of you sick of love for Christ;

1. Christ's giving himself to those that were never sick for him, nor sought
for him at all. I was found of them that sought me not, Isa. 65.1. So he gave
himself, tendered, and revealed himself to those that never heard of him, and
into whose hearts it never came to beg such a gift of God; how much more then
shall they find him, that are sick of love for him, and earnestly seek him
being revealed and tendered to them in the Gospel, their want and need of him
being discovered to them. Seek and you shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened to you, ask and you shall receive. Shall such receive that never asked?
how much more shall they receive, that ask and cry after him! If the door of
Gods free grace be opened to such who never knocked at the gate of mercy, how
much more will he open the door of mercy to such, who in the sense of misery
shall knock earnestly for mercy? It is said of a Roman Emperor, Sucton.
that he would never suffer any Petitioner to go from him with a sad
countenance: Christ that is full of such bowels of compassion (put all the
tendernesses and bowels of all the compassionate men in the world into one,
none can be so tender as his heart is) he will not suffer his Petitioners to go
from him with a sad countenance. Jesus Christ may defer his grace, but will not
give an absolute denial.

2. Consider that Christ does as it were woo poor sinners to seek and sue unto
him; he does as it were put up his bills unto us, when we go to prayer, that we
would earnestly pray to his Father, that he might be given to us, which is a
manisest proof that he will freely bestow himself upon such as thus seck for
him: God calls to us in this manner, Call unon me in the day of trouble; ask
and you shall receive; seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to
you: What are these but wooing commands? and begging commands? it is a
remarkable phrase. Cant. 2.14. O my Dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in
the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Lo here he takes
pleasure in beholding his people praying to him, mourning and lamenting after
him; therefore he wooeth his Spouse with prayers, requests and petitions to
pray unto him: the prayers of his people are his delight: the praises of Angels
and Saints in heaven, and the prayers and praises of the Saints on earth, is
all the music Christ delights in: so in the answer of Christ to the woman of
Samaria, John 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says
unto thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living water: Christ there did, as it were, beg of her to seek him
for living water: he manifested to her, what he was, what he would give unto
her, and give it her he would, if she would but ask it of him. The same in
effect he speaks to every one of us; if you would ask of me, I would give you
living water; Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, open thy heart wide,
open thy desires wide, and I will fill thee with mine hidden treasures.

3. Christ so far condescendeth, as to seek to us to receive him; he follows
and pursues rebels with entreaties to make up their peace with God, then much
more will he give himself to them that shall pursue him with entreaties. I am
come says he, to seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel: My great errand
into the world, is to seek those that are lost, to bring them bak again. But
note that place, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, etc.
Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors; and our commission is to treat a peace
between an angry God and sinful men; the word that we preach is nothing else
but an Embassy of peace; the Gospel is called a word of reconciliation; but
here are the expressions of wonder and astonishment; as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God: God himself
by the mouths of his Ministers entreats you; we are the Mediators of peace
between you and him; what arguments we use to draw you to Christ, are Christ's
arguments, when we command you it is as though God commanded you, when we
exhort you, it is as though God exhorted you: so when we pray, when we
threaten, etc. so we pray you in Christ's stead; when we pray you by all the
mercies of God, by all the bowels of Christ, by all the love of Christ
manifested in giving himself for you by his sufferings; it is as if Christ did
in his own person lay open all that he done and suffered for you, and entreat
you to be reconciled: Now shall the God of infinite glory and Majesty so far
condescend as to beseech us, and to pray us to be reconciled, will not he then
freely bestow himself upon us when we are sick of love for him, when we beseech
him and diligently seek him!

4. Consider he makes a gracious Proclamation, inviting all, excepting none out
of it, manifesting his readiness, freely to bestow himself on every one that
shall seek unto him, John 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.
Where the greatest concourse of people was, there the Proc amation of mercy was
published. If any among you thirst after living waters, let him come to me and
drink let him that will come, He, every one that is thirsty, come and buy
without money; the poorest sort are the most acceptable customers: so Prove.
1.20, 21. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, she
cries in the chief places of concourse, in the openings of the gates, in the
City, she utters her words without in the streets; in the high street, among
the press, in the Congregation, in the assemblies. Why does wisdom make such
public Proclamation? It is 1. To show his freeness and readiness to receive
all that come, and to refresh every thirsty soul that comes to him. 2. To take
off all excuses, that none shall pretend ignorance, nor pretend they had no
offer of salvation.

5. Consider, that Jesus Christ will put by none that seeks him; Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast off, John 6.37. Whosoever betakes
himself to Christ for his only Savior is embraced. I will in no wise cast him
out. (...) it is a double Negative. The unworthiest of sinners, the greatest of
sinners have been received when they have come unto him; The blind and the
lame, let them come in; let the door of mercy and righteousness be opened that
they may enter in.

6. Consider Christ's unspeakable readiness to do what he did, and suffer all
that he did for us. Christ speaking of his sufferings says With a desire have
I desired to eat this passover: Shall be love us so much as to give himself to
death for us? and will not the same love incline him to give himself to those
that are sick of love for him, and earnestly seek him? Christ did manifest more
love in dying for sinners, then he does in giving himself to sinners that long
after him.

7. Consider his manifold and gracious promises made to the generation of
seekers: he has spoken it in the word of a God that cannot lie, You shall find
me: I will be found of you: I will hear you, Turn and you shall live, Those
that hunger and thirst shall be filled: He is faithful and just, and will keep
promise. The Promises of God show two things, 1. Gods willingness to
communicate himself to his people in all kinds of mercies, for promises are but
the manifestations of his will. 2. To encourage every thirsty and lovesick
soul to seek him: Promises are Gods earnest-penny that he will make good his
word unto us. -- To this, let me add the reason of it, consider Christ's nature,
though he be in heaven, he is full of bowels of compassion, and much tenders
the deplorable estate and case of the lovesick spouse that thirsts and
seeks after him: he knows his peoples wants, their straits, their fears,
and when they fly to him for succor and relief, being faithful and merciful,
he will help them, Heb. 2.17, 18. See why Christ would be made like unto his
brethren, like us in substance of nature, in natural properties, in natural
infirmities, in suffering of miseries, in tentations, it was that he might be
merciful, and that he might be able and willing to succor us: his
participation of our nature, miseries and temptations, is a pawn and pledge
that he will help us.

CHAP. XV.
I Shall now give you directions how ye may get your hearts into a longing
frame after Christ:

1. Labor to know what thou art without Christ; Thou art a cursed, sinful,
helpless, hopeless creature without him. Thou art a condemned person to eternal
death: hell waits to devour to thee; and the wrath of an Almighty God is ready
to fall on thee every moment: Thou must answer God for every sin, and thou
can not answer for one of a thousand. Thou must endure the extremity of his
wrath to eternity, and art not able to endure it for a moment; labor to
believe and know this, and to persuade thy own heart, that this is thy estate
and condition.

2. Labor to know what God has appointed and ordained Christ to be, viz. to
be a Savior, and to be the only Savior of such wretched men as thou art: if
ever thy sins be-satisfied, it is by Christ alone that died, if ever thou have
redemption from the curse and condemnation, it is by Christ that died for thee.

3. Labor to know what a man is having Christ, viz. righteous before God, a
reconciled friend to God; a Jedidjah, beloved of God, one (as God said of
Christ) in whom he is well pleased, an heir of heaven, that art as far above
all thy sins, the curse, the wrath of God, as the highest heaven is above the
lowest hell: were men but truly persuaded of these things, Christ would be the
desire of their souls, they would be sick of Love for him.

4. Know thy wants, thy utter insufficiency and inability without him; labor
to persuade thy heart thou have nothing, thou want all things, thou can do
nothing, want will put thee upon longings after him: Beggars wants will make
them importunate, hunger and thirst will make a desire Manna and Living waters.

5. Persuade thy self of thy absolute need of Christ, labor feelingly to know
thy necessity of him: Christ thou must have, if thou will escape the damnation
to come.

6. Know the worth of Christ: all created glories, comforts good things, are no
more to be compared to him, than a pins head to the terrestrial globe: Worth
has an attractive power, it will draw out the longings of men after it.

7. Labor to see the necessity of ministerial pressing the terrors, the curse
of the Law home to the hearts of sinners: Ministers of the Gospel must be
Boanerges, sons of thunder, they must lift up their Voices like trumpets, and
cry woe, woe: The end of such a way of Preaching is not to drive men to
despair, as the world injuriously censureth it; the end is to convince men of
their misery, of their doleful estate, that they might long for Christ, and be
sick of love for him: We preach the Law to drive you to Gospelmercy; we preach
damnation to drive you to Christ, the Author and finisher of our salvation:
When a man cries Fire in the streets, it is to stir up men to labor to quench
it: When a Physician tells a man he is ill, it is to make him to take Physic,
and not to make him to despair of life.

8. Labor to see the necessity of the work of the spirit of bondage upon our
hearts; the spirit of comfort is first, a spirit of bondage, of fear and
terror to us; he therefore terrifieth us with sin, that our hearts may break
for longings after Christ. He makes us sorrowful, that sorrow may beget
vehement desires in us after Christ, 2 Cor. 7. God brings his Church into a
wilderness, and then he speaks comfortably to her, Hos. 2.

CHAP. XVI.
BUt here some poor soul is apt to say;

For answer hereunto consider these four things.

1. That Christ will make himself known to his people in his own time, not when
we will, but when he pleases: he will turn our Waterinto Wine in his time, not
in ours, and his time, is in truth. As Joseph did not presently manifest
himself to his brethren, but dealt roughly with them for a while, and put them
into great fears what should become of them, but at last could refrain no
longer, but told them with tears, I am Joseph your Brother whom ye sold: so
Christ suffers his people to long for him, and they are in fears what will
become of them, but at last he will manifest himself to them, I am your Christ,
your Savior, whom you seek, whom you long after.

2. Some obtain Christ sooner than others; some lie a great while under
terrors, under desires, under soul-sickness; others but a little while; some
like the impotent man, lie many years at the pool, before they are put in,
others are put in within a while after they come to the pool: Some lie like
Christ himself, but three days in the grave, and then they rise triumphant
Conquerours over their doubts, sorrows, fears and terrors: over sin and
Devils; being assured that Christ is theirs: others lie a long while in the
grave of fears and terrors: Some God leads into Canaan through a vast,
solitary, dry wilderness; others go but a few steps from Egypt to Canaan: Some
feed on honey, and are carried in Christ's bosom to heaven, says a Judicious
Divine, and others are floating in floods of wrath, and their first smile of
joy, is when the morning of Eternities Sun dawneth in at the window of the
soul: Rutherf. in John 12.
some sing, and live on sense all the way, and others go in at heaven gates
weeping.

3. A man may have Christ and not know it; a man may be in the state of grace,
and not assured; for assurance is not of absolute necessity to make a man
godly; it conduces to the been esse, but not to the esse, to the comfort of
godliness, not to the being of godliness. Take an instance for illustration: a
King that is crowned in his Cradle, is truly and rightly the King, though he
knows not so much for the present; and while he is in the Cradle, he is
attended with Princes and Nobles, that give him Royal respect, and service: so
a man may be in Christ, in the state of grace, and not be assured of it.

4. True and unfeigned defires after grace, are grace: Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Christ's righteousness, they shall be satisfied, Matthew.
5.6. Your very desires, if they be true and constant, do entitle you to the
promise of righteousness: constant desires are streams of those living waters
that flow out of the bellies of true believers.

CHAP. XVII.
THe last Use is for comfort to poor distressed Christians that are cast down
with the sense of the decay of their first love to Christ:

1. Christians in this life are like unto children, growth is not always
perceived by those that always live and converse with them; so a Christian
grows in grace and in love to Christ, though perhaps himself perceives it not.

2. Though be may not have such a fair flourishing top, and branch, yet he may
be better rooted than before, have a deeper and stronger rooting in grace: The
Apostle Paul speaks of being rooted and grounded in love. The affections of
Christians to Christ at their first conversion, are like the affections of new
married persons: at first their love seems to be excessive, but after they have
lived together some years in a married estate, this excess of love, this
violent tide of affection abateth, yet true love abides still between them: so
a Christian may not have such violent pangs of love, and such passionate
affections to Christ, and such strong expressions of love to Christ afterward,
as he had at his first conversion, yet true love may still abide in the soul.

3. A Christian that is of long standing in Christianity, is a more
experimental Christian, is more grave, more solid, and practical than he was
before; he has now more ability to resist tentations, to overcome corruptions,
to perform holy duties than at his first conversions, Sym. desert. soul.
then a Christian is nothing but love and affection, but afterward more
experimental and practical: an Apple, that is green and unripe, may look as
fair and be as big then as ever afterward; but it has not that sweetness, that
good juice and nourishment, as it has when it comes to its full maturity: A
young man of twenty years old, may be as big and lusty, and more vigorous in
complexion, than at any other time afterward, but he has not that solidity,
that judgment, that gravity, that experience, as at the age of thirty or forty
years. So it is with a Christian; at first he is but a babe, but a novice, a
gristle in grace, but after he comes to riper years, to be a grown man in
Christ, his love is more dilated and extended to all the duties of Religion, to
all acts of piety toward God, to all acts of charity toward men, and of
sobriety toward himself. So then this is no ground for a Christian, that has
the truth of grace in his soul, to bereave himself of all true comfort, because
he finds not his affections so strong toward Christ, as they were or seemed to
be at his first conversion.

FINIS.

