GOD'S SOVEREIGNTY DISPLAYED.

From Job 9.12. Behold he takes away, who can hinder him? etc.

OR, A discourse showing, that God does, and may take away from his creatures
what he pleases, as to the matter what, the place where, the time when, the
means and manner how; and the reasons thereof: With an Application of the
whole, to the distressed Citizens of London, whose houses and goods were lately
consumed by the FIRE: An excitation of them to look to the procuring causes of
this fiery trial; the ends that God aims at in it, with directions how to
behave themselves under their losses.

By William Gearing Minister of the Word.

LONDON, printed by R. I. for Thomas Parkhurst at the Golden Bible on London
Bridge. 1667.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sr. John Pelham of Laughton, Sr. John Fagge of
Wiston, in the County of Sussex, Baronets:
TO Herbert Morley of Glyne, in the same County: to John Gell of Hopton, in the
County of Darby, and to Gervaise Pigot of Thrumpton in the County of
Nottingham, Esquires.
FRom that dreadful fire that consumed a great part of the City of London,
about the beginning of September last, I may take occasion to show, that the
greatest chances, alterations, and most notable changes have commonly happened in
the month of September; Bodinus has collected many remarkable instances to
this purpose. Bodin. de Rep^^^ lib. 4
Great earthquakes wherewith oftentimes great Cities and whole Countries have
been destroyed, have happened in the month of September: Such was that
Earthquake at Constantinople, wherein thirteen thousand men were lost in the
year 1509 in the month of September: In the same month of September, wherein
the battle was fought at Actium, ten thousand men perished in the Land of
Palestine, with an Earthquake. The Victory of Augustus also, against Antonius
in the battle of Actium, was by him obtained on the second of September, by
which victory the Empire both of the East and West, fell into the power of
Augustus, himself alone. The third day of the same month the Macedonian Empire
which had so long flourished, was by Paulus Aemilius changed from a great
Kingdom into diverse popular Estates: the King Persius being by him overcome and
taken prisoner: Sultan Soliman on the like day took Buda the chief City of
Hungaria, with the greatest part of that Kingdom. The same day and month
Rhoderick King of Spain, was by the Moors overcome, and driven out of his
Kingdom, which wrought a strange alteration in the state of that Monarchy. On
the same day of the month revolving, Lewis the twelfth the French King took the
City of Milan, with Lewis Sphortia Duke thereof, whom he deprived of his
Estate. On the like day the Emperor Charles the fifth passed over into
Africa, and invaded the Kingdom of Algiers. On the same third day of
September, in the year 1658. dyed O. Cromwell: on that very day of the month,
wherein he had gotten two notable Victories, the one at Dunbar in Scotland,
1650. the other at Worcester, Anno 1651. On the fourth day of September dyed
Sultan Solomon before Sigeth, which being one of the strongest holds of
Christendom, was by the Turks taken the seventh day after, the City of
Jerusalem was taken about this time of the month of September by the Romans, as
Xiphilinus declares. On the ninth day of September, Alexander the Great at
Arbela overthrew Darius King of Persia, with his Army of four hundred thousand
men, and so joined the Kingdom of Persia unto his own. On the same day in the
year 1544. James King of Scots, was by the Englishmen slain, and his Army
overthrown. On the tenth of September, John Duke of Burgundy was slain by the
commandment of Charles the seventh, whence arose great Wars throughout all
France. On the like day and month was Peter Louys the Tyrant of Placenzza slain
by the Conspiratours. On the eleventh of September the Paleology the Greek
Emperors took the Imperial City of Constantinople, and drove out thence the
Earls of Flanders, who had there possessed the Empire 560 years. On the
fourteenth day of September, the Switzers were with a great slaughter
overthrown by the French in the Expedition of Merignan; which self-same day
also the Turk's great Army besieged Vienna the Metropolitical City of Austria.
On the seventeenth day, the French Army was overthrown at Poictiers, and King
John himself taken Prisoner by the English. On the same day of the month A. D.
1575 the Christian Fleet with a great slaughter overthrew the Turk's great
Fleet in the battle of Lepanto. On the same day of the same month Charles the
ninth, King of France, was by his Subjects assailed near unto Meaux, where by
speedy flight, and the help of the Switzers, he hardly with life escaped the
hands of the Conspiratours. A. D. 1567. On the which self-same day, month and
year, Henry King of Sweden was by his rebellious Subjects dispoiled of his
Estate, and cast into Prison. On the eighteenth day of September Bulloign was
surrendered to the English. Upon the like day of the month, Bajazet at Nicopolis
overthrew a great Army of the Christians, of three hundred thousand men. And on
the same day Saladine took the City of Jerusalem, on which Pompey had before
taken it. On the twentieth day of September, was that sharp sight at Newbury,
in that late unhappy War in England. A. D. 1643. On the four and twentieth day
of September, Constantine the great in a bloody battle, overcame Maxentius the
Emperor. A. D. 333. and so became a great Monarch, which wrought a notable
change, almost throughout the whole World; from thenceforth he commanded the
year to be begun in September, and to the Greek Feasts unto that day is added,
(...). In this month Pope Boniface 8th. A. D. 1303. was taken Prisoner, and
deprived of his Papal dignity. On the third day of the same month, A. D. 1556.
such a Tempest of rain and Thunder happened at Lucern, as that a greater (as was
reported) was never seen; On which self-same month and day, the Town Hall of
Maidenburg in Germany, with the Citizens dancing therein, were altogether with
lightning consumed. About the beginning of this month A. D. 465. such an
horrible fire brake forth in Constantinople by the waterside, which raged with
that fury for four days together, that it consumed the greatest part of the
City, and such was the force thereof, Evangr. lib. 2. ca. 13.
that as Evagrius says, the strongest Houses were but like so much dried
stubble before it. And how has the Lord sent a dreadful Fire upon London, and
it has consumed the lofty buildings and Palaces thereof in September last?

We read also, that many of the greatest Princes and Monarchs of the world, to
have dyed in this very month of September; Viz. Augustus, Tiberius* Vespasian,
Titus, Domitian, Aurelianus, Theodosius the great, Valentinian, Gratian,
Basilius, Constantine the fifth, Leo the 4th. Rodolph, Frederick the 4th.
Charles the 5th. all Roman or Greek Emperors. And of the French Kings, Pepin,
Lewis the younger, Philip the 3d. Charles the 5th. surnamed the Wife, and Lewis
his Kinsman, King of Hungary, and Polland, with many other most noble and
famous Monarchs. And it is remarkable, that Lothair and Charles the Bald, the
one the K. of France, and the other the German Emperor, (and both of them the
Sons of Lewis the devout Emperor) both died the 29th. of September, the first
of them in the year, 855. and the other A. D. 877. So Charles 5. and Sultan
Solomon, two of the greatest Emperors that were these many Ages, were both
born in one year, and so both also dyed in one month, viz. in September. Now
though some have thought all these great and mavelous effects, to have been
wrought by the Conjunction of the superior Planets, or look below God to
secondary causes; yet let us look above all these, to God himself, who works
all things after the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.

Right Worshipful, to you I Dedicate these ensuing Meditations, as a public
testimonial of those respects you have manifested to me, let me beseech you to
look diligently to your selves, because the Lord has set you on higher ground
than many others; it is more for persons in your places and stations to win the
City of God, being ships of greater burden, and in the main Ocean, than for
small Vessels that are not so much at the mercy of the storms, because by
sailing along the Coast, they may come quietly to the Haven. In the midst of
your worldly affairs; labor ye to be like the fresh Rivers, that preserve
their own sweetness in the salt-Sea. Thus recommending you to the rich Grace of
God, I humbly take my leave, and remain,

Yours in all Gospel-Services to be commanded, W. GEARING.
Cransden in Sussex. March. 27. 1667.
God's Sovereignty DISPLAYED.
Job 9.12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? Who will say unto him,
what do thou?


CHAP. I.
FOr the Author of this Book, whether it were Moses, as the Jewish Rabbis
think, or Job himself, it mattereth not; we being assured that the Penman
thereof (as of all holy Scriptures) was inspired from above, and it came not by
private motion, but the Author thereof spoke and wrote as he was moved by the
Holy Ghost; as S. Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. yea, all the Authors of the
Scriptures being as Justin Martyr testifies, Justin Martyr.
like Lutes ready strung, though not sounding till they were struck by the
Finger of God: It is of no great consequence who wrote it, Hierom. Lyra.
as what is written in it. Hierom who (as Lyra testifies) twice translated it,
once out of Greek into Latin, and out of Hebrew also into Latin, says, that it
was for the most part written in Hebrew Hexameter verse: All do number it among
the Poetical Books: It may seem a Tragedy in regard of those many miseries that
Job endured, but at length it turned to a Comedy, by the happy issue and
blessed deliverance that God gives to him.

In the words of my Text Job acknowledges the Sovereignty, Power, and
Righteousness of God in all his dealings with, and Dispensations toward men.
The word [ Behold] is a note of attention, like the sounding of a Trumpet
before a Proclamation, or the ringing out of a great Bell before a Sermon, and
it signifies some matter of worth, of admiration and observation. In the matter
it self ye may observe Gods dispensations toward men: Gods Dispensation is
expressed in the Original in one word, he takes away. One Expositor says, he
snatcheth away suddenly, of which kind of Dispensation, Job himself had great
and sad experience, four persons one after another being sad Messengers of four
sad and sudden strokes, Job 1.

Then their condition and carriage under Gods Dispensation is to be observed,
wherein two things are to be noted.

1. It cannot be resisted: whatsoever he pleases, he takes away; who can
hinder him, or cause him to restore? None can rescue, or recover out of his
hand.

2. It ought not to be controuled: Who will say unto him, what do thou? Who
may in thought or word question or call him to account for any of his
Dispensations?

CHAP. II.
Obser. THat the Lord does, and may take from his creatures what he pleases.
The point has two branches. 1. De facto. 2. De jure. That the Lord does often
take away many things from his Creatures; and that of right he may do it.

That the Lord does take away from men what he pleases, there are great
examples in Scripture: this is to be considered in respect of 1. The matter,
what. 2. The place, where. 3. The time, when. 4. The means and manner, how.


SECT. I.
In respect of the matter or things he takes away.

1. He takes away health and strength, and that many times from his dearest
Children. We read 2 Kin. 20.1. That good Hezekiah was sick even unto death: and
Joh. 11.3* The Sisters of Lazarus sent to Christ, saying; Lord, he whom thou
love is sick. The efficient cause of all diseases is God himself. I will
appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and the Burning Ague, etc. Levit. 26.16.
I will appoint them as so many Tyrants and Lords over you, who shall vex you
with all manner of vexation; and I will appoint them over you as so many
Judges, who shall punish you for all your disobediences; and I will appoint
them over you is so many Executioners, who shall execute the fierceness of my
wrath upon you: they shall be over your heads, over your hearts, over your
bodies; they shall fall upon you when I will, and as often as I please; they
shall go to this person or that place, whither I shall direct and send them; go
whether you will, yet still they shall be over you; you shall not escape them;
when I bid them to fall upon you. I will set them over you as so many
Taskmasters with Cudgels in their hands over their slaves; they shall be
watching over you to do you mischief; you are not afraid of my threatenings, nor
do you tremble at my word of precept; therefore I will appoint terror over
you, I will appoint terrifying diseases to come upon you; yea, your own fancies
shall terrify you: Do we not see how men's fancies and imaginations are set
over them in every place to affright them at this day? How does God sometimes
set Conscience over men to terrify them, sometimes their sins, sometimes his
Judgments; yea, God makes every rumor to affright them, and nothing can allay
those terrors; every man they meet, every bush they see, every sickness that
is near them, does terrify them; fear is from God. -- I will, says he, set
the Consumption over you, a Consumption which shall consume the flesh of men,
and make them to pine away from day to day, waxing more and more feeble* so
that all the means they shall use, shall be of no value for their recovery; God
has appointed it over them, there is no escaping: There is no remedy against
evils which God appoints over a people: so the shaking Ague makes the
strong-bodied, and the stout-hearted men to tremble: so likewise the Fever is
of Gods appointment, which wastes the spirits, dries up the radical humor, and
puts men into a scorching flame. The like is threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.22. The Lord
shall smite thee with a Consumption, and with a Fever, and with an
Inflammation, and with an extreme burning: And ver. 27. The Lord will smite
thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the Emerods, and with the scab, and with
the itch* whereof thou can not be healed. Ver. 28. The Lord shall smite thee
with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. Ver. 59. The Lord will
make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed great plagues, and of
long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance. Ver. 60.
Moreover, he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast
afraid of, and they shall cleave unto thee: Also every sickness, and every
plague, which is not written in this book, will the Lord bring upon thee. Thus
you see, every disease in the world is the stroke of God. Men may attribute it,
as Pagans do to ill luck, you may attribute it to the unseasonableness of the
weather, to extremity of heat or cold, to drought or moisture, to the illness
of the seasons: All these are of God; it is he that changes times and seasons,
it is he that makes the constellations of the Heavens to meet in such and such
conjunctions, it is he that causes a distemper in the air; it is not the
unseasonableness of the year, the illness of diet, that can bring diseases upon
the body, unless God appoints them over a sinful people: Yea, sometimes God
imployeth Angels to execute his wrath upon men's bodies, he permits the Angels
to infest the air, and so plagues and pestilential diseases are over a people;
it is the Lord that sends forth these destroying Angels; sometimes he suffers
the Devil to smite men, as he did permit him to smite the body of Job with
sores: whom or whatsoever you may look upon as the causes of diseases, they are
of Gods appointment; it is he that takes away the health and strength of any
person or people.

SECT. II.
Psa. 90.3. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye Children of
Adam to the dust: dust ye are, and to dust ye shall return. When the living God
says Return, there is no nay: in his hand is our life and breath, and all our
ways, Dan. 5.23. The Chaldee Paraphrast renders my Text thus: Si rapuerit
hominem e mundo. Targ in Job 9.
If he shall snatch man away out of the world. So S. August. if he will stop
thy breath, and deliver thee up to death, who can hinder him? as if Job should
have said thus: He has taken away my Children, my Cattle, my substance, my
health, my strength, and all my outward comforts, and if he now come and take
away my life too, I cannot hinder him. God threatened the old world, Genesis 6.6,
7. I will destroy man from the face of the earth. Pareus in Genesis 6.
The Original word signifies (as Pareus observes upon the place) I will steep
him as a man steepeth a piece of earth in water, till it turn to dirt; man is
but clay, a speaking piece of clay, and is apt to forget his Maker, and the
matter whereof he is made; none but God can reduce man to his first principles,
and original matter whereof he was made: there is no dust so high, but the
great God is able to give it a steeping. In the City of Jerusalem, Joseph. de
bello Judaico.
during the time of the siege by the Romans, there died and were killed eleven
hundred thousand, and there were taken by the Romans ninety and seven thousand;
at which time there were slain in all Judea in several places, to the number of
twelve hundred and forty thousand Jews, besides an innumerable multitude who
perished with famine, exile, and other miseries. In the second Carthaginian
War, in Italy, Spain and Cicily, in seventeen years, fifteen hundred thousand
men were consumed. The Civil War of Caesar and Pompey swallowed down three
hundred thousand* Pompey the Great wrote it upon the Temple of Minerva, that he
had scattered, chased and killed, twenty hundred eighty and three thousand men;
and one Cains Caesar gloried in it, that eleven hundred ninety and two thousand
men were killed by him in the Wars. King Mithridates, by one Letter, caused
eighty thousand Roman Citizens to be slain, who were dispersed through Asia for
traffic. In Judea, in the time of King David, one Pestilence in a very short
time swept away seventy thousand men. Under Gallus and Volusianus Emperors, a
Plague arose from Ethiopia, and invaded the Roman Provinces, and emptied them
for fifteen years together, and sent an innumerable company of mortals to their
graves. In the time of Justinian the Emperors, in the City of Constantinople,
and the places adjoining, the Pestilence raged so much, that every daylit
dispatched five thousand, and some days ten thousand to their long home. In
Numidia eight hundred thousand persons died of the Plague; in the Sea-Towns of
Africa, two hundred thousand. In Greece, Anno Christi, 1359* there was such a
Pestilence, that the living were scarce able to bury the dead. In Athens the
Pestilence raged for twelve years together. When Italy was wasted by the
Goths, in Picene only, fifty thousand persons were starved with hunger. At
Fidenae under Tiberius the Emperor, by the fall of the Amphitheatre there
perished the number of twenty thousand Spectators. How many thousands were
swept away the last year in the great City of this our Land by the Pestilence,
and yet in many other Cities, Towns and Villages of this Kingdom, the Plague
devoureth at noonday; the Plague cries with a loud voice still to us, Death is
near, Death is in your streets, Death is creeping in at your houses, and
entering in at your windows. Now whosoever, or whatsoever be the Instrument of
Death, it is God only that takes away the lives of men at his pleasure. See now
that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me; I kill, and I make alive,
Deuteronomy. 32.39.

SECT. III.
Psa. 76. ult. Princes are usually men of the stoutest spirits, but God
sometimes cuts off the spirit of Princes. When Belshazzar, that Babylonish
Monarch, was in the midst of his jollity, drinking Wine with a thousand of his
Princes, in the Vessels of gold which his Father brought from the Temple of
Jerusalem, he suddenly saw a handwriting upon the wall, at which sight the
King was amazed, so that his countenance was changed, and the joints of his
loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against the other: What was the
cause of this so great affrightment? He saw a hand; what hand? Drexel. School
of Patience.
the hand of a man. What could one hand of a man, says one, terrify so mighty
a Monarch? Had he seen the paws of a Lion, of a Bear or Dragon, there had been
some cause of terror; but need such a puissant Prince fear the hand of a man
so much, at whose beck and command an hundred Troops of Armed Horse would
presently fly to his assistance? What dreadful weapon could that one hand wield
or manage? None but a Pen, with which it wrote: No other man would, much less
a King, be afraid of a writing pen. Had he beheld the three darts of Joab, or
the Fiery Sword of the Flaming Cherub brandished directly against him, he had
then had some argument of astonishment. But one hand, one pen, one piece of
writing which he understood not, this was that which daunteth him.

Sometimes the imagination that this or that evil will befall them, Plura sunt
quae terrent, quam quae premunt.
does so disturb them, that they are presently overwhelmed with fear. There
are more things which affright us, than there be which oppress us: some things
do torment us more than they ought, some things do afflict us before they
ought, some do disturb us which ought not: We often give place to our
imaginations, and do not give a check to those things which lead us into fears,
but feeding our fears by our fancy, we turn our backs and fly, and many times
fly when none pursues. I have read of certain Soldiers, who being amazed at a
little dust raised up by a flock of sheep, turned their backs, as if the Enemy
had been at their heels. The French History tells us, that the men of Burgundy
were so affrighted at the apprehension of the approach of their Enemies, that
they thought long Thistles to be men with Lances. We read that in the days of
Ahaz, King of Judah, that Rezin the King of Syria, and Pekah the Son of
Remaliah, King of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it, but could not
prevail against it; and it was told the house of David, that Syria was
confederate with Ephraim; hereupon the heart of Ahaz was moved, and the heart
of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind, Isa. 7.1, 2.
This kind of fear fills the heart with all confusion, leaving a man without
memory, judgment, or will to encounter any danger that threatens his ruin, it
dis-spirits a man, and enfeebleth his spirits; that whereas fear is a spur to
generous spirits to strengthen them, stirring them up to the use of the most
effectual means to avoid the danger, it does so deject the faint-hearted and
fearful man, as he remains like a mere block or stone, incapable at all of
any action.

There is a slavish fear, when the dread of evil drives us to desperateness in
evil, and forces us to fly from the presence of God. Conscientia peccati est
matter formidinis. Chrysostom.
This is the worst plague of all other, no terror is like inward terrors
arising from a guilty Conscience. The Conscience of sin is the Mother of fear,
says Chrysostom; sin is horrors fuel. This was the ground of Cains fear; the
accusation of a guilty Conscience followed him wherever he went, he knowing
that blood required blood; feared lest every one that met him would kill him,
Genesis 4. 14. Such a fear surprised Caligula the Roman Emperor, of whom it is
written, Suetonius.
that when it thundered, he would get into a Vault he had under the earth, to
hide himself from the wrath of God: Such was the fear of some whom Aulus
Gellius speaks of, who thought there was a plurality of Gods, Aul. Gell. Noct.
Attic.
and they diverse in quality; so some good, some bad; some good to whom they
sacrificed, and prayed to help them, and some bad also, whom they desired to
please, that they might not hurt them. Sin makes in man an Assizes, where the
soul stands arraigned and condemned before a terrible Judge: The Heathen
said, that the greatest terror was earthquakes, thunderbolts, burnings,
deluges, the earth gaping; but what is all this to a trembling heart, to the
thunderbolts of Gods Judgments, to the burning Lake, to the inundations of the
waters of bitterness, to the yawning of the gulf of hell; this and worse is the
condition of that man whose heart is the habitation of terror: such a man is
Magor Missabib, he is compassed about with terror on every side, yea he is a
terror to himself; he feels a deadly arrow wounding him to the very heart,
there is both a fire burning, and a knife sticking in his tender heart.

SECT. IV.
momentaneum corporis accidens: If the body fall to ruin, the accident cannot
stand. Among all the qualities that flee away with the body of man, there is
none more swift than beauty. When thou with rebukes do correct man for
iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth, Psa. 39.11. David
complained, that when Gods hand lay heavy upon him, his moisture was turned
into the drought of Summer, Psa. 32.4. The radical moisture, or chiefest sap of
his body was dried up, wasted and worn away, so as he was even brought to
deaths door, and become little better than an Anatomy, or bag-full of bones.
Ainsworth in Psa. 32.
The radical moisture is an airy and oily substance dispersed through the body,
whereby the life and vigor of the body is fostered, which being spent, death
ensues: And Solomon tells us, that a sorrowful spirit dries the bones, Prove.
17.22. the gathering together of much blood about the heart, extinguisheth the
good spirits, or at least dulleth them, and that humor having seized on the
heart, it cannot well digest the blood and spirits, Wright de Passionib.
which ought to be diffused through the whole body, but turns them into
melancholy, the which humor being dry and cold, dries up the whole body, and
consumes the beauty thereof, for cold extinguisheth heat, and dryness
moisture, which two qualities do principally concern the life of man. The
passion of fear has likewise wrought strange effects upon some men's bodies: I
have read of some to whom the sentence of death has been brought in the
Evening, whose hair has turned white before the next morning. Beauty is but
skin-deep, a very slender vail, a painted flower that soon withers; although
thy hair does now flourish, thy flesh does shine like ivory* though thy Rofial
face be beautified with the twinkling gems of thy rolling eyes; though the
health of thy body does now minister ability; though youthful age does promise
space of longer life; though reason springs, and the bodily senses are nimble
and vigorous; though the sight be quick, the hearing ready, the going right and
strait, the face and countenance most pleasant and delectable, yet a violent
Fever will debilitate thy body, and a few fits of a Quartan Ague turn thy
beauty into swarthy deformity; old age, and the space of a few years, will show
the slightness of it, and death will utterly consume it. If vain creatures,
that like Narcissus, dote upon their faces, did think how soon, and how many
ways God could blast and take away their beauty, they would not spend so many
precious hours at the glass in trimming this outward sheath, which might have
been much better spent about the adorning of the precious soul.

SECT. V.
He takes away wealth and riches Seneca said, Seneca.
That Fortune is a glass; which oftentimes is the sooner broken, the more that
it shines: And the Psalmist says, I have seen the wicked spreading himself
like a green bay tree, yet he passed-away, and lo he was not; yea, I sought
him, but he could not be found, Psa. 37.35, 36. As Job acknowledges that God
had given, so likewise that God had taken. One might have said to him, O Job
thou seem to be mistaken, for this large Patrimony thou have now lost, thou
had from thy Parents, thou gottest it together by thy own proper industry;
these flocks and droves of cattle thou have obtained by thy own wit: But Job
says, I am not mistaken; for neither my Parents, nor my own labor, nor yet my
own ingenuity, but the Lord gave me all these things, all which therefore by
right and equity he has taken away, because he gave them. But it may be
objected, did God take them away? Is it not injurious to God to say so? For the
Chaldeans and Sabeans drove away all his cattle; or if you will behold the
original of all this mischief, Satan bereaved him of all, for he procured the
fire, he raised the winds, he instigated those Robbers and Free-booters, he
threw down the house, and in very deed he did all these things; and therefore
Satan took all away: but Job holds his former sentence, and repeateth it; the
Lord has taken away, even the same Lord who gave me these blessings, he has
taken away; not the Sabeans, not the Chaldeans, not Satan, but the Lord has
taken away, and that rightly too, for he gave them all unto me; for except the
Lord had given this license to Satan, neither he nor any other of his
Instruments could so much as have stolen a Fleece, nor a lock of wool from me.
The Son of Syrach says, that good and evil, Ecclus. 11.14.
life and death, poverty and riches, are from the Lord; and says he further,
In the day of good, remember the day of evil; when thou have enough, remember
the time of hunger; and when thou art rich, think, upon poverty and need: From
morning until the evening the time is changed, and all such things are soon
done before the Lord: Art thou a Lord, and of great power, thou may be
brought to serve? Art thou rich and wealthy, thou may be brought to beggary
and penury? Do thou now swim in wealth, and is thy substance increased? One
hour, yea a few moments, may deprive thee of all thy goods; and when thy wealth
shall take its uncontrolled wings, and fly away from thee, then thou shall be
driven to say, I knew, what was but for my use, was not my own; the Lord gave
it, and he also took it away.

SECT. VI.
The Lord takes away honors from He powers contempt upon Princes, says the
Psalmist, Psa. 107.40. Man being in honor abides not, he is like the beasts
that perish: Sim lis pecoribus morticinis, like beasts that die of the Murrain,
Tremel. in Psa. 49.
says Tremelluns, and so become useless, and fit for nothing. By gold, silver,
brass and iron, are meant the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman
Empires, who should rule the world till Christ, here called the Stone, does
come himself to destroy the last of these Monarchies.
This seems not unaptly to be figured in Dan. 2. where King Nebuchadnezzar
saw an Image, whose head was of gold, whose arms and breasts were of silver,
the belly of brass, the feet of iron and clay: And there was a stone cut out of
the Mountains without hands, which struck the Image on the feet, and brake it
in pieces, and brought it into dust. Figuratively by this high Image, you may
understand the High and Mighty Man of the World, whose golden Head does
signify the Nobility of his blood, the height of his birth, and his high
honor and advancement in the world; his breast and arms of silver, signifies
the quantity of his money, in the getting whereof the rich man uses his heart,
hand and arms; the belly of Brass, denotes his fame or report sounding abroad,
for brass does lend a great noise or sound; by the legs of Iron, his strength
and power is figured; and by the feet of Clay or Earth, is noted his mortality:
The stone which is cut out of the Mountain without hands, may denote the death
of man, which the hand of the Lord has not made, says the Author to the Book
of Wisdom, neither does he delight in the destruction of any, but our first
Parents came thereunto by their own demerits; wherefore this stone strikeing
the feet of the Image, does suddenly and unexpectedly bring the High and Mighty
into dust, as well as others, neither is there any one that can resist his
fury; and such, so great, and so uncertain is his violence in the manner, in
the place, and in the time, that man's honor, force, or policy, cannot any way
suffice to provide defense against him. Of Gods taking away honor from men, we
have a notable instance in proud Haman, who grew insolent by the Kings favor,
cruel, stately and lofty in his gate, as if he would have reached the very
stars: All the Kings servants bowed their knees to Haman, and worshipped him,
Esther 3.12.
for so the King had commanded. Now Haman was as a Cock upon his own dunghill,
and would also be worshipped of Mordecai as well as others, this Mordecai could
not brook; some think he could not do it, because Haman had the form of some
Idol-gods wrought on his garments in Needle Work; others think this worship did
contain something of Divine Worship in it, a worship not to be given to man,
therefore Mordecai refused to perform it, lest he should have given Gods honor
to a man. Now behold on a sudden a wonderful alteration, while Haman was next
to the King, and bragged of his Honors and Riches, his Noble Family, his
Children, his benevolent fortune, the Kings favor, and the like, while he had
the Command of an hundred twenty and seven Provinces, he is adjudged by the
King to the Gallows, while Mordecai that was condemned to the Halter, was all
of a sudden clothed with the Kings Robes, set upon the Kings Horse, adorned
with the Kings Crown upon his head, led through all the chief places of the
City, Haman being as it were his Lacquey to attend him, crying, So shall it be
done to the man whom the King delights to honor. See what a change is here;
Mordecai but even now appointed to the Gallows, is now next to the Throne, and
Haman who was so highly advanced, is now hanged upon the Gibbet he had provided
for Mordecai.

SECT. VII.
He takes away liberty: At Rome the pattern of a wise and prudent man, a lively
Emblem of Virtue, was haled, thrust down, spit upon, stripped both of his
Senatorship and Pretorship, cast into prison, and compelled, as Socrates, there
to die. King Jehoiakin is bound in fetters, and carried away prisoner to
Babylon: Manasseh is bound in Chains, and Zedekiah is bound with fetters of
brass, and carried to Babylon, 2 Kings 25.6, 7. how was that of the Psalmist
fulfilled in them? He shall bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of iron, Psa. 149.8. Sapor King of Persia took Valentinian the
Emperor, and led him as a Foot-block for himself to step upon, when he moved
into his saddle: Thus Tamerlane served Bajazet the Turkish King. This has been
the lot of some of Gods dear servants. Joseph is sold for a slave, and put into
prison in the Land of Egypt: When Micaiah did prophecy, and pleased not King
Ahab, the wicked King commanded, that he should be put in the Prisonhouse, and
fed with the bread and water of affliction. John Baptist was shut up in close
prison by Herod: Paul and Silas were cast into prison, Act. 16.23. and thrust
by the Jailer into the inner prison, and their feet made fast in the Stocks.
The Apostles were put into the common prison, Act. 5.18. Peter was imprisoned
by Herod the King, and delivered to four Quaternions of Soldiers to keep him,
Act. 12.4. But no evil shall befall those whom God possesses wheresoever they
are: What! though Joseph be in prison, yet the Keepers of the Prison shall see
that the Lord is with him, he shall there speedily find his liberty; the very
obscurities of the Dungeon will furnish him with light enough to discern what
will happen; and those that have been the contrivers of his ruin, shall be the
causers of his happiness: God followed Joseph into the Pit, into Egypt, and
into the very prison, he is ever present with those who love and serve him
faithfully. Are they falsely accused, and thrown into prison? E carcere veniet
judex judicaturus judices. Out of the prison shall come a Judge that shall
judge their Judges, and those that falsely accuse and condemn them. Oh how sweet
is the yoke when God fastens us to it? How pleasing is Chains when God is with
us, and sets our souls at liberty? John Baptist being in prison, was careful to
promote the glory of Christ, and to have it known that he was the true Messiah,
that he was also mindful of the salvation of his Disciples, and was careful to
have their Faith confirmed in this Article which was Fundamental, and necessary
to Salvation. This burning and shining light could not be kept from shining
abroad by the thick walls of the prison; and though he was bound perhaps, yet
the Word of God in his mouth, zeal for Gods glory, and love to his Brethren,
was not bound: So we find S. Paul in prison, instructed and confirmed the
Saints by Letters: It is a great honor to bear Chains and Fetters for Christ,
this is the golden end of the Cross of Christ: No man can be miserable there,
where Christ is the keeper of the prison, and Lord of the Keys.

SECT. VIII.
Job's cattle, servants, and substance were taken away, the Lord suffers the
Devil to bereave him of his Children also: We are to know, that all that die
for sin, do not die in sin; this under-garden is Gods own, and all that grows
in it, the flowers, trees, and fruits be his own; if some be but Summer apples,
he may pluck them off before others: When God takes away our Children, they are
not gone away, but sent before; and we should not think them to be lost to us
who are found to Christ: God many times takes away our Children, lest
wickedness should alter their understanding, or deceit beguile their minds;
though they were soon dead, yet fulfilled they much time; and they may justly
say, mors nobis lucrum, death to us is great gain, in that both they escaped
this worlds miseries, and were quickly put into the possession of Eternal
felicity; if they have cast their flower, their bloom is fallen into Christ's
Lap, and as they were lent a while to Time, so now they are given to Eternity;
and whereas others are fain to pass through even a vast Ocean of troubles, they
by a short cut, and a little Bridge, have gained to arrive in the Land of the
Living by the Conduct of Death. Methinks I hear even Christ from heaven more
earnestly rebuking those that would not suffer little children to come unto him
of their own accord (concerning whom he has said, Mark 10.14. Plorabant
nascentes, Prophetae suae calamitatis: lachrymae enim testes sunt miseriae;
nondum loquebantur, and jam Prophetabant. Quid Prophetabant? In labor se
venturos, vel timore, etc. Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 24.
Of such is the Kingdom of God) than he did those that rebuked those that
brought them. And these little ones (who when they came into the world, might
as well have laughed as wept, having equal possibility to both) yet they wept
as soon as they were born the Prophets of their own calamity, for their tears
are witnesses of their misery, as yet they spoke not, yet they prophesied: What
did they prophecy? that they should come into the world with pain and fear;
being now past out of the world, to cry loud unto their Parents and Friends
that do mourn for their absence, speaking not in the language of Canaan, but of
the heavenly Jerusalem; if you did love us, you would rejoice, because we go to
our Father; and weep not for us, but weep for your selves; and in your weeping
for us (as you cannot choose but you will) mourn not as men without hope, we
have that you hope for: Mat. 18.10.
Our Angels, which behold the face of our heavenly Father, have now performed
one of their offices for us, to carry our Souls out of our Nurses Laps into
Abraham's Bosom, and in time will execute the second, when he shall send them
that can best command them, to gather his Elect from the four winds, and from
the one end of the heaven to the other; then our bones shall be raised out of
the Beds where ye have laid them, and shall be coupled with their sinews,
compassed with their flesh, covered with their skin, and crowned with
immortality: This we have in hope, and not in hand; but we have received the
earnest thereof in our souls, that are already in the joys of our Savior, and
wait for the other at the appointed time, which cannot be long. I have read of
L. Paulus Aemilius, who having lost his two only Sons, all the hope of his
house; the one a little before, the other presently after his triumph, told the
people of Rome (who were sorry in his behalf) that he was glad in theirs, in
that the calamity which had befallen him, might excuse them. Valor. Maxim. lib.
5. cap. 10.
Now O ye that have lost all your children, if your seely Scape-goats have
carried the penalty of your family with them, and excused the hoped-for
posterity of your other Relations, let them glorify God on their behalf, and
say you with Aemilius, I am glad that God has given just occasion for you to
lament for me, rather than for me to bemoan you.

SECT. IX.
God sometimes takes away Churches, Revelations, Christ directs diverse
Epistles to several famous Churches, and he threatens the most famous Church,
viz. the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou are fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent. By the Candlestick
is meant the Church planted in that place, viz. the visible Church in Ephesus,
joined together in the profession of the Gospel, and the enjoyment of
Ordinances, as a Candle put into a Candlestick: Those whom God forms into a
visible Church (who of themselves were sometimes darkness, as a Candlestick
without a Candle) and sets up the light of the Gospel among them, as men light
a Candle, and put it into a Candlestick: So when God will unchurch, he
threatens to take away the Candlestick, to take away Church Priviledges and
Ordinances; it is Gods work to do this, I will take away, or remove the
Candlestick; and the state of this Church makes it evident, that it is not in
the power of Men or Devils to unchurch a people, or remove the Candlestick, but
when the Lord pleases. Ephesus was planted in a rich and fruitful soil, it was
a flourishing Church, and stood firm under the Roman Persecution; this Church
out-stood the fury of all the Heathen Tyrants, albeit that lasted three hundred
years; and about one hundred and thirty years after (viz. Anno Christi, 430.)
the Emperor Theodosius II. assembled a famous Council at Ephesus, to assert
the truth of Christ, and to condemn the dangerous Heresy of Nestorius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, which was in dividing the Natures of Christ,
making one Christ Man, and another Christ God, as if they had been two persons:
I mention this, to show that it is not in the power of any to take away the
Ordinances of the Gospel, and Churchpriviledges, from any place or people, but
when the Lord pleases: There are these three things to be taken into
consideration.

1. Consider the condition of this and other Churches in the time of the ten
Roman Persecutions, and the condition of the same Churches afterward in latter
times, when they lost their glory: Under the Roman Persecution these Churches
were in great measure pure in Doctrine, and holy in Conversation; and when was
the rage of the Devil and his Instruments more against them than when they were
purest? and had they been able, Satan and his Instruments would then have
utterly destroyed them: But in aftertimes they grew loose and corrupt, and
then they fell by the world, when they were most suitable to the world, and
most corrupted in the world.

2. Compare the Enemies of this and other Churches against whose attempts they
were upheld, with those Enemies by whose hands they fell: they were preserved
against the power of the Roman Empire for three hundred years, and they fell by
the hand of Sarazens and Arabians, the Vassals of that base Impostor and false
Prophet Mahomet: Now what comparison between the fallacies and impostures of
this false Prophet, and the power of the Roman Empire, to overthrow a Church,
and yet they were upheld against all the power of the Roman Tyranny, and fell
by the hands of desperate Arabians, Sarazens, and barbarous people,

3. This Church of Ephesus, with many other Churches of the Christians, while
they held fast the profession of the Faith of Christ, yielded their bodies to
the Roman Emperors as to their Lords during those ten famous Persecutions, and
could not be destroyed; but afterward, though they took up Arms for their
lives, to defend themselves, yet they fell by the hands of barbarous Arabians
and Sarazens; a clear demonstration, that it is not in the power of men or
devils to divest men of Church Priviledges, and holy Ordinances, when they
please; therefore when such are taken away, it is the Lord that takes away the
Candlestick out of its place, being provoked thereunto by the sins of men, and
especially by the unfruitfulness of a people under the Gospel.

I will give another instance, viz. in the Church of Israel.

1. In the case of Shiloh, Jos. 18.1. we read, that the whole Congregation of
the children of Israel, assembled at Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle of the
congregration there, and the Land was subdued before them. The Tabernacle had
been in a wandering posture for forty years together, all the time they were in
the Wilderness, at length it is fixed in Shiloh, being the first resting place
of the Ark of Gods presence. Now you may see 1 Samuel Chap. 4. that God gave the
Philistines a great Victory against Israel, and the Ark of God was taken by
them, and Shiloh was divested of this great blessing: The Psalmist says, They
provoked him to anger, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images;
when God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, so that he
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which he placed among men, Psa.
78.59, 60. And in Jer. 7.12 Go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I
set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my
people Israel.

2. Consider the case of Temple in Jerusalem, and the Nation of the Jews before
Christ's coming; see how God threatens them: I will do to this house which is
called by my name, wherein you trust, and unto the place which I gave to you,
and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh, Jer. 7.14. Though the
Babylonians and Chaldeans were the instruments of its ruin, yet God is said to
do it: Thus says the Lord, I will give this City into the hands of the
Chaldeans, and into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and he shall
take it, Jer. 32.28. God gave him the City and Temple; he did but take what God
gave into his hand, and the greatest Conquerors do no more, they take but what
the Lord gives them.

Consider we likewise the condition of the Temple in Jerusalem, and of the
Nation of the Jews after Christ's coming into the flesh. We read Luke 20.9.
Christ spoke to the people this Parable; A certain man planted a Vineyard, and
let it forth to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country for a long time; and at
a season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they should give him of the
fruit of the Vineyard; but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty;
and again he sent another servant, and they beat him also, and entreated him
shamefully, and sent him away empty; and again he sent the third, and they
wounded him also, and cast him out. Then said the Lord of the Vineyard, what
shall I do? I will send my beloved son; it may be they will reverence him when
they see him: But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying; this is the heir; come let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours: So they cast him out of the Vineyard, and killed him; what therefore
shall the Lord of the Vineyard do to these husbandmen? He will come and destroy
these husbandmen, and shall give the Vineyard to others. Now it is said, Ver.
19. that the chief Priests and Scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on
him, for they perceived he had spoken this Parable against them.

The sense is this: God planted his Church in the Land of Canaan, he brought it
out of Egypt, and removed and transplanted it out of a dry and barren soil, and
set it in a fat and fruitful place, viz. the Land of Canaan, a Land flowing
with milk and honey, he gave them his Word and Ordinances, sent his Prophets
among them, rising early and sending them, and called upon them to bring forth
fruit; but instead thereof, they persecuted his Prophets, slew diverse of them,
and at last slew his own son. Now here is destruction threatened, and who shall
do it? The Lord of the Vineyard shall do it; he shall come and destroy these
husbandmen, and let out the Vineyard to others: So that albeit the Romans were
the instruments of this dreadful execution, yet the Lord of the Vineyard did
it. Joseph de bello Judaico.
Josephus tells us, that Titus was very unwilling to destroy the Temple in
Jerusalem, that he labored to quench the flame after it was set on fire, and
suffered some prejudice in his War about it; it was done divino quodam impetu,
by a certain divine stroke, as the same Author observes. But Joseph being a
Jew, was ignorant of the main cause, sc. their rejecting and murdering the Son
of God. Now of all judgments, this is the most sad and woeful, when God
removes the Candlestick out of its place, and unchurcheth a Nation, and takes
away Church Priviledges, and the use of his Ordinances; oh that we were deeply
sensible, how we have provoked the Lord by our sins to deal with us in this
kind, to unchurch us, and leave us in the dark, as a people that shall no
longer be owned by the Lord for a people: If the Lord does continue these
privileges among us, we have cause much to admire his patience, and to
magnify his mercy. You see the people were very much affected with what Christ
spoke, when he told them the parable forementioned, and that the Lord of the
Vineyard would come, and give the Vineyard to others. When they heard it, they
said, God forbid, ver. 16.

SECT. X.
Daniel in a Vision, are represented like four cruel Beasts. The Chaldean in
the likeness of a Lion, Dan. 7.2, 3
the Persian in the shape of a Bear, the Grecian, or Macedonian, in the
likeness of a Leopard, and the Roman by a strange. Monster, with iron teeth,
intimating that great Conquerours, that make great changes, are most commonly
like wild and savage beasts. All those savage Beasts forementioned, fastened
their Claws upon the Church of Christ.

1. The Assyri^ or Babylonian came like a Lion roaring after his prey. In the
days of Pekah King of Israel came Tiglath-Pilneser, King of Assyria, and took
Ijon, and Abel-Beth-Maacha, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and
Galilee, and all the Land of Naphtali, and carried them Captive to Assyria, 2
Kings 15.29. And in the ninth year of Hoshea King of Israel, 2 Reg. 17.6.
Shalmaneser King of Assyria came up thorowout all the Land, and went up to
Samaria; and besieged it three years: In the ninth year of Hoshea, he took
Samaria; and carried Israel away unto Assyria, and transplanted the ten Tribes,
placing them in Halath, and in Habor, by the River of Gozan, and in the Cities
of the Medes. Now the Assyrian was Gods Instrument to remove Israel out of
their own Land, yet it is said the Lord did it, 2 Reg. 17.18. The Lord was very
angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight; there was none left but
the Tribe of Judah only: Also Judah kept not the Commandments of the Lord their
God, etc. This Beast also invaded Judah also in the time of Sennacherib, and
cruelly threatened Jerusalem, where the Temple of God, the special place of his
worship was; and in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, this Beast besieged Jerusalem,
and took it, and burnt the House of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the
houses of Jerusalem, and every great man's house burnt he with fire, and carried
multitudes of the people to Babylon, and held them in bondage seventy years.
Now see what God says of this cruel Beast* Isai. 10.5, 6. O Assyrian [or woe
to the Assyrian, as some read it] the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation; I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and
against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and
to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. What
does God make of this great Conqueror, the Assyrian Emperor, that prevailed
over his own people, and many others, but as the Rod of Gods anger, and one
that could do no more than a rod or staff without a hand; if the Lord had not
managed it, this staff could have done nothing; the Lord makes use of
Instruments as a staff, and soon sets them behind the door; and this appeared
by the great slaughter that God made in the Host of this proud Assyrian; for in
one night an Angel of the Lord smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand; and Sennacherib himself was slain by his own sons,
Isa. 37.36, 37.

2. The Persian Monarchy represented by the Bear, though by the hand of God
this Beast was so muzzled, as not utterly to destroy the people of God, and so
overruled by the Lord, as to give opportunity to the people of God to return
and build the Temple, and repair the City of Jerusalem, yet were they afterward
persecuted by the Court of Persia, and brought in danger by the pride of Haman,
abusing his favor with Ahasuerus the Persian Monarch.

3. The Macedonian represented by a Leopard, came with his flying wings to
destroy the Church of God in Judah: afterward it was most grievously afflicted
by two limbs of this Beast, viz. that of the South, and that of the North,
especially that of the North; sc. Antiochus Epiphanes, whose cruelties are
notably set forth in the first book of the Macchabees.

4. The fourth Beast, viz. the Roman Monarchy, is worse than all the three
former Beasts; and that Vision of Daniel forementioned, is suited to that of
S. John in Rev. 13.1, 2. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast
rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns
ten Crowns, and upon his heads the name of Blasphemy; and the Beast which I
saw, was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a Bear, and his
mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and his seat,
and great authority. The reason why Daniel did not liken the fourth to any
Beast, as the former three were, is because it was a Monster compounded of the
cruelties of the several beasts, sc. of a Lion, Bear, and Leopard, this Beast
was like them all. Now this Beast was some hundreds of years before it came to
its full growth, and being distant from Judah, the Church of God felt nothing
of its fury till the Age before Christ came in the flesh. The first time that
this Beast put forth his Paws against the Church, was about sixty one years
before the Birth of Christ, when Pompey, the Roman General, taking advantage of
the contentions of the two Brethren ( Hircanus and Aristobulus, of the Race of
the Macchabees) about the Priesthood and Principality, took from them the City
and Temple of Jerusalem, and made them Tributary to the Romans: whereupon, he
and others with him, presumed to enter into the Temple, and saw such things
that was not lawful for them to see; after which violence and presumption, it
is noted of Pompey, that was very victorious before, above any one Roman, that
he was very unhappy in his wars afterward, and being vanquished by Julius
Caesar, fled into Egypt for refuge, and there was murdered where he looked for
succor. Crassus committed horrid sacrilege, he robbed the Temple in Jerusalem
of ten thousand Talents (that is, two hundred thousand pounds of our money) and
afterward being overthrown of the Parthians, had molten gold powered down his
throat to satisfy his greedy appetite. One notable mischief the Romans did to
the people of God, was the placing of that cruel Herod in the Throne, who was
made King by the favor of Augustus and Mark Anthony; he was a Vassal to the
Romans, though a cruel Tyrant to the people of God: And now the Scepter was
departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from under his feet; this Herod slew the
Sanedrin and Grand Council of the Land, and murdered the Infants at Bethlehem,
from two years old and under, out of a desire to murder Christ in his Infancy.
This fourth Beast murdered the Prince of Life, and Lord of Glory, Pilate the
Roman Judge condemning him, and the Roman Soldiers putting it in execution:
And the Jews, who formerly had suffered by this fourth Beast, as the Church of
Christ, and now joining with this Beast against Christ, they became the most
malignant persecutors of Christ and his Church, stirring up the Roman
Magistrates in several Provinces and Cities to persecute the Apostles of
Christ, and the sincere professors of the truth; and remaining in their
rebellion and enmity against Christ, they were unchurched; and the Kingdom of
the Gospel being translated from them to the Gentiles, the wrath of God came
upon them to the uttermost; eleven hundred thousand of them were slain by the
Sword, Famine and Pestilence, at the Siege, by Vespasian and Titus his Son, and
the residue sold for slaves, and afterward five hundred thousand of them
ruinated by Adrian the Emperor. And because the Sovereign Power was now settled
in the Emperors, that I may speak further of the fury of this Beast against
the Saints of the most High, I think fit to the two former descriptions in
Daniel, and that in Revel. 13. to add another out of Revel. 17.3. where S. John
says, Plutarchus (...) quasi septicollem vocat.
I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy,
having seven heads, and ten horns. This is explained, ver. 9. The seven heads
are seven mountains on which the woman sits. Ver. 10. And there are seven
Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he
comes, he must continue a short space. Ver. 11. And the beast that was, and is
not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition. Ver.
12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet, etc. These shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and
naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Ver. 16. and ver. 17.
The woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the Kings
of the earth. Septem una sibi muro circundedit arces. Servius in VI Aen.
The seven Heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman sat: This Woman is
that great City of Rome built upon seven hills, viz. Mons Palatinus,
Capitolinus, Caelius, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Viminalis, Esquilinus. They also
signify seven Kings, or seven sorts of Supreme Magistrates, by which the City
and Empire has been, and is governed. Supreme Magistrates in Scripture are
called Kings, when Israel was formed into a Commonwealth, they had Moses set
over them, Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5. Moses commanded us a Law, etc. and he was King in
Jesurun, when the Heads of the people, and the Tribes of Israel were gathered
together. So the Dukes of the Sons of Esau are called Kings, Genesis 36.31. These
are the Kings that reigned in the Land of Edom, before there reigned any King
over the children of Israel; that is, before Israel was delivered out of
bondage, and was formed into a Commonwealth, and had Moses set over them as
Supreme Ruler under God. Now Rome is famous for these seven Heads, or seven
sorts of Governors, I. Kings, II. Consuls, III. Tribunes of the Soldiers, IV.
Decem-viri, V. Dictators, VI. Emperors, VII. Popes. Tacitus notes, Haliemus
Instrumenta servilia etiam Reges. Tacit.
that among other things, Rome has this honor, to have Kings for its Vassals.
And S. John speaking of these seven sorts of Magistrates, that did successively
rule in Rome, he says, five are fallen; that is, when this Vision was
presented to John, and the Revelation written by him, viz. five of those seven
Supreme Magistrates were fallen; Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decem-viri,
Dictators: For although there were Consuls many hundred years after, yet they
were no longer Heads, as formerly, though they had the same name, yet they came
short of the former Consuls in power and dignity. -- Then Saint John says, one
is; -- that is, the Heathen Emperors were then in being; these were then
regnant, and had the place of Heads in the Empire: These began to head the
Beast (as the sixth Head) about forty years before the Birth of Christ, and
continued three hundred years after Christ's birth; I understand it of the
Heathen Emperors only, not the Christian. -- Saint John adds, And the other
is not yet come, viz. the Popes, they were not then come when John wrote. After
the Heathen Emperors were taken away, Rome was left vacant for the Pope; and
although the Christian Emperors had some power, yet they did not reside at
Rome, but continued for a long time at Constantinople, or Ravenna; and after
the power of the Christian Emperor was broken by the Barbarians, the Pope got
Rome, and settled himself there, and so becomes the seventh Head of the fourth
Beast.

Now the sixth and seventh Head of this Beast, one that was then in being, and
one that was not then come, were the grand Enemies of the Church of Christ.

1. The sixth Head, the Roman Emperors, they raised many bloody persecutions
against the Church of Christ, and though God restrained some of them, and gave
his Church a breathing, yet many of them tortured their own brains to devise
cruel torments wherewith to torture the Christians, as Nero, Tiberius,
Domitian, Trajan, Antoninus, Decius, Maximinus, Dioclesian, etc. under whom
many thousand Martyrs sealed the truth of Christ with their blood: Such was the
favor of God to this Realm, that they escaped all, except the last
Persecution, which was under Dioclesian: and Alban was the first that suffered
Martyrdom in this Land for the Gospel of Christ. But the Pope, the seventh and
last Head, has been more mischievous, and continued longer than all the rest:
Take his first rise, from the time the Heathen Emperors were cut off, and the
Pope has continued 1360 years, or thereabout; and Rome was builded about a
thousand and sixty years before the Pope arose; so that this Head has
continued near three hundred years longer than all the other six, which may
give us hopes his time is now almost expired, and since the Church has been
vexed by him for so many Ages, it is not so much to be admired he should fall
speedily, as that he has stood so long. The Pope was born about the time of
Constantine the Great, and came not to his full stature till about the year six
hundred, or somewhat after, then Boniface III. made by Phocas, universal Pastor
of all the Churches of the world, appeared with his Ecce duo gladii hic: Behold
here the two Swords, challenging Imperial and Papal Dignity.

The mischief done to the Church by this seventh Head, has been partly by
fraud, partly by open violence; partly by bringing in corruptions in matter of
Doctrine, (Popery is not a single Heresy, like that of Apollinaris, or Arrius,
but a heap and sink, or common sewer, in which there is a confluence of
Heresies and corrupt Doctrines meeting together) and partly by rage and
cruelties; witness their cruelties to the Albigenses, and Waldenses. About the
latter end of the reign of King Henry the Second, Du Moulin Respons. ad Cardin.
Du Perron.
King of England, Pope Alexander III. held a Council at the Lateran Church in
Rome, where they consulted about the extirpation of the Albigenses. They were a
people that did not acknowledge the Pope, prayed to none but to God alone, had
no Images, went not to Mass, denied Purgatory, and read the holy Scriptures.
The Pope therefore gave the same graces to them that should spill the blood of
these poor Christians, as to them that crossed themselves to go to the holy
Sepulcher, and fight against the Sarazens: Hereupon Dominick, the Author of the
Order of Dominicans, put above two hundred thousand of them to death: This was
done in the time of John, King of England, and by the instigation of Pope
Innocent the III. And of the Albigenses and Waldenses, Pope Julius the II. was
the cause of the death of two hundred thousand.

Now whosoever be the Instruments of great trouble to the Church, or changes in
the world, it is the hand of the Lord that does it; we have no cause to repine
and murmr at such and such, but have just cause to blame our selves for it;
others have not dealt so ill with us, as we have dealt with God; therefore when
God takes away peace, and sends trouble, takes away the fruits of the earth,
and sends famine, takes away health, and sends Epidemical diseases, in all
these we are to eye God; remember that the Judgments of God are a great deep,
and like the great Mountains; if we do not thoroughly search the reason of it,
let us confess our understandings are too short to reach to the bottom of it,
let us not accuse God of injustice, but confess with Job; Lo, he goes by me,
and I see him not; his ways are unsearchable, and past finding out.

CHAP. III.
II. GOd takes away what he pleases, in respect of the place where: So Jobs
Children were taken from him when they were feasting in their Elder Brothers
house, a place seemingly of great security. Naomi lost her Husband and her two
Sons in a strange Land; when she sojourned in Moab, she was left a childless
Widow in a strange Country, therefore, says she, Call me not Naomi, but Marah,
for I went out full, but the Lord has brought me home again empty, Ruth 1.21.
So Jacob had his beloved Rachel taken away from him on a journey, as they were
traveling in the way.

III. In respect of the time when; Nebuchadnezzar lost the use of his reason,
when he was in the height of his glory, walking in his stately Palace of Babel,
Dan. 4.30. being puffed up with pride: Is not this great Babylon that I have
built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty; and while the
word was yet in his mouth, a voice came from heaven, saying, to thee it is
spoken, the Kingdom is departed from thee, and the same hour was it fulfilled
upon him. So the rich man in the Gospel had his soul taken from him, even then
when he promised himself many years enjoyment of his wealth.

IV. The Lord takes away by what means and instruments, and in what manner he
pleases: Job's Oxen and Asses were taken away by the Sabeans, his Camels by
the Chaldeans, his sheep burnt by fire from heaven, his children slain by the
fall of an house, yet in conclusion Job does not say, The Lord has given, and
the Chaldeans and Sabeans have taken, but the Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken: Now God is said to take away, when Instruments do take away; it is
seldom that God deals with a people immediately, but in these outward
Providence he stirs up Instruments to do what is done; but that which
Instruments do, the Lord is said to do, Isai. 42.24. Who gave Jacob to the
spoiler, and Israel to the robber, did not I the Lord? Men robbed and spoiled
them, yet it was the Lords act to send these spoilers upon them; the Act is
from the Lord, though the wickedness of the act be from the evil instruments.
There are many ways that God uses to take men away; some die with the
Pestilence, and such like contagious diseases; some die by the Sword; one is
consumed with famine, another is killed with thirst; some are choked in
waters, others consumed by fire; some are torn with the teeth of Beasts, others
are taken away by poison, and so by many means the miserable life of man is
finished.

CHAP. IV. Shows the Reasons why God takes away from us what he pleases.
SECT. I.


Reas. 1. Because of that right and property that God has to, and in all his
creatures; they are his creatures, whatsoever they have he gave them, therefore
he does with his own as he pleases: Gods own people did not consider this,
therefore the Lord threatens the Church to take away what he had given her,
Hos. 2.8, 9. She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold, therefore I will return and take away [my] corn
in the time thereof, and recover [my] wool, and [my] flax given to cover her
nakedness: Though man be the possessor, yet God is the chief Lord; we are but
Stewards, God is the owner, as David acknowledges. All things come of thee,
and of thine own have we given thee, 2 Chronicles. 29.15. God has given us only the
use of such things he has committed to us for a time, not the propriety. A
Steward cannot say, this house is mine, these Farms are mine, these are my
Tenements, this is my Land, these are my Cattle, this is my Treasure, for they
are his Lords: He only has the care of them, not the propriety in them: So
every particular man (whatsoever he enjoys) he has but the use of it, not
the propriety. God is the Lord of heaven and earth, he styles himself the
possessor of heaven and earth; all these things are his, he has jus ad omnia,
jus in omnibus; a right to all things, a right in all things: therefore he
calls all the creatures his servants, Kings and Emperors are his servants:
My servant Nebuchadnezzar: and all the Kingdoms of the world are Gods; God
calls all things his: as Jacob said concerning Joseph's sons, Ephraim is
mine, and Manasseh is mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine, Genesis
48.5. So God calls all things his which we do possess. These houses are mine,
these riches are mine, these lands are mine, these children and servants are
all mine; the Sea is his, and he made it, and all the Fishes therein are his;
The earth is the Lords, and all the fullness thereof, Psa. 24.1. and Psa. 50.10,
11. God challenges all the creatures to be his; Every beast of the forest is
mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills are mine: I know all the fouls of
the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine: the rich treasures
within the bowels of the earth, the rich Mines of gold and silver are his, the
precious pearls are his, yea all the Inhabitants of the world are his: And all
men at the best are but Domini usu fructuarii (as the Civilians term is) such
as have the use and benefit, but not the right and property in the things they
possess. God has let out the world to the sons of men, as Solomon did his
Vineyard at Baal-hamon, Cant. 8.11, 12. unto certain Keepers. Solomon was to
have a thousand pieces of silver, and those that kept the fruit thereof two
hundred: God will have the honor of property and possession, we the fruit of
his Vineyard: Therefore it was a presumptuous usurpation of foolish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh, that I have
killed for my Shearers? He speaks like a covetous, usurper, as if all these
were his own, and not Gods, as if he had both the propriety and use of them.
There are two things that demonstrate that God has the right and property of
what we do enjoy.

1. Because there is but one Lord of all things in the world: God is the wise
Creator of all things, and he will be the Lord of all his creatures: he will
preserve the propriety of things to himself, although he gives the useful
fruition of his creatures to man. There are two reasons why God made man Master
of all the creatures; one is, ut cum mundus refertus sit, intelligeret, quod
locum in coelis, and non in terris quaereret: that seeing all necessaries are
provided for him on earth, he should not seek after a place upon earth to
settle himself in, but a Mansion in heaven. Another reason is, to show, that
seeing all things were made before him, that the creatures were the Lords, and
not his; that he was brought to this great house of the world to be Gods
Steward, Tenant, or servant; therefore God enjoined Adam to labor presently,
even in Paradise he was to dress the garden: Adam in his state of Innocence,
when he enjoyed the whole world, yet he was not Dominus terrae, the Lord of the
earth; the earth was the Lords, and the fullness thereof: Adam was but as the
Frenchmen call a titular Lord, Dominus sine terra.

2. Because God will have all men to be dependent upon him; if men had their
riches or honors from themselves, they would stand upon their own bottom, they
would even dare with Impudence to stand out and contest with God: Who is the
Lord, says proud Pharaoh? Thus every one would be ready to say, who is the
Lord that I should serve him? but when men shall know, that what they have,
they have from God, they will depend upon him as a Steward depends upon his
Master; you see the unjust Steward, Luke 16. was undone, when his Master turned
him out of his service.

SECT. II.
God many times takes away from whether that man had sinned, or his Parents,
that he was born so, Joh. 9.3. Our Savior answered, neither of both, but that
the works of God might be manifest in him. What do I hear (says S. Augustine)
neither he nor his Parents? If there be no man without sin, then doubtless not
his Parents; and was not he himself born in original sin? Or is it credible
that in his life time he had added no actual offenses to it? and though his
eyes were shut, did not concupiscence wake within him? Noverat cogitare ut
forte concupiscere aliquid, quod caecus non possit implere, sed in cord
judicari a cordis perscrutatore. Aug. Tract. in Joan. 44.
How many mischiefs do some wicked blind men commit, yea from what evil almost
do they abstain? his eyes were closed indeed, but an evil mind can keep
Sentinel well enough within it self. He knew how to think upon, and perhaps to
lust after something, which being blind he could not put in execution, but be
judged in heart by the searcher of the heart. Doubtless then both had sinned;
but their sin was not the cause why he was born blind; what then? ut
manifestent^r opera Dei, that the works of God might be manifested. Thus far
Augustine upon the same place. He says, opera Dei, the works of God (says
Calvin) because as his work of judgment had been seen in his blindness (which
was opus solitudinis, a work of solitude) so his mercy might appear in his
recovery (which was opus reparationis, a work of reparation.) Itaque oum latent
afflictionum causae, cohibenda est curiositas, ne and Deo faciasimus. Calvin
super Joh. 9.3.
Therefore (says he) when the causes of afflictions are not manifest,
curiosity is to be restrained, lest we both do injury to God, and become cruel
toward our Brethren. This was manifest in Job, a work of power in taking away
all his children, and a work of his clemency in restoring him so many again,
and in suffering him to live to see the fourth generation of them, and
afterward to die old and full of days, for God is able even out of stones to
raise up children to Abraham, to Job, to every true believer. When God takes
from us those things which he formerly gave us, as our habitations, food,
raiment, health, wealth; if any man being thus emptied; complain of Gods
dealing with him, cannot God reply justly to him, I owe you nothing? what I
gave formerly, impute it to my mere love: My gifts are free, I take them now
away, that you may know whence you had them, not that I am any ways obliged to
you: hitherto I have showed my liberality and bounty toward you: if I now
please to continue so no longer toward you, what Law have you to recover upon
me? May I not do with mine as I please? Mat. 20.15.
Friend, I do thee no wrong, take what is thine and depart. S. Augustine
explaining Gods equity, says thus: God takes away from us sometimes things
necessary, and so fretteth us, that we may know him our Father and Lord, not
only pleasing, but sometimes likewise squeezing us.

And who dares or can object the least injury done unto him? And if God take
away necessaries from us, yet we cannot accuse God of injury; if he takes them
from us, even for his own Honor and Majesty, and to show his power and
Authority over us: let us then cease complaining, we are his subjects, and must
be his Clients.

SECT. III.
things upon us, and then we are no losers but great gainers, if God take away
our goods, and give us more grace, if he take from us things necessary for our
bodies, and gives us things absolutely necessary to salvation, as pardon of
sin, peace of conscience, assurance of his love and favor, what have we lost
thereby? It is too low to say (says one) these are equivalent to temporals;
Byrdals profit of godliness.
they are transcendently more excellent than all temporal goods; the whole
world is nothing to the grace and favor of God, and to pardon of sin: if
wealth were as necessary as grace, every Child of God should have it;
therefore godly men have great cause of contentment, if God for reasons best
known to himself, does either deny them, or take from them the things of this
life. That Christian is not poor, that is rich in grace; that man is not
miserable that has Christ for his portion; though he has no house to put his
head in, yet he has a Mansion in heaven provided for him, though he has no
food for his body, yet he has meat to eat which the world knows not of, he
has Manna for his soul, though he has no raiment for his body, yet he has
glorious robes for his soul. What kind of injury is that to take from one a
threadbare out-worn Coat, and to give him a new one that is far better? It is
an excellent change to lose temporals, and get spirituals and eternals. We many
times think that a great estate is best for us, but God our heavenly Father
both knows what we need, and what is best for us; were we to be our own
carvers, as to our worldly estates and outward comforts, we should do as the
young Prophet, who being sent to gather herbs, gathered poisonous weeds instead
of wholesome herbs: therefore in all Gods Dispensations toward us, it is good to
submit to the wisdom of God, who could make all his Children rich and great in
the world, but does not, because in his wisdom he thinks a meaner portion of
the things of this life to be better for them than a greater: To have lectum
stramineum, and cibum gramineum, straw for our beds, and herbs for our food,
may be better for us, than with the rich Epicure, to be clothed in fine
linen, and to fare deliciously every day. In fine, every Christian shall
conclude, that estate God allotted me, was best for me, and the poor Christian
shall say, as Luther did, it was better for me that I was a poor Clown, and a
Christian, than if I had been great Alexander, and an Infidel.

SECT. IV.
Behold another cause of Gods taking Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices
(an argument of Gods sore displeasure in the eye of man, to be surprised with
death, (and that a bloody one) even in the act of Gods service:) but Jesus
answered; Suppose ye these Galileans were greater sinners than all the other,
because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.1, 2. And he confirms it by another
parallel to it, of the men upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell; here you see
punishment for other men's instruction and example, ut aliorum (...), that other
men's scourges should be our warnings: Let every one consider, says Cyprian,
not what another has suffered, but what even he himself deserves to suffer.
unusquisque consideret, non quod alius passus sit, sed quid patiet ipse
mereatur, Cyprian. de lapsis Sect. 21. Calvin harmon. sup. hunc locum.
In this we may say as he does Plectuntur interim quidam, quo caeteri
corrigantur. Some are suddenly punished, to the end that others may be amended.
It is a common disease among men, says Calvin, to be severe Censors of others,
when we see the scourge of God upon them, and to flatter themselves if they
escape unpunished; whereas thus they ought to consider: First, that they ought
to behold their own sin, and to examine whether they have not deserved the like
punishment: Secondly, in that the Lord in his mercy spares them, and
chasteneth others before their faces, to magnify his name in their own behalf,
and to betake themselves unto speedy repentance. Caecus ergo and pravus Arbiter
est, qui hominum peccata ex paenis praesentibus astimat: Therefore he is a
blind and perverse Judge, who taxes men's sins from their present punishments:
Neque enim ut quisque deterior est, ita primus ad paenam trahitur; for every
one that is worse than others, is not therefore drawn first to punishment; Sed
cum paucos ex multis puniendos Deus eligit, in eorum persona relinquis
denunciat, se fore ultorem, ut omnes turreantur. But when God singleth a few
out of many to be punished, he threateneth, that he will be an avenger to the
rest, that all may be terrified. For your part, O thou distressed City of
London, say thou therefore with the Prophet; Rejoice not over me O Enemy; for
thought I have fallen, I shall rise again, though I now sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me, I will patiently bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, Mich. 7.8, 9. and if any insult too
much, or censure too hard of your calamity, and glory in their own prosperity,
let Christ give them their answer; unless they repent, they shall all likewise
perish.

SECT. V.
God in taking away outward comforts I know both how to be abased, and I know
how to abound; every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full,
and to be hungry, both to abound* and to suffer need, Phil. 4.12. Although some
of these outward things are in some degree necessary for this present life, yet
our heavenly Father knows how far forth they are necessary, and how much is
necessary for us, or else gives us content in himself immediately without them:
yet these things are not so needful as they are commonly supposed to be: it is
wonderful to consider what sweet joy and content many a Child of God has had;
when they have been stripped of these things; and the reason is, because when the
people of God do want these things, they do more fully apply themselves to God;
when a Christian is stripped of these, and has none of these things to rest
upon, then the affections of the soul are like water running one way in one
Channel: whatsoever S. Paul's outward condition was, he could find enough in
Christ to be content; in particular, he knew how to be abased, sweetly
satisfying himself in this, that he was an adopted Son of God, and he knew how
to be hungry, because he had bread and meat to feed on that the world knew not
of, and could feast himself with marrow and fatness at that time, when carnal
eyes thought him ready to perish for hunger: he knew also how to suffer want,
contenting himself with that abundance that is found in Christ: Many evil men
have been forced to suffer need, but were never instructed to it as Paul was;
they never learnt to relieve themselves in their wants out of the fullness of
Christ, as the Saints do, who (be their wants never so great) do find enough in
Christ to satisfy them all. Again, the Lord does immediately fill and satisfy
the soul with himself, when it lies under many outward wants, and replenisheth
them with abundance of joy, when they are under many occasions of sadness and
sorrow. So says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things: He was filled with the joy of the Holy Ghost at the same time when he
had many outward occasions of sorrow: as poor in respect of worldly enjoyments,
yet being able to enrich others in God; as having nothing (nothing of the
world) yet possessing all things in God. Thus does the Lord glorify the
All Sufficiency of his grace, in giving in himself plentifully to his poor
people, when they are under many outward straits and wants.

Moreover, there are many things which we fondly persuade our selves we can in
no wise want, while we possess them; but when they are taken from us, God
teaches us how to live without them. One that was formerly rich, and fared
delicately, having by the providence of God, lost all, being brought to a hard
pinch, is glad of a mess of pottage to his dinner, and to go to bed supperless;
he is then taught to be content with his mean estate, and to say, I had not
thought I could have lived so sparingly. Drexelius tells us of a prodigal
Knight, who having buried all his substance in Banquets and Belly-cheer, and
for want of an Horse, being forced to go on foot, in this ebb praised God, and
said; I thank God, who has set me on my own legs again; I had not thought
before this, that I was so good a footman: So God deals with many men, he
reduces them to a mediocrity and temperance, by a wholesome penurious
indigence. Many while they abound in all outward comforts, are apt to say, one
thus; I must have so many dishes at my table, I cannot not keep house without
such an annual income; I cannot endure hunger or scarcity: Another says, I
cannot want sleep, nor endure watching; I must have such conveniences and
accommodations: but now when God takes away these outward comforts from us,
takes away our dainty dishes, our associates, our sleep, and turns our Wine
into water, and turns us out of house and home, then God instructs us how
to want, how to suffer need, how to fast and watch, and live under decks, or
lie upon the ground, or in a prison, or to live in banishment, and then we need
not care where or in what condition we be, if the Lord be with us.

CHAP. V.
NOw let us prove the point de jure, as well as de facto, that the Lord may
take from us what he pleases.

I. He may do it without crossing his Justice: The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works, Psa. 145.17. Clouds and darkness are round
about him; righteousness and judgment, are the habitation of his Throne, Psa.
97.2. Or, as it may be translated, are the foundation of his Throne: his Seat
of Judgment is composed of, and founded in righteousness; whatsoever he takes
away from us, he acts by Rule, his Throne is upon Judgment and
Righteousness; God is infinitely righteous, it is impossible for God to do
iniquity; how unjust soever his ways seem to us to be, yet they are most just;
he is the Supreme Lord of all his creatures, and may do with them what he
pleases, as the Potter with the clay: all acts that God does, are acts of his
will, and whatsoever he wills, is exceeding just. This is a received Axiom
among Divines: Voluntas Dei est summa perfectissima, and infallibilis Regula
divinae justitiae, and Deus sibi ipsi lex est. The Will of God is the chiefest,
the most perfect and infallible Rule of Divine Justice, and God is a Law to
himself; no losses, no crosses that befall us, but do proceed from him who is
most just and righteous; therefore we must not murmr at God, when he takes
our goods or houses from us, as if he dealt unrighteously with us; but if we
ponder with our selves what we have deserved, we may behold abundance of mercy
toward us under our greatest losses, and his sharpest corrections.
Peradventure, thou art in some great pain in some part or member of thy body,
but tell me, do thou not deserve to burn in hell, and to feel the scorching
pains of the damned? if such an easy disease does so torment thee here, think
then with thy self how thou could lie in everlasting torments? if the pain of
one worm-eaten tooth does so fearfully vex thee day and night, that it almost
drives thee to madness, think then that thou deservest to be tormented for
ever with that fearful Worm of Conscience? Thou can not brook the sight of
such a person, nor endure the company of such a man who has done thee wrong;
but tell me then how thou would be able to endure the company of all the
damned, yet even this also thou do deserve: thy sharpest sufferings here are
sweet* if compared with hell torments: Perhaps thy house is burnt, thy goods
are consumed by the flame, thou have lost thy husband, thy wife, thy children,
thy friends, thy estate: but tell me, do thou not deserve it, and much more,
even to lose thy God, thy Savior, thy soul, thy treasure in heaven,
everlasting glory and blessedness? Therefore under all thy losses and
sufferings; let God have the glory of his Justice, and say with Mauritius the
Emperor, Justus es Domine, and justasunt judicia tua. Righteous art thou O
Lord, and just are all thy judgments: Or as Daniel, To thee, O Lord, belongs
righteousnes^^ but unto us confusion of face: Say thou, I am unrighteous, thou
art righteous; I am a sinner, thou art just.

II. God may take from his creatures what he pleases, without crossing his
goodness or mercy: his mercy is free, it is not due to any, he has mercy on
whom he will, therefore he may take away what he will from any: it is a mercy
that God has left any good thing in the possession of sinful man, who might
have stripped us of all; and when he does a little consume us, it is his mercies
that we are not utterly consumed. August.
S. Augustine well weighs the words of S. James: Behold we count them blessed
which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the
Lord made. They should not therefore, says he, suffer the loss of their goods,
in hope to receive their goods again, as Job did; for his wounds and rottenness
made him whole, and all those things which he had lost were doubly restored to
him. That therefore we should not, when we suffer temporal losses, expect or
look for such a remuneration, he says not, ye have heard of the patience and
end of Job, but he says, ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen
what end the Lord made; as if he had said, Endure the greatest losses as Job;
but for this your enduring do not expect the restitution which Job had of
temporal goods, but rather of a more enduring substance laid up in heaven for
you.

III. God may take away what he pleases from us, without crossing his truth
and faithfulness: For

1. Gods promises by which he engages to us in these outward things, are
conditional; and what man living is able to say, that he does so exactly
perform his conditions, that God cannot take any thing from him without breach
of promise? who among us has performed the conditions of the promises? your in
quities have withheld good things from you, says the Prophet: So I may say,
your iniquities have taken good things from you: We have either failed in our
duty, or we have been unthankful for what we received from God, or we were not
wise Stewards of Gods blessings, or we waxed proud and wanton, Certe si
beneficiorum Dei essemus capaces, liberalius nobiscum ageret Deus. Calvin.
and forgot God the giver of our blessings, therefore God has turned us out of
all, or the greatest part of those good things he gave us, as a chastisement of
our sins, and negligence in our duties: Could we make good the condition of the
promises, we should still find God making good all the promises of this life to
us: Assuredly, says Calvin, if we were fit and meet to receive Gods benefits,
he would open his hand, and deal more liberally with us: Therefore when God
takes away your goods, your wealth and substance, search and try your ways,
and you will find your iniquities to be the cause, and then you will see little
ground to blame God for unfaithfulness in his promises: for albeit abundance of
outward things be promised to the godly, yet if we are deficient in our duty,
he may either withold or take away those good things promised; for these
things are promised upon condition of our hearkening diligently to the voice of
the Lord our God, to observe and do all his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2.

2. God may take what he will from the wicked, without crossing his truth,
because they have no interest in Christ and his promises; the promises are all
yea and Amen in Christ, but the wicked can claim no interest in the promises,
because they have no interest in Christ; and if God leave them any good thing,
it is more than he promised them; if he take away their children, and leave
them health, it is more than he promised them; if he takes away health and
wealth, and give them only their lives, if he cast them not into hell it self,
it is more than he promised them.

IV. When God takes away health, wealth, goods, liberties, outward comforts,
from his own people, he has made up all their losses aforehand; he has given
himself, an infinite God, to be their portion; nay, he that takes these outward
things from them, will give them a kingdom, and that Will make up all their
losses, and therefore he may take away all other things. See how God speaks to
Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward. Had Abraham left his native Country, his Kindred, all save one Lot, and
was he also gone from him to dwell in Sodom? was Abraham now as one alone
among strangers, among Idolaters and Atheists, and those the most execrable in
the world, the very brood of Cham, the Father of Canaan, a people devoted to
destruction, having four hundred years given them to fill up the measure of
their sins, and yet has Abraham no cause to fear? no says the Lord to him,
Fear not Abraham: The Majesty of God is pleased to stoop so low, as in love to
give a reason hereof to Abraham, and one, that Abraham must needs say, was very
sufficient: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward: which is more
full, than if God had said, I will shield thee, and reward thee, though that
had been enough; but God promises himself as a shield to him, and so assures
him of an infinite protection; yea, he gives himself as a reward to him, an
exceeding great reward. What cause then has Abraham to fear? Fear no dangers,
nor enemies, for I am thy shield; fear no wants, nor losses, for I my self am
thy reward. Are any dangers so great, any enemies so strong, that I cannot
shield thee against them? who am ready to cover thee with my wings, and defend
thee against all the wicked of the world, and against all the legions of hell?
can thou be undone by any losses, or be sunk by any wants, when I my self am
thy exceeding great reward? Have thou the possessor of heaven and earth in thy
possession? and have thou cause to fear any wants? if the earth cannot supply
thee, heaven shall; if neither heaven nor earth can, yet I will, who am the
Lord of heaven and earth, I my self am thy exceeding great reward, So Genesis 17*
7, 8. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee
in their generations, for an everlasting covenant to be a God to thee, and unto
thy seed after thee. He does not say, only to be a helper to thee, or a friend
to thee, but to be a God to thee; I will give myself to thee; as I am
essentially God, so I will be a God to thee, thou shall have me for thy own;
those that are in Covenant with God, they are in possession of an infinite
good, and they have him in everlasting possession.

CHAP. VI.
meat that perishes, and to try who can outstrip one another in worldly
riches, although God can soon clap a pair of wings to them, and make them to
flee away from them. These things are the summum bonum, the chiefest good, the
very God of the world, the Paradise, the All in All of this world, the great
Diana that all the world magnifies; they think it better to be out of the world
than to have no riches, esteeming them the only miserable men that are poor and
needy: Jeroboams golden Calves are still the worldlings God, the world is of
Jeroboams Religion to this day; no lusts are more unsatiable than worldly
lusts, they are green and vigorous even in old age, the love of the world is a
sin that never waxes old; when men should think most on the world to come, yet
then are old earthworms too mindful of this present evil world.

O what unspeakable folly is this, so eagerly to thirst after and pursue such
perishing vanities, which may soon be taken from us, and which only serve us
while we are in this world; for if once our soul be taken from us, then whose
shall all these things be? while the rich Glutton lived in the world, he fared
deliciously every day, and wore Purple and fine linen every day; but when he
died, he left all these things behind him: Death turned him out of the comforts
and possession of these things. He that drank Wine in Bowls, is now drinking of
the Cup of Gods wrath in hell: he that had all things to the full, does now
want a drop of water to cool his flaming tongue; he that was clothed with
Purple and fine linen every day, is now bound with chains of darkness, and
clothed with woe, curses, and unspeakable wrath: he that maintained Hawks and
Hounds for his delight and pleasure, is now howling and roaring with cursed
Fiends and damned Hell Hounds. Thus he that had the worlds goods only, while he
was in the world, he has nothing in hell to enjoy but Gods wrath, that is his
everlasting portion.

So again, rich Abraham and Job, that had this worlds goods, have now no need
of them in heaven; there is no need of the Sun by day, nor of the Moon by
night, for the Lord God is the light thereof. What a folly is it in men
therefore to labor so eagerly after this worlds goods, and to set their minds
upon them, and to neglect the good of their immortal souls; to love riches more
than grace, and love dross and dung more than Christ, when as Christ and Grace
will be their comfort in this world at death, and in the world to come when
this worlds goods shall be taken from them; though your houses and goods be
burnt and consumed to ashes, yet Grace is a good that fire will not burn, nor
water drown. Justly did our Savior call the rich man in the Gospel, fool (and
in him all such fools) that had more care for this world than for heaven. Who
ever seeks the world for their bed, shall at best find it but short, and ill
made, and a stone and thorns under their sides to keep them waking, rather than
a soft Pillow to sleep upon. O that it were written upon the bags, upon the
doors, upon the chests, tables, counting-houses of worldlings, which holy Job
said, Naked came I forth of my Mothers womb, Job 1.21.
and naked shall I return; I must appear before God not in the worlds goods,
but in the sins which I have done in this world: It pitieth me many times to
see the industrious Bees to take such great pains all the Summer to get a
little honey for the winter; they go abroad daily from flower to flower to suck
honey, and carry it to their Hives, and are burnt in their Hives perhaps before
winter comes, and others take the honey. Thus worldlings toil, and spend their
lives and strength for the goods of this world, and think in their old age to
take their ease, and give up themselves to a devout solitude; but before that,
it may be God takes away their goods by fire or water, or suffers thieves and
robbers to break in upon them, and take away all their wealth and riches from
them; or it may be death comes, and exercises dominion over them, and turns
them into hell, and there they burn, and others enjoy their goods upon earth.
Will ye then spend most of your care, thoughts, strength, and time, for the
things of this world, and have no care and thoughts for grace and heaven? Will
ye like Martha, cumber your selves about many things that may quickly be taken
from you, and neglect the one thing necessary that shall never be taken away
from you, if once you have it? Luke 10.42. This worlds goods will do you good
no longer than you live in this world, but godliness will make you happy, and
the fruit of it will remain with you, when the goods and the world it self
shall have an utter end: Leave then this worlds goods to the children of this
worlds, whose names are written in the earth, they are the only portion of
worldly men: So Abraham said to Dives; Son remember, thou in thy life time
had thy good things. God gives unto Esau's the fatness of the earth, but
denies them the dew of heaven. Indeed, God sometimes promiscuously scatters
these outward things upon the godly and the wicked; he gives the wicked some
share of his goodness, yet it is worth your observing, that Isaac would not
vouchsafe to call Esau's Portion a blessing, yet he gives him the fatness of
the earth; the worlds goods are the influences of Gods Providence, not of his
love; only the riches of his Grace is the influence of his love and favor. Ah!
what pity it is to see how Satan lays upon many men a burden of cares above a
load, and makes a Pack-horse of their souls, when they are wholly set upon the
world; we owe the Devil no such service; it were wisdom then to throw off that
heavy load into a mire, and to cast all our cares upon the Lord: Oh never seek
warm Fire under cold Ice; this world is not a field where true happiness
grows.

CHAP. VII.
THe work which now remains to London in special, many of whom have had their
goods and houses taken away and consumed to ashes by that late sad and raging
fire that happened among them.

1. I beseech you enquire into the procuring cause, and that you will find to
be sin: if sin be in the City, and in the house, vengeance may quickly be seen
at the door, and at the gate; sooner or later God will visit iniquities, sin
shall never go unpunished. This was David's resolution when God took away his
subjects, Behold it is I that have done wickedly, but those sheep what have
they done? 2 Samuel 24.17. This was Hezekiah's confession for his own life. I
have cut off like a Weaver my life, Isai. 38.12. Thus did that godly Widow of
Zareptha acknowledge at the death of her Son. What have I to do with thee O man
of God, art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my
son? 1 Kings 17.18. She verily thought that either some of her former sins, or
else the not using of so holy a man according to his place, was the cause of
this present punishment: A harsh string to be touched, but will be tuneable
enough in the ears of the Child of God, that is already touched with the
feeling of sin, whose heart is still rather in the house of mourning, than in
the house of mirth: it is the Unison of Gods people, We have sinned, and dealt
wickedly. Our Savior prophesied, Mat. 24.12. that iniquity shall abound, etc.
and do not the times wherein we live tell us, that iniquity does abound? It
has abounded, and does abound exceedingly among us in all our Country Towns
and Villages; but I had almost said, it cannot abound more than it has among
you in London. I wish I could draw a veil over the sins of these times, and
cover the iniquities of the City and Country, as Constantine did over the
errors of learned men in his days. But the sins of our times, and the
iniquities of your City cannot be hid, they are too public, too common among
us: See whether all manner of sins do not abound among you? the iniquities of
the head, the iniquities of the heart, iniquities of the tongue, iniquities of
the life, do abound in the midst of you: have not the streams of all iniquities
fallen into your City, as all waters and rivers run into the Sea? There are
some particular sins for which God threatens to pour down fiery showers of
wrath and indignation upon a people.

1. The first I shall set before you is Sabbath-breaking, the profanation of
the Lords day, Jer. 17.27. See how God threatens the City of Jerusalem for this
sin. But if you will not hearken to me, to hallow the Sabbath day, and not to
bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day;
then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the
Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. Examine now whether there
were not many among you that neglected and despised the public worship of God;
and others, that as soon as they came out of the House of God, laid aside all
thought of the Word preached to them, either spending the rest of the day in
the Alehouse, or in some idle recreations; yea, many suffering their children
and servants in the close of the Public Worship, to turn Gods Ordinances, sc.
prayer, singing of Psalms, hearing the Word, into shouting and clamors, idle
sports, and foolish loud laughter, and that in such a rude manner, as if they
would profess themselves open despisers of God and of his Ordinances: Is this
to bring up your children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord? Is this to
do like Abraham, to command your children and servants to keep the way of the
Lord? Is it a wonder to see Gods Judgments upon your City, to see the Plague
raging among you, and destruction wasting at noonday, poverty increasing, and
a fire kindled in your Gates, and devouring the stately houses and Palaces
thereof?

SECT. II.
A second sin, is a general contempt Mat. 23.37, 38. that our Savior
prophecieth of the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, for killing, and
crucifying, and stoning some of Gods Prophets, for scourging others in their
Synagogues, and persecuting them from City to City; therefore, says he, Behold
your house is left unto you desolate. His Disciples were troubled to hear that
so goodly a Structure should be made a ruinous heap: wherefore they showed him
the goodly buildings of the Temple, wishing him but to look on them, vainly
imagining, that he could not but admire the stateliness of the house, and
sumptuousness of the buildings, and would call in his threatening, and prevent
the desolation of it: but Christ, who regards not the magnificence of
buildings, or persons, but will stain the pride and glory of man; was so far
from revoking his threatening, as he does assure them by an oath, that the
stately Temple so much admired for its curiousness, so strongly seated and
enriched, should not only be left desolate, but should be totally demolished:
Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down, Mat. 24.2. This was for their contempt of the
Word, and their cruelty toward the Prophets. This sin God has always avenged,
and will avenge with the forest destruction; the Temple in Jerusalem was
afterward burnt and utterly overthrown by the Romans: no flame is more fierce
than when oil, wine, or sugar are fired: if you will know when the sins of a
people are at the full, and ripe for the sickle of destruction, it is when the
Gospel is rejected, and his Messengers despised, and misused. They mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy: Therefore
he brought upon them the King of the Caldees, who slew their young men with the
sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or
maiden, old men, or him that stooped for age, he gave them all into his hand:
and all the vessels of the House of God, great and small, and the treasures of
the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the King and of his Princes, all
these brought he to Babylon: and they burnt the house of God, and brake down
the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the Palaces thereof with fire, and
destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof, 2 Chronicles, 36.16, 17, 19. Whether you
are guilty of this sin, you best know.

SECT. III.
Solomon) chastises them with whips, and your oppression (like Rehoboam) whips
them with Scorpions; and as he told the oppressed people, that his finger
should be heavier than his Fathers loins; it is most true of your oppression,
it is far more tyranny than their wants: whereas you should pour oil into their
hearts, you pour in vinegar to aggravate their calamities; whereas you should
show mercy to them in misery, you show all cruelty to the miserable; your
bounty should relieve them, your cruelty draws more from them. Oppression is
like unto a Grindstone, yea, it is as a Millstone hung about the necks of the
needy, and sinks them deeper and deeper into want and misery: the poor are the
grapes, and you are the Wine-pressers squeezing out the blood of the poor: It
is a notable phrase of Solomon, Prove. 12.10. The tender mercies of the wicked
are cruel: it is in the Hebrew, the bowels of the wicked are cruel: The tender
mercies] that is, when men seem to show mercy to their needy brother, their
words and actions carry fair shows of compassion, as lending money to them in
their necessity, yet there is much cruelty in those mercies in the event
ensuing thereupon: How often do Oppressors fetch home their money lent to needy
brothers with a vengeance, and unconscionable exactions? How often do they take
the garments which should cover the nakedness of their needy brethren for a
pledge? aad instead of clothing the naked, they expose them to nakedness,
Exodus 22.22, 23. God threatens, if thou afflict any stranger, widow, or
fatherless child, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry:
Oppression is a crying sin, it cries for vengeance; yea, Gods anger will burn
against such merciless men; And my wrath, says he, shall wax hot] and I will
kill you with the sword.] God threatens to meet with the Oppressor by one
judgment or other: and God will make your Wives and Children to be in the same
extremity, that your needy Brethren are. The stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, Habak. 2.11. Suppose the poor
and needy whom you oppress, do not cry against you, yet these dumb inanimate
creatures will cry out against your oppressions for vengeance upon you. Amos
5.11. Forasmuch as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens
of wheat; ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them:
God threatens to take away the habitations of such as oppress the poor and
needy.

SECT. IV.
A fourth sin I will set before you, is Solomon speaks of, that was all
overspread with thorns and thistles; and not only so, but persons of all ranks
and conditions, and estates (it is to be feared) have been Actors, Factors, and
Abettors of sin; most men have run into sin with more greediness than before.
As Noah's flood covered hills, dales, mountains, valleys, so the flood of
ungodliness has covered high and low, rich and poor. Though God justly
punished us, Opposita juxta se posita clarius elucescunt.
yet in the time of his just wrath he remembered to show mercy, Habak. 3.2. The
mercies of God are over all his works, even over his penal judiciary works, Psa
145.9. his mercy is most conspicuous in times of judgment; to command
deliverance when we are in the mouth of danger, in the Den of Lions, in the
Burning Furnace, is mercy indeed: to save a people being in the very jaws of
death, is mercy indeed: it is the Lords mercies you were not utterly consumed,
the Sword would have consumed, the Plague would have devoured all; these
judgments like fire and water, are merciless; had not God interposed his own
mercy, you had been utterly consumed; if mercy had not rebuked his judgments,
they had swallowed you up quick, you can no more resist an overflowing
judgment, than a level of Sand can withstand the inundation of the Sea. The
Lord gave you a respite after the last years wasting plague, he moderated his
wrath, and did not make a full end of you; the Lord would make trial, whether
you would act according to your resolutions, vows and promises made in the day
of your distress. When the plague of Frogs was upon Pharaoh; when the Frogs
were crawling on his bed, on his table, in his chamber, when he heard Frogs
every where croaking, and saw all Egypt to be filled with them, then he sent
for Moses and Aaron, and begs them to pray for him: Entreat ye the Lord to
remove the Frogs; and then he promised to let Israel go, and they should serve
the Lord: Moses prayed, and God removed that plague; then he put Pharaoh upon
the trial whether he would be as good as his promise, but then he hardened his
heart again, and would not let them go: By this God made a discovery of the
grand hypocrisy of his heart; has it not been so among many of you, in the
time of your sickness, in the day of your calamity, when you supposed your
selves to be very near to death, did you not then promise to let your sins go?
God was pleased to give you a respite, to set you at liberty, and have not many
of you again hardened your hearts, and refused to let your sins go? therefore
you may think God has now suffered this late fire that was kindled among you,
to devour your habitations: Certainly, it were better to have no respite given
at all, than to have it, and abuse it: it were better to be taken away by the
first judgment, than to have a respite between judgment and judgment, if you
repent not; for now ye become greater sinners, and you treasure up for
yourselves more wrath; the more respites you have given you, and you abuse
them, the greater will your condemnation be: To such the Lord says, Why should
ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more, Isai. 1.5. They were
never the better for all the strokes of God upon them, but increased their
revolts; now see what judgment follows hereupon, Ver. 7. Your Country is
desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire, and your Land strangers devour it
in your presence. Scultetus on this place says, Scultet. in Jes. 1.5.
it is Theologica Pictura Germaniae, a Divine Picture of Germany; I may say it
is Theologica Pictura Londini, nec-non totius Angliae; it is a Theological
description of London, yea of all England, I mean of the wicked in City and
Country, Isai. 26.10. Let favor he showed to the wicked] i. e. let a respite
be given him from destruction, yet will he not learn righteousness, but return
to their former wickedness; see how God threatens them. Ver. 11. The fire of
thine Enemies shall devour them. Though thou bray a fool in a Mortar with a
Pestle among Wheat, yet his folly will not depart from him, Prove. 27.22. Though
God does pound them even to powder, following them with stroke upon stroke, yet
their folly remains with them.

SECT. V.
Whoredom is a sin also which God Sodom and Gomorrha burned with lust, and God
overthrew and consumed them with fire and brimstone from heaven. O how many
have been guilty of this sin in City and Country? how many are there who have
eyes full of adultery? 1 Pet. 2.14. How do multitudes of men make lusting after
a woman the end of their looking upon them? they look in order to their lusts,
making no other use of their eyes than a man does of a Burning Glass, merely to
set their own hearts on fire of unclean lusting: yea many continue looking,
till their hearts be enflamed with lust after women; pulchris vultibus oculos
Affigunt, they nail their eyes, Chrysostom. in Mat. 5.28.
and fasten them to beautiful faces, as Chrysostom speaks, delighting to feed
their eyes with the sight of women, and seeking after beautiful faces to feed
their eyes with them, and as the same Father says, not so much that they would
commit corporal uncleanness with them, but only that they may lust after them.
As often as a man looks on a woman with a fixed eye, or a glancing eye, it
mattereth not much; if it be accompanied with a lustful motion, this is
adultery before God; how many such adulterers are there every where?

And as with the eye, so there are many that commit adultery in the heart, as
by unchaste imaginations, and unclean fancies, and by lodging unchaste thoughts
in their hearts, and giving entertainment to them: how many are there, whose
hearts do long, lodge, dwell, and insist upon unclean things? which is
abominable heart-adultery in the sight of God, inwardly wishing to have their
lusts and desires satisfied, with an actual Commission of carnal uncleanness
with those persons they lust after? yea, many take great delight in such wanton
and unchaste fancies and contemplations; this is an high degree of adultery in
the heart.

I know it is a question whether every such thought and motion of the heart be
a sin, as long as a man does not consent unto them. Papists will not
acknowledge them to be sins till they are accompanied with delight and consent;
but Paul determines the question, Romans 7. who there tells us, tha^ such
motions are sins, whether consented to, or not, delighted in, or hated Paul did
not consent to them, yea Pau^ hated them, yet he acknowledged then to be sins;
whatsoever is a transgression of the Law, is a sin; now to covet, or lust, is
forbidden by the Law, whether a man consents to it, or not consents to it,
hates or delights in it, yet because he coveteth, he sins; to consent to
them is a higher degree of sinfulness; the fuller consent men give, the more
heinous sins are; the more men delight in such lustings, it is an higher degree
of sinning against God. Hence you see the reason why our Savior does so much
condemn the filthiness and uncleanness of the heart, Mat. 5 27, 28.
Heart-adultery is minoris infamiae, of less infamy, because it is secret, and
unknown to any man; but it is majoris culpae, a greater fault; the reasons are
these. 1. Because heart-adultery argues Atheism and contempt of Gods presence
more than the outward act; thou actest that in the sight of God, which thou
would not act before a poor sinful man. Moreover, 2. Heart-adultery is more
directly against a man's own soul than other sins: here a man makes his own soul
the adulterer, and the adulteress, the Bed, and the Brothel-house, the Incubus
and Succuba, the Agent and Patient, the Whore and the Whoremonger. 3. Adultery
in the heart is far more frequently committed in the heart, than the outward
act is or can be; opportunity can never fail the Adulterer in his heart, he can
have an opportunity when he will: The heart-adulterer can never want an
adulterous subject, he can frame one in his mind, and can with delight commit
folly with his own imaginary Strumpet; he can do it in every place and company,
yea, though a thousand eyes be upon him; and when he wants strength and
ability of body, yet then his will and fancy is strong to act this wickedness;
sick men, old men, can then commit mental uncleanness with greediness; yea,
many there are that come into our public Congregations, chiefly to look after
and look upon beautiful faces, and when they are outwardly conversant in the
Worship of God, when they are hearing the Word, their eyes and heart may then
be full of adultery. What cause have we all to bewail the woeful pollutions of
our hearts? Who can say my heart is clean?

Now for corporal uncleanness, never was this sin thought to be more frequently
committed in the great City of this Land, than it has been within these few
years past. The Lord might now take up the same complaint against many wanton
Gallants, as he did by the Prophet Jeremiah of old. When I had fed them to the
full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the
Harlots houses. They were as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after
his Neighbors wife: shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall
not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5.7, 8, 9. The Lord
charge the people of Jerusalem, that they had committed fornication with the
Egyptians, and with the Assyrians, and multiplied their fornication in the Land
of Canaan unto Chaldea, and yet they were not satisfied therewith, Ezekiel. 16.26,
28, 29. Therefore the Lord threatens to give them up into the hands of those
that should strip them of their clothes, and take away their fair jewels, and
leave them naked and bare, ver. 39. and ver. 41. says he, They shall burn
thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many
women; and I will cause thee to cease from playing the Harlot, and thou also
shall give no hire any more. It had been well if London had not been too true a
Comment upon this Text, both in the sin, and in the punishment.

SECT. VI.
strong drink, and continued until night, till the Wine enflamed them, whose
frequent walks were from their own Beds and Houses to the Alehouse, and from
the Alehouse to the Tavern, whence (being not able to stand by themselves) they
were led or carried to their Beds again, reelling to and fro, staggering, and
being at their wits end; and so they who had something of men in them when they
arose in the morning, were (when they came to lie down at night) turned into
Beasts, their understandings being departed from them, and themselves at their
wits end? As the old world was swallowed up with the flood, so are many men's
bodies and souls with liquor: as those waters prevailed exceedingly, so that
all the high hills and mountains were covered, and every man (as well as Beast)
that was not in the Ark, died; so does the deluge and flood of drink prevail
upon drunkards, not only their bellies, but their brains are covered, not only
the valleys of their sensitive powers, but also the mountains and high hills of
their rational faculties are over-topt; their reason and understandings are
drowned, and all their wisdom is swallowed up: Every thing of a Drunkard dies
in him (every thing of a man) and for the present he gives up the Ghost; nor is
there any Resurrection or reviving till the next morning, when these strong
waters are assuaged, and these floods decayed and dried up: Sad it is to think
how this deluge of excess in drink has drowned the face of City and Country,
and risen many Cubits above the highest mountains of Religion and wholesome
Laws. Oh what swarms of drunkards might be seen in some great Town or City in
one day? Go but to some great Fair or Market, and you may see drunkards lie in
ditches, or upon the highway at the Towns end where a Fair is kept, as if some
field had been fought; here lies one, there lies another, even like unto men
that are slain in the field, and are stark dead. I have read, that there was a
street in Rome, called vicus sobrius, because there was never a Drinking house
in it: but where should a man have found such a street in the great City, or in
any other populous Town or City in England? Multitudes there are who take a
pleasure in drinking, till their bellies and throats can hold no more, yea,
many there are, who by accustoming themselves to frequent acts of immoderate
drinking, have gotten an habit of being able to drink excessively, without
being distempered by it, notwithstanding that woe that is denounced against
them that are mighty to drink wine, and strong to pour in strong drink; that
is, woe unto them that by repeated Acts of drunkenness, have made themselves
like brewers horses, able to bear away a greater quantity of drink than other
sober healthy persons are, or themselves at first were. It is a sign of
destruction and desolation approaching upon a people, when they are not ashamed
of such a swinish sin, but drink and stagger, and reel to and fro in the face
of the Sun: O fearful condition of those that are not ashamed to go on in
drunkenness, which is one of the most shameful sins, and most contrary to the
light of reason. Certainly God has his times of visitation for this, as well
as for other sins, and then the drunkard shall be cast down, and shall be able
to stand no longer.

SECT. VII.
English Nation, to follow all new devised fashions, and especially to be the
Frenchmens Apes, who are generally haters of our Nation: therefore in Foreign
parts they paint an English man naked, with a piece of cloth under his arm,
and with a pair of shears in his hand, seeking a Tailor to find him out a new
fashion. The use of Apparel is, 1. for necessity, to cover our nakedness. 2.
for ornament and comeliness. 3. for distinction of age, of sex, of quality;
for great personages may, and should wear rich apparel, so it be grave, sober,
and seemly: but now people of all ranks almost are grown to an excess in this
kind, and the servant can hardly be distinguished by his apparel from his
Master, nor Gill from a Gentlewoman. Apparel shows what most people are that
wear it, it uncovers their hearts to the world, you may know whether people are
chaste or wanton, proud or grave, sober or fantastical by the apparel they
wear. Is not he condemned for a very fool that takes more care to be comely,
proud, and rich in apparel, than to he healthy? Is not he a fool to be laughed
at, that will brag of a clean Band, and has a foul dirty face, and will not
wash it? Strange it is to see the folly of men, whose special care is to adorn
their bodies with costly apparel that they might appear comely and glorious in
the sight of men, but regard not how ugly, how deformed, how polluted and
abominable their souls are in the sight of God. As God complained of the Jews,
Is it time for you to dwell in your seiled houses, and this house lie waste?
Hag. 1.4. So God may complain, is it time for the daughtets of England, for the
daughters of London to be haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and
wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go? when the Lord is pouring out his
fury, like fire upon them, and marring the pride of England, and the great
pride of London, as sometime he threatened to mar the pride of Judah, and the
great pride of Jerusalem, Jer. 13.9. Ah! how do many people spend more precious
time in dressing their bodies, than in trimming their souls; and delight more
to see their faces in a glass, than to view their hearts in the glass of the
Word! Oh what will become of their souls, when God shall strip them of their
gaudy clothes, and pampered bodies! What confusion will fall on them, when
their souls shall appear naked before the Lord! Then they will cry out; the joy
of our heart is ceased, Lam. 3.15 16
our dance is turned into mourning; the crown is fallen from our head, woe unto
us that we have sinned. Our crown of honor, our crown of pleasure, our crown
of pride is fallen from our heads, woe unto us that we have sinned, and walked
in pride. Pride is the usher of ruin; Pride goes before destruction, Prove. 16.
18. One asked an Heathen Philosopher, what God was doing? he answered, Totam
ejus occupationem esse in elevatione humiliu^, in dejectione superborum; It is
Gods whole business to exalt the humble, and to abase and cast down the proud.
Behold the day comes, that shall burn like an tven, and all the proud, etc.
shall be as stubble. Mal. 4.1. Though now they are like iron and steel, yet
then they shall be like stubble before the fire of his devouring wrath.

CHAP. VIII.
HAving discovered those Capital worldly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. and it is so far
from working comfort in the end, that it works death; not only death
temporal, but also death eternal: if this sort of men weep their eyes out, and
their hearts out, for these carnal things, yet shall they no more partake of
divine joy, than the tormented Glutton does of heavenly comfort. David's
mourning for his son Absalom was carnal, and did no way tend to his true
comfort; Joab did justly blame him for his bellowing and howling for the death
of Absalom. This mourning may be found in Pharaoh; such was Esau's mourning for
the loss of his Fathers blessing. The Prophet Hosea tells us, that wicked men
will howl upon their beds, for corn and wine, for the want or loss of temporal
goods, Hos. 7.14. They can lament for these things, but cannot lament for their
sins, or lament after God; the loss of God and of Christ, is not such a matter
of mourning to them.

Neither is it available, to mourn merely for the Judgments of God inflicted
upon us: Oh how did Cain mourn, when the wrath of God was upon him. So did
Pharaoh under Judgments; and Ahab humbled himself greatly; so do the damned
mourn to eternity in hell: The wicked mourn, not because they have sinned, but
because they are punished: God no more regards the howling of sinners under
Judgment, than we regard the howlings of dogs when they are beaten.

Neither is all sorrow for sin, godly sorrow, yet this is an high degree of
mourning. Pharaoh lamented his wickedness, I have sinned; Judas also lamented
his grievous sin, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood, Mat. 27.3 and now
he mourns in hell for his sin: and we have some examples of men, who sin and
mourn, and then sin afresh, and mourn afresh, crying out, O my pride, O my
drunkenness, O my swearing, O my uncleanness! that the beholding their bitter
mourning, would make a tender heart to mourn with them; many such there are
that mourn on earth for a fit, and mourn in hell for ever. Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13.
Deathbed lamentation and mourning for sin, is not always repenting mourning.

Neither are all that mourn under dreadful apprehensions of Gods anger against
them, and terrors upon them arising from their sense of sin, and apprehension
of Gods wrath, true mourners; yet this like the former, is an high degree of
mourning, yet below holy mourning; such a mourner was Cain; the load of
terrors upon his heart, pressed forth all his tears and complaints. There are
such examples still of men, who in their fears of death and judgment, and
agonies of conscience, do weep, confess their sins, resolve to forsake sin, and
yet when they have ease, do sin again, and they are again as profane, as
irreligious as they were before, nay, they become more hardened in sin, and
opposite to God and godliness than they were before.

Neither do all who mourn after grace and pardon, truly mourn; yet this is one
of the nearest degrees to spiritual mourning that is found in hypocrites. An
unregenerate man may feel such a load of guilt upon his conscience, as that he
may mourn after grace and pardon, yet not be comforted: as there is a temporary
sorrow for sin, so there is in them a temporary desire after ease and
deliverance from it.

But all such as mourn in bitterness of spirit under their spiritual wants: Mr.
Cartwright gives this as a reason, Cartwr. Harmon. Evangel.
why in the Beatitudes our Savior adds mourning next to poverty of spirit,
because the want of grace and Gods favor is such a lamentation, that nothing
quieteth them so long as they are without it. And though God by the hand of his
bounty, give them all outward things liberally, as health, strength, riches,
friends, yet still they mourn over their spiritual wants; these are the true
mourners, that complain for the want of spiritual riches. What is this worlds
goods, if I have not the grace and favor of God? As Moses said, What is the
presence of an Angel, if we have not the presence of God with us? so what is
any thing? what are all things? if I have not Gods favor, I am undone for ever.

Again, such as mourn bitterly for sin, they truly mourn. Lam. 5.16. Woe to us,
for we have sinned. Woe is the time that ever I sinned against God; Woe is me
that ever I did curse, swear, and blaspheme the holy name of God; woe that ever
I was drunk; woe that ever I sinned against the Lord: such a mourning was that
of St. Peter, he went forth and wept bitterly: woe is me that ever I did deny my
Lord and Master. Such a mourner was Mary Magdalen, who washed the feet of
Christ with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head: so David made
his bed to swim, and watered his couch with tears, Psalm. 6.6.

Again, such as mourn for sin, not only because it does terrify the
conscience, but because it does pollute and defile the soul; who mourn for sin,
not only because it is a soul-damning evil, but because it is a
God-dishonouring evil, these are true mourners. Thus David mourned, Against
thee, against thee have I offended, Psalm. 51.4. This was that which troubled
his spirit, that he should off^nd a gracious God, a loving Father, and
dishonor his holy Majesty, and violate the holy Law of God.

Moreover, such as mourn for sin, and repent for sin, that bewail and forsake
sin; these men are sorry after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.10. For godly sorrow
works repentance to salvation, never to be repented of. These holy tears are
very acceptable unto God, when our sins are put into the mortar of our hearts,
and there pounded with the pestel of compunction, and so brought into dust, and
moistened with the waters of our tears, Savanarol. meditat. in Psalm. 51.
then is there made thereof a sweet smelling Ointment and sacrifice unto God,
as one well notes. The Angels in heaven do rejoice over one sinner that
repents, Luke 15. They much rejoice to follow such a sinner, carrying the
tears, of godly compunction in his eyes, and of godly sorrow in his heart:
Which is not unaptly figured, Luke 22. where the Disciples of Christ went after
the man which carried the vessel of water, and in that house prepared the
Passover of the Lord: so in a spiritual sense; the man carrying this vessel of
water, is the penitent sinner, whose heart and eyes are full of tears of godly
sorrow, whom the Angels following, do enter the house of his soul, and there do
prepare an holy banquet for the Lord; for which cause St. Bernard says, The
tears of holy penitents, Lachrymae sanctorum, Vinu^ Angeloru^. Bern.
are the sweet wine of Angels; because in them is the savor of life, the taste
of Christ, the smack of pardon, the health of the returned, the joy of
reconciliation, and the sweetness of conscience. Bonaventure says, Bonavent.
Meditat.
this is one reason why God made Paradise, that our first Parents might hate
and detest sin the more hainously and eagerly, which had cast them out of so
pleasant an habitation: God would therefore that Adam should feel what he had
lost by his sin, that he might seek to regain another Paradise by repentance,
that he who had lost paradise on earth, should more earnestly seek after that
heavenly Jerusalem: so my Brethren, you that have been lately driven out of
your houses, by that lamentable Conflagration; God thereby shows you, that he
would have you to hate and detest sin the more vehemently, which has cast you
out of your pleasant habitations; God would have you to feel what you have lost
by your sins, that ye may seek to regain better Mansions by repentance; that
you who have lost your houses on earth, may more earnestly seek after a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor.
5.1


CHAP. IX.
SECT. I.


1. One end is to teach you, that there is nothing in any man, nor of any man
that you can safely trust unto: Man has nothing in him that he may rely upon;
his best abilities will fail him in time of his greatest need.

1. For bodily strength, take the example of Sampson, Judge. 16.20, 21. when he
had dealt treacherously with God, in discovering to an Harlot the strength he
had received as a Nazarite, he awaked out of sleep, and said, I will go out as
at other times, but the text says, he wist not that God was departed from him:
then the Philistines took him, and bound him, and put out his eyes, and made
him to grind in a Mill: his strength now failed him, when he had need to make
use of it, now he found he had no strength of his own to trust to, and was left
wholly to the will of his enemies: if the Lord leave a man to himself, his
strength will soon fail him, whatsoever his strength and abilities be. -- So
it is in multitudes of men, and combinations of men: who more vigorous than
David and his men of war; yet when he would have the people numbered, to see the
number and multitudes of his people, the Lord in three days space cut off
seventy thousand men by the Pestilence, to show him the vanity of trusting in
numbers of men. There is no King saved by the multitude of an host; a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength; an horse is a vain thing for safety,
neither shall he deliver any by his great strength, Psalm. 33, 16, 17.

2. The abilities of the soul, whether natural or moral abilities, are not to
be trusted to, Eccles. 9.11. thus says Solomon, I returned, and saw under the
Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread
to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of
skill, but time and chance hapeneth to them all.

1. Time: Notwithstanding all their skill and cunning, unless God go along with
them, they cannot bring their enterprises to pass, be they never so wise and
skilful; unless God go along with rhem, they cannot take the fittest time to
accomplish their ends and desires. And on the other side, Time happens to
them, that is, such a time happens to them, that casts them into such
straits and exigences, that all their wit and skill, and understanding cannot
help them. Some think they have so much wit, and so much forecast, so much
understanding, skill, and foresight, as that they can shift and provide for
themselves in the worst of times, as it is said of Cato, he was suae fortunae
Faber, let him live in any time or Commonwealth, he would make shift for one:
but Solomon here tells us, that favor shall not be to men of skill,
notwithstanding all their wit and understanding, they shall not be able to get
the favor of those they do desire: and notwithstanding all their
understanding, though they think they shall lay up wealth and riches to sustain
them in a time of trouble, yet riches shall not be to men of understanding,
neither shall they have bread to eat in a time of Famine, thus Time happens
to them all.

2. Chance also happens to them: no chance hapeneth to God, for he orders all
things by his providence; no contingency happens to him; but many chances and
occurrences happen to men beside their expectation; many things happen to them
above and below their expectation, contrary to their own wills, to their own
ways and means, to their own ends, to their own thoughts* projects and
designs. Achitophel relied much upon his wit, and gave evil counsel to Absalom,
2 Samuel 17.1, 2. for thus he said unto him; Let me choose out twelve thousand
men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night, and I will come upon
him while he is weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid, and all the
people that are with him shall flee, and I will smite the King only, and I will
bring back all the people to thee; and the man whom thou seek, is as if all
returned, so all the people shall be in peace; and the saying pleased Absalom
well, and all the Elders of Israel. This plot was fairly laid, but chance
happened to him; now Hushai forsook David, and fled to Absalom on purpose to
defeat the counsel of Achitophel; and a strange chance it was that Absalom
should admit him to be of his Privy Council; and yet more strange! that he
should ask his advice after Achitophel's, whose counsel in those days, was as
if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God, and that he, and all the men of war
should prefer Hushai's advice better than Achitophel's; thus chance happened to
this grand Politician; that he immediately withdrew himself from the Court.
When he saw that his counsel was not followed, he sadled his Ass, and arose
and got home to his house, unto his City, put his household in order, and hanged
himself. But none of these came as a chance to God, no contingency in this was
to him; for v. 14. The Lord had appointed (or commanded, as in the Margin) to
defeat, and bring to naught the good counsel of Achitophel, that he might bring
evil upon Absalom.

2. For courage and valor that neither is to be trusted to: be a man never so
stout hearted, let him have the heart of a lion, yet courage may fail the most
valiant, when they have occasion to make most use thereof. Who more valiant
than Joshuah and his army; yet the little Town of the men of Ai smote the
Israelites, and the hearts of the men of war melted away like water, Josh. 7.5.
their natural valor, proved then but a mere vapor; for the Lord withdrew
himself from them, because of the accursed thing that was in the Camp of
Israel, 1 Samuel 14. chap. we read a strange story of Jonathan the son of Saul,
that he with one man, his Armor-bearer, assaulteth a whole Garrison of the
Philistines, kills many of them, scatters and pursues them, and raises a
great fear upon them; and there was trembling in the host, in the field, and
among all the people; the Garrison, the spoilers they also trembled, and the
earth quaked, so it was a very great trembling, and the watchmen of Saul in
Gibeah of Benjamin looked, and behold the multitude melted away, and they went
on beating down one another. Verse. 15, 16. Yet this valor of Jonathan was not
to be trusted to: for we read, 1 Samuel 28. chap. that Saul gathered a great
army together, to fight against the Philistines, and chap. 31. when the
Philistines fought against Israel, the men of Israel fled from before the
Philistines, and the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his Sons, and
Jonathan with the rest of the army, fled away from the face of the Philistines,
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul's sons, in
Mount Gilboa.

The reason why none of these things are to be trusted to, is because God is
the only fountain of all those excellencies and good things, whether of body or
mind, that are upon any men upon earth; and therefore as the greatest, streams
that run with the fullest current and carry the biggest vessels, if they be not
continually relieved with a constant spring, they would soon fail, and leave
their channel dry: So men of the greatest natural or moral endowments, unless
they are relieved by a constant influence from Heaven, from the Fountain of
life, they will soon wither and decay.

II. Then much less is there any trusting to sin, or any sinful course. Trust
not in oppression. Psalm. 62.10. do not study how by defrauding and
circumventing others, you may enrich your selves, and work out your own ends,
by base and wicked oppression: if a man would undertake some dangerous
enterprise to the hazarding of his life, upon promise of some reward from
another man, it shows he did rely much upon that man; else he would never
make so dangerous an adventure upon such a man's woid: many men rely upon sins;
they promise fair, pleasure, profit, and hereupon they hazard their souls upon
uncertainties: if thou trustest in any sin, thou will be exceeding vain,
because sin is the greatest deceiver in the world: sin is deceitful all over,
root and branch; the inward lusts are deceitful, and all the issues, succors,
roots and branches, that proceed from it, are deceitful.

III. God would have us also to understand, that there is no trusting to
riches: Riches are called deceitful riches, Mat. 13.22. They promise, or seem
to promise much more than they perform; they are therefore compared to thorns,
by our Savior: many are taken with the green leaves, but are never sensible of
the thorns that grow under them; they bring many troubles to those that have
them, and lay many loads upon their backs, and prove snares to their souls,
leaving them under great discontent, and hindering the souls of many men, in
the pursuit of eternal happiness. And many times they are deceived in the very
thing it self, as to the ends themselves most aim at: Prove. 12.26. The way of
the wicked seduceth them. V. 27. The slothful man rosteth not what he took in
hunting. As hunters many times lose their prey; sometimes the dogs eat it;
sometimes others catch it out of their hands. Achan hunted after the wedge of
Gold, but lost his life by it; and Saul got fat cattle, but lost his kingdom
by it. Many a wicked man gets much wealth and riches, but never reap that
comfort by them as they expect: neither do they get the blessing of God to
sweeten those outward comforts to them, though they have them: and in the mean
time perhaps their Conscience wounds them, and although they feed upon the
sweet of Gods creatures, yet they become as gravel in their bowels, like the
book which St. John did eat, which was in his mouth as honey for sweetness, but
bitter in his belly, Rev. 9.10. The remembrance how many men came by their
wealth and riches, proves very woeful and bitter to them.

Finally, there is no creature to be trusted to; not friends: nor relations,
nor great men's favors. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie, Psalm. 62.9. The furest friend thou have in the world, is not
sure of himself, therefore thou can not promise thy self, he will be sure to
thee.

SECT. II.
A second and God aims at, is to learn you, that when men take too much delight
in their outward comforts and enjoyments, it is his usual course to deprive
them of what they esteemed most dear and precious. I have read of Justus
Lipsius, a most learned man, who had a most choice Library, and such a one as
contained the primest Authors; for out of all parts of the world, what rare
book soever could be purchased, either by price, or by entreaty, he had it in
this his treasury; so that his Library was esteemed the most famous for books
of all sorts; nor had Lipsius so great a delight in any thing in the world, as
in being in this his rich study; so that I may say, Lipsius had even buried his
soul here; but behold a lamentable change; what he had been, in so many years,
with so great care gathering together, all, even all, was by one furious fire
suddenly consumed; what grief must this be to Lipsius, at once thus to lose all
these his precious delights and jewels? The like happened to John Comenius, that
master of Learning, in this present age; the story whereof he gives us in this
manner; In the year 1655. (says he) the King of Sweden brought in Armies into
Poland, the event whereof was very unhappy to the Gospel-professours;
especially to Lesua, the chief City of refuge of the Bohemian and Silesian
Exiles, which although the very Nobility of the Kingdom, delivered up with
other royal Cities in the greater Poland, (as Posnonia, Calissia, Wschowia)
into the hands of the Swedes; yet the Polonians being afterward stirred up,
and again prevailing, there seemed a good occasion and color for the utter
overthrowing of Lesna, the late odious Nest of the Heretics, as they termed
it; Comenius in vit. Drabic. c. 28.
which was done at the latter end of April by the permission of God, in the
year 1656. where, as others suffered the loss of all their goods, so did I also
in like manner. Indeed I would have timely conveyed away my self, either for
fear of some such tragical issue, or of a war of a longer continuance, and
therewith of the hinderance of my studies amongst the noises of Arms. And both
the admonitions sent privily by Drabicius, as also the Exhortations of friends
to hasten away from that strange Country out of those flames, with invitations
to come unto them, did spur me up. But I could not get a discharge from my
people, nor would I leave my flock with scandal, it being verily an evil
example, as they said; until being oppressed on a sudden, and carrying away my
life only for a prey, we were deprived of all; For a foregoing rumor (only for
two hours) of the Enemies approaching to destroy us with an universal
slaughter, raising a pannick fear, put the whole City (the armed with the
unarmed) to flight; and the Enemy being not able to pour out his fury upon the
Citizens, he poured it out upon the City; all the streets of the City (after a
light plundering of the principal houses) being set on fire, and so burning for
three days together, that of a thousand six hundred house, four Churches etc.
nothing, truly nothing was left but ashes and rubbish. In which terrible fire,
my little house also, with all my household stuff, was destroyed; my Library
also, with my Manuscripts, Philosophical, and Philological (chiefly those which
appertained to the garnishing of our own Country language;) and my Theological
Manuscripts, of more than forty years study, were consumed. Even thus does God
many times deal with his chiefest favorites, he either depriveth them of what
they esteem most dear and precious to them; or else denies what they most
eagerly pursue. I will also give an instance of another kind; The Lord gives
to Parents perhaps a beautiful, docil, ingenious, and towardly Child, which
for his pregnant wit, carries away the Bell from all his School-fellows; but
upon a sudden death croppeth off this rosebud, and the hopeful youth dies in
the prime and flower of expectation; oh now how excessively do his Parents weep
and lament? and it may be conceived, they inwardly think, what they blush to
speak; as, why did God give us such a Son as this, since he was determined to
snatch him away so soon from us? had we not affliction enough before, but must
this heap of misery be added to all the rest? But God takes away such comforts
as these, and he will have us to subscribe, it ought to be so, and for that
cause God takes away our dearest relations and best comforts sometimes from us,
that we may see our error, in placing too much of our love upon these things,
and give God the very yolk of our hearts,

SECT. III.
Absalom had by his servants often desired Joab, the Captain of the Host, to
come unto him, but he came not, 2 Samuel 14.29. But what Absalom? Therefore he
said to his servants, see Joabs field is near mine, and he has Barley there;
go and set it on fire; and Absaloms servants set the field on fire; then Joab
arose, and came to Absalom, unto his house: In like manner the Lord deals
sometimes with us; the Lord sends out his Messengers from time to time,
declaring that it is Gods will and pleasure that we should come unto him, but
in the time of our ease, of our health, of our prosperity, we refuse to come
unto him, but when God fireth us out of our nests, burns up our corn,
consumes our goods, our substance, then we begin to be more gentle and
tractable, and presently think of returning to him, from whom we have gone
astray. Certainly Hawks will not come to the lure until they be empty; Eusebius
Emissenus said of the Prodigal, Eusebius. Emissen. sermon. 2. de Prodigo.
Luke 15. That hunger brought him home, whom saturity and fullness, had driven
away from his Fathers house. It is reported of Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, when
as his army was routed, and all his forces dispersed, and himself was taken
Prisoner, being asked how he did, and what courage he had now; he answered,
never better: for while he was so environed with his strong army, he very
seldom thought on God, but now being stripped of all these fading helps, he
placed all his trust and hope in God, who would heartily embrace those that
came unto him, and never forsake those that trusted in him.

SECT. IV.
man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses,
Luke 12. 15. By life two things are understood,

1. That a man's happiness does not consist in the abundance of the things he
does enjoy; only Christ, and a right to, and assurance of heaven, that is a
man's happiness in this life, and the fruition of Christ and heaven hereafter,
is the eternal happiness of a man: Lazarus was an happy man, though he had
nothing, and Dives a miserable man, though he had abundance. Earthly-minded
persons seek for satisfaction from earthly things; therefore there be many that
say, Who will show us any good?

(1.) Such a satisfying good, as may make our souls happy; they look downward,
and think to find this happiness in outward things. But David opposes his
resolved choice to their vain wandering desire; Lord, lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon me; as if he had said, I know where to have enough, Lord
let me enjoy thee, and have the light of thy countenance shineing upon me, and
I am satisfied: Then he speaks of his former experience, that formerly he had
found satisfaction from God. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in
the time that their corn and their wine increased, Psalm 4.6, 7. as if he had
said, the fullest Barns and Wine-cellars cannot yield that content to an
earthly heart, that my soul has formerly found in thee; when they are as full
as they can hold, yet their immortal soul is not satisfied; but I by enjoying
thee am fully satisfied: Then David compares the satisfaction he had found in
God, not only with the abundance of these things, but with the increase of
them; for it is the increase of outward things that is apt to win the heart: a
lesser estate increasing does more win the hearts of natural men, than a
greater estate not increasing: But David found more content in God, than
worldlings did, not only in the abundance, but also in the increase of corn and
wine. Lastly, says he, Thou have put gladness into my heart.] Thou have
infused it into my soul: it is God that sheddeth sweet consolation into the
spirit of a man; he does not only give matter of joy, and ground of comfort to
a believer, but gives, as it were, the very affection of it to the soul. As
for earthly things, they put not comfort into our hearts, if a man will have
any good from them, he must extract and draw it out; and when the heart and the
world do close most, yet it then falls short of satisfaction; but God does put
gladness into the heart, and he can satisfy it.

2. By life is meant likewise, that although a man had never so many
possessions, had an house full of gold and silver, yet all his wealth cannot
prolong his days, nor add a minute to his life; as if our Savior should
reason thus; I wonder to see men take such great pains for the things of this
life, to toil and labor in a restless manner: if every pound they got and had,
would add a day or year more to their lives, there were some reason why men
should thus toil for riches: but can a rich man redeem his life from death with
thousands of gold and silver for a day? would not a rich man that fears death
and hell, give a world (if he had it) that he might not die and be damned, and
yet ten thousands of worlds cannot redeem a man's soul from death and hell;
therefore why are men so greedy after these things that cannot make their lives
any longer?

Let us take a view of the Parable which our Savior spoke upon this very
occasion of a rich Farmer, wherein several things are to be observed.

1. His Trade was very gainful, intimated by his ground, which brought forth
plentifully, the world was coming on upon him apace.

2. He had heaped together abundance of riches, he had so much, he could not
tell where to lay them.

3. See what he resolved upon, viz. to follow his pleasures and contentments
without all control; as the Proverb is, What is a Gentleman more than his
pleasure? he would take his pleasure as well as the best man in his Country; he
would play the Glutton, and Hunt, and Hawk, and Whore, and Drink, and Swear,
and Swagger, and let him see what man would dare control him, he would make
the Town and Country too hot for him. Thus says he to himself; Soul, thou have
riches enough.] and that not for a day, or a month, or a year, but for many
years: go take thy pleasure, eat, drink, and be merry; thy abundance of riches
will maintain thee in it; here you see the prosperity of a rich covetous fool.
Mark now the end and conclusion of him; behold the lamentable Tragedy of an
Earthworm; behold what God says unto him, Thou fool.] He was but a fool for
his labor; (...) insipiens, an unwise man, so the word signifies; one that
lived by sense like a bruit, not forecasting for the future. This night they
shall take away thy soul.] Mark the words, This night.] Thou have to day
promised thy self long life, mirth and pleasure; thou art deceived, thy riches
shall not lengthen thy life, for this night thou shall die, They (i. e. the
Devils) shall come and take away my soul.] And thou that did dream of many
years pleasure, shall burn in hell to Eternity. Salvian has a good meditation
on this place: Bonis suis aliis praeparat beatitudinem, sibi miseriam, aliis
gaudia, sibi lachrymas, aliis voluptatem brevem, sibi ignem perpetuum. Salvian.
With his goods he prepares happiness for others, misery for himself, mirth
for others, tears for himself, a short pleasure for others, everlasting fire
for himself. His Heirs that enjoyed his riches, did game, eat, drink, and were
merry, and this poor covetous wretch was howling and roaring, weeping and
wailing in hell. Now see our Saviors use of this Parable: So is he that lays
up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God: that is, so is every
covetous wretch, that labors more for temporal riches, than for grace and
godliness, such a one is a fool, though he gets abundance of riches; such a one
will God cross in his plots and purposes, and when he thinks to enjoy his
pleasures, then God will cut him off, and throw him into hell, his children
after him shall spend his wealth, he shall be tormented in hell, when they are
merry and jovial upon earth.

SECT. V.
Clemens Alexandrinus spoke to the purpose: Clem. Alexandr. Padag.
The Vine turns wild, and degenerateth, unless it be pruned: man proves
exorbitant except he be scourged: for as the luxuriancy of the Vine-tree
runs out into wild branches, except it be cut and curbed, and brings
forth but a few Grapes, and those bitter ones; but when it has endured the
pruning knife, it produces soft, thick clustered, and sweet Grapes: scarce is
it otherwise with man, for unless he be daily purged by losses, crosses,
sorrows, he runs out into lewd courses, as the Vine into leaves, and is
hardly reduced to a due conformity to the Will of God: but when the hooked
Sickle of Calamity biteth him, then he brings forth the fruits of repentance
and mortification. Our corrupt appetite always lusts after forbidden fruit,
and is by an unbridled itching, carried headlong into dangerous precipices;
here the most wise God represseth the hasty course of this unbridled kicker,
while he meets him with losses, crosses, and calamitous encumbrances, and so
this wild Colt is tamed. Now because we are as fearful to meddle with
mortification, as the dog is to drink of Nilus, therefore our most gracious God
does exercise us with losses and fiery trials, that by them we may be the more
ready to mortify our corruptions. The Scripture sets it forth by a full
expression, viz. the crucifying our lusts and the affections thereof, Gal.
6.24. in allusion to Christ's crucifying: observe the manner of his death, his
hands and feet were nailed to the Cross, the Soldiers thrust their Spears into
his side, it was near the heart of Christ: Thus must we do with our sins, we
must run the spear into the very heart of sin, and we must nail the hands and
feet of our lusts: Nail the hands (1) The outward acts of sin, and nail the
feet, that so we might not walk any more in the lusts of our flesh, as we have
formerly done; that look as Job after his manifold losses and sore trials,
said, Lord I have sinned, I will do so no more: so do thou say, Lord I have a
proud heart, I have walked within my house in pride and loftiness, I have
boasted of my great wealth and substance, I will do so no more: Lord I have bad
an unclean heart, full of filthy thoughts and affections, I will be so no more;
here is a mortified man. If you would have your losses and crosses sanctified,
consider with your selves whether your earthly members be mortified, or do you
walk still in the vanity of your minds? do you still keep up your former
conversation? Are your lusts your Centurions still? do you obey them? if so,
then have your losses done you no good at all; this is the end that God aims at
in sending these Visitors to you, to clip your wings, that you be not as Birds
that flee away from their Masters. Let these therefore excite you to do with
your body of sin, as they were to do with the house that was overspread with
Leprosy; they were to raze it down to the ground, and carry all the rubbish
without the City; so do you raze down that body of corruption, and put away
your lusts, that abominable rubbish of sin from among you.

SECT. VI.
A sixth end is, that you may be the Joseph; so long as you had your backs
clothed with rich apparel, and your bellies filled with variety of dainties,
and could dwell in your stately edifices, and warm ceiled houses, you never
thought upon the hunger and cold of the poor and needy, and the miseries of
those that scarce have a hole to put their heads in; you were often acquainted
with the pinching wants of your miserable brethren, yet perhaps your hearts
were nothing affected with pity and compassion toward them; you had hearts of
stone, who could hear the cries of the oppressed, and look upon the
pale-wrinckled faces of famished persons, and hear them sighing and bemoaning
their extremities and yet your bowels yearned not over such; how many Nabals
are there that could see David in hunger, and yet their hearts dead within
them? cursed Edomites, who could behold the ruin of Zion, and mourn not over
it? How many were there among you, that had abundance of this worlds goods, and
yet were niggardly in releiving and refreshing the bellies of the poor: as for
themselves, they felt no hunger, but had their full tables every day, yet
suffered they poor Lazarus to go away without crumbs; they had changes of
apparel, and some of them lay by till they were moth-eaten, yet suffered they
Christ in his members to go naked: cursed Chams, that would not cover their
brothers nakedness. How many among you, had abundance of all things, and yet
gave poor pittances, God knows, and that with murmuring and repining hearts?
parting with their Alms, as narrow-mouthed pots do with liquor, with much
bubling, who like Grapes, yield no liquor unless they be pressed. Oh how
dwells the love of God in such, says the Apostle? what a Sun in the Heavens,
and not light? what a fixed Star, and not shine? what fire, and not give heat?
these are strange things in nature. So I may say, what love to Christ, and no
compassion to his members, no relief, no bounty? it is as strange as to see the
Sun full of darkness; certainly the love of God dwells not in such flinty
hearts. Therefore does the Lord take away our houses, our goods, our dearest
outward comforts sometimes, for this end, that we may have a fellow-feeling of
others miseries. They are usually the most pitiful to others, who have
suffered great losses and miseries themselves. He that has been pinched with
poverty, will easily be brought to pity those that are poor and needy: he that
has been sick and weak, will be ready to commiserate those that are visited;
He that has lost all his goods, been tossed from post to pillar, and stripped
out of all his estate, will presently relent at others grieved in the same
kind. Being diversely afflicted and distressed, we learn with that Tyrian Queen
to say, Virgil. Aeneid. 5.
Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco
The sense of evils makes me to bemone,
And succor them who under sufferings groan.


You may plainly see there was such bowels of compassions in the Saints in
Scripture. What is the whole book of Lamentations, but a large Commentary, or
description of Jeremiah's compassion toward Jerusalem? though God had provided
well for the particular comfort of him, yet Jerusalems miseries did embitter
his comforts, and turned all his wine into water. How tenderly affected was
Job, with every particular man's distress? When the ear heard me, then it
blessed me; and when the eye saw me, then it gave witness to me; because I
delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was
I to the lame, I was a father to the poor, etc. Job 29.11, 12, 13, 15, 16. This
the Apostle calls a refreshing of the bowels of the Saints; which is a Metaphor
taken from such, as being almost faint with a great heat, do find some shady
place to cool them; such is relief to our needy brethren. Till we have been in
misery and necessity our selves, we shall scarce afford our distressed
brethren, any more than lip-compassion: Alas poor man! he is in great wants, he
is in a miserable condition, it grieveth me to see him, this is all; this is
that which the Apostle James taxes, Jam. 2.15.16. If a brother or sister be
naked, and destitute of daily food: and one of you say unto them, depart in
peace, be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding you give them not those things
which are needful to the body, what does it profit him? Your lip-love, and your
lip-compassion, is no comfort at all to him; Christ will throw such
compassionate Hypocrites into hell: where there is no relief from the hand,
there is no pity nor compassion in the heart; A niggardly hand is the Index of
an iron heart: this compassion is no other than painted fire to a cold hand; it
is true what a very Reverend man said; Miseratio divitum sine benignitate, est
illusio miserorum. Rich men's pity without bounty, is a mocking of the poor in
their distresses.

SECT. VII.
Thou art my portion O Lord, Psalm. 119.57. The Prophet calls God, the portion
of Jacob, Jerem. 10.16. The Vine is the Drunkards portion; Mammon is the
Covetous man's portion; Pleasure is the Voluptuous man's portion; Gods wrath is
the Wicked man's portion, upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup,
Psalm. 11.6. outward sorrows, inward graces, and God himself, are the godly man's
portion, and the kingdom of heaven is his inheritance. True it is! some of
Gods people have these outward things also, but they have them not as their
portion; and many times he takes them from those that have them, that they may
make God their only portion, Therefore David says, The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance, and of my cup, Psalm. 16.5. The meaning is, the Lord is to me
instead of house and land, of meat and drink, and all necessaries for this
present life. As the Apostle says, Heb. 6.13. Because God could swear by no
greater, therefore he swear by himself: So it may be said in this case, because
God could give no greater portion to people, therefore he gives himself unto
them. And when they are stripped of other things, yet even then they have God to
live upon. Wherefore did God keep Israel forty years in the Wilderness, and
made them to hunger and thirst, and fed them with Mannah, which neither they
nor their Fathers did know? was it not to this end, that he might make them
know, that man did not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord, does man live, Deuteronomy. 8 3. What does a great rich
heir live upon, but this portion? he may have many other conveniences, but
he chiefly makes account of his portion for his livelihood. God is an
All-sufficient portion; whosoever has him for his portion, has enough; there
is enough in him to supply all our wants: the creatures at best, can but supply
this or that particular want; but my God, says the Apostle, shall supply all
your wants. All other portions are defective, but this suffices all: Some
things give health, but not comfort; some things give comfort, but not honor;
some things give honor, but not satiety. Still the shoe wrings in one place
or other, there is something or other wanting to us: but God is an
All-sufficient portion to the soul; he is health to the sick, wealth to the
poor, honor to the despised, an habitation to the distressed; he is all that
we need or can desire, yea, he gives abundantly more than we are able to ask or
think. God is of all other, the most transcendent portion, for communicating,
for security, for certainty: we may be robbed of our other portions, or they
may be lessened, diminished, burnt, spent, consumed; but here is an abiding
portion; God is my portion for ever, says Asaph, Psalm. 73.26. He is an
everlasting portion. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our
guide even unto death, Psalm. 48.14. God is a most sure and certain portion, and
many times when Gods Children have least of the things of this world, he gives
most of himself to them, in whom is every good and perfect gift, and all things
richly to enjoy. Aaron had no lot among his brethren, but God says to him, I
am thy part, and thine inheritance among the children of Israel, Number. 18.20. So
it is with all Gods children when they are stripped of all, then God is their
portion, and their inheritance: hence a believer may conclude, the Lord is my
portion, therefore I shall not want; surely mercy and goodness shall follow me
all the days of my life: he that has the Sun, can never want light; he that
has a fountain, can never want water; and he that has the most high God, the
possessour of all things, can never want any thing that is good for him: it is
an infinite advantage to be heir of all that God has to give, both in heaven
and in earth: well may he say, when I have nothing, yet I want nothing,
because I have God who is all things to me: The lines are fallen to me in
pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6.

CHAP. X.
Peter drew his Sword in the defense of Christ at the Mount of Olives, and
struck off the ear of Malchus, the Lord presently said unto him; Put up thy
sword into thy sheath: Shall I not drink of the Cup which my Father has given
me? Joh. 18.11. Might not one say, Lord why say thou, Thy Father put this
Cup into thine hand? This Cup, did not Judas Iscariot thy Disciple, did not
Annas and Caiaphas, did not Herod and Pilate mingle it? Did not those five
Apothecaries compound and make up this very Wormwood, this mere Aloes, this
bitter Gall? Why then say thou, The Cup which my Father has given me? This
Cup was the Cup of his sufferings, which God put into his hand, ut Pater, non
ut Judex; as a Father, not as a Judge, says Rupertus; amore non ira,
voluntate, non necessitate, Rupertus.
gratia non vindicta; it was of love, not of wrath, it was voluntary, not of
necessity, it was of grace, not of vengeance, that this Cup was given to him:
This Cup, says Christ, comes to me from a most loving hand, is it not fit
that I should drink it? the Father drinks to me; and though there be many
things which commend this Cup, as the restoring and redemption of the world,
the enlargement and augmentation of the Kingdom of heaven, yet above all these
my Fathers hand does most of all commend this Cup unto me: it is indeed a most
bitter Cup, but my drinking it will be profitable to many people; therefore
because my Father gives me this Cup to drink, I will drink it. As my Father
gave me Commandment, so I do, Joh. 14.31. And says he, Luke 24.46. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things? We are apt under our losses to cry out,
such a one has done me a mischief, the Devil set such a one on to fire my
house, to consume my goods, Satan himself has thrown down his Thunderbolt upon
me: Oh such complaints are foolish; as it pleased the Lord, so things have
been, are, and shall be done; nay, so they are best done; not so much as one
hair of thy head falls to the ground, but God foreseeth and wills the same:
What hurt is it if fire consume thy house, if God himself be thy habitation?
What evil is it though an Enemy tear thy body to pieces, when as thy God
numbreth thy hairs? Whosoever was the Apothecary to mingle the Cup, yet drink
it off if thy Father put it into thy hand. The Prophet Micah says, that evil
came from the Lord to the gate of Jerusalem, Mic. 1.12. Behold against this
Family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, Mic.
2.3. Shall there be evil in a City, Amos 3.6
and the Lord has not done it? All losses, crosses, all evils of punishment do
come from God, and from his divine will. God is not the Author of any sin, but
he is the Author of all punishment for sin, nor are we hurt by him, Origin.
Homil. 23. in Numer.
but only corrected for our amendment, says Origin. Remember this word, says
S. August. The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, as it pleased the
Lord, August. in Psa. 72.
so come things to pass. They were unjust who sat by Job on the dunghill, yet
he was scourged and received; they were spared to future punishment; God
reserveth all to his own judgment: Good men labor, and are punished as sons;
the wicked rejoice, and are punished with condemnation: That which afflicts
us, shall exercise us, not hurt us.

CHAP. XI.
IF God has taken all away from Esau did Jacob, I have enough, I have enough
my Brother; so say thou, I have a heavenly Mansion in the promise, which is
more worth than my earthly house which is consumed; I have heaven in the
promise, which is more worth than a thousand worlds in present possession:
Eternal glory is better than fading honor, eternal delights are better than
momentany pleasures, eternal habitations are better than our Claytabernacles;
what if I have lost my goods, in heaven there is a more enduring substance,
worth more than all present enjoyments? What if the world be a Wilderness, so
long as I have Canaan in the promise? and thither I am going. Oh how good is it
for Christians to store up promises aforehand, and to let the Word of God
dwell richly in our hearts, especially the promises, which are the quintessence
of the word: we use to say of a rich man, he is worth God knows what; this may
we say truly of him who is rich in promises, we are subject to variety of
estates and conditions here; no man's Mountain is so strong, but it may be
removed. Now as the Astronomers say, there is no herb growing on the earth, but
has its star in heaven from which it receives sweet influences; so there is
no estate or condition, wherein a Christian possibly may be in this life, but
there is a promise to it in the holy word of God, from which he may receive
sweet influences by faith. And considering that all Promises are yea and Amen
in Christ; under all your losses and afflictions labor wisely to apply them,
depend on Christ in them; he will faithfully perform all and every promise in
due time to thee, for faithful is the Promiser: urge him with his promises,
produce to him his hand and seal, Lord thou have promised this or that good
thing, oh make it good, be it to thy servant according to thy word: that soul
may walk on thorns, on tempestuous Seas, whose feet are shod with the Promises;
he may walk in the very valley of the shadow of death, who has the staff of a
promise in his hand: he may fear no ill, but expect all grace, glory, and every
good thing, who has a promise from Christ.

CHAP. XII.
STudy to behave your selves Christian-like under all your losses: endure
Patiently, Thankfully, Cheerfully, With submission to the will of God.


SECT. I.
Ye have need of patience, Heb. 10. So may I say to you that have sustained the
loss of your houses, goods and possessions, ye have great need of patience. As
Soldiers have need of good Boots or Shoes to save their feet and legs from
being hurt with gravel stones, thorn-bushes, sticks, or other impediments that
may either lie or be hurled in their way: so a Christian-souldier being armed,
and having his feet shod with patience, may by help thereof pass the pikes, and
go through all losses, crosses, and calamities, that may betide or befall him in
the warfare of this world. In patience possess ye your souls, says our
Savior, Luke 21.19. As faith gives us possession of Christ, so patience gives
us the possession of our selves. An impatient man is so far from possessing
himself, that he loses himself, and tearing himself in his passion, throws all
reason out of door, whereupon follows a great loss; the dominion of the mind is
not attained but by patience, the soul is not possessed by your deep counsels,
nor by your prudence, nor by your wealth, but by your patience. Impatience
exposes a man to the greatest hazards and dangers: if the Waggoner has not
reason enough to guide the Wagon, says Augustine, but suffers the horses to
have their heads, they will draw both him and it into destruction: The
impatient man is void of reason, and so exposes himself to ruin, he creates
a constant trouble to himself, his life is a burden to him, and he enjoyes the
possession of nothing with comfort, that has not the possession of his own
soul: when people are impatient under every petty loss or small cross, the Lord
in just judgment lets greater crosses to befall them to disquiet those that
have impatient spirits; and let them expect it, they must look for trouble and
vexation all their days, that give way to this evil of impatience. God in his
providence has thrown you out of possession of your houses; what a sad thing
were it for you to be thrown out of the possession of your selves by
impatience? Impatience, says one, is the Daughter of Satan, and the Parent of
folly and madness. An impatient man for the loss of a penny will throw away his
purse, and if he has lost but an handful of corn, he is ready to fire the
whole field. I have read of a Noble man that was Lord Chamberlain to the
Emperor Rodolphus the Second, that bringing some water for the Emperor to
wash his face in a Vessel of Crystal covered, by his default and negligence
the cover fell off and was broken; whereupon the Emperor in a great rage took
and threw the Vessel likewise to the ground, uttering these words; Let the
devil take the horse, since he has got the saddle: So by one impatient act he
cast away four hundred Crowns, for at so much the Crystal was valued. Thus a
light and lesser evil is oftentimes doubled with a greater, and small losses
through impatience do become great and extraordinary damages. Patience sweetens
every loss, and takes away the weight and burden of afflictions: Patience to
the soul is as the lid to the eye; for as the lid being shut, saves it from
many things that would annoy it; so patience coming between the soul and that
which it suffers, is a great safeguard thereunto: Patience is a Sovereign
remedy against all losses and crosses, it cures all; it keeps the heart from
envy, the tongue from murmuring, the hand from revenge, it overcomes our
Enemies without weapons, it makes a man a living Martyr without fire or sword;
suppose a man be brought very low in his outward estate, yet if he be patient,
he feels the want of nothing; it is all one not to have the world, and not to
need it; he that does not want, has enough, patience gives contentment in the
midst of want, and then a man may be said to abound; it is all one to be
without losses and crosses, and patiently to bear them: no affliction, no loss
can be heavy to the patient soul, for patience wheresoever it is, it bears
all.

SECT. II.
Study to bear your losses thankfully; In everything give thanks, says the
Apostle, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you, 1 These.
5.18. Chrysostom. Tom 5. Homil. 68.
Hear how excellently Chrysostom speaks to this purpose; This, says he, is
the very will of God, to give thanks always; this argues a soul rightly
instructed. Have thou suffered any evil, if thou will, it is no evil, give
thanks to God, and then thou have turned the evil into good; say thou also as
Job, when he had lost all, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord; and what evil have thou suffered? what is it,
a Disease? This is no strange thing to us, seeing our bodies are mortal and
naturally born to suffer. What! do thou want money? this may be gotten here,
and lost here. Art thou slandered and disgraced with calumnies by enemies? Thou
do not so much suffer injury herein, as they who are the Authors; for he who
bears the evil, is not the transgressor, but he that does it; whatsoever
evils or losses therefore do oppress thee, give thou thanks, and thou have
changed the nature of them: Let us not therefore (as that Father advises us)
fret, and vex, and fume. Job then did more deeply wound the devil, when being
stripped out of all, he gave thanks to God, than if he had distributed all to
the poor and needy; for it is much more to be stripped of all, and yet to bear it
patiently, generously, and thankfully, than for a rich man to give Alms; as it
here happened to righteous Job. But has fire suddenly taken hold upon thy
house, destroyed thy house, and consumed thy whole substance? remember the
sufferings of Job; Give thanks to God, who could, though he did not, have
hindered that mischance, and thou shall be sure to receive as equal a reward,
as if thou had put all into the bosom of the indigent. This he repeateth
over again, and says, Thy reward being thankful, is equal to his, who gave all
he had to the poor. Chrysostom speaks further to this purpose, Idem in c. 1.
ad Romans homil. 2.
to them that are apt to be dejected at their poor and low estate in the world.
It is fit, says he, that not only rich men, but even such as are cast down
with poverty, should give thanks to God; not only the healthy, but as well the
sick also; not only such as are in prosperity, but also such as live in
adversity, it becomes the Saints to be thankful; it is no such wonder, if men
who live in the affluence and abundance of wealth, be thankful; but when our
poor ship is weather-beaten with storms, and driven with tempests, then is the
time for the trial of our patience, long-suffering, and thanksgiving: hereby
Job got the crown, and stopped the mouth of the raging adversary, plainly
showing that he gave thanks to God, not only for the vastness of his wealth,
but likewise for the great love which he bare to God, even for his affliction.
To give thanks in adverse and cross affairs, argues a mind truly grateful and
wise: When thou give thanks for blessings which thou have received, thou
payest thy debt to God; but when thou give thanks to him for evils, then thou
make God thy debtor: in the first thou art the debtor, but in the latter thou
make thy creditour to become thy debtor. As therefore we respect and love our
Physician, Idem in Psalm. 148.
not only when he gives us restoratives, but likewise when he sends us
corrosives; not only when he feeds, but when he pincheth us; not only when
he gives us liberty to walk abroad, but also when he makes us close
prisoners within; not only for anointing, but also for launcing us; for though
the things which be done are contrary, yet the end of both is for our good,
viz. for restoring us to health; so must we for all things praise and magnify
God, and that the more, because the Physician is a man, and may miss of his end
and aim; but God cannot, because of his infinite wisdom and knowledge:
therefore also we must give thanks to God, not only when he gives us our
hearts desire, but also when our petitions seem not to be regarded; for when
God denies any thing to his children, he is no less a father to them, than
when he grants their requests; Idem in Genesis 11. Homil. 30
for we know not what is conducing to our good, so then whether we be masters
of our desires and wishes, or whether we miss of them, yet must we give
thanks. Thus Chrysostom. To this purpose, Thomas de Kempis speaks excellently,
Thom. de Kempis de imitat. Christi, l. 3. c. 5.
in his Book of the imitation of Christ. I give thee hearty thanks O Lord my
God, that thou have not spared my faults, but have visited me with thy stripes
for them; inflicting griefs and sending sorrows within and without; thy
correction shall instruct me, and thy rod shall tutor me unto salvation.
Gregory speaks sweetly to this very purpose. Gregor. Pastor. part 3. admonir.
13.
Who can be unthankful even for blows, when as he went not out of the world
without stripes, who came into, and lived in it without faults? Therefore he is
of a right judgment, who not only praises God in prosperity, but also who
blesses his name even for calamities: if thou shall by thanksgiving in
adversity gain Gods peace with thee, things which were lost, shall be restored
with multiplication, and moreover eternal joys for the time of thy sorrow shall
be surely added. Thanks must be given to a Father for his scourges and
severest discipline; for the blows of a father, are better than the kisses of
an enemy.

SECT. III.
Aug. Sermon. 12. de sanctis.
St. August. speaking of the great joy and courage which the Christian Martyrs
had in the midst of their losses and sufferings, has this expression; Doing
and suffering such things, they rejoiced and showed themselves glad: it was a
pleasure to them to obey all his commands, who had suffered more for them;
their inexplicable reward set their hearts on fire. The Hebrews took with joy
the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a
better and enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. The Lords corrections to his
children are very comfortable; God's rod, like Aaron's, is a blooming rod, St.
James implies no less, even in the first exhortation, which he gives to the
Churches of Christ; for even immediately after the inscription of his Epistle,
he says, Count it all joy, my brethren, when, you fall into diverse
temptations, or tribulations, Jam. 1.2. joy is to be found in the sharpest
trials wherewith God does exercise his children. True it is! no grievous loss
or affliction in it self (if a man turn his thoughts upon it, and upon the
smart of it) is comfortable; for it is an evil, and depriveth us of some good;
but the right consideration of the Author of it, of his great love toward us;
of the mind with which, and the end for which he lays it on us, may make it
very comfortable to us. As when a man has a very dangerous wound in any part
of his body, and a searching, drawing plaster, if applied unto it, to get out
the corrupt blood, that may be made for the cure of the wound; there can be no
comfort in the plaster, as it smarteth, yet comfort in it, as it gives hope
of a perfect cure: so in this respect, there being many sores in our souls, and
much corruption in them, these afflictions are like searching and drawing
plasters, and are not joyous in respect of the smart, but in respect of the
hope they give us that we shall be healed by them; yea, in regard of the
beginning of healing, which we feel by them when they are upon us, for even
then shall a Christian begin to feel a vent given to the putrefying sores of
his heart, and the lusts and corruptions of the same, beginning to languish,
which yields some degree of present comfort; but moreover, the Lords Rod is
joyous in regard of the future issue; and howsoever it may smart as to present
sense, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness
to them who are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. So David, after his afflictions
were over, found it was good for him that he was afflicted: was it not good for
David, that his Shepherds Crook was changed for a Scepter, that his mean Hood
was turned to an Imperial Crown, that he was advanced from the Sheepfold to a
Majestic Throne, that from wearing Shepherds weeds, he was brought to be
clothed in purple? These things were good, and David was no way unmindful of
those large benefits. He took it for a singular great favor that God took him
from the Sheepfold, from following the Ewes great with young, and brought him
to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his Inheritance; but yet he esteemed it a
far greater favor that God had humbled him in the state of Royalty, as he was
when he fled from Absalom his Son: therefore David reckons this among the
choicest blessings, and says; It is good for me that I have been afflicted;
this I esteem more precious than if thou had given me thousands of gold and
silver. Why was this so good for David? That I might learn thy Statutes.
Hitherto I have been altogether unacquainted with the language of that heavenly
Court, I was a stranger to thy divine Law, but I am become a great Proficient
in that School, where none are good Scholars but such as are humbled by the Rod
of Correction. Great losses and crosses do put into our hands the Torch of
Wisdom, and great tribulations do make us truly wise, and though they seem to
be very unpleasant, and are many times very unwelcome, yet they are Lectures of
holy Discipline, and therefore we ought to bear them cheerfully.

SECT. IV.
Far decet patienter onus, quod far necesse est. Qui jacet invitus, durius
ille jacet.
from vainglory, and a vain affectation of praise, from pride and stoutness of
stomach, have endured the severest torments, and suffered the loss of all
things with great undauntedness of spirit, and merely upon certain carnal
grounds, and for sinister ends. As

1. That impatience is no part of manhood, but mere childishness of spirit.

2. That impatience may much aggravate, but cannot ease us of our troubles, or
remove them.

3. Because others suffer with them, it is the common lot of mankind to suffer.

4. Because there is an inevitable necessity that they must be born; feras non
culpes, quod vitari non potest; Seneca.
that must be borne that cannot be avoided, says Seneca.

5. Because they cannot last always, therefore they will endure them. But as
August says well, there is no true virtue where there is no true Religion;
they are not right, unless they be fruits of the spirit. True Religion teaches
us to bear losses, and endure afflictions out of love to God, and in obedience
to Gods Command, and with submission to his will. There are some who are
possessed with a spirit of obstinacy, that they disdain to bow under the yoke,
and (though the rod smart never so much) to testify any submission or remorse.
Pharaoh was such a one; how terribly did God lash him with a tenstringed whip,
yet still he hardens his heart against him, and relenteth no more than if he
had struck upon the side of a rock: and Ahaz was such a one, he is branded and
stigmatized for it, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. God for his wickedness had delivered him up
into the hands of his Enemies, and they held him in captivity and thraldom*
yet in the time of his distress he did more trespass against the Lord; This is
that King Ahaz. Now the ground of true patience is the will and pleasure of
God. The Orator in his definition of patience, made it to be a voluntary and
constant suffering, honestatis and utilitatis causa, for credit or for profit
sake: but it is not credit or profit that we must aim at in the bearing
afflictions, but we must have an eye to God in it, and it must be for his sake
altogether, whatever we do, or whatever we suffer. Now consider, it is his will
to lay these trials upon you, it is his pleasure you should be exercised with
them, this must teach you to bear them quietly, and not to murmr against him,
but to hold your peace and be silent. I was dumb, says David, and opened not
my mouth, because thou did it. Psa. 39.
Let others make a virtue of necessity* Quia necessitas sio cogit, because
necessity so constrains them, they must do thus, and they cannot do otherwise;
let them yield because of this: Consider thou what the pleasure and will of God
is, Quia Deus sic jubet, because God sees it good for you, and so appoints
it; submit thou therefore to his will without murmuring. I have read of Sir
Thomas More, being returned from his Embassy beyond the Seas, and being far
from his own house, with King Henry the VIII. that in the month of August,
part of his dwelling house, and all his Barns (being then full of corn) were
burnt up and consumed by a sudden fire; his Lady certifying him of this sad
mishap; he answers her Letter in this manner.

Madam, all health wished to you; I do understand that all our Barns and Corn,
with some of our Neighbors likewise, are wasted by a fire: An heavy and
lamentable loss (but only that it was Gods will) of such abundance of wealth:
but because it so seemed good to God, we must not only patiently, but also
willingly bear and submit to the hand of God so stretched out upon us; God gave
whatsoever we lost, and seeing it has so pleased him to take away what he
gave, his divine will be done: never let us repine at this, but let us take it
in good part; we are bound to be thankful as well in adversity as in
prosperity, and if we cast up our accounts well, this which we esteem so great
a loss, is rather a great gain; for what is necessary and conducing to our
salvation, is better known to God than to us. I entreat you therefore to take a
good heart, and to give thanks to God for all these things which he has
pleased to take away, as well as for all his blessings which he has bestowed
on us, and to praise him for that which is left: It is an easy matter with
God, if he please, to augment what is left: But if he shall see good to take
away more, even as it shall please him, so let it be: I pray thee be joyful in
the Lord with my children, and all our family; all these things, and all we,
are in the hands of the Lord; let us therefore wholly depend upon his good
will, and so no losses shall ever hurt us. Oh how good is it under all losses
to conform our wills to the will of God! How willingly did David submit to the
will of God, when he fled from his rebellious Son Absalom, and commanded the
Priests and the Ark to return into the City, and told them, that if he should
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he would bring him back again, and show
him both it and his habitation; but if he say, I have no delight in thee,
behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good in his eyes, 2 Samuel 15.25,
26. Behold here David in a most sudden and hasty flight, in extreme straits, in
deep distress, the whole Kingdom being even lost in appearance, then did David
submit himself wholly to his dispose; he submits to the authority, sovereignty,
and dominion that God has over him. There is not any sacrifice more grateful
to God, than under any losses or crosses to yield consent to the good will and
pleasure of God. August. in Psalm. 60.
S. Augustine speaks excellently to this purpose; Does the gold shine in the
Furnace of the Goldsmith? it will shine and show its luster in a Ring, in a
Chain or Bracelet; let it yet suffer the crucible, that it may come out purged
from its dross to the public view. There is the Furnace wherein is dross and
gold, and fire, at which the Goldsmith blows; in this Furnace the dross is
consumed, the gold refined; the one is turned to ashes, the other is cleared
from all filth: The world is the Furnace, the wicked are the Dross, the
righteous are the Gold, tribulation is the Fire, and God is the Goldsmith; I do
therefore what the Goldsmith will have me; where he puts me I endure, I am
commanded to bear, he knows best how to purge: Though the dross burn to heat
me and consume me, yet it wastes it self, and I am purged from silth, because
my soul waits upon God. It is meet therefore we should beg this at the hands
of God, as once that devout man did. Behold, O my loving Father, Tho. de
Kempis. de imitat Christi, lib. 3. ca. 5.
I am in thy hands, I bow to the rod of thy correction, I kiss it; strike my
back and my stiff neck, that I may bend my crookedness to thy right and strait
will; give me above all things to enquire after the good pleasure of thy good
will.

CHAP. XIII.
The Birds of the air have nests, and the Foxes have holes, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head? Mat. 8.20. So then you are in no worse
condition than Jesus Christ himself was; he that was Heir of both worlds had
not an house of his own to put his head in; your Head, your Lord, your Master
did drink of the same Cup that you drink of: are you poor, hungry, naked,
harbourless, so was Christ? Mark what our Savior speaks, Mat. 10.24, 25. The
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord: it is enough
for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord. If you
be Christ's Disciples or servants, you must not look to be above him; it were
unreasonable that the servant should be in a better condition than his Lord is,
it is enough if he be equal with his Lord, it is honor enough that the servant
fares no worse than his Master. Christ thereby shows what measure they must
expect in case they will be his Disciples: Are you rich, expect to be poor for
my sake? Have you houses and Lands, expect to forsake all these, if I require
it? This is the Motto of Christ's Disciples; Domine reliquimus omnia, and te
sequuti sumus. Lord, we have left all and followed thee. Christ deals plainly
with his people, and tells them, in the world ye shall be poor ye shall have
tribulation, ye shall endure the loss of all things. Our Savior requires of
all that will be his Disciples, that they do not set their affections on
earthly things, that they should set their affections on heaven, Christ and he
alone must dwell in us: Moreover, he requires of his people, that quoad
praeparationem animi and affectum, in respect of the preparation of the heart
and the affection, they be always ready cordially to part with houses, lands,
and livings; to forsake all persons and things which are near and dear to them,
for his sake, and for the Gospel-sake. Yea, Christ does sometimes put some of
his people upon the actual abdication of all their worldly goods, and to become
as poor as Job, as Lazarus, for his sake, yea, to rejoice they have houses,
riches, goods, lands to lose for Christ: such undoings are their makings; such
losings are savings; this poverty is riches; he loses nothing who gains
Christ by losing all the world. Christ's Discipleas did actually forsake all
things and persons, to follow him. Did you often think of the poverty and low
estate of Christ, while he was in the world, your hearts would be quiet under
your losses. Be not too much dejected at your removal from your habitations;
the whole earth is your Fathers ground, the Lords lower house; while you are
lodged here, you have no assurance to lie ever in one chamber, but must be
content to remove from place of the Lords nether house, to another, resting in
hope, that when you come to the Lords upper City, Jerusalem, that is above, you
shall remove no more, because then you shall be at home: and for the present
remove to what house or place you will, if the most high God, the possessor of
heaven and earth be with you, you are still at home, and your lodging is ever
taken up before night, so long as he, who is the keeper of Israel, Psalm. 90.1
is your home and habitation: in this dwelling House are many spacious rooms,
and pleasant lights; Oh lay down your heads, by faith, in the bosom of Christ,
till this be done, you shall never sleep soundly, nor rest in a quiet and
settled habitation,

FINIS.
NO Abiding City IN A Perishing World; BUT Heaven only the continuing City,
which we must diligently seek.

Set for in a Discourse on Hebrews 13.14.

For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

OR, Meditations occasioned by the late, sad, and lamentable Fire, in the City
of London.

Published by William Gearing Minister of the Word.

Isaiah 24.15. Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires, etc.

Quicquid in mundo, aut praesens and hoc instabile; aut praeteritum, and hoc
jam nihil; aut futurum, and hoc incertum.

August. LONDON, Printed, by R. I. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on
London Bridge. 1667.

NO Abiding City IN A Perishing World.
Heb. 13.14. For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.


CHAP. I.
THe Particle [for] invites me to look back upon the verses foregoing. The
Apostle tells us, ver. 12. that Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with
his own blood, suffered without the gate: Then he exhorts. ver. 13. Let us go
forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach. Christ was
figured by the Sacrifices under the Law; as the Beasts were burnt without the
Camp, so Christ suffered without the gate, being cast out of the world as an
accursed thing: if Christ suffered without the gate, how should the Saints be
content to go out of the world, and bear the reproach the world casts upon
them, knowing that they shall be graciously received, not only into the Camp of
Christ, but into his Royal Court; the world shall not cast so much scorn upon
them, as Christ will show them love and favor: it is better to be out of the
Camp with Christ, than without Christ, at the worlds head Quarters. Moses chose
to forsake all rather than not to follow Christ: So let us willingly bear the
reproach of Christ, and know that he will willingly receive all those that for
his sake are content to bear the reproach that the world casts upon them.
This exhortation of the Apostle is directed

1. To the Jews; to bid an eternal farewell to all the Levitical Ceremonies and
Ordinances, and to go to Christ who suffered without the gate: his suffering
there was to put an end to Temple-worship in Jerusalem. Calvin thus
paraphraseth it; Calvin ad loc.
Think not that God will now be pleased with this typical worship; but now he
expects that you should go to Christ, and suffer injuries, banishment, and
all manner of persecutions for his sake.

2. To Christians: to bid an adieu to the customs, to the fashions, to the
courses, to the lusts of this world, and to resolve to go forth to Christ, and
follow him, notwithstanding the vile reproaches, cruel mockings, that ever did,
and ever shall fall upon all, both Hebrews and Christians, who sincerely follow
and cleave to Christ: for the Ceremonious Jews did reproach such as did shake
off the yoke of Mosaical Rites, and observe the Evangelical Ordinances of
Christ: and the wicked among Christians do to this very day load such with
reproaches, who cast off the yoke of worldly lusts and practices, and walk as
becomes the Gospel of Christ: Now he that will go forth to Christ, must
resolve to bear his reproaches; which are better than all the magnificent
Titles of Honor, the vast treasures of wealth the world can give; and though
they render us ignominious before the world, yet they render us as honorable
before God.

My Text is a reason of the Apostles exhortation, or a strong motive to
encourage us to go forth to Christ bearing his reproach; For, or because, we
have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come: Wherefore slight the
reproaches of the world (as Travelers do the barking of dogs) in your journey
to the City of glory.

It is a probable conjecture made by some, Estius Exposit. in loc.
as Estius observes, that S. Paul speaks Prophetically of the destruction of
the City of Jerusalem, which was then at hand, and that in a short time neither
that City nor the Country about it, would be an abiding place for them, but
driven from thence they should be, and be forced to wander up and down, and
therefore they were to look for no other abiding place but heaven.

CHAP. II.
IN the words of my Text you have a Position, and an Opposition, or a Position,
and a Conclusion.

1. The Position is; Here we have no continuing City.

2. The Opposition or Conclusion is, But [or therefore] we seek one to come:
for the present we have no abiding City, but there is an abiding City to come
which we seek. This earthly Jerusalem is no abiding City for you Hebrews: this
world is no abiding City for you Christians. But Jerusalem that is above, the
heavenly City, the City of the King of Kings, that is an abiding City, that let
us diligently seek after. This world is to believers, as the Wilderness was to
the Israelites, they were Pilgrims in it: So are believers in the world,
strangers and Pilgrims; they abode not long in the Wilderness, but passed
through it to Canaan, there they made their abode: so this world is not a place
for believers to abide in, but must pass through it to an heavenly Canaan, that
is an abiding Country, an abiding City, and there all believers shall abide to
eternity.

The general point of instruction to be drawn from hence is; Observe.
That the consideration that there is no abiding place in this world, should
forcibly move us to seek out for heaven. This was that which moved Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, those renowned Candidates of Eternity, to be as Pilgrims in
the world, wandering from place to place, now sojourning here, then sojourning
there, but abode no where; and wheresoever they went, they dwelt not in Palaces
or Fortresses strongly built, but in Tabernacles, which they could pitch down,
and take up, and carry them whether they pleased: and so they used to do, to
mind them that there was no abiding for them here, but they must look after a
City, wherein they should abide for ever. Heb. 11.9, 10, 14, 16. By faith
Abraham sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in
Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same Promise: for
he looked for a City which has foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God.
They confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth; for they that say
such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. But now they desire a
better Country (than that from whence they came out) that is, an heavenly. Here
ye have a full proof of the point; the Holy Ghost calling believers sojourners,
pilgrims, strangers, what is it but to convince them, that there is no abiding
for them in this world? this world is not their Country, their City, their
home, their habitation; here they are not to place their hopes, to set their
affections, to seek a lasting happiness; but heaven is their City, their
Country, their home, their habitation: there all our hopes should be placed,
thither should all our desires aspire, there we are to seek everlasting
happiness, there we shall be sure to find it, and to abide in the possession of
it to eternity.

CHAP. III.
FOr the better prosecution of this point, I shall draw from it two
Propositions, and make use of them.

Prop. 1. That here is no abiding City. I need not seek proof for this, for
there is none of us, but his experience evidenceth it.

1. Take City here, for our houses we dwell in; they are no abiding places for
us: death turns every man out of his own doors, and carries him from his
house to the grave; it turns Princes out of their stately Palaces, and great
men out of their strong-built houses and Castles, and poor men out of their
Cottages. The poor man's Cottage, the rich man's House, and the Princes Palace,
are of no continuance; how many stately Houses, Edifices, and Castles have we
seen in our days to be made ruinous heaps, and consumed to ashes? your
continual repairing them shows them to be of no long continuance.

2. Take City, for the Towns and Cities wherein we inhabit with others, they
are no continuing places for us to abide in for ever: See we not, how one
Generation passes, and another comes? and the Generation that is coming is
going: and though the Stages stand a while when the Actors are gone off, yet at
length the Stages are taken down. What is now become of Jerusalem, of Athens,
of Corinth, and of those famous Cities of Asia? How many famous Towns and
Cities are become ruinous heaps? Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit.
Behold there now is good Corn-land,
Where once the City Troy did stand.
The like may be said of many Towns and Cities in the world. Cato the Censor
boasted that he had taken more Towns and Cities in Spain, than he had been
days in it; Plutarch.
Plutarch says he took four hundred. Sempronius Gracchus, destroyed in Spain
three hundred more, as Polybius relates. Pliny says, Polyb. Histor.
that Coneys destroyed a great City in Spain, and that Moles destroyed another
in Macedonia: Many have been destroyed by fire, many by inundations of water,
and others have been swallowed up by earthquakes: here we have no abiding City.
We read, Genesis 19.24. That the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and
fire from the Lord out of heaven, and he overthrew those Cities, and all the
Plain, and all the inhabitants of those Cities, and that which grew upon the
ground. Joseph. de bello Judaico, lib. 5.
Josephus says, that five Cities perished: and we read of five Cities of that
Region named, Genesis 14.2. viz. Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, Sebojim, and Bela, which
is Zoar. Moses, besides the two principal Cities, mentions the place of their
situation, but Admah and Sebojim were destroyed by fire as well as Sodom and
Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 29.23. these the Lord overthrew in his anger and fury: As for
Zoar, Theodoret, Lyra, and others, think it was preserved upon the request of
Lot, Walther. Harmon. Biblic. in Genesis 19
but that after Lot went out of it, it was utterly over hrown. But this cannot
be made evident from Scripture, that this fifth City was either overthrown
together with the rest; or a little afterward; but the contrary rather
appears from the speech of the Lord to Lot, Genesis 19.21. He said unto him,
see, I have accepted thee concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this
City, for the which thou have spoken. And mention is made of it, Isa. 15.5.
where it is said, that the Moabites being overcome by the Assyrian, should fly
unto Zoar, Babylon, and Nineveh; those great Cities, are long since utterly
laid waste.

3. Take City, for the Countries wherein we live; they shall not abide, neither
shall any man continue in them for ever: Fruitful Canaan is now become a barren
wilderness: how has the Country cast out all her Inhabitants? Kingdoms,
Countries, Nations, Commonwealths, have their deaths and burials, as well as
the Inhabitants of them.

4. Take City, for the world it self, and this is no continuing place. Though
it has continued a most six thousand years, yet 2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the
Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up. Here you have a full description of
the Worlds destruction: it is above all humane determination, whether this fire
shall be a fire of utter abolition of the world, or a fire of purgation to
refine it: when these things come to pass, then Heaven and Hell will divide the
whole world between them.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
Quest. HOw is it that nothing here is of continuance?

Resp. 1. The very law of their Creation subjecteth the world, and all
creatures therein, to dissolution and corruption: Every creature, qua creature,
is corruptible; look but upon their composition, the materials, the principles
are corruptible; and there is a contrariety and opposition between them: how
can creatures stand and continue which are divided within themselves? look upon
the things we are most apt to dote upon; our Cities, Houses, are they not made
of dissoluble materials? though some continue for many generations, yet either
water, fire, or war, or if none of these, their age consumes them. We see how
among men, some dye of old age; so age ruineth Cities, Towns, and all other
things: the heavens, which of all creatures are the most durable, yet says the
Psalmist, they shall wax old like a garment, Psa. 102.26. which Text is enough
to confute the Philosophical opinion, that maintains the heavens to be made
of incorruptible matter.

2. Man's rebellion against his Lord and Creator, has put the whole creation in
subjection to great vanity and corruptibility, Romans 8.20, 21. The creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope. By the creature there, is meant, the heavens and the earth,
with all the creatures in them, Angels excepted, who are only spectators of
this vanity, not vassals to it, as all other creatures are. By vanity] we are
to understand a state of imperfection, opposite to their created condition and
perfection; they have lost much of their Primitive excellency and perfection.
And they are made subject to vanity, which denotes, that they are unavoidably
in a state of vanity; they cannot help themselves. But yet not willingly.] Here
the Apostle continues his Prosopopeia, attributing will to inanimate and
sensitive creatures, which have no will at all: It shows, that this vanity
that is upon the creature, is against the natural inclination of the creature.
Creatures by natural instinct do abhor corruption: all creatures are strongly
carried with a desire of self-preservation, to preserve their own perfections.
Moreover, it notes, that all the vanity in the creature is not from it self,
but it is merely adventitious; man's rebellion, and Gods curse, is the cause of
all their vanity: As Death passed on all men, because all had sinned, so Vanity
and Corruption has passed upon the whole Creation, because man has sinned. --
But by reason of him who has subjected the same.] These words clearly show,
how and by whom this yoke of vanity came to be laid on the creatures; not by
themselves, but by him who has subjected the same, viz. God; who being
provoked by the sin of Adam, lays this bondage of vanity on the creature, as
part of the penalty of man's disobedience. Cameron passionately contendeth, that
it must be meant of man, not of God; because the Apostle does not mention the
Name of God; but the following words sufficiently confute him, and evince, it
is God who subjecteth the creature to vanity; because though he has powered
forth vanity on them, yet he has left in them a hope of restitution. Cameron
Praelect.
And to reconcile Cameron with other Interpreters, this distinction may be
used: Man is the procuring and deserving cause of the creatures subjection unto
vanity; and God is the efficient or imposing cause of this subjection unto
vanity. All creatures in their own being were by nature corruptible, but our
sin makes them twofold more the Children of vanity and corruptibility: Man's
sin and Gods curse on the creature for sin, hasteneth the creatures to their
dissolution. As the house of the Leper was in it self not unclean, but the
walls thereof being once infected with Leprosy, it was the sooner pulled down.

SECT. II.
I know it is a Dispute among Divines, whether there be a decay of Nature in
all creatures: Some strongly affirm, that yet there is no decay, but they are
as vigorous now as they were in their first Creation. Others (and I think more
truly) affirm, a decay in Nature, both in the Heavens and the earth; the Sun
and the Heavens have not those vigorous influences as formerly. What means
the curse upon the earth; (thorns and briars shall it bring forth) but a decay
of its Nature? What is meant by vanity and corruption under which it groaneth,
but their natural decay? Why are not the lives of men of that duration* as
formerly? One reason given is, because the fruits of the earth are not so
nourishable and healthful as before the flood? A general Deluge brought
saltness and barrenness upon the earth: so that now there is a gradual
privation of the creatures of their original beauty, goodness, pleasantness,
sweetness, which they received from God in their Creation, by which privation
they are rendered unable to perfect the particular uses for which they were
created. The Sun, Moon and Stars, though still they remain excellent creatures,
yet it is supposed by sundry Divines, they have lost much of their Primitive
splendor, and that they shine not so bright as at their first Creation: The
Moon has her spots; it is disputable, whether she had them from the beginning:
Some Stars (though great bodies) yet are scarce perceptible by the eye: The
air, the waters, have lost much of their sweetness, pleasantness and clarity;
the earth has lost much of her beauty; the herbs, plants, fruits, trees, have
lost much of their virtue; all the living creatures have lost much of their
created goodness. All men see with what art, toil and labor, the husbandman
provokes the earth to its present fruitfulness, seeing the whole earth was
naturally propense to bring forth fruits of all kinds in great abundance* but
for our sakes it is subject to much barrenness; all the Heaths and wilder wastes
in the world, are marks of this curse of vanity on the earth: had not the soul
of man become a Wilderness in respect of grace and holiness, there had been no
Wilderness in the earth in respect of barrenness. All man's labor and sweat to
make the earth bring forth, is a part of man's punishment also: Had not man
sinned (though Adam in Innocence should have labored) yet it should have been
without sorrow, sweat, and wearisomness: Men may thank their own sin for every
drop of sweat that trickleth down their face, and for every miscarrying of the
earth.

SECT. III.
Moreover, it consists in a positive malignity, which through sin and the
curse of God is now cast upon the whole Creation; the Sun it self works
deliquia, eclipses, it suffers, it works a contrary evil to the good for
which it was created: the heat thereof scorcheth the earth, and makes it to
become iron under our feet, whose light and heat was created to comfort and
cherish the earth, it now scorcheth the creatures, yea man himself: the
Ethiopians are so scorched with it, that for anger they shoot arrows against
the Sun. -- The Moon, besides her Eclipses and Changes, does also emit sad
influences on the creatures below, witness the Lunatic, the Paralitick; the
Moon causes many humors in the body to stir: You read in the book of Job of
the sweet influences of Pleiades, but these also do sometimes send out their
malign influences: the air is oftentimes very contagious and pestilential, as
we have seen by sad experience of late; and yet is manifest in many Towns and
Cities, and other lesser places of this Kingdom at this day: Now the air
scorcheth, then it cools; now it is calm, then boisterous: The earth brings
forth briars and thorns, and unwholesome weeds, instead of wholesome fruit. In
all living creatures, you shall see how sin has put into them an hatred, and
antipathy, and opposition, the one seeking to destroy each other* the curse of
vanity has put the whole Creation out of order: Hence are all those mutations,
alterations, corruptions, and destructions among the creatures, and of the
creatures.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, Why does God inflict this punishment of vanity
and corruption on the creature for man's sin, without any fault in the creature?

Resp. 1. It is no injury to the creature at all. Chrysostom says well,
Chrysostom.
Ratio aequi and iniqui non ad creaturas inanimatas transferenda est. The
consideration of right and wrong, justice and injustice, is not to be
transferred to the creatures void of life, but only to the rational, who were
subjects capable of both.

2. Because the creatures were made for man; therefore if man rebelled against
his Sovereign Lord, they shall suffer for man also. Chrysostom says, Si
propter me factae sint, nihil admittitur injustitiae, si propter me patiantur:
If they were made for my use and service, there is no injustice if they suffer
for me to my shame and vexation; and the reason is, because seeing they were
made for the use and service of man, therefore the change to the worse, which
is now come upon them, is not their punishment, but a part of the punishment of
man.

CHAP. V.
R. 3. A Third reason why we have no abiding City here, nor any thing of long
continuance, is taken partly from the love of God to his people, and partly
from his wrath to the wicked. The wicked shall not have a continuance here, and
nothing durable, because God will put an end to sin and sinners, and clear the
world of sin and sinners, wherefore he will dissolve all these things. As long
as wicked men live they will continue in sin; should a wicked man live a
thousand years, so long would he live in sin; a drunkard would continue in his
drunkenness, a swearer in his swearing, so long as there is any continuance of
his City. Oh to what an height of wickedness would men arrive, if they and
their Cities were of long continuance on the earth; they forget God already,
and should God lengthen out their time to continue for ever, or for some
thousands of years, they would be ready to think themselves were Gods, and not
dying men: therefore the Lord does not suffer sinners nor their Cities to be of
long continuance; and many times he cuts off notorious sinners in the midst of
their days: Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; God
ruineth their Cities and habitations, they moulder away, and are not of long
continuance.

It is likewise in love to the godly, that neither they nor their Cities shall
be of long continuance here, because God will quickly put an end to their
sufferings, their reproaches, their persecutions, their calamities, and deliver
them from the body of death which makes them miserable, and will ere long take
them up to their desired and expected happiness, laid up in heaven for them. In
a word; God will have no long lasting worldly City, or other worldly thing,
that the miseries of his children may be short, and their happiness may be of
eternal duration; and that the joy and prosperity of the wicked may be short,
and their sorrow and torment may be eternal.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I.
IF here we have no continuing City; Will thou set thine eyes upon that which
is not? Prove. 23.5. for riches make themselves wings, and flee away toward
heaven. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is but as the flower of
the field; the grass withers, the flower fades. 1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is as
grass; it is but as the Earths Summers garment, put off before winter comes;
and all the glory of man (or whatsoever man is apt most to glory in) is but as
the flower of the field, a fading ornament, that within a day or two withers
and comes to nothing: We look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal, says S. Paul, 2 Cor* 4.18. We are not
restrained from the seeing of these things; for the senses were made for use,
and their use is to be applied to their several objects; the words there used
by the Apostle are [(...).] We look not at the things that are seen as at a
mark: the word (...) signifies a mark, and the word (...), to look at things
as at a mark. Now when a man aims at a mark, he sees many things between his
eye and the mark, but he slightly looks upon them, but he looks fully upon
the mark; his eye staieth at, and is fixed upon the mark: now the mark that the
Apostle professed he looked at, was Jesus Christ, Phil 3.14. I forget that
which is behind, I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. I conceive he alludeth to those games and acts of
hostility used among the Greeks, where there was first, a mark, secondly, a
price; a mark which they looked at, a price which they aimed at, in their
exercises of shooting, wrestling, running on foot, or on horseback, etc. So
the Apostle, he had his mark that he aimed at, that was the Lord Jesus Christ,
that he might know him, and be found in him, and be made conformable to him:
and the price that he ran for, was the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, the
Crown of eternal life and glory, that high price to which Christians are called
of God in Christ Jesus. Now on the contrary, the Apostle shows, that these
visible and temporal things were not the mark that he aimed at, that was but a
poor low thing, in comparison of eternal glory. Do not therefore make these
transitory things, your mark and scope, make them not the scope of your
intentions; you cannot level at them; they are transient, and will soon have an
end. I know no such beauty in the face of this fading world, so as to draw the
eyes of our souls to fix upon it; the house of this world is a smoaky house,
and it blows upon our eyes; Oh then let us pluck up the stakes of our tent,
and take our tent upon our back, and repair to our best home, for here we have
no continuing City.

SECT. II.
Solomon did, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.2. as he found them by experience,
which cost him dear. I conceive that the Lord by his wise counsel, left him to
plunge himself into sensual delights, having such a large understanding, to
contrive what was in the creature to the uttermost, that he might teach the
Church the nature of them, to the end of the world from his own experience.
Now, says he, Eccles. 2.12. what can a man do that comes after the King? Is
it not a madness for any man to think to find more satisfaction in them than
King Solomon did? If any man has higher thoughts of these things, it is not
because he sees more into them than Solomon did, but because he dotes so much
upon them, so as to be besotted with them. Judge not according to appearance,
says our Savior, Joh. 7.24. He that will judge of these fading things by
their outsides, may well expect to be deceived; but the immortal soul of man
being of an intellectual nature, and having an understanding faculty, being far
above sense, should look more inwardly into them, and see what they are all in
comparison to the true happiness of the soul of man; they bring not the soul
one step the nearer to true happiness: Now it is as impossible for the outward
man to be happy, while the inner man is miserable, as for the outer part of the
body to be in health, while the heart is sick unto death. Let us therefore
value these transitory things at a low rate, esteeming them as vain things that
cannot profit, 1 Samuel 12.21. as nothing, less than nothing, and vanity it self,
Isai. 40.17. Oh let us compare our inch of time with vast Eternity, and the
esteem that we have of this now flourishing and green world, with the esteem we
shall have of it, when worms and corruption shall make their houses in our
eye-holes, and our flesh and body shall be consumed (then our light of this
worlds vanity shall be more clear than now it is) then shall we see, that
though the world makes men believe, that whatsoever things it offers them it
is of good substance, and may well suffice to satisfy our hungry appetites yet
when trial is made, there is nothing to be found but wind and vanity, and that
they that feed upon these Husks, feed upon nothing but the wind, as the
Prophet speaks of Ephraim, Hos. 13.1. would thou not take him for a fool,
that when he is hungry, would open his mouth, and gape, and take in the air to
satisfy his hunger withal? Thy folly, O man is nothing less, if thou think
to satisfy the appetite of thy soul with the wind of things visible and
temporal, neglecting things eternal. Such a fool was that rich man, Luke 12.16,
17. (for so the Holy Ghost calls him) wherein did he play the fool, but in
suffering his thoughts wholly to run after outward perishing things? Therefore
he thus complains; I want room to lay up my fruits; but never thinks what
room there is for him in heaven; be cries out: What shall become of my goods?
but never thinks, oh what shall become of my poor soul? Then he comes to
this resolution; I will build my Barns to lay up my fruits in.] But no such
thought as this, I will lay up for my self treasure in heaven, and labor to
have a Mansion in heaven for my immortal soul: Thou have goods laid up for many
years in store.] but no such thought as this; Thou know not whether thou
shall enjoy them one day more; for thy soul may be taken away before one night
be at an end: Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; but no such
thought as this: Soul, what ease shall I find in eternal torments? What if my
present mirth and jollity should deprive me of that fullness of joy that is in
the presence of God, and those pleasures that are for evermore, and end in
howling, and weeping, and gnashing of teeth?

SECT. III.
O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity? Psalm. 4.2. All the goods of
mortals are mortal; whatsoever it is that you entitle your selves Lords of, it
is with you but for a time, it is not yours to continue with you; there is
nothing firm, eternal, and incorruptible, that weak and corruptible men do
possess; it will as necessarily perish, as we must necessarily lose it; and
this if we well understand, is a great solace, to lose that indifferently,
which must perish necessarily; the only help therefore that we shall find
against these losses, is not to love them too dearly, because in a short time
they must be lost: Lift up your soul above humane felicities, cast it not away
for those things that are below, and without it self. The soul of man comes of
a more Noble and Divine Stock, than to be enamoured with fading and perishing
things: O what vanity is it so much to dote upon these shadows? how fondly do
we love them while we have them? and how passionately do we lament their loss?

We part with many things in grief;
Because we loved them in chief.
O the unhappiness of mankind, says S. Augustine; The world is bitter, August.
Tom. 10. Sermon. de Temp.
and yet we love it: if it were sweet indeed, how should we then dote upon it?
it is very troublesome, yet we love it; how should we affect it, if it were
altogether quiet and peaceable? how eagerly then should we gather the flowers
of it, since we so greedily catch up the thorns? Now if, as Chrysostom speaks,
Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Homil. 6.
notwithstanding all the evils which compass us about in this world, we desire
to live long in it, when, oh when (were it free from all disturbances) should
we seek for any thing else? we are so bewitched with these vanities, that we
prefer our Pilgrimage before our Country; and hence it is, that God either
imbitters our Cups, and mingleth our pleasures with vexations, lest we should
mistake Wormwood and Vinegar for true Nectar; or else he takes away these
outward comforts from us, that we may see our folly in placing so much of our
affections upon things that were of no continuance: Ah! how much do we smell of
the smoke of this lower house of the earth, because our heart and thoughts are
here? and how unwilling are we to go out of it, albeit we are in danger of
being suffocated with the smoke of it? It is a great folly so eagerly to love
fading and unstable things: Gregory speaks well to this purpose; Gregor. Moral.
lib. 1. ca. 3.
We never forego any thing willingly, but what we possess inaffectionately; and
speaking of Job, he says, He parted with all with a willing mind, which he
possessed without inordinate delight. You now see the best of this world to be
but a Moth-eaten threadbare Coat; resolve now to lay it aside, being old and
full of holes, and look after that house above, not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens: Set not your heart upon the world, since God has not made it your
portion, and your inheritance. What misery of miseries is it for the immortal
soul of man to be enslaved to the world, which is but an heap of fuel kept in
store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men, 2 Per. 3.7.
especially now in this age of the world when it is ready for the fire? but in
that day, when the perdition of the ungodly shall be, then shall the world be
destroyed, the world and all its fond lovers shall perish together in one day:
How shall this make for the glory of Gods Justice, who shall bring destruction
upon them that love the world above himself, on that day wherein the world it
self shall be destroyed? Let us therefore endeavor daily to curb and restrain
this exorbitancy of affection; as King Tarquinius walking in his garden,
whipped off the tops and heads of the tallest flowers with his staff; so must
we cut off these rising affections, as soon as they begin to peep forth, and
put up head in our hearts; this world which God will not have to be yours, O
Christians, is but the dross and scum of Gods Creation, the portion of the
Lords poor hired servants, the movables, not the heritage of the Sons of Zion:
It is but an Offal or hard bone, cast to the dogs that are thrust out from the
new Jerusalem, upon which they rather break their teeth, than satisfy their
appetite: Keep your love and your hope in heaven; it is not good your Love and
your Lord should be in two sundry Countries, as one excellently speaks; he is
semper idem, always the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever: Keep at a
distance from the walls of this Pesthouse, even the pollutions of this
defiling and fading world.

SECT. IV.
It is good for us to be here, let us here build Tabernacles; as they are
transitory in their own nature, so they must be looked upon in transitu: As a
Traveller in a Journey, may see many fine Towns, and stately Edifices with his
eye, but he minds his way, he will not stay his horse to take a view of them:
So he that has heaven in his thoughts, and will seek after a City that is to
come, must not suffer these fading things to stay him in his course
heavenward: It is the vanity of our spirits that enclineth us to muse upon
these transitory things; and on the other side, the more we dwell upon them in
our thoughts, the more light and vain our spirits are; the more you muse upon
them, the more you will be ensnared by them. What is a soul the poorer to want
the lusts and perishing vanities of this present evil world? Certainly we have
no cause to weep at the want of such toys as these; we have nothing to do in
this prison except to take meat, drink and house-room in it for a time only:
this world is not yours; let not your heaven be made of such poor metal as
mire and clay. Oh where are those heavenly-minded souls, that have nothing but
their bodies of earth walking up and down upon the Superficies of it, whose
souls, and the powers of them, are up in heaven? Oh men's souls have no wings,
and therefore they keep their Nest, and fly not to that upper Region. Could we
be deaf and dead to this worlds charms, we might deride at the folly of those
who are wooing this world for their match, and scorn to Court such a withered
Princess, or buy this worlds kindness with a bow of our knees: Alas! it is
little the world can take from us, and it is not much that it can give us; but
the worst of Christ is better than the worlds best things; his Chaff is better
than the worlds Corn. Oh let your thoughts dwell much upon that blessedness
that abides you in the other world, and upon that continuing City that is to
come.

SECT. V.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, Joh. 6.27. Our Savior therein
teaches us, to look upon all things here below whatsoever, but as meat that
goes into the belly, and is cast out of the draught to the dunghill, and
exhorts us to labor after that meat that shall endure to eternal life: Do not
then toil and moil for such uncertainties; all earthly things are very mutable,
they are like a Land-flood which fails in a time of drought, when we have
most need of water: S. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand. It is true in a twofold sense.

1. In a relative sense, in relation to every particular, person, and his
interest in them; in relation to thee and me, and every one of us; when our end
comes, then the end of all things is come unto us: when thy life ends, then
the world, and all the things of the world do end to thee; it is as much to
thee as if all the world were at an end.

2. It is true in an absolute sense, 2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord comes as
a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the
works that are therein, shall be burnt up: So that all these visible things are
temporal, and shall have an end. Now these visible things are of two sorts;
either first, The substances, or subjects: Or secondly, The accidents; though
in a proper sense, the accidents are visible, and the substances cannot be
discerned but by their accidents. You see not the substance of the world, but
the color, the form and figure of it, the (...), and even this also is
temporal, and the fashion of it passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. All visible things,
though never so pleasing to us, as health, wealth, honors, pleasures, riches,
beauty, strength, all the outward and natural perfections that are in any
creatures, are not abiding, they are temporal only, though never so pleasant to
us. On the other side, all miseries, deformities, pains, sicknesses, shall all
be abolished; the substance (that is, the foundation) being taken away, the
accidents that cleaves to them (whether ornaments or blemishes) must needs
vanish with them. When a goodly Palace is on fire, the beauty of it, the
painting, the engraving, the carved work, and also the decays and ruins of
it, will be abolished with it: So the substance of these things being
destroyed, all the materials (whether beautiful or uncomely) shall be destroyed
together. As the iron naturally has its rust to consume it, Lips. lib. 1. de
constant. ca. 15.
and each tree its worm and rottenness, so all living creatures, all Cities,
Kingdoms, have their internal causes of decay: Consider things above or below,
all Trades or Liberal Sciences, they all ever had, and ever shall have their
perishings; and as the rivers by a continual course do empty themselves into
the Ocean, so all worldly things do slide into the Channel of destruction, as
to their mark they aim at: therefore labor not after these perishing things.

SECT. VI.
Do not expect much from these unstable Bildad speaks, Job 8.13, 14, 15. Such a
man may lean upon his house, but both he and his house will fall together; he
may hold it fast, but his hope will deceive him: Every thing under the Cope of
Heaven is but ill ground, and an ill foundation, every thing except God wants
a bottom; and cannot stand alone of it self, and therefore can give no support
to any one that shall rest or lean upon it. Oh how many are there in the world
whose hearts would die within them, were these temporal things taken from them?
take away these temporal things from those that have made them their
confidence, and they have nothing else to rest upon. All these visible things
have miscarrying wombs and dry breasts, that will deceive those that look for
much from them: the world still makes many fair promises of much good to us,
and of long continuance with us, but in performances proves contrary; it
promises joy, but comes accompanied with sorrow, and when we have most need
of its help, it will be farthest from us: Grapes never grew out of these
thorns, nor figs out of these thistles: It is not good to trust to lying
vanities, which ever deceive those that trust unto them; and God often strips
us of these uncertain things, these fading helps, and weak-hearted runawayes,
that we might place all our hope and trust in him, who never leaves nor
forsakes them that trust in him.

CHAP. VII.
I Come now to handle the second Proposition, which is this.

Prop. 2. That Heaven is a continuing City. In the prosecution of this point, I
will show you first how it is a City, then how it is a continuing City: That it
is a City, will appear by these demonstrations.

1. In a City there be diverse streets, diverse houses in those streets, wherein
some are bigger, some are lesser; a City is large and spacious; so our Savior
says, In my Fathers house (the City of the great King) are many Mansions, Joh.
14.2. It is a most magnificent City, no greatness in the world can be compared
with the greatness of it; it is the Royal Palace of the great God, who
inhabiteth Eternity, whom the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens are not able to
contain, there he vouchsafes to dwell, and in a most glorious manner to
communicate himself to his Angels, and his Saints.

2. Heaven is populous as a City: If you desire to know the number of the
Inhabitants of this City, S. John will tell you, Revel. 7.9. that he saw in
Spirit such a great company of blessed Saints (that no man was able to reckon
them) gathered together of all kinds of Nations, people and tongues, which
stood before the Throne of Almighty God, and of the Lamb, apparrelled in white
garments, and with Triumphant Palms in their hands, singing praise unto
Almighty God. Hereunto does that of the Prophet Daniel agree, Dan. 7.10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand-times ten thousand,
stood before him.

3. It is full of glorious riches as a City: It is said of Tire, that the
Merchants thereof were Princes; so all the Inhabitants of this City are Noble
Personages, there is no one among them of base Lineage or extraction, forasmuch
as they be all the Sons and Daughters of the Lord God Almighty, and instated
into a rich and glorious Inheritance.

4. It is a City compact, and at unity within it self: We must not think that
the greatness of the number of these Citizens causes any disorder among them;
for there the multitude is no cause of confusion, but of greater order; there
must needs be good agreement, there being none but God and good company there;
there is no matter of discontent or discord among the Citizens; for these
commonly arise about partition and division either of honors or offices; here
is ambition: or else of goods or possessions; here is covetousness: Now neither
of these shall ever come there; for heavens happy excess shall not be
diminished, nor any whit impaired by reason of the multitude of sharers in it;
for as S. August. tells us, the glory of heaven shall be, Tanta singulis,
quanta omnibus, such to every one in particular, as it shall be to all in
common; and although there shall be dispar gloria singulorum, yet there shall
be communis laetitia omnium; they all live so lovingly together, that they are
all as it were one heart, and one soul. All the Citizens of heaven live so
harmoniously and peaceably together, that the very City it self is called
Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace. Although all the Saints shall be like Christ in
glory, yet one Saint will exceed another in glory. God will cloathe all his
children alike, yet their garments shall be made proportionable to their
stature; all the Saints shall be Vessels of Mercy, yet one Saint shall be a
larger and a more capacious Vessel than another. Christ in his answer to that
curious request of Zebedees wife, Mat. 20.23. Granting that some shall sit at
his right hand, and others at his left in his Kingdom, implies, that there
shall be degrees of glory, to some more, to others less; they all shall have
the same glory and happiness, Ratione objecti faelicitat is and gloria non
ratione participationis: In regard of the object of happiness (God in Christ is
the object of happiness) they shall all enjoy God; but in regard of the
participation of the object, one may and shall see him more clearly than
another. In my Fathers house are many Mansions, says our Savior. Patris
Domus, the Fathers House is put for one and the same object of glory:
Pluralitas Mansionum; there be many Mansions, that shows there are diverse
degrees of glory, says Aquinas. Aquinas.
This is his comparison; there is but one Center unto which all things tend,
but some bodies are nearer than other bodies; so God in Christ is the Center of
all our happiness ( Seneca calls God, Seneca.
Animae Centrum, the Center of the Soul.) But one Saint tends more near to
God than another; one shall partake more of glory than another, Carent omni
invidia, and ^arent omni rerum ad beatitudinem necessariarum indigentia. Danae
^8.
yet notwithstanding they shall be all full of glory and happiness, as Christ
is; Christ will give to every Saint his measure of glory. Danaeus says well;
the Saints in heaven shall want envy; one Saint shall not envy another Saints
greater measure of glory, because they shall be all full of glory; and there
shall be no want of whatsoever pertains to make a creature happy: Every Saint
shall have and enjoy such fullness of happiness, that nec plus quaeret quam
habebit, nec minus habere se dolebit, quam habet: He that has the least
measure of glory shall seek for no more, nor grieve that he has so little.

5. The end of building Cities was, that people might be free from the fear of
their Enemies abroad, and live quietly among themselves at home: Now this
heavenly City is too high for any Adversary to approach to, and therefore free
from being assaulted with any Foreign Enemy: There is no Enemy can shoot an
arrow into this City, nor scale the walls, nor incamp against it, nor make any
battery in it, nor set it on fire, nor so much as draw a line about it; great
is their peace, and nothing shall offend them.

6. It is a City in respect of its Government: A City is a Corporation of men
enjoying the same privileges, living under the same Government. Heaven is a
City, says St. August. whereof the holy Angels and Saints are the Citizens,
the Eternal Father the Temple, the Son the Brightness, the Holy Ghost the Love:
How can it be ill in that City where God himself is the Governor, his will and
pleasure the Law, and none but the good Angels and Saints the Inhabitants
thereof? In this City God manifests himself gloriously, and rules
immediately, not by outward compulsion, but by taking full possession of the
soul and body of every Saint and Citizen; they esteeming it to be their glory
and happiness to be subject to him fully, he ruling in love, and they obeying
in love; he governing them as a Father, and they yielding filial subjection to
him.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw this City has a high privilege above all other Cities, it is a
continuing City. The Apostle gives the reason why it is a continuing City,
because it is a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 11.10.

1. It has foundations in the Plural number; it has many foundations, firm
and immovable, foundations that cannot be shaken.

1. It is built upon the foundation of Gods eternal good will and pleasure to
his people.

2. It is builded upon the foundation of Gods Election to eternal glory.

3. It is built upon the foundation of Christ's Eternal Merits and Purchase.

4. It is built upon the foundation of Gods everlasting Covenant of Grace.

5. It is built upon the foundation of Gods great and faithful promises: Oh
what a continuing City is heaven, that is founded upon such strong immovable
rocks and mountains of love.

II. It is said, Whose builder and maker is God.] All other Cities are builded
by mortal, corruptible, Coeli conditor est Deus, quoad formam naturae, and
Artifex ejus quoad formam gloria. Gorran in Heb. vid. Perrer. in Gene^in. and
Polan. Syntagm. p. 274.
dying men: but this City is made and builded by the eternal and immortal God,
who will uphold it by the word of his power for ever and ever; it is the place
where he will dwell, where he will govern for ever. The Psalmist tells us, God
by his excellent wisdom made the heavens, Psa. 136.5. There is no tongue able
to express the workmanship of that curious building: for if that work that
appears outwardly to our mortal eyes be so goodly and glorious, what is there
to be supposed of all the rest, that is there reserved for the sight of
immortal eyes? And if certain works of mortal men are made here so beautiful
and sightly, that they do even amaze the Spectators; what a work then must that
be, that has been wrought by the immediate hand of God himself, in that
Magnificent House, that Royal Palace, that City of joy and comfort, which he
has built for the glory of his chosen Ones? This City therefore shall continue
for ever, and they that are once in possession thereof, shall never be cast out
of those Mansions, which God has appointed them in this heavenly City.

CHAP. IX. Use 1.
Cosmopolitae, Citizens of the world, as the Heathen Philosophers did, but Our
anopolitae, Burgesses of heaven, as all the faithful have done, and carry our
selves as S. Paul professes of himself, and all his fellow-believers, saying,
Our conversation is in heaven. (...), our City-like Conversation. Nos ut
municipes Coelorum gerimus. Beza in Phil. 3.20.
Phil. 3.20. We carry our selves as the free Denizons and Inhabitants of
Heaven; so Beza renders it. In a word; as English Merchants or Citizens of
London, traveling in France, Spain, Italy, Venice, have their hearts and minds
at home with their Wives and Children, where their friends and freedoms be; so
should we from these and the like examples, learn to have heavenly minds in our
earthly Mansions, and to fix our hearts and hopes upon our heavenly City, even
while we be finishing our earthly Pilgrimage: The hopes of this happiness
sweetens our present discontents; and there is not any holy Pilgrim on earth,
who takes not courage, when he thinks that after his tedious Pilgrimage, he
shall enjoy an endless felicity in that heavenly City. What was a station in
the Wilderness among Sands, and fiery Serpents, to a settled abode in Canaan?
What is an Inn upon earth, to a man's own home in the City of the great King?
How should every one of us hasten to this City, traveling thither with all his
might, and longing to be there? Labor with a spiritual eye to take an exact
view of this heavenly City, and of the beautiful order that is therein; walk
about this Celestial Sion daily in thy Contemplations, go round about her, tell
the Towers thereof, walk through all the streets and ways therein, consider
well the beauty and glory of this City, the nobleness and worthiness of the
Inhabitants thereof; salute this sweet and pleasant Country, the Land of
Immortality, the glory of all Lands, the Haven of Security, the House of
Eternity, the Garden of never-fading Flowers, the Storehouse of all Treasures,
the Crown of the Blessed. Ah dear City! for thee have I sighed, after thee have
I thirsted for a long time, for thee have I often wept and mourned, in thee
have I a treasure more worth than the whole world, which all the world is not
able to deprive me of. I have long fate weeping by the waters of Babylon, my
Harp hangs upon the Willows, and is now silent; my mind now is all upon that
heavenly City; Lord I am greatly desirous to be with thee: Thy Court and House,
O Lord, is safe enough, and large enough, out of which all griefs and sorrows,
all pains and dolours are banished, where there is no place for fears and
terrors, for diseases or death, but all is full of joy and pleasure. Happy are
they who have passed their hard and wearisome time of Apprenticeship, and are
now Freemen and Citizens in that joyful high and continuing City, the new
Jerusalem!

CHAP. X. Use 2.
THe second use that I shall make of Will ye have everlasting life? then seek
after this City: will ye have happiness that shall continue for ever? then seek
heaven: will ye have pleasures, riches, honors, mansions, that shall continue
for ever, then seek this continuing City that is to come.

SECT. I.
Now seek after this heavenly City.

1. It supposes a sense and apprehension that we have lost heaven: we were
driven out of heaven, when we were driven out of Paradise; losing Communion
with God we lost heaven: Sin has made a wide Gulf between every son of Adam
and heaven: now till men are under conviction of this loss, they will never
seek after heaven. When the woman in the Parable was convinced of the loss of
her groat, she made earnest and diligent search after it. The Psalmist tells us
plainly, that men seek not God, because they understand not, they do not
understand they have lost him, Psalm. 14.2. Many a poor creature never comes to
the knowledge of their loss of heaven, till they have lost both heaven and
their souls for ever; and their first entrance into hell, is the first tidings
of their loss of heaven.

2. It implies a trouble of mind for the loss of heaven: it is the fear of
hell that puts men upon the diligent seeking after heaven; if men were not
troubled for the loss of any thing, they would never seek after it: Let it go,
say they, we care not for it: If a man be not troubled for the loss of a
friends favor, he will never seek to regain it: This is one reason why so few
seek heaven, because few are troubled at the loss of it. Oh where is the man
that signeth and cries out, woe is me, I am undone, for I have lost heaven,
and am in danger of hell* I can lay no claim to heaven, but hell lays claim to
me* Where is the man that is troubled in spirit, that he is without God,
without Christ, without hope? therefore it is that this heavenly City is so
little sought after: it is only the troubled spirit that is an heaven-seeking
soul.

3. It supposes a knowledge of the worth and necessity of the thing we seek
for: No man will seek for a thing of no value; let it go, will men say, such a
thing is not worth a seeking after, we can do well enough without it; but when
men are once convinced of the worth and necessity of a thing, which they cannot
be without, they will earnestly seek after it: Now if there be any thing worth
seeking for, it is this heavenly City: Who can be without heaven? Is there any
thing more precious than God? Is there any possibility for our souls to be
happy without enjoying God? Is not eternal life of unspeakable worth? What more
precious in this world than life? Is not life eternal in heaven most precious?
O who can suffer the pains of eternal death? That man will never be persuaded
to seek heaven, who never thinks it worth the having and enjoying.

4. It implies vehement desires of heaven: what a man desires not, that he
seeks not: earnest longings will put us upon seeking for every thing: in other
things desires are not seekings; but in spiritual things, earnest desires of
God and heaven, are seekings of God and heaven: For, what are heavenly desires,
but the reachings of the soul after heaven, pursuings after God? O God, thou
art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee; my flesh
longs for thee; my soul follows hard after thee, Psa. 63.1.8.

SECT. II.
In the second place I will show you, wherein this seeking does consist.

1. It consists in an earnest enquiry after the way to heaven. Isai. 55.6.
Qui quarit, vult scire, aut obtinere. Lamb. in Plaut.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; the word in the original signifies,
quaerere interrogatione and verbis, to seek by words and interrogation; as a
wandering traveller will be enquiring of all he meets the way to such a City:
So they who seek after this City that is to come, they will be very enquisitive
about the way to heaven, very desirous to be directed in the right way. How did
diverse persons come to Christ, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? What shall I do to be saved? O that my feet were directed into the ways
of thy testimonies, says David: The greatest fear of holy men, is, lest they
should be out of the way; therefore none more scrupulous and less confident
than they; none fuller of holy doubts than they, and more frequently putting
forth holy questions. Usually men are very confident that they are in the right
way to heaven, therefore they never seek out after it: It vexes them very
much, when they are put to the question; are ye sure that ye are in the right
way to heaven? I know not any thing in all the world, wherein the generality of
men are more contentedly cheated, than about their state of Grace, and their
title to Heaven, few there be who have a care to buy gold tried in the fire.

2. It consists in a diligent and industrious application of our selves to
the use of all appointed means leading and directing us to this heavenly City:
He that diligently prays, diligently seeks heaven: he that diligently
hears the Word, diligently seeks heaven* Hence in the New Testament the
Gospel is often called the Kingdom of Heaven, and seeking God is frequently
put for the worshipping of God: Gods Ordinances are a Jacobs Ladder, the top
whereof reaches to heaven, though the foot thereof be on earth; for by it we
scale heaven: The Ministry of the word are a light and a Lanthorn to our
steps, to guide our feet in the way to heaven: God has set up the Ministry as
way-marks to direct Travelers in the right way; those that neglect Gods
faithful Ministers, do neglect the seeking heaven. Take this rule or caution;
when you come to Gods Ordinances, make heaven and salvation, and seeking God
the end of your coming to them, Psa. 42.1, 2. My soul thirsts for God, for
the living God, when shall I come before God. i. e. To enjoy God in his
Ordinances; seek not so much the enjoyment of Ordinances, as of God in them.

3. It implies an application of our selves to an holy and heavenly
conversation: An holy life is the strait way which leads to heaven; heaven is
the reward of an holy and heavenly Conversation; it is not every foul dog with
his soul feet that shall tread upon the pure pavement of the New Jerusalem: He
that does not seek holiness, does not seek heaven; heaven is to be sought for
in an heavenly manner; heaven is a City hard to be won, the righteous will
scarcely be saved; hell is prepared for unholy persons, forus canes, without
ate dogs.

4. It consists in a constant use of all means, all holy duties, without
fainting or desisting, until you have found a title, and obtained a claim to
heaven. The woman in the Parable did not desist from seeking, till she had
found her groat; and the Spouse in the Canticles never gave over seeking
Christ, till she had found him whom her soul loved: He that is slothful in
seeking, may never find heaven.

5. It consists in an early and timely seeking; begin to day while it is
called to day: The greatest part of the world do but play with Religion, they
think it an easy thing to be a Christian, and that to seek God and heaven is
at the next door, and that they will be found at any time: No, no; the foolish
Virgins lost heaven by seeking it too late: Many do eternally lose heaven by
delay of seeking. I make no doubt, but all do desire heaven, nor do I make any
question but all or most of us do purpose to set some time apart to seek
heaven: Why then not presently? who knows what a day may bring forth? who
knows how soon death may arrest him? heaven is not easily found, it is not
gotten with a few words or faint wishes.

SECT. III.
Consider, I beseech you, Mot. 1.
your continuance here is but short: By what elegant comparisons does the
Scripture set forth the shortness of man's life: it is but a vapor, says S.
James; it is but a dream, it is but the shadow of a dream, said an Heathen: It
is as grass, or as a flower; it is as a tale, as a thought, as a bubble, it is
but a Race, but as a Weavers Shuttle* but for a little moment, all which things
are of a very short continuance. Have we not need then to day, while it is
called to day, without delay to seek heaven, and life which continues for
evermore? But the misery of man is great upon him, because we flatter our
selves with a kind of immortality: none so sick and weakly, but hops for a
recovery, none so aged, but thinks he shall live a while longer.

2. How long you shall continue here is uncertain; who knows when and how
soon he shall depart hence? It may be to morrow, it may be this night, or this
hour, who can tell? We do not (...) ^ither the day nor the hour when death will
come, therefore seek heaven. We have need to make haste; the time present is
yours only, the time to come is uncertain, the time past is irrecoverably gone:
who can tell what to morrow will bring forth? Peradventure death and damnation.
-- The present time is thine only, this hour, this Sermon, this opportunity,
this call from heaven, this very exhortation to seek heaven presently.

3. Or suppose our continuance upon earth to be long, even as long as
Methusaleh continued; suppose thou had the Reign of Time in thy hands, and
could slack the pace of Time at thy pleasure, yet there were no continuance
for thee always here, but die you must, and die you shall: But certainly you
have not Time at your command; you cannot command the Sun of Time to stand
still one moment, nor to go back fifteen degrees; time is irrecoverable if it
be lost: Lost money may be recovered, but occasions neglected are
irrecoverable, and will never return again.

4. Consider that properly we have no continuance here, because our lives do
not stand at a stay, but like (...) we are continually going to our graves, as
fast as the wings of Time can carry us: No motion more swift than that of the
Sun; our lives do run away as swift as the Sun it self. The Sun (that is the
measurer of time) once stood still in Joshua's days, and returned ten degrees
in Hezekiah's sickness, yet time it self ever past forward, and did never stand
with the Suns standing, nor return with his returning.

5. Consider what is the reward of our neglect of seeking heaven; even an
eternal abode in hell? For as heaven is a continuing City, so hell is a
continuing Fiery Dungeon; these flames are of eternal continuance; these Chains
of darkness are everlasting Chains; there is the Worm that never dies, the Fire
that never goes out; there is everlasting destruction. Isai. 30.33. Tophet is
ordained of old.] Hell is as old as sin; God made hell, as soon as the creature
became sinful: He has made it deep and large] here is the vastness of this
prison: it is large enough to hold all wicked men and Angels: it is deep, there
is the impossibility of escaping, of getting out of it; it is so deep, that it
has no bottom, therefore it is called the Bottomless Pit: the Pile thereof is
fire and much wood; there is the super-abundance of punishment, and the
extremity of torment; and the breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone
does kindle it. Here is the Eternity of torment, while God breathes, the fire
of hell shall burn. Now if you will escape hell, seek heaven while you may find
it: we are all hastening to a continuing City, or to a continuing prison, to an
everlasting heaven, or an everlasting hell: this glorious City, and that
burning Prison, will shortly divide the whole world of men and women between
them: beware of too earnest seeking riches, they have wings, and will flee away
from you; seek not houses and Lands, for they will not abide for ever; let not
your inward thought be, Psa. 49.11*
that your houses shall continue for ever, and your dwelling places to all
Generations: Go to Christ, walk in heavens way, get an entrance into that
everlasting Kingdom, for that and that only is the continuing City.

Now my Brethren, up and be doing; seek ye first the Kingdom of God, seek
heaven first of all; it is worth finding, worth enjoying, it will make amends
for all your toil and labor; heavenly seeking is a comfortable kind of life,
there is no comfort like that which is to be found in seeking heaven: What
comfort will it yield to a Christian in the hour of death, who can say, I have
sought, and I have found heaven? and what horror will it be to a dying sinner
that has neglected to seek after heaven, when he shall cry out, O I have lost
heaven, because I neglected to seek after it, I might have found it, had I
sought it: Oh what a fool was I, so willingly to deprive my self of this
endless glory for a few stinking lusts, and perishing vanities! Oh what a mad
man was I to bereave my self of a room in this City of Pearl, for a few carnal
and momentany delights! Oh what Bedlams are they, and Beasts in humane shape,
who for a little transitory trash, do shut themselves out of these everlasting
habitations! What intolerable Sots and senseless wretches are all such who
wilfully bar themselves out of this Palace of everlasting pleasure, for the
short fruition of worldly trifles? Therefore as the Rabbin said to his
Scholars, so say I to you; Tempus breve, opus multum, operarii pigri, pater
familias urget. We have a great work in hand, viz. our salvation, we have a
short time to do that great work in, viz. this present life; we are slow
workers in the work, and God earnestly calls upon us to give all diligence to
work out our salvation: All that is here is condemned to die, and to pass away
like a Snow-ball before a Summer-Sun; labor to wean your hearts from the
breasts of this fading world, and do not make it your Patrimony, carry your
selves like the Heirs of heaven, let the movables go, and fasten your hold
upon that immortal, incorruptible heritage that fades not away: Consider well
that our great Master, Eternity, and Judgment, and the last reckoning will be
upon us after a few moments, and there will shortly be a Proclamation by one
standing in the Clouds, that time shall be no more; this worlds span-length of
time is now drawn to less than half an inch, and even to the point of the
evening of the day of this old and grey-haired world, then a sight of him that
is invisible will obscure and darken all the glory of this world: Oh mend your
pace, and go on more swiftly toward your heavenly City; you have need to make
haste, because the inch of your life that remains will quickly slip away.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London-Bridg.
THese six Treatises next following, were written by Mr. George Swinnock.

1 The Christian man's Calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The First Part.

2 Likewise a Second Part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their
Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the Conditions of prosperity and adversity.

3 The Third and last Part of the Christian man's Calling; wherein the Christian
is directed how to make Religion his business, in his Dealings with all Men, in
the Choice of his Companions, in his Carriage in good Company, in bad Company,
in Solitariness, or when he is Alone, on a Weekday, from Morning to Night, in
Visiting the Sick, on a Dying-bed; as also the Means how a Christian may do
this, and some Motives to it.

4 The Door of Salvation Opened, by the Key of Regeneration,

5 Heaven and Hell Epitomized; and the True Christian Characterized.

6 The Fading of the Flesh, and the Flourishing of Faith: or, One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well; All these by George Swinnock, M.
A.

A Wedding Ring fit for the finger; together with the non such Professor; by W.
Secker.

Joh. Am. Comenii schola, Ludus seu Encuclopaedia viva, i. e. Januae Linguarum
praxis Comica.

The Godly Man's Ark, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven; by
Ed. Calamy.

A Practical Discourse of prayer, wherein is handled the nature and duty of
prayer; by T. Cobbet.


