A Second Letter TO Father LEWIS SABRAN, Jesuit, IN ANSWER TO HIS REPLY.

Imprimatur, hic Libellus cui Titulus (A Second Letter to F. L. S.)

December the 2 d. 1687. Jo. Battely.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1688.

A Second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply.
Reverend Sir, November. 30 th. 1687.
I Was very glad to hear yesterday of your intentions of giving me an answer to
the Letter I wrote to you five days ago; I did expect I should find something
extraordinary, and some reasons or arguments of strength sufficient to convince
the world, that even the demonstrative argument from Isidore ought to be set
aside, since you could produce evidences as strong and as positive on the other
hand; and therefore as soon as I heard it, I resolved with my self not to be
obstinate in the defense of my charge against you, but fairly and honestly to
own my mistake, if you did bring on your side any thing stronger and more
rational than what had been produced against you.

But when I this day had your Answer from the Press; the first perusal of it
sufficiently informed me, that you had not done that thing, which indeed my
private reason (I must confess) did assure me that you could not, I mean that
you had not given any thing of moment in defense of your self.

One thing I must own I was surprised at, the great alteration in your style
betwixt your two Letters. This is as blustering and abusive, as the other was
calm; you reflected in your Letter to the Honorable Lord on the insulting and
scurrilous lauguage of the Heretics, but for your self you said, far be it
from me even to return Letter to a Peer, page 9.
the like, we have no such custom, neither has the Church of God: Truth (say
you) would blush to be defended by such unwarrantable arms: but it seems your
mind is altered since, and now Truth will not blush to be so defended, and you
can make use of harsher words (which others call insolent language) in the
defense Reply, p. ^.
of Truth: but I must do you this justice to own, that you have not quitted the
resolutions of the former Letter, since what you set your self so angryly to
defend here is no Truth but a gross Error, as I shall very quickly show.

You begin your Letter in a victorious style, and reason good, since you say
you have the Opinion of all men of sense that your Letter to the Peer of the
Church of England has cleared you sufficiently of the mistake I charged you
with. I must confess I dare not deny what you say here, since I have not spoken
with the hundredth part of the men of sense in the Town to know whether it be
Truth that you write here: however thus far I dare speak, that I do not believe
it, since I am afraid that by the ALL MEN of SENSE here is meant no more than
SOME of your own party.

It was not from an inconsiderate itch of Scribbling (as you word it Reply, p. 2.
) that I reflected upon that passage in your introduction to your Sermon at
Chester. I was provoked to it from that passage's being so much cried up,
boasted of, and insisted upon as if it had been a* most genuine and a most
considerable Testimony (about Praying to the Virgin Mary) from St. Augustine:
and therefore since I was quickly satisfied that the Sermon, out of which it
was taken, was not St. Augustine's, I looked upon it as a duty I owed to the
world, and particularly to the Nobility of the Church of England (some of whom
had been urged much with that passage) to publish it to the whole Nation [in
that page that was empty at the end of my Book] that that Sermon de Sanctis out
of which it is taken, was not, nor could be St. Augustine's.

The Reasons I used there have been the subject of this Letter-Controversie
betwixt us, and though you be resolved never to take any [farther] notice of
such unknown persons, who conceal their names, yet I am resolved to defend my
first Letter to you, and I believe I shall convince the world in it, that you
ought to make some other Reply than you hitherto have, to the Demonstrative
Argument from Isidore.

The first and least considerable Reason that I urged against the Sermon was
from the Title and Subject of it. About this we have had the most ado, though I
hinted in my Letter to you that the stress of the Controversy did not at all
depend upon it. But you are resolved to insist upon this, and in your Reply you
have marshaled my reasonings for that proof first into a new Error, next into
a false Inference, then into a plain cheat and contradiction.

These are very hard words, and therefore I come now to examine how I deserve
them: It Is an Error (say you) that there was not in St. Reply, p. 3.
Augustine's time a general pious Belief of the Blessed Virgin's Assumption:
You refer me for the proof of what you say there to your Letter to the Peer:
well, I have looked into it, and am no more convinced by it yet, than I was by
my first perusal of it. The Authors named in that Paragraph Letter to a Peer,
p. 7.
you refer to are [the Supposititious Sermon of] St. Hierome, St. Hephonsus I
can meet with no Author of this name either in your or our Critics. I suppose
you mean St Ildephonsus; if you did, you should surely have corrected in your
Reply the error in your Letter.
, William Bishop of Paris, St. Bernard and others* but these cannot be the men
to show the General pious Belief of the Assumption in St. Austin's time, since
you say you find in them, that they doubted of; or disbelieved Letter to a Peer
p. 7.
her [the B. Virgin] being assumed in Body into Heaven: and methinks these
Fathers and others look like a fair argument to prove against your GENERAL
pious belief in St. Austin's time. To pass them therefore, who are either not
to the purpose here, or against your assertion; there are but two Authors more
in the Paragraph, St. Mellion's Sermon [which in your Reply has changed both
its name, and is called St. Melitons Reply, p. 3.
Book] and Nicephorus: And now I would fain know of you, Sir, how either of
these Authors prove what you assert a General pious Belief of the Assumption
in St. Austin's time: as for Nicephorus, he lived not till almost a Thousand
years after St. Austine, so that he is a most unfit Witness for such a purpose:
but here you will tell me that Nicephorus is urged by you only, to show, that
Juvenal Patriarch of Jerusalem proved the Truth of this Mystery to have been
received of very Ancient Tradition before Marcian the Emperor. To this I
answer, that Juvenal lived after St. Austine's time and therefore can be no
Witness as to his time: but passing this, the Credit of all this story depends
upon Nicephorus Callistus, who is of no Authority herein, not only because he
lived not till the fourteenth Century, but because he is a most fabulous
Writer. I have not time to insist on or urge what Monsieur Launoy has offered
against this Story, especially what he says Launoii de Controversia super
exscribendo Paris. Ecclesiae Martyrologio exorta Judicium. Paris. 1671. p. 90.
about the silence of the Historians who lived in, near, or since that time down
to Nicephorus, who is the first and only Author (according to him) that
broached that fable about Juvenal and Marcian the Emperor. I have one argument
to urge against your Juvenal, and that is, that it is impossible he could show
any such ancient Tradition for the Assumption, since it is granted that the
Writers of the Church before him never mentioned any such thing, and which is
more since, this very Doctrine about Assumption was condemned in the same
Century in a Council at Rome by Gelasius Pope with 70 other Bishops.

What I urge here concerns your Author St. Melito, the supposititious book
under whose name was condemned as Apocryphal. But pray, Sir, how do you prove
to us that this Book under St. Melito's name was before St. Austine's time? the
first news we hear of it is not till above 60 years after St. Austine's time,
and the same time that we hear of the Book, we hear of its being condemned as
an Apocryphal thing: Yet I will grant to you (what I do not believe) that the
book was older; will any man of tolerable sense argue from this Book a General
Pious Belief of the Assumption in St. Austine's time, when this very Book that
taught it was condemned as Apocryphal at Rome in the same Century Liber qui
appellatur Transitus, id est, Assumptio Sanctae Mariae, apocryphus. Council.
Romans I. sub Gelasio, An. Dom. 494. in Tom. 4. Council. p. 1264. edit. Cossar.
?

I cannot but stay here to wonder a little at your saying there, that IF this
Sermon be not S. Melito's Genuine work, it must be of some other Author nigh
those times. I can be no longer angry that you should stand up so obstinately
for the 35 th. Sermon de Sanctis, when I find you at most but dubious whether
that Book (for so I would call it) under Melito's name be genuine or no;
Whereas all the men of Learning in the Church have long since thrown it up as
spurious and Apocryphal; I have already shown how it was condemned by a Pope in
Council as Apocryphal twelve hundred years ago: Not long after that our
Venerable Bede fell most severely upon it, and lays to the charge of the
Author of it Ignorance, and downright lying: so that De La Bigne was about
striking it out of his Bibliotheca Patrum; but though he satisfied himself with
some reasons for his continuing it there, yet this is his Conclusion about it;
notwithstanding what has been said above, it is Biblioth. Patrum T. 7. p. 580.
Edit. Par. 1624.
certain that this Book is falsely ascribed to S. Melito, that it is
Apocryphal, and of no Authority, and to be altogether rejected for its
mixtures, [of Truth and falsehood.] He then tells us that the Spanish Index
Expurgatorius have ordered the whole of the Book from the 8 th. Chapter to be
expunged: and I can assure you that the History of the Assumption is the
subject of those Chapters which the Index has ordered to be struck out: And
yet you, Sir, after all this (and more which I could add) are not satisfied of
that Book's being spurious: Which thing among Learned Men I am sure will not
add any Luster to one who writes himself of the Society of Jesus, but will
satisfy the World, what sort of an Adversary I have to deal with.

Having shown that your Melito and your Nicephorus are of no Credit* and there
being no other Authors offered for my Conviction, I pray Sir, where and how
have you shown the General pious belief of the Virgin's Assumption in St.
Austin 's time: And what ground had you for your charge of a new Error in me,
when you are not able to evince the thing; all see at least that you did not
do it there.

The next charge is a false Inference; my words upon which you ground it are
these, if the Day of Assumption do not ever signify the day of a Saints Death,
why may not this be the exception? Upon this you charge me with inferring that
if Assumption do not always signify the Death of a Saint, therefore here it
may signify the Corporal Assumption of the blessed Virgin, therefore it does.
I own that this last, [therefore it doth] is not only a false but a silly
inference, but I am sure it is not mine, I only said, why may not this be the
Exception. I appeal to my words just put down, and to all Scholars whether this
be ingenuous dealing; so that your second charge is fallen.

But before you pass to your third great charge, you accuse me of a wilful
mistake in making you say that in the ancient Writings Feast or Day of
Assumption when applied to Saints did only almost always signify the day of
their Death. Well, Sir, and did not you say so your self in your first Letter;
is not the almost of your own putting in there. These are the very words you
used there; as if Feast or Day of Assumption in the Writings of Ancients, did
ALMOST EVER signify any thing else but the Letter to a Peer, p. 7.
Day of a Saints Death. I must confess, Sir, that I thought I had to do with
one who would admit of his own words, and not charge them upon his Adversary,
as if they were his; with one that understood English: but I must now take my
Lot, what ever it is.

Your next charge is of a Cheat in endeavoring to insinuate that the 35th
Sermon did not speak of the Virgin's Death, but of her Assumption in the Vulgar
sense of the word. But wherein is the Cheat, I put down there the very words of
the Sermon; well but, say you, Assumption here does only signify her Death,
and you quote a passage of the Sermon for it, which is very accurately You have
twice translated in this short passage Catholica Historia the Catholic Church.
translated: I am not thoroughly satisfied of this, and my reason is this,
because as I was, before I saw your Letter, satisfied that there was not a
necessity of taking Assumption here in the Vulgar sense, so I was fully assured
that the Author of the Sermon has determined for neither sense, but has left
it doubtful whether she were assumed Corporally or no Vera autem de ejus
Assumptione sententia haec esse probatur ut secundum Apostolum, sive in
corpore, sive extra corpus Ignorantes, assumptam super Angelos eam esse
credamus. Sermo 35. de Sanctis.
.

You next take me to task about the mistake you made in quoting the 14th Sermon
de Sanctis; and you advise me to be less rash in my Rhetorical Declamations.
But I cannot see my fault here: You did quote the 14th Sermon de Sanctis, I
went thither, and when I could not find it there, I looked into those Sermons I
mentioned in my Letter, and not finding it in any of them, I concluded it to be
your mistake, and did believe that some body had imposed upon you: I afterward
looked over all the Sermons de Sanctis, and not finding it any where, I thought
you had been deceived, and I hope it was no fault to tell you so, as I then
did. But you will have it that I was resolved to mistake you, that I might
fancy something to object against. There are (say you) but two 14th Sermons de
Sanctis, that of the first ancient Collection, and that in the other
Compilation of Seventeen made by the Divines of Paris. I am not, Sir, to be
frighted or born down with dint of Confidence. I say that it is false that
there are two 14th Sermons de Sanctis; the Sermons de Sanctis are a Body of one
and fifty Sermons, and when any one talks of or quotes such or such a Sermon de
Sanctis, we know readily whither to go. The Sermons added by the Divines of
Paris are not entitled de Sanctis either in the Louvain Edition that I use, or
in the Benedictine: And therefore when the Benedictines put one of the Paris
Sermons down in their Volume they tell us in the Margin that it is the 5th or
7th, for example, inter additos a Parisiensibus, whereas when they put down one
of the Sermons de Sanctis, they always tell us there that it is the 24th or
42d, for example de Sanctis: So that you cannot avoid seeing how you have run
your self into a new mistake by resolving to defend an old one. I am afraid you
are not so much versed in St. Austin, as your Sermon made show of, and
therefore I will give you this piece of advice, that when you meet with St.
Austin's Sermons de Sanctis quoted in your Authors, you would not quickly
swallow, but would examine a little, and be careful, since of the 51 Sermons
de Sanctis the Benedictines have rejected one and forty as spurious, and none
of St. Austins.

We are now come to the next Argument from the Manuscripts against the Sermon.
I charged you with having said nothing to the Benedictine Manuscripts which
give us no Author of that Sermon, you tell us that my charge herein is
ridiculous; and you endeavor to illustrate your answer, or rather to answer by
a Similitude taken out of the Law Courts; but so ill applied as nothing worse,
for what is possession, in this case, must a Book always belong to such an
Author, because once in his Possession; it seems the world have wronged
Arnobius in vindicating Octavius to its true Master; what say you, was it not
in his Possession; did not the Manuscripts give it to Arnobius? or how came he
to have it? what if some Manuscripts name no Author for it? This how ridiculous
soever is all you would say here; and yet you pity my weakness and pass it by,
because you love, not to insult on an erring Adversaries patent mistake:
forgetting in the mean time that while you would make what I say ridiculous,
you fall foul upon those Benedictines of Paris (whom I had it from) whose
Learning is as much known as admired, and the world too much indebted to them
for their excellent pains upon St. Augustine, whom they have published, and
upon St. Ambrose whom they are now a fitting for the Press, to think their
arguments ridiculous, because you think them so.

You next charge me with Disingenuity and real forgery in insinuating, That
this Sermon bears not his (St. Austine 's) name either in the Manuscripts used
by the Louvain Divines, or by the Benedictines, when I own my self that the
Louvain Divines only say it is not in several of their Manuscripts. Would any
one but look into that Paragraph of my Letter, whence you quote this, he will
easily see that the Louvain Manuscripts I speak of here are those that
entitled this Sermon to Fulbertus. Those Manuscripts that gave it to Fulbertus
are those I had in my eye there, when I said that the Manuscripts used by the
Louvain Divines, give it to Fulbertus instead of St. Austine. I did not say all
their Manuscripts gave it against St. Austine, but that the Manuscripts spoken
of at the beginning of the Paragraph did give it for Fulbertus.

You next ask me whether I do not egregiously destroy my own cause in appealing
to most ancient Manuscripts, [my appeal was to the most as well as to the best
Manuscripts] and the known style of the Author. I think, Sir, that I do not,
and shall think so till you show me not only that the style of this Sermon is
purely St. Austine's but that it is attributed to him in the MOST, and BEST
Manuscripts. These things you should regularly have done here, but instead of
offering at one word of this nature for my Conviction: You think you answer me
enough in asking me whether St. Thomas was not better acquainted with St.
Austine's style, than I dare presume to be: and whether he had not as great a
plenty, He and all his Contemporaries, and of fresher Manuscripts? [here must
be added, for not only the Antithesis, but the English requires it, as I
have.] But had you added this as the style requires it, every one would have
seen the great weakness of it: I have not only told you, but proved it to you
in my first Letter, that Thomas Aquinas was no Critic: But as to your
questions, you cannot be ignorant that I did not rely on my own ijudgment, or
pretend to have MSS. by me. What I have said about these things has the
assistance not only of the Benedictine, but Louvain Divines, and the Questions
you put to me do as much concern them as me, nay more: for they had those MSS.
I insisted on, and therefore for the future pray lay your accusation right; and
since the Louvain Divines are in their Graves, write a sharp reproof to those
impudent Benedictines, who have dared to understand St. Augustin's style as
well or better than Thomas Aquinas, and have had the face to pretend to such
MSS. as do oblige them to deprive St. Austin of that 35 th Sermon de Sanctis.

After all this skirmishing hitherto, we are arrived at the Argument from S.
Isidore. I urged that it was certain the 35 th. Sermon de Sanctis could not be
St. Austin's, since Isidore was quoted in it, who lived not till two hundred
years after St. Austin.

Your answer was, that the Isidore quoted in the Sermon could not be he that
lived in the Seventh Century, and your proof was from a passage in the Sermon
it self, in which the Author of the Sermon said that, In our time no Author
among the Latins can be found [is found, says the Sermon] who treating of the
blessed Virgin's Death, has been positive and express, or as I shall translate
it, to have spoken any thing expressly concerning her Death; whereas no one (you
add) could be ignorant of what so famous an Author as S. Gregory of Tours had
in his History plainly and fully written in the sixth Age.

This I answered in my last, by telling you that the Author of this Sermon
might either not know, or not regard Gregory of Tours; and urged the instance
of St. Bernard, who notwithstanding Gregory's most full account of the
Assumption, either doubted or disbelieved it; upon which I concluded that St.
Bernard as well as the Author of the 35th Sermon de Sanctis did either not
know, or not regard Gregory of Tours. Against this plain and full answer you
have made several objections: first you say, no one could be ignorant of what
Gregory of Tours had written in the sixth Age; This is, Sir, affirming without
proving; and though a contrary affirmation is sufficient against such a proof,
yet I gave you there not only the Instance of the Author of this Sermon,
which I can certainly prove to have been written much after Gregory's time, but
the Instance of St. Bernard. I will add but one more to them, which I question
not will satisfy all reasonable persons.

Isidore of Sevil lived in the beginning of the seventh Century, and is allowed
by all to have lived at the beginning of it, and to have been not only near
Gregory of Tour's time, but near his Country, and therefore to have had the
best opportunities of knowing this famous History, you so much insist on: and
yet these are his words at the end of his account of the Life of the Virgin
Mary; no History informs us particulary that Mary suffered Martyrdom by the
Sword, nor is her Death ANY WHERE READ of, nor her Burial Specialiter tamen
nulla docet Historia Mariam gladii animadversione peremptam, quia nec obitus
USPIAM legitur, dum tamen nec reperiatur sepultura. Isidorus Hispal. de Vita
and Morte SS. number. 68. p. 168. Edit. Paris 1580.
to be found any where. As this Instance shows that Isidore was ignorant of
Gregory of Tour's writing [and therefore no wonder that others were, who lived
farther from his time,] so it holds as strong against the forged Melito and St.
Hierom: and shows that Isidore was equally ignorant of them all, or looked upon
them as so very fabulous and Apocryphal, that not one of them did deserve the
name of an History.

And therefore as to the Equivocation that I make Fulbertus guilty of, when I
make him say Nobody writ of such a Subject positively, only meaning that what
was written was not true; I must tell you, Sir, that you wrong me very much in
this passage; your only meaning that what was written was not true, is a very
great misrepresentation of my words: I did insist there upon Fulbertus 's not
knowing, as well as not regarding Gregory of Tours. I need only to put down my
own expressions used in that Letter to let the world see how I am used by you.
My words were these in relation to Gregory of Tours; It is no error to suppose
the Author of that Sermon had never seen Gregory of Tour's book, and therefore
might have that expression concerning no Latin Author treating of the Virgin
Mary's Assumption: or we may very well suppose that if he had, he reckons his
Story among those Apocryphal ones which were Letter to F. Sabran, p. 7.
THEN WRIT, but REJECTED by the Church of God. Whosoever will compare these
expressions of mine and your charge, will easily see that there was no
equivocation on my part but a great deal of misrepresenting on yours.

Your next charge against me is as true; and you tell me that you never said
(as I intimate) that St. Bernard disbelieved the blessed Virgin's Assumption. I
cannot but wonder at such strange behavior; whether you or I am the guilty
person here, will quickly be seen by putting down both our words about this in
the two Letters, which I will set one against the other, that all may see the
Truth or falsehood of this accusation.

F. Sabran's Expressions in the Letter to a Peer, p. 7. -- St. Bernard and
others writ Sermons on our B. Lady's Assumption; although in those very
Orations we find they DOUBTED OF, or DISBELIEVED her being assumed in Body into
Heaven.

My Expressions in my Letter to F. Sabran, p. 7. -- and not in St. Bernard, who
so very long after either DOUBTED or DISBELIEVED the Story of the ASSUMPTION
[in the vulgar corporal sense.]

It is time to return to the business of St. Isidore; you had said in your
Letter to the Peer* that there were several Isidores before St. Austin, and
that the Isidore quoted here in the 35 th Sermon must be one of them: to which
I answered, that though there were never so many Isidores before St. Austin,
yet can you, or dare you offer to show that any of them were Writers? All the
Answer you give in your Reply to this is, that it is childish. But is it, Sir,
really so? the Isidore quoted was a Writer; I demanded of you to show that any
Isidore before St. Austin was a Writer* I do not wonder at your being
disordered at this Question, though all the World cannot but see how very fair
and reasonable: but the mischief is, neither St. Hierom, nor Bellarmine make
mention of any such a Writer before St. Austin: and therefore it was the
wisest, because the best answer that could be given to say mine was childish.

But that I might drive you from so weak a pretense, I told you that we are
certain that the Isidore quoted in the Sermon is He that lived in the Seventh
Century; and that if you did look into the Louvain Edition, when you wrote your
Letter to the Peer, you could not have missed seeing what Book of his the
Passage is taken from. Your Reply to this is very short, you say it was
answered in your first Letter; what? answered before it was objected, I said
not a syllable in my Postscript, nor you in your Letter to the Lord about what
Book of St. Isidore this passage is taken from, or that the Book was mentioned
in, and might be seen in the Louvain Edition; and yet you tell me that you have
answered this in that Letter. But I easily see what it is that you mean by the
Answer; it is, I suppose, that which you next insist on in the Reply, that the
citation of Isidore could not be made out to be taken out of the Book cited by
the Louvain Divines, the doubt there proposed being obvious, having been made
Reply, p. 7.
before St. Austin 's time by St. Epiphanius. I would fain know, Sir, what we
must gather hence, is it, that because the doubt was made by Epiphanius before
St. Austin's time, therefore it was not made by Isidore, who lived so long
after St. Augustin's time: or is it because the doubt was made then by
Epiphanius, therefore it could not be made by Isidore afterward. Either I see
no Logic, or no sense here; and certainly, Sir, it is neither inconsistent,
nor impossible, nor improbable that Isidore should in the seventh Century make
such a doubt about the words of Simeon, as St. Epiphanius had made in the
fourth. But all this illogical fluttering is to no purpose, our debate is not
about the doubt it self, or the sense or words of the passage, but whence the
passage it self is taken; out of what Author, and out of what Book the words
in the 35 th Sermon de Sanctis are borrowed; and here, that I might put an end
to the Excursions about things of no moment to the Controversy, and fix you, I
did refer you to the Book, Chapter and Page in Isidore out of which the passage
in the Sermon is taken. But to this I find not a syllable of answer made, nor
the least notice taken of it; so that I should have suspected that your half
hour had been out, which you were willing Reply, p. 1.
to cast away upon answering me, and therefore that you would say no more to
me, did I not see that you had time still for a whole Page after this.

Whatever was the occasion of this Neglect, whether it was because you had not
one word to reply to such a demonstrative Evidence, or for some other Reason, I
will not trouble my self to guess; I intend not to be put off thus: and
therefore I am resolved that you shall see the Passage in Isidore, and before
it, what the Benedictines as well Louvain Divines have said about the 35 th.
Sermon de Sanctis, which is the Subject of the Debate betwixt us. The Louvain
Divines having thrown this Sermon into their Appendix as spurious, and having
placed i^ the 83 d in their Appendix give this account of it. This Sermon was
the 35th. de Sanctis, but in Fuit, 35. de Sanctis, sed in plerijque
Manuscriptis exemplari^us tribuitur Fulberto Carnotensi Epi^copo citat autem
Isidorum ex opere de Vita et obitu Sanctorum. Append. ad Tom. 10. Augustini p.
631. Edit. C^l^^. Agripp. 1616.
very many Manuscript Copies it is attributed to Fulbertus Carnotensis. It
quotes Isidore out of his Work concerning the Life and Death of the Saints.

The Benedictines of Paris in their Edition lately come over have also placed
it in their Appendix, as none of St. Austin's and their Judgment about it is
thus delivered there: [This Sermon is the Work] of some uncertain Author* who
quotes (...)doris qui multum Augustino re^entiorem Isidorum ^x Opere de Vita
and Obitu Sa^^^do^^am In nostris Codi^ibus M S.M S. habetur ab^que nomine
au^^oris. At (...) Lovaniensium pleri^que ut (...)ant, Manuscriptis (...)ur
Fulberto Epi^copo Carnotenti Praef. (...) 2^8. in Append. Tom. 5. p. 343. Edit.
Benedict. Paris. 1683.
Isidore, who is MUCH LATER than S^* Austin, out of his Work concerning the Life
and Death of the Saints. We have it in our Manuscripts without the name of any
Author: but in very many of the MSS. of the Louvain Divines, as they
themselves observe it is attributed to Fulbertus Carnotensis. Having now given
you, Sir, the Judgment of the Louvain Divines as well as of the Benedictines in
their own words. I will next produce the Passage as it is in Isidore himself,
and as it is in the Sermon; that so you may see which Isidore it is about whom
so much noise has been made:

The Words in the 35 th. Sermon de Sanctis. H^nc and Isidorus, Incertum est,
inquit, per hoc dictum, utrum gladium Spiritus, an gladium dixerit
persecutionis. Sermon. 208. in Append. Tom. 5. p. 344. Edit. Paris. 1683.

The Words of Isidore himself. Quod quidem incertum est, utrum pro Martyrii
gladio dixerit an pro Verbo Dei valido et acuto prae omni gladio ancipiti.
Isidorus Hispai. de Vita and Morte Sanctorum c 68. p. 168. Edit. Paris. 1580.

I can see no place left now for Cavil, but this one, That the Words here put
down are not exactly the same in the Sermon, and in the Book: But such a Cavil
will neither be offered at, nor admitted by any Person of Learning, since every
learned Man knows that it is the frequent practice of those who cite other Men's
Works, sometimes to keep exactly to the words of the Author cited, sometimes
to contract them, and sometimes to give only the Sense of them: The Author of
this Sermon is an instance of this last Method, who though he has contracted and
partly changed the Words of Isidore, yet he has given us the Sense of them;
which no body can deny to be that set down in the Sermon, That it is uncertain
whether by the Sword which Simeon said should pierce through the Virgin Mary 's
Soul, is meant the Sword of the Spirit, or the Sword of Persecution.

I hope Sir, that after such invincible evidence against the Sermon's being St.
Austin's, you will at last forsake your wilful mistake; if such Arguments
cannot persuade you, it must be because you are resolved not to be persuaded
herein. I must, before I end this, take notice of your last Charge against me
of imposing upon unthinking Readers when I represent that your Assertion was
false, when you said that the Divines of Louvain did assert to St. Austin the
18th. Sermon de Sanctis. I do own my words there, and since you will force me,
I do affirm it a second time that Your Assertion is false: and my farther
Reason for it I will now give you here. The Divines of Louvain in their Censura
generalis [which you may find on the back of their Title page to the Tenth Tome
of St. Austin's Works] have distinguished all the Sermons of that Volume into
three sorts: in the first sort they reckon those Sermons which did certainly
appear to be St. Austin's, and them they put in the Volume with St. Austin's
name before them. They next reckon those Sermons which are certainly not his,
these Sermons they cast into the Appendix as spurious: their third sort are
those which are doubtful, which they leave in the Volume, but without St.
Austin's name to them to distiuguish them from the certain ones. With this
information therefore we will look for the 18 th. Sermon, we find it indeed in
the Volume, but without St. Austin's name to it; so that it is certain from
this very Circumstance that the Louvain Divines looked upon it as dubioas, and
therefore did not prefix St. Austin's name to it, but put that note before it
which I mentioned: I need add no more to so plain a proof; as to your offering
me Natalis Alexandre's Opinion, I have here proved that if he did assert the
same thing, he was then as much mistaken as you. But pray, Sir, how come you to
urge me with N. Alexandre? I had thought you had known that you are
excommunicate sine ulla alia declaratione, if you either read or kept his Books.

You lastly put me in mind of the Business about Invocation, and your Challenge
and Charge thereupon: I will be as good as my word, and will undertake that, as
soon as this Controversy is either ended or dropped.

You are so angry at parting that I cannot but take notice of it; and therefore
will be careful to avoid a thing so indecent. If I have but given you hard
Arguments for your hard Words, I have gained my Design. I am,

Reverend Sir, Your Friend and Servant in all Christian Offices.

Advertisement.
THE same day that F. Sabran's Reply to my last Letter was published, there
came out a pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of
England, etc. wherein I am accused of being a Papist. I am sufficiently certain
that it came out of the same Printer's hands that F. Sabran's Reply did, and
that it is from a Popish hand. I do here promise the World a speedy Vindication
of my self from that Calumny, wherein I will show that the Author of that
Letter is as good at Misrepresentations, as at stealing a Nubes Testium out of
Natalis Alexandre.

FINIS.

