Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling. S. T. P. Rev. in Christo. Pat. D Gilb. Episc. Land. sac.
domestic.
Ex Aed. Sab. Jun. 22. 1663.
A BRIDLE FOR THE TONGUE; OR, A Treatise of ten Sins of the Tongue. viz.
Cursing, Swearing, Slandering, Scoffing, Filthy-speaking, Flattering,
Censuring, Murmuring, Lying and Boasting.


SHOWING, The nature of these sins, and how many ways men may be guilty of
them; with the Causes and Aggravations of them, and Remedies against them:
Together with many Considerations, Rules, and Helps for the Right ordering of
the Tongue: Diverse common places succinctly handled, and diverse Cases cleared.

By William Gearing Minister of the Word.

Solicitam ori tuo custodiam pone, non enim est quicquam in nobis, quo facilius
peccare possumus, quam lingua. Hier. Epist. ad Demetriad. London, Printed by R.
H. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Sign of the Three Crowns over against the Great
Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside. 1663.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief
Justice of his Majestyes Court of Common Pleas, etc. and to the virtuous Lady
his wife.
Right Honorable.
AS Man is a reasonable creature, so is speech given to him by God to express
his reason, and a tongue to utter that expression: Brute creatures can make a
noise, but man only can articulate his voice; his mind provideth the matter,
his breath the convoy, and his tongue frames distinct and significant words
and syllables, and carries the sense of our minds from us by the ear to the
heart of others: The Tongue is the secretary of the mind, and the Interpreter
of the heart; it is the great huckster by which we negotiate and traffic one
with another. Plin. not. histor lib. 7 cap. 16.
The Teeth, says Pliny, serve not only to grind our meat for our daily food
and nourishment, but necessary also they be for the framing of our speech: the
fore-teeth stand us in good stead to rule and moderate the voice by a certain
concent and tunable accord, answering as it were to the stroke of the Tongue;
and according to that row and rank of theirs wherein they are set, as they are
broader or narrower, greater or smaller, they yield a distinction and variety
in their words, cutting and hewing them thick and short, framing them pleasant,
plain, and ready, drawing them out at length, or smothering and drowning them
in the end: but when once they be fallen out of the head, man is bereaved of
all means of good utterance, and explanation of his words: Therefore God in
Scripture threatens to strike the wicked on the cheek-bone, Percutire maxillam,
figura quasi proverhiali significat poenam cum ignominia and dedecore
conjunctam. Drus. observe lib. 3 cap 5.
and to break the teeth of the ungodly. Psalm. 3.7. And to smite on the
cheek-bone, and break out the teeth, says Drusius, signifies in a proverbial
speech, a punishment joined with reproach and infamy. The Tongue has no Rein
by nature, but hangs loose in the midst of the mouth, taking that hollow
place as its appointed limits for the nimbleness thereof. Man has many
importers, his ears, his eyes, and all his senses in their several employments,
but only one exporter, sc. the Tongue, and that finds work enough to utter all
their reports.

The Tongue in Scripture is called Man's Glory; but alas! foolish man turns
his glory unto shame; he has no member more fit to honor God, and edify his
Neighbor; and none whereby God is more dishonored, and Mankind more injured:
Most commonly when Gentlemen meet, they talk of their Hawks and Hounds, their
Feasts and Banquetings, their pleasures, sports, and pastimes; when Gentlewomen
meet, they talk of their Attires and Habits, new fashions and new fangles: when
Husbandmen meet, their discourse is how the year will fall out, what the price
of Corn and Cattle is: Neighbors can meet together to confer about
Town-business; but God is quite forgotten, Clara cum laud la^^it a. Gloss. in
Romans 16.
as a dead man out of mind: Some indeed (for fashion sake) will a little talk
of God, but it is in a cold and dead manner without any life at all, not
talking of him with delight: Men nowadayes count it a shame to them to read the
Scriptures, to pray, to entertain one another with holy discourses, for fear of
being talked of by others; so carrying the light in a Thieves Lanthorn: Whereas
wisdoms Maidens of honor will cry in the Marketplace; Prove. 9.3.
and whosoever has the Law of God in his heart, cannot but speak of him and
not be ashamed. But alas! if ever men's tongues were set on fire with hell, it
is in this age: and if profaneness, slanders, revilings, lying, blasphemies,
scoffings, oaths and execrations, were taken out of men's words, how few would
remain! but pertinent and profitable speech that savoureth of grace and
godliness is as rare as the other abounds.

Physicians take great notice of the tongue, judging thereby of the health or
sickness of the body: so our words show plainly the qualily of our souls; and
as a vessel is known by the sound, whether it be whole or broken; so are men
proved by their speech, whether they be sound or rotten at heart: Holy tongues
are always desirous to be speaking good, to speak of Gods name, which to do,
is truly to sanctify it, Polan. Syntag. cap. 10. de lege.
says Polanus: This is the practice of the glorified Saints, and must be ours:
A Father takes most delight, in his child, when it can talk of him, and with
him; so God loves to hear us praising him, and making him our song: And as the
Bees mingle nothing in their little mouths but honey; so should our tongues be
always honied with the love of God, and to feel no pleasant sweetness, but to
hear the praises of God pass through our mouths, with so daily thankfulness for
all our blessings, that some honey-dew may pass into the hearts of the hearers.
It Is good to speak of God reverently, not to show our own eloquence; but with a
spirit of humility to distill the precious balm of true devotion, sometime into
the ears of one, sometime of another, which must be done sweetly by way of
inspiration; for mavelous it is, how much a sweet and amiable persuasion to
any good, is of force to attract the hearts of men unto it. Words are not to be
affected by us for curiosity or vain glory: to what end says St. Augustine, is
a golden key, if it open not what we desire? and what hurt if the key be of
wood, so it do the deed which the other cannot? seeing all that we expect from
a key, is but to open what before was shut up: therefore all painted and gaudy
words must be avoided, that edify not. A good man had rather his words go forth
in a plain dress, then in the garb of an Harlot. But albeit our words are to be
without vain affectation, yet Rhetorical and Hyperbolical expressions are
sometime useful and excellent: such speeches as are according to the rules of
Art, which are laid down in Rhetorique, which delivers rules of elegant
speech; and what is according to Art, must needs be lawful, useful, and
commendable. 1. Because the Arts are gathered out of the creatures by the
wisdom of God which is in the creatures, or from the diverse actions and
affections of the creatures, working according to the severa ends they are
directed unto; which ends are good, as may appear by the examination of
particular Arts, as Logic, natural Philosophy, Astronomy, etc. This elegant
kind of speaking God has given to some men more then others, according to the
wisdom and passionateness of affection bestowed on them; indeed this kind of
speech is the most excellent of all other; and we shall observe that the most
lofty writings of the Scriptures are written in this style; as the book of the
Canticles is a continual Allegory; and why was David called the swee-singer of
Israel? was it not for that the Psalms of all other Scriptures are most full of
Metaphors, Allegories, Hyperbolies, etc. So the Songs that are in Scripture,
and the Books of the Prophets do abound with these figurative sentences. 2,
Because the Arts do not contradict each other; for what is true in one Art is
not falsified by another Art; and what is true in Logic, Grammar, etc. is not
false in Rhetoric or Theology. 3. All Arts are subservient to Divinty; She is
the Mistress, the rest are the handmaids; therefore this is to be noted, that
we are not always bound to strict propriety of speech, but have liberty
allowed us out of the word of God to adorn our speeches with figurative
sentences: He is rightly eloquent says Cicero, who observing a decorum, and
tempering his style according to his person, can speak fitly, fully and
fluently of all things, temperately of mean things, and weightily of matters of
importance.

As for prolixity and shortness of speech, either may be used commendably in
their time; as Mariners sometime sail with large spread, and sometime with
narrower gathered sails: we should affect rather to be great doers then great
speakers: It is said of our Savior, he began first to do, and after to teach.
Act. 1.1. Didac. Stell. de contemp. mundi.
It is a monstrous thing for a man to have his tongue larger then his hand. God
has made the tongue of man less then his hand: and closed it up in his mouth,
teaching him thereby to use but few words, and many deeds, speak little and do
much: and Solomon tells us, that in the multitude of words there wants not
sin. Prove. 10.19. Emyssen says: there is as much difference between saying and
doing, as between leaves and fruit: He that says only, is like the Figtree in
the Gospel, which brought forth leaves only: He that does also, is like Aarons
rod which brought forth blossoms and Almonds: Blossoms as leaves, and Almonds
as fruits: that man only knows to speak well, that has learnt to do well.
The Scripture mentions three Tongues which are in every well disposed man. 1.
The tongue of the heart; loqui veritatem in cord suo; for a man to speak the
truth in his heart. Psalm. 15.2, 2. The tongue of the mouth; non agere dolum in
lingua sua, ver. 3. 3. The tongue of our works: the works which I do, says
Christ, they bear witness of me, Joh. 10.25. God little regards words without
works; for he is not as Mercury, to whom Tongues only are offered in Sacrifice:
Better it is with the Lacedaemonians to do well, then with the Athenians to
speak well.

Yet the speaking little, so much commended in Scripture, is not to be
understood of few words only, but that we should not speak many unprofitable
words; for in matters of speech, the quality, not the quantity is to be
regarded; but the two extremes are to be shunned: for too much to play the
sullen, refusing to contribute to familiar discourse in good company, seems
to have a distaste or a disdain; so to talk always, not affording any
opportunity to others to speak, savoureth of vain glory and vanity; Multa non
multum. Multa dicendo nihil dicunt. August.
so that Balaams Ass spoke more to the purpose then such men do: Speech is
often like unto coin, which passes for current, not in regard of the metal
only, but of the stamp that is set upon it.

Now the design of this Treatise which I humbly dedicate to your honors, is
to set forth the evils of the Tongue, and more particularly of ten sins of the
Tongue; to show the nature of those sins, the several branches, the mischiefs,
and aggravations of them, with remedies against them, whereunto I have added
diverse considerations, rules, and helps for the government of the tongue,
showing also wherein the right ordering of the Tongue consists, all which is
fitted to the times, as the ingenuous Reader will well discern.

Right Honorable,
I Have made bold to send this slender Treatise into the world, under your
honors name and patronage, which I have presumed to do, understanding the
goodness of your dispositions to be such, that I cannot in the least doubt, but
that you will pardon my boldness, and cherish this small spark and evidence of
my unfeigned affection to your Honors. My Lord! Judges and Magistrates are
fingers of that great hand that governs the world; the Gods of the earth to
be dispensers of Gods mercy to good men, and executioners of his judgments
upon evildoers: Compassion is the handle, Justice the edge, and Mercy the
point of the Magistrates sword: the Magistrate is a common servant for the
common good and wealth of all; and he is a happy man indeed, that lives least
for his own, and most for the good of others; it is the right use of authority,
when Governors respect not their own ends in public actions, nor wear the
sword of Justice in their own sheath, as I hear your Lordship does not.

Whereas many in high places make Tacitus their Gospel, studying Lucian more
than the old Testament, and Macchiavel then the New; your Lordship knows that
there is no Nobility like to the New Birth in Christ, no Beauty like to the
beauty of the Daughter of Sion, who is all glorious within; no Honor to the
Service of God; no Glory to the Cross of Christ, no Gain like Godliness, no
Treasure to that which is laid up in Heaven; no clothing to the righteousness
of Christ; no Ornament to the ornament of Humility and Meekness; no Crown to
that of Immortality; no kingdom to the Conquest of our Selves; no Learning to
the knowledge of Christ, no Wisdom to that of the Spirit; no Joy to that of a
good conscience, no Life to a Heavenly conversation. The Lord grant that you
may always account it to be more honor to you to be a servant of God, then a
Judge over men; as Theodosius the Emperor esteemed it more honor to be
Membrum Ecclesiae, then Caput Imperii, a Member of the Church of Christ, then
Lord of the World; and that you may be like unto Moses; who as he pleaded the
cause of God to the people with the sword of Justice, so he pleaded the cause
of the people to God with the tears of Mercy; for good Governors should have
manus ad clavum, oculos ad astra, their hands at the Stern, and their eyes to
Heaven. The Lord continue your Lordship long to execute judgment and justice
among us, which even the Heathens acknowledge to be mentem Dei, Harmoniam
Caeli, and concordiam mundi; and enrich you Both with all Heavenly blessings:
So prays (my Lord and Madam)

Your Honors in all Gospel-Services to be commanded. W. GEARING.
From my Study at Mayfield in Sussex. August 24. 1663.
Index Rerum.
CHAP. I. Text. James 1.26. opened. CHAP. II. A Point of Instruction raised.
CHAP. III. The Point confirmed by five Reasons. CHHP. IV. Shows in diverse
particulars how much men fail in the government of their Tongues. CHAP. V. Of
the cursing tongue. Sect. 1. Cursing defined. Sect. 2. The greatness of this
sin showed in eight particulars. Sect. 3. How severely God punishes cursers,
showed in five things. Sect. 4. An objection about Noah's, Job's, David's,
Elijah's cursing, answered in five things. A question about Ministers
denouncing curses against the wicked, resolved.
CHAP. VI. Of the swearing Tongue. Sect. 1. Of common swearing, men are guilty
of it two ways: Two objections of common swearers answered. Sect. 2. Of the
aggravations of this sin of common swearing showed in four things. Sect. 3. Of
idolatrous swearing, showed in two things: The greatness of this sin showed
four ways. Two objections answered. Sect. 4. Of perjury and false swearing:
the greatness of the sin, and of its punishment. Sect. 5. Of the great
judgments threatened against swearers. Sect. 6. The objection of those that
deny the use of all kinds of oaths answered; how oaths must be qualified,
showed in three things. Sect. 7. Magistrates stirred up to suppress rash and
common swearers.
CHAP. VII. Of the slandering Tongue. Sect. 1. Slandering defined; six ways
men may be guilty of this sin. Sect. 2. The greatness of this sin showed in
four things. Sect. 3. How men do speak evil of God himself, showed in four
things. Sect. 4. Of speaking evil of Rulers and Dignities. Sect. 5. Of
slandering Gods Ministers, and defaming Gods people: The greatness of this sin
showed five ways. An objection answered in four things. Sect. 6. Of the causes
of slandering others in General, and of the people of God in special. Sect. 7.
Of the means to prevent this sin of slandering. Sect. 8. An exhortation to the
patient bearing of the reproaches of the wicked.
CHAP. 8. Of the scoffing Tongue. Sect. 1. Shows that men may be guilty of
scoffing seven ways. Sect. 2. Of the greatness of this sin showed in four
things. Sect. 3. Of the severity of Gods threatenings against scorners, showed
in diverse particulars. Sect. 4. The Remedies against this sin of scorning.
CHAP. 9. Of the filthy Tongue. Sect. 1. The greatness of this sin of filthy
speaking, showed in eight particulars. Sect. 2. Of the cure of this sin; four
remedies against it.
CHAP. X. Of the flattering Tongue. Sect. 1. Flattering defined. Sect. 2.
Shows that men may be guilty of this sin five ways. Two questions about the
performance of promises answered. Sect. 3. Of the greatness of this sin of
flattering showed in seven things; Of the mischief it does to those that are
deceived by it, showed in diverse parculars. Sect. 4. Of the cure of this sin of
flattering.
CHAP. XI. Of the censuring Tongue. Sect. 1. Censuring defined Men may be
guilty of censuring others seven ways. Sect. 2. Shows that men may be
censurers of the word of God three ways. Sect. 3. Sets down five causes of
this sin of censuring. Sect. 4. Of the aggravation of this sin showed in four
things. Sect. 5. An objection touching judicial proceedings answered; How a man
may suspect or judge evil of another, in two things, amplified by diverse
instances; an objection answered; all rash judgment condemned. Sect. 6. Of the
cure of this sin; of the great difference between censuring men's persons and
their actions; what things are subject to man's judgment, and what are not.
CHAP. XII. Of the murmuring Tongue. Sect. 1. Murmuring defined. Four ways men
may be guilty of this sin. Sect. 2. Of the greatness of this sin showed in six
things. Sect. 3. Five aggravations of this sin. Sect. 4. The remedies againg
this sin of murmuring.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Lying Tongue. Sect. 1. Lying defined, and distinguished. 1.
From an untruth. 2. From Hyperbolies, Parables, and Ironies. 3. From feigning
and simulation. 4. From the concealment of the truth. Sect. 2. Of the sporting
lie. Sect. 3. Of the officious lie, many objections answered. Sect. 4. Of the
pernicious Lie; eight aggravations thereof. Sect. 5. Of the many sins that meet
together in this sin, and of the causes of lying. Sect. 6. Of the hainousness
of this sin, showed in eight particulars. Sect. 7. Equivocation, and Popish
mental reservation condemned. Sect. 8. Nine Remedies against this sin of Lying.
CHAP. XIV. Of the boasting Tongue. Sect. 1. Boasting defined: Six things men
are apt to boast of. Sect. 2. Of the greatness of this sin, and how many sins
meet together in the sin of boasting. Sect. 3. Of the cure of boasting, four
Remedies against it.
CHAP. XV. Diverse considerations to stir us up to the brideling and moderating
of our Tongues. CHAP. XVI. Shows wherein the right ordering of the Tongue
consists. CHAP XVII. Diverse Rules laid down for the better governing of the
Tongue. CHAP. XVIII. Sets down ten Helps aad means for the government of the
Tongue: Some Objections answered by the way.
A BRIDLE FOR THE TONGUE.
CHAP. I. Jam. 1.26. If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth
not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain.
THe Apostle having showed, that every good and perfect gift comes down from
God. ver. 17. and that these spiritual gifts are conveyed by the preaching of
the Word: He comes in the next place to press it as a duty incumbent upon all
to wait upon the preaching of the Gofpel, as the means that God has appointed
for the obtaining of Grace. ver. 19. he says, let every one be swift to hear:
that is to hear what God says unto him in his word; and slow to speak; that
is, against that word that meets with the most secret corruptions of his
heart: in ver. 21. he shows the manner how we should come to the Word,
pressing all to come with due preparation thereunto: showing also how we should
carry our selves in hearing, and after hearing, not satisfying our selves with
bare hearing; but to mind an after duty, to receive with meekness the
engraffed word; or so to receive it, that it may become an engraffed word, and
be able to save our souls; for it is not the bare knowing and receiving the
Word into the ear, that will make men happy; but he that is a doer of the work,
as well as a hearer of the word, that man shall be blessed in his deed. ver. 22
26.

Here the Apostle speaks against some that did seem to be Religious, and yet
did not take any care to keep their tongues in order, whence we may take
notice, that here is,

1. A supposition, that some may seem to be Religious, and yet want the truth
of Religion in heart, life, and conversation. This seeming to be Religious, you
may know what he means by it, by the verses foregoing: they seemed to desire
to hear the mind, and to know the will of God, Sometime the word (...) he
thinks or he seems, is a mere expletive particle without any signification.
Mar. 10.42. Mat. 20.25. Hoord. in Ephesians. 4.30.
as if they would serve him, when their hearts were not brought over to him:
the Apostle compares them to those that having beheld their faces in a Glass,
going away, do straight way forget what manner of men they were, showing the
danger of being such formal hearers, and no more: by a similitude, comparing
them to men that come into a Barbers shop, or some other place, where there
hangs up some pure Chrystal-Glass, wherein they look and view themselves, but
never mark what is amiss in them, much less take any care to amend it; such be
they that come to hear Sermons, where the clear and pure Glass of Gods word
lays before them the ugliness of their sins, and the deformity of their lives,
but they have no care to reform and redress any thing, and so going away as bad
as they came, are never the better for coming: Crook's Hypocr. Part. 1. Chap.
15.
one calls them Religious, because they make a show of Religion; yet
Hypocrites, because this is but a show without the life of Godliness.

2. Here is a sin that many are guilty of, that yet seem to be Religious; and
that is, the not bridling of the tongue; it is a Metaphor taken from unruly
Beasts, because by putting Bits and Bridles upon them, and into their mouths,
we turn them about as we please: hereby he gives us a hint how disorderly a
creature an unbridled tongue is, when it is not kept in the bounds that God
has set for it; The tongue is an unruly evil, that no man can thoroughly tame.
Jam. 3.8. the tongue is the helm or rudder of the whole man; at this Helm ought
every Christian carefully to sit, that he may bridle the whole body: The Holy
Professors of the Word, must endeavor thereby, not only to reform their
actions, but also to reform their speeches, and moderate their tongues, Turhull
in hunc locum.
that they fall not into those vices whereunto the Godless tongue is given.

3. You may take notice, that those who have a seeming show of Religion, who
yet take no care of their tongues, their Religion is but seeming, there is no
truth nor reality of Religion in them: so that he that comes to the Word, and
takes no care to bridle his tongue, he deceives his own heart; that is, says
Aquinas, by thinking this shall not be counted any great fault: Aquinas ad loc.
and this is the greatest deceit of all other, when men deceive themselves, or
their own hearts deceive them: this is the greatest danger, because the heart
is the greatest Impostor; therefore says Moses, Deuteronomy. 11.16. Take heed lest
your own hearts deceive you.

4. This shows the vanity and emptiness of such men's Religion; there is no
power at all in it, such Religion is vain: the word here translated Religion,
is in the Greek (...) signifying Worship, comprehending both (...), and (...),
as Pareus Pareus.
has noted: the Latin word is Religio, and the word is usually rendered in
English, Religion; and whosoever cleave unto God with a sincere faith and
worship, call upon, and serve one God lawfully, they are rightly termed
Religious, says Bullinger: Bullinger decad. 4. Sermon. 5.
Now Religion where it is in power, it will bind the tongue to the good
behavior, and the whole man, so that nothing be spoken or done to the
dishonor of, or as may be unbeseeming the profession of Religion: One says,
Torshels. Hypocr.
that many men have a form, they receive a Mark, but refuse a deep stamp and
impression; the Mark is a seeming to be Religious; the deep stamp is the
bridling of the tongue, etc. And he that bridleth not his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain, Se alcuno fra voi si pensa essex Religioso, e non r^ffrena la
ua lingua, ma dif ^iail fuo cuore (i. e. in ganna) la Religion di Costui e
vana. Ital. Some will have Religio to be derived a Relinquendo, because we
leave false Gods, all errors, and earthly desires, and seek after the true God
and Heavenly things: But M. Cicero supposes that Religio is so called a
Relegendo, of Selecting, or putting apart; because they that be Religious, do
carefully choose all things which seem to belong to the service of God; but he
is confuted by Lactantius. Jnstit. lib. 4. cap. 28. Jerome and Austin following
him, derive Religion a Religando, of tying or binding: Jerome has this
expression. This bundle tied up with the Religion of the Lord which is one.
Hieron. Comment. in Amos. 9.
whatsoever shows of Religion he makes: That is vain. 1. That is to no end;
that is to no end that brings no profit with it. Psalm. 127. 1. Romans 6.21. 2.
That which deceives a man's hope and expectation, that brings forth a Lie, 1
Cor. 3.20. Psalm. 62.10. such is the Religion of such a man, it is both
unprofitable, and that which does deceive his expectation.

CHAP. II. A point of instruction raised.
FRom the words thus opened, we may gather this point of doctrine.

THat when men make a seeming show of Religion in the outward performance of
the duties of Gods Worship and Service, and in the mean time take no care to
keep their tongues within the bounds that God in his word has set down: those
seeming shows of Religion are vain; that man's Religion is vain, there is
nothing of Religion in such a man. God sets this down as one note, how a person
truly gracious may be known, viz. that he labors to keep his tongue in due
order; the question is put, Psalm. 15. Who is the Citizen of Heaven, or who is
he that is truly Gracious? and he answers ver. 2, 3. He that speaks the
truth from his heart, he that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor is apt to
believe such reports as are raised against his neighbor: and Psalm. 34.12, 13.
he gives the command, keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile: and backs it with a promise of life, that is eternal life: the
regulating the tongue is set down as a rule for his practice, that would enjoy
God hereafter: and the Psalmist says, Psalm 39.1. he would keep his tongue as
with a bridle, or put a muzzle upon his mouth, Chasam, obturare, claudere,
obstruere, diciturque de o^e ac naribus instrumentum quod in ore jumenti
ponitu^, ne comedat vel mordeat. Lorine, in Psalm. 39.1. Si inter arbores
vitesque aretur, fiscelis bestias capistrari, ne germinum tenera praecipant.
Plin. not. Hist. lib. 18. Ambros. Sermon. 2. in Psalm. 108.
that he might not offend with his tongue, nor do any thing that might unbeseem
Religion; this course he took, and because he found it an hard matter for
himself to accomplish, he goes to God, beseeching him to do it for him. Set a
watch O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Psalm. 141.3. This he
did, says Ambrose, Quia fortasse aliquando aliquid locutus erat incautius:
because perhaps he had spoken something somewhat unwarily; and this is the
whole series of his resolution. Psalm. 101. that as he will not allow this sin
in himself, so he will not suffer it in any about him. ver. 5, 7. This David
resolves to do as a Magistrate, and in his own house. God under the Law took
order, that if a false witness did rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; then both the men, between whom the controversy was,
should stand before the Lord, before the Priests and the Judges which should be
in those days, and the Judges should make diligent enquiry; and if the witness
has testified falsely against his brother, then should they do unto him, as he
had thought to have done unto his brother, that the evil might be put away from
among them. Deuteronomy. 19.17, 18, 19, 20. Consider likewise, what Solomon gives in
charge, Prove. 4.23, 24. First he begins with the heart, the root of all: keep
thy heart above all keeping, then he comes to the Tongue: put away from thee a
froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee: and God himself by his
spirit gives singular testimony of Job, both in the first and second chapters
of Job, Job 1.22. Job. 2.10.
that he did not yet sin with his lips: it is an hard matter to keep the tongue
in order in great calamities; yet Job in all that misery did not sin with his
tongue, he charged not God foolishly.

CHAP. 3. The point confirmed by 5 Reasons.
NOw come we to the reasons of the point, why he which brideleth not his
tongue, though he seem Religious, yet his Religion is vain.

Because Gods word (which is the that have Grace in their hearts, should have
their tongues seasoned with Grace. Colos. 4.6. seasoned with salt: there is the
Salt of Holy doctrine. Sal doctrinae, Sal mortificationis, Sal boni sermonis.
Mat. 5.13. the Salt of Mortification. Mar. 9. ult. and the Salt of savory
speech. Prove. 10.20. Prove. 16.23. let no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
Grace to the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29. It is said of Christ, that Grace was poured
into his lips, Psalm. 45.2. and the people wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth. Luke 4.22. Our Savior tells us that for every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give an account at the last day; and if
so; then much more for every sinful and wicked word.

if so be you have been taught by Christ, as the truth is in Jesus, then put
off concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt, etc.
putting away lying, speak every man truth to his neighbor; let all bitterness,
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all
malice. Ephesians. 4.22, 25, 31. and this is commanded to be put off upon this
ground; because ye have put off the old, and put on the new man: and the
Apostle Peter having spoken of their Regeneration. chap. 1. he grounds his
exhortation to this duty upon it. 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore lay aside all malice,
and envy, and all evil speaking.

Because according to what is most Prove. 10. The wise man sets the tongue of
the Righteous against the Heart of the wicked; and as one is compared to choic^
Silver, so the other is little worth^ worth nothing; and such a pervers^ tongue
shall be cut off: Out of the ^bundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Ma.
12.34. The strokes i^ Music answer to the Notes tha^ are pricked in the Rules.
The Anatomists teach, that the heart and tongue hang upon one string, and hence
it is, as in a Clock or Watch, when the wheel is moved, the hammer strikes;
so the words of the mouth answer to the motions of the heart; Dr. Featly.
and when the heart is moved with any passion or perturbation, the hammer beats
upon the Bell, and the mouth sounds. Psalm. 45.1. Romans 10.10. as one well
notes.

Though the tongue now and then may prove a false glass, yet it is then when it
makes show not of the worse, but of the better; as false glasses do commonly
make men seem fairer than they are, not fouler. Stock. Exposit. in Malac. 1.
Because when there is much sin manifested in the tongue, it clearly shows
that there is little grace in the soul. The Apostle James 3. from ver. 6. ad
12. shows that though the tongue be a small member, yet 1. There is a world
of iniquity in it; and for the variety of sin in it, he might well say so: it
is parvum but pravum, a member little in quantity, but great in iniquity: some
indeed number 24, others 29 sins of the tongue. 2. The Apostle says, that the
sins of the Tongue defile the whole body. 1 Cor. 15.30. Evil words corrupt good
manners: when the earth is broken up, and a filthy stench comes out, it
argues there was some dead corpse there; so when men send out railings,
cursings, blasphemies, etc. that one is not able to endure, these spring from a
dead and rotten soul, these sins are great spots to Religion: the Pharisees
found fault with Christ's Disciples for not washing their hands before meat;
Christ tells them that the meat they eat with unwasht hands, defiled them not,
but the things which come out of their mouths, as evil speaking, etc. these
defile the man. Mat. 15.8. It is not credibl^ says St. Ambrose, he should live
wel^ that speaks wickedly; in man^ words there wants not sin. Prove. 10 29
He that can sport at sin with hi^ tongue, will not stick to commit it, i^ time
and place give leave, being tempted thereunto. 3. The unbridle^ Tongue is set
on fire of Hell: the Prophet speaking of the incurable mischief of the evil
tongue, says it is as the sharp arrows of a mighty man, o^ as the coals of
Juniper. Psalm. 120.4. Juniper burns soonest, and keeps fire longest of any
wood: such is the force of an evil tongue; it sets on fire the course of
nature, and is it self set on fire with Hell; the Devil is in that tongue, he
kindles a fire in it, and blows it with the bellows of all mischief: now
then consider what that man's Religion is that has such a tongue, what show
soever he makes. 4. He shows how cross this is to Religion by natural
demonstrations: one and the same tree cannot bring forth good and bad fruit; it
is contrary to nature, and he illustrateth it; that Man with one tongue should
bless God, and curse man, made after the image of God, were a great vanity to
think: to bless and to curse are things contrary one to another, and be not in
the same tongue; as a Fountain cannot send forth sweet and bitter water, which
being considered, shows such a man's Religion is vain.

Because what pretenses soever Psalm. 12.3, 4. though they may say God is their
Lord in their words, yet this shows they are without ack^^^ledging any to
Lord it over them: they say their tongues are their own, and who shall Lord it
over them? if God were their Lord, then they would keep his Commandments; and
to such will Jesus Christ say at the last day, why call ye me Lord, and do not
the things that I command you? and the Law of Christ is; Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouths; and let him that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity.

CHAP. IV. Shows in diverse particulars, how much men fail in this point.
THis then may inform us, how great a number of men there are, whose seeming
shows of Religion will be found to be but vain, because of their unbridled
tongues: consider how common this sin is, and how many that profess themselves
Christians, are guilty of these sins in an high degree; and let us hence see
what great cause we have to lament the great decay of Religion with the
Prophet, Psalm. 12.1, 2. Help Lord, for the Godly man cease, for the faithful
fail from among the children of men: and he proves it is by this; They speak
vanity every one with his Neighbor; with flattering lips, and with a double
heart do they speak: and mark how general it is: every one speaks vanity to his
Neighbor: and if this be so had joined with a seeming show of Religion, what
is open profaneness? The Prophet Jeremiah complains also, wishing his eyes
were a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for his people, and
bewail the misery that is coming upon them, and all because of this sin: they
bend their tongues like their bow for lies. Jer. 9.3. they will not speak
truth, they have taught their tongues to speak lies ver. 5. their tongue is as
an arrow shot out, it speaks deceit; one speaks peaceably to his neighbor,
but in his heart he lies in wait. ver. 8. shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord? So St. Paul, Romans 3. when he insisteth upon the general
corruption of nature, he quickly passes it over, but he spends two verses,
viz. the 13 and 14. upon the sins of the tongue; speaking of wicked men, he
says, their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues there have used
decit, the poison of Asps is under their lips, whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness: The Asp does morsu inficere, says Grynaeus.
the poison of Asps is under the tongues of such persons: Aspidum ictui vel
rarum vel nullum remedium invenitur. Aelian. not. hist.

Compertum est ictu laesos hujusmodi vix horis quatuor superfu isse. Pierii
Hierogl. lib. 14. Puncto acus simile. Plin. Actuari de medic. composit. Gloss.
Interlinear. in Rom 3.


now Naturalists observe of the Asp that it poisoneth a man secretly, with a
kind of delight, and it is such a poison as is incurable, killing a man in four
hours; very fitly representing the poison of the tongue; for such a one
wounds his brother in secret, and he knows not who hurts him; and he
hardly admits of cure again: We have great cause to bewail the commonnesse of
this sin in these Gospel Times; a sin so rife, even among those that seem to be
Religious, that we may lay it to heart, and beware thereof; and so much the
rather, because the sins of the tongue are a special cause of procuring misery
upon a Land, and People. Consider therefore

1. That when men come to the public worship of God, to hear the word of God,
etc. and yet take no care of their tongues, God esteems them more like unto
poisonous creatures, then to men that have his Image upon them; more like to
Asps or venomous serpents then men: of such the Prophet speaks, saying, They
have sharpened their tongues like a serpent. Psalm. 140.3. and his case when he
was among them, was as bad as Daniels in the Lions Den: My soul, says he, is
among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire; even the sons of
men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Psalm.
57.4. and the Lord tells the Prophet Ezekiel, that briars and thorns were with
him, such as scratch and tear all that come near them; and that he dwelt among
Scorpions, the most poisonful of all other creatures. Ezekiel. 2.6.

2. The Lord compares men of evil tongues to all kind of deadly instruments;
to a maul, to a sword, to a sharp arrow. Prove. 25.18. the one is sufficient to
knock a man on the head, the other to run through his body, and the other to
pierce him to the heart; to signisie to us, that while a man may go about to
avoid one, he may yet be in danger of being hurt by another before he is aware
of it.

3. By these sins of the tongue, men break no less then three commands of God
at once. 1. The sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder; men are apt to
think if they lay not violent hands upon their neighbor, it is nothing: but
our Savior, Mat. 5.21, 22. sets down three sins as breaches of this command.
Sunt Homicidae interfectores, fratrum, and sunt Homicidae detractores eorum.
Clem. Alex. Epist. 1.
1. causeless and unadvised anger, though it break not out into words. 2. rash
and inconsiderate words. 3. railing and reviling speeches; and these shall be
in danger of Hellfire: and how many poor souls have run this hazard, and yet
never considered it! and besides this, I shall add further, there is yet a
fourfold murder of the tongue.

1. By commanding any to be unjustly slain and executed, as Saul commanded Doeg
to fall upon the Priests of the Lord, who slew fourscore and five persons. 1 Samuel 22.17, 18. Thus David contrived the death of Uriah, and commanded Joab to
set him in the front of the battle against the children of Ammon, where he was
slain. 2 Samuel 11.15. thus Absalon gave charge to his servants to kill Amnon. 2 Samuel 13.28. and Ahab and Jezebel to the Nobles and Elders of the City to put
Naboth to death. 1 Kings. 21.10.

2. By giving counsel to any to procure the death of any one: thus Herodias
taught her daughter to ask the head of John Baptist in a Charger of Herod.
Mar. 6.24.

3. By giving ill language, and reviling words, whereupon a fray is occasioned,
and murder ensues.

4. By bearing false witness against any one, in case of life.

2. By the sins of the tongue men break the eighth Commandment, which is, Thou
shall not steal. Though many men rob not their Neighbors of their Goods, yet of
their good names; and this is a sin of an higher nature than stealing their
Goods; for the loss of Goods may be valued, but the loss of a man's good name
cannot: a good name is better then precious ointment, Eccles. 7.1. Cost y
ointments are reckoned among the treasures and happiness of Princes; and he
that robs a man of that, robs him of his choicest Jewels; the death thereof is
an en evil death; the grave were better then it, says the son of Syrach.
Eccles. 28.21.

3. There is a plain breach of the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor. Now a false witness sins, 1. Directly
against God, robbing him of his honor, by speaking an untruth, breaking his
Law that forbids it. 2. He does injury to the Judge whom he deceives by lying.
Testis falsidicus tribus personis est obno^iu^, fa^ Deo quem persu^ando cante
(...), Judic: quem mentiendo follit, Inno enti quem falso testimonio prodit.
Isidor. de sum boni. lib. 3. cap. 59.
3. To an Innocent whom he betrayeth by bearing a false Testimony.

4. These sins of the tongue, are of such a nature, that without Grace to
repen^ of them, and forsake them, they will exclude a man out of Heaven; the
Apostle mentions a Reviler to be one that shall be shut out of Heaven. 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. and chap. 5. he says that private familiarity with such must be cast
off; and that men may see the danger of it, David proposes the quest on, What
shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee thou false tongue?
and himself makes answer by the spirit of God: Sharp arrows of the mighty, w
th coals of Juniper. Psalm. 120.3, 4. that as they shoot at God, and his people,
so God shall shoot at them; he shall give them coals of Juniper, because it is
observed to be the most hot and lasting fire; this shall be their punishment:
expositors think this war spoken of Doeg, when David was at Nob, he was there
under a pretense of worshipping the Lord, for it was the Sabbath day, and Doeg
would seem Religious; but as soon as he is gone to Saul, see what becomes of
his seeming show of Religion; he reports the matter concerning David and
Ahimelech unto another end then they did intend it; wresting their words to
make Saul think there was a plot against him, when they intended no such thing:
And though for the matter it was the truth he did relate, as we may see in the
story: yet for this it is that the spirit of God calls him a false tongue. See
his sin and his doom. Psalm. 52. his sin, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. he boasted himself in
mischief, his tongue devised mischief, like a sharp razor, working deceitfully,
loving lying rather than to speak Righteousness: Thou love all devouring
words, O thou deceitful tongue: See his doom. ver. 5. God shall likewise
destroy thee for ever: He shall take take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy
dwelling place, and root thee out of the Land of the living: and this shall be
his Epitaph. ver. 7. Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, etc.
but strengthened himself in his wickedness.

These things being so, what reason then have we to be the more careful to
avoid these sins! there being more sins in a disorderly tongue, then men are
aware of; for even those that take some care of oath sins, yet fail much
herein: there needs a great deal of grace to keep the tongue within compass;
much power may be gotten over other sins, when yet we may not seriously think
of this: but let us carefully take heed hereof; for as far as this remains in
any man, and is not watched against, and prayed against, and a man brought to be
humbled under the sight of it; so much vanity and emptiness is in the Religion
o^ that man; his Religion is but an outward appearance; there is little trut^ of
Religion in such a man's heart.

CHAP. V. Of some particular sins of the Tongue, and first of the cursing
Tongue.
SECT. 1. Cursing defined.
NOw that we may take the more heed of these sins of the tongue: I shall
discourse upon some of them, and show you the evils that are in them; and first
I will begin with that sin of the Tongue, which is called in Scripture a
cursing Tongue; and First I shall define the sin of cursing.

To curse, Definitt. of cursing.
is to wish the Plagues and Judgments of God upon such things or persons,
Maledictio proprie est imprecatio seu optatio mali alicui facta sub ratione
mali Angelus de Clavis. sum. de casib consc. in Titul. maledict. (...) devoveo
diris, impre^^^. (...) an execration verbal or real. (...) verbo vel re
maledixit. Job 3.6. Genesis 3.17. Ruther.
with whom we are offended; There is a cursing of our selves, or others: men
curse themselves, when through wrath and anger they wish evil to themselves; as
when ^he Jews cried out to Pilate concerning Christ, his blood be upon us, and
upon our children, Mat. 27.25. which within a few years after came upon them
according to their wish, and lies heavy upon them to this day; and it is very
frequent for wicked persons to curse and ban themselves. God damn me, God judge
me, God confound me, pray God I may never stir, let me sink where I stand,
let me never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor come where God has to do,
if it be not so: Oh how should persons take heed of such imprecations against
themselves! for God hears men's prayers two ways; either in Mercy, or in
Wrath; if thou cursest thy self, except thou turn to God by speedy repentance,
he may hear thy prayer in his wrath and verify thy curse upon thee to thy
utter confusion.

2. Men may curse themselves when they bear rancor and malice i^ their heart
against their brethren when they pray that God would forgive them their
trespasses, as they forgive their brethren that trespass against them, and yet
forgive them not: then do men curse themselves as often as they pray; and their
own sins being great, do they not as it were pray, that they might sink under
the burden of them: and seeing their sins are in multitude so innumerable, and
magnitude so intolerable, do they not pray in effect, Lord, I would have thee
pour out thy whole displeasure upon me forth m! for so would I do, even the
worst that I can against my brother; execute the rigor of Revenge upon him.
Lord so deal with me, take no pity on me; pour out the Viols of thy wrath upon
me; set me up as a mark to shoot at; make thine arrows drunk in my blood; let
thy sword be bathed in my Bowels; Lord, I pray thee do the worst thou can
unto me: Now because this is a fearful curse, when men are loath to forgive, and
more loath to curse themselves, therefore they will either not use the Lords
prayer or leave out this peti^ion or condition in it: A notable device to
deceive themselves; it is not the saying it, will keep off the curse from them;
but being in such a state, let them say it or not say it, or whatsoever prayer
they use, they curse themselves; there shall be judgment merciless to him that
shows no mercy, Jam. 2.13.

2. Men curse others, when they bann or wish evil unto others, Maledictio est
imprecatio qua quis alteri imprecatur malum culpae, poenae, vel naturae.
Alsted. Theol. Cas. Cap. 21.
when men wish the Pox, or plague of God to light upon others, a vengeance to
take them, the Devil to break their necks, the Devil take them, etc. Many men
when they are provoked curse their Children, their Servants, and their Cattle;
a sin too rife and common among us: now if a man give way to this sin, what
she^ of Religion soever he makes, his Religion is vain.

SECT. 2. The greatness of this showed in eigh^ particulars.
NOw that we may see the greatness of this sin, consider.

1. It is the mark of a graceless person, that his mouth is full of cursing
Psalm. 10.7. This is the character of^ man that has not God in all his
thoughts: such a man is so full of mischief, that he venteth it upon every
trifling occasion: Some indeed like Saul's servants, bless with their mouths,
but with their hearts they curse. Psalm. 62.4. but multitudes of men now-a days
curse with their mouths what ever comes in their way: how many that would be
accounted Religious, do rejoice at the hurt and sin of those whom they hate:
now this sin reigning and Grace cannot stand together; for where it reigns,
it clearly shows the heart to be full of bitterness. Romans 3.14. therefore the
Apostle says, Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. As they have gall
and bitterness in their heart. Act. 8 23. so they utter it with their mouth as
one notes; Grynaeus.
from that root of bitterness that is in their heart, there is brought forth
gall and wormwood by their Tongues, Deuteronomy. 29.18. and were there not such an
overflowing of bitterness and wormwood, and gall in the heart, it would not
thus run out in the tongues of men: Salvian says, Salvian. de gubern. lib. 3.
that cursing is made the common weapon of graceless men when they are angry,
their fierce wrath wishing that evil upon another, which because of weakness it
cannot work.

2. This is directly cross to Gods command: for our Savior says, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despightfully use you. Mat. 5.44. and the Apostle doubleth the
command, Bless them which persecute you, and curse not. Rom, 12.14. this is
repeated for two causes. 1. To note the weightiness of it, that we should not
slightly pass it over. 2. The difficulty of it; for there is nothing more hard
to corrupt nature then to wish well to them that wish us ill, and to bless them
that curse us; and Peter says. 1 Pet. 3 9. render not railing for railing but
contrariwise blessing; and this lesson which Paul taught others, he practiced
himself. 1 Cor. 4.12. we are evil spoken of, and yet we bless.

3. It is contrary to Christ's example: now every one would be looked upon to be
a Christian, and a member of Christ's body mystical; but if it be so, let men
show it by being conformed to his example, considering that the Lord Christ did
not curse his enemies, but prayed for them; and we are commanded to imitate his
example, if we are his people. 1 Pet. 2. 22. who when he was reviled, reviled
not again: So it was with Stephen, he gave them not ill words for their
cursing, but blessing; he sent up prayers to heaven for his enemies, when their
stones flew about his ears: therefore for men to say they are Christians, and
walk cross to Christ's example and the examples of the Saints, is to deceive
their own hearts.

4. This is quite cross to the hope of a Christian; when the Apostle bids us
not render reviling for reviling, he adds, but contrariwise blessing; for
this reason; knowing that ye are thereunto called that ye might inherit a
blessing. 1 Pet. 3.9. there is no curse mingled at all with the blessings Gods
people shall inherit; therefore he that curses another, Cursing is as common
as stones in the street; men in one day curse oftener, then pray in a whole year.
cannot hope to inherit a blessing.

5. How absurd a thing is it, that men with the same mouth should bless God and
curse men, the Apostle shows, Jam. 3.9.10. showing that this is no more
consistent with Grace, then that the same tree should bring forth good and bad
fruit, were consistent with nature: As sweet and bitter water mingled together,
the bitter easily takes away the nature of the sweet; and as honey and poison
mingled together, the poison far less in quantity turns the honey: so when
cursing and blessing are in one mouth together, the bitterness of the curse
turns the sweetness of the blessing, and makes it odious before God.

6. He whom you curse, is made after the image of God; therefore in cursing
him, you curse Gods image. Genesis 9.6. therefore the cursing of man does in some
sort touch God, whom we use only to bless and to speak well of God gives a Law
against the shedding of man's blood, and gives this reason; for in the image of
God has he made man: and Prove. 17.5. Whosoever despises the poor, despises his
Maker: the wrong that is done to the poor man, is done to the Lord, his Maker:
as the abusing of the Kings image, is the abusing of the King, declaring a want
of love and reverence toward him; in like manner by cursing to abuse men [Gods
images] is to abuse God, Mayer Exposit. in Jam. 3.
and to do against that love and reverence that we owe unto him.

7. Herein men entrench upon that which is Gods sole prerogative: for of right
it belongs only to God to curse: How foolish is this! hereby they make as
though God knew not when, nor whom, nor how to strike; how saucily do such deal
with the God of vengeance?
God tells Abraham, I will curse them that curse thee. Genesis 12.3. Abraham must
not curse his enemies. Thou in thy passion wishest evil upon another, that (it
may be) hurts thee: Thou setst thy self by this deed in the Lords throne, to
whom vengeance belongs, and who has commanded us not to avenge ous selves,
but to recompense good for evil. To. 12.18, 19, 20. and he that does not so,
sets up himself in the stead of God, whose right it is to avenge wrongs and
injuries.

8. Those that live in this sin, do presumptuously set up themselves above God;
for such a one makes himself his own Judge, and God must be the executioner of
his passion. By these particulars, you may see the greatness of the sin of
cursing.

SECT. 3. How severely God punishes cursers, showed in five things.
LEt me therefore beseech you to take heed of this sin of cursing; and to this
purpose observe and consider the dreadfulness of the punishment that will light
on those that take liberty to go on in this sin, except it please God to grant
them repentance that they may be saved; and to this end, consider seriously
that most dreadful place of scripture. Psalm. 109.17, 18. where are five
dreadful evils that the Holy man by the spirit of God denounces against those
that are guilty of this sin.

1. As he that is given to cursing, cared not for blessing, so he shall have
nothing to do with it; he delighted not in blessing, and it shall be far from
him.

2. He loved cursing, and a most direful curse shall be his portion: such is
the condition of all cursers, whose tongues run with great speed on the Devils
errand, whose maledictions are shot out of their mouths just like fools bolts,
not caring where they light: that like ill-made Pieces with which while men
discharge at others, they recoil in splinters upon their own faces.

3. Mark in what manner it shall come upon him: it shall come into his Bowels
like Water, and like Oil into his Bones; water and oil are soaking things;
and a drop of oil upon a piece of cloth, spreads it self abroad, and soaks so
into it, that it can hardly be gotten out: So cursing shall come within the man
that loves cursing, soaking into his very bones and bowels; it shall fall upon
his innerman: Now what this is, the Prophet tells us. Lament. 3.65. namely,
sorrow of heart. The Prophet imprecating evil upon the enemies of the Church,
prays thus to God: give them sorrow of heart, thy curse upon them, and this of
all other is the most dreadful evil; a wounded spirit who can bear? a sore
judgment it is for a man to be like the troubled sea that cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt; Isai. 57.20. It is a disease that changes the
countenance, and terrifieth both soul and body: the Jews said of Christ, his
blood be upon us, and upon our children, Mat 27.25. a sore imprecation, Aretius
in Mat. 27
and it pursues them to this day tanquam attonitos and terrefactos: they look
as men affrighted and astonished; and some say they may be distinguished from
all other men in the world.

4. It shall stick so close unto him, as he cannot escape it; it shall be as a
Garment about him; let it be unto him as the garment which covers him, ver.
^9. it shall not be easily thrown off; as his garment that is fitted, and sits
close to his body: and if every curse should stick a visible blister upon the
tongue, as it does insensible ones on the soul, oh how many men's tongues would
be too big for their mouths, and their mouth as an open sepulcher full of
rottenness and putrefaction!

5. It shall lie upon him to all eternity: they that have frequently poured out
cursings upon others, shall lie under the curse of God for ever; Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire: cursing says the Psalmist, shall be to him for a
girdle, Maledictio est peccatum gravius, 1. Si Imprecatio mali fiat ex animo.
2. Si fiat ex plena deliberatione animi. 3. Si malum quod imprecamur alteri sit
gravius; extra hos casus est peccatum levi^s. Alsted. Theol. Cas. Cap. 21. Of
the judgments of God upon cursers, see Mr. Perkins, of the government of the
Tongue, and Mr. Ball upon the same subject. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments
Chap. 31. Woodw. Child's patrim. Fox Act. and Monum. Mayer. Exposit. Jam 3.
wherewith he shall be girded continually; this girdle he shall always wear,
and never put off, it shall be continually about his loins: now you have seen
the sin, the greatness o^ it, and the misery that attends it, sit down,
consider it, and repent, lest it come upon you.

SECT. 4, An Objection about Noah's, Job's, David's, Elijah's cursing, answered
in in five things. A question about Ministers denouncing curses against the
wicked resolved.
Noah, Job, David Elijah, etc.?

Resp.
That you may see that this makes nothing at all for such:

1. Consider first, that our rule to walk by is Gods precept, not man's
precedent; and God commands we should render blessing and not cursing.

2. If we look upon examples, let us look on such as do not err, and ^hen we
can follow none but our Lord and Saviors, who prayed for his enemies: follow
no man further then he does follow the example of Christ; and if we would be
accounted Christians, let us walk as Christ walked; not as this or that man
walks, 1 John 2.6. as he was, so must we be in this world.

3. If we will imitate the Saints in any thing, let it then be in that wherein
they followed the rule of Gods word, and not make use of their failings to
nourish sin in us: Imitate not Job in his infirmity, when he cursed the day of
his birth, Job. 3.1. But you may imitate him in what God commends him for; when
stripped naked of all, he curses not his enemies, but blesses the Lord that
might do with him what he pleased, without whose providence nothing comes to
pass. Job 1. ult. and this is added to his commendation, Job 31.29, 30, 31.
That he rejoiced not at the destruction of him that hated him, nor lift up
himself when evil found his enemy; nor did he suffer his mouth to sin by
wishing a curse to his soul; and albeit he had strong incitements to revenge by
them that were about him that would have eaten the flesh of them that did wrong
their Master, yet he kept himself from it, ver. 31. So David, though his
enemies rewarded him evil for good; yet says he, When they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting; they rejoice at his
evil; he mourns for theirs, and prays for them in affliction. Psalm. 35.13,
14. He behaved himself as though his enemy had been his friend or brother,
bowing down heavily as one that mourns for his Mother; and 2 Samuel 16.9. when
Shimei curses him, his servants desire his leave to take off Shimeis head for
cursing the King; he harkens not unto them, but looks to the Lord in it, and
commits his cause to God: Let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has
bidden him; it may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and requite
good for his cursing this day. ver. 11.12. he will not therefore take vengeance
himself, nor suffer others to do it; in this imitate David: So we read of
Jeremy, that he stood before the Lord to pray and entreat for those that had
abused him. Take heed of the Saints sins, but imitate their Graces.

4. Consider what our Savior says to his Disciples, concerning Elijah. Luk
9.54, 55. they would have imitated him in calling for fire to come down from
Heaven upon the Samaritans, as he did upon the two Captains and their troops;
but Christ rebukes them for it, saying, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye
are of: as if Christ had said; you do this upon the account of private passion
and revenge; he did it by another spirit, even the spirit of God: you
understand not your Commission; for you that be my Disciples, must be of meek
and humble spirits like me your Master, There be in man's soul says Anselm. 3
several faculties. sc. Ratio, qua assimulatur Angelis; Appetitus qua
assimulatur brutis; and voluntas, which enclineth sometime to the one, sometime
to the other, Et hic sapiens and sentiens in pesorem partem ferebatur. Anselm.
in Luc. 9.
and not of such furious and fiery mettatl. I suspect you more desire revenge
then the glorifying of my name: This was like the Zeal St. Paul speaks of,
which was not according to knowledge. Romans 10.2.

5. When the people of God in Scripture have cursed their enemies, they have
therein been acted by the spirit of God in an extraordinary manner; it was not
by humane passion (that is sinful) that Noah cursed Cham, but it was a
Prophetical prediction of what should come upon him afterward: and Austin
says, that David's imprecations against his enemies (or rather Gods enemies)
are prophesies, showing what should come unto them, rather then curses of his
own, as desiring that such things should come to pass: St. Amb. observes, that
when God gave the Devil leave to afflict Jobs body, he spared his tongue, that
feeling his pain, he might easily rail and curse; so pleasing a thing is
cursed speaking to the Devil; Rich. Rogers on Judge. 5.
but it is in no sort lawful for us to curse any man to satisfy our own
revenging minds; for when we deal in our own matters, we must love our enemies,
and bless them that curse us: 2. Reg. 1.
and for Elijah, what he did, he did by the spirit of God; for as soon as God
bids him go, he goes down to the King, and boldly speaks unto him what the Lord
would have him: therefore let all those that know by their own consciences,
that this is, or has been their sin, lay it to heart, and be humbled for it
before the Lord, considering how cross they have walked according to the rule
of Gods word, lest the very Heathen rise up in judgment against them: for I
have read of a certain woman Priest of Athens, being proffered money to curse
Alcibiades, refused it, saying, It was her office and duty to pray for others,
not to curse them.

Wheher it be lawful for Ministers to denounce curses against wicked men?

Resp.
Yes; but they do it only declarative, declaring what shall come upon them, if
they repent not: Ministers must not look upon such as their enemies, St. Austin
speaking of his denouncing Gods judgments against the wicked, says, Non hoc
ago, ut sim homine con vitiando supeoior, sed errorem convincendo salubrior. I
strive not in reproving my adversary, to out-goe him in railing words but to
make him better, convincing him of his fault. Christianus non est, qui facile
maledicit; Qui pacem cordis, oris and operis non habet, Christianus dici nod
potest. Aug. Sermon. 2. ad fratres in Eremo.
but as Gods enemies; Paul in general denounces a curse against all wicked
men; If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor.
16.22. Ministers denounce curses, but Ministerially, when they in the name of
God denouce the judgments of God against impenitent sinners.

CHAP. VI. Of the swearing Tongue.
SECT. 1. Of common swearing; men are guilty of it two ways. Two objections of
common swearers answered.
I Come in the second place, to treat of that abominable and reigning sin of
the Tongue, the sin of swearing; many that seem Religious, sometimes are guilty
of it, and so thereby show their Religion to be but vain. And here in the first
place I shall discourse of common, vain, and rash swearing; a sin too rife in
these days: men may be guilty hereof,

1. When upon slight occasions or ordinary speech, men break out into oaths, or
words of admiration, taking Gods name in vain, and abusing his Titles, as Lord,
God, Jesus, Christ, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; when these Titles, or any of
them are used jdly, irreverently, profanely, commonly, or customarily, upon an
ill use or an old custom, they are abused, and Gods name is profaned; this is
done. 1. In way of admiration, when we hear or see any strange thing, to say
Good Lord, O God, O Christ, O Jesus, Jesu-God, O Lord, Lord have mercy upon us,
what a strange thing is this! what a thing is it! or 2. In way of pity or
commiseration; as such a man is a poor man, God knows; it is in a very poor
case, or its a hard time the Lord knows, naming God, or the titles of God
very jdly, and profanely with an evil mind, or very unconscionably without
reverence due to the heavenly Majesty; though this may seem a very small matter
because of the commonness of it, yet it is a very wicked practice, and a
manifest breach of the third Commandment, and a sin directly against God, who
is of infinite majesty; therefore the offense against him deserves infinite
punishment: for the greater the person is against whom we offend; the greater
is the offense; as to speak evil of any man is a fault, though an inferior; but
to speak evil of a Nobleman, or of a King, is a greater offense, and deserves
a far greater punishment. None of us all but would take it for a great abuse
and disgrace to our persons, if our names should be in every man's mouth taken
up, and used as by-words in way of admiration or commiseration upon every light
occasion; and shall we think that God does not hold himself abused, disgraced,
dishonored, when his Name and Titles are taken up upon evey toy and trifle
that is in our way?

2. When men make a common practice of swearing; when men will lay their faith
and troth, and souls to pawn, upon every word almost that they speak; and when
they buy and sell, to confirm every word with an oath: many men are so
accustomed to this sin, that when they swear, tell them of it, they will not
believe it; they forget it again, and are apt to swear they did not swear: the
Pharisees gave liberty upon all occasions to swear in common talk, rather out
of custom then conscience.



Resp.
It is so much the more inexcusable: it is an old custom for men to cozen in
their Shops, to forswear themselves before a Judge, to commit sacrilege; are
these things therefore the more tolerable? if a servant (like the unjust
Steward) has accustomed himself to steal, and to imbezzle his Masters Goods,
is this sufficient to excuse him? no, it is rather an aggravation of his
offense: does this reason aggravate other sins, and shall we think it will make
this the lighter? art thou accustomed to this sin? thou have the more reason to
confess this sin, to repent of it, and forsake it, lest the judgment of God
overtake thee in it.

2. Vain men are ready to object

Do you think to get any more credit to your selves by swearing? Resp.
thou will lose thy credit the more with all good men, and with all ingenuous
persons; for he that will swear, will lie too; and the more a man accustometh
himself to rash swearing, the less credit will other men give to his oaths:
what credit or authority shall any man's words or oaths have with others, that
undervalueth and contemns the authority of God himself? if then thou meetest
with men hard of belief, thou should not presently fall a swearing, but say
it is so, Yea or Nay; and if then they will not believe thee, let them go.

SECT. 2. Of the aggravations of this sin of common swearing, showed in four
things.
IN the next place I shall lay down the greatness and aggravations of this sin
of ordinary swearing.

1. It is a great dishonor to God, when he is called to witness in every poor
trifle, which is not worth an oath: it were a great dishonor to the Kings
Majesty, to be troubled and disturbed with every slight cause which the lowest
and meanest Officer might determine: and it is a greater dishonor to the King
of Kings and the Lord of all, to be called out of his Heavenly Throne to decide
every trivial matter on earth: this is to make less account of God, then the
Turks of their Mahomet, by whom they will not swear lightly and vainly, but
upon some important necessity: an oath is an high part of Religious worship; it
is spoken of as the sum of Christ's worship, and of the service we must
perform to him in the days of the Gospel: The worship of the converted
Egyptians is thus expressed, Isai. 19.18. Five Cities in the Land of Egypt
shall in that day speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts.
This is commanded Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him,
and swear by his Name, and therein we acknowledge him to be our Lord, and to
have power over us as his creatures and servants: it is therefore a sin of a
very high nature for men to swear by the name of God in ordinary and common
discourse, when they scarce think of God, or what they do: Some break out into
hideous oaths not fit to be named, as Wounds, Blood, etc. Art thou a Christian,
and make no more account of the Wounds and Blood of thy Savior? herein thou
art worse then the Jews that put the Lord Jesus to death: they made light of
his blood upon earth, but [Thou] now he is ascended into Heaven: they shed his
blood and wounded him but once, but thou do repeat it as often as thou do
repeat that oath: they wounded him, but did not own him for their Lord; but
thou acknowledgest him for thy Lord and Savior, and yet sparest not to wound
him, and to profane his name now he is in Glory.

2. It is the note of a graceless person: for the mark by which the Holy Ghost
sets forth a man truly Religious, is that he fears an oath. Eccles. 9.2. he
fears to take it in vain; therefore he that fears not an oath, fears not
God: Christ says Mat. ^.35. Let your communication be yea ^ea, nay nay: for
whatsoever is more ^hen these, comes of evil. ver. 37. that ^s from the devil,
(...) i. e. in omni genere exercitatus. Beza.
who is called the evil one. Mat. 6.13. And indeed swearing is a language the
Prince of darkness delights in: it is an argument of a dislolute heart, to
use common swearing about common business, and trivial matters; such a man is
little other then an Atheist: when God speaks of himself, he says, thou shall
fear the great and glorious name of the Lord thy God; we must fear it, and not
take it so often in our mouths. Deuteronomy. 28.58. But you will say, Is the Lord God
so fearful a name? one would think it to be the most comfortable name in the
world: I answer, so it is indeed, if it be used in that reverential manner, and
with those signs and tokens of reverence that Gods people ought to use toward
their God: but the using the name of God so often in ordinary and vain
discourse, shows men to be more like Atheists then Christians, and that they
are altogether ignorant of God, and know not what God is; for if they did, they
would not thus abuse his Name.

3. The common swearer is a man of a frothy and vain spirit; one that has
neither the gravity of a man, nor the seriousness of a Christian in him; a
common swearer has so accustomed his tongue to this sin, that he knows not how
to leave it; he gets nothing at all by his swearing; in other men's sins there
is perhaps honor or gain at the end of them, they get some advantage to
themselves by their sins; but a common swearer sins Gratis, he sins for a
thing of naught: They are apt to plead they are tempted to it: but what if you
are tempted to it? are you therefore the more to be excused? no, you are bound
to resist the temptation, and to overcome it: but most profane and ordinary
swearers commit this sin without any temptation at all: and he that sins
without a temp^ation, is the greatest sinner of all; and so the whole malignity
of his sin (...) involved into the malignity of his Will: the hearts of common
swear^rs are vain, and by reason of common custom, they have so habituated
themselves to this sin that they cannot leave it.

4. He that swears commonly, will be ready to swear falsely, if occasion offer
it self, and if he may get advantage by it: evil communication corrupts good
manners, says the Apostle; and common swearing takes away the reverence of an
oath; Qai facit consuetudinem frequenter manu sua percutere, necesse est ut
injuste aliquando percutiat: sic qui facit consuetudinem jurare in rebus
idoneis, frequenter and in rebus superfluis etiam volens consuetudine trahente
perjurat. Chrysostom. in Mat. 5. oper. imperf. Homil. 12. Dico vobis Non jurare
omnino, ne sc. jurando ad facilitatem jurandi veniatur: de facilitate ad
consuetudinem, de consuetudine in perjurium decidatur. Aug. in lib. cont.
mendac.
and he that will swear for every trifle, or ^or nothing, will not account it
any great matter to swear falsely.

SECT. 3. Of idolatrous swearing, showed in tw^ things. The greatness of this
sin shewe^ four ways. Two Objections answered
THe second branch of this sin o^ swearing, is idolatrous swearing and this is
manifest.

1. When men swear by those creatures that are worshipped as true Gods, when yet
they are but false Gods, idol Gods; as Amos 8. the idolatry of the Jews is set
out by their swearing: They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God
O Dan lives, and the manner of Beersheba lives. ver. 14. By the sin of
Samaria is meant the idol Gods that the Samaritans had set up, as the Calves at
Dan and Bethel: the like we read of some that swear by the Lord and by Malcham.
Zeph. 1.5. The Lord forbids all swearing by false Gods, as by Baalim, and by
jdols: There are some among us that will not swear by the Lord, will ^ear by
the Mass a Popish jdol, ^y our Lady, by St. Mary, by St. Peter, ^y St. Anne, by
the Cross, by the ^ood, or by any Saint or Angel.

2. When men swear by other crea^ures, as when they swear by Heaven or by the
Earth, What a madness is it for a man to swear by this Fire, this Light, etc as
if these inanimate creaures were able to judge of Truth and Falsehood; and had a
Commission from God so to do: wherefore as Lactantius sometime proved Jupiter
to be no God, because he swore by Styx or Hell; so we may argue such persons to
be less then men, or at least then true Christians, because they swear by
things inferior to themselves, contrary the good old rule, He that swears,
swears by the greater. Heb. 6.16. Stock. Exposit. Malac. 3.
or by Jerusalem, or by their head, or by this Bread, Drink, Light, Salt, Gold,
etc. This practice our Savior reproves in the Jews Mat. 5. showing the
absurdity of it, and giving a flat precept against it; saying, swear not at
all, neither by Heaven, for ^is Gods Throne, nor by the Earth, for it is his
footstool, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King, etc. and
he denounces a woe against those blind guides which said, Whosoever shall
swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the Gold of
the Templ^ he is a debtor; whence we may gathe^ that in swearing by any thing,
Go^ was indirectly sworn by; therefore Christ says; whosoever swears by the
Altar, swears by it, and all things thereon; and whosoever shall swear by the
Temple, swears by it, and him that dwells therein; and he that swears b^
Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and him that sits thereon. Mat.
23.16. ad 22.

Now for men to swear by Creatures, is a very great sin, because that creature
is set up in the place of God; and to swear by a creature is to communicate the
worship of God to a creature, which is due to God alone, for this reason;
Because he that is sworn by, is as it were looked upon to be omnipotent, to know
the truth of what is spoken; and looked upon as Almighty, viz. able to take
vengeance on him, if he speak not truth in it: Some will swear by the life of
Caesar, a thing odious among the very Heathens; for they could say, it was worse
to swear by Caesar then by Ju^iter. Men in swearing by creatures ^re jdolaters;
for an oath is not only Gods ordinance, but a special part of ^is worship, both
because there is invocation, and because it is in the first Table commanded;
and the solemn ^orm of imposing an oath was this, Give Glory to God, Josh.
7.19. and the solemn Rite of taking an oath among the Jews, was to stand before
the Altar. 1 King. 8.31. and the same custom was among the Athenians and
Romans; then to give Gods worship to any creature, is flat idolatry: These
reasons may be given of it. 1. No part of Gods worship may be abused by, or to
any creature. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my Glory will I not give to
another. Isai. 42.8. But an oath is a part of Gods worship, as has before been
noted. 2. He that swears, swears by something greater then himself. Heb.
6.16. But no earthly creature is superior to man. 3. In every oath God
requires the express mention of his own name. Deuteronomy. 10.20. but so do not they
that mention other creatures. 4. Frustra fit per plura; quod fieri potest per
pauciora, but in swearing by creatures, men swear by God also, as has been
said Mat. 23.20, 21, 22.

Joseph swears by the life of Pharaoh? Genesis 42.16, 17. Therefore some may
say, it is lawful to swear by the creatures.

Resp.
Some learned men say, it was not an oath, but an asseveration, ita vivat
Pharaoh: so let Pharaoh live, or as surely as Pharaoh lives; so Junius and
Tremellius: Junius and Tremell.
which may be paralleled with that of Elisha to Elijah, As the Lord lives, 1 Samuel 1.26.
and as thy soul lives 2 King. 2.4. and that of Hannah to Eli, and that of
Abner to Saul speaking of David. 1 Samuel 17.55. As thy soul lives O King.
Receptum affirmationis genus, apud omnes nationes tum pias, tum impias
usitatum; a common kind of affirmation used among all Nations, both good and
bad, as Junius notes: and so it might be either a sin of ignorance in Joseph,
as the Learned say of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs; or it might be an
oversight in him, and forgetfulness of him, and custom might carry him beyond
Knowledge and Conscience; and then it teaches us that we must live by Laws,
not by examples, and ^mitate the best men only in the best things: Hieron.
Ne quos itineris duces existimemus, erroris comites reperiamus.

It may be further objected, Cant. ^.7. and Cant. 3.15. and Paul pro^esteth by
the rejoicing of the Corinthians, which is a Gift of God. 1 Cor. ^5.31.

As to that of Cant. 2.7. some understand it of Christ himself; Resp.
so Hierom and the Genevians; Hieron. Genevius.
which cannot so be understood; for God swears not by any, but by himself:
But the Hinds and the Roes of the field, Dove on Cant. 2.7. Some read among the
Roes rather then by the Roes, because the Letter Beth is prefixed, signifying
in or among. Clapham. ad loc.
or whatsoever may be understood by them are creatures; therefore it cannot
stand with the Majesty of God to swear by them; and the word is of the
Faeminine gender; and Junius and Tremellius use arguments to prove it to be the
speech sponsae, not sponsi: By these the Church charge her Daughters, not as
the persons by whom they were to swear (for no oath is lawful by creatures) but
as those for whose sake they were to take themselves bound, as by solemn oath.
And for the words of St. Paul. 1 Cor. 15.31. They be not an oath, but an
obtestation to show his diligence in discharging his duty, as one has noted;
Perkins on Mat. 5. Bishop Sanderson de Juramento.
and an asseveration only, that as he was subject to death, so he was daily
prepared for death when it should please God to call him, as a Reverend Bishop
of ours has observed.

SECT. 4. Of Perjury and false Swearing: the greatness of the sin, and of its
punishment.
IN the third place I shall proceed to show how men are guilty of this sin of
swearing, when men either swear falsely, or break the oaths they have taken in
the name of the Lord.

1. When men (though they swear by the name of the Lord and him alone) yet they
swear falsely, and not the truth: of such God complains, Jerem. 7.9, 10. They
were a people that came and stood before God in his House, and thought because
they came to the Temple, to the Ordinances of God, they were delivered to do
all manner of abominations, and this sin of false swearing; and yet cover this
wickedness with the Mantle of Religion: the Lord hates such oaths. Zech. 8.17.
let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor, and love no
false oath, for all these are the things that I hate, says the Lord: he that
swears, must swear in Judgment and Truth, and take heed of all false and
fraudulent oaths: An oath is either Assertory or Promissory: in an oath
Assertory there is a double truth required; Logical; Moral;
as the Schoolmen speak; the one veritas Rei, Abrah. Gibson Sermon. in Jerome
3.10.
the other veritas Mentis; the first when we speak as it is; the second, when
we think as we speak; in a lawful oath both are requisite. 1. that we speak
according to the thing, and that not upon conjectures, and probabilities, but
upon a clear and undoubted truth, for which we have good ground and warrant.
2. That our mind agree with our tongue, not meaning one thing when we swear
another, as Arius did, but according to the plain meaning of the oath, being
persuaded of the truth thereof: otherwise we make God a liar, or think it an
easy matter to deceive him, when we invoke him to bear witness to a falsehood;
both which are very dishonorable to the God of truth.

Furthermore an oath is as much security as a man can have from his neighbor;
and if men will not care what or how they swear, how long would any man enjoy
either life or estate? Ille qui scienter pejerat, in primo perjurio suo manum
dat Diabolo, qua ipse tangit Evangelium, vel qua tangit manum illius cui jurat;
and donec ipse poeniteat de perjurio illo, manus illa Diaboli est. Peraldus. de
peccat. linguae.
and who could call any thing that he has his own? by a false oath many a man's
Estate and life is taken from him: and for a man to hire any one to swear
falsely against any one, promising him a reward, and for him to receive it upon
such an account, this is abominable; and he that will take a false oath, will
not stick at the committing of any sin whatsoever: such a man makes himself
liable to all the curses in the book of God threatened against such sinners: The
custom in our country to him that swears, is, to kiss the Book, intimating
that all the curses that are in that book shall light upon him, if he swear not
that which is true: and in Israel they were wont to lift up their hand when
they swore, lifting it up toward Heaven, calling on God to testify the truth
of what they swore, as God himself when he swears, he says, I lift up my
hand and say, I live for ever. Deuteronomy. 32.40.

2. When men having sworn, and taken an oath in the presence of God, whereby
they bind themselves to that which is good and right; yet make no account at
all of keeping it, but the next time that oath crosses their lusts, or suiteth
not with present occasions, then it is laid aside; no matter is made of
breaking of it. I told you before, there is an oath promissory as well as
assertory: now in a promissory oath, we are required 1. to swear what we mean
to perform, and afterward to perform what we have sworn; a man that swears
an oath to bind himself by a Bond, must not break his promise, but do according
to all that proceeds out of his mouth, performing his oath. Numb. 30.3. for
this we have Gods own example, who remembered his oath to Abraham Luke 1.37. and
so must we if we will rest in his Holy-hill: this is the mark of one that shall
inhabit Gods heavenly Zion, that having sworn, though he finds it to be his
hurt, yet he breaks it not. Joshua and the Princes of Israel having sworn to
the Gibeonites, though they were not so well advised as they should have been
in taking that oath, yet the matter of the oath being just, and having taken
it, they would keep it. And the children of Israel smote them not, because the
Princes of the congregation had sworn to them by the Lord God of Israel; and
all the congregation murmured against the Princes, but all the Princes said
unto them: We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel; now therefore we
may not touch them. Josh. 9.18, 19. Tully says, an oath must be sacredly kept
toward our enemies; as David made conscience of keeping his oath to Shimei that
before had cursed him. 2 Samuel 19.23. and therefore the Latin word juramentum, a
jure manente, plainly shows unto us, Quae enim juramus, firma and immota
debent esse. Valla. lib. 6 Eleg. cap. 37.
that our oaths must be steadfast and constant: and so much the Greek word (...)
imports to us whether we understand it quasi (...) a hedge, or quasi (...), a
bound or limit, because the swearer has hedged himself about with Gods truth,
and is so bounded and limited, that he must of necessity perform what he has
sworn. Abraham when he sent his servant which had the rule over all that he
had, to his kindred, to take a wife to his son Isaac, he made him put his hand
under his thigh and swear by the Lord God of the Heaven, and of the Earth, that
he should not take a wife unto his son of the daughte^s of the Canaanites. Genesis
24. 3, 9. It was a custom then to swear ^utting their hands under their own
^highs, or the thighs of him to whom ^y oath they bound themselves, their ^word
hanging upon the thigh: it was ^s much as to say, Let this sword en^er into my
heart, if I be not true to ^he matter which I have sworn. Another rite there
was also of old, in taking of an oath; it was by shedding ^he blood of some
creature, which was to be offered up in sacrifice: and the man was to swear
thus: So let my blood be shed, if I do not perform what I have sworn: many
Heathens were very tender of breaking an oath they had taken: when the
Carthaginians had taken Regulus a worthy Roman prisoner, they sent him to Rome
on a message upon his oath, which when he had performed, he returned back again
a prisoner to Carthage, according to the faith he plighted: and Pharaoh an
Heathen bids Joseph go up and bury his father, as he had made him swear. Genesis
50.6.

Perjury therefore is a great sin, an^ that which casts more contempt upon
God then any other sin in the world; for thereby a man offers disdain to the
holy name of God, t^ which men fly as to a strong Tower in this regard, says
one, an oath is a divine thing; for it is an anchor hold to which we fly,
Divina res est jus jurandum; secra enim anchora est, ad quam confugitur quum
humana sapientia ingredi non potest. Zuingl. Elench. in Catabap.
when man's wisdom can go no further now when a man takes an oath as he does
appeal to the God o^ truth for confirmation, as truth^ witness and maintainer;
so likewise he appealeth to the God of Justice for vindication as the avenger
of falsehood; So also to the God of power, speedily to take vengeance upon him,
if he break his oath now he that having sworn by the name of God, yet dares
wickedly to break his oath, the matter of his oath being just and good; he does
as it were dare God, and say, I will do what I have a mind to do, I fear not
what God can do unto me. This sin highly provokes the wrath of God a^^^nst a
man. Ezekiel. 17.18, 19. Be^^^se Zedekiah broke his Covenant ^^de with the King of
Babylon, which (...) confirmed by oath, therefore the ^^rd threatens him thus:
for he has ^^spised the oath, and broken the ^^venant (yet lo he had given
his ^^nd) Because he has done all these ^^ings, he shall not escape: therefore
^^us says the Lord God; As I live, will surely bring mine oath that he has
^^spised, and my covenant that he has ^^oken upon his own head, and I will
^^read my net upon him, and he shall be ^^ken in my net, etc. where you may
^ote. 1. That oaths are sacred things, that which God owneth as his, in a
^pecial manner: my oath has he despi^ed, and my covenant has he broken. ^. It
is a great contempt to God to break his covenant, and to despise the oath of
God; to despise an oath, is to despise God himself, the God before whom we
swear: as if we should say, we neither fear, nor regard his power or severity;
we do say so much in effect, when we break the oath w^^ swear. 3. When God
speaks of p^nishing for this sin, he speaks after another manner, then when he
is about to punish for any other sins; h^ does it with more solemnity. 1. Yo^
may note here the certainty and sur^ness of the punishment. He that ha^ done
all these things, he shall not escape. God confirms it with an oath As I
live, I will surely bring mine oa^^ that he has despised upon his head. A^ I
live, says the Lord, he shall die in the midst of Babel in the place of the
King, that had made him King, whos^ oath he despised, and whose covenan^ made
with him he brake. ver. 16. Thu^ you see what an horrid thing it was for
Zedekiah to break his oath with the King of Babylon. 2. It is the sorest kind
of punishment: Gods curse shall enter into the house of him that swears
falsely by the name of the Lord, and it shall remain in the midst of his house,
and shall consume it with the timber and stones thereof. ^^ech. 5.4. Perjury
brings a flying ^^rse that enters into the house of ^^e false swearer, and
abides there, ^^d there it will remain, not only upon their persons, but their
houses, and ^ot on the outside but the inside ^hereof, that shall consume the
very ^^mber and stones thereof; it shall ^ring his estate and family to nothing.

There is yet another kind of oath, and that is when men bind themselves ^y vow
or oath to do that which is in it self unlawful, and forbidden by the word of
God: as those 40 men. Act. 23. that made a vow they would not eat nor drink
till they had killed Paul; the like oath was that of Herod to the daughter of
Herodias, who swear unto her, whatsoever she should ask of him, he would give
it her, even unto the half of his Kingdom; and when she asked the Head of John
Baptist in a charger, Mar. 6.25. albeit Herod seemed to be sorry, yet for the
oath he commanded it to be give^ her: ver. 26. when he had sinfull^ and rashly
made this oath, then h^ runs into another sin pretending conscience to keep it.
But though it be a very wicked thing to make suc^ oaths, yet being made, they
are be^ter broken then kept: for the sinn^ that was committed in the making
them, is continued and increased i^ keeping them.

SECT. 5. Of the great judgments threatened against swearers.
LEt us therefore be exhorted to harken to that dehortation of the Apostle;
Before all things my brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor
by any other oath, Jam. 5.12. Let us therefore consider the great miseries and
judgments that are threatened against vain and profane swearers, in the word
of God. Swearing is a sin that brings upon men all miseries in this world, and
in ^^e world to come.

1. The Lord will not hold such men guiltless: though thou have not ^worn by
any false God, nor sworn to (...) lie, yet by ordinary oaths thou have taken
his name in vain, and that guilt shall stand upon Record against thee, until
thou have been seriously humbled for it, and truly repented of it, and art
acquitted from it; and if this be not in this life, Hell fire will show the
greatness of this sin: Great reason there is, God should take the avenging this
sin into his own hand; because most men are eager in avenging every taunting
and reproachful term against themselves, and will not digest the Lie, but give
the Stab; yet can be contented to hear Gods name blasphemed, and reproached,
and never show any discontent at it.

2. God will come as a swift witness against such. Malac. 3.5. it may be thou will deny it, and thy Companions will deny it, and not witness against thee;
but God will be a swift witness against thee. The Trope is a Metaphor, and the
affection of the Metaphor seems to be a Catachresis, witness being put for
Judge; that is in effect thus much: I will soon upon the evidence of the Fact
give judgment against you: Bodin. de Republ. lib. 6. Gratiam. Cause. 2. qu. 1.
and 7. Bocerus de jurisdict. Cap. 6. Sect. 34. Weemes Exercit. Vol. 2. Lib. 2.
Cap. 17.
that of Bodinus is generally received. If a Fact be only known to the Judge,
he may be a witness of it, but a Judge he cannot be; and the Canons speak
positively, that a Judge is to give sentence secundum allegata and probata.
Great reason it should be so among men; but God being omnipresent, an
eyewitness of evey fact, infinitely wise, and not subject to the least error,
and infinitely Holy, out of all danger to be corrupted, may be, and is both
Witness and Judge; and often comes as a swift witness against profane
swearers: I have read of a Mariner that was greatly given to swearing and
cursing; and upon a day the Sea being very calm) he leapt into the water to
swim, and although he was very skilful in swimming, yet by Gods permission he
sunk, and was drowned; Serafino. Razzi.
but being afterward found by his friends, a due search being made about his
body, there was nothing found wanting but his wicked tongue only. In Mantua
diverse gamesters playing at Tables, and abusing the name of Christ, their eyes
presently fell out of their heads upon the Tables as they played.

3. Everlasting woe hangs over the heads of profane swearers: St. James tells
us they shall fall into condemnation. Jam. 5.12. and that for eternity; though
such men may escape the wrath and punishment of men, yet shall they not escape
the wrath of God: therefore let as many as have any fear of God before their
eyes, any care of their own Salvation, any desire to escape endless
condemnation, beware of it, and take the Apostles counsel, swear not at all,
lest ye fall into condemnation.

SECT. 6, The objection of those that deny the use of all kinds of oaths
answered: how oaths must be qualified, showed in three things.
Jam. 5.12. before mentioned, and from Mat. 5.34. the Manichees of old, the
Anabaptists long since, and the Quakers of late, do deny all kind of oaths, and
affirm swearing in any case to be utterly unlawful; because it is said, swear
not at all. For the Manichees, Chemnitius out of Austin, Chemnit. ex August.
Hieron. Theophilact.
and other approved Authors, says, that they disproved of the old Testament,
because it approved of oaths; Yea, Jerome and Theophilact, as he says, thought
oaths unlawful in the new Testament.

Resp.
But if they make their full point at Ne juretis omnino, Swear not at all: they
allege the Text in both places as honestly as the Devil did. Psalm. 91. to
persuade Christ to throw himself down headlong from the top of the Temple Mat.
4. But let both places be well weighed, and you will see the scope both of
Christ and his Apostle, was either to forbid common and causeless oaths, or
else swearing by the creatures. So says St. Augustine, In novo Testamento
dicttum est, Ne juretis omnino, non quia jurare est peccatum, sed quia
perjurare est immane peccatum; in the New Testament it is said, swear not at
all: not because all swearing is sinful, but because it is a grievous sin for
a man to forswear himself: and again. Admonitio non jurandi, est conservatio a
peccato perjurij; Christ's admonition not to swear at all, is a preservation
from the sin of perjury: and Calvin says; Christi Scopus, Calvin Instit. lid.
2. cap. 8.
non fuit legem laxare aut restringere, sed ad veram and genuinam
intelligentiam and sensum reducere, quia Scribarum and Pharisaeorum Commentis
valde erat depravata: Christ's scope was not to slacken or restrain the Law, but
to reduce it to its true and genuine sense and understanding; because it was
much depraved by the false Glosses and Comments of the Scribes and Pharisees.
Now that there were lawful oaths, appears Exodus 22.11, where it is said, that
if a man deliver any thing to his neighbor to be kept, and it perish or be
lost, (no man knowing how) the party to whom it was committed, must clear
himself by an oath, and that shall put an end to the controvesie: Praecipuum
vinculum ordinis Politici. Melanct. Bonavent. Centiloq part. 1. cap. 12.
There is a great use of oaths to be taken now as was heretofore; the end
theref being the manifestation of truth, and the stinting of strife. Heb. 6.16.
it being, as Melancton calls it, the chief Bond of civil order; hereby right
and justice is maintained, truth and verity is preserved, peace and concord is
established, discord and dissension ended, says Bonaventure; To this end in
the first place Reasons must be used; when these fail, then by witnesses must
the matter be established; when witnesses fail, then oath must be used, and
this is the end of strife: and therefore it must be done but sparingly, and in
weighty matters when necessity requires, and the truth not otherwise to be
cleared, and that before a Magistrate, etc. You may read Exodus 18.22. that
great matters of weight and moment were only to be brought before Moses; and
for the deciding of smaller matters, inferior officers were appointed; and
shall God be troubled and called to witness for every trifling cause? Calvin
says well to this purpose; Laeditur Dei Majestas omnibus frivolis Juramentis.

That an oath is ordained by God to very good purpose, may be seen by the
practice of the Saints of God, of the holy Angels, yea of God himself. 1. The
Saints in the old Testament and in the new. Thus Abraham lifts up his hand to
the most high God, Genesis 14.22. Jacob swears to Laban. Genesis 31. Joseph to
Jacob his Father. Genesis 47. David to Jonathan, Elijah to Obadiah: and in the new
Testament Paul to the Romans, God is my witness, etc. Romans 1.9. and to the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.23. 2. The holy Angels havv sworn. Dan. 12.7. by him that
lives for ever, Rev. 10.5.6. Yea. 3. God himself is recorded to have sworn,
sometime by his Holiness. Psalm. 89.35. Sometime by his right hand. Propter
hominum socord^am Deus jurat Philo. Jud. in lib. and de Sacrif. Cain and Abel.
Isai. 62.8. Sometime by his great Name. Jerem. 44.26. Sometime by his Soul.
Jerem. 51.14. not that he needs to confirm his words by an oath, which of
themselves are sufficient enough to be believed; but God swears, says Philo,
to convince the infirmity of our nature, and then to comfort it again.

Having seen that there are lawful oaths; let us now see how our oaths must be
qualified; for your direction therein, see Jerem. 4.2. Thou shall swear the
Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness.

1. In Truth: the matter of this oath must be true; thy oath must not be
against thy conscience; the contrary is reproved Isai. 48.1. where God
complains the people had sworn by his Name, but not in Truth.

2. In Judgment, i. e. in Wisdom and Prudence, with discretion and
consideration of the thing in question, the nature of an oath, of the mind and
meaning of him that ministers it, of the circumstances of time, place, person,
etc. else we swear rashly and unadvisedly; the matter about which thou swearest
must be well known to thee, and not uncertain: the Romans used that most
considerate word Arbitror, I think, when the Jurors said those things which
they knew most certainly: if the matter of the oath a man takes be not just,
he sins in swearing, and more in keeping of his oath. David did much better
in breaking his rash oath, and not killing Nabal. 1 Samuel 25. then Herod did in
keeping his oath and beheading John Baptist. Mar. 6. It is the precept of an
Heathen (...). Reverence an oath; and the child of God is said to fear an oath.
Eccles. 9.2. judgment will guide us, never to take an oath but upon necessity.

3. In Righteousness, or secundum justitiam: and here we are to look that the
thing be lawful, that it will stand with Piety and Charity, and that there be
a just occasion to swear; else our oath is a wicked oath, like Herod's to
Herodias, and the Jews against Paul: God is hereby sanctified, when we swear in
Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; when he is called upon as a knower
of all secrets, a searcher of all hearts, a defender and rewarder of truth, and
a revenger of falsehood.

SECT. 7. Stirring up Magistrates to suppress vain swearing.
NOw since rash and idle swearing, and perjury are sins that abound in this
Land of ours, and are like to make the whole Nation to mourn and shake; is it
not high time that our Rulers and Magistrates should put bridles in the mouths
of those that are given to these sin, against which strict Laws have been made
by most Nations in the world?

Among the Egyptians, Boaemus de moribus gentium. lib. 1. cap. 5. and lib. 2.
cap. 9.
whosoever was convicted for a common swearer, was to lose his head; among the
Scythians, it was the loss and forfeiture of all his Goods. Among the Romans,
the swearer was to be thrown with violence from the top of the Rock Tarpeius;
and this was the only cause says Plutarch, Plutar.
that they would not suffer their children to swear by the name of Hercules
within doors, but made them to go abroad, that they might deliberate of their
oaths: Among the Grecians there was a Law that every swearer was to lose his
ears: and the Jews were wont to rend their clothes when they heard the name of
God blasphemed or profaned; which if we should do in our days, as often as we
hear men belching out black and hideous oaths, we should not keep one suit long
upon our backs, ere we might tear it to pieces: one of the Kings of France made
a Law that every swearer should have his mouth seared with burning hot irons,
St. Lewis.
and caused the tongue of a great swearer to be cut out of his head; Rhenan.
annot.
and said he would endure the like punishment himself in his own person,
conditionally it might so fall out, that afterward this hateful vice might
never more be heard in his Kingdom: and one of the Kings of this Land, out of a
pious care to suppress this sin, ordained that a forfeiture should be exacted
of every one that was heard or noted to swear in his Court: Yea some report
that the very Turks will stop their ears at the hearing of an oath.

But men of all estates among us do show themselves worse then Jews, in daily
crucifying the Lord of Glory, and ripping up his wounds to bleed afresh, and
instead of Cross and Nails rend and grind him to pieces between their teeth.
Is not this the sin of many of the Nobility and Gentry of this Land? God has
vouchsafed to honor them more then others, and they dishonor him more then
others; making it the common figure in their hellik Rhetoric, not to give
their best friend a word, till they have given their Savior a stab, and the
name of God a wound; making an oath the Proem of their speeches, and the
Complement of their discourse.

Look into our Towns, Cities, and you shall see how ready Tradesmen are to sell
their souls so they may sell their wares with oaths; but a sad ba^gain it is,
when for every trifle they se^ their souls, which the whole world i^ not able
to redeem: not only Courtiers, that are men of the best breeding, bu^ even
Countrey-Peasants, men that are not only void of Grace, but also of all natural
endowments, are wise enough to practice this sin; the arrant'st Clown, that is
most rude and barbarous in speaking, is Rhetorical enough in swearing, and can
equal the highest in strange and various oaths.

For this sin God will have a controversy with this Nation, and for this I
fear, our Land will mourn; it is a sin that is like to shake the very bowels of
our Church and State; therefore if Magistrates tender the good and welfare of
either, if they bear any love to this Nation, if they have any zeal for the
Lord of hosts, then let me beseech them to gird their sword upon their thigh,
and arm themselves with resolution to suppress this proud sin, that scorneth
to quarrel with any under God himself.

CHAP. 7. Of the slandering tongue.
SECT. 1. Shows what slandering is, and that men may be guilty of this sin
six ways.
IN the next place I shall speak of that sin of the Tongue, Definit. of
slandering. Detractio est Locutio ex invid a procedens, bona aliorum denigrans.
Hugo.
which is called slandering: First I shall show what it is, then how many ways
men may be guilty of this sin.

Slandering is the blemishing of another good name, or the speaking against
another out of envy and malice.

Now men may be guilty of this sin diverse ways; when men report that which is
false of their Neighbors, to their disgrace and damage: no man but will grant
this to be a slander: some there are, when they have no just matter of accusing
others, they will devise matter wherewith to slander them: thus the Jews
conspire against Jeremiah: Come, said they, let us imagine some device against
Jeremiah, come and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed
to any of his words. Jerem. 18.18. David by the spirit of God speaking of Doeg
that slandered him to Saul, sets down his sin thus: Thy tongue imagines
mischief, and is like a sharp razor that cutteth deceitfully: Thou do love
evil more then good, and lies more then to speak the truth. Psalm. 52.2, 3. and
he complains of his slanderous enemies to God, praying God to help him. Hold
not thy peace, O God of my praise: for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth rf
the deceitful are opened against me; they have spoken against me with a lying
tongue; they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against
me without a cause. Psalm. 109.1, 2, 3.

2. Men may be guilty of this sin, when they speak for the matter that which is
truth; yet they wrest it to another end then it was intended, Words reported
again, have as another sound, so another sense.
spoken or acted: Doeg reported concerning David and Ahimelech, that which was
for the matter true, but reporting it to another end then it was done, the
scripture calls him a false tongue: Thus it is with them that were false
witnesses against our Lord and Savior Christ, they said, he said, he would
destroy the Temple, and raise it again in three days: Now he said, destroy ye
this Temple, (speaking of the Temple of his body) and I will raise it again in
three days. Joh. 2.19, 21. Of this the Prophet David complains. Psalm. 56.5.
every day they wrest my words, thetr thoughts are against me for evil; and of
this number were those that watched for the prophet Jeremiah's halting, to make
him an offender in a word: that time shall come that such tongues as these
shall be cut out.

3. Men may be guilty hereof, when unto something that is true, they add
something that is false; and of their own surmising, and charge their
neighbors with it. Thus it was with Paul's accusers. Act. 21.28, 29. they
supposed that he had brought Greeks into the Temple, because they had seen
Trophimus an Ephesian before with him in the City: the Apostle did not any such
thing, but because they do surmise such a thing, therefore they lay it to his
charge, and stir up the people againg him: thus men become guilty of this sin,
pretending some ground why they think so, and so charge their neighbors with
what is false, and the product of their surmises.

4. Men are slanderers when they speak that which is for the matter true, and
yet they speak it not upon right grounds, that they ought to speak it; as

1. When they speak truth for matter, yet it is to vent their own passion, as
many times in men's reviling one another, and throwing filth in one another
faces, they speak truth, but do not care to do their Neighbor good by it, but
speak it in passion, not with a spirit of love, but on purpose to disgrace and
vilify them, as when evil Neighbors fall out, they rip up one another faults
and infirmities, and miscarriages, and call one another by disgraceful and
opprobrious Terms.

2. When men speak what is to the discredit of their Neighbor, merely to hold
on a tale in discouse: Now consider that Slanderers and Tale-bearers are called
in the Original by the same word, it being a hard matter for those that are
given to tale-bearing, not to be guilty of slander: The Lord absolutely
requires, that men should not be given to the sin of tale-bearing, to take
away their neighbors good name. Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer
among thy people. Lev. 19.16. where we may take notice that the Hebrew word
[Rakel] properly signifies a Pedlar or petty-Merchant, (...)
that goes up and down the Country offering his wares at every man's door,
taking up his Wares at one place, and carrying them to another to sell them: So
the talebearer catches up an evil report of his Neighbor at one place, and
is not at rest till he is at another place to tell it again, offering to vend
it at a very low rate to any man that will take it off his hands: and as it is
with the Pedlar, so long as his Pack is fast, his Ware is not seen, but he
opens his Pack, and then it is for every ones eye; so it is with a talebearer;
he readily opens his Pack, and the more secret the thing is, the more he
desires to publish it, that it may go for the greater news: The Lord tells the
Mountains of Israel; Ye are taken up in the lips of talkers; and are an infamy
of the people. Ezekiel. 36.3. when people have nothing else to discourse of, then
the Church and people of God shall find discourse for bablers; and says the
Holy Ghost, ye are become the reproach of the people. Tatlers and busybodies
are joined together by the Apostle. 1 Timothy 5.13. and when such people meet
together, other men's matters are the matter of their common talk. Gerson Gerson.
writing to his brother, tells him of many sins he might run into, before he
was aware of it, and this is the first that he mentions, sc. Nubes verborum,
intimating that in men's ordinary discourses, there be as it were many Clouds of
evil speaking and slandering: one of the Ancients tells us of one that carried
a stone three years in his mouth, ut vitaret multiloquium, that he might avoid
babbling; and well were it if the mouths of tatlers and tale-bearers were shut
continually, unless they could open them to better purpose then they do.

Obloquium est absen i detrahere, and dolose mordere. August.
3. When men speak that behind another back, as evil, which they will not speak
to their faces, speaking to the defaming or discredit of them that are absent;
these are whisperers, such as go about from one to another, privately and
closely venting their slanders: This is against the Rule of our Savior, who
says, If thy Brother has trespassed against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone. Mat. 18.15. Now here is their sin, speak of it they
will, but loath they are to have it known it came from them: Pray neighbor
speak not of it, bring not my name in question, I would not be known to be the
Author of this report: if this be spoken openly, and before many, then it is
called by the name of backbiting: Psalm. 15.3. if it be secretly spoken, then it
is called whispering: such a one would not seem a slandrer, though he well
deserves the name. Austin caused these verses to be written over his Table.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
Whosoever delights the Absent to disgrace, Austin.

Let that man know that here he has no place.
Whispering and revealing of secrets is usually the cause of much strife and
contention among men: A whisperer separateth chief friends. The whole Duty of
Man. part. 13.
Pro. 16.28. This sort of slanderer, is of all other the most dangerous, for he
works in the dark, ties all he speaks to, not to own him as the Author; so
that whereas (as one observes) in the public accusations, the party may have
some means of clearing himself, and detecting his accuser; here he shall have
no possibility of that; Aquin. 2 da 2. de quest. 74. Christop. Cart- Exposit.
Psalm. 15.3.
the slander like a secret poison works incurable effects, before ever the
man discern it. Aquinas makes whispering another kind of sin distinct from
backbiting: but as one well notes, they differ only as Genus and Species,
backbiting being more general then whispering; for every whisperer is a
backbiter, but every backbiter is not a whisperer.

4. When men speak against their Neighbors, not unto those that may cover
their infirmities with the mantle of love, or do any thing toward the
reclaiming them, but unto those that will blaze them abroad to their infamy: it
is lawful to speak of men's faults behind their backs, to those that have
authority over those of whom we speak; this is no backbiting: those that were
of the house of Cloe declared unto Paul the contentions and divisions that were
among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.11. they do not tell what they hear of them
abroad to hurt them, but they tell it to the Apostle who watched over them for
the good of their souls, and he tells them of it, and gives them good counsel,
telling them also whence he understood of this their miscarriage, and this he
does for their good: and they that do otherwise, are guilty of these sins
before the Lord: Grace will teach, and Religion will command a man to speak
nothing to ^ay against his neighbor, except unto those that may labor to
promote his good: did men make Gods word their rule, much of this Tongue evil
might through Gods grace be prevented.

5. When men speak evil of others (though for the matter true) yet have not
their hearts so affected with it as they ought; as when a man pleases himself
with it, and is tickled with delight at it, but has no bowels of compassion
toward the body or soul of him of whom he speaks: this is a sign of a very
evil heart: we ought to deal with the sins of our neighbors, as with their
wounds; not please our selves with them, but consider them with relenting
hearts toward them.

6. When men speak of the sins of others with all the aggravations of them, and
are not content once or twice to mention them, but go on in a continued course
of reproaching them more and more: this is a sign of a bad heart:

Yet in some (cases, which being wisely considered) we may speak what we know
of others (though it be evil that we know of them) and yet not be guilty of
this sin of slandering: as when we are (by some that have good ground to
enquire after such and such of our neighbors) desired to relate what we know
of them; in such a case we may witness the truth concerning them before a
Mrgistrate, or any person justly desiring it: or when it is so, that our
silence may be an occasion to deceive others, or prejudice others, we may
inform them, lest their specious pretenses of Religion may deceive them: the
scripture allows in sobriety and moderation, to give an Item to undeceive
those that are in danger to be deceived thereby.

SECT. 2. The greatness of this sin showed in four things.
NOw in the next place, The backbiter is like a Butchers Cur, whose lips are
always bloody with the slaughter of some Beast or other.
to deterr you from this sin, and that you may see the danger of it, consider.

1. This is one of those sins that is most abominable in the sight of God.
Prove. 1.16, 19. As a lying tongue and false witness that speaks Lies, so he
that sows discord among his brethren, are things that the Lord hates; and he
shows his hatred of it by his frequent forbidding of it in his word. Thou
shall not report a false tale. Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not go up and down as a
Tale bearer among thy people. Lev. 19.16. and see how God esteems of such
persons; he joyneth his prohibition of it, with that of murder, as in the next
words is evident; neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor.
The backbiter is a manslayer, and God esteems of him as no other then a
murderer.

2. God denounces a curse and strange punishments that he will bring upon
those that are slanderers of others Cursed be he that smites his neighbor
secretly. Deuteronomy. 27.24. This was one of the curses that was to be read by the
Levites in the hearing of all Israel under the Law, and all the people were to
say Amen. And albeit such men may pretend an interest in Gods Covenant; yet he
tells them plainly, they have nothing to do with his Covenant; and as they make
no bones of tearing the names of others by this sin of the tongue, so the Lord
will tear them in pieces, and none shall deliver them. Psalm. 50. from ver. 16.
ad finem: He speaks to those that brought their sacrifices before him, and
thought highly of themselves from their interest in the Covenant: but verses
19, 20. you may first read their sin. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy
tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and speak against (...) brother; thou
slanderest thine own ^^thers son: then read their punish^ent. ver. 21, 22. But
I will reprove ^ee, and set thy sins in order before ^ee: Consider this, all ye
that forget ^od, ( i. e. Ye that are apt to forget ^ods word, by falling into
these sins,) ^ast I tear you in pieces, and there be ^one to rescue you: In
Psalm. 140.9. God threatens strange punishments that he will bring upon them.
Psalm. ^40.9. As for the head of those that ^ompass about the Godly, the
mischief of their own tongues shall cover them; and ver. 10. he compares them
to one in a deep pit without water, that cannot get out, when a shower of fire
is falling down upon his head. God will root out such from among the living:
for the backbiter shall not be established in the earth; evil shall hunt a man
of a violent tongue to overthrow him. ver. 11. God will throw them down as it
were from the top of a Rocky-cliff or steep place, where, with the fall they
must needs break their bones.

3. It is a most dreadful and a damnable sin: whisperers and backbiters are
mentioned by St. Paul, as such that regard not to know God, and to be delivered
up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient. Romans 1.28,
29, 30. whispering and backbiting are there ranked among many other great sins
which are the effects of a reprobate mind: this was a damnable sin, deadl^ in
the very Heathen, of whom the Apostle there speaks; how much more those that
profess themselves to ^e Christians? and the same Apostle bids Timothy refuse
the younger widows that wax wanton against Christ, that are idle, and go about
from house to house, yea not only idle, but also pratlers and busy-bodies,
speaking things which are not comely; and of these he says, they have
damnation, because they have broken the first faith. 1 Timothy 5.11, 12, 13.

4. Slandering makes a man more like the Devil then any other sin does; for the
slanderer has the Devil in his tongue; and the spirit of God gives the same
name to a slanderer, that is given to the Devil; he is called Diabolus a
slanderer, he is the patron of all evil speaking; he spared not God himself,
but spoke evil of him to our first Parents Adam and Eve in Paradise. Genesis 3.4,
5. and slanderers are called (...), false accusers or devils. 2 Timothy 3.3. Tit.
3.2. So our Savior in this respect calls Judas a Devil, because he acted the
part of the Devil, in slandering his Master in secret. Joh. 6.70. and from this
sin he came to betray his Master for 30 pieces of silver; slanderers are the
Devils journey-men; they are Canini dentes Diaboli. The Devils sharpest teeth,
as Parisiensis speaks: Parisiens. Struth. observe.
Calumniation is the Devils mind in man's mouth, and his Arrow shot by Man's Bow,
as another observes.

SECT. 3. Of speaking evil of God himself; showed in four things.
THere is another branch of this sin, which is grearer then the former; as when
men speak evil of God and his ways and proceedings, or any that receive any
power, authority, or Commission from God, as Magistrates and Ministers; and
also when men speak evil of the Saints and people of God.

1. When men slander God himself, and speak evil of his doings; as, 1. when we
debase or undervalue the excellency of Gods works, which were all made in
wisdom; or when we do obscure or extenuate the gifts of God that are in any of
our Brethren; or when God has given us variety of his good creatures for our
daily refreshment, yet we slight them, and discommend such meats as God has
sent us to eat; this is to reproach God himself. 2. When we either take no
notice of, or lightly pass over the judgments of God, as the wicked man in the
Psalms, of whom it is said, Thy Judgments are far out of his sight; and when
men so pass them over, as that they apply them to others, not to themselves, as
they did. Luke 13.1, 2, 3. 3. Men slander the justice of God, when they say
that Gods ways are not equal: that God deals partially, unequally with those
that are equal; that he deals ill with good men, well with evil men; the
wicked have the world at will, the Godly are grievously afflicted; when men
count the proud happy, and in discontent say, Malach. 3.14, 15.
They that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are delivered:
Jerem. 12.1, 2.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are all they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Thou have planted them, and they have taken root, they
grow and bring forth fruit; Psalm. 73.4, 5, 7.
there are no bonds in their death, but they are strong and lusty, they are not
in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued with others; their eyes stand
out for fatness, they have more then heart can wish.

4. Men slander and dishonor God when his name is used in profane prayers for
wicked purposes, and in praises and thanksgivings for some evil that is done;
as when the Pirate and the Thief prays that he may meet with a good booty, as
Camden speaks of the wild- Irish: so when Thieves having gotten their prey, or
Gamesters and Cheaters when they have gotten much money of a man (when they
might as well have cut his purse) give thanks to God for their theevery. I
thank God I have sped well, I have had good luck to day, I thank God: thus Saul
gives thanks to God for the discovery of David, when the Ziphims brought him
word where he was. 1 Samuel 23.21. Blessed be ye of the Lord: Thus Adulterers
make God as it were their Bawd; common cutters make him their abettor or
receiver; Dicers make him a Gamester, and all wicked men make him accessory to
their sins. These things have thou done, I held my peace, or did not rebuke
thee, but gave thee success. i. e. I suffered thee to prosper, and thou
wickedly thoughtest that I had been altogether such a one as thy self. Psalm.
50.21. Hereunto may be referred the notable abusing of Gods name by evil
Magistrates, in making wicked decrees, and by the Pope and his adherents, in
making wicked Canons and Constitutions, countenancing and authorizing them with
the name and authority of God. In nomine Dei, Amen. which gave occasion to the
common byword, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: now the greater the person
is that we defame or speak against, the greater is the offense, and deserves
the greater punishment; as to speak evil of any man be he never so mean, is a
fault; but to speak evil of a Nobleman, is scandalum magnatum, and deserves
punishment or imprisonment; but to speak evil of the King is crimen or
scandalum laesae Majestatis, Treason, and deserves death: therefore to speak
against God, deserves both temporal and eternal death.

SECT. 4. Of speaking evil of Rulers and Dignities.
A Second sort of men there are, that upon every small discontent, are ready to
speak evil of Rulers and Governors, and those whom God has set over them: a
sin forbidden expressly, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of
thy people: and Solomon says, Revile or curse not the King, no not in thy
heart. Eccles. 10.20. for the birds of the air shall bewray it: God has
commanded us in Scripture to be subject to the higher powers. Romans 3.1.
therefore we ought to give them Titles of Honor according to their places, and
to ascribe unto Princes Titles of Grace and Majesty, because it has pleased
the spirit of God to ascribe it to them, and by their Titles to commend their
persons and places to us; yea, and to furnish them with such gifts for
government, as they become not naked Titles only, Perkins Exposit. Epist. Jude.
but just significations of the true honor with which God has graced them, as
one well notes.

And as Princes are the highest powers on earth; so they have the right of life
and death over men: and the use and exercise of high powers is so necessary in
every Government, that without it no Government can long subsist; for it is for
the defense of well doers, and without it all will soon be marred: and the
Ensign, Badge, or mark of the high power whereby it discovers it self, and
makes it self known, is the sword; and causes it to be born before him; hence
says the Apostle, if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he (i. e.
the Ruler) bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil; and the sword is the general
and common instrument of death; whereby the Magistrate becomes a terror to
evil doers, to execute death upon them, and is a Revenger of that Law upon the
transgressors against it: Now these high powers are called in Scripture by the
name of Gods; God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among
the Gods; i. e. the most high God judges among the Judges. Psalm. 82.1. and
ver. 6. he says to the Judges, I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are
children of the most high: seeing then to have a high power makes the nature of
God, and God himself calls Rulers Gods; then let men take heed of speaking
evil of them, it being forbidden by God under this notion, Exodus 22.28. Thou
shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people; there the word
[Judges] is put in the Margin; Ainswer. in Exodus 22.
and the Jewish Doctors explain it thus: Whosoever revileth a Judge among the
Judges of Israel, transgresses the Law: Thou shall not revile the Gods; and so
if he revile the Ruler, either the chief of the great Synedrion, or the King,
he transgresses this Law: Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
people. Here then are they to be condemned that slander and speak evil of the
doings of Magistrates, which are become the common Table-talk and ordinary
discourse of these times. St. Paul when he called Ananiah a painted wall, he
knew him not to be the Lords High Priest; for if he had, he would not have
reproacht him; he looked upon him as an usurper, which made him use that
boldness toward him; it is set down as a brand on those false teachers
mentioned by Jude, they despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities; in the
Greek it is, (...).
they blaspheme Dignities or Glories, they speak evil of those whom God has
adorned with Majesty and Glory.

SECT. 5. Of slandering Gods Ministers; and slandering Gods people; the
greatness of the sin showed five ways. An objection answered in four things.
3. A third sort of men there are that speak evil of Church Officers and
Ministers; none are so maligned and slandered as they; the better and the more
faithful they are, the more opposed; the more outcry there is against them from
unreasonable men: the Ministry is apt to be evil spoken of by profane and
graceless persons, because it discovers their filthiness, and unmasks their
hypocrisy: and their Doctrine comes so close to their consciences, that it is
oft-times a fretting corrosive to them, that they cannot go on so smoothly and
quietly in their sins as otherwise they would: They never speak well of a
faitful Minister, because he never speaks good to them: 1 Kings 22.8.
There is one Michaiah, says Ahab, by whom we may ask counsel of the Lord,
but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good unto me but evil: therefore it
is that evil men spurn both against the calling and the men, and watch for
their halting, and take hold of their least infirmities thereby to disgrace
them, judging that to slander and pour contempt on that Calling, is to remove
shame from their own impudent practices. Furthermore, when a faithful Minister
does justly reprove them for their sins, they say he raileth at them: the term
that these slanderers give a just reproof, is reproaching: Christ having
reproved the Pharisees, one of the Lawyers said unto him; Master, thus saying,
thou reproachest us also, Luk 11.45. This is the common humor of bad people,
especially of the greater sort, who be like a certain Beast, of whom Pliny
affirms that he has his Gall in his Ear, and by much noise is made stark
mad; so there be a sort of people, who if they hear their sins reproved, are
much enraged, affirming their Minister raileth on them, when according to his
duty he does but reprove them.

4. A fouth sort there are that smite the people of God with their tongues, and
if they see any to walk more exactly then others, or themselves, then he is the
matter of their reproach and Ale-bench discourse; he is termed a singular
Person, one that is proud, factious, schismatical, or hypocritical.

1. Now that you may see the greatness of this sin, consider; that in speaking
against others, you speak against men; but in speaking against Gods people, you
speak not only against men, but against God himself: Enoch the seventh from
Adam prophesied of these, Backbite not any man, least thou flander'st him whom
God loves.
saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince them of their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him. Jude. ver. 14, 15. Christ was not then upon
earth in Enochs days, yet then in speaking against his people, they spoke
against himself, and he takes it so: Enoch was spoken against, because he would
not go on in sin with them, but walked with God, and they smite him for it with
their tongues; and thus they speak against God himself; and David says, they
set their mouth against the Heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth.
Psalm. 73.9.

2. God will one day call you to account for this: you please your selves with
it, and think all is well, and it is secret enough: none but your own
companions know it, that are like your selves; but God will bring it to light:
you speak evil of them that run not with you to the same excess of riot, but
you shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead, 1
Pet. 4.3, 4.

3. When that day of the Lord comes, then those his Saints whom you have so
spoken against, shall sit with Christ on Thrones to judge you; they shall
receive honor from him, and be owned by him, and all your reproaches shall be
wiped off from them. St. Paul. 1 Cor. 6.2. would have all men consider, what an
honor God reserveth for his people at that day: know ye not that the Saints
shall judge the world? Christ is the great Judge himself; to him the Father
has given the power of judging, and He will first absolve the people of God,
and then they shall sit upon his Throne with him, and shall approve the
sentence against all wicked men, and shall glorify the Lord for it, as the
whole Bench at the Assizes approve the Sentence that the Judge gives upon the
Malefactors: Consider then, it is a sin of a very high nature for you to take
liberty thus to slander the people of God: see the great honor that is
reserved for the Saints. Psalm. 149.5. ad finem. Let the Saints be joyful in
glory, etc. Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged
sword in their hands, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with
fetters of iron, to execute upon them the judgment written; This honor have
all his Saints: at the last day there shall be as much difference between a
child of God, and a great worldly Tyrant, as there is between a poor prisoner
at the Bar now, and his Judge upon the Bench.

4. As in speaking against them, you speak againg God: so herein you are found
to be blasphemers of the spirit of God in them. 1 Pet. 4.14. it is He that is
evil spoken of on your part, when ye reproach the people of God for the name of
Christ; the Apostle sets it down as an encouragement to the people of God, not
to fear any reproach that is cast upon them by the wicked; for says he, while
ye are thus reproached, if you walk answerable to your Profession, you glorify
the spirit: but those that speak evil of you, do blaspheme the spirit; and can
you speak evil of the spirit of God, and yet have the spirit? and having not
the spirit of Christ, ye are none of his.

5. Consider the punishment of Dives, or the rich glutton in Hell; not a drop
of water allowed him to cool the tip of his tongue. Luke 16. and as some
Divines observe, it was because he had let his tongue loose so unto this sin of
evil-speaking against Gods people; he fared deliciously every day, and cared
not for a poor child of God; and most commonly profane feasts are made up with
mad mirth, taunts, and reproaches, against the people of God: But sometimes it
so comes to pass, that they that reproach Christ, his ways, and people, do
themselves become an object of reproach and contempt to others, even in this
world; as one writes of the Emperor Charles the fifth.

Convitiis Christum oppugnans and fraudibus, ingens
Regum ille terror Carolus,
Ipsis ridiculus pueris, furiosus, and excors
Totus repent corruit.
While Charles that terror of Kings, subtly and reproachfully fights
against Christ and his Members, being driven out of Germany by Maurice Duke of
Saxony, he lies distracted in a Monastery, and becomes ridiculous to children,
crying out often of Metz and Maurice; of Maurice which had beaten him, and Metz
which he had lost.

6. Reproachers and slanderers of Gods people shall be shut out of Heaven at
the last day; God will then say to such, as unto Miriam; How were you not
afraid to speak against my servant? Numb. 12.8. If David would not admit a
slanderer into his house. Psalm. 101.5. much less will God admit any such to
come into his glorious Kingdom.

But some are ready to say;

Resp.
But to such I answer: How dare you to judge them, and pass sentence against
them as hypocrites, and such like? oh, know it is against Religion you speak;
else why make you more ado about the miscarriages of such, then of your own
companions! you conceal the same and worse actions in your selves, and in your
own companions, and agree well enough, and take no notice at all of them; but
if one that looks after the ways of God fail never so little, he is the
object of your reproach.

2. As for the Virtues and Graces which are eminent in them, and worthy of
commendation and imitation from you, you conceal them, and leave them unspoken
of; but if you espy the least vice or imperfection in them, you presently
reproach them for it, as notorious hypocrites; and in this respect a Slanderer
may be compared to a Swine, that coming into a Garden where he sees sweet
Flowers and stinking ordure, neglects the Flowers, and runs presently to the
Dung; or to him that snuffeth a candle with his bare fingers; for although his
fingers be defiled thereby, yet the candle gives the clearer light; even so he
that traduceth the virtuous, defiles his own conscience, but makes him a
great deal the more glorious.

3. How comes it to pass, that your hearts rise against those that profess
Religion, and own the ways of God, merely because they do so, and because they
go not on with you in sinful ways, and open profaneness! for if they did so,
you would hide their sins as your own; this clearly shows the ground of your
hatred and malice is because of Religion.

4. When you speak evil of Gods ways, and of all the people of God, because of
the miscarriages of some that make profession of Religion; this plainly shows
that it is from an enmity against the ways of God and Godliness; far be it
from me to plead for, or to uphold any men in any miscarriages, that own the
profession of Religion: but I desire men would in the fear of God, take heed of
this sin, lest they be found speaks against God himself: there is more danger
in this sin then men imagine; for it is so cross to true Grace, that the guilt
of this sin may justly question, whether a man has any true grace or not. See
the title that the Lord gives to such men. Isai. 57.3. Draw near hither, ye
sons of the sorceresse, the seed of the Adulterer and the Whore: they were of
those spurious Israelites, that seemed to be Religious, but were not so in
truth: now see their sin ver. 4. Against whom do ye sport your selves? against
whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue; Consider how unbeseeming to
Religion this is, it being the very same sin that we are speaking of.

SECT. 6, Of the causes of slandering others in general, and of the people of
God in special.
NOw the general and ordinary causes for which men slander and speak evil one
of another, are these.

1. Out of a desire to avenge themselves of such as have done them wrong, or
whom they suppose to have done them wrong: and when they cannot avenge
themselves otherwise, they will smite their Neighbor with a slanderous tongue.

2. Men often slander others, out of a desire of gain to themselves: thus Ziba
slandered Mephibosheth, to get his Lands for himself: this is very common in
Princes Courts; therefore Diogenes advised the Emperor to take heed of two
sorts of beasts in his Court, that did bite dangerously; the tame beast, the
flatterer; and the wild beast, the slanderer.

3. Envy is also the cause of evil speaking. 1 Pet. 2.1. which the Apostle
would have to be laid aside; and ill Will we say, never speaks good of any; Men
eminent in place or parts, are envyed; and who can stand before envy? herewith
the Jews being stirred up against Stephen, whose wisdom and spirit they were
not able to resist, they slanderously accused him as one that had spoken evil
of Moses, and of God. Act. 6.8.9.

4. Pride is also the cause of evil speaking: pride will scarce suffer a man to
speak well of any; the proud man is apt to detract and speak evil of all
others, that he only may be honored and applauded.

Furthermore, the special causes why evil men slander the people of God, are
these.

1. The enmity they bear against the Image and Graces of God in them, the
luster of their Holy conversation, their eminent parts and piety: Eusebius. Eccl.
hist. lib. 15. cap. 17. Niceph. Eccl. hist. lib. 15. cap. 9. Tripart. hist.
lib. 2.
for this cause the wicked Priests slandered Narcissus to Constantius, as
Eusebius tells us; for the same cause the Arians slandered Athanasius, as
Nicephorus tells us; and for this cause was Godly Anastallius slandered also.

2. The wicked slander the Godly, to discourage them in their profession. A
slanderous tongue is compared in Scripture to a Razor, to a Sword, to an Arrow;
A Razor is keen, it takes off every small hair, a Sword wounds at hand, and
an Arrow further off; so does an evil tongue.

3. Because they run not with them to the same excess of riot. 1 Pet. 4.4.
While Paul was a Pharisee, he is chosen out by the Jews as their Champion to
persecute the Saints; but when he is converted, and preaches the faith which
before he destroyed, then they cry out against him, Away with this fellow from
the earth, he is not woothy to live; the world now is scarce wide enough to
afford him a Houseroom.

The worst men speak worst in hope to lurk under the blemish of their betters.
4. Evil men slander Gods people to hide their own deformities, as Joseph's
Mistress complains of his unchaste behavior, when she her self was the
wanton solicitress.

5. They slander Gods people to stir up others to do the like, as one dog
sets many a barking: an ungodly man digs up evil, and in his lips there is a
burning fire.

6. Because they know not otherwise how to hurt them; Dan. 6.4.
as Daniels accusers sought an occasion against Daniel concerning the Kingdom,
but they could find no occasion nor fault, he was so faithful, there was no
blame nor fault found in him; and when they cannot otherwise hurt him, they
seek an occasion against him concerning the Law of God, and then accuse him to
the King; telling him that Daniel regarded not the King, nor the decree which
he had sealed. Dan. 6.13. Parisiensis says, that all the poison of the old
Serpent is in this sin, there is so much venom in it. One compares the
slandering tongue to the Frog, but that it goes beyond it in vileness of
quality. A slanderer is like unto a Frog in 4. things. Fra. Giacomo. Affinati
de Acuto Romano.
1. The Frog always abides in muddy places, and troubled waters: so the
slandering tongue delights in depraving his Neighbor, and never commends
any man for the good he possesses. 2. The Frog is bred of the dirt and
corruption in the Moorish ground: so is the backbiting tongue derived of a
putrified heart, as also of an erroneous and a perverse conscience. 3. The Frog
with his horrid voice never cease croaking day nor night; and the slandering
tongue never wants matter of detraction, permitting others to take no rest, but
always molesteth them with new devised calumnies, and will not let it self
sleep, lest it should lose time in harming others. 4. The Magicians and
Inchanters of Egypt, could not deliver Egypt from this great Plague of Frogs,
but only God himself must send them away by Moses and Aarons earnest prayers;
and even God himself must take away this great plague of the slandering tongue.

SECT. 7. Means to prevent this sin of Slandering.
NOw in the last place, if you would prevent this sin, then

1. Take heed of giving ear to such as are guilty of it, and that we receive
not false tales, slanders, and ill reports at second hand concerning others:
this bewrayes lack of love, and want of good affection to our brother, and an
ill disposition in a man's self. Prove. 17.4. The wicked gives heed to false
lips, and a liar harkneth to the naughty tongue; where the Holy Ghost gives us
two brands of a Tale-receiver, a wicked one, and a liar: Besides it is a note
of evil-minded men, not only willingly to speak evil, but gladly to hear evil;
the froward slanderous tongue, and the itching ear delight to rub one another:
the Godly man as he reproacheth not with his tongue, so he takes not up a
reproach against his neighbor. Psalm. 15.3. A man may have a slanderous ear as
well as a slanderous tongue: Thou shall not take up a false report against thy
neighbor. (...) i. e. nec consentiendo, nec loquendo. Gloss. Interlin. in
Exodus 23.1. nec falsi rumoris author, nec adjutor esto. Jun. 19. in annotat.
Exodus 23.1. neither by speaking or consenting to it; neither with our heart to
believe it, or our tongue to utter it. Without Jerusalem shall be dogs,
enchanters, etc. and whosoever loves and makes lies: Some are so graceless, and
shameless, that they quoin lies, fain them: others not altogether so; yet if
some impudent person buzze some slander into their ears, they embrace it,
believe it, entertain it gladly, as some pleasurable or profitable thing.

As a Receiver makes a Thief; so the Receiver of tales makes the slanderer; if
there were no tale Receiver, there would be no talebearer: In theft he is
accessany which willingly receives stolen goods: So here in backbiting, he that
receives the whisperers report, is more guilty of his neighbors infamy, then
the other of felony: Detractor and cubens auditor, uterque diabolum portat;
alter in ore, alter in aure. Bernard. Non minus auribus, quam lingua fugias
detractionem: nam detractor dum te videt non libenter audire, non facile potest
detrahere. Hieron. in Epist.
for a thief may rob his neighbor of Goods without a receiver: but a slanderer
cannot rob a man of his good name, unless there be one to hear and admit his
slanders; therefore they are both alike guilty: the talebearer has the devil
in his tongue, and the tale-hearer has the devil in his ear. See the remedy of
this laid down by Solomon. As the North Wind drives away rain, so does an angry
countenance a backbiting tongue. Prove. 25.23. a cheerful countenance will
encourage him; but if you hear him with show of mislike, he will learn not
willingly to speak that which is not willingly heard. As where no wood is,
there the fire goes out; so where there is no talebearer, the strife cease.
Prove. 26.20. Tale-bearers were so odious to the very Heathens, that they would
have a talebearer hanged by the tongue.

2. Take St. Bernards advice; Apelles drew the counterfeit of Antigonus, who
had but one eye, in such artificial manner, as that part of deformity could not
be seen, and being asked the reason, he replied thus: Let it suffice that I
have drawn him with his natural lineaments, and made no appearance of deformity
in the eye defective. Let another paint his Picture as himself pleases. The
slanderer is not of his mind, who seeks not to cover men's blemishes, but
rather adds more enforcements of blame.
when thou hear an ill report against another, be so far from spreading and
divulging it, as at first seem not to believe it. 2. but if the matter be so
evident that it cannot be denied, excuse his intent and purpose; it may be he
had a good end in doing what he did. 3. If thou can not excuse his intent,
think he did it ignorantly, not maliciously and wittingly. 4. If not that; then
think that perhaps he was overcome with some grievous temptation, which if it
had befallen us, it would have shaken the foundation of our faith, and loosed
the anchor-hold of our hope.

SECT. 8. An exhortation to the patient bearing the reproaches of the wicked.
NOw if any of us are slandered and evil spoken of undeservedly by wicked men,
let us be willing to bear reproaches, and slanders quietly and cheerfully,
especially when it is for Christ's sake, and for the Gospel sake; to this
purpose, consider.

1. That no man in the world can totally escape the lash of evil tongues: The
son of Syrach says, that the lashes of the tongue do reach all men. Ecclus.
25.9, the Prophet Jeremy complains that he was exposed to the revilings and
maledictions of all men. Jerem. 15.10. and it was the lot of Job, not only to
be cruelly struck and afflicted by Satan, but also most grievously to be
scourged by the tongue of his wife, and of his friends that came to visit him,
proving but miserable comforters to him.

2. It is of great advantage to a Christian, to bear the unjust slanders of
evil men with patience: therefore St. Bernard was always ready to suffer them;
saying, Bernar. Epist.
I do not know any fitter medicine for the wounds of my conscience, then the
opprobrious contumelies and slanders of other men; or says he, Homuncio sum
omni opprobrio and despectione dignus. I am a poor wretch, that am worthy of
all disgrace and disrespect. Among Christians he is not to be reputed miserable
who suffers contumelies and slanders, but he who broacheth them. Blessed are
ye, when men revile you, and hate you and speak all manner of evil against you
falsely for my name sake; rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven. Math. 5.11.12. and St. Peter speaks to the same purpose, If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, blessed are ye. 1 Pet. 4.14. Therefore
concerning those that praise or reproach us, let us always have recourse to our
consciences; and in case we find not the good there for which we are so
extolled, let us grieve and lament; and again, if we find not the evil in it
for which men speak so evil of us, let us heartily rejoice: for what are we the
better for the commendations of men, if our consciences condemn us? or what are
we the worse, if all men speak evil of us, if our consciences acquit us? many
people think to go to Heaven by the voice of the Country, if no man blame
them, or speak evil of them; but this will not do it; we must distinguish
between a good name and a good conscience says Augustin^: August.
A good name will carry it among men, a good conscience, only can acquit us
before God, says Lactantius; Lactant.
it is not enough that our neighbors absolve us, if God and our own
consciences do condemn us,

3. Consider what manner of persons they are that do thus falsely reproach us:
they are such as are rather to be pittyed then maligned: Who would be angry
with a dog for his barking? what Seneca said to the Romans, Senec. de bea^.
vit. cap. 19.
the same may every innocent Christian say to his slanderers: Fret and grieve,
exercise your unhappy tongues to the reproach of good men: be instant, bite
hard, you may sooner break your teeth then make impression: thou have no cause
to grieve at the things that are spoken against thee, since they are false, and
thy conscience upbraideth thee not; and since thy conscience safeguardeth thee,
and affirms those things to be the slanders and backbitings of wicked men
which are said of thee, thou needst not greatly be troubled at their speeches;
why should any man shrink for headless arrows? or grieve for that which hurts
not? and if these Darts do any way hurt thee, God will recompense the harm an
hundred fold.

The wisest course then is, to lend a deaf ear to all the slanderous clamours
moved against us, as David did, who when he was basely reproached of his
enemies, he says, But I as a deaf man heard not, I was as one in whose mouth
is no reproofs. Psalm. 38.14 now when any whisperer steps in, and says, Such a
one reports this thing of you abroad to your disgrace, be you as deaf men
that hear not: To strive to quench such malicious firebrarnds, is the only way
to kindle them more; such Thunderclaps do usually break out most violently
where they meet with most opposition; not to take notice of them, is the way to
silence them; like Meteors they will go out of themselves, says Drexelius;
Drexel. Gymn. Patient.
Epictetus gives sage counsel; If any one shall tell you, says he, that such
a one spoke ill of you, refuse not his sayings, but answer; certainly he knew
not my other faults; for if he had, he would have told them likewise: To
conclude, be not troubled at a few slanderous words of evil men; thy Judge is
in the Heavens, why then should thou so regard the world? how can thou be
ready to lay down thy life for Jesus Christ, when as for his sake thou can
not as yet quietly digest a few slanderous words? be still and quiet; patience
will overcome all this and much more; thou shall enjoy thy reward in Heaven,
and they their punishment in Hell for ever, except they repent.

CHAP. VIII. Of the scoffing Tongue.
SECT. 1. Shows what scoffing is, and how many ways men may be guilty of this
sin.
ANother sin of the tongue, that is too common in these days, is Scoffing and
Jeering; this was the sin of the the Rulers of Gods people at Jerusalem. Isai.
28.14. that Holy City which should have given the people better examples; and
if the Governors were so bad, you may easily think what the body of the people
were.

Definit. of scoffing.
Scoffing is a sin when one flouteth or derideth at any person or thing because
of the goodness that is in them; or when a man mocketh at the sins, infirmities
and miseries of others: Men may be guilty of this sin diverse ways.

1. When men make a mock at Gods faithful Messengers and Ministers, and
entertain the reproofs of the Word with scoffs and jeers: the Pharsees were
very demure men, and very exact in observing their traditions, yet they deride
our Savior and his Doctrine. Luke 16.14. they did not simply deride Christ,
but gave external signs of scorn in their countenances and gestures, and
according to the meaning of the Greek word, they blew their Noses at him, (...)
signifies to blow the Nose ^t one. Leighs Annot.
contemning his Doctrine as a thing of naught. Scorners of the Word make lies
their refuge, and under falsehood they hide themselves. Isai. 28.14.15. It was
the great sin of the Jews, and that which hastened their destruction. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. they mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, etc. When Lot willed his Sons in Law to depart quickly out of Sodom,
because of that fiery shower that was ready to fall from Heaven upon that
wicked City, they made a mock thereat, and received his fatherly admonition no
otherwise then as if he had jested to them. Genesis 16.14. When Hezekiah sent his
Posts through the Land to call his people to the offering of a solemn
passover, they of Ephraim and Mansseh laughed them to scorn. 2 Chronicles. 30.10.
and mocked them. When Paul discoursed of grave matters before Festus, he mocked
Paul, and said, Paul, too much learning has made thee mad. Act. 26.24. and
Augustine himself before his conversion came to hear Ambrose to laugh at him.

2. When men jest with the Scriptures in profane mirth and merriment, which is
done three ways. Men make jests of Scripture-phrases; as he did of Mat. 17.27.
Go to the Sea and cast in an Angle, and the first fish that comes, take; and
when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty-pence; for
Angle reading Angel, and thereupon making a jest, What got Peter by that, to
cast in an Angel, and get a fish with twenty-pence? or as he that said, there
were more lies in the story of the Passover then truths; because Christ spoke
but seldom, and the Jews often, and they nothing but lies.

2. When Scripture phrases are used in way of jesting or scoffing to make
laughter: as such a one has no good Talent in railing: and when a man has
many Bastards, to say he has employed his Talent well, he has not the spirit
of pitching and ditching, etc.

3. When profane fellows make a mock at the doctrine or sayings of the
Scripture, as those profane persons did of old. Isai. 22.13. who when the
Prophet told them of Gods judgments, of death and destruction, they make a
mock at it: Come say they, these Prophets tell us, we must all die; if we must
die, let us be merry while we may: let us take time while time serves; for
they tell us we must away: So our Alehouse-Knights and Pot-companions at this
day, are wont to say; Come let us ply the Pot; for these Preachers tell us,
that Dives when he was dead could not get one drop of drink; its better that we
drink out our eyes, then that the worms eat them out: St. Peter prophesied,
that such mockers and scoffers at Scripture shall come in the latter days,
which should make a mock at the coming of Christ to Judgment, and say, Where
is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers dyed, all things continued
alike from the beginning of the world. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. We hear much of the great
day of Judgment, wherein all must be called to account for their works and
words; but where is it? when comes it? we would fain see it once. Thus Julian
the Apostate that scoffing Emperor, when the Ch^istians being much wronged and
abused by the Heathen, complained to him for some redress, he sent them away
with this scoff: It is your duties to put up wrongs patiently; for Christ your
Master bids you, Tripart. Histor. lib. 36. cap. 6.
not to resist evil; and to him that smites you on the one cheek to turn the
other also; and him that would take your cloak, not to forbid to take your coat
also. Mat. 5.38.39. There is a wicked generation that call themselves the
damned crew, in mocking of death and damnation: if you reprove them for it by
Scripture, they will presently answer: How know you this or that to be
scripture, or the word of God? All is not Gospel: how know you that the story
written by Matthew and John is Gospel?

3. When men do as it were scorn at God himself, by deriding his workmanship,
or the manner of his working: as he did, who said, if he had had a hand in
making the world, Derisio est, cum a^i u^^ malum alicujus personae vel defectum
in ^^^um vel r^sum ponit.

Angel. de Cla^isio.


he would have made it better: So when men deride and mock at the bodily
blemishes that are in others, as their crookedness, deformity, weakness,
deafness, blindness, etc. when men keep fools in their houses only to make
sport in laughing at their folly; whereas they should be humbled and sorrowful
to see the judgments of God and his heavy hand upon them in this kind;
foolishness being either a sin, or the pun shment of sin: it is a sin Mar. 7.22.
it is the punishment of sin, Deu. 28.28 When scorns are cast out against th^se
that are poor or below others in estate or parts, or employments, etc. men do
as it were cast contempt upon God himself; not considering who it is that has
made the difference b^tween thee and them: contemptuous words spoken of our
brethren, argue a vile esteem of them, such as fool, witless, shallow brain, a
poor beggarly fellow, etc. likewise all ireful upbraidings, whether of
kindness received, or of sin committed: He that despises his Neighbor
sins, Prove. 14.21. this sin is of so high a nature that it strikes at God
himself; whosoever mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker. Prove. 17.5. whatsoever
difference there is between thy self and him thou mockest, it is the Lord that
made the difference; it came not by chance, but according to the good pleasure
of God; and therefore he that mocketh at such a one, reproacheth his Maker,
that if it had pleased him, could have made thee like him: If there were any
true Grace in such men's hearts that are advanced above others, it would make
them the more thankful to God, that did advance them above their Neighbors.

4. So it is that very often the Saints of God are the objects of wicked men's
scorns: so it was with the Prophet Jeremias. Chap. 20.7. Thus he complains to
God, I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me; Prince and People agreed
together thus to persecute him with their tongues: so David tells us of himself
Psalm. 69.12. They that sit in the Gate speak against me; and I was the song of
the Drunkards. David suffers for well-doing: O God, for thy sake I have born
reproach, etc. ver, 7. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. ver. 9. he
suffers from those that sat in the Gate (which expression denotes Power and
Authority) the Rule^s and Governors of the people derided him; and when the
Toss-pots upon the Ale-bench hear this, they think well may they make him the
object of their scorn also. And 2 Kings 2.23. you may see that the young
children of Bethel having learnt this sin from their Parents, they mock Gods
Prophet: Go up thou bald head; when as according to the command of God, they
should have honored him being aged: Voces ipsac pueri a parentibus edocti
erant; quare pue^o^um clade parents flagellavit. Illu ^en m Ascend calve,
p^oscindendi per detractionem Eliae assumptionis g^atia proserebant. i e.
abripiat te quoque Spiritas, ut i^idem a te liberem^r.

Just Mart. Quest. 8.


doubtless they had learnt that taunting language from their Parents and
Elders, at least by hearing them speak so, if they were not by them taught so
to speak; Go up thou bald head, etc. which scoff they cast upon Elisha in
allusion to the rapture or going up of Elijah to Heaven; as if they had said;
Go thou up to Heaven after him, that we may be rid of thee as we are of him:
Thus old scoffers among us teach their children to deride Religion, and the
professors of it: so when David in his zeal danced before the Ark of the Lord,
his wife Michal despised him and jeered at him. 2 Samuel 6.20. when Nehemiah is
building the Wall at Jerusalem, Sanballat mocketh the Jews, and says, What do
these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they
make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish
which are burnt? and Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he mocked also and
said: Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down
their stone-wall. Nehem. 4.1, 2, 3. Thus wicked men cannot endure that the work
of Religion and Holiness should go up, lest they should be forced to leave
those sins they so dearly love.

5. When wicked men are at ease themselves, and seeing the people of God in
distress, instead of pitying them, and mourning for them, as they should do,
they sport at them. Job tells us, that in his afflictions he was as one mocked
of his neighbor. Job. 12.3. the just upright man is laughed to scorn; this is
set down to be the sin of the Ammonites; they said Aha, when Israel was in
distress, Ezekiel. 25.3. and when they were desolate and went into captivity: but
see what the Lord threatens against them ver. 6.7. This David met with when he
was in adversity; In mine adversity they rejoiced, yea, the abjects gathered
themselves together against me, etc. with hypocritical mockers in Feasts. Psalm
35.15, 16. and ver. 21. Yea they opened their mouths wide against me, and said
Aha Aha, our eye has seen it: the very scum of the people gathered together
against him and Psalm. 69.26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten, and
they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded. When God had wounded
him, instead of comforting him, they persecute him and grieve him with their
tongues: Yet this was the carriage of most of them that were at Jerusalem
toward those of the brethren that were gone into captivity, as if they were got
far from the Lord, and that themselves were the only people of God that were
left in the City. Ezekiel. 11.15. but ver. 21. God speaks comfortably to them
that were scoft at, and denounces his judgments against them that scoff at
them: To mock at a man in misery is a sore affliction: among the sufferings and
cruel persecutions that the Saints endured, the Apostle mentions this, They
had ^^ial of cruel mockings. Heb. 11.36. (...) was one part of Christ's
sufferings; ^e was mocked, and used like a fool (...) a play; they put a Robe
on his ^ack, a Reed in his hand, and a Crown ^n his head, and when he hung upon
^he Cross, and was perfecting the ^ork of our Redemption, they (in ^ighest
scorn) bid him come down from the Cross, and save himself. The Philistines
thought it not e^ough to make Sampson grind in a Mill, after they had put out
his eyes, and bound him with fetters of Brass; but at their great Feast they
call for Sampson to make them sport: but their jest ended in earnest, they
pulled an old house about their ears, which was the destruction of three
thousand men and women.

6. Sometimes wicked wretches scoff at their Parents, whom they should honor;
but this sin, and the danger it brings with it, is set down by the spirit of
God. Prove. 30.1^ The eye that mocketh at his Father, (...) despises to obey
his Mother, the Rave^ of the Valley shall pick it out, and (...) young Eagles
shall eat it. So that (...) there be but a scornful cast of the ey^ against our
Parents, God takes notic^ of it, and will punish it; and he adds* He that
despises his Mother to obey he^ because children are more apt to scor^ their
Mother, then their Father: H^ that mocks at his Father. as an ol^ doting fool,
or that despises his Mother, looking upon her with disdain as an old withered
creature; he tha^ despises the wrinckles of his Mother, the judgments of God
will light upon him: By the Law such a child was to be put to death,

7. When men make a sport at their own sins, and the sins of others: instead of
mourning for them as they should do, they sport at them. Prove. 10.23. it is a
sport to a fool to do mischief; these are in the number of Solomon's fools:
fools make a mock at sin. Prove. 14.9. they sport with their ^^n sins, and
albeit they cast fire-^^^nds, they think it excuse enough (...) say, Am I not
in sport? and ^^us sinners glory in their ^^ame, as if a condemned ma^^factor
should boast of his ^^alter: And as they sport at ^^eir own sins, so they mock
(...) the sins of others also; e^^ecially at Gods children, (...) they see any
of them fall in^o sin: Luther says, Tanquam famelici Porci immergunt se in
stercora nostra, and ex ijs delicias saciunt, dum infirmitatem nostram exemplo
maledicti Ham aperiunt, and traducunt; vere enim esuriunt and s^^^unt scandala
nostra. Luther in Genesis 9.
they ^unger and thirst after the ^^lls of the Godly, and if at a^y time
through humane frail^y, they fall into an evil, like ^ungry Hogs they nuzzle in
their excrements: and Augu^tin compares them to Dogs, ^o the rich Gluttons
dogs, that lay licking and sucking Lazarus soars: Some think that when Noah was
overcome with Wine, that Canaan Chams son, Hebraeus etiam id tradebat and
ratine confirmabat, proprimum Chanaan verenda avi sui vidisse, suoque solum
patri narrasse, tanquam de seen ri^entem. Theodoret. in Genesis Quest. 57.
first saw his Grandfather in that case; and he being one without all Religion,
and perhaps having been often reproved by Noah, therefore Canaan seeing him in
his shame, tells it to his wicked Father Cham, and he afterward with mocking
and derision to Shem and Japhet; else why should Noah curse Cham in his son
Canaan, rather then in any other of his sons? for he had diverse other sons?
Genesis 10.6.

SECT. 2. Of the greatness of the sin of scorning and scoffing, laid down in
four things.
NOw let us consider how inconsistent this is with the power of Religion,
whatsoever seeming shows any one makes; and also how great a sin it is;
consider therefore,

1. It is a note of hypocrysie wheresoever it is found in any man that seems
to be Religious: David sets out the hypocrites of his time, by the name of
mockers at Feasts; he calls them hypocritical mockers at Feasts. Psalm 35.16.
and he was cut to the heart with hypocrites, that were factious, and sanniones,
mockers that in their Feasts made him their sport: St. Jude speaks of such
mockers that should separate themselves, being sensual, not having the spirit.
Jude ver. 18, 19.

2. The Scripture sets forth the scorner as a graceless person. Psalm. 1.1. It
is the character of the blessed man that he sits not in the seat of the
scornful: he that is truly Religious, will not come into the company of any
such, nor have to do with any of them: By the scornful there, are meant proud
Rhetorical, artificial mockers, and profane jesters, such as make a mock of
sin, and scoff at Religion and the Professors thereof, and such as are any way
watchful over their ways, and such as contemn God and all Goodness, and do as
it were set up Shop, and make open profession of all impiety: Some translations
read the words In Cathedra pestilentium, Hieron. Lyra Theodoret.
in the Chair of the pestilent, calling scorners pestilent people; and most
fitly; for as the Plague or Pestilence secretly infecteth and suddenly
devoureth whole Parishes, and great Congregations: so this kind of people by
their bitter words and ill examples, do infect and poison many souls.

3. When men entertain the reproofs of Gods word with scorn, this shows such
men to be Atheists in heart; and that while they in words seem to own his word,
yet in heart they show they do not believe it to be the word of God; for did
they believe it to be so, they would not scorn it, but rather tremble at it:
Such show themselves like those proud men mentioned. Jerem. 42.2, 3. that when
God met with them by his sword, they said, Baruch the son of Neriah has set
thee on against us: so say these men; some body has told the Minister some
such thing of us, and so they storm at the word, and mock it: Reproofs do no
good upon scorners. Prove. 9.7, 8. Reprove not a scorner lest he hate thee: He
that reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame.

But God says. Levit, Thou shall not hate thy Brother, but shall rebuke him,
and not suffer sin upon him.

We must either construe Solomon of such as are desperately evil and
incorrigible, Resp.
concerning whom our Savior forbids his Disciples to give holy things to dogs,
or cast pearls before Swine. Mat. 7.6. And if we could distinguish such, (as
like enough many of the Prophets could in Solomon's time) then surely we might
leave them; but since we cannot, therefore we must plant by doctrine, water by
exhortation, and labor to cut off and pull up what might hinder the growth of
what we have planted and watered by reproof and reprehension, leaving the
success to God: or it may be that speech of Solomon was not spoken of matter of
so high a nature, but only a Moral precept, whereof that book of the Proverbs
is full, being called his Ethics, and so it may contain a direction for a man's
carriage in his ordinary conversation; and so (as the proverb says) it is good
sleeping in a whole skin, and no wisdom for us to meddle with them on whom we
can do no good, but they may do us much hurt.

Now when men entertain the reproofs of the word with scorn, and mock at Gods
Messengers, they scorn and deride at the Lo^d Jesus Christ himself. He that
despises you, despises me, says our Savior; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Luk 10.16. The like speaks the Apostle of all Gods
people in general: 1 These. 4.8. He therefore that despises, despises not man
but God, who has given to us his holy Spirit: he says ver. 7. that the Holy
God inviteth and calls all men to holiness: it may be thou art one that when
thou see another that labors to walk more accordingly to the rule of Gods
word then thy self, thou deridest him, and say, There goes such a Saint, a
holy Brother, a Precisian, and the like: thus by thy vilifying him, thou
despisest God himself.

4. When men m^ke a sport at sin in themselves or others; see how contrary this
is to God, to Christ, to his holy Spirit: it is a sin very displeasing to God:
Men are very forward to laugh at other men's sins, at their running to Hell:
they laugh to see a man drunk, and to make a fool of himself; but if he begin
to be godly, they persecute and abuse him: The very Heathen made Laws that
vice should not be laughed at; yet even Christians sport to see God dishonored,
Christ crucified, and the spirit grieved, and men carried away in Satan's jaws.
See Tacitus description of Germany.
the Lord Jesus Christ wept over Jerusalem for their sins, and wept over others
because of the hardness of their hearts; he also shed his precious blood to
wash away sin; and can thou sport at that which cost the Lord Jesus so dear?
the spirit of God likewise is grieved by our sins. Ephesians. 4.30. Now to sport at
sin, you show your selves like unto the Devil: the repentance of sinners on
earth, is the joy of the Angels in Heaven; and if devils have any joy, it is
when men make a sport of sin: such persons also walk quite cross to Gods
peoples mark and practice; for the people of God have always mourned for the
sins of others, as for their own: so did Lot when he was in Sodom; he was vexed
with their sins; and Rivers of tears ran down David's eyes because men kept not
Gods Law: so Jeremiah, Ezra, etc. mourned in secret for the sins of others.
Consider ye scorners, and ye that laugh at sin, how cross ye walk to Gods word,
and to the examples of Gods people in all ages of the world.

5. As for those that scorn at Gods people in affl^ctions, they Act more like
those that persecuted Christ and put him to death, then like to the people of
God: So Herod and his men of war set him at naught and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him to Pilate. Luk 23.11. Pilate also
with the Soldiers mocked him, calling him the King of the Jews; the chief
Priests and Elders mocked him also. Mat. 27.41, 42. Again. 2. This is cross
even to nature, that one member should rejoice in the afflictions of another,
and scorn it: in the body of man, Nature teaches, that if one member suffer,
the rest take part with it: and if one member of Christ suffer, the rest suffer
also, and are grieved; and if it be otherwise with you, there is no truth of
Religion in you: 3. Herein men Act cross to Gods command, Rem. 12.15. who
requires us to rejoice with them that rejoice, and weeep with them that weep.
and Heb. 13.3. to remember them that are in bonds, as if we were bound with
them; and them which suffer adversity, not to scorn them, but to pity them;
knowing that our selves are in the body.

SECT. 3. Of the severity of Gods threatening against scorners, showed in diverse
particulars.
MOreover, that we may take notice of the misery of such as go on in this sin,
let us consider what the Lord in Scripture threatens against scorners, and how
he esteems of them.

1. God scorneth the scorners. Prove. 3.34. Take notice of this ye scorners; you
mock and scorn at others, and God scorneth you; Prove. 14.6.
you think to show your wit, when your tongues walk against others, and when
God and his people are your sport; but therein you show your folly: A scorner
seeks wisdom, and finds it not, says Solomon.

2. Set the condition of Michal Saul's daughter before you; you see how God
dealt with her for scorning at David her Husband, when in his zeal he danced
before the Ark of God. 2 Samuel 6.23. she meets with a sharp reproof, and a great
judgment: sc. to be childless to the day of her death: and to be childless was
looked upon as a great and sore affliction in those days; and this was for
scorning a child of God; and as God shut her up under bodily barrenness; so
such persons may justly fear lest God shut them up under barrenness of soul,
and barrenness in Grace, that scorn others for their Piety and Holiness; and it
is a great mercy if God remove this curse from their souls.

3. Thou scornest at the people of God and his Ministers; consider what shall
be thy reward; read and tremble. Prove. 1.23, 26, 27. How long will the scorners
delight in sc^rning? Ye have set at naught all my counsels, etc. I also will
laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear comes: Gods scoffing at men
doubleth their misery: it is one of the torments of Hell to have God deride us;
Many do flear when they should fear.
oh that mockers would consider this, that in their misery they must be
derided; God shall then loath them, and laugh them to scorn when their fear
comes: you laugh at Gods people in their calamity, and God will laugh at your
calamity; you make a mock at the committing of sin, and God will mock at you
when you fear and tremble at the approaching of Gods wrath unto you; scorning
does in a special manner strike at God and his Honor, and he will avenge it.

4. God shows what low thoughts he has of scorners: Job was had in derision
by those that were younger then he, and persons so base, as whose Fathers he
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of his Flock. Job 30.1. and the
Holy Ghost calls them children of fools, children of base men, men of no name,
as in the Hebrew. ver. 7. Such as were viler then the dust of the earth. ver.
8. and Psalm. 59.6. he compares them not to rational men, but to dogs; those
that open their mouths against the people of God, and the ways of Holiness,
they Act like dogs that make a noise and go round about the City, and are
belching out with their mouths; if a man gallop through the streets and ride
beyond the ordinary pace, then the dogs run after him, and bark at him: So
those that run the way of Gods commandments, making more haste in the way of
Religion and Holiness then others, they shall meet with these scorners, and
suffer the lash of their tongues; and like they are to dogs, who sometimes bark
at the shadow of the Moon; so these will bark at the very shadow of Relgion.

5. God has sore and sharp punishments in store for scorners: Judgments are
prepared for scorners. Prove. 19 29. the scorner shall be consumed, and all that
watch for iniquity shall be cut off. Isai. 29.20. the children at Bethel tear
the Prophets name; and God sent two she-Bears that teared two and forty
children in pieces; they that go on in this sin, shall howl for sorrow, they
shall run howling about, like dogs, and be cast out of the Heavenly Jerusalem.
Rev. 22.15. foris Canes, without are dogs. Now therefore be not mockers, lest
your bands be made strong. Isai. 28.22. Know this ye scorners, if the bands of
Religion will not hold you in, and keep you within compass, God will make bands
strong enough to hold you under his wrath to all eternity: A great scoffer was
Libanius the profane sophist, who scorned at the Religion of Christians,
calling them Galileans, Tripatrit. histor. lib. 6. cap 1. and lib. 7. cap. 12.
and their Christ a Carpenter; and asking what then the Carpenters son was
doing, jesting at Christ; a godly Schoolmaster answered him that he was making
a Coffin for Julian the Apostate a great scoffer of Christ and Christians, who
dyed immediately after. Mocking is called in Scripture persecution, and no
persecution is like it. Sarah saw Ishmael the son of Hagar mocking at Isaac.
Gen, 21.9. Now the Apostle ^iting this Text, says: He that was ^orn after the
flesh, persecuted him that ^ar born after the spirit. Gal 4.29. and ^or this he
and his Mother are cast out of Abraham's house. Genesis 21.10. Now the Apostle
citing this Text, says: He that was born after the flesh persecuted him that
was born after the spirit. Gal. 4.29. and these words spoken by Sarah to
Abraham, Cast out the bond woman and her son, are called the voice of
scripture. ver. 30. The reason is, because they were afterward approved by God.
Genesis 21.12. If any shall demand why Sarah was so severe to Hagar and her son,
as to have them banished; Tremellius will answer, Tremell. in Genesis de vartis
significat. vocis Haebr. lege Lyram in Genesis 21.9. Ille Ludus erat illusio.
Gorran. in Gal. 4. Ludendo laedebat, Lyra ut antea.

Metsachek signifies Ludentem vel idololatrantem, ut Exodus 32.6. Sive
occidentem. 2 Samuel 2.14. So she might fear lest he might make him away, that
himself might inherit.


who tells us that Ishmael being much elder and bigger then Isaac, being 13
years old (at least) before Isaac was born, might easily wrong him, which his
Mother (loving him tenderly) could by no means endure: othe^s say he mocked at
him for the Religion wherein he was educated, and that he made Images of Dirt
or Clay, enticing Isaac to worship them; which if he did, then Sarah had cause
to bestirre her self to have him turned packing; this signifies to us, that all
mocking, persecuting Ishmaelites shall have no portion with Isaac, with true
Believers in the Heavenly inheritance.

Consider further what the Scripture denounces to fall upon scorners; Nehem.
4.4, 5. Hear O our God, for we are despised, and turn their reproach upon their
own head, and give them for a prey in the Land of their captivity, and cover
not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee: 1.
He tells them that God hears all their scorns against his people. 2. God will
turn their sin upon their own head, and make them to be the scorn of others. 3.
He says, this them their sin shall stand for ever against them before the Lord
upon his Book, and never be blotted out: and the Holy man denounces this, not
in passion, or self-revenge; but as Gods judgment upon his enemies: the people
were working for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; and now by sco
ning of Gods people they provoke God to this severity against them: Christ
would not suffer that rude multitude that scorned him to behold his miracle of
raising Jairus daughter; he would not let them see mysterium resurgentis, qui
resuscitantem indignis deridebant contumeliis, as Hierom notes. Hieron. in Luc
8.


SBCT. 4. Remedies against this sin of scorning.
NOw in the last place, that this sin may be avoided;

1. Take heed of familiarity with those that are scorners; for if you converse
much with them, you may learn their practice; especially beware of the company
of pot-companions: Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, says Solomon.
Prove. 20.1. it is so called because it produces such effects in those that are
overcome thereby. In the day of our King, the Princes have made him sick with
bottles of wine; he stretches out his hand with scorners. Hos. 7.5. Plutarch
tells us of a notable drunkard, Plutarch. in vit. Pyrrhi.
who being brough before Pyrrhus for jeering at him in his cups, said It is
true that I spoke somewhat against thee; and much more should I have spoken,
had not the Wine failed me. Drunkards observe no Laws, reverence no
Magistrates, respect no friends, spare no cost, regard no Religion, fear no
God; tell them of Gods wrath, they will jeer you to your face: tell them of
Solomon's induction. Prove. 29.30. like so many Edomites they will make songs of
you all, Math. Griff. Bethel.
as one notes.

2. Take heed of harboring any unruly Lust in your hearts; for when men give
way to them; no wonder ^f at length they become scorners, that give way to
their lusts. St. Peter says, ^here shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts. 2 Pet. 8.3. let us avoid all appearances of
evil; he that walks in the counsel of the ungodly, and stands in the way of
sinners, will at last sit down in the seat of the scornful. Psalm. 1.1. Take
heed of covetousness, that was the sin of the Pharisees, they were inordinately
set upon the love of the world, thence came their mocking of Jesus Christ: when
Christ had bidden them make friends to themselves of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, and told them that no man could serve two Masters, God and
Mammon; then the Pharisees who were covetous, hearing these things, they
derided him, Luk 16.14. Beware likewise of pride of heart; for pride is a cause
of scorning and contempt; none so scornful as the proud in heart. Our soul is
exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the
contempt of the proud. Psalm. 123.4.

3. See that there be no inward despising of others in your hearts: for if you
give way to the sin there, at length it will show it self in the tongue: it is
said of Michal, first she despised David in her heart. 2 Samuel 6.16. there the
sin began, and it did not end till it brake out against him in her tongue unto
his face: so many servants there are that contemn their Masters in heart,
either because their Masters are poor, of mean place, and parentage, and
themselves well born and bred, or because their Masters are simple, ignorant in
this or that, wherein they are skilful, they scorn to learn of them, to be told
and directed, much more to be controlled by them* or else by reason of their
Maste^s familiarity, or kind usage to them, grow contemptuous and scornful, and
make no reckoning of them; familiarity aspireth to equality.

4. Take heed of all scornful behavior or gesture tending to vilify, mock or
disgrace any one, as making of mops and mowes, nodding the head, pointing with
the finger, clapping of hands, putting out the tongue, Though pity must not,
yet wickedness may be derided: as Elijah did the worshippers of Baal: but with
these caveats. 1. To instruct others by it, and to hate the practice of it the
more. 2. Y^u may mock them not as men, but as sinners, and such as are out of
hope of returning; not because they break Gods precepts, but at their folly and
madness: for we are to mourn for the breaking of Gods commandments.

Aequo animo audienda sunt imperitorum convitia, et ad honesta vadendi
contemnendus est iste contemptus. Nemo plus videtur aestimare virtutem, nemo
magis illi esse devotus quam qu^ boni virisamam perdidiene conscientiam
perderet. Seneca.


making horns, grinning, gibing, etc. this is condemned in David's enemies who
made Mowes at him. Psalm. 22.7. and gaped at him. ver. 13. and in those that
mocked Christ on the Cross: They that passed by reviled him, wagging their
heads. Mat. 27.39. these scornful gestures often more disgrace the person of
our neighbor, then reviling and plain railing; for though it be a dumb
gesture, yet it speaks loud. Prove. 6.13. He that accustometh himself to the use
of scornful gestures and behavior, will not stick at the giving of scornful
language.

And if at any time you are derided and scorned by others for Holiness and
Piety, regard it not: for if ye be reproacht and scorned for the name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of God and of Gl^ry rests upon you: on
their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. Seneca tells
us that among the Heathens, Virtue was derided: what though you are derided for
fools and madmen, and counted the offscouring of the world! its no matter how
others call you or esteem of you, but what you are indeed. Intus teipsum
considera, says Seneca, inwardly consider of thy self, and judge not what thou
art by the words of others: for the most part good men are called fools and
blockheads; let me be so derided, says he: the reproaches of the ignorant or
unskilful must be patiently heard, and this contempt of one that follows
virtue must be contemned: yea, as one well notes, it is the highest honor to
be accounted bad, that we may not be so; and the greatest trial whether we be
indeed sincere, to be put to it, to be either accounted hypocrites, or to be
such: no man says Seneca, seems to set an higher price on virtue, no man seems
more to be devoted to it, then he that has lost the reputation of being a good
man, lest he should lose his conscience: You cannot mock men out of their
drunkenness, pride, and covetousness; and let none mock you out of the practice
of Piety and Holiness.

CHAP. IX. Of the filthy Tongue.
The greatness of the sin of filthy speaking, showed in eight Particulars
(...). Putridus Sermo; nam and a putrida radice pullulat.
LEt us now proceed to treat of another evil tongue, and that is the filthy
tongue, which we should take heed of: The Apostle warns us to beware of this
sin. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth:
multitudes of men there are who delight in obscene words, in filthy jesting,
and rotten communication, that speak as if the devil had opened their mouths;
the poison of Asps is under their lips. Now consider;

1. Rotten words are a sign of a rotten heart within: the mind of man by nature
is corrupt; false Teachers are called men of corrupt minds. 1 Timothy 6.5. Till a
man be renewed in the spirit of his mind he is a man of a corrupt mind; Faecem
ma^ttiae turbidam mali bibunt. Euripides. The heart being filthy, the tongue
casts out stenches, instead of ambrocial odours.
and he that has a corrup mind, will speak corrupt words: The Astrologers are
said to speak to Nebuchadnezzar lying and corrupt words. Dan. 2.9. Where the
Spring is corrupt, the Stream is corrupt; A Fountain cannot send forth sweet
and bitter water, neither can excellent speech and filthy speaking at once come
out of the same tongue; Men do not gather grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of
Thistles, says our Savior. Jude calls wicked men corrupt trees; and Christ
says, a corrupt Tree does not bring forth good fruit: but an evil man out of
the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil; for of the
abundance of his heart his mouth speaks, Luk 6.43, 44, 45. Filthy mouths may
be compared to the dun-gate at Jerusalem, Nehem. 3.14. through which the filth
of that City was carried forth: Such was the Port Esquiline at Rome, through
which past nothing but filth and uncleanness.
To hear a man vomit out filthy unchaste speeches, to hear words full of
uncleaneness come out of a man's mouth, and running over with lewd and lustful
words, it is a note of a filthy person: The heart is the fountain of our words
and actions; our words are as the Rivers flowing from it: the tongue is the
Looking-glass of the soul; he that is a filthy speaker, let him make what show
and profession of Religion he will, he is but a dissembler, and not yet
sanctified, nor is his heart purged; for speech is the discovery of the mind;
as there is no smoke without, (...). Clem. Alex.
except there be some fire within: so where there be foul and filthy words,
there is an unclean heart: a troubled fountain yields impure water, and a
corrupt soul filthy words: the tongue of the Just is compared to choice Silver,
because his heart is precious; but the heart of the wicked is little worth, and
his tongue is dross and filth. Prove. 10.20. when men's breath stinketh, it
shows there is much corruption in the Stomach: so rotten communication in the
tongue shows that the heart of such a one is rotten, that he lies in the
grave of sin, and is rotten at core, rotting in its own filth.

2. Filthy speakers do not only show that themselves are rotten, but they are
in danger of infecting others; a corrupt tongue, like the Plague and other
infectious diseases, will infect those that are in hearing of it: we often see
that one Neighbor learns deceit of another, Lippire ad conspectum Lippientis.

Lips. de Constant.


and one filthy companion learns rotten communication of another: Man's nature
is quickly won to evil, sins baits being so many; and sin so pleasing as it is
to nature, it must needs follow that one corrupt speaker will corrupt another.
Corruption, as the Philosopher says, Arist. Phys. 5.
is a mere changeing of a thing from that it was, from the better to the worse;
of this nature is a corrupt tongue, Bain in Ephesians 4.19.
it changes that which before was Morally good to be really bad; civility
teaches us to hide a stinking breath from others, and Christianity should
teach us to hide the stink of our putrified souls.

(...). Menander. Turpi^oquus est tanquam porcus, qui in luto ubi ponit pedem
ibi ponit os.
3. Filthy words are usually an inlet to filthy actions; he that makes no
conscience of what he speaks, will make little conscience of what he does: he
that abstaineth not from filthy words, will not stick at any filthy action if
opportunity serves: it is not credible he should live well, that speaks
filthily; the filthy tongue defiles the whole man: therefore the Apostle gives
this caution: Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good manners. 1 Cor,
15.33. corrupt words fret like a Gangreen: he that can speak filthy words
without blushing, will be ready to commit filthy actions without
shamefacedness: A filthy speaker is like unto a Hog, who in the dirt where he
puts his foot, puts his mouth; and where he puts his mouth to muzzle, there
also he puts his foot, lying down and wallowing in the mire: those things which
proceed out of the mouth, come fo^th from the heart, and they defile the man,
says our Savior, Math. 15.18.

4. Filthy speaking is a thing very unbecoming the Saints and people of God,
such as by Baptism are given up to God, and have given their names to him, it
is not so much as to be named among them as becomes Saints. Ephesians. 5.3, 4. it is
a contradiction to the name of a Christian: Now when the Apostle would not have
us to name filthy speaking, he means no otherwise but with abhorrency, not so
much as to name this sin without detesting of it: othewise Paul should sin in
naming it, while he does forbid it: as David would not take the names of
heathenish Idols into his mouth. Psalm. 16.4. and the Hebrew expresses sins by
words that signify the contrary virtue, as blaspheming God by blessing, does
show that the names of filthy vices are to be declined by the people of God.

5. Filthy speaking is a note of disordered affections; as fire here and there
will fasten upon things that are next to it, if they are combustible; so this
fire of Hell burning in the heart will fasten on the tongue, if it be not
timely quenched: He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City
broken down and without walls. Prove. 25.28. as a City without fence lies open
to be spoiled and sacked by the Enemy so are they liable to the strongest
temptations, and most unruly expressions, who are swayed by their lusts and
passions; if men discourse lasciviously or shamelesly, doubtless what the
Tongue speaks, the heart much affects. It is written of Commodus a beastly
Roman Emperor, that he used to have the excrements of man to his Table in some
of his dishes with some of his meat, which made every one to abhor him; and it
is noted by Naturalists that enquire into excrements, that Man's dung is the
worst of all other; the dung of Beasts and Fowls is good for many u^es; but
Man's dung is the basest of all other, and the most unsavory, and that which is
most rejected. Ezekiel. 4.12, 13, 14. This is much like unto this filthy and
beastly kind of speaking: unclean mouths are like the raging sea which casts
up nothing but dirt and filthiness; Jude ver. 13.
so these men are still foming out their own shame; as the waves of the Sea
rage, swell, and beat one upon another, causing a froth, making a foame, and
casting it out upon the shore and Sea-banks to be seen of men; so these
miscreants full of all ungodliness, do often foame out their corruption, shame
and filthiness; the poison of their unclean hearts is to be seen and openly
heard by the world: such persons like that creature that is called Ibi^, are
always feeding on dung and excrements, and are loathsome and abominable to all
modest persons.

6. They that give way to this sin, do show themselves to be acted by another
spirit, then by the spirit o^ God; for in the Scripture when the penmen of
Holy Scripture come to set down such actions as are in themselves filthy, see
with what modesty they set them down: that unnatural sin of the Sodomites, St.
Jude only styles their lusting after strange flesh, Jude. ver. 6. and so in
diverse other places of Scripture in like sort: now when men shall profess
themselves to be the people of God, and yet give way to this sin, they act most
like unto the Devil, who is styled in Scripture an unclean spirit: they are not
guided by the spirit of God, but by the spirit of the Devil: the Devil is an
unclean spirit by reason of sin, not because he does filthy actions himself,
but because he stirs up others to the practice of them: therefore if thou
delightest in this sin, thou art acted by the unclean spirit: We read of three
unclean spirits like Frogs, that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out
of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for ^hey
are the spirits of Devils. Rev. ^6.13. So when filthy and rotten ^ommunications
do frequently come ^ut of the mouths of men, it shows ^hey have much of the
spirit of the devil in them.

7. It is a sin that grieveth the spirit of God: those that make profession of
Christ, Would any man converse with a slovenly fellow that would be gaping till
such time as Flies might make nests, and Spiders weave webs in his mouth? if
any such person were known, he would be abhorred: no less odious is he to God,
that defiles his mouth with filthy speeches; such lips are an abomination to
the Lord, and God will not Lodge there where the Devil must be his Host.
they must not think it enough to refrain gross deeds, and think that words
are free, but must make conscience of sinful and rotten words, as of evil
deeds. Therefore says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.29.30. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouths etc. and grieve not the Holy spirit of God: This
sin is a filthy thing which the pure eyes of God cannot endure to behold: For
as when we burn filthy savours in a Room where we lodge a Guest, we very much
offend him; so does it grieve the Holy spirit of God which dwells in us; if
we send out of our mouths the stench of those corruptions that are within us:
God complains of the Jews, that he was wearied by their words. Malach. 2.

8. Filthy speakers are very unfit for modest company: an obscean and filthy
word lighting on a weak heart, spreads and dilateth as does a drop of oil in
a cloth, and often so seizes on the heart, that it fills it with an hundred
imaginations and temptations: for as poison enters into the stomach by the
mouth; so does the poison of our filthy words enter by the ear into the heart
of others: such therefore that take themselves for gallant men for uttering
undecent words in company, do abuse the company, which ought to meet together
as Bees for making honey by a sweet and loving intercourse; and not as a hive of
Wasps that assemble together to feed on some putrid matter.

SECT. 2. Remedies against the sin of filthy speaking.
NOw if you will avoid this sin of filthy speaking, make use of these
directions which may by Gods blessing prove remedies against it.

1. Take heed of frothy jesting: many people do so addict themselves to a
frothy kind of speaking, that they know not how to be serious; and from foolish
talking, and jesting they fall to filthy speaking, and can speak so broad, that
nothing in the old Comedy is more beastly: therefore the Apostle joyneth these
together: let neither filthiness nor foolish talking, nor jesting, be so much
as named among you. Ephesians. 5.4. Some men's luxuriant wits dissolve them into a
(...), Scurrilitas (...) est vitium, quum quis in jucando and modum and decorum
excedit, non habita ratione, aut honestatis, aut personarum, aut loci and
temporis, aut gestuum and motus corporis, aut aliarum circumstantiarum. Polan.
Syntag.
or all manner of scurrilous speech, to vex those whom they have a mind to
abuse, so they can but make sport to themselves and others given to dissolute
mirth: the hearts of fools are delighted in the house of laughter; it hardens a
man in sin, and keeps a man from repentance, and the exercise of a contrite
heart: the Devil delights, as one says, in such Musicians as these are: Ball
de Gubernat. linguae.
Pleasantness and Mirth must be used as Sleep and Rest, when more grave and
serious businesses are dispatched.

2. If you are guilty of this sin, seriously humble your selves for it; take
shame and sorrow to you for this sin, and cry out with the Prophet, Woe is me,
for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. Isai. 6.3. and pray with
the Prophet David, Create in me a clean heart O God. Psalm. 51.10. then will
your words be clean: pray that God would make you new creatures; then he will
give unto you new tongues; when God turns a people to him by true repentance,
he does return unto them a pure language. Zeph. 3.9. If those that are given to
this sin do not mourn for it here, a time shall come that they shall gnaw their
tongues for pain, and that for ever. Rev. 16.13.

3. See that your speeches be Gracious* seasoned with Salt. Colos. 4.6. That it
may be good and profitable to the use of edif^ing, ministering Grace to the
hearers. Ephesians. 4.29. let them be seasoned with grace in the heart, and such as
may paint forth the graces that are in your minds: if there be grace in the
heart, there will be grace in our wo^ds: Grace is the same to the heart of man,
as Salt is to meats; it sucks out the blood first, which if left in the flesh,
it makes a stink and corrupts: so Grace soaks out that corruption that makes
our words so unsavory: now as Salt makes the meat savoury, so Grace makes our
words savoury and gracious: Now if it be not thus with us, we had need do as
the Prophet did, when the waters of Jericho were corrupt, that nothing about it
came to perfection, but all was barren: he goes to the springhead and cast in
salt there, and healed the waters. 2 King. 2.21. So let us go to the Fountain
of Life and Grace, and beg of him to purify our hearts; and if we have the salt
of Grace in our selves, it will spread it self through every stream of our souls.

4. Shun the company of those that are obscene persons, keep company in no wise
with those that are immodest: for as Goats do imbitter the sweet Almond-tree,
when they lick it with their tongues: so these rotten hearts and corrupted
souls scarce speak to any of what sex soever, but they make as it were some
breach upon their modesty and chastity; for they have venom not only in their
eyes, V^r pius lapides in se conjectos majo^^ patientia tulerit, quam obscaena
verba. Athanas.
but even in their tongues and breath, as have the Basilisks: a good man cannot
endure the company of filthy speakers: One said that a good man could with much
more patience endure stones to be thrown at him then filthy words: on the
contrary, frequent the company of modest and pious persons, read ofted the Holy
Scriptures; for the word of God is pure and clean, puifying and cleansing them
that delight in it: Some Physicians tell us, that they that are libidinous, by
sleeping upon the Herb Agnus-Castus, become chaste: so resting thy heart upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the immaculate Lamb of God, thou shall find thy
heart and tongue purified from all impurity and uncleanness.

CHAP. X. Of the flattering tongue.
SECT. 1. Flattering defined.
WE are now to treat of another sin of the tongue, sc. the sin of Flattering,
which may thus be defined.

Flattering is a sin whereby men beguile others with deceitful praise; or as
one says, It is an overthwart praising or commending of another: Flattery is
ingendered by Pride, hatched up by Arrogance, and perpetually softered by
fools; for they are the Anvils on which the flatterer still beats, who by
reason of their weakness take no notice of his insinuation, but are presently
puffed up with those Peacocks tails he sticks in their foreheads; folly and
popularity are his prime objects, and he is still present where they
predominate; his tongue is in the ear of every affectatour, although at the
same time at a great distance from his own heart; he cannot be truly generous,
because he is a slave to other men's humors, Lentons charact.
as One well observes: Flattering is a great sin; it was become general in
David's days. Psalm, 12. for he complains, they speak vanity every one with
his neighbor; with flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak.
ver. 2. and the more general it spreads among us, the more reason we have to
labor against it; for the more spreading, (...) labia blanditiarum, quas
Chaldaeus vocat (...) adulationes: Sicut lingua pro sermon passim accipitur,
ita labium aliquando, ut cum dicitu^, Terra labii unius. Genesis 11.1. unum
labium. ver 6. peccare labiis Job 1.21. Venenum sub labiis. Psalm. 14.3. Labium
Electum. Zeph. 3.9. Lorinus. in Psalm. 12.
the more dangerous.

SECT. 2. Shows that men may be guilty of this sin five ways. Two Questions
about the performance of promises answered.
NOw I will show how many ways men may be guilty of this sin.

1. When men promise in fair words more then they intend to perform; thus do
men flatter with God and men: we read of some that flattered with God. Psalm.
78.34, 35, 36. When He slew them, then they sought him, and enquired early
after God, and they remembered that God was their Rock, etc. Nevertheless they
flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue: how usual
is it for men to flatter God in afflictions! how many fair promises do they
make that they will become new men! but at last they deal with God as the
Israelites did, when as their hearts are as bad as before, so that they turn
with the dog to his vomit, when they are well again: This sort of flatterers
exceed the ordinary sort of dissemblers with men, carrying their dissembling up
as high as God himself, seeking to put as great a cheat upon God as upon men,
being grown s^ cunning as those cut-pu^ses that will use their Art not only in
the face of the Court, or at the time and place of the execution of their
fellows, but will pick the pocket even of the Judge himself, Crooks hypocrit.
Part. 1. chap. 25.
as One well notes: God may say to such persons as Delilah to Sampson, How
can thou say I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? Judge. 16.15.

The Flatterer likewise is large in his promises to men, like Antigonus (by a
Sarcasm nick named (...)) always ready to give, but never giving, (...) verbis
mult^m polli^etur, re nihil praestat. Beza.
large in promising, short in pe^forming The Flatte^er is an excellent Merchant
of words, traffiqueth much in promises, but breaks when it comes to
performance. A flatterer boasts of a false gift, and is no better then clouds
and Wind without Rain, Prove. 25.14.



Resp.
1. We are bound to perform such promises as are possible. A man may promise and
bind with an oath, that he will leave such a One his Heir to such an House and
Land, which is then in his possession; but afterward the Land being eaten up of
the Sea, or the House consumed and burnt down by fire, its impossible for him
to perform that promise in so ample a manner as he made it; yet is he not
perjured, if once he purposed to perform it so far as was in his power. Item,
if one promise to pay such a sum of money at a certain time and place, and he
be robbed by the way, he breaks not his promise, because he purposed to do it,
and was prevented by Gods providence: but men should be sparing in making any
promises absolutely, but with St. James's limitation. Jam. 4.13, 14, 15. else
the rash unadvised making them is sin.

2. In vows and promises, the thing promised must be lawful; the rule is, In
malis promissis rescinae fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum.

The like case may happen, if a child promise with an oath to take such a one
for his wife; but being come to years of discretion, sees manifest cause of
refusal, as want of consent of Parents, disparity in Religion, or the like;
such promises bind not. Numb. 30.

It may further be demanded, push bound to perform it, or not?

Resp.
If her self only be like to sustain loss thereby, she is bound to perform it,
because it was in her power as well to have denied it, or suspended her answer,
as to have past her promise; Therefore the Casuists hold it fit enough that she
pay for her folly: But if she have children, who are likely to be prejudiced in
their Right, and depraved of their ancient Inheritance, she is not bound to
perform her promise: a good man swears to his own private hurt. Psalm. 15.4.
but the Prophet presses the point no fu^ther.



Resp.
If the conditious be lawful, they must be kept, as that of Joshua to the
Gibeonites. Joshua 9.15, 19.

2. Men may be guilty of this sin of flattering when they do overmuch commend
another beyond what is his due: As first, when men applaud others to their
faces for their Parts, Virtues, good Deeds, that do little deserve it; this is
flattering when men extol others, their Persons, Guts, Actions, above what
they know or think, either to get favor with them, or some other way for their
own advantage.

A flatterer will report he heard such worthy things of thee, Eltons. Exposit.
in praec. 9.

Qui^ coram laudamur, summa gravitate, summaque modestia laudentur necesse est,
ne scurrae magis and adulatores quam orato^es videamur. Brandolin.


although it were nothing so; and if he know any good done by thee, he will
praise thee with a loud voice; whereas Solomon tells us, He that blesses his
friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a
curse to him.

2. When men by flattery do applaud any in their sins; Both to virtue and to
vice, is flattery a false glass, making the one seem greater, the other less
then it is. Felthams resolves. Cent. 2. When Aeschines commended Philip of
Macedon, that he was well-spoken, fair, and able to drink well: Demosthenes
answered, the first was the commendation of an Advocate, the second of a Woman,
the third of a sponge. I had rather commend the virtues of an Enemy, then
flatter the vices of Friend.
this shows a high deg^ee of corruption, and baseness in such persons: thoug
they see men go on in sin, yet they bless those whom God abhors. Psalm. 10.3.
Blessing them in their wicked ways, dealing with them as the fawning Orator
Tertullus does with that unjust Governor Felix, telling him, that by him they
enjoyed great quietness, and that very worthy deeds were done to the Nation by
his providence, Act. 24.3. Whereas Felix was no such man as Tertullus reports
him to be; because when Paul reasons of Righteousness, Temperance, and
Judgment to come, Felix trembled. ver. 25. being so intemperate a man, and
unjust an oppressor, as Historians relate concerning him: and we may take
notice, that flatterers do love those that will sooth them up in their sins:
God tells the rebellious Jews, that they would say to the Prophets, Prophecy
not to us right things, speak to us smooth things, prophecy deceits. Is^i.
30.10. Flattering Ministers are here to be taxed, that seek to please, not to
profit their people, and so show themselves not to be the servants of Christ.
Gal. 1.10. by crying Peace, Peace, where there is no peace; One building up a
wall, and others daubing it with untempered Mortar. Ezekiel. 13.10. refraining
wholesome Doctrine to secure themselves from danger; not daring with Nathan to
say to a great sinner, Thou art the man; nor with Elias to Ahab, It is Thou and
thy Fathers House; nor with John Baptist to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brothers wife; nor with Christ, O ye serpents, ye generation of
vipers, how shall ye escape damnation? Such as these do hinder the building of
the spiritual Temple, not hewing and sawing rough timber, nor planing and
polishing rubbish stones, but rub with smooth slikestones, and wipe with Foxes
skins: whereas they should cry aloud, and not spare, but lift up their voices
like Trumpets against the sins of their people; they are to be sons of thunder.
Mar. 3.17. It is the son of Thunder that speaks, Filius tonitrus est qui
loquitur, and tonitrum est quod loquitur.
and it ought to be Thunder that he does speak; except ye repent ye shall all
perish. There were 400 Prophets, a whole national Synod, all led by a lying
spirit. They all flatter King Ahab, bidding him go up to Ramoth Gilead and
prosper; the whole Council did vote it, but Michaiah was not among them; he was
sent for and courted to speak as the others had done; he speaks Ironically, go
up and prosper, delivering it so that Abab perceived he jeered him, as
appears by Ahabs answer: then he speaks more plainly to him, telling him,
that he saw all Israel scattered upon the Hills as Sheep that have not a
Shepherd; implying that the Sheep (the Army of Israel) should escape, and the
Shepherd (the King) should be smitten; and shows him the reason why his
Prophets spoke the contrary, sc. because they were possessed with a lying
spirit: yet Ahab would not harken to him, but commands the Prophet to Prison,
and there to be kept till he should return in peace: Thus he flattereth and
promises himself victory, and a false return.

3. When men fawningly give unto any more honor then is due unto them: None so
fawning as fancy-feeding flatterers.
Herod flattered the people by killing of James, and persecuting of Peter, for
which they gratify him with a flattery again, by a blasphemous acclamation
which cost him his life, Act. 12.2, 3.22, 23. At his eloquent Oration they gave
a shout, saying It is the voice of a God not of a man. We read Dan. 11.2. there
shall stand up a vile person, which according to interpreters, is Antiochus
Epiphanes the great King of Assyria; his name signifies Illustrious, yet God
calls him a vile person: Now Josephus writing of this man, says, that the
Samaritans when they saw how he persecuted the Jews, they sought his favor,
and would not own themselves Jews, and in a Letter they wrote thus unto him, To
Antiochus the mighty God. Good men have ever abhorred such kind of flatteries;
Elihu would not give flattering Titles to men; for says he, I know not to give
flattering Titles; in so doing my Maker would soon take me away. Job 32.21, 22.

4. When men are full of vain complements, affected phrases, and pretended
courtesies; the flatterer will tell you he is your very good friend, your most
humble servant, and ready to be commanded by you; he kisseth your hand, or the
hemm of your Garment; but as (one says) with a kiss of a Joab or a Judas; Some
say that the Hebrew word that is rendered to flatter, signifies Dividere, to
divide, because the flatterers Tongue is divided from his heart.
If you come to his Table fu^nished with variety of dishes, he deeply
protests to you that you are most heartily welcome, and calls often upon you to
eat and drink, when perhaps he wishes every bit you eat may choke you: When he
meets any man by the way in the street, or the open Marker, he will fawn upon
him, as if he would creep into his mouth, and throw himself at his feet; but as
soon as he turns his back, It is said of Xistus 5. that he was the most
crouching humble Cardinal, and the most stout and resolute Pope that ever wore
Crown.
he looks over his shoulder and mocks him to the next he meets, bragging how
neatly he cozened him. St. Matthem sets down the form of that flattering
salutation that Judas used to Christ, when he betrayed him with a kiss, Ave
Rabbi. Mat. 26.49. St. Mark says, he ingeminated it; Master Master. Mar.
14.45. as if he had said, alas Master! that it is thy hard hap to fall into
such troublesome times, and such danger, from which I wish it were in my power
to rescue thee! But alas! we are weak and weaponless; few and but feeble in
comparison of this great company, to which some think he made show of not
coming among, but accidentally, Ret^nens adhuc aliquid ve^ecund^ae, non dedit
signum violentiae, sed amoris.
and so would kiss his Master out of show of love, and lothness to leave him:
Some think he had some Reverence yet remaining in him to his Master, when he
kissed him; but he comes in a dissembling manner, ut c^cultior esset prodentis
dolus, and minor proditi metus, Beda in Marc 14.
kissing him that he might not be suspected doing any thing more then what is
usual and ordinary: he kisseth him, says Bosquier, Bosquier. Theatr. Patient.
which was as familiar at meetings and partings among the Jews as shaking
hands is among us. Augustine says, August. sermon 28. ad fratres in Eremo.
our Savior had bestowed many favors upon him, that he had saved Judas from
the Gallows, cured his Father of the Leprosy, and his Mother (with whom he
says this Miscreant had committed villainy) of the Palsy, made him his
Disciple, and the Almoner or Steward of his Household, found him often false and
spared him, yea even admitted him to the Sacrament; yet thus he requited him.

5. Many unfaithful servants are guilty of this sin, when they entice and draw
away their Masters customers by whom they have their livelihood; this sin is
too notorious in Towns and Cities, when Apprentices come to be Journey-men, and
to set up for themselves; for as Absalom stole away the hearts of the men of
Israel, by flattering them, and calumniating his Father. 2 Samuel 15.6.. So this
sort of people do ^^eal away the hearts of their Maste^^ customers, by fawning
upon them, telling them they shall have better choice of wares, better usuage,
and long forbearance: they are to be condemned for impiety, that are thus false
and unfaithful to their Masters.

SECT. 3. Of the greatness of this sin showed in seven things: of the mischiefs
it does to those that are deceived by it, showed in diverse particulars.
Now that ye may avoid this sin, I shall endeavor to set down the hainousness
thereof.

1. A flattering tongue is a double tongue. 1 Timothy 3.8. Such a double tongue
had Joab, when he ki^led Abner in Hebron, and Amasa, with whom dissembling, as
a great friend, meeting him upon the way in the open field, and friendly
saluting him, said, Art thou in health my brother? 2 Samuel 2.9, 10. then taking
him by the beard with the right hand, as if he meant to kiss him, drew forth
his sword with the left hand, and smote him under the fifth rib, so that all
his Bowels fell out upon the ground: such are propery called hypocrites: one
compares such tongues to the tongues of greyhounds, or dogs exercised in
hunting, whose tongues are so apt and pliable, that very easily they are every
way turned double; and hereunto some think the Psalmist alludeth in that
phrase, Psalm, 68.25. the tongue of the dogs in the blood of the enemy. Blondus
for his extreme flatteries was usually called Blandus

(...) the tongue quasi (...) of (...) to know, signifying, that the tongue
should speak nothing but what the heart means.




Flattering Clawbacks are students in brazen-faced College. The flatterer
bears in his arms, a cleven or divided tongue, and a double heart.
As a Looking-glass does imitate whatsoever is set before it, and does represent
the likenesses of them that look in it, but by a contrary way; for it shows
the left side to be the right; and if you look into the East, it represents you
looking toward the West: Even so a flatterer in voice and gesture will imitate
thee: if thou laugh and be merry, he also will be merry and pleasant; if thou
weepest, he also will weep for company; if thou will backbite and slander a
man, he will take thy part, and will with obloquies and slanders wound the same
man: if thou will praise thy self, he will help thee; or if thou love to hear
thy self praised of others, he will carry thee as it were upon the wings of
praises and commendations, up into the clouds and lofty sky. Through his subtle
slights he bends himself every way; he handles old men gravely, Gawdr. Simil.
and young men courteously: the flatterer has always the gestures, voices,
inclinations and dispositions of all persons high and low at his fingers ends:
he leaves out none, that he may deceive all; the flatterer is double-tongued:
Now he extolleth thee, and sets thee aloft with great praises, and by and by
will cast thee down with wrongs and injuryes, as one has well observed He that
is first a flatterer; Servo. d'altrui Si fa: Chi dice il suo secreto a chi no'l
sar. He makes himself a servile wretch
to others evermore,
That tells his secrets unto such
that knew them not before.

will afterward be a tale bearer, and a revealer of secrets. Prove. 17.9. He
that flattereth thee to thy face, will slander thee behind thy back. He that
will hide a man from himself, will dispay him to others. A flatterer if he does
not tempt a man to sin, yet he flattereth him in it; or (at least) concealeth
his knowledge of it, keeping his friend hood-winkt from a true sight of his own
faults, whereby he might mend them, but will not long keep them from others who
will despise his friend for them, as a judicious Divine has noted. Adulatio
blanda omnibus applaudit, omnibus Salve dicit, prodigos vocat liberales, avaros
parcos and sapientes, lascivos curiales, garrulos affaliles, obstinatos
constantes, pigr^s maturos and graves; haec sagitta leviter volat, and cito
infigitur. Cassiodor. in quad. Epist.


2. Flattering is a sin much displeasing to God. He that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, are both an abomination to the Lord. Prove.
17.15. A woe is denounced against them that call evil good. Isai. 5. and he
says, Woe to them that sow pillowes to all arm holes: will ye hunt the souls of
my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you? and will ye
pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to
slay the souls alive that should not die, and to save the souls that should not
live by your lying to my people. Ezekiel. 13.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. The false
flattering Prophets prophesied against the Godly, that they should dye, and so
dep^ived them of their peace and comfort, and the apprehensions they had of
Gods favor, and filled them with fears, Greenhill's Exposit. in Ezekiel. 13.
Just viventibus adulatores prophetant mo^tem and infortunium, and injustis qui
per peccatum mortui sunt, prophetant vitam and prosperitatem, propter dona
temporalia sibi ab illis data. Lyra in Locum.
grief, and sad thoughts, if they harkned to Jeremiah, and submitted to
Nebuchadnezzar; or thus, as one notes, they stirred up the people against them
that were Godly, and would not believe their prophecies, provoking the
Magistrates to slay them before their time, who by the course of nature should
have lived longer: and they promised life and peace to those to whom they
should have threatened war and misery; God therefore threatens a severe
judgment against them. ver. 22, 23.

3. Flatterers have ever been odious to wise men; this made Diogenes call
Aristippus (flatterer to Dionysius) a dog; another time a well coucht snare.
Constantine called the flatterer a Moth: Horace the Lyrick Poet gives him the
name of a Fox. Aeneas Sylvius reports that Sigismund the Emperor soothing a
flatterer up in his folly, and using familiar gestures with him, at last lifted
up his hand and gave him a good box on the ear, and the other finding fault
with this injury done him, said, Alas my Lord, why do you smite me? the
Emperor replied why do thou bite me? a blow is the best reward for a bite.

4. Flattering is a sin very pleasing^ to the Devil: it is as one says, the
Devil's invisible net, Rot^ Diaboli invisibile. Perald. de v^^^s.

Amici vulnera quam inimicorum oscula sunt utiliora. Ambros.

Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes.

When flattery is resident in the tongue as Porter, Satan keeps Court and fits
president in the heart, as King and chief Ruler.

Impia sub dulci melle venena latent. Ovid.


which by the flatterer he spreads to entangle us. A man that flattereth his
neighbor spreads a net for his feet. Prove. 26.6. by flattering the Devil
himself deceived our first Parents: and when he cannot at any time overcome us
by force, he labors to overcome us by fraud: when temptations and
tribulations cannot bear us down, he labors to charm us with his flatteries:
Satan ever makes show of most love when he intends the greatest mischief; he
covers his hatred with a cloak of love, and so do all flatterers; when they
make most show, there is least love. He that hates, dissembleth with his lips,
and lays up deceit within him. Prove. 26.24. flatterers do spread the Devils
Net before those that are flattered by them: the flatterer by his mout^ (one way
or other) destroys his neighbor. Adulatores homici^ae sunt, and prodit^ es,
quoniam sub specie a micitiae homin^m int^^ ficiunt, ut sub specie osculi (ut
Judas) hominem tradant Diabolo. Alex. Fabrit. part. 4. cap. 15.
Prove. 11.9. faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy
are deceitful. Prove. 2^.6. Flatterers are man-slayers and such as do betray us,
killing a man under the show of friendship, and with a seeming kiss (like
Judas) they be ray a man into the han^s of the Devil.

5. It is a shame to be commended by such vile tongue as the tongue of a
flatterer: the praise of wicked men says Seneca, is a manifest instant that
the praised is like unto the praiser: Therefore Antisthenes the great
Philosopher was very much offended, when he heard that certain lewd fellows had
highly commended him, as Diogenes Laertius tells us, O me miserum, metuo ne in
crimen aliquod inciderem. Diog. Laert.
which made him say, wretched man that I am, I fear no greater mishap could
have befallen me: another Philosopher also being told that some of evil
conversation had liberally praised him, answered, Alas what evil have I done?

6. It is a very foolish thing to flatter any man whatsoever; Titles without
Truth, are like Lanthorns without light, buds without blossoms, flowers without
fruit.
it is great folly to praise a man to his face; it is as if one would sell a
man to himself: whence it was that one said to a man flattering him, why d^st
thou praise me to my self, will thou sell me to my self? The folly of a
flatterer may farther be demonstrated, in that he flattereth another to find
favor with him, which he should the better obtain if he spoke the truth unto
him. Hence it is that Solomon says, He that rebukes a man, afterward shall
find more favor then he that flattereth with the tongue. Prove. 28.23 and
elsewhere he says, He that says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall
the people curse, Nations shall abhor him: but to them that rebuke him shall
be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them: every man shall kiss his
lips that gives a right answer, Prove. 24.24, 25, 26.

7. A flatterer is worse then a slanderer, because detraction and slandering
are means to humble him; Ipsi sunt Sacerdo^es De^holi hominis vivo^ se
pelientes. Perald. Tim 2 de peccato linguae.
but flattering extolls a man, and by means thereof a man is apt to be puffed up;
Thus Herod was puffed up with pride at the vain flattery of the people; When men
are highly extolled and commended, they are apt to have high thoughts of
themselves; One calls flatteres the devils Priests, burying men alive; and
under the pretense of adorning others, they sully them and strangle them.

8. Let us therefore consider what mischief it does to those that are deceived
by it. 1. It is an occasion of drawing men to sin: thus the Harlot deceives
the young man; she inviteth him to come to her, saying, let us take our fill of
love, etc. for the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey, he has
taken a bagg of money with him, and will come at the day appointed; so with
much fair speeches she ^auseth him to yield, with the flattering ^f her lips
she forces him. Prove. 7.^8, 19, 20, 21. The lips of a strange ^oman drop as a
honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother thin oil. Prove. 5.8. The Princes of
Judah, after the death of Jehojada did obeisance to Joash to flatter him into
idolatry. 2 Chronicles. 24.17. Sicut finis oratoris est dictione persuasisse, and
medici medicina cur^sse; sic adulatoris est finis ^^^vi loquio decepasse.
Chrysostom.
Flattering is an infectious plague, a damnable disease, a sweet poison, a
deadly hony-bait that deceives by enticing, and poisoneth by sweet persuading;
it is the Siren that draws many to destruction.

2. To flatter men in any evil course is a means to harden them in sin;
Adulantium linguae ligant homines in peccatis: dele^^at enim ea facere in
quibus non solum non metuitur repraehensor, sed etiam laudatur operator.
August. s^p. Psalm 9.
when men meet with such that will sooth them up in sin, they are hardened in
sin: a man is kept in his wickedness and hardened in it, when he thinks he
does that which is good and right: the tongues of flatterers do bind men in
sinful courses, for it delights them to do those things in which not only
they fear no reprover, but also the doer of them is praised: A mind that
knows it self guilty, is in a manner dejected to a servile flattery.

3. It makes men neglect to seek after the virtues or excellencies for which
the flatterer commends them; this makes many unuseful, that otherwise by
diligence might have deserved true praise; as Carneades observed in the sons of
Princes, who could indeed learn nothing deserving honor but horsemanship; for
in all other things their teachers would flatter them by commending them
without cause, and so keep them from laboring after the truth of those
excellencies for which they falsely praised them. Therefore Antisthenes judged
it less harm to light into the power of Ravens, then into the hands of
flatterers; and another Philosopher quarrelling with one about words, Sicut
corvi cadaverum oculos ^ff^di^u^, sic a^ulatores suis laudibus hom number animas
corrun^^unt. Anton. Moner. in Melissa. part. 1.
many unseemly speeches passed between them: quoth one of them, peradventure I
may live to see thee hanged, and then the Ravens to come and pick out thy eyes;
whereunto the other answered; Perh^ps I may live to see thee fall among
flatterers; for Ravens pick out the eyes but of the dead, whereas flatterers
dig them forth while they are living. A faithful friend is as a wise Physician,
that considers the condition of his Patient, not giving him that which may
please, but that which may do him most good: a true Lover wounds his friend
as well as embraces him: but those wounds are the wounds of a Surgeon, not
of an Enemy: The Holy smitings of a righteous man he takes for a kindness, and
fears not that such as excellent oil will break his head. Psalm. 141.5.

4. It makes men fearless of judgment and danger, until they fall into that
misery they were not aware of: Thus the young man (befooled by the wanton
Harlots flatteries) goes after her straight way as an Ox goes to the
slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dart strike
through his liver; he hasteneth to his ruin as a bird hasteneth to the snare,
and knows not that it is for his life. Prove. 7.22, 23. By flattering words
men are put into fools Paradise, and peswaded all is well, when it is quite
contrary; and when men are soothed up and flattered in sin, hence it comes to
pass that they drop into the bottomless pit before they are aware of it, not
fearing the torments of Hell till they feel them.

5. This carriage is cross to the carriage of God to his people whom he loves;
the more near and dear any people are to God, the more he will make them to
know their sins by warnings, and by punishments if they take not warning: Thus
he speaks to the children of Israel; You only have I known above all the
families in the earth; therefore I will punish you for your iniquityes. Amos
3.2. If David sin, who was a man after Gods own heart, God will not let him
alone in his sin, but Nathan the Prophet, and Gad his Seer shall be sent unto
him, that he may come to a fight of his sin, and be brought out of it:
therefore they that flatter others in sin, they show not Gods, but the devils
kindness to those they pretend to love.

6. Consider how God will deal with those that are flatterers; Labiis and
Linguae excisionem imprecatur, cum tamen malum hoc revera non sit labiorum, nec
linguae, quae sunt instrumenta, sed cordis, tanquam ipsius sontis, cui labia
and lingua ministrant: Sic igitur detestabile est hoc malum, ut non solum cor
unde fluit, sed and labia and lingua quibus v^lut instrumentis dispensatur,
recte detestationi and excisioni subijciantur. Muscul. ad Ps. 12.
God will cut off such flattering tongues sooner or latter, Psalm. 12.3. Whither
they flatter others in sin, or too much extol what is good in them: All such
flattering lips shall be cut off: Some read the words of the Psalmist as an
imprecation; let God cut off all flattering lips; the Prophet being moved with
zeal for the Glory of God, prays that they may be cut off, and they shall be
cut off. Elihu says, if he should give flattering titles to any, his Maker
would take him away.

7. It brings down judgments not only upon men's persons, but upon their
posterity; Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam gladius persecutoris. Gregor.
also Job. 17.5 He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
children shall fail: The flatterer shall not only be punished himself, but his
children also shall be punished for the Fathers sin; when his posterity shall
come to look for truth and faithfulness from others, their eyes shall fail:
Thus we see what hurt comes by a flattering tongue, so that we may say with
one of the Fathers, the tongue of a flatterer is more mischievous then the
sword of a persecutor.

SBCT. 4. Of the cure of this sin of flattering.
LEt no man therefore delight in the praises of men; for the delectation of
popular applause, and humane praise lasts no longer then it is heard, and the
relish thereof perishes with the very taste; for when the sound of the words
is gone, the worth is at an end; a folly so great, as there can scarce be
imagined a greater: He that desires everlasting commendation, must not seek
that which comes from men but from God, the searcher and examiner of all
hearts; then shall evety man have praise of God, says Aquinas: There is no
security in committing a man's glory to the tongues of men, which (as One says)
are like Chests, without either lock or key; for when it is referred to another
man's liberty, it is no longer in thy own power, but in the others either to
commend, or to condemn thee: Who be they that are respected in Kings Courts,
and such places but they that be mollibus induti, Mat. 8.11. that is, as Ferus
says, Ferus in Matthew.
such as have smooth tongues to fawn and flatter, and speak placentia, sowing
pillow^ under their elbows, like Ahabs false prophets? but Elijah and Michaiah
are no Chaplains for his turn; no more was John Baptist for Herod; B^se
assentation is the bane of many Princes: Flatterers like Lazarus dogs do lick
even Princes sores.
these rough hewn fellows shall have no place but in prison. Jerem. 38. Amos
7.12, 13. But in Gods kingdom, things shall be done otherwise: the vile person
shall be no more called liberal, nor the hurl said to be bountiful. Isai. 32,
5. in Heaven says Augustine, Lodovic. Granad. Meditat. Part 1.
shall be true Glory, for there shall ^one ^e praised either by error or
flattery. Ibi plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, and conscientia bona
quam Marsupia plena: There shall pure hearts be more acceptable then crafty
words, and a good conscience then full purses. The flatterer shall go out in a
snuff at last; his conscience shall accuse him that he has praised men more
then God, and consequently that he has the praise of neither; and though he
fit his Lyre to every man's tune, yet in Fine, all men shall hate him; for he
that is a flatterer cannot be a true friend, as One said to a friend that
flattered him, Lenton's Charact.
Non potes me simul amico and adulatore uti; Thou can not use me both for a
friend and a flatterer; faithfulness is the best and surest token of love and
friendship; and he that deals faithfully shall have favor both with God and
man. The way to be rid of this sort of men is not to listen to them; an angry
countenance will send them packing: for if flatterers were not listened to,
neither would they continue, or any one be flattered by them: The more we
hearken to them, the more we multiply them: Solomon tells us, If a Ruler
hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. Prove. 29 12.

CHAP. XI. Of the Censuring Tongue.
SECT. 1. Censuring defined: Seven ways men may be guilty of censuring others.
I Proceed now to speak of another sin of the Tongue, sc. the sin of censuring
and rash judging, a sin very common among us in these days. First I shall
define this sin, and show what it is.

Definit. of Censuring.
Censuring is a rash and uncharitable judgment, whereby we misconstrue and
condemn the sayings and doings of our brethren, or mis-judge their persons.

Here two sorts of persons are justly taxed. 1. Those that are professors among
us at large, and at the best do but seem to be Religious. 2. Those that are the
people of God themselves. For those that profess Religion at large, they pass
most heavy censures upon others, thinking highly of themselves: We read of
some. Isai. 65.5. which say to others, Stand by thy self, come not near, for I
am Holier then thou. In the foregoing verses you may read what these men were:
They were a People that walked in a way that was not good, a People that
provoked God to anger continually to his face; and God says of them; these are
a smoke in my Nose, a fire that burns all the day; they were like the snuff
of a Candle in the nostrils of God. Thus the proud Pharisee seems to give
Glory to God, while he gives him thanks, but takes all the Glory to himself,
in censuring the humble Publican, and preferring himself above him. Luke 18.11.
God, I thank thee, I am not as other men are, nor even as this Publican.
Sometime also it so falls out, that those that are more sincere, are guilty
of this sin. The Romans judged one another, and despised one another for not
complying one with another in every small matter. Romans 14. Now men may be
guilty of this sin diverse ways.

1. When men take occasion by some passage of providence befalling such and
such persons to censure them: Thus the barbarous people in the Isle Melita, or
Malta, when they saw a Viper fasten upon Paul's hand, they said among
themselves; No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the
Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. Act. 28.4. that passage of providence
upon him makes them to censure him; but the censure was unjust; our Savior
perceives some such temper as this in their hearts who spoke to him about the
Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices: therefore says he
to them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans
because they suffered such things? I tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.2, 3. as if he should have said, ye are apt
to censure me worse then your selves; but if ye repent not, you shall also
perish. This was the sin of Jobs friends; when they saw how God had dealt with
him, they thought him to be a most wicked hypocritical man. Job 4. Now it is
come upon thee, and thou art troubled: Is not this thy fear, thy confidence,
the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope? remember I pray thee who ever
perished being innocent? ver. 5, 6, 7. So it fell out with the Jews that were
left in Jerusalem, they slighted those that were in captivity, as if they that
were behind were more Holy then those that were carried away into captivity.
Ezekiel. 11.15. While a man is able to do well to himself, every one will praise
and applaud him. Psalm 49.18. but when God lays his hand upon him, and does as
it were single out and expose him to contempt, every one is ready to trample
upon him, to persecute him whom God has smitten, and to talk to the grief of
those whom God has wounded. Psalm. 69.26.

2. When men look only upon an action done, In this critical age, every man's
actions and labors are arraigned at the tribunal seat of every pedantical
censorious Aristarchus understanding.
and it may be such an action as is not in it self simply unlawful, and yet
upon that action they are apt to pass a severe sentence: So they censure Christ
for going to the house of Zacheus; when they saw it, they all murmured saying,
That he was gone to be guest with a man that was a sinner. Luke 19.7. with one
that was a Publican; hereupon they pass an heavy sentence upon him, that he was
a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners; the thing was not unlawful
for Christ to dine with Zacheus, though a Publicane, a sinner; but the sin was
theirs in censuring him: So when he had made a man whole on the Sabbath day,
diverse censures were past upon him: Some said he is a good man, others said
nay, but he deceives the people. Joh. 7.12. Now this was done for the
advancement of Gods Glory, yet they think there is some appearance of sin in
it, that he should take up, and carry away his bed on the sabbath day;
therefore they censure the man for it* and Christ that made him whole; but he
did it to manifest the Glory of his Father, and himself to be the son of God,
and Lord of the Sabbath; but they looked not at this, Qui succu^rere potest
perituro, and non ^^ccurrit, occ^dit. Seneca.
but past a sentence according to the outward appearance, which caused Christ
to give them that caution. ver. 24. Judge not according to the appearance, but
judge righteous judgment: Christ taxes their hypocrisy for preferring the
Shell before the Kernel, Ceremonies and Shadows before the Truth and
Substance, telling them that to avoid a seeming evil, they would have him do an
evil indeed; lest he might seem to be guilty of breach of the sabbath, they
would have him guilty of manifest murder, which may be committed as well by
withdrawing such things from a man whereby he should live, as by direct killing
him. Syracides says, the bread of the needful is the life of the poor, and he
that defraudeth them of it is a murderer, or man of blood: Now that is not
only the bread of the needful which he has of his own, but that which thou
can spare, and he needs, and thou art bound to bestow upon him. Ecclus.
34.22.

3. When men judge of others only because of some difference that is between
them in some small matters, and circumstantial things: Hence came that caution
of the Apostle, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let
not him which eats not judge him that eats, for God has received him. Romans
14.3. Those that were weak in faith, were apt to pass sentence upon their
Christian brethren, that knew their Christian liberty better then they did; and
they that were strong in faith were apt to despise those that were weak: This
has been a sin too common in our days, because men do not jump with us in
every punctillio, therefore the work of Grace in their hearts is looked upon as
nothing: They are not rashly to be censured whom God has received to Grace;
this is to reproach Gods favorites, and to condemn them whom God approves.

4. When men censure another for something they hear of him, but seek not out
the truth of it, neither are they able to prove the truth thereof against him;
this is that the Apostle calls a judging before the time, 1 Cor. 4 5. he
judges without judgment that thus preposterously censureth his brother.

5. When men take upon them to judge the hearts of others, and those things
which are secret, which they cannot see into; such men are partial in
themselves, and judges of evil thoughts, as the Apostle speaks. Jam. 2.4. not
calling evil thoughts to judgment, but judging the hearts and thoughts of
others according to the evil thoughts within themselves: Corrupt hearts love to
be judging where they ought not, and where they cannot judge aright.

6. When those things that are good and lawful in themselves, are nicknamed,
and have foul names put upon them: Men that walk exactly, are looked upon as
mad men, as men out of their wits and besides themselves, more nice and precise
then wise: Thus the young Prophet sent by Elisha to anoint Jehu King of Israel,
was accounted a mad fellow by the rest of the Captains of the host, 2 King.
9.11. Thus the kindred of our Savior thought him besides himself; because he
is more Holy and zealous in the ways of God then they are, they think him mad:
thus the devil puts bad names upon good actions, and good names upon bad
actions, and hereby men fall under that heavy curse. Isai. 5.20. Woe to them
that call evil good, and good evil; darkness light, and light darkness; that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. God complains, Isai, 59.15. that
judgment was turned backward, that truth fails, and he that refraineth from
evil makes himself a prey; the times were so bad among them, that he that
followed truth, made himself to seem a mad man, and he that departed from sin
made himself a prey.

7. Curios^ ad cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendum suam. Aug.
confess. lib. 10. cap. 3.
When men judge that as evil in others, which they allow in themselves; they
are very busy to inform themselves of other men's faults, but careless of their
own; therefore they are forward enough to censure others, careless enough to
pass judgment upon themselves. Judah no sooner hears of Tamars pollution,
but he passes sentence; Bring her forth and let her be burnt. Gen, 38.24.
whereas he was not so hasty to judge himself who had made her a harlot: Now he
that judges another, condemns himself while he does the same things. Romans
2.1. and he which is guilty of that which he condemns in another is
inexcusable; and doing the same things, deserves the same censure. Tully
affirmed that an intolerable ^^ing, for men not only severel^ to judge, but
sharply to reprove others, when themselves are faulty.

SECT. 2. Shows tha^ ^en may be guilty of censuring the word of God three
ways.
FUrthermore, men may be guilty of this sin in reference to the Word it self,
unto the hearing whereof they come; and therein they may be guilty of this sin.

1. When a truth is delivered that is clear, yet the hearers do not understand
it, or they have no mind to receive it, and because it crosses their
corruptions, instead of submitting to it they fall a censuring him that
delivers it in the name of the Lord; this Christ met with himself: Some said
he was a good man; others said nay, but he deceived the people. Joh. 7.12.
therefore no wonder if the servants meet with what their Master did; that some
judge them good men, and others as deceivers: when men's hearts do not close
with the Word that is delivered in the name of God, and it crosses their
lusts, then they are apt to open their mouths in judging their Minister: if
corruption boil in thy heart against the Word, then that which rises in thy
heart while thou art hearing, will soon also show it self in the tongue:
therefore against this the Apostle gives a good caution, Be swift to hear,
slow to speak, slow to wrath. Jam. 1.19. Yet because the Minister is not meal
mouthed, nor daubeth with untempered mortar, nor sows pillowes under men's arm
holes, but reproves sins sharply, laying salt to the sore; therefore many men
will say, he speaks in choler, hatred, malice; he means this of me, etc.

2. When men are guilty of censuring also in reference to the Word, when
instead of receiving the Word home to themselves, they transfer it upon others;
they say Now such a one is met withal; now the Minister has hit him home:
when they hear him sharply reproved by the Word, they never apply it to
themselves, judging themselves by it, but apply it to others whom they judge
great^^ sinners then themselves; The e's a good lesson for such a one. Horace
in his time checked men for being purblind in the view of themselves, Horat.
lib. 1. Sermonum.
that notwithstanding were sharp of sight, and severe in judging of others. Now
this is not the mark of a good man; for he had rather, 1. when he hears such
a sin spoken against, to say with the Disciples (when Christ told them that one
of them should betray him) Lord, is it I? Lord, is it I? Math. 26.22. Grace in
the heart will teach men to consider, whether such a reproof does not reach
them, but multitudes of men consider not whether it has any reference to
themselves, but refer it to others. 2. A good man will consider that a Minister
does not mean such a one, but it is God that speaks by him: it is not man
that meets with his sins, but it is God that meets with him; as the King of
Syria's servants tell him; It is not any of us that have betrayed thee; but the
God of Israel shows by the Prophet that is in Samaria to the King of Israel
what thou speak in thy bedchamber: True Grace will teach a man to say, God
has now met with my heart; this day my sin was smitten.

3. When men carry themselves as those that come to carp and censure rather
then to hear and apply the word; there is much of the cunning and subtilty of
the devil in this, to make men rather to corrupt what they hear, then out of
any desire to learn to submit to the word: Thus men make the Pulpit which is
Gods tribunal, to be their bar to judge others, coming rather to be jeerers and
scorners then hearers of the word; and sometime those that leave other sins,
yet they are taken with this, and go on therein.

SECT. 3. Sets down five causes of this sin of censuring.
IN the next place I shall sit down the causes of this sin of rash judging or
censuring; which are these.

1. It proceeds from a guilty conscience; for a man that is bad himself, and
privy to his own naughtiness, does easily judge others as bad in every kind as
himself: The most vicious are most suspicious, and are apt to take all things
in the worst part, whereas Love thinks not evil. 1 Cor. 13.5. when it may
have a good meaning: So Jacob when his sons brought Joseph's coat all imbrued
with blood, he knowing it, did not charge them that they had murdered their
brother, and made him away; but said It is my sons coat; an evil beast has
devoured him, Joseph is surely torn in pieces. Genesis 37.33.

2. Pride and an overweening conceit of a man's self: It was a proud one that
said, I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican Luke 18.11. he was high
in his own esteem, when he was far lower in the eyes of God, then he that was
despised by him; he set him at naught, as if he were not worthy to come near
him. When the self-condemning Publican went home to his house justified rather
then the censorious and self-conceited Pharisee: Some judge rashly out of pride
thinking by how much the more they depress the good name of others, by so much
the more they advance their own reputation, Proud and Arrogant spirits looking
on others with contempt and scorn; why else do they blaze abroad other men's
vices, but to give an occasion of extolling their falsely supposed virtues?

3. A third cause of censuring is envy and uncharitableness; how Eagle-ey'd,
and sharp-sighted are the Scribes and Pharisees, as also open-mouthed, and
long-tongu'd concerning the carriages of others? If they can find no holes in
their coats, they will make some, as appears by their dealing with John
Baptist, yea with Christ himself and his Apostles: John is condemned as
austere, and abstemious, one that will not keep company, nor partake with them
in worldly delights and pleasures, because such carriages suited not with the
doctrine of repentance which he preached; therefore they pass an uncharitable
sentence upon him, and say he has a devil. Mat. 11.18. On the other side our
Savior coming to seek and save that which was lost, conversing familiarly, and
keeping company with them that he might convert them, therefore they say he is
a pot-companion, and a friend of Publicans and Sinners. ver. 19. so they deal
with his Disciples; nothing they do will please them; if they eat but with
unwashen hands, they charge them for transgressing the tradition of the Elders.
Mat. 15.2. Let them on the Sabbath but pluck a few ears of Corn to stay their
hung^y stomachs, they change them with breaking the Sabbath Luke 6.2. Likewise
the uncharitable Corinthians censu^e Paul's Ministry, because it was not set
forth with painted eloquence, and excellency of words, as their other teachers
was, 1 Cor. 2.1. When men do envy or hate others, they are soon angry and
offended with them, and are easily persuaded to judge amiss of them; Quod nimis
volunt facile credunt; every man easily believes that to be true which he
desires.

4. Because men are stark blind and cannot see their own fau^ts; they can see
moats in other men's eyes, but cannot discern beams in their own; and although
they are far worse then those they censure, yet by reason of their sottish
stupidity, and senseless security, they are apt to aggravate other men's faults
and extenuate their own: some men do flatter themselves, and to silence their
own guilty, and clamorous consciences, do judge othe^s guilty of those faults
themselves commit.

5. Passion is another cause of rash judging, and so many times the innocent
are condemned; there are some angry and sharp spirits, who (as the Prophet
says) turn judgment into Gall and Wormwood: Now as a man in a mist seems
bigger to us then he does in a fair day, by reason of the ill-disposedness of
the Air or Medium; so do the faults of those with whom we are angry, by reason
of the distemperature of our imaginations, and their indirect passage to the
estimative faculty: Now as by this and the other foregoing causes, we think
other men's faults like men in a mist bigger then they be; so we esteem our own
like men upon the tops of Mountains, or high Steeples, less then they are.

SECT. 4. Of the aggravations of this sin, showed in four things.
NOw let us see the aggravations of this sin of censuring.

1. It is cross to our Saviors command, who forbids men to censure others
Math. 7.1. Judge not that ye be not judged, and that of the Apostle, Judge not
before the time. 1 Cor. 4.5. and that of St. James, who says; My Brethren, be
not many Masters; the Italian translatour renders it, Non s^ate molti censo i.
Ital.
My Brethren be not many Judges or Censurers. Jam. 3.1. Gods children must not
ambitiously challenge a Mastership and Authority to judge their Brethren.

2. It is a sin directly cross to that common rule of equity given by our
Savior: Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do ye unto them;
that is the common rule of equity that God will have us to walk by; and ye that
are so apt to censure others; consider whether you would take it we^ that
others should do so by you; yo^ may meet with those that will do the same by
you: they incurr judgemen^ the more worthily, and shall assuredly find the
greater condemnation wha^ do themselves offend in judging an^ condemning their
brethren.

3. Herein men take upon them th^^ which belongs to God to do; who art thou
that judge another man's servant? why do thou judge thy brother? we shall
all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Romans 14.10. They which stand
before Gods judgment themselves, Qui judicat fratrem, tantum crimen elationis
iucurrit, ut Christi tribunal sibi videatur assumere, and ejus judicium
praevenire. Anselm. in Romans 14.
ought not to judge others; but we must all (both strong and weak) stand before
the judgment seat of Christ; Ergo Judge not thou thy brother, for thou thy
self shall be judged: Shall the prisoner that stands at the Bark leap up into
the seat of the Judge? the judgments of men be not right but rash, because
they be not right Judges one of another, but in judg^ng usurp the office of the
Lord; and they be rash, because the chief malice of any sin resideth in the
intention of the heart which is unsearchable, seeing every one has enough to
do in judging himself, So Judge, as if thou would have God see thee, or
judge thee. Jove Aequo judica.
and not his neighbor.

4. Because by rash judging of others we set our selves to control the Law of
God; he that speaks evil of his brother, or he that condemns his brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and condemns the Law; he judges the Law as if the
Law were not just and equal, because it crosses his corruption in censuring
his brother. Jam. 4.11. Now the Law says, Thou shall not judge the person of
thy brother; He that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law; but if thou judge the Law, thou
art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge; There is one Lawgiver that is able to
save and to destroy, who art thou that judge another? ver. 12. when we
violate the Law, we condemn the Law that it is not good enough to be the rule
and bridle of our lives, and in effect, do speak evil of the Lawmakers. When
positive and civil Laws and Statutes are made by Princes, and their
Commonwealths for the governing and ordering the manners of men, and men
infringe and violate them, and will not reform their manners according to the
prescript thereof, do they not thereby show, that they like not such Laws, and
so in effect, speak evil of them, and condemn them?

SECT. 5. An objection touching judicial proceedings answered: How a man may
suspect or judge evil of another, showed two ways; amplyfied by diverse
instances: An objection answered: all rash judgment condemned.
BUt here some may object, judge not lest ye be judged: Mat. 7.1. and are we in
diverse other places of Scripture commanded not to judge others? this seems to
ove^throw the course of justice, judgment seats, and all judicial proceeding^?
(...)
We must not imagine that our Savior Christ and the Apostles do go about to
overthrow the course of justice, or to condemn judgment-seats, and judicial
proceedings, for so should they overthrow in one place what is established in
others. Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 25.1. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Romans 13.1. Thus Moses, Joshua,
David, Solomon, and the rest, executed judgment upon the Lords people; No^ as
the Prince and civil Magistrate may judge; so may the Pastor and Ministe^ upon
just cause and good ground by our Savior Christ's own Canon. Mat^ 18.17. and
Paul's practice toward the incestuous Corinthian. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. and Hymeneus
and Alexander. 1 Timothy 1.20. nay, every Minister judges his people, when in the
public dispensation and preaching of the Word, he reproves the sins whereof
they be guilty. 1 Cor. 14.24. the unbeleever and unlearned is convinced and
judged by him that prophecieth: and private persons in some cases are not
debarred from judging; for the Apostle tells us, that some men's sins go before
unto judgment, and some follow after. 1 Timothy 5.24. Mature patefiunt, and
prodeunt in notitiam and conspectum hominum, says Calvin upon that place.
Calvin in 1 Timothy 5.
A man may suspect or judge evil of another two ways.

1. Upon evidence of the fact; as to judge him a murderer, whom he ^eeth
killing a man; or to judge him to ^e a thief whom he sees breaking up another
man's house, or carrying away ^is Goods, or him to be an Adulter^r, or her an
Adultresse, that like that ^oman mentioned, Joh. 8.4. are ta^en in Adultery in
the very Act: this ^s called by Civilians, fa^^i flagrantia, ^he manner, or to
be taken with the ^anner: thus to judge a man is no sin ^t all.

2. Upon some clear and evident sign, as 1. If I see one that delights ^o be
in ill company, he is never well ^s he would be, but when he is among
drunkards, swearers, gamesters; I may justly say without sin, he is a bad
fellow; such as his mates are, such is ^he man; B^rds of a feather will fly
together. 2. If I hear one vomit out filthy unchaste speeches, a Tongue fu^l of
uncleanness, a mouth running over with lewd and lustful words; in this respect
I may pass a censure up in him as a filthy person; for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaket^* 3. If I see a man receive the Sacramen^ profess
that he will amend all that i^ amiss, and lead a new life, and seem t^ rake up
coals of malice under ashes that no spark appears to be left to kindle
contention again, but I shall se^ him within a while after as full of malice,
cozenage and deceit as ever; ^ may well judge that he came to the Sacrament
without faith or repentance, that he polluted the Lords Table, eat and drank
his own damnation, being guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. 4. If I see
any man to be a stickler in suits of Law, that sets men together by the ears;
that might live quietly with his neighbors, yet will not; I may say; that that
man is a common Barratour, and a pernicious person in the place and parish
where he dwells: where envy and strife is, there is sedition and every evil
work. Jam. 3.16. Finally a man may judge the tree by the fruit, and say, that
He that does wickedness is wicked, and he that lives and dies an Atheist,
Drunkard, or Idolater, etc. shall be damned: So in clear cases we must not
speak good of evil, nor evil of good. Jerem. 15.19. albeit we may not judge of
the tree by the sap that is hid, yet by his fruit which is manifest; for a good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree bring forth good fruit: by
their fruits ye shall know them. Mat. 7.16.

But we may not judge all: it thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5.

As Charity is not suspicious, Sol.
so neither is it sottish; as it does not allow suspicion, so neither thrust
out discretion; as not so sharp sighted to see a mote where none is; so neither
is it purblind but it can discern a beam where it is: Christ seeing the lives
of the Pharisees, that they did all to be seen of men, prayed, and fasted, and
gave alms to draw men's eyes upon them, judges them, and calls them Hypocrites;
When Elymas the sorcerer soughe to turn the Deputy from the faith, Paul being
full of the Holy Ghost, set his eyes upon him, and said, O full of all subtilty
and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness*
will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Act. 13.10
and St. Paul bids Timothy beware of Alexander the Copper-smith. 2 Timothy 4.14,
15. by warrant whereof a man may admonish his son, servant, or friend, to
beware of such and such persons whom he knows to be lewdly disposed, and in
so judging them he does not wrong them: as therefore we must not rashly
condemn, because we know not men's estates before God, so we must not commend
without good testimony to the world.

All judgment then whether public or private, is not forbidden, but only
rash, unadvised, and uncharitable judgment: this was the fault of Eli the
Priest toward Hannah the Mother of Samuel, thinking and saying she was drunk,
when in pensiveness of spirit, and heaviness of heart, she poured out the
sorrow of her soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.13, 14, 15. it was likewise the
fault of Eliab the eldest brother of David, telling him that the pride of his
heart brought him from his business to the battle. 1 Samuel 17.28. whereas in the
verses foregoing, we read his father sent him to visit him, and the rest of his
brethren, and help victual the camp: yea David himself was not free from this
fault; and it was some blemish in his government, that he was overhasty to
hear a false information of that whibling Ziba, against his own innocent, and
better deserving Master, Mephibosheth. 2 Samuel 16. Thus the Jews hearing the
Apostles speak diverse languages, affirm them to be full of new wine. Act. 2.13.
Thus we see what kind of judgment is forbidden, sc. rash and uncharitable
judgment.

SECT. 6. Of the cure of the sin of censuring: of the great difference of
censuring men's persons and their actions: what things are subject to man's
judgment, and what are not.
Judge nothing before the time, either collatae p^testatis, or cognitae
veritatis. Pet. Barker. Exposit. in praecept. 9.
I Shall in the last place prescribe those means by which we may through Gods
blessing be preserved from this sin of censuring.

1. See that you censure no man before you are fully convinced of the matter:
judge nothing before the time. 1 Cor. 4.5. He that answers a matter before he
hears it, it is a shame and folly to him. Prove. 18.13. The Poets feign of
Jupiter, that he would not destroy the old world, till he had assumed a bodily
shape, and came down to Lycaons Count and found the wickedness thereof to be
greater then was reported; but not to give credit to Fables, we should do
herein, as the great God of heaven and earth; before he passes sentence upon
mankind, he first sees that the wickedness of man upon earth was great. Genesis
6.5. So Genesis 11. about the Builders of Babel, he will go down and confound
their language; and he would not utterly destroy those sinful Cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah, till he had taken a full and through view of their villainies. Genesis
18.20. God deals thus in these matters, that so he may give an example to
others, how they may walk toward their brethren, that they should not be too
rash in passing judgment: consider well whether that you hear be truth, before
you pass sentence upon a bare report: We read Levit. 13. that the Priests in
the Law were not presently to judge of the p^ague of Leprosy, but the party
suspected must be shut up seven days for the better trial, to teach us not to
be too hasty, and over-rash in censuring and giving sentence of men's persons
and sins that are secret; and hope the best in charity, till we know the
certainty.

2. Let us look into our own hearts when we observe the temper of others; and
when we judge them, whether we do it out of good will, or out of ill will:
Sometime men have no good will to such a person, and that makes them speak ill
of them upon every slight occasion; for malice never speaks nor thinks the best
of those that they hate in their heart. Now God forbids the hating of our
brother in our heart, and yet are we not to see sin to lie upon him, but to
rebuke him, but this rebuke must be in love, not in hatred; nor must we avenge,
nor bear any grudge against the children of our people, but love our neighbor
as our selves. Levit. 19.17, 18. 1. This will make us mourn for it, that there
is such an action in our brother, that we must rebuke him for it. 2. It will
teach us to carry our selves toward others, that we may do them good by our
rebukes, by taking the most convenient time when it may be most for their good,
and there may most love appear toward them. Thus Abigail deals with Nabal, If
he find out a crime, he is not so much grieved that it is committed, as glad
that he is able to prove it: The thing, says he, that I accuse him of is true:
I therefore do him no wrong to judge him as I do: But that is a false
consequence, that he does him no wrong because the thing is true, for even in
truth there may be wrong, as in Doegs accusing, and in Saul's judging; in the
case of Ahemelech relieving David, Doegs report was true, but malicious;
therefore he is cursed for it by the spirit of God, because he loved evil more
then good. Doegs Hypocr. part. 1. Chap. 34.
she lets him alone in the day of his Wine, because then he was not fit for a
reproof, but afterward she tells him the danger he had brought himself into:
great care ought to be had, when we set about such a duty, that they may see it
is not out of any desire we have to reproach them for their sin, but to bring
them to a true sight of sin, and repentance for it, that they may turn from
their sin unto God: an erring Brother must be restored with the spirit of
meekness, that so he may perceive no ill will in us toward him, but conscience
of duty toward God and love to his soul: But when it is so, that men reprove
others out of ill will, then that will show it self thus. 1. When a man is
glad, that he has some occasion to censure and speak against his Brother; and
his heart is tickled at it, that he has an opportunity to censure and speak
evil of him. 2. When he pries into his Brothers Actions, that so he may pick
out something against him, to speak against and censure him for: thus the
Scribes and Pharisees watched Christ, whether he would heal on the Sabbath day,
that they might find an accusation against him. Luke 6.7. They watched him not
out of love to him, but it was a fruit of their malice that they might accuse
him: for St. Mark tells us the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took
counsel with the Herodians against him how they might destroy him* Mar. 3.9.
At other times they put questions to him, that so they might have occasion to
entangle him in his discourse; therefore we must seriously consider what our
aims are in observing the actions of others, whether out of love, or out of
malice. 3. He that observes his brothers actions out of a principle of love to
him, will so carry himself that thereby he may gain his brother; for he aims
at the good of his soul thereby: but when men do it out of ill will, then they
do it not for their brothers good, but that they may thereby bring him to
defamation, and get him an ill name by it: let such consider it, when they
protest they owe no ill will to such a man, yet God knows it is out of
ill will toward him, that they so speak or act against him: it behooves us to
consider what our ends and affections are; for God knows both, and also
whether we carry our selves to our brethren out of love or hatred. 4. When
there are some hard thoughts against another in our hearts, then the report
that we give credit unto at first, though it be false and appear to be false,
yet it does not easily go out of our hearts, but still rises in us against our
neighbor; and this is clear, when men are thus hasty in snatching an evil
report against another, that is not from good will, but from ill will.

3. Let us observe, that there is a great deal of difference between censuring
of men's persons and their actions: There are three things of men that are
subject to judgment.

The Doctrines, of men. The Lives, of men. The Persons, of men.
1. The Doctrines of men. 1 Cor. 15.32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophets, that is, are to be judged by the Prophets, and 1 Cor. 10.15. I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.

2. The lives of men. Judge. 19. ult. Consider of the matter, take advice, and
speak your minds, that is, consult and judge of it: Go, Paul says to the
Corinthians, Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray to God
uncovered? 1 Cor. 11.13.

3. The persons of men: Paul thus judged the incestuous Corinthian to ^e a
wicked man. 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. The Grecians had their Law-keepers, the Egyptians
had their Presidents of the Law: the Romans had their Cen^ors, censurers of
manners, who examined and punished all disorders. Aul. Gel. Noct. Atic. lib. 4.
cap. 12. and 20.
The Doctrines of men, and Lives of men are to be judged by the Word; ^ut the
Persons of men are not ordinarily to be judged: for it is an old and true
saying; three things are not subject to man's judgment, videl. Gods secret
counsels, the holy Scriptures, and men's persons. It is lawful to censure men's
actions, when we may not censure their persons: for their actions we may judge
them, we ought to judge them according to the word of God; but our affections
must not be the rule of our judgment, but Gods word must be the rule, and that
sentence that the word passes upon the action, we may pass upon it, but so
that it may appear to be in love to their souls; as for instance, One that is a
common pot-companion, Gods word calls him a drunkard from his customariness in
that sin; and let such consider that men's hearts may be overcome with this sin,
when their heads are not; when men love Wine and strong drink; though they can
draw much like Brewers horses, and carry away more then others, yet against
them the Holy Ghost pronounces a woe. Isai. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine, etc. The censure that Gods word passes we may pass, and set
before our neighbor, to this end that he may be recovered out of his sin; so
the Apostle says, Tit. 1.12, 13 One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own
said, The Cretians are always liars, etc. This witness is true, Therefore
rebuke them sharply that they may be sound in the faith; the rebuke must be
sharp, yet done in the spirit of meekness in regard of the temper of our
spirits.

4. Let us suspect and judge our selves, and so we shall have no spare time to
spend in judging others: They that find nothing to do at home, are busiest
abroad. 1. Tim. 5.13. Let us take a strict view of our selves, and consider
whether there be not the same sin lying upon us, and we indulge it: therefore
Christ advises the censorious hypocrite, First cast out the beam that is in
thine own eye, then shall thou see clearly to cast out the moat that is in thy
brothers eye. Mat. 7.5. where our Savior says in effect, that men are
eagle-ey'd to see small sins in others, but having greater sins of their own,
are mole eyed toward themselves; Quae culpare soles, ea tu ne se^eris ipse.
Turpe est doctori cum culpa reda^guit ipsum Cato.
this is a manifest token of hypocrisy: The true Christian will more zealously
beat down that in himself for which he censureth another; he that will judge
others, must be free from faults himself, and not too blame in that kind at
least. Si vitia oderis, cur in te residere eadem, imo majora permittis? si
charitate fraterna duceris, cur eam charitatem non tibi ipsi ea hibes? nescis
illud dictum, Qui sibi malus, cui bonus? Ferus Com. in Mat. 7. Qui seipsum
inspicit, non tam quaerat in alio, quod repraehendat, quam in seipso quod
lugeat. Bernard.
Let us therefore consider whether we are not guilty of the same or greater
sins then we observe in our brethren; the consideration hereof will make us not
so rigid in judging the persons of others.

CHAP. XII. Of the murmuring tongue.
SECT. 1. Murmuring defined: four ways men may be guilty of this sin.
THe next sin of the tongue that we shall speak of, Definit. Murmurare est
quere lascum impatientia affundere. Drexel. de vit. linguae.
is the sin of murmuring a sin very rife in these days.

To murmr is to pour out complaints with impatience, as Drexelius defines it:
to murmr signifies properly to speak with a low voice, and as it were to
mutter to a man's self; but because in such a kind of speaking we are wont to
complain, especially when we have no just cause, or when we fear his
displeasure of whom we complain, it comes to pass that murmuring is often put
for complaining of one, and the accusing of him as dealing unjustly with us:
and in this signification it is often used in the old Testament, especially in
the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, Murmurare significat
proprie submissa voce loqui; Quia vero sic submissa voce queri solemus,
praesertim cum non satis justam causam habemus, aut ejus offensam de qu^
querimur metuimus, sit ut murmurare admonum crebro pro queri de aliquo, and
accusare aliquem tanquam secum injuste agentum significet. Flac. Illyc. Clav.
scrip. Murmur est obl^cutio indebito mod^fa^^ae contra deum, vel factum
alicujus. Perald. tom. 2. de pec linguae.
where the many unjust complaints of the Israelites against God, and Moses are
largely set down: So likewise we read in the new Testament of the complaining
of the Jews against Christ. Luk 5. and of the Laborers against the
Householder, that hired them to work in his Vineyard. Mat. 20.11. and of the
Greeks against the Jews. Act. 6. So then murmuring is a kind of muttering, and
complaining speech made after an undue manner against God, or man.

Now men may be guilty of this sin of murmuring many ways.

1. When men are discontented and complain at the want of something they would
enjoy: Thus the people of Israel come to the waters in the wilderness of Shur,
but they were so bitter they could not drink thereof; therefore the people
murmureth against Moses saying, What shall we drink? Exodus 15.24. Who would
have thought, that so soon after such a glorious deliverance as they had, that
such weakness should show it self? So again, Chap. 16.1, 2. when they came into
the wilderness of Sin, the whole congregation of the children of Israel
mu^mured against Moses and Aaron; they mu^mured for want of bread, saying,
Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we
sat by the flesh pots, and did eat bread to the full! for ye have brought us
forth into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger: they wish
themselves dead with the plagues of God with which the Egyptians dyed, so far
were they from blessing God for his mercies: This sin is very common among us;
if some men are restrained of liberty, if they be touched with poverty, if they
be pinched with penury, if they be subject to affliction and adversity, if they
be not in highest places, they fret, and are discontented with the Highest, as
a Reverend man has well noted. Bp. Babington in Exodus 16.
These are the greedy dogs spoken of by David, that go round the City, and
wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied. Psalm. 59.14,
15.

2. It shows it self, when men are discontented in that station wherein God
has set them; the former is a discontent for want of something they would
have, this is a discontent with what they have: of these Jude speaks ver. 16.
These are murmurers, complainers, etc. discontented that some are higher then
themselves. This was the sin of Korah and his accomplices. Numb. 16.1, 2, 3.
they gathered themselves against Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take
too much upon you seeing all the congregation are Holy, etc. wherefore then
lift ye up your selves against the congregation of the Lord? they grudge at
Moses his authority, ver. 13. as if he meant to be an absolute Prince over
them: they thought themselves fit to bear a share with him in the Government.
Was ever Nation more obliged to a man, then this people to Moses? did ever man
carry himself more meekly, and more worthily then he did? but no worth can
exempt him from the envy of these murmurers: Neither were they content to be
Levites, but they affect the Priesthood also. ver. 10. they grudge at Aarons
office that he comes nearer to God then they can; and are not they as good as
he? but against these murmurers the Lord shows his displeasure by two severe
judgments: and Jude ver. 11. shows that such shall be in the last days of
the world* that shall perish in the same sin of Core.

3, This sin is manifest, when men without any just ground given, quarrel at
some actions of others whom they love not; as the Pharisees that murmured at
Christ for going to the house of Matthew the Publican, Luke 5.30. they knew not
Christ's end in it, which was for his conversion, nor considered they of it, but
presently they murmur against him to his disciples saying, why do ye eat and
drink with Publicans and sinners? you see what a good Master you have, that
will keep company with any one whatsoever he be; but though Christ tell them
the reason of it, sc. that he did it for the good of their souls, yet hating
his person and doctrine, they are glad at an opportunity to murmr at him, as
Matthew has it, Why eats your Master with Publicans and sinners? Mat. 9.11.
and after the conversion of Zacheus, when Christ goes but to his house, they
not only murmr secretly, but speak it openly, that he was gone in to eat with
a sinful man. Luke 19.7. It is the property of evil natures to repine at some
for doing, and at others for receiving good: The Scribes and Pharisees murmured
at Christ for receiving penitent sinners to himself, and at them for being
received by him. Luke 15.2. they murmr that the Physician was come to visit
the sick, that the Chyrurgeon should heal the Plague, that the Shepherd should
bring back the affrighted strayed Lamb to his dear esteemed Flock and Fold, and
that the Heavenly Schoolmaster should come to instruct earthly ignorant
Scholars.

4. When we speak not only against men, but against the Lord himself in our
discontent: When the Spies brought up an evil report on the Land, which they
had searched, all the congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron, Numb.
14.3. and against God also; Wherefore has the Lord brought us into this Land
to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it
not better for us to return into Egypt? and Deuteronomy. 1.27. Moses tells them, Ye
murdered in your tents, and said, Because the Lord hated us, he has brought us
forth out of the Land of Egypt to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to
destroy us; See how rashly they charge God himself, as if God had brought them
out of Egypt on purpose to destroy them; and God was very sensible hereof; The
Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying, How long shall I bear with this evil
congregation that murmr against me? Numb. 14.26. This was it that Satan would
have brought Job into in his great afflictions; but in all this Job sinned not,
nor charged God foolishly. Job. 1.22. This is one of the great sins of these
our days, therefore we have the more need to lay it to heart.

SBCT. 2. Of the greatness of this sin of murmuring showed in six things.
NOw that we may see the greatness of this sin of murmuring, consider how many
sins meet together in this one sin; for there is abundance of corruption in the
heart and tongue of a murmurer.

1. There is very much unbelief in murmuring; the children of Israel murmured
against the Lord, and showed their distrust, when they wanted water, saying,
What shall we drink? as though God who had done such great things for them
before, could not now have provided them drink? therefore they are said to
tempt the Lord, Exodus 17.2. and therefore the place was called Massah, and
Meribah because of their chiding with Moses, and tempting the Lord, saying, Is
the Lord among us? ver. 7. their unbelief makes them murmr, keeping them from
considering the presence of God among them, his promises to them, and his
providence over them: The Psalmist sets forth their unbelief and murmuring
thus; They spoke against God, they said, Can God furnish a Table in the
wilderness, can he provide flesh for his people? and when God smote the rock,
that the waters gushed out, and the streams over-flowed, yet they said, Can he
give bread also? Psalm. 78.19, 20. therefore the wrath of God was kindled
against them, because they believed not in God, nor trusted in his salvation.
ver. 22.

2. This sin shows, that men's hearts are more set upon other things then God,
and the things of God, are set up in the place of God: other things are more
sought after for their lusts. Manna, Angels food, bread from Heaven, is
despised by the Israelites, though it be such choice food as it is described to
be. Psalm. 78.24, 25. It was a small round thing like Coriander-seed, colored
like Bdellium or wax, to be ground in mills, or pounded; of it Cakes were made,
whose taste was like the best fresh oil, and like wafers made with honey; yet
after they had enjoyed it a while, they loathed Manna, saying There is nothing
at all besides this Manna before our eyes; and the mixed multitude among them
fell a lusting, and said who shall give us flesh to eat? Numb. 11.4, 5, 6. And
the Apostle setting down this sin of Theirs with Gods punishing of it, says,
These things were our examples, to the intent that we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted. 1 Cor. 10.6. That which accompanied this sin
of murmuring was their lusting, and murmurers are said to walk after their own
lusts. Jude. ver. 16.

3. It is always accompanied with unthankfulness; murmurers are utterly
forgetful of all that the Lord does for them: the Jews were perpetually
unthakful, and therefore ever and anon in a murmuring posture; they were as
ungrateful for all the bene^^^s they received, as if God had ^^ne nothing for
them, Willet Comment. in Exodus
as One ^^ll notes; though they had great ^^perience of Gods power and
good^^ss, yet because in every thing they ^^ve not what they do desire,
there^^re they slight and undervalue all ^ods blessings, though God gives ^^em
such choice mercies which their ^athers knew not of; murmuring ^earts rob God
of the honor that is ^ue to him for his choicest favors, Qui murmu at,
ingratus est deo que autem ingra^us est deo, blasphemus est. Drexel. de vit.
linguae.
^xtenuating his greatest blessings: he that murmureth is unthankful to God;
and he that is unthankful to God, is a ^lasphemer, says Drexelius.

4. Murmuring is a token of a proud ^eart; there is much pride in murmu^ing;
therefore the patient in spirit, ^re set by the spirit of God in opposi^ion to
the proud in spirit. Eccles. 7.8. An humble soul will be satisfied with Gods
dealings, and is no carver ^n the afflictions which he suffers: he quietly
bears whatsoever God lays upon him, acknowledging wi^^ Ezra, that howsoever
God deal w^^^ him, yet it is less then he has deserv^* Murmurers are apt to
snarl at (...) hand that strikes them, to make r^flex acts of their sufferings,
to thi^ their burden too great, and the ti^^ of their suffering too long;
therefo^^ they forbear not God himself as if (...) had dealt but hardly with
them.

5. Murmuring makes men to co^troul the wisdom of God, as if the^ were wiser
then God, and could manage affairs better then he: that this also, consider
the story of Job; thoug^^ the devil labored to bring him to (...) yet he did
not charge God foolishly* whereby it is plain that those who d^ murmr against
Gods dealings, d^ charge God with folly. When Job di^ show some impatience
through h^^ temptation, Bildad says thus unt^ him, he teareth himself in his
anger* shall the earth be forsaken for thee? an^ shall the rock be removed out
of hi^ place? Job 18.4. The state of the controversy between Job and his ^^^ds,
was about Gods providence, (...) the dispensations of justice: his ^^^ds said,
that good men were blessed, (...) men pun^shed by God; hence ^^^ause of the
greatness of Job's suf^^^^ngs they tax him for an hypocrite; (...) because they
asserted that evil ^^n suffered evil things, and withal ^^^erved Job's
impatience under his ^^^ferings, therefore says Bildad, Shall (...) earth be
forsaken for thee? Mercer. ad Job 18.4.
that (...) think thou that God will change (...) course and method in
governing ^^e world? shall the wisdom of God, (...) brought to thee for thy
direction? ^^ou may as well hope that the ^^arth shall be forsaken, and the
Rock (...) moved out of his place: when thou ^^est God change the course of his
^rovidence, then may thou expect (...), and not before; he that murmu^eth
would teach God knowledge.

6. Murmuring controuleth the ju^tice of God; as if Gods ways were ^ery
unequal. Qui in poenis murmurat, ferientis justiam accusat. Edisca^ non
murmurare, qui mala patitur etiamsi ignoret cur mala patitur: per hoc enim
quisquis se just pati arbitra^e potest quia ab illo judicatur, cujus judicia
nunquam sunt injuria. Isidor.
He that m^^mureth at Gods punishments, (...) any just punishment, accuses the
^^stice of him that punishes: Whe^^ he that suffers affliction, should l^^^
not to murmr, although he know^^^ the cause of his suffering, because ev^^^
man should think he suffers just^^^ seeing he is judged of him whose
judg^ments are never unjust; and if th^^ should object at any time that th^^
art punished without a cause, y^^ know that thou have deserved as mu^^ in other
causes which thou thinke^^ not of: Yet suppose that thou were a^^ together
blameless in that respe^^ well may he once afflict thee for (...) cause, that
has freed thee from many deserved punishments.

SECT. 3. ^^ve aggravatinns of the sin of murmuring.
^^ve Now come to consider the many aggravations of this sin of mur^^ring.

1. It is a high piece of vanity and ^^^ly to murmr at any of Gods
dis^^nsations; and God at one time or o^^er will show such men their folly.
those that murmr against Gods ^^ovidences, are like the Eremite that ^olcot
speaks of, that always desired that weather he thought best for the ^erbs in
his Garden, and still he had (...) in that excess that nothing prospe^ed that
he sowed therein, and lament^^g his ill success to his friend, (...) in lib.
(...) 9
he an^wered him thus, Putabas te sapienti^rem deo, and ipse ostendit tibi
fatuita^em tuam. thou thoughtest thy self wi^er then God, and he has showed
thee ^hy folly: Ordinarily men extol the ^heapness of former times, their
great hospitality, their kind nei^bourhood, their honest deal* their skilful
workmanship, their li^^rall almsdeeds, their devout pi^^* their deep wisdom,
Cotton exposit. in Eccles. 7.
their valiant (...) The Papists think it was a bet^^^ world under their
Religion then o^^ Heathens thought the Empire flo^rished more under the worship
of J^piter, then under Christian Religion* Multitudes of people now adays a^^
apt to say, Such times, and such day^^ were better then these; and this is
(...) want of judgment to discern of th^^ times; but God sees these times
(...) be fittest for us. Say not thou, sait^ Solomon, What is the cause that
the former duyes were better then these? f^^ thou do not enquire wisely
concerning this. Eccles. 7.10. Were it not for men's wickedness, the times would
not be so bad as they are: Murmurers are like boys that turn round about till
their senses being turned, they imagine all things to turn round with them.

2. Consider what good ye can do ^ur selves by your murmuring; christ says
concerning carking cares, which of you by taking thought can add ^^e cubit to
your stature? Mat. 6.27. (...) I say, what advantage is it to you (...) murmr
against Gods dealings? (...) who can make that straight which (...) has made
crooked? says the wise ^an. Eccles. 713? It is a vain thing ^^erefore to
quarrel at Gods providence. Isai. 8.21. or to imagine we ^^n redress any evils
by our own wis^om: no, it is God alone who can ^ake straight that which is
crooked, ^oth in the hearts, estates, and ways ^f men; who then shall say unto
the Lord, What do thou?

3. By murmuring men lose the ^omfort and sweetness of all their ^njoyments;
all that they have does them no good at all, they are so discontented for some
one thing that they want. Ahab prizeth not a kingdom while he wants Naboths
poor vineyard; and Haman that under King Ahasuerus governed 127 Provinces, too
no content in the glory of his riche^ nor in the multitude of his children nor
in all the things wherein the Kin^ had promoted him, nor in all his advancement
above the Princes and se^vants of the King; all this, The whole duty of man.
pa^tit. 7.
says he avails me nothing, so long as I se^ Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
King^ gate E,st. 5.11, 12, 13. If, as the Psalmist says, it be a joyful and
pleasant thing to be thankful; Bur Jewel of conten^.
then on the contrary, it is a sad and unpleasant thing to be murmuring. One
observes concerning Manna, when the people were contented with Gods allowance,
then it was very good; but when they would not be content therewith, but would
gather more then he would have them, then worms grew in it: so when we are
content with our condition, there is a blessing in it, then it is sweet to us;
but if we must needs have more, and will keep it longer then God would have us
enjoy it, then some worm or other will corrupt it that it will do us no good at
all.

4. See how God esteems of this sin of murmuring. It is called in Scripture
by the name of Rebellion: We read Numb. 16.41. that on the morrow after the
death of Corah and his companions, all the Congregation murmured against Moses
and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord; they all murmured;
now in the next Chapter ver. 10. the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aarons rod
again before the testimony to be kept for a token against the Rebels: So that
to be a murmurer, is to be a Rebel against God; to have a murmuring heart, is
to have a heart rising against the Lord: a general discontent and murmuring ^n
a Nation is usually the forerunner of rebellion, and murmuring is the root of
rebellion against God, and so the Lord accounted it. Gregory says, Murmurantes
dicuntur intrare in judicium cum Deo. Gregor. in Psalm. 7.
that murmurers do enter into judgment with God: he is a very bad Soldier
that follows his General grudging, and murmuring, says Seneca; Malus est
miles, qui Imperatorem sequitur gemens. Seneca.
and he is as bad a Christian that that cannot look at Gods dispensations
without murmuring at them.

5. By murmuring men lose the benefit that they might reap by every passage of
D vine providence that they meet withal: God brought Israel into many straits
in the wilderness to humble them, and to prove them to know what was in their
heart; this was Gods end in it. Deuteronomy. 8.2. Hereby also he tried whether they
would keep his commandments or no: but this being not considered by them,
every turn they murmr against him, and say, Is the Lord among us? God saw
their prid^; therefore says he, ver. 3. he humbled thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with Manna which thou knew not, neither did thy Fathers
know, that he might make thee to know, that man lives not by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord: God kept them 40
years in the desert, and brought them into sore straits to humble them; else
they would have been apt to have said, that their Righteousness had procured
such and such things for them; but ver. 16. God did exercise them with many
trialls to humble them; and that he might prove them, and do them good in their
latter end, that they might see what great sins were in their hearts: murmuring
is a sin that men are very prone to upon every thing that crosses their wills,
their humors, their judgments: very often did the children of Israel commit
this sin; Concerning the diverse murmurings of this people, Jerome numbers them
to have bin ten: The first when the Egyptians pursued them, Exodus 14. the
second and third for want of water, Exodus 17. the fourth and fifth about Manna
when they kept it until the morning, and gathered upon the Sabbath, Exodus 16.
Hieron. de 10. tentat.
the sixth murmuring was for flesh. Exodus 16. and the seventh for flesh
likewise. Numb. 11.4. the eighth for Moses absence when they made the Golden
calf; the ninth when they tempted God in fighting against the Amalekites being
forbidden. Numb. 14. the tenth upon the return of the spies that were sent to
search the Land of Canaan; but if all their murmurings be summed up, Dr. Willet
in Exodus 15.
they will be found to be many more, as a learned Divine of ours has well
noted,

SECT. 4. The Remedies against this sin of murmuring.
NOw that we may avoid this sin of murmuring, The Jew sh Targum observes, that
the Sepent did not murmur for his Curse, On thy Belly shall thou go, and dust
shall thou ear all the days of thy life. Yet although God gave the Jews Manna
from Heaven, they murmured, they were worse then the very serpent, then the
very devils

Targ. Hieros. in Nu.


I shall lay down the remedies against it,

1. Be persuaded to sit down and consider what our sins have deserved; this
will be a special means to keep us from this sin: Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? it is a murmuring complaint
that the Holy Ghost speaks against, and so it is in the Margin, Wherefore does
he murmr? Lam. 3.39. Oh that God would show thee the secrets of wisdom! that
they are double to that which is: know therefore that God exacteth of thee less
then thine iniquity deserves, Job 11.6. Zophar first prays for Job, that God
would show him some of the secrets of his wisdom in the way of his providence;
then he advises him to consider, that though the hand of God was heavy upon
him, yet God exacteth less of him then his sin deserved: Now the consideration
of this will be enough to silence all our murmurings; for 1. By this means we
shall be enabled to see that there is very much of mercy in the greatest
afflictions that befall us in this life: notwithstanding the affl ctions of the
Church (mentioned in the book of the Lamentations, Chap. 1, and 2.) were so
great, that the Prophet could not parallel their case with any people under
Heaven; yet for all this, says the Church, Lam. 3.22, 23. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are
new every morning; great is thy faithfulness. She observes much mercy in this
severity; so that when a man comes to such a sight of his sins as this; when
he sees that he has deserved nothing but to be cast out into hell, and to
have no other portion; then whatsoever dispensation he lies under in this
life, he can look upon it (by the spirit of grace) to be a great mercy. 2. By
this means we shall come to look upon the least of Gods favors, and highly to
prize the least of the mercyes we enjoy: Ezra blesses God for that deliverance
they had, and that they were escaped with their lives; though they were in very
great distress; yet they see what they had deserved, and therefore it is they
so highly prize this deliverance. Ezra 9.13, 15 If you will know what their
condition was then, read Nehem. 9.36.37. Behold, we are servants this day, and
for the Land thou gave unto our Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the
good thereof; Behold we are servants in it, and it yields much increase unto
the Kings whom thou have set over us, because of our sins: also they have
dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure, and we are in
great distress; yet for all this, when they consider what their sins have
deserved, all their misery is esteemed but small, compared with the least mercy
they do enjoy at the hands of God. 3. Hereby we shall come to acknowledge the
Lord to be righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, in all his
p^ovidential dispensations: This is the reason of men's murmuring against God,
because they think Gods ways are not equal; but when a man comes to consider
his own deserts, he justifies the Lord, and acknowledges him to be righteous
in all his dealings. Lam. 1.10. ad 18. The Church calls upon all to take notice
of her misery. ver. 12. not to murmr, but to consider wherefore the Lord has
afflicted her; though her calamity is very great, yet she justifies God, and
condemns her self. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his
commandment. ver. 18. This will make a soul silent before the Lord, and not
dare to open his mouth against him; yea it will enable a man quietly to sit
down under Gods dispensatious, be they never so severe: If their uncircumcised
hearts be humbled, and they accept of the punishment of their sins, then will I
remember my covenant, says the Lord. Levit. 26.41, 42.

2. If we would be kept from murmuring, let us take notice of Gods hand in all
that comes upon us; from whose hand it is that all the mise^yes come upon us,
that at any time do befall us: Let us not be looking at the instruments, but
let our hearts be raised up to look at the hand of God in all: when men look at
Instruments and no further, they are very apt to fall into this sin: but the
more we eye Gods hand in it, the more our hearts ^^all be kept from murmuring:
Thus ^^d David when Shimei railed against ^^m: Let him alone, says he; It may
be ^^d has bid him curse David; not ^^at God did bid him to cu^se him; ^^at
God will make use of his vile ^^ngue to try the faith, meekness, and ^atience
of David; this was it that re^^rained the complaints of this holy ^an. Psalm.
39.6. I was dumb, I open^d not my mouth, because thou did it. (...) we look
at Gods hand in all condi^^ons, we shall draw much good from (...); if it be
prosperity, it will make us ^hankful; if adversity, it will make us ^atient and
humble.

3. To be preserved from Murmu^ing, let us consider that, That is best ^or us,
which God in his wisdom ^hinketh fit to lay upon us: Thus it was with Hezekiah,
when Isaiah brings him such sad tidings from the Lord, concerning his
posterity; he said Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken. Isai.
39.8. He looks upon that condition to be best, which God thinks fit to bring
upon him though his Sons must be captive in (...) strange Land, yet he knows
God can do them more good by it, then (...) they should wear the Crown in their
own Land; and he acknowledges i^ a good token of Gods favor to him, that
peace and truth should be in his days. 2 King. 20.18, 19.

4. If we have murmuring tongues, God has an ear to hear all our murmurings,
and he does not take notice of them only against Instruments, but takes them as
spoken against himself. Exodus 16.6, 7. The people of Israel murmured against
Moses and Aaron; but say they to the People, Irenae^s calls murmurers ora
Diaboli. Irenaeus. lib. 12. cap. 12.
In the morning ye shall see the glory of the Lord; for that he hears your
murmurings against the Lord: and what are we that ye murmr against us? ver.
7, and ver. 8. the Lord hears your murmurings against the Lord; and what are
we that ye murmr against us? You murmr not so much against us, as against
the Lord: So, albeit we think ill of ^he inst^uments of our afflictions, and
^urmure against them; yet it is against ^he Lord, and he hears our murmu^^ng,
and will punish it. How often did ^od bring sore judgments upon the Jews for
their murmu^ings? therefor the Apostle gives us a Caveat to ^ake heed of
murmuring: 1 Cor. 10.10.
neither murmr ye, as some of them also murmu^ed, and were destroyed of the
destroyer; which some think to be the fiery ser^ents that were sent among them:
^hey murmured, and God sent fiery ^erpents to sting them* so St. James ^aith,
Grudge not one against another brethren, lest ye be condemned; Regnum cae^orum
nemo qui murmurat, acc^p^^. ^emo qui decipit, murmurare potest.

Gregor.


behold the Judge stands before the door. Jam. 5.9. Take heed of this sin,
for it will render you liable to condemnation; God will take vengeance upon all
those that are given to this sin: the Israelites do no sooner break into this
sin, but God immediately plagueth them for it. If moderation of our minds be to
be showed toward our enemies, for whose oppressions we ought not to murmr,
or impatiently to complain against them to God how much less then ought
Christian against Christian, and Brother against Brother to grudge and murmr
one against another! This is far from the excellency and dignity of a
Christian, as one well notes. Turnbull exposit. in Jam. 5.


5. Labor to get an interest in Jesus Christ, and an evidence of your interest
in the covenant of Grace; this will be a special means to still your
murmurings: Have frequent recourse to Gods covenant; look over all the promises
and privileges of the covenant, look to the blood of the everlasting covenant,
and to the faithfulness of God, and to the riches of his Grace; call to mind
all the love tokens whereby God has expressed his love to you in former times,
then will you not at any time murmr at the prosperity of the wicked, nor
repine at your own adversity, having the sense of Gods favor for the present,
and the hopes of enjoying God for ever hereafter. David had enough, because God
was his portion. Psalm. 16.5. ^he more Grace a man has in his ^eart, and the
more faith in Gods pro^ises, the more cheerfully will he be ^nabled to walk
under every dispen^ation of Gods providence: the more ^f Christ is in us, the
better shall we know how to carry our selves in every ^ondition; we shall then
know both ^ow to be abased, and how to abound, and be instructed everywhere,
and in ^ll things, both to be full and to be ^ungry, both to abound and to
suffer ^eed. Phil. 4.11, 12.

6. Let us be conversant in Gods word, and meditate much upon it; Non est
judicandum de operibus Dei ante q ^ntum actum. Pet. Mart.
^here we shall see not only the beginnings of his providential dispensations,
but also the end of them to his people: when David looked upon the prosperity
of the wicked, and the adversity of Gods children, he was filled with
discontent, and his faith could never conquer his temptations, till he went
into the Sanctuary of God, and consulted with him; then h^ understood the end
of Gods prov^dences. Psalm. 73.16, 17. When me^ consider the end of Gods
servants, as of the wicked, then will they not mu^mure against Gods dealings. A
man when he has brought home wood i^to his Yard in Summertime, th^^ which is
Timber, he heweth, he squ^reth, and cu^s it for his purpose; bu^ for his
firewood, he lays it on a heap for winter; even so God squareth and cu^s his
children by afflictions; bu^ for the wicked, he is reserved for the day of
destruction. Job. 21.30. an^ is made for the day of evil. Prove. 16.4. they
flourish in false shows, but shall have real torments: Christ says, that
sorrow is the portion of Gods children in this life; Flo^ent falsis bonis,
peribunt veris tormentis.
you shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice. Joh. 16.20. Let us go
then into the house of God with David, and there we shall see the brittle
estate of prosperous sinners; then you will not murmu^e that you possess not
the riches of iniquity; for better is Daniels pulse then Acha^^ ^^edge; Lazarus
with his rags; with ^^is nothing,, was better then the rich ^lutton with his
abundance; that is no ^ood Gold that never comes into the ^^re; it is a note
of Gods wrath when he denies us the means to see our sins; it is as much as if
a child should be brought up without a rod: Sodom and Dives lived without
trouble, yet they paid for it in the end; Though Cham was not drowned, yet he
could not e^cape Damnation: our obedience and Gods correction are two marks
that God ^s our Father; if we fail in obedience, and God in correcting us, it
may be suspected we are none of his: we are chastned of the world, that we
should not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11.32. If God will not punish
men when they sin, it is no argument of his love to them; It is a curse that
afflictions come not the second time. Soloman advises, Let not thine heart
envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long; Prove.
23.17, Though sinners grow great, yet envy them no^ murmr not against Gods
dispensa^^ons, keep close to him, fear him continually, in the end God will
remember his People: God has one end i^ giving worldlings their wealth, the
honor, their pleasure here, and the look at another end; he gives it the^^ as
their portion; they look at no other good but prosperity, and care for n^ other
good, and so God gives it there; when as God withholdeth such things from his
people, not because he does not love them, but because he has a better portion
in store for them hereafter. Patienter ab eo sustinet flagellari, a quo
caelestem haereditatem expecta^. Perald. de peccat. ^^nguae.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. Psalm. 37.37. Hereby the Godly and the wicked man are known asunder; the
one has hope in the end, but the hope of the other shall perish* the fool has
said in his heart, I shall not be moved. Psalm. 10.6. Some rely on men, some on
their Goods and Lands, some on the Creatures, but all shall fail them at last;
sperando peribunt, they shall perish by thus hoping; the wicked stand in
slippery places, and their feet shall slide in due time. Deu. 32.35.

7. To keep us from murmuring, let us consider our unprofitableness under ^ll
Gods dealings with us; this will cause us to be silent either under his hand,
or to bewail our condition, that we are no better then we are, and have made no
better improvement of Gods former dealings with us; God often laps up many
precious pearls in the ^undle of our sorrows: though thy af^^ictions are
bitter arrows, yet they ^ome from a sweet friend; let us therefor lament that
we are not bettered ^y them.

8. Consider how many there are that are below us, that want many things that
we enjoy: we look only at ^uch and such as are above us, and at that we want
that they have, and we ^re apt presently to think, why should ^ot we have as
much as they, and then ^^ur hearts are apt to fret and murmr; ^ut to remedy
this, consider what you enjoy that others want; it may be thy Beer is small,
but God gives to many others Tears, and Gall, and Blood to drink; yet these
that are below thee may be better Christians then thy self, unless thou silence
thy murmurings; what if thou have nothing but bread and water! then remember
that promise, Ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread
and thy water; If thou have but bread and water, and the blessing of God with
it, thou have enough, and have more cause of rejoicing, then worldlings have in
the time that their Corn and their Wine increases: I have read of a certain
Soldier that earnestly entreated a Holy man to pray unto God for him that he
might be freed from a sore disease which much afflicted him* Ora Dominum servet
te in Statu quo magis humilieris
but he answered him thus; pray thou to the Lord to keep thee in that condition
in which thou may be more humbled; that condition is best for us that lays
us low, and makes us humble and poor in spirit.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Lying tongue.
SECT. 1. Lying defined, and distinguished from an untruth: from Hyperbolies,
Parables, and Jronies: from feigning and simulation, and from the concealment
of the truth.
THe next sin of the Tongue that I shall treat of, shall be the sin of lying, a
sin that shows itself very ear^y, even in little children. Psalm. 58.3, The
wicked are estranged from God, from the womb; they go astray as soon as ^hey be
born speaking lies; they show their alienation from God in this par^^cular.
They were by their profession the people of God, yet were become very cunning
in this Art of Lying; and our experience can witness the commonness of this sin
in these our days; and here let us take notice what this sin is.

Definit. of Lying. Mendacium est falsa verborum prolatio cum intention
fallendi. Cicero.
Lying is a voluntary speaking of that which is false, with a purpose to deceive
our neighbor: When a man speaks contrary to what he thinks, or to his
knowledge, for some evil intent, as to deceive, to pleasure, to profit, to
delight, etc. I say, contrary to what a man thinks, or against his knowledge
or conscience; for this does distinguish a lie from many things.

1. From an untruth: for a man may speak what is false and not lie; when a man
speaks that which is false, yet thinks he speaks truth, he speaks
falsehood, he erreth, and is deceived, yet lies not, because he speaks not
against his conscience. 2. A man may speak that which is true, and lie,
delivering that which is true, thinking it to be false. This is one mark of a
child of God, that he speaks the truth in his heart, or from his heart. Psalm.
15.2. for many speak truth from the lips only, and not from the heart. A man is
to be declared lying or not lying, not from the verity or falseness of the
things themselves, but from the purpose or meaning of the heart; and Aquinas
says, when a man tells something that i^ false, whereof he has been
misinformed, or believes it was as he reported it, he tells a lie
materialiter, but not formaliter: but on the contrary, If a man purposing to
tell a lie* and deceive, does per accidens, and against his will tell the
truth, he tells a truth materialiter, Mon mentitur, qui falsa dicit, putans
severa dicere sed qui falsa apprehensa vere enuntiat. Jul. Scal.
and a lie formaliter, and forma dat esse rei, the form gives the being to a
thing, says Aristotle; and therefore he lies even by telling the truth,
because he did it cum intention fallendi, with a purpose to deceive* and as
Scaliger says, he does not lie, who speaks that which is false, thinking he
speaks truth; but he who declares these things to be true, which he
apprehends to be false: For this cause both Divines and Philosophers
distinguish between mendacium dicere and mendacium facere; a man may tell a lie
sometimes against his will, but no man makes a lie but willingly. He that
makes a lie loves lies.

2. From Figurative and Hyperbolical speeches, and parables; both which if we
respect the sound of words seem to be false, yet if we regard the meaning of
the speaker, are very true, and express the thing more significantly as
figurative speeches called Hyperbolies, or more profitable as feigned parables;
both which are warranted in Scripture, the word of truth: First for
Hyperbolies, the Land of Canaan is called a Land flowing with Milk and Honey.
Exodus 33.3. that is, very fruitful, abounding with all necessaryes, as Deuteronomy.
8.7, 8, 9. The Canaanites are said to have Cities walled up to Heaven. Deuteronomy.
1.28. That is, fenced with high walls. Deuteronomy. 3.5. So when the Holy Ghost would
signify a great multitude, he uses this expression, as the sand of the Sea,
Genesis 32.12. 1 Samuel 13.5. Psalm. 78.37. So the many Miracles and Acts that Christ
did, are said to be more (if they should have been written) then the world
could contain the Books that should be written. Joh. 21.25. Secondly for
Parables: when by things feigned is signified an unfeigned truth: as in Jothams
Parable, where the trees are brought in conferring and consulting about the
choice of their King, Judge. 9.8. and in the parable of Jehoash King of Israel
sent to Amaziah King of Judah, where the Thistle that was in Lebanon, is laid
to send to the Cedar that was in Lebanon to give his Daughter to his Son to
wife. 2 Reg. 14 9. and the Parable that Nathan delivered to David, concerning
two men in one City, the one rich, the other poor. 2 Samuel 12.1. And our Savior
Christ himself delivered many things in parables to the Scribes and Pharisees,
Non omne quod fingimus mendacium est, sed quando id fingimus quod nihil
significat, tunc est mendacium; cum autem fictio nostra refertur ad aliquam
significationem, non est mendacium, sed aliqua figura veritatis. Gerrard. loc.
com. ex August.
as Mat. 21.28. of a certain man that had two sons, whom he bid go work in his
Vineyard on a certain day; and a parable of a certain Householder who planted a
Vineyard, and hedged it round about, etc. and let it out to Husbandmen, and
went into a far Country. Mat. 21.28, 33. All parables and similitudes are not
lies; Christ tells us of the parable of Dives and Lazarus, not that there were
any two such men, nor any such thing done by them, as is mentioned, Luk 16. Yet
we ought not to count it a lie, but it is a Similitude, and foretells us what
shall become of the rich, if they oppress and grind the faces of the poor; and
that God will rather accept of a poor Lazarus, though in rags and misery, then
of a flourishing Dives clothed in purple and scarlet. The like may be said of
Ironies; so the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians: We are fools for Christ's
sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are
honorable, but we are despised. 1 Cor. 4.10. Do you think he would tell them
they were wise, whom a little before he condemns for their foolishness? this
is but an Ironical expression: So when a Captain shall say to his Soldiers,
Fight courageously, quit your selves like men, the Enemy flies before us; this
is but to hearten his own Party to fight the more valiantly; this is very
disputable, whether it be a lie or not: Likewise when a Physician has to deal
with a froward and melancholy Patient, he must abuse his judgment, telling the
Patient, this and that is for his good, and if he will not take it, he must
dye: therefore I shall not accuse such a man of a lie.

3. A Lie is distinguished from feigning and simulation, when a man speaks not
contrary to, but besides his meaning, diverse from that he thinks: This
feigning, if not prejudicial to truth, nor against Gods Glory, and the good of
our neighbor, and that we have some good ground for it, is not unlawful. Thus
God himself uses feigning, Let me alone, says he to Moses, that my wrath may
wax hot against this people, and that I may consume them, Est quaedam simulatio
cautelae, quaedam doctrinae, quaed^m deceptionis; p^^ma fuit Jnsuae and David,
secund^ (...), qua docuit discipulos offi^ium hospitalitatis^; tertia est.
hypocrisis. Bonavent.
and I will make of thee a great Nation. Exodus 32.10. He meant not to destroy
them, but to stir up Moses to fe^vent prayer, and Israel to unfeigned
repentance. So Joshua meant not to fly before the men of Ai, but feigneth a
flight to draw them out of the City and destroy it: there is dolus bonus as
well as malus, good deceit as well as evil. So when the two Harlots came to
Solomon about the Child which both laid claim to, Solomon at first said it
should be cut in pieces, and divided in two; but she whose child it was, would
not suffer him so to do with it, because it was her child; therefore when he
saw her Bowels yearn toward it, he altered his sentence, and gave the child to
the true Mother: this was not a lie. Thus Christ when he met the two Disciples
going to Emmaus, Faciebat eos putare quod qua^^ ad locum longinquum
proficis^eretur. Sir. verse.
when he came thither with them, he made as though he would have gone further,
Luke 24.28. Christ here personateth a stranger, and therefore carries himself
as a stranger to these Disciples; he made as though he had been to have gone
furrher: Some say, there was a mystery in it, that he went further afterward,
when he ascended into Heaven in the sight of his Apostles, which thing only was
meant by his pretending to go further; but it is not said, He took leave of the
Disciples, or told them he would go to some other place to take up his Lodging,
but only he concealed his purpose from them, and did not let it appear that he
was willing to tarry with them, till they entreated him: So the Angels coming
to Lot, Genesis 19.1, 2. made show, as if they would not come into his House, but
lie in the street all night. Did these Angels lie or no? surely no; this was no
lie, but the condition is not expressed, but kept secret in the heart of the
speaker: Simulatio facti est licita and laudabilis quando fit ex rationabili
causa and bono fine. Aug. Quest. Evang. lib. 2.
thus at our Neighbors Table, when we have some meat offered us, we refuse it
as the first time with a No I thank you; for it is but civility so to do, and
then the second time we take it. So these Angels, at the first they will not
go into Lots house, but at last by the entreaty of Lot they are persuaded to
go in thither.

Cum nemini sit injuria, cum non sit cum fraud coajuncta. Polan. Syntag. de
simulat. and dissimul.
4. It is distinguished from the concealment of the truth: for albeit the truth
is never to be denied, nor an untruth affirmed, yet not always to be confessed
or professed: for its sometime Necessary, Unseasonable, Arbitrary.


1. Sometime necessary; when either Gods Glory, our Neighbors Good, or our own
duty require it at our hand. In cases spiritual, it is necessary; when we are
called to give an account of our Faith and Religion, then a constant profession
is necessary. 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear. 1 Pet.
3.15. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the tongue
confession is made unto salvation. Romans 10.10. He that confesses me before
men, him will I confess, etc. and he that denies me before men, him will I
deny before my Father which is in Heaven. In matters civil, when we are called
as a witness before a Magistrate, we must testify the truth, the whole truth,
as the woman of Tekoah did to David. 2 Samuel 14.19. 2. Sometime it is
unseasonable to declare the whole truth; when as there being no necessity to
utter it, in respect of Gods Glory, our Neighbors Good, or our own Duty, it is
joined with our own, or our Neighbocrs danger or hurt.

3. It is arbitrary, or at our own liberty, when it is neither necessary nor
unseasonable. Thus Christ sometimes answers to questions asked him, sometime
he is silent. Mat. 27.12, 14. That truth may be concealed, is proved by
Abraham, who spoke truth in part, calling Sarah his Sister, and concealed it in
part, not confessing her to be his wife. Genesis 12.10. The which thing also his
son Isaac did afterward. Genesis 29. this is no lie to hide the truth, but to
affirm that which is false. God appointed Samuel to go to Bethlehem to anoint
David King; he desiring to be informed how he might go thither and do it with
safety, for said he, if Saul hear of it, he will kill me, the Lord teaches him
this Godly policy, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to
the Lord, and call Jesse to the Sacrifice; he was sent for two causes, but to
conceal the more principal. 1 Samuel 16.2, 3. So King Zedekiah wills Jeremiah
(having advised him to yield to the Caldeans) if the Princes should be earnest
to know what talk they had had together, that then he should say unto them, I
humbly besought the King that he would not cause me to return to Jonathans
house to dye there. Jerem. 38.26.

SECT. 2. Of the sporting Lie.
Lies may be divided into three kinds; there is Mendacium Jocosum, Officiosum,
Pernitiosum.


1. The sporting lie, which is without cause, merum mendacium, Hutchinson de
imagine Dei.
neither with desire to hurt, no^ pu pose to help any one: Nascica when he came
to Ennius the Poets house, having earnest business, commanded his Maid to meet
him at the door, and to say that he was not within; who knowing that her Master
had bidden her to say so, because of his business, departed* Soon after it came
to pass that Enni^ came to his house, and knocking at the door enquired for
him: Nascica hearing one knock, and perceiving out of a window that it was
Ennius, answered with a loud voice that he was not at home; but Ennius knew his
voice, and came in: then Nascica came to him, and said, You are impudent, for I
believed your Maid, that you were not at home; and will you not believe me my
self? In this example be two lies: One of Ennius his Maid at her Masters
commandment, the other of Nascica in the way of jest and mirth. Thus vanity
shows it self in great boasters and travelers that love to tell strange
things; when men do not only sport at it themselves, but think thereby to make
sport for others also. So it was with those of Ephraim and Samaria, who made
the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies. Hos. 7.3.
To what an height of impiety were they grown! this was a clear note of a
corrupt state among them; That all sorts lies be sins, vid. Eusebius. lib. 8. de
praepar. Evangel. cap 4. Damascen. paral. 3. Chytr. tract. de Jacobi mendacio.
Gerson. Protest. Bernard. de modo been vivendi. August Epist. 8, and 9.
the reason hereof is expressed, ver. 2. They considered not in their hearts
that God remembered all their wickedness; They were become very Atheistical.

All condemn the idle lying lie, and the pernicious lie; but some excuse the
sporting or jesting lie, and commend the officious lie; but all naught.

1. For the merry lie, we must distinguish; that is improperly called a lie,
when in show of words some false thing is uttered, but by the gesture or
pronunciation of the speaker, it may appear that some truth is uttered: This is
not unlawful under show of untruth to hide a truth; as Elijah said to the
worshippers of Baal, Cry aloud, for he is a God; either he is talking, or he is
pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be
awaked. 1 Reg. 18.27. But the Text says that he mocked them. So Micaiah said
to Ahab, as the rest of his Prophets had done before him, Go up to
Ramoth-Gilead and prosper; but he delivered it so, that Ahab perceived he
mocked him. 1 Reg. 22.15.2. Properly, that which in the meaning of the speaker
is a lie, is in no sort to be used, but is simply unlawful.

1. Because it is not only false, but vain and idle: Now if but for idle words
men shall give account at the last day. Mat. 12.36. much more for idle lies.

2. The Prophet Hosea in the place beforementioned inveigheth against those
that make Princes merry with their lies. Now if Princes may not be made merry
with lies, to whom oppressed with great cares mirth is needful, none may.

3. A lie may not be delivered to help a man, or free him from danger, much
less to delight and make him merry.

4. Epaminondas with other Heathens, will rise up in judgment against those
that make no conscience to tell merry lies; so strict observers and lovers of
truth were they, that they could not abide a lie spoken, no not in jest; it is
not good jesting and sporting with sin; He that makes it his common course to
lie in jest, will also lie in earnest; and he that lies in jest, unless he
repent of it, shall be sure to be damned in earnest.

SECT. 3. Of the Officious Lie.
THe next Lie we are to treat of, Corrupt was the opinion of Plato, that
allowed a lie lawful, either to save a Citizen, or deceive an Enemy.
is the Officious lie, which is covered over with love to our neighbor; when a
man sees his neighbor in danger, he thinks it either no sin, or a very small
sin to help him out: This is the practice of too many among us, and the devil
beguileth many souls thereby: Now that we may take heed of this, consider,

1. That Gods word is to be looked on as the only rule and square to guide our
actions by; but the word requires that we must not do the least evil for the
gaining or any good whatsoever: the rule of our actions is Gods command, not
our love to our neighbou^; God says, ye shall not lie one to another. Colos.
3.9. and he will destroy all liars; which comprehends those that lie
perniciously to do hurt, or officiously to do good to their neighbors.

In this thou do thy self more hurt then thou can do thy neighbor good,
nisi fiat jus^^^ and rectis mediis, says. Pet. Mart. loc. com. de mendac.
2. Consider how the Apostle rejects this practice of doing evil that good may
come thereby. Romans 3.8. He abhors that any such principle as this should be
in the heart of any Christian whatsoever; and says of such that affirm that
men may do evil that good may come thereby, that their damnation is just: a man
must not lie to save Gods honor. Job. 13.7. much less for the good of his
neighbor.

3. He that th nks he may thus give way to this sin that good may come by it,
will think so of any other sin whatsoever; as if a man should steal from the
rich to relieve the poor, this is odious to God; the Lord says, he hates
robbery for a burnt offering: there were some that thought they might rob, that
they might have the more to offer to the Lord; and though they brought a fat
oblation, yet God loathed them, and their offerings: Austin observes of the
Priscillianists, that they would make use of a lie to show themselves Orthodox,
and that they might the better vent their opinions with the more credit to
themselves: And others there were that would fain themselves to be of their
company and society, that so they might find them out, and bring them before
the Magistrate to be punished.

But some will say,

It is against charity; Resp.
for charity rejoices not in iniquity, (not in falsehood) but in the truth: A
Christian that has a good conscience can do nothing, and say nothing against
the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13.8.

2. Charity requires a man not only to do good, but to do well; to do it in a
good and godly manner, not to do the least evil, not tell the least lie to
procure a great outward good to another.

3. Charity requires not that for another man's good and commodity thou should
cast away thy self: but God will destroy them that speak lies. Psalm. 5.6. The
lying mouth slays the soul. Sap. 1.11.

4. Charity does not allow, that any man in danger should tell a lie to do
himself good; much less does he allow that we should lie to do another man
good; a good man chooses affliction, or to run upon any rock rather then to
sin against God, according to that speech of Elihu to Job, chap, 36.21.

But here it may be objected that Jacob lied to his Father Isaac, saying, I am
Esau thy first born, that he might procure the blessing of his Father, before
his brother came, Genesis 27.19. and ver. 24. when he asked him, Art thou that my
son Esau, he answered Yea: he says further, that he had hunted for Venison, as
his Father bade him, ver. 19. when he hunted for none, nor was bidden to hunt
for any: Thirdly, being asked how he found it so quickly; he answered, the Lord
thy God brought it to my hand. ver. 20. when himself had taken a Kid cut of the
flock, by no miracle, but by ordinary means.

Some say, that is to be understood mystically, Quod minor populus, hoc est
Gent^um, substituendus esset in locum primogeniti, hoc est Judaeorum. However
the Jews were Gods first born, yet they should be cast off, and to the Gentiles
the younger brethren, the blessing and the inheritance did belong. Aquin. 2dae.
q^^st. 110. Art. 3.
by way of prophecy, I am Esau thy first born; not in person, but in right of
the first born I come unto thee, as Paul speaks in another case. Act. 23.5. by
which is meant nothing else then that which Christ says, Behold there be last
which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. Luke 13.28.30.
this shall be when men shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God, and themselves thrust out of doors; this is now come to pass; for we
Gentiles that were last, are now first; we that were not a people, are a
people, and beloved which were not beloved; and St. Paul names this a mystery,
Romans 11. I would not this mystery should be hidden from you brethren, lest you
should be wise in your own conceit, etc. It appears then Jacobs saying to
Isaac, I am Esau thy first born, is as much as to say, The last shall be first,
and the first last; by Esau he meant the Jews, by himself the Gentiles; and
this is no lie, because a mystery: This is the opinion of diverse of the
Ancients.

2. But I cannot excuse Jacob in this, but do believe he sinned; their examples
are no rules for us to walk by, we must walk by the rule of the Word: the
errors and slips in their Lives, are as blemishes in fair faces, e^idences of
humane frailty.

5. There Is a difference between ^peaking a lie, and concealing the truth, as I
touched before in the first ^ection of this chapter; the one, in ^ome cases may
be lawful, Aliud est mentiri, aliud est verum occultare; ut siquis non velit ad
mortem hominem prodere, paratus esse debet verum occultare, non falsum dicere,
ut neque proat neque mentiatur. August. in Psalm. 5.
when the other in no case is ^awful. Negative precepts bind at all times, and
upon ^ll occasions; and such is this, Thou shall not lie; but the truth may be
concealed at some times and upon some occasions, except when a Magistrate calls
us to declare the whole truth: so truth is to be spoken, though it expose our
selves or others to danger: So when Christ is adjured (by the High Priest) by
the living God to tell whether he be the Christ the son of God, though it be to
the exasperating him against him, and to the exposing himself to the malice of
his enemies, yet he confesses the truth. Mat. 26.63, 64. St. John gives in
this for his further answer to Pilate, To this end was I bor^ and for this
cause came I into the worl^ that I should bear witness to the truth Joh. 18.37.
St Augustine commends a Christian Bishop of Tagesta for hiding a poor
Christian, and when the Emperor sent his officers to search after him whom he
had hidden, being asked where he was, he said, he would not deny but he had
hidden him; ye^ would he never betray his brother for which cause he was
grievously tortured; but he stood firm still, as his name imported, which was
Firmus, that he would not disclose his brother, nor tell an untruth: the
Emperor marvelling at his stedfastness released him.

Some do object, Abraham to escape danger, said his wife was his Sister. Sol.
Genesis 12.10.

Non petit Abraham ut Sarah menti^tur. Juniu^.

Veritat^m voluit celari, non m^n^acium d^ci. August.


Abraham answers himself, Genesis 20.12. In very truth she is my Sister, and he
uttered no untruth, but only concealed a part of it, as was before said; he
said not, she is not my wife, but she is my Sister, nor did Abraham desire
Sarah to lie, as Junius notes.

The Midwives in Egypt are com^ended for delivering the male-Child^^n of the
Hebrews, and Rahab for pre^^rving the spies by lying.

We must distinguish the work one from the execution of the work; Sol.
and of the ^ear of God; God blessed them not for the lie: but for their faith,
that wrought in them by love. Dr. Sutton.
and that is commended: ^ut the manner how they preserved them, sc. by lying,
is not approved. But it may be said; faith, and the fear of God cannot stand
with a manifest known sin; I answer; the best actions are imperfect in this
life, and joined with many frailties; and even actions of faith are mixed with
sundry defects and sins.

SECT. 4. Of the pernicious lie; eight aggravations thereof.
NOw let us treat of the pernicious lie, the worst of all the rest. Men are
guilty of this sin wh^^ they speak that which is false, knowing it to be false;
when they speak o^ thing, and their own heart and conscience tells them plainly
the contrary. Thus does Joseph's Mistress. Ge^ 39.15, ad 20. So in Commerce
among men, when the buyer calls a^ a thing naught, which in his conscience he
knows to be good; o^ when the seller says, the commodity is good, Tho.
Cartwt^ in Prove. 20.
when it is not; and that it cos^ him so much when it cost him less both false.
Prove. 20.7. One observes upon the buyers dispraising, and afterward boasting
of his bargain, that he passes a sentence of condemnation upon himself, for
his lie; and for him that puts his Child to such a Master, whose practice is so
to sin, and to teach his servants so to sin also, he puts him into the very
mouth of the devil: and says the wise man, The getting of treasures by a lying
tongue is a vanity tossed too and fro of them that seek death: The robbery of
the wicked shall destroy them because they refuse to ^o judgment. Prove. 21.6,
7. Here ^ou may see that to get riches this ^ray, is to get them by theft and
rob^ery; this is the way whereby they ^hink to grow rich, when as they take ^he
high way to destruction: Now ^et us consider the greatness of this ^in, by the
many aggravations of it.

1. When men speak that which ^s false rashly, and inconsiderately.

2. To speak falsey aftet delib^ration, and premeditation, that makes the sin
the more heinous: God complains of some among the Jews, Nonnunquam pejus est
m^ndactum medi^ari quam loqui; nam loqui plerumque praecipitation^s est: med
^ari vero st^diose pravitatis. Greg. mor. lib. 8.
that conceived and uttered from the heart words of falsehood. Isai. 59.15. It
was a great sin ^n Peter (though in his fear) upon a sudden to deny his Lord
and Master; but greater to do it after deliberation.

3. When men take delight in lying: we read of some that delight in lies, Psalm.
62.4. This is much worse then to commit this sin ignorantly: this shows an
height of impiety in t^ heart, when men delight in that whi^^ is so hateful to
God and good men.

4. When lying is a man's ordinary practice from day to day; now the more
frequently men commit this sin the more abominable it is to God every day they
wrest my words, says the Prophet, Psalm, 56.5. he shows their frequency in
this sin, and this is a great aggravation of it; and he compares such men to
the deaf Adder, that will not harken to the voice of the charmers* that will
not hear, let God and man say what they will unto them.

5. When men have hatred in their hearts, yet by lying words do cover it over,
and hide it, that thereby they may gain an opportunity to revenge themselves
upon them: how many a man speaks a man fair to his face, and yet as soon as he
turns his back, is ready to cut his throat! he that hates, dissembleth with
his lips, or, (as in the Margin) makes his voice Gracious, and lays up
deceit within him; when he speaks fair, believe him not, let his words be
never so seemingly Graci^us. A Liar is not to be believed, and God will at the
last day show his sin before the whole congregation. Prove. 26.24, 25, 26.

6. Sometimes men do belie themselves that they may gain the love of others, as
boasting what great matters they have done at such or such a time, that so they
may come behind none of the most forward of their companions in sin: So
Augustine August. confess.

Among pernicious liers I may rank all Heretics; Seducing Spirits speak lies
in Hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.2. A loud lier was be that in Adrians days, said He
was the Messiah, calling himself Barcochabo. i. e. filium Stellae. the Son of a
Star; but his divinations failing him, the Jews changed his name, calling him
Bencozba. i. e. Filium mendacii, the Son of a lie. Carrion. Ch^nic.


reports of himself in his Confessions, when he was young, that he might the
more ingratiate himself with his sinful associates, he would lyingly boast what
he had done also, accounting it a shame to him to become behind any of them in
sin.

7. When a lie is made use of to draw men to sin how many sinners make use of
lying to make others of their companions bold and hardy in sin! he that by any
means whatsoever does draw another to sin, he acts the devils part against
that person. Thus the old Prophet pretending to the man of God that came from
Judah, that an Angel of God spoke to him by the word of the Lord, to bring him
back to his house, he drew the man of God to disobey the word of the Lord, but
he lied unto him, 1 King. 13.17, 18.

8. When men make use of a lie to hide and cloak their sin: when they are
charged therewith, then they deny it. Job did not cover or hide his sin as Adam
in his bosom. Job 31.33. that so the guilt may be taken off from him, and laid
upon another, as Adams upon the woman that God gave him, and so he laid it upon
God himself by fetching a little compass; but Job by Grace was changed, and
herein not like his father Adam. 1. This is not a lessening but a great
aggravation of sin: it was bad to sin, but much worse to deny it; for this is
to add sin unto sin. 2. This will not hide it from the eye of God: though you
may hide it from the eye of man a while, yet not from the eye of God, before
whom all things are naked and bare, as open to Gods eyes, as any thing
Anatomized is to man's eyes. Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities before
thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. 3. The free and full
confession of sin, is a giving glory to God, when hiding of sin by lying and
denying is a robbing God of his glory and honor: by a free and full confession
we glorify Gods omnipresence and omniscience: when Ananias and Saphira hid
their sin by a lie, Act. 5.7 9.
Peter tells them, that they had done more then to lie against the Lord; for
says he, ye have agreed together to tempt the Lord, to try whether he be God
or not, or whether he will revenge himself upon sinners, as he has said he
will: So thou by this addest sin to sin, to try whether God will punish it or
not: You see what befell them, God took them both away in their sin, and great
fear came upon the Church: but suppose God should not make such examples
presently, yet by this sin, thou do what in thee lies, to stop up the way of
mercy against thy own soul. Prove. 28.13 He that hides his sin shall not
prosper, says Solomon; but he that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall
find mercy. 4. God will make thee confess it, either here before men, or else
eternally before Men and Angels: God does strangely bring hidden things to
light: Sometimes he brings hidden sins to light by some punishments for other
sins; yea it may be someimes men that are condemned for what they are not
guilty, shall yet before they dye, confess the justice of God upon them;
although they be wronged in that they be condemned for; yet shall they give
glory to God before men, by confessing some sins hitherto kept secret. And
sometimes God by giving men horrors of conscience, makes men to confess what
before was kept secret: By these things you see the aggravations of this sin of
lying.

SECT. 5. Shows how many sins meet together in this sin, and what are the
causes of lying.
LEt us now see how many sins are complicated in this sin, together with the
sinful occasions, whereby men give themselves to lying.

1. There is a direct breach of the ninth commandment, which says, Thou shall
not bear false against thy neighbor. 2. Robbery is a breach of the eighth
precept; robbing others of their due to whom we are related, and so have need
of one another. 3. A hazarding the soul for nothing that is able to countervail
the loss of it. 4. Atheism; in forgetting Gods All-seeing eye, and his
sin-revenging justice, that he will revenge himself of those that rob him of
his truth. Now the causes and usual occasions of this sin are these.

1. A greedy desire of gain; We see that Tradesmen for a penny, or a two-penny
gain will not stick at a lie: Gods command is, that no man defraud or go beyond
his Brother in any thing; and you gain something by lying (as you think) at the
present; but you will be losers by it in the end. Are there yet the treasures
of wickedness in the house of the wicked? etc. for the rich men thereof are
full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their
tongue is deceitful in their mouth; therefore will I make thee sick in smiting
thee, etc. Micah. 6.10, 11, 12. God may give them leave to get some little in
the world by it, but he wi l give them much wrath with it hereafter.

2. Not only the desire of gain, but also the fear of losing some present gain
or advantage is the cause of lying: this made Gehezi to belie his Master to
Naaman. 2 King. 5. He coveted Vineyards, Olive-yards, Silver and Gold, and
changes of raiment, menservants and women-servants, as his Master charge
upon him, and then tells a lie to his Master after his return from Naaman,
saying he went nowhither: Amaziah charge Amos falsely to King Jeroboam,
saying, that Amos had conspired against him in the midst of the house of
Israel. Amos 7.10. whereas he only prophesied against the house of Jeroboam,
and spoke nothing against the King. ver. 9. But what is the matter with Amaziah
the Priest of Bethel? oh he sees his gain is going down, if he suffer Amos any
longer to show the people their sin in worshipping the golden calves: So they
dealt with Paul stirring up the people against him, because he cast the spirit
of divination out of the Maid, that brought her Master much gain thereby. Act.
16. So also does Demetrius cause a great uproar at Ephesus; it was gain that
made him make such a stir, and to accuse Paul falsely. Act. 19.24, 25.

3. Lying proceeds from envy and malice; when men owe such and such persons
ill will, they care not what they say against them: So they that hate Religion,
will speak any thing against the Religious: As the Heathen Tyrants did use to
do with Christians, they clothed them in the skins of wild Beasts, that so
their dogs might be the more hardy to tear them: So do envious persons deal
with those that are Godly, they cloathe and load them with scandals, that so
they may set all men against them.

4. When men suborn persons against those that are good, that so they may get
advantage against them to put them to death: Thus the Libertines and others
that disputed with Stephen, being unable to resist the wisdom and spirit by
which he spoke; they set up false witnesses against him, which said, This man
cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the Law.
Act. 6.13.

5. When men cover their malice against Gods people, under pretense of public
good; and thus the adversaryes of Gods people write a lying letter to King
Artaxerxes against them, and so caused the work of the house of God to cease.
Ezra 4.11, ad finem, pretending thereby much good to the King of Babylon.

6. When they cloak all with Religion: This was Absoloms practice; first he
charge his Father unjustly with a lie, as if the King neglected the
administration of justice; and therefore wishes that he were a Judge, then he
would do every man justice; whereby together with his courteous carriage to
every one that came nigh him, he stole away the hearts of the men of Israel:
then he pretends the paying a vow at Heb^on. 2 Samuel 15.3, 4, 5, 8. when as he
meant to rebel against his Father: Thus did Ananias and Saphira hide their
hypocrisy with a Religious cover; whereupon Peter tells Ananias, that he had
not lied unto men, but unto God. Act. 5.3. Thus did Simeon and Levi hide their
malice to Hamor and Shechem his son, with a Religious pretense; but, the Text
says, Genesis 34.13. telling them if they should be circumcised, they would be
one people with them, when as they lied unto them, and used this pretense only,
that they might come violently upon them, when they were not able to resist
them.

SECT. 6. Of the hainousness of the sin of Lying, showed in eight particulars.
NOw that we may beware of this sin, let us consider the odiousness of this sin
of lying.

1. It is very hateful to God, it is an abomination to him: The wise man
reckons up six things that are an abominatioo to the Lord, Lease false leasung
a^ a leasing a lie, lease g^witnes verstegan restitut, of decayed intelligence.
and this is one of them. sc. a Lying tongue: God does so abhor Liars, that he
will destroy all them that speak leasing. Psalm. 5.6. a word that comes from an
old word now out of use, signifying Lying, Lying lips are an abomination to the
Lord. Prove. 12.22. but they that deal truly are his delight. So good David
loatheth this sin, Solomon has pictured a lie with this Motto upon the face,
The sin which God abhors.
setting out his detestation of it by two words, I hate and abhor lying. Psalm.
119.163. and for those men that have but common honesty, they hate lying, and
cannot endure to be charged with it: though it may be they do lie sometimes,
yet would they not that men should know it.

2. Lying makes men wholly unlike to God; it is contrary to the nature of God,
who is styled a God of truth. Deu. 32.4. And David prays to God under that
notion, O thou God of truth. Psalm. 31.5. He who blesses himself in the earth,
shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that swears in the earth,
shall swear by the God of truth. Balls power of godliness.
Isai. 65.16. Truth (as One observes) is one special branch of that Image of
God, according to which man was made; the greater measure of truth in our
inward parts, the more are we changed into that image. A lie is so offensive to
God, as Anselm Anselm
says, that God as pattern of the universal world may in some sort be said to
dispense with many faults, but he never yet dispensed with lying, it being a
mere denying of himself who is the only Truth: So the Lord Jesus Christ is the
Amen, Truth it self. John 14.6. The faithful and true witness. Rev. 3.14. and
that both as God and man in one Person, in him all the promises are yea and
Amen, most sure and certain, who also came into the world to bear witness of
the Truth; the Spirit of God likewise is the Spirit of Truth. Joh. 14.17. and
16.13. The spirit is Truth, bears witness of the Truth, and leads into all
Truth; All the three Persons are one God of Truth, as that he cannot lie, Magna
Dei potentia, mentiri non potest. August.
it is impossible ^or him to lie. Heb. 6.18. He is not a man that he should
lie. Numb. 23.19. God is so much the stronger that he cannot lie, says
Augustine. Consider what the Lord Jesus the wisdom of the Father says, Prove.
8.7. Tho opening of my lips shall be right things, my mouth shall speak truth,
and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. Again, consider, that Gods word is
a word of Truth; Paul calls the Word, sincere Milk, 1 Pet. 2.2. that is without
any deceit and falsehood in it. It has the God of Truth for its Author, Christ
Jesus the Truth for the witness, the Spirit of Truth for the composer of it;
Thus prays our Savior for his Disciples, Sanctify them with thy Truth, thy
Word is Truth. Joh. 17.17. Now for men to say they own this God, and this word
of Truth, and yet go on in this sin of lying, how cross is this to Religion?
our relation to God should teach us to speak truth; our relation to him as our
Creator; hereby we show forth the image of our Creator* our relation to
Christ as members of Christ, and our relation to the spirit of Christ, should
also teach us to speak truth: What, are we the members of Christ, and does the
spirit of Christ dwell in us, and act in us, and shall we lie*

3. It is a sin that makes a man most like the devil, who is called a lying
spirit, there is no truth at all in the devil; and the less truth is in men,
the more they are like the devil; it makes a man a child of the devil: Christ
says to the Pharisees that bent their tongues like bows to tell lies, Ye are
of your father the Devil. Joh. 8.^4. Here it is worth observation, that Christ
never called any sinner the son of the devil, but only the lying man; and can
there be found a greater infamy in the world then this to be the son of the
devil, the subject of the devil, governed by the devil, possessed with the
devil, and directed by the devil? how then can a man stand, but like one
confounded, when he thinks of uttering a lie? Lying is a yielding a man's self
to Satan, whereby he lets Satan rule and reign over him; all sin ^s of the
devil, but this is fathered upon him in a particular manner: he was ^ liar from
the beginning, it was the second sin that ever he committed, he ^bode not in
the truth because there ^s no truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he speaks
of his own, for he ^s a liar and the father of lies.

4. A liar has no credit with any man; he that has this brand upon him shall
not be believed when he speaks truth. Lying is a great reproach to any person
or people: The Creti^ans were called by the Apostles Liars, Arist. apud Diog.
Lacit. lib. 5.
Tit. 1.12, 13. Paul out of Epimenides taxes the Cretians for lying and
idleness. Demetrius Phalerius being asked what was the fruit and reward of
lying, answered: that after a man is known to be a liar, every thing that he
speaks is questioned.

5. It is a sin against the light of nature: Heathens could say it did very
much unbeseem a man: The Egyptians made such strict account of truth as for
maintenance thereof they have lost their lives. Whereupon Herodotus Herodot.
making report of the Egyptians, says, that in making a bargain, a
confederacy, or a conjunction of new amity, one joyneth his fingers to the
other parties, and each lets them blood; after with their tongues they lick
off the blood, wherewith each signed the others hand, inferring by the ceremony
that first they will make expense of the utmost drop of their blood, and
willingly dye, rather then speak false, or lie one to another: How much more
abominable ought it to be to every one that professes himself a Christian!

6. It is a great abuse of the tongue, which God has given to man for his
honor and glory, and whereby to glorify him, using it to another end then God
has appointed him: In this little members use God has differenced Men from
Beasts, that we may declare our minds one to another in truth: Lying is a
corrupting of that member, which is to be an Instrument of truth, a great
debasing of a man's self, and of the image of God in man.

Lying is a very spreading sin; men are much given to it, and its become
general; God complains of his own people by profession, that there was no
Truth in the Land. Hos. 4.1. and the Prophet Jeremy says, They bend their
tongues like their bows for lies, but they are not valiant for the truth upon
earth; They will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth,
they have taught their tongues to speak lies. Jerem. 9.3, 4, 5. It is very
spreading when the Prophets prophecy lies, and the Rulers love lies, and the
People speak falsehood, as it was in those days. But Solomon says that a poor
man is better then a liar. Prove. 19.22. We see it in unregenerate men, how few
of them make conscience of a lie, but are full of lying excuses: Yea, there is
in Gods own people a proneness to this sin. David lies to Ahimelech the
Priest. 1 Samuel 21.2. and being sensible hereof, he prays to God, Remove from
me the way of lying. Psalm. 119.19. It is a sin usually charged upon professors
of Religion; but this is done out of hatred, because they will not run with
them to the same excess of riot, therefore they are charged for a Generation of
Hypocrites and Liars.

8. Lying brings the greatest miseryes upon a Land and People: God had a
controversy with the Jews, because there was no truth in the Land, By swearing
and lying, etc. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells
therein shall be cut off. Hos. 4.1, 2, 4. a fore punishment was this which God
denounced against liars, in regard that all the dwellers upon earth should be
taken away; and very wo^thily says Austin, is such a punishment inflicted upon
them, because by lying they divide themselvns from what is, and adhere to that
which is not; if men mourn not for this sin, God will make the Land to mourn
for it with his judgments: Moreover, those that persist in this sin, shall be
shut out of Heaven: Without are dogs, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.
Rev. 22.15. yea such shall be cast into Hell. Austin says, that Christ chased
the buyers and sellers forth of the Temple in Jerusalom, in token that by their
lies they shall be driven forth of the Heavenly Temple. David would not suffer
a liar to abide in his house Psalm. 101. neither will God suffer any to be in
his Kingdom. There shall in no wise enter into the new Jerusalem any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie. Rev. 21.27.
but all liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. ver. 8.

SECT. 7. Equivocation and Popish mental reservation condemned.
HEre may be taxed and condemned the Popish Doctrine of equivocation, and
mental reservation, holding it lawful for a Popish Priest, before an heretical
Magistrate (as they term him) or an incompetent Judge, to say one thing, when
he means and knows the contrary, and so delude him by equivocation, mental
evasion, and secret reservation. As for instance; being asked, Art thou a
Priest? by this Doctrine he may answer, no; meaning he is none of Baals
Priests, or Priests of Jupiter, or Apollo: and being asked did thou do such a
thing? or know thou such a thing? he may answer no: though he knew it, or did
it with reservation [to tell Them.] And another being asked whether such a one
lies in his house? he may answer no: not meaning that he lodges not in his
house, but he does not tell lies: This mystery of iniquity, this sophistry of
Satan, this Art of hypocrisy, this Quintessence of impudence is maintained at
this day, both in Press and Pulpit by the Popish Doctors; but it is far frow
Christian simplicity, and the Doctrine of God, which requires that men speak
the truth from the heart. Psalm. 15. It is a Doctrine of Devils that teaches
men to speak lies in hypocrsy. 1 Timothy 4.2.

This was the practice of that fantastical Saint Francis, who being met with a
hue and cry, and demanded by the persuers of the manslayer or malefactor,
whether he saw such a one pass that way, to the end that he might save his
life, putting his hand in his sleeve, or finger in his ear, answered, he saw
none such pass that way; meaning through his sleeve or his ear. This practice
was used by that old Arch heretic Arrius, that denied Christ to be God; who
being urged by the Emperor Constantine, to subscribe to the Canons of the
Council of Nice, and to the Nicene Creed; subscibed that he thought them all to
be true consonant to the Holy Scripture; Soceat. Eccles. histor. lib 1. cap 25.
yet with this secret reservation in the sense and construction that he would
make of them; of which imposture the Emperor being informed, sent for him the
second time, commanded him to swear that his subscription was true: He having
written his own opinion in a paper which he had in his sleeve, or under his
arm, took God to witness, that he was verily persuaded of the truth that he
had written, meaning what was written in the paper in his sleeve.

This point of Popery is practiced among our common people: Come and ask to
borrow money of such a man, his answer is; I have it not, or not so much, when
conscience tells him, he has it, and may well spare it: meaning he has it not
for them: he has not so much to lend them; Because he thinks that against good
manners, he had rather tell a fine and mannerly lie, and so sin against God,
then offend his neighbor: Ask to borrow money of another, he answers, he
has not so much in all the world; but he means in his Chest, which he
calls All the world; though it may be he has more then so much again in his
house.

But say the Papists, our Savior speaking of the day of Judgment, Of that day
and hour knows no man: no, not the Angels in Heaven; nor the son himself,
etc. Mar. 13.32. Note, say they, Christ who knows all things, says of
himself that he knows not: therefore the meaning must be, that he knows not
to tell us: therefore they say further, that when we know a thing, we may say
we know it not to tell others.

1. The Greek word (...), is but once set down, Resp.
and is in the same sense applied to Men, Angels, and Christ. But it were
ridiculous to say, that Men and Angels know it, but not to tell us. 2. The
Father by this interpretation should not know it, because he knows it not to
tell us: The meaning then is, that though Christ knows it (for all treasures
of wisdom are hid in him) yet in some sort Christ (as man) knows it not; but
as God or Mediator; for something a man may be ignorant of without sin; as Eve
was, whether the Serpent could speak, and as Christ was of the time of ripe
Figs, etc. There is no shelter or succor from this example for equivocation.

The Scripture condemns it, Nature abhors it.
1. The Scripture condemns it: John Baptist being demanded who he was,
whether Elias or not; answered I am not. Joh. 1.21. yet might have truly
answered, that he was Elias, as Christ says. Math. 11.14. if ye will receive
it, This is Elias that was to come, prophesied of by Malachy, chap. 4.5. Behold
I will send u^^o you Elijah before the coming of the great and terible day. And
Mat. 17.10. Christ's disciples asked him saying: Why then say the Scribes that
Elias must first come? and Jesus answered them: Elias verily shall first come,
and restore all things: But I say unto you, that Elias is come already, and
they knew him not, etc. ver. 11.12. and ver. 13. the Disciples understood that
he spoke unto them of John Baptist: Malachy calls him Elijah, and Christ
likewise; yet because he was not Elijah in proper person, but in office only,
to be Christ's forerunner, to go before him in the spirit and power of Elias;
and because he asked him of the person of Elias, he answers I am not.

2. Nature abhors this guileful deceitful answer: Tully condemned him who
having made truce for 20 days, wasted and depopulated the Country in the
night, answering that he took truce for days but not for nights: Its collusion
and deceit, lying and dissimulation between God and Men: As when there is no
conformity between a man's mind, and the thing he thinks, he thinks an
untruh or falsehood; and when there is no conformity between a man's word and the
thing, he speaks a Logical untruth: so when there is no conformity between a
man's tongue and his heart, he speaks a Moral untruth, that is a lie; the world
is full of such liars, so that we may justly cry out with David, Help Lord, for
the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the children of men:
They speak vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips and with a
double heart do they speak; with a heart and a heart according to the Hebrew.
Psalm. 12.1, 2.

SECT. 8. Nine remedies against this sin of Lying.
LEt us therefore be exhorted to beware of Lying, and to speak truth from our
hearts: God commands us, that we shall not deal falsely nor lie one to
another. Lev. 19.11. These are the things that ye shall do; speak ye every man
the truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your
gates, Zech. 8.16. and ver. 19. love the truth and peace: Therefore that ye may
be kept from this sin, let me persuade you.

1. To hide Gods word in your hearts: it comes to pass that men fall so easily
into this sin, because they consider not Gods commands and prohibitions as they
ought, and hide not the Word in their hearts.

2. Be much in prayer to God to keep you from this sin: pray with Agur, Remove
far from me vanity and lies. Prove. 30.8. Be earnest with God for new hearts,
that ye may put off the old man, and put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness, or holiness of truth: and let not
any man pretend to put off the old man, and be clothed with the new man, that
does not show it by putting away lying, and speaking truth with his neighbor.

3. Labor for Godly sincerity and integrity of heart: the more truth we have
in the inner parts, the more we shall put away lying, and be able to speak
truth one to another: He that has no guile in his spirit, will lay aside guile
in his tongue.

4. Accustom your selves to speak the truth, and to walk in the truth, and
labor to be filled with the spirit of truth, and that will lead you into all
truth.

5. Labor to be convinced of the horrible nature of the sin of lying: then you
will soon avoid it, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ; it is his work to heal
our corrupt nature, and to purify the heart, to put forth the power of his
Grace and Spirit into the heart, to enable the soul to cast off this sin.

Struth. Cent 2. Obser. 81.
6. Inform your selves of the nature of things, and then report of them as you
know them to be, and be sure that your speech and thoughts agree together, and
both of them be warranted of the matters themselves.

7. Think much of Gods omnisciency: therefore men run so fast into this sin,
because they forget Gods all-seeing eye. Gehezi thought his Master could not
find him out, and so he thought God would not: therefore when his Master asked
whether he went, he is ready with a lie, saying Thy servant went nowhither. Now
if God has given wisdom to men to find out this sin in others, then much more
is he able to find out this sin where ever it is.

8. Study to act faith in Gods promises; the more faith we act on them, 2 Reg.
5.
the better we shall be kept from lying. 1. His promises of provision:
Godliness has the promises of this life; did men believe this, and act faith
upon it, that God would bless their honest endeavors to this end that they
should not want what is necessary for them, then they would not dare to take
any inordinate courses to help themselves. 2. Confider God promises of
protection; when men are in danger, and are afraid how they shall get out, then
at a pinch they are ready to make use of a lie to help themselves out; and this
is out of distrust of Gods providence: This was Abraham's weakness at Gerar
(though the Father of the faithful) he doubted hereof. Genesis 20.11. Though God
gave him a special promise in the beginning of that Chapter, yet he distrusteth
Gods promise. ver. 7.

9. Take heed that you step not at any time out of Gods way, nor make use of
any indirect means for the getting of that you hope God will bring to pass. He
that does so, may bring himself into such a danger, that he may see no other
way to get out but by adding lying to lying, and so sin unto sin: Thus Jacob to
get the blessing, after he had once stepped out of Gods way, he had no other way
to help himself, but by adding lie to lie: Now ^et us see what condition Jacob
^rought himself into hereby: he got ^he blessing by a lie; but then Esau voweth
to kill him; that he was fain to be sent away from his Fathers house; and as he
had deceived his Father to get the blessing, ^o his Uncle Laban deals
deceitfully with him, and changes his wages ten times, and gives him Leah for
Rachel; and he endures much hardness there for 20 years; and Rebekah that put
him upon that course of beguiling his Father, never saw her beloved Jacob more,
she dying a little before he returned: So those that inordinately seek any
thing out of Gods way, may through the just judgment of God, either lose the
thing it self; or else if they have it, they may have it with a great deal of
smart and sorrow to imbitter it to them: Set the fear of God always before
you: By mercy and truth iniquity is purged, and by the fear of the Lord men
depart from evil. Prove. 16.6. Better were it for us to be dumb, Plutarc. de
garrulitate.
the^^ to lie, and with the Heathen to bite off our tongues then to lie with
them*

CHAP. XIV. Of the Boasting Tongue.
SECT. 1. Boasting defined: Six things men are apt to boast of.
LEt us now in the last place set down something of another sin of the Tongue,
sc. The sin of boasting.

Definit. of Boasting

Gloriatio est alicujus sui boni magnitudinem agnoscere, de eo s^bi placere,
seque beatum putare, and insuper id ore apud alios depraedicare. Flac. Illyr.
Clav. scrip.


Boasting is a sin whereby men glory in themselves, or in any thing belonging to
them, or that they do imagine does appertain to them; thinking the more highly
of themselves for it, and openly publishing it among others, when men rejoice
in their own ^oastings, all such rejoicing is evil, ^ith the Apostle. Jam.
4.13. Man ^s very prone to this sin: The tongue is ^ little member and boasts
great things; Behold how great a matter a ^ittle fire kindles. Jam. 3.5.

There is scarce any thing but cor^upt hearts are apt to boast of it: The
Scripture shows us in diverse particulars what things men are apt most to
boast of.

1. Some boast in their parts, gifts, and endowments, numbering up their own
virtues, that they may appear to be praiseworthy* Habes tu unde glorieris, and
gaudeas, non in te quidem sed in eo qui te summa in re tanto majoribus
praeferre dignatus est, qua nil majus, nil melius tibi, tribui poterat in hac
vita. Haec vero religio,, quae te Deo religat, Deum tibi, humilitatem p^is
mentibus inserit, insolentiam and arragantiam extirpat. Petrach de Remed. utr.
fort. Dial. 13.
boasting of their Knowledge, their Religion, etc. but of these things men
ought not vainly to boast: If thou boastest of an imaginary excellency, thou
art fantastical; if of a real, thou art sacrilegious; thou have not
wherewithal to glory in thy self, but in him who has vouchsafed to prefer
thee in these things before many others; and indeed a wise man the more wisdom
he has, the more he sees his lack of true wisdom, he does not boast of it,
but earnestly desires after it. A man that is truly Religious does not boast
of Religion: That is true Religion, which binds thee fast to God and God to
thee, that sows humility in the minds of men, and rooteth out insolence, and
arrogance: many boast of the form of Religion, that are strangers to the power
of godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5.

2. Some there are that boast in their wealth and riches, that they are the
highest and best men in the Parish: they think they are beloved of God, and
that all is well with them, because they are wealthier then their neighbors:
The Psalmist speaks of such as trust in themselves, and boast in the abundance
of their riches. Psalm. 49.6. Many boast in their full purses and stately
buildings, like Nebuchadnezzar, crying out, Is not this great Babel thai I have
built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30. Ephraim boasts that he was rich and had
found out substance. Hos. 12.8. A great vanity it is to boast of riches, when
as he that heapeth up riches, knows not who shall gather them. Psalm. 39.6.
Indeed they are things that are not, and therefore not to be boasted of.
Socrates finding Alcibiades boasting much of his riches, Lands, Farms, and
Houses, carried him into a place of the City, where a Table was containing the
circuit of the whole earth, and bade him there find out Athens, which being
found, he bids him find out his Farms and fair Buildings; which things when
Alcibiades told him, were nowhere to be found: Wherefore then, said Socrates,
do thou boast of those things which are not about any part of the earth?

3. Some boast of the greatness of their power; and especially that they have
power to do mischief to others: So does Do^g. Therefore says the spirit of God
to him, Why boastest thou thy self in mischief O mighty man? Such as boast of
their power to do mischief to the Saints, God will destroy them for ever; he
shall cast them away, and root them out from the Land of the Living. Psalm. 52.5
They shall be hurled away as a man hurleth a stone out of a sling. Job 27.21.
This i^ threatened against Babylon: So much as she ha^h glorified her self, so
much torment give her. Rev. 18.7.
Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful Tongue! Psalm. 52.1, 4.
Pilates boasting speech to Christ was full of pride; Know thou not that I
have power to crucify thee, and p were to release thee? Joh. 19.10: It was not
Caesar that could give Pilate power over Christ: it was the supreme King of
Kings whose Vassal Caesar himself was, that gave him power thus to judge and
condemn his own only begotten son as an evil-doer, for the accomplishment of
his promise, and the salvation of his people; and the word (...) signifies
lawful authority: therefore Judas that betrayed him, and the High Priest that
delivered him, had the greater sin. Lamech boasts, I have slain a man to my
wounding, and a young man to my hurt: if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,
truly Lamech seventy and seven fold. Genesis 4.23, 24. he boasts of his strength
what he could do.

4. Some there are that boast of their merits by their works; but this is
hateful to God: for as Theophilact speaks, What can be more pernicious or
abominable before God, Abominatio est apud Deum cum quis sibi, non Deo sua bona
opera tribuit; quid hoc aliud quam negare Deum esse, et eum adversari?
Theophil. in Luc Tu pol si sapis, quod scis nescias. Terent. in Andria.
then when men attribute their good deeds to themselves? what is this but to
deny God and be his adversary? frustra de radice gloriatur, qui nihil adfert
nisi folia. In vain does he brag of the root that brings forth nothing but
leaves; and to as little purpose is a man's boasting of good works, and merits,
that brings forth nothing but vain flourishes.

5. Sometime men boast of what they have not, and that they will do what lies
not in their power. Peter boasts more then John. Mat. 26.33. that though all
men should be offended because of Christ, yet he would never be offended, and
he cuts off an ear of one that comes to apprehend his Master; yet he that said
less, performed more; although he was known to the High Priest, he spoke to her
that kept the door, and brought in Peter who stood at the door without. Joh.
18.16. We read of one of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, Differt jactantia
ab arrogantia in hoc quod arrogantia est in incorde tantum, jactantia vero in
ere, and procedit ab arrogantia tanquam causatum a causa. Alex. Fabrit.
destruct. vitior. part. 6. cap. 7.
that could not dispute yet would dye for Christ As some proud vaunting spirits
boast of what they have not, and are not able to do; so some there are that
boast what they will do at such and such a time: to such the Apostle gives a
check, Go to now ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City
and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain; for ye cannot tell
what shall be to morrow. Jam. 3.13, 14. and Solomon says: Boast not thy self
of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Prove. 27.1. If
we cannot promise to our selves the events of one day, then can we not be
assured what shall be to morrow.

6. Some there are so impudent, as to glory in their shame, that boast of their
sins, Phil. 3.19. Such the Prophet speaks of Isai. 3.9. The show of their
countenance does witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom,
they hide it not; by how much the more vile they are above others, by so much
they glory in sin above others, and by their proud and haughty looks as well as
by their lofty tongues they show their sins: How many are there that will cheat
and cozen their neighbors, and when they have so done, boast how neatly they
have lurched them: Others will boast of their filthiness and of their
drunkenness, how many they have made drunk, and laid under board: it is a
dreadful thing for a man to boast of sin and wickedness; and upon such Gods
hand falls heavy at last: Their thinking to sin, their affecting sin, yea their
working of sin, God forbears, and seems to wink at all these; nay further! he
lets their custom in sin alone, and strikes not, although they plead for sin;
but when men declare their sins like Sodom, and boast of their wickedness, then
they are come to the height of sin, and then God cuts them down.

SECT. 2. Of the greatness of this sin of boasting, and how many sins meet
together in this sin.
NOw that we may see the greatness of this sin, consider.

1. Boasting is plainly in Scripture forbidden by the Lord. 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no
more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of your mouth; for the
Lord is a God of knowledge and by him actions are weighed; the meaning is;
Boast not what you will do, for God is a God of knowledge, and whatsoever you
think of your selves, and of your power to do this or that, the Lord knows
what shall come to pass.

It is no honor nor credit for a man to be a boaster: Laus proprio sordet in
ore, praise in a man's own mouth is shame to himself; for men to seek their own
glory is no glory. Prove. 25.27. This was the vanity of the builders of Babel,
to build themselves a City and a Tower, whose top might reach unto Heaven, that
they might make themselves a name. Genesis 11.4. to do any thing whereby to search
for our own praise, and then to trumpet out our own glory, is a dishonor to us.

It is a note of great weakness and folly; Stultus est im^rob s mor. Horat.
a boaster is not only a wicked man but a fool too; The boasting Pharisee said,
well, I am not as this Publican, for he was much worse: such persons gape for
the applause of every vain fellow, and (like harlots) lay open themselves to
every gull, and lend their ears to the report of fools; and the speech of a
foolish flatterer, and fawning Sycophant more pleases them, then a wise
reproof; so that a vain boaster is exceeding foolish.

4. Every man abhors a bragger and is ashamed of him, and loathes his
company: and if a boaster suffers shame, reproach and misery, no man pityeth
him; Who will commiserate a boasting beggar?

5. Boasting is a certain mark of a wicked man, of one that is given over to a
reprobate mind; proud men and boasters are said to be given over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being filled with all
unrighteousness. Romans 1.28, 29, 30. There are many sins that meet togegether in
this one sin.

1. Pride; when men are proud of what they have, then their tongues are apt to
crack of it: when the bagpipe is full of wind, dry and extended, it gives a
sound; so when men are full of the wind of pride, extended to all evil by
obstinacy, and dry for want of grace to supple them, then they boast and brag,
and are full of their bravadoes, and would make the world believe that they are
the only men, that they only ought to speak, and who should control them? This
kind of speech carries the coat of pride and arrogance: The tongue that
speaks proud things, says, With our tongues will we prevail, our lips are
our own* who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. proud men and boasters are put
together. Rom, 1.30.

2. It is a kind of lying to boast of what a man has not, Ne verbis quod sis
os^entes, sed rebus te ostendere scires.
and shows the vanity of such a man's spirit: He in vaunting speaks largely of
what he has, and what he can do, when as he forgets the rules of modesty, and
is the vain trumpeter of his own supposed excellencies, setting them forth in
the largest characters, transgressing the bounds of sobriety: It is a loud lie
for men to speak well of them selves and do ill; thy deeds will mak^ thee more
famous then thy word^ can.

3. There is much of self-love i^ this sin; the vaunting Pharisee when he
boasts of his good deeds, he sticks not to say, that he is not as other men
are; his bosom was full of self-love; so it is with every boaste^ how green and
lively are the roots of self-love, honor and estimation to be found in his
heart! how is he tickled with vain glory, privily dissembling his hypocrisy!
how does he labor to cover his defects, and would gladly seem to be another
manner of man then in very deed he is!

Some are as vain: boasters as ever was Thraso on the stage, Goliath in the
Camp, and Gorgias in the Schools
4. This is a great demonstration that the heart is empty of what it should
have, and of what it boasts to have: An empty barrel gives the greater
sound. He that boasts himself of a false gift, is like clouds and wind
without rain. Prove. 25.14. And one observes that the Apostle Jude alludeth to
this Text, when he ^mpareth such men whose mouth ^eaketh great swelling words,
to ^uds without water, carried about (...) winds. Jude ver. 12, 16. Some ^^ve a
name of Christians upon them, ^^d like Simon Magus give out that ^^ey are some
great ones, and would ^e taken for some body, when they ^e nothing at all: thus
Christ tells the Church of Laodicea, sick of this di^^ase: she said, I am rich
and increased ^ith goods, and have need of nothing: ^ut says he to her, Thou
know not ^^at that thou art wretched, and mise^able, poor, and blind, and
naked. Rev. ^^.17.

5. This is a robbing God of his honor; when men search for their ^wn glory,
they rob God of his Glory, who has said, My Glory will I not give (...)
another. Dr. Sibs Dr. Sibs returning backslider.
says, that boast^ng is Idolatry, because it sets the crea^ure in the place of
God; that it is spiritual adultery, causing a man's affec^ions to go a whoring
after other things; that it is a spiritual drunkeness, such a man being drunk
wi^^ self-conceitedness; that it cause^ blindness, that he cannot see any thin^
but the creature: The boasting Ph^risee Luke, 18.11. puts up no petition for
any thing he wants, nor gives God thanks for any thing h^ has, when he
stood and prayed the with himself; God, I thank thee that am not as other men
are; extortioners unjust; adulterers, or even as this Publican; as if he had
acquired all of him self, and came to the Temple to boa^^ of it. This God
warns his people o^ Deu. 8.17. That when their Herd and Flocks multiply, and
their Silve^ and Gold. and all they have be multiplied, that their heart be not
lifte^ up, and that they forget not the Lord their God who brought them fort^
out of the Land of Egypt, and die thus and thus for them: when evil me^
prosper, they arr apt to say, Our hig^ hand, and not the Lord has done a^
this. Deuteronomy. 28.27. It seems the Church of Corinth was sick of this di^^ase;
they were apt to be puffed up for he against another, and to boast of ^^eir gifts
and parts; therefore says ^he Apostle; Who makes thee to differ from another?
and what have thou that ^hou did not receive? Now if thou did ^eceive it,
why do thou glory as if thou ^idst not receive it? 1 Cor. 4.7. This kind of
pride is, first, a vain imitation of Gods Majesty; because such a one ^scribeth
what he has to himself only, as if it came not from the Lord. Secondly, as
God has All in himself, so he does act all to himself: So a vain glorious man
sacrifices to his own ^et, and burns incense to his own drag. Hab. 1.16. He
takes all the glory to himself, attributing nothing to God; If ill weather
come, he ascribes it to the change of the Moon, or the course of the time; if
his Cattle dye, he says it comes of negligence; if his Land be not fruitful,
it is laid to ill-Husbandry: if sickness come, it is caused by distemper; on
the contrary, If he has a healthy body and constit^tion, he ascribes it to his
good dye^ if he increase in riches, it is his goo^ fortune or good Husbandry;
if he overcome an enemy by Law, it is hi^ friend in Courth or his purse; if he
overcome an enemy in Fight, it wa^ his valor and manhood; if he got so much by
a good bargain, it was hi^ wit and cunning; thus he, and no^ God has done all
this. Thirdly, i^ is Gods prerogative, that his will is the rule of all
righteousness; and a vain glorious man scorns to be at the will of any, yea of
God himself. Thus you see how filthy a thing it is to brag above right; all
evil comes of this sin^ of boasting, much of the devil is in it; whence one of
the Ancients said, Bernard.
Matter gehennae est inanis gloria, vain glory is the Mother of Hell.

SECT. 3. Of the cure of Boasting: Four Remedies against it.
NOw I shall lay down the remedies against this sin of vain boasting.

1. Labor after humbleness of mind: the more truth of Grace is in any man, the
more humble he is; the great work of Grace is to make and keep the soul humble,
and the soul is kept humble because it sees its own vileness, and emptiness;
and when a soul comes to see its defects, it is a good means to keep it
humble; and the more grace it has received, the more it looks upon it self as
engaged to the Lord; and the more the Lord gives, the more he looks for our
returns: Grace teaches us that Obligations are increased with receipts; and to
know how short we are of what we ought to be, and of what we shall be, this
will keep us from vain boasting: As Adam fell by ascending so we must rise by
descending; when we are lowest in our own eyes, we are highest in esteem with
God; when we go farthest from God by a holy desperation, he is nearest to us by
a gracious acceptance: The humble Publican would not boast of his good deeds
and worth as the Pharisee did, Noluit ap propinqua re ad Deum, ut Deus
appropinqua^ et ad eum. Beda.
nor come near to God, that God might come near to him; when we are lowly in
our own eyes, sin will not stoop to us; and when we are lifted up with a
presuming self-conceit, and are apt to boast of our own supposed or real
excellencies, God will not come near us.



Resp.
I answer, with Solomon, If thou art praiseworthy, Let another man praise thee,
and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. Prove. 27.2. for as
one says, God likes better or sin with humbleness, then of innocence with
pride and boasting, if it were possible.

2. If any man glory let him glory in the Lord. God has so ordered it, that
the whole matter of our salvation shall depend upon his free grace; If a man
may boast of any thing, it may be of his natural parts, that they were born
with him, or that he has gotten them by Art or industry, and won them proprio
Mart: But let no man be deceived; even nature it self in the last resolution
is of grace. Sanders. in 1 Cor 12.7. Gratia nullo modo est gratia, nisi omni
modo sit gratuita: vae universali justitiae no^^rae and laudabili; hominum
vitae si amota Dei misericordia, discuriatur. August.

Qu^ gratiam Dei secundum merita hominum d^^ri asserere audei, contra fidem
catholic ^mpraedicat. Ambros l b. 2. de vocat. Gen^^um. cap. 8.


he is in and thorough Christ all in all to us; that so we might not have any
thing in our selves to boast of, but that all our glorying should be in the
Lord. Jerem. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me that
I am the Lord; for God will have no flesh to glory in his presence: Therefore
Christ is of God, made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that according as it is written, He that glories let him glory in
the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. Our Redemption is through the blood of Christ,
and he is made ours by faith, and this faith is the gift of God, that so we
might not have any thing in our selves to glory in, but all our glorying should
be in the Lord: So the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ye are saved by grace through
faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest
any man should boast. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. If the whole work of our salvation proceed
from the grace of God, then our works have no hand in the matter; as Romans 11.5,
where Paul tells us, God reserveth to himself a remnant according to the
election of grace; then he adds ver. 6. if by grace, then is it no more of
works; otherwise grace is no more grace; or if of works, then no more of grace,
otherwise were work no more work; where you see, grace and works cannot stand
together in the business of our salvation; it is of grace not of works, lest
any man should boast he has of his own to save him.

3. Labor to have the true fear of God planted in your hearts: Be not
highminded, but fear; Romans 11.20. The fear of God is set in opposition to
highmindedness, which causes foolish boasting; The fear of the Lord is to
depart from evil, pride, and arrogance. Prove. 8.13. the fear of God will make
thee afraid* of assuming glory to thy self, when God has no praise; pray to
the Lord with David to keep thee from presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19.12. whereof
this of boasting is one of the greatest.

4. Take frequent views of thy self in the glass of Gods law, what thou wast,
what thou art, what thou may be, if God should leave thee: consider what thou
art to God, to Angels, to good men; then thou will have little cause to boast;
consider what thou have, and what thou want, and thou shall surely find thou
have good cause to be afraid, lest that thou have be a very deceit, and a mere
shadow of virtue, and thy righteousness even a false and counterfeit
righteousness: oh then boast not of thy goodness; forget it, and God will
remember it; be mindful frequently to confess thy sins, and be humbled for
them, then God will forget them.

CHAP. XV. Diverse considerations to stir us up to the bridling and moderating
of our Tongues.
SEeing then that men most easily of all things do offend in their lips and
tongues, then which to keep from failing there is nothing more difficult; what
need have we to be watchful over our mouths, and careful to keep the doors of
our lips, that we offend not with our tongues! It is a thing praiseworthy, in
anger to keep our hands from fighting, in abundance of dainty meats to bridle
our appetite from intemperance; in great prosperity to refrain from pride; but
to offend with the tongue being so easy, and the way thereof so slippery, that
not to offend in words is a virtue so rare, and a thing so seldom seen, as that
the son of Syrach counts it most marvelous, when he says, Who is he that
fails not in his tongue? and St. James esteems it a great perfection; If
any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle
the whole body. Jam. 3.2. And to show what great things may be done by the well
ordering of the tongue, the Apostle compares it to a Bridle or Bit of an
horse: like as the bit is but a small thing in comparison of the horse, yet it
turns about, and rules the strongest horse at the pleasure of the rider; so
the Tongue is but a small member in the body of man, yet being moderated with
discretion, it bridleth the whole body. Now that we may the better be enabled
to bridle and moderate our tongues, I shall propound these considerations.

God in his word gives a great charge Prove. 4.23, 24. Solomon advises, First,
keep thy heart with all diligence, etc. then the tongue, Put away from thee a
froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee; what is spoken there of a
perverse tongue, is meant of all the sins of the tongue, that have been spoken
of, and many more that might have been spoken to: And seeing God does so
strictly require that we should keep our tongues from evil, and our lips from
speaking guile. Psalm. 34.13. It behooves all those that would be counted Gods
people to take special care of it: He that keeps himself from other sins, and
fails herein, shows the vanity of his Religion.

Let us consider wherefore God he knows what a matter it is to keep the
tongue in good order: The Apostle shows, that though a small Bit will rule a
great Horse, and a little ^udder will rule a great Ship, yet the tongue is very
hardly tamed* Therefore God does so often provide a Remedy against it.

We must when we least think of it, Mat. 12.36. Alas! how much vain discourse
proceeds from men, that they take no notice of! but did men consider this, it
would make them more careful then they are; did they consider they must give
account of their evil-speaking to him that is ready to judge the quick and the
dead, 1 Pet. 4.5. God will enquire a reason why you slandered such a one at
such a time; what answer will you give at that day? Consider how God dealt with
Aaron and Miriam for speaking against Moses; they speak against him because of
the Ethiopian woman whom he had married; that is the pretense. Numb. 12.1. but
the true reason of their grudge is expressed. ver. 2* And they said, Has the
Lord indeed spoken by Moses only? has he not spoken also by us? and the Lord
heard it. And God does not only take notice of it, but also he reasons with
them about it, how they durst do it: Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak
against my servant Moses? ver. 7, 8. and not only so, but consider how God
punishes Miriam; First, she is smitten with leprosy, then she is put out of
the camp of Israel: Men think it nothing to speak against their Minister; but
God will bring such to account for it. Some do it because they will not suffer
the word of reproof to come close upon their hearts, but put it off with
railing: and others with Aaron and Miriam cry out, Has not God given us the
gifts of the spirit as well as to him? cannot we preach as well as he? This
has been the language of many men of late years among us: but God keeps an
account of all the sinful words of such men. God by the Prophet Jeremy 1.6.
shows, that he did harken, but they did not speak that which they ought to
do, and that he took notice of it: and Malac. 3.17. there is a book of
remembrance before the Lord; and as he remembers the words of the wicked to
punish them for it, so he remembers the gracious words of his People to reward
them for it; for they are written before him.

By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned, says our Savior. Mat. 12.37. God will ^^dge men according as their
words ^^ew either Holiness or wickedness: ^o Jude sets down what God will do
^^to men for their evil words: God ^ll execute judgment upon all, A man is
condemned by his words: as though nothing did return into the condemnation of a
man but his words; and indeed a man's worst sins be his words: The sin against
the Holy Ghost consists in word; the Holy Ghost is more on the tongue then
all the members else.

Capel. de tentat. part. 3. cap. 5.


to convince all that ^^e ungodly among them, ^f all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly ^ommitted, and of all their ^ard speeches, which un^odly
sinners have spoken against him: this (if well con^^dered) would be a strong
motive to persuade men to ^ake more heed of sinning ^n this manner: Solomon
says, A man's ^elly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth, and with
the increase of his ^ips shall he be filled. Death and Life ^re in the power of
the tongue, and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof. Prove. 18.20, 21.
the scope of the wise man is to show what influence the words of men have
either to their weal or woe to eternity. ver. 20. the shall eat of the fruit of
their tongue whether wholesome or poisonous; an^ ver. 21. Life or death,
according t^ their words. He that suffers h^ tongue to run at random without
bridling it, shall have the fruit of i^ even everlasting death: The tongu^ is
either the best or worst member i^ the body next the heart: and says the wise
man, Prove. 13.3. He that opens wide his lips shall have destruction but he
that keeps his mouth, keepet^ his life: Men are careful of nothin^ so much as
of their life; then would you keep your lives? keep you tongues: it is not
without great caus^ the spirit of God has set down the^^ things so plainly in
Scripture: Anacharsis being asked what was worst and best in a man, answered,
the tongue, if it be not ruled, it is the worst; if well ruled, the best.
The tongue, as one notes; is a Tree o^ life to them that use it well, a Tree
o^ death to them that abuse it: It is fitl^ compared to the Gates of a besiege^
City, whose safety or destruction stands much in their careful or loo^^
custody.

Consider how God deals with Moses though an holy and good man, and the
meekest upon ^he face of all the earth? Numb. 12.3. ^et when he is provoked by
the people, he does not so order his tongue as ^e ought to do. Psalm. 106.32,
33. they ^rovoke his spirit, and he speaks unadvisedly with his lips; so that
it went ill with Moses for their sakes; the story whereof you have Numb. 20.3.
the people want water, and they chide with Moses, saying, Would God we had died
when our brethren died before the Lord: their discontent put that good man into
a rash and unadvised speech: when God bade him take the rod and speak to the
Rock, he gathers the Congregation together, and says unto them, Hear now ye
Rebels, must we fetch water for you out of this Rock? ver. 9, 10. the speech is
spoken against the people, not against God, and ^o not so great a sin as in
impatience and unbelief to contest with God for instead of his speaking to the
Rock, he falls a chiding with the^ and smote the Rock twice with hi^ Rod, that
Rod of God that had bud bed, blossomed, and bare Almonds One would think that
Moses committed a greater sin. Numb. 11.21, 22* distrusting God, when he said,
The people among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou has^
said, I will give them flesh that they man eat a whole month: shall the flocks
and the herds bo slain to suffice them, etc. yet all that God says to it, is
only this, Is the Lord's hand waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my words
shall come to pass to thee or not. ver, 23* what less could have been said?
Bernard.
but to the other sin of his at the waters of Meribah, he threatens a severe
punishment: And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, Because ye believe me not to
sanctify me before the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring the
congregation into the Land which I have given them; the reason is conceived to
be this: Jerem. Dyke Tract of the mischief of scandals.
though the former sin were in its own nature greater, yet that is thought to
be private between God and Moses, and so no scandal in it; but the latter was
public before all the people, and so a scandal in it; God not sanctified, but
his name dishonored: Now if God express so much severity against this good man
for one unadvised speaking with his lips; how will he deal with those that live
in such sins all their days? but though God punishes his sin, he saves his
soul, when they that give way to this sin continually; shall perish for ever.
God will not bear with sin in any of his best servants. Job had discovered some
impatience in his speech, Job 3. and before Job shall be restored, he shall
come and acknowledge, and confess his sin; Once have I spoken, but I will not
answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further; Job 40.5; and chap. 42.3. he
confesses, he had utterered that he understood not, things too wonderful for
him, which he knew not; Wherefore says he, I abhor my self, and repent in dust
and ashes. ver. 6.

Solomon says, In the multitude of words there wants not sin. A Babbler is a
waster of words to no purpose* as the Stoic Philosophers falsely called St.
Paul (...). qui libens verba fund^^at H. Stephen. in verb. (...) Such a one is
like one that throws away good seed wastefully, and glories in it.
Prove. 10.19. but he that resraineth his lips, is wise. In many words usually
are many sins; so that the more liberty a man gives his tongue, the more sin
he commits; and the more he refraineth his tongue, the more truth of
Religion he shows: The wise man l kewise tells us, that an unbrideled tongue
is a snare to a man: A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the
snare of his soul. Prove. 18.7. A sinner is snared not only with the works of
his hands, but also with the words of his tongue: and when the Devil prevails
with a man to draw him into these sins, he easily draws him to the committing
of other sins.

To take heed to our tongues is a He that refraineth his lips is wise. Prove.
10.19. A fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward. Prove. 29.11. A fools voice is known by multitude of words. Melior
est ind screta prudentia quam stulta loquacitas. Aul. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Eccles. 5.3. The virtuous woman opens her mouth in wisdom. Prove. 31.26.
Every one would be counted wise: Look carefully then to the performance of this
duty, and this will evidence thee to be wise. A man by natural wisdom may get
much power over these sins, but much more by the wisdom that is from above. He
that has knowledge, spares his words. Prove. 17.27. It is an argument of
wisdom to know what, when, and how to speak: Solomon was the wisest of men, and
he gives many lessons for the well-ordering of the tongue; it is an argument of
much wisdom to be well skilled in this duty.

Consider how much mischief comes

1. When men go about with their tales one to another, speaking that which
ought to be covered with the mantle of love; hereby they set one house after
another one fire, till almost all the Town be in a flame. An ungodly man
diggeth up evil and in his lips there is a burning fire: a froward man sows
strife, and a whisperer separateth chief friends. Prove. 16.27, 28. such a one
takes as much pains in his evil way, as another does in digging in Mines and
Quarries in the bowels of the earth: such a man's tongue is set on fire of hell,
and it sets others on a flame, even chiefest friends. He that repeateth a
matter, separateth very friends. Prove. 17.9. A fools lips enter into
contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. Prove. 18.6. contrary to the
practice of him that desires to make and keep peace; he will make the best of
things, and not repeat matters from one to another: this the Lord hates. A
false witness that sows lies, and him that sows discord among his brethren,
they are an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 6.19.

2. He does others much mischief in wounding them in their credits, and in
their estates: A man of an evil tongue is a Beast in the shape of a man; for
his tongue is the tongue of a Serpent, under which lies nothing but venom and
poison: nay he is worse then a Serpent, for it cannot hurt unless it be present
to see a man, or to bite him, or to strike him with his tail: but he which has
not the rule of his tongue hurts men as well absent as present; neither Sea
nor Land, Ball de Gubern. linguae.
nor any thing can hinder him, as One well notes.

3. It hurts others, when those that are naught themselves give evil counsel to
others, and are an occasion of making them as bad as themselves: So Ahab; who
so bad as he? notoriously wicked, yet one worse then himself stirs him up to
more wickedness, and that was Jezebel his wife. 1 Reg. 21.25. her tongue
stirs him to do more evil then he has in his heart. Ahab having a mind to
Naboths Vineyard was troubled; Jezebel bids him be merry, and tells him she
would give him the Vineyard of Naboth; so she writes Letters in Ahabs name, and
sends them to the Elders and Nobles in the City dwelling with Naboth,
commands them to proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth on high among the people, as
if his wickedness were so great, that God were highly dishonored by it; then
must Naboth be falsely accused of blasphemy, and stoned to death. And as it
brings much mischief to others, so it brings greater mischief upon
themselves, both from God and men. Sometimes men's unruly tongues call for
strokes upon themselves from God; For the sin of their mouth, and the words of
their lips, let them he even taken in their pride, and for cursing and lying
which they speak, consume them in wrath, consume them that they may not be.
Psalm. 59.12, 13. Thus the Prophet by the spirit of God imprecateth a dreadful
judgment upon them; The froward tongue shall be cut out. Prove. 10.31. yea God
shall cause their own tongues to fall upon them, that is the mischief of their
own tongues. Psalm. 64.8. A prating fool shall fall. Prove. 10.8. his mouth
calls for strokes from God and man. Prove. 18.6. A rod is for such a fools
back: sometimes men's evil tongues bring misery upon them from men. Violence
covers the mouth of the wicked. Prove. 10.11. David would cut off him that
slandereth his neighbor, and expel out of his family, him that works deceit
and tells lies. Psalm. 101.5, 7.

Moreover, let us consider the excellency Prove. 10.11. it is compared to a Well
of life, to a Spring of living water: The mouth of a righteous man is a Well of
life, a Spring that shall never be dried up; it is compared to refined silver;
The tongue of the just is as choice silver, of great worth. ver. 20. He
likewise compares the good and wisemans tongue to a Table richly furnished
that feeds many: the lips of the righteous feed many, ver. 21. when he that
has no wisdom to guide his tongue dies for want. ver. 20. He sets the
righteous man's tongue against the wicked man's heart; that as the one is very
excellently good like choice silver, so the other is stark naught, little
worth, very refuse; and that because out of the heart proceeds all evil; and
he that has nothing of grace in his heart, must needs have a very bad tongue.
Again, he sets the lips of a wise man against the wicked man's heart Prove. 15.7.
the lips of the wise disperse knowledge, but the heart of the foolish does not
so: that is, A good man's lips are like a good seeds man, sowing good things for
his own good, and for the good of others he has to do withal; but where the
heart is naught, no good can come from such a man. and Prove. 12.18. There is
that speaks like the piercings of a sword, but the tongue of the wise is
health. the one is a cutting tongue, the other is a wholesome medicine; the
profit of it reaches to many others, but the refreshment and comfort returns
into a man's bosom; a wholesome tongue is a tree of life. Prove. 15.4. Trees (as
One well notes) bring forth fruit for others, not for themselves; Ball de
gubern. linguae.
but he that uses his tongue lawfully, shall reap the fruit which he bears:
Trees are often planted and dressed by one, when another enjoys the fru t:
but he that governs his tongue well, shall possess that fruit which none can
take from him: Trees bring forth fruit once in the year; but the due use of the
tongue is continually fruitful for the comfort of him that uses it: The fruit
of Trees is one and the same; but the fruit of the tongue rightly exercised is
diverse, among which the special is eternal life.

CHAP. XVI. Shows wherein the right ordering of the Tongue consists.
BEcause the work of the right ordering and government of our tongues
notwithstanding the many specious shows of Religion that men make is very much
neglected; therefore it is a lesson that is very needful for us to learn to
bridle and keep our tongues in order: and as a bridle or bit in a horses mouth
is to hold him to that pace the rider thinks fit, and to turn him about at his
pleasure: so the directions that God gives in his word for the tongue, should
be as a bridle to restrain our too much aptness to exorbitant expressions.
Theophrastus the Philosopher said not amiss: it were better trusting to an
untamed and unbrideled horse, Turnbul. exposit. in Jacob. 3.
then to an bubrideled tongue: for the danger of the Horse by not meddling with
him may be prevented; but because we carry our unbrideled tongues always about
us, the peril and danger thereof cannot be avoided.

Now the right ordering of the Tongue consists

1: In a care not to speak rashly, but that we consider what, and how, and
when, and to whom to speak: he well considers what he speaks before he
speaks, Diu eonsidera quid loquendum sit, and adhuc taceus provide, nequid
dixisse poeniteat. Quicquid dicturus es, prius cum anim tuo reputa. Isoc. ad
Demon.
who speaks as he ought to speak. Prove. 15.28. The heart of the righteous
studieth to answer, but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things: a wise
man will well weigh his words before he speaks; and ver. 2. The tongue of the
wise uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of fools pour out foolishness, or
belcheth out his folly: The good man makes use of his tongue that he may not
sin with his tongue, but uses his knowledge aright for the good of others,
when as the wicked is babbling any thing that comes next to his lips: The tongue
is placed near under the brain and understanding part, as at the feet of her
Schoolmaster, that it might not run before the wit; Pet. Barker. exposit in
Prove. 1.3.
and the heart is counselor to the tongue, that it might have a good guide
above and beneath, to teach us to sift our words, to let them be prius ratione,
quam prolatione, prius ad limam, quam ad linguam. Jephtha upon his rash vow
brought sorrow upon himself. Rashness does nothing well: A man going in haste
easily slideth. Prove. 1^.2. Avoid rash speaking, lest with Jephtha thou say too
late, I have opened my mouth and cannot go back: Peter's rashness made him to
curse and forswear himself.

2. It consists in taking a due and fit time to speak in; A word fitly spoken
is like apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, says the wise man. Prove. or a
word upon the wheeels: It is a Metae^hor taken from a Potter that mould^th his
clay while it is upon the wheel, ^o what fashion he pleases: he does ^isely
that speaks seasonable words, that gives a reproof in season; and he ^lso
does wisely, that hears it, and makes good use of it: this is better esteemed
in the eyes of God, then jewels of gold and silver in the eyes of men. Thus
Abigail deals with Nabal, she takes the fittest time to speak unto him, not in
his Wine, nor in a passion presently when she hears of it, but when his wine
is gone. 1 Samuel 25.35. So Nathan deals with David 2 Samuel 12.1. He by a
parable gets within him, and makes him pass sentence upon himself, and then
tells him, Thou art the man. Solomon tells us, there is a time to keep silence
and a time to speak. Eccles. 3.7. every thing is beautiful in his season; so is
speech; so is silence. The Learned tell us, there are seven special seasons of
speaking; as,

1. When we bring honor to God, and do good to our brethren.

2. When the truth and honor o^ God may be vindicated by us.

3. When the credit of a wronge^ brother may be repaired by us.

4. When by speaking the ignoran^ may receive direction or instruction from us.

5. When the weak may be supported and comforted by us.

6. When a doubting soul may receive establishment from us.

7. When we have an opportunity of giving due reproof and conviction to those
that do evil. To these I shall add, that it is lawful and seasonable for
Christians being falsely accused to use appeals, and make apologies for
themselves in defense of their innocence: So did David, when Saul had received
many false informations against him, 1 Samuel 26.18. The like does St. Paul
before Felix, Festus, King Agrippa, and all other Governors before whom he was
accused, Act. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 chapters. Yea so does Christ himself being
accused to cast out devils. Luke 11.17. and when he was called a Samaritan,
etc. Joh. 8.49. and after these examples some of the Ancients have written
whole Books of this Argument; as Tertulian, Justin Martyr, and others: and good
reason there is hereof; for a good name is better then great riches. Prove.
22.1. Ruffinus Ruffin. Eccles. histor.
tells us, that whosoever is silent being accused of Heresy, cannot be a good
Christian; he is cited by Bishop Jewel in his Apology for the Church of
England. Epaminondas an Heathen, Plutarch. in Epaminond.
was so chary of his credit, that he was wont to say, He cared not to be
killed, so it might be recorded that he died without just cause. Christians
therefore have just warrtnt to answer in their own defense, when they be
falsely accused, especially in the case of Religion, when the imputation does
not so much touch their Persons, as their Profession; in this case not to be
resolute, is to be plainly dissolute: In Athens, every Citizen took a corporal
oath to maintain their professed and established Religion, Melanct praefat. ad
comment. in Roman.
in this sort, Pugnabo pro sacris, and solus, and cum aliis. It is also
necessary in some cases to make confession of our faith. sc. where the Glory of
God may by that means be procured, our brethren edified, and scandal avoided.
So does Paul, Act. 22. St. Peter enjoyneth us always to be ready to give an
answer to every one that asks us, Note that the Articles of faith are subject
to reason, but that every one may see we have reason to believe as we do.

Junilius. de partib. 9. divinae legis. lib. 2. cap. ult.


and a reason of the hope that is in us* 1 Pet. 3.15. Yea Paul tells us, that
every one that will be saved, with the mouth must make confession to salvation.
Romans 10.10. and Bullinger tells us, that faith in the heart breaking forth into
confession with the mouth, is a note whereby the friends of Christ are
distinguished from the followers of Antichrist: Yea Christ has told us
plainly, that whosoever will not confess him on earth before men, he will not
acknowledge them before his Father in Heaven: This confuteth all Peter-like
Professors, who ^re silent in time of persecution, and ^hink that then its
enough for them to think well, and mean well, and keep their faith to
themselves; no, they must confess it to others; and if they do not, or dare
not, it is an argument for the time, their tongues are not loosed by God, but
tied up by the Devil.

3. The right ordering of the tongue consists, The leaves of loquacity,
spring from the root of small capacity.
when a man is careful that there is not too much loquacity in himself, that he
does not vainly babble upon all occasions. Prove. 10.19. the wise man shows the
folly of a man given to talk much: A wise man refraineth his lips; but where
much talk is, there is much sin, unless there be much grace to govern the
heart: He that has knowledge spares his words. Prove. 17.27. The Preacher is
clear in this point. God is in Heaven, thou upon earth, therefore let thy words
be few. Eccl. 5.3. Men must take heed of impertinent words, words of wind, that
are empty and fruitless: The Hebrews call a vain word, a word of lips Prove.
14.23. Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no
better. Eccles. 10.11. A babbler hurts his friend, aideth his enemy, and
undoeth himself: as members that are continually diseased, continually draw
humors to them; so the tongue of a babbler, being never without an
inflammation, draws poison to it self by continual babbling, as One well
notes: Crook. Hypocr. chap. 3. August. de Conven. 10 Praecept. and 10 Plagar.

Absit in oratione multa locutio, sed non desit multa precatio. Hieron. Non
magna vocis extensio, sed magna cordis intentio deo grata. Chemnit. Harmon.
Evangel.


What One says of Heretical teachers, I may say of all vain bablers, they are
like Frogs, that in muddy Marshes and Fens are always croaking, that bring
irksomness to the ears, but yield no food to the minds of men. Our Savior
condemns vain repetitions in prayer; for some think they shall be heard for
their much speaking. Mat. 6.7. Christ corrects them not for the matter they
prayed, but for the manner of their praying, that in their prayers they used
vain repetitions, superfluous and superstitious multiplying of words, like the
Heathen; for repetitions of the same petitions are not unlawful.

4. It consists in this, that we be careful not to be often found talking of
the things that concern us not to talk of; This is set down to be the fault of
women that go from house to house, that are tatlers and busy-bodyes, speaking
things which they ought not. 1 Timothy 5.13. and these are such, says the
Apostle, that learn to be idle, that wander from house to house, and talk of
things that concern them not; but this is not the fault of women only, but the
fault also of too many men among us; and such were among the Thessalonians; he
bids them study to be quiet, that is, show not your selves to be men and women
of the tongue. 1 Timothy 4.11* Let no man affect the honor to be a great talker,
but love the honor to be at rest, as the Greek words import, which is greater
honor: (...).
sometime the Greek word (...) signifies, the Rest of the body, as the women
rested on the Sabbath day before they went to the Sepulcher of Christ, to
anoint the dead body of our Savior, with the spices and ointments they had
prepared; there is the same word in the Original, (...).
Luk 23. ult. but here the Apostle means the rest of the Tongue, to rest from
meddling with things that belong not to them: If men will be discoursing, let it
be of what may do themselves and others good.

5. It consists in this, that our speech be not cross, nor froward, nor
thwarting language: Many men have froward hearts, and they show it by their
froward words; speak to such men, and you shall have nothing but some froward
answer again* Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far
from thee. Prove. 4.24. One observes upon that place, how ill God looks upon
such a tongue, comparing it to a lip drawn awry; as that seems ill in the
eyes of men, so a froward tongue is much more unseemly in the eyes of God:
therefore put this away from thee: This is one character of a naughty person; A
wicked man walks with a froward mouth. Prove. 6.12. The phrase is very
emphatical; where ever he goes he carries it with him: God made not the tongue
of man of bone or of any other hard substance, but of tender flesh, because thy
words should be tender, and sweet, not rough and sharp. Stella
Here is the difference between a good man, and a wicked man; though there be
by nature such frowardness in the heart of a Holy man, yet Grace makes him
strive against it, and he has no Rest in himself, till he has gotten the
Mastery over it: In this case it is with a child of God, as with an horse that
trots hard, yet by Art he is brought to pace easily; but because his trot is
natural, he is apt to fall into it very often, but the rider with the bridle
minding him of it again, recovereth him: So the bridle of Gods law and his
Grace recovereth a child of God out of frowardness, though it be natural to him.

Now the evil of this sin of frowardness in words appears. 1. In that men
hereby show their passion, their choler and boiling anger; by froward words
they show the frowardness that is in their heart. Prove. 6.18. 2. It does
provoke others the more to anger, it may do them much hurt as well as our
selves; an angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds with
transgression. Prove. 19.22. It does but stir up strife, and cause their sins
with ours the more to abound; as the coal makes burning coals, and wood a
fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife; anger are as fire, and
words are as fuel to the fire. Prove. 26.21. 3. Froward words are not the way to
calm and quiet men's spirits, but calm words serve for that end: A soft answer
turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. Prove. 15.1. A soft tongue
breaks the bone. Prove. 25.15. 4. A froward man is not to be dealt with nor
spoken to; to instruct the froward, Perversum corrippere est stimulare insanum,
and oleum camino adhibere. Petr. Raven.
is to set goads to one that is mad already, or to pour oil into a Chimney;
froward men are like a piece of rotten wood, scarce touched but they fall in
pieces: Many Salamandry spirits there are whom nothing will content but mere
frowardness and discontent. 5. The froward are an abomination to the Lord.
Prove. 11.20. and God will cut off all froward tongues; the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them. Prove. 11.3. Therefore let every one repent of
his wrathful ire, and espy every wrinkle in his brow; labor to bridle this
sin, for it is stronger then a horse; for an horse may more easily be ruled
then this humor.

6. The right ordering of the tongue consists in this; sc. that we give not
our tongues liberty to speak evil of what we know not, nor understand not; nor
of those men we are not well acquainted with. Consider what St. Peter and Jude
speak of this. 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude ver. 10. These as natural brute beasts made to
be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and
here let us consider. 1. In speaking evil of what we understand not, we show
our folly, and it is to our shame. He that answers a matter before he hears
it, it is folly and shame to him. Prove. 18.13. Many men will be ready to answer
a matter that is before them before they understand it, or it be half spoken to
them, that they maybe counted men of great wit and parts; but this shows
their folly. 2. In speaking evil of what we know not, we may be guilty of as
great a sin as those that put the Lord Jesus to death, who preferred a murderer
before him, condemning the holy and spotless Lamb of God, and justifying and
acquitting one that was notoriously wicked; we may call evil good, and good
evil, and so come under the woe denouned against such persons. Isai. 5.
Consider 3. What the Apostle Peter compares such men to; he says, they are
more like to brute beasts; then reasonable men. 2 Pet. 2.12. God gives us
reason that hereby we should govern our selves, and this we must show in the
well-governing of our tongues. 4. These men shall perish in their own sin, and
corruption; such men are in the high way to destruction.

7. It consists in speaking to others as we ought; when others show their
passion or malice against you in giving you provoking language, then it becomes
you to show the truth of your Religion, by your not retorting again: if one
cast dirt in thy face, do not thou cast dirt in his face: Some will say this is
hard to fl sh and blood; but though flesh and blood cannot bear it, yet grace
can: When Shimei raileth at David, though the Commanders with the King give him
the same language again, yet David does not so. 2 Samuel 16.10. his heart was not
in the same temper with theirs, he had another manner of spirit then they had.
Now that we may take heed of this sin whenever we are tempted to it, or have
any occasion thereunto, let us consider these motives to persuade us to the
contrary duty.

1. This sin God has plainly forbidden in his word: Render not railing for
railing, nor evil for evil. 1. Pet. 3.9. Therefore those that speak so
slightingly of us, do break the command of God. 2. If we do so, we shall hereby
show we are overcome with evil, whereas we must overcome evil with good.
Nothing more pleases now adays, then that which the French men call
l'escriture picquante, Satirical Invectives, both in Pulpits and Pamphlets.
3. In so doing we shall show our selves but like unto them that, revile us;
they show themselves unlike to Christians; and if we do so, we shall show our
selves as bad as they are. Prove. 26.4. the wisemans counsel is, Answer not a
fool according to his folly lest thou also be like him; in the next verse he
seems to cross this command; but if it be well considered, it is meant only
that so he may see his folly in that same thing wherein he spoke foolishly. 4.
By doing as they do, we may lose the fruit that God would have us get by the
reproaches that are cast upon us by our enemies. In these respects consider.

1. Where truth of grace is in the heart, it will make a man reflect upon
himself, to see whether he deserves that charge that such men charge him
withal or not, that if it be so, he may be humbled for it before the Lord, and
beg pardon; and if it be not so, then he may sit down and bless God that it is
not so, that he is not so bad as such a one would make him. As Augustine is
liberal in discovering his own defects, so he touches upon his Mothers Itaque
ad illud modicum quotidiana modica addendo (quoniam qui modica spernit,
pau^atim decidit) in eam consuetudinem lapsa erat, ut prope jam plenos mero
caliculos hauriret. Aug. lib. 9 confess. 8.
; he says Surrepserat ei vinolentia, a too much love of wine did steal upon
her. This came to pass, says he, by sipping a little wine now and then, when
being a young Girl and waiting at the Table, she used to fill wine to her
Father and Mother; she did it not, says he, out of any drunken humor, but
mere youthful wantonness; but yet she did it, and by frequent doing it, she had
gotten such a love it, that she could afterward with greediness drink up, and
draw dry whole cups of wine; and this ill custom would have brought her to
greater indecencyes that way, had not God by stirring up a servant of her
Fathers to reproach her, and call her Meribibulam a wine-bibber, cured her in
time of that infirmity, which Austin therefore calls Medicinale ferrum, a
curing weapon; this reproaching of her by the Maidservant* was the means
through Gods blessing to cure her of this Malady.

2. Where there is grace in the heart it will teach a man to consider whether
God may not suffer such a one so to open his mouth against him, as that his
graces may be tried thereby, that our faith, patience, meekness, humility, may
be the more apparent: Thus David in patience and meekness considers Gods end
in Shimeis railing upon him, and lets him alone.

3. Consider the example of our Savior Christ himself; his practice was, not
to render evil for evil; but when he was unjustly accused, he did as was
prophesied of him, not open his mouth again, Isai. 53.7. It is twice repeated
of him, and this the Apostle sets down also; Who when he was reviled, reviled
not again, and when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him
that judges righteously. 1 Pet. 2.23. Christ reviled not again, partly because
reviling is a sin, and partly because he suffered as our surety, though he had
deserved no such shame as we had: therefore he holds his peace not only from
reviling, but many times from just apology, confessing our guiltiness by his
silence, as One well notes; if we would be accounted members of Christ, let us
walk as Christ walked.

4. Consider the example of Michael the Archangel, when he dispued with the
Devil about the body of Moses, Jude ver. 9. he contended with him, yet durst
not bring any railing accusation against him, but said only, The Lord rebuke
thee: Michael had to do with the worst of creatures, and in the best cause by
the appointment of God; yet he raileth not at him, but commits his cause to
God: If he in the cause of God durst not do it; shall any Christian dare to do
it in his own cause? no, the Scripture teaches us, 1. Silently to bear what
reproaches are cast upon us: So does Moses, when Aaron and Miriam chide with
him. Numb. 12.3. he held his peace; he saw their passion, and knew if he should
break out into passion also, he should sin against God, as they did against
him: So David, I was dumb with silence, says he, I held my peace. Psalm. 39.2.
when it may be he was reproached by them for so doing.

5. Grace will teach a man in such a case, instead of answering them in the
like language, to go to God and spread our case before him; this does Job,
chap. 16.20. My friends scorn me, but mine eyes pour out tears to God: So
Nehemiah, while the enemies scoff, he prays, Hear O our God, for we are
despised. Nehem. 4.4. therefore spread thy case before the Lord, and entreat
him to plead for thee, and to clear thine innocence, and make them to see their
sin, and humble them for it, and sit them receiving pardon at his hands: hereby
we shall show our selves to be true Christians, and such whose Religion is not
vain.

CHAP. XVII. Rules laid down for the better ordering the Tongue.
LEt us now look to it, that The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and
his tongue talks of judgment; the law of Go^ is in his heart, none of his
steps shall slide, Psalm. 37.30, 31. Where the law God is in the heart, and the
love of it in the soul, it will be known by Gracious speeches: The wise man
gives this as a mark of one truly good, The lips of the wise disperse
knowledge, but the heart of the foolish does not so. Prove. 15.7. The Metaphor
is taken from seeds* men that scatter and disperse their seed, that so it may
come up and bring forth fruit: So a wiseman sows instruction that it may do
good: the heart of the foolish is opposite to it, to show that it is the Forge
of all evil whatsoever; therefore there is no good in the mouth of such a man:
When St. Paul forbids corrupt communication to proceed out of our mouths, he
enjoyneth that what we speak be good to the use of edifying, that it may
Minister grace unto the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29. that thereby we may do good not
only to our selves, but also to others: and Colos. 4.5, 6. he requires us to
walk in wisdom to them that are without, and to let out speech be always with
grace, seasoned or poudered with salt; so to carry our selves in our speeches
to others, that we may win them to Holiness; this is to walk wisely to them
that are without; for if the tongues of those that profess Religion are as
loose and bad as others, this will make them take offense at our profession;
let us then show our selves to be of another spirit; and if we would rule our
tongues aright, according to Gods word, let our speeches be such as are for the
matter good, and suitable to the will and mind of God revealed in his word;
this is the ground why the mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, because the
law of God is in his heart, and he brideleth himself in whatsoever is forbidden
in the word of God.

Romans 15.2. as in direction, counsel, exhortation to that which is good: Let us
consider one another to provoke to love and to good works. Heb. 10.24. not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, etc. but exhorting one
another. Consider what was spoken of the days of the Gospel, Zech. 8.21. The
Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray
before the Lord and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also. Here is not one
inviting another to a Stage Play, to a Stews, to the Ale-bench, but to the
congregation of the Lords people, to the house of God; and this does every man
by his own example; for says he, I will go also. Now if we live in such times
where Religion is spoken against, and men think it vain to serve the Lord, yet
then should we be careful of giving men counsel, and exhorting men to these
duties. Malach. 3.13. We may observe that those that are apt to let loose their
tongues to speak against God, yet are loath to be known to be such, or to be
accounted so; when God lays it to their charge, your words have been stout
against me, yet they say, what have we spoken so much against thee? they are no
such men, not so ill-bred as to speak against God; but in such a time as this,
you may see what were the words of those that feared the Lord; when others take
all occasions to speak against him, these men take all opportunities to speak
for God and his ways; while others desire to have others as bad as themselves,
these speak often one to another, laboring to bring souls home to God; and
these shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day when I make up my Jewels. ver.
17.

Philip when he had found Christ, he finds Nathaniel, and tells him of the
Messiah; and the woman of Samaria when she had some small hints of Christ, she
runs into the City, and calls for the men of the City. Job 4. So Peter being
converted from his sin of denying his Master, he must strengthen his brethren,
that is, he must show how willing the Lord Christ is to receive those repenting
sinners that do return unto him; and St. Paul had comforts for this very end,
that he might comfort others that were in trouble, wherewith he himself was
comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4. So David. Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that
fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul.

Let your words be weighty and Paul spoke wisdom among such as were perfect,
The Apostles were, enriched with the gift of Tongues in the day of Pentecost,
not only for variety of languages, but for elegancy of speech, by which they
were enabled (...) to speak Apothegms, Act. 2.4. which comprehend much in a
little: they spoke as the spirit gave them utterance.
yet not the wisdom of this world; it was the words of wisdom, not the wisdom
of words. 1 Cor. 2.7. The mouth of the wise brings forth wisdom, the heart of
the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning io his lips. Prove. 16.23. As
he sees what meat goes into his mouth before he eats it, so he pondereth
the matter of his words before he speaks: Now let us see how short the most
of those that would be accounted Christians do come of this duty; the abundance
of idle discourse that comes from them, and nothing that is good to the doing
good, either to their own souls, or to the souls of others, plainly shows:
Let them consider what God requires from Parents and Masters of Families.
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up: If the words of God were more in men's
hearts, then would they show themselves more in men's tongues; their words would
be more gracious and tend more to do good then they do; therefore God
commands that his words be laid up in our hearts; that which we have learnt
out of Gods word we should often speak of, that so it may do good to our selves
and others; and if you talk more of God and his word, and labor not after the
advancement of Religion more in your familyes, and take no more care of your
children and servants to instruct them for the good of their souls, your case
will be so much the more s^d after all these warnings. Alas! many men take no
more care of their children and servants then of their beasts, putting no
difference between them and brute creatures: Oh let us not live as beasts only
minding our bodies; we take care that our beasts have Meat and Water, Straw and
Provender; and if we have no care of the son's of our children, we take no more
care of them then we do of our beasts: God requires this duty should always be
done by us; not one day should pass without some savory discourse of Heaven,
among those with whom you have most to do: Men of the same Country meeting in
a strange Land, are glad to sit and talk of their Country; and shall
Christians be ashamed or loath to talk of their Country? if Heaven be our
Country, let us show it by our discoursing of it: Our Savior when he was upon
earth took all occasions to do good to the souls of men and women before his
death; when the woman of Samaria comes to Jacob's Well for water, he teaches
her, that living water was to be had in Himself; and when others come to him
for bread, he shows them that He is the bread of Life; and after his passion,
he spoke unto those to whom he showed himself alive, of the things appertaining
to the Kingdom of God. Act. 1.3.

CHAP. XVIII. Sets down Means and Helps for the government of the Tongue.
I Now come in the last place to the Means and Helps by which we may (through
the blessing of God) be enabled to order our tongues so, as that we may
evidence both to our selves and others, that our Religion is not vain, but in
reality and truth.

Let us in the first place labor to that has a a disorderly and unbrideled
tongue, shows his heart is void of the fear of God: We see the fear of men's
Laws does curb men's tongues many times; but did men labor more after the fear
of God, it would be a special means to help them against this sin; it is the
want of this that makes men make no bones of swearing, cursing, lying, and
slandering, and speaking all manner of evil.

Let us hide the word of God in our David purposed with himself that his mouth
should not transgress. Psalm. 17.3. and by what means he hops to bring this to
good effect he shows. ver. 4. Concerning the works of men by the word of thy
lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. If men take Gods Covenant
in their mouths, and declare his Statutes, and hide not the word in their
hearts, they will give their mouth to evil, and their tongues will frame
deceit. Psalm. 50.16, 18.19. What have men to do to take Gods Covenant in their
mouths, and declare his Statutes, when they hate instruction, and cast his
words behind them, and give their mouth to evil? were this Text seriously
considered, there would not be so much sin in the tongues of many that would be
accounted professors of Religion.

Let us seriously and often consider Psalm. 139.4. There is not a word in my
Tongue, but lo, O Lord thou know it altogether: Quisquis cupit fraenare
linguam, assidue Dei praesentiam coguet. Tanto quis cautius loquetur, quanto
sibi altius impresserit hoc unum: Audiris; Angeli audiunt, Deus audit, and
tuorum dictorum rationem poscet suo tempore. Drexel. de. vi^ling. medicam.
When men forget this, that God knows all they speak, whether truth or
falsehood, then no wonder their tongues are unbrideled: Whence comes it to pass
that men whet their tongues like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their
Arrows, even bitter words, that they may shoot in secret at the perfect, and
shoot at him privily, and fear not, and encourage themselves in an evil matter,
and commune of laying of snares privily! Psalm. 64.3 4. there is the ground of
it. ver. 5. they say Who shall see them? they speak it among their close
companions, and in a sly way, that none may charge them with it: but though
they think that none hears or takes notice of it, yet God will make them
know that he hears it, and will make them to answer for it. ver. 7. But God
shall shoot at them with an Arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded; they smite
his people suddenly with their tongues, and God will smite them suddenly with an
Arrow that shall wound them to the heart: God lays this to their charge. Psalm.
50.19, 20. and though he does not by and by make them smart for it, yet sooner
or later he will set their sins in order before their faces, ver. 21. and Mal.
3.13. we read of some whose words had been stout against God, that had said, it
was vain to serve God, and unprofitable to have kept his Ordinances, and to
have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts, calling the ^roud happy, etc.
ver. 14, 15. but God took notice of their words: and ^s a Book of remembrance
is written of all the gracious words of all his own people; so there is a book
of remembrance kept of all the evil words that wicked men speak against God and
his people: There is no swearing, cursing, lying, scorning, jeering word, but
it is set down before the Lord: Mat. 12.35. Yea every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of ju^gement: yea God will
reason the case with such men (as he did with Aaron and Miriam about their
speaking against Moses) Wherefore then were ye not afraid, how durst you go on
in so many evil and idle words, Numb. 12.8.
as you have done?

Another help will be to consider Christian, and to be in Christ: Now h^ that
says, He abides in him, ought so t^ walk even as he walked. 1 John 2.6 and
St. Peter tells us how he carrye^ himself, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. He did no sin
neither was guile found in his mouth and when he was reviled, he reviled no^
again; when he suffered, he threatened not but committed himself to him that
judges righteously. In this example o^ Christ, these four things will be
useful to us. 1. There was no guile found in his mouth; then what an unseemly
thing is it there should so much guile be found in those that would be
accounted his members? 2. When he was reviled, he reviled not again; he
returned not bitter words to them that gave such to him, but either is silent,
or if he does reason the case with them, it is with meekness, as Joh, 18.21,
23. when the High Priest asked him of his Doctrine, he bid him ask them which
heard him, what he had said unto them; and when one of the Officers that stood
by struck him for answering the High Priest so; Jesus answered him, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? he
reasons the case with them without bitter words, or the least appearance of
evil. 3. When he suffered by them, he was so far from threatening, that he
prayed for his persecutors; and by virtue of this his prayer, those that did
belong to the election of grace were afterward converted, and some even of the
Priests themselves became obedient to the faith. 4. He committed his cause to
him that judges righteously: Did we more study his example, we should not fall
into sin as we do: what was it that we meet withal, that he suffered not* it
may be we suffer sometime from those that are beneath us in the world: did not
the Lord Christ suffer from those that were infinitely below him? yet he
submitted himself unto them, though when they came to take him, his breath cast
them down to the ground.



Sol.
Now in answer to this, consider; 1. That you a have great cause to bless God
that it is so, viz. that no just cause is given by thee for others to speak
evil of thee. 2. Consider, Was it not so

Another is apt to say, I see such

Sol.
Oh take heed it do not make your corruption stir within you: could there be a
more odious thing, then for Jesus Christ to be stripped naked and whipped, and
called Beelzehub, a wine-bibber? etc. Now the servant is not above his Master:
Though he was pleased to come for the good of sinners, and with more meekness
then John Baptist, yet they reproach him, and John also: Thus it was with Jesus
Christ himself; and if we did more frequently consider his example, it would
prove effectual to preserve us from these sins of the tongue, and from many
other sins; then should we learn to pray for our implacable enemies, and to
leave them to the judgment of the great day; and it would be a means to keep
us from sinning with our words, so that our words should be always very good;
for so it was with him: Now how much difference is there betwixt his example
and our carriage, though he gave us this example for our pattern!

Take heed the^e be no unruly or Pharisees, and they hearing Christ speak
against the unrighteous Mammon, therefore they deride him, Luke 16.14 they
laugh to hear such a poor man as he to speak how hard a matter it is for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of God: Where the heart is full of enmity against
God and Godliness, there will be nothing but enmity in the tongue; for how can
men of evil hearts speak that which is good! if corruption be harbored in the
heart, it will easily manifest it self in the tongue; how easily is such a man
drawn to speak loosely and vainly in corrupt communication! therefore those
that would keep their tongues in order, must first look unto their hearts.
Solomon first exhorts, Keep thy heart with or above all keeping; and then
says he, put perverse lips far from thee. Prove. 4.23, 24. if the heart be
viperous, the lips will be perverse.

He that will keep his tongue in order, Paul advises the Ephesians, to put
away all evil-speaking from them; and first, says he, Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor be put away. Ephesians. 4.31. He mentions all the
degrees of passion. 1. Bitterness, the rise of the rest; it is it is a
smothered displeasure of that which a man hides in his Breast, which makes a
man a burden to himself and others till it be digested; it is a f^et that
rankleth inwardly, P. Bai^. ^. exposit. in Ephesians. 4.31.
and is fuller of discontent then revenge, as One well notes. Then says the
Apostle, Let [wrath] be put away, that is, either fierceness or suddenness of
anger: then [Anger] that is, when it rests in the heart, and comes as it
were to some head: Then [Clamour] when others afar off are witnesses of our
passion; disordered words usually go with disordered passions: When Lamech was
angry, he presently breath's loud menaces to kill and slay. Genesis 4.23, 24. So
Stephen's enemies being enraged, cried aloud, and ran upon him. Act. 7. Then
lastly, follows evil-speaking or blasphemy, which must be put aside: All
these tend to the hurt of our neighbor: It is a hard matter to be angry and
not to sin: Now therefore. 1. Watch over your passion so that it arise not on a
sudden, that you be not overhasty to be angry and guilty of rash anger:
Sudden and violent passions make men rage and be like mad men: Thus Saul in a
sudden passion raged at Jonathan, as though his wife had been a whore and
Jonathon a Bastard to David's father. Capel. de Tentat. part. 3.
1 Samuel 20.30. Other affections carry one power of the soul out of the way, but
passion over-turneth all, as a Learned man well notes. Our Savior tells us,
that this hasty passionateness is a degree of murder, and sets down three
degrees of the breach of the sixth commandment, which the Jews thought not of,
as 1. Rash or causeless anger. Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment. 2. He that shall proceed further,
and say to his Brother, Racha, that is, Blockhead, empty-pate, etc. in contempt
of his weakness, he shall be in danger of the Council. But 3. whosoever shall
say, Thou fool, shows his tongue to be set on fire with hell, and he shall be
in danger of hell fire. 2. Take heed that anger lodge not in your breast; see
that anger rise not; but if it does arise, yet let it not lodge in your heart.
Jacob was angry, and chid with Laban, but he was friends presently after. Gen*
31.35. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
devil. Ephesians. 4.26, 27. The longer anger lodges in the soul, the more way you
give unto Satan: anger lodges in the bosom of fools. Eccl. 7.9. To lodge anger
in our breast, is the way to turn anger into hatred; take heed when just anger
comes into thy heart, unjust wrath come not into thy heart together with it.
3. When passion is stirred, that you speak not sudenly without deliberation; a
little pausing may be a means to prevent a world of mischief: He that has no
mastery over his passion, is like a City broken down, and without walls, that
lies open to all mischief.

Let us consider that nothing befalls David resolves, Psalm. 39.1. to take heed
that he offend not with his tongue, that he would keep his mouth as with a
bridle, while the wicked were before him; the reason is expressed ver. 9. I was
dumb, says he, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

cost him dear again: Now if this will do it, then how much more if a man's
conscience did lash him for it! and most of all, if we did in a holy manner
call our selves to an account for it. God lays down this as a great cause of
the Jews rushing into sin, as the horse that rusheth into the battle; and why?
no man spoke aright, because they did not call themselves to account for it. No
man repented of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Jerem. 8.6.

Set a watch diligently over your Providet tibi, antequam prodas, sermonem,
arudentique consideratione omnia praeveni. Bonavent. Part. 3. sp^. cap. 3.
Xenophon.
keep an holy sentinel upon your tongues, that no word may pass you, but you
may know what it is you not only think, but also what, when, and how you speak.
The tongue is a very moveable member which is turned up and down with little
labor and difficulty, without much weariness; and man being a sociable
creature, by his very nature is much given to speaking, therefore he had need
to be the more watchful over his tongue. An Heathen could say that nature (but
I may say the God of nature) has given every one of us two ears, and but one
tongue, to show us that we should be swift to hear, and slow to speak; to hear
much more then we should speak; and if we consider the double guard the tongue
has, being shut up with a double hedge, the lips and the teeth, should put us
in mind, that we should not be rash in our words and expressions.

sc. that he would keep it in those due bounds he has appointed for it: Thus
David when he saw the work was too hard for him to do, he prays to God: Set a
watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Psalm. 141.3. Pray to
God that he would keep the key, and be as it were the Porter to let out only
such words as may be good and profitable: There is no one member but is unruly,
but none so unruly as the tongue. Every kind of Beasts and of Birds, and of
Serpents, Some Roman Emperors have had some wild Beasts to run and draw in
their chariots; other Princes have had Lions made so tame, that they would play
with them as with Spaniels, or Beagles: A Tigre was sent from India to
Anastasius, that was so tame, that a boy might lead him in a st^ing; the birds
and fouls of the air are tame in like manner, as the Crow, the Pie, the Raven,
the Hawk, the Vulture, the Pigeon, the Parret, Some birds will sit on a man's
fist and eat out of his hand, and come at the lure of him that keeps them; yea
serpents and creeping things have been tamed; some have carried Snakes without
danger in their bosoms, but the tongue of man who can tame?
and things in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of mankind; but the
tongue can no man tame. Jam. 3.7.8. Whence St. Augustine has this meditation;
Man says he, tameth the beasts, but tameth not his tongue; he tameth the Lion,
but is not able to bridle his tongue; he himself tameth other creatures, but
cannot tame himself; he tameth that which he feared, and that he may tame
himself he fears not that which he ought to fear: the horse does not tame
himself, the Lion does not tame himself, the Elephant does not tame himself;
but that the Ox, Horse, Lion, Elephant may be tamed, Man must be sought unto;
and God must be sought to that the tongue of man may be tamed: therefore he
that would speak well, let him pray well. By the use of such means as these,
and Gods blessing upon them, we may get strength and power against the sins of
the tongue.

You now see that all shows of Religion are vain, if there be not a due care of
the tongue; you see likewise how many sins there are of the tongue and the
great danger of an unbrideled tongue, and by what means you may be enabled to
keep your tongues in order: Now if any man shall henceforth give way to any of
the sins of the tongue, their sin will be so much the greater, because
committed against so many warnings, so much light, knowledge, etc. therefore
this may persuade us to be the more strict and watchful against it for the time
to come, and make us to resolve with David, that we will take heed to our
ways, that we offend not with our tongues. Psalm. 39.1. I have read of one
Pambus, that went to a friend of his, desirous to learn how to keep himself
free from sin: And that very Text Psalm. 39.1. was read unto him, where David
says, I said I would take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue: and
then he would hear no more, saying, if I can indeed perform this one verse, it
is sufficient; and when he that taught him that verse, blamed him that in six
months he came not near him, he answered that indeed he had not fulfilled that
verse; and living long after, being demanded of a familiar friend, whether he
had learnt his verse, he confessed (as some say) that in eighteen years, or (as
others say) that in forty eight years, he could not learn that one Lesson. The
consideration of the difficulty hereof, gave occasion to Cato to say, that he
is next unto God that can bridle his tongue: Now he that upon Religious and
Holy grounds shall be able to bridle his tongue, may from hence have some
evidence to his soul of the truth of grace in his heart; but the neglect of
this shows, that notwithstanding all specious shows and pretenses whatsoever,
that man's Religion is vain.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the sign of the Three
Crowns over against the Great Conduit at the Lower end of Cheapside.
Folio's.
THe History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont. By Samuel
Morland, Esquire;

A Commentary upon the Holy writings of Job, David, and Solomon; that is, these
^ive, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, being part of
those which by the ancient were called Hagiographa. By J^hn Mayer, Doctor in
Divinity.

Exemplary Novels.

A practical Commentary, or an Exposition, with Observations, Reasons, and
Uses, upon the first Epistle General of John, By Mr. John Cotton Pastor of
B^ston in New England.

Quarto's.
The plain Doctrine of the Justification of a sinner in the sight of God:
Wherein are handled the causes of the sinners justificatlon. By Charles
Chauncy, Resident o^ Harvard College in Cambridge in New England.

God save the King, in a Sermon preached the day after his Majesty came to
London. By Anthony Walker, Preacher of the Gospel.

Mesolabium Architectonicum, that is, a most rare and singular instrument, for
the easy, speedy, and most certain measuring of Plains and Solids by the foot:
Invented long since by Thomas Bedwel Esquire,

The Beauty of Magistracy. in an Exposition of Psalm. 82. where is set forth the
Necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty, and Morality of Magistrates. By the labors
o^ Thomas Hall, B. D. and Pastor of Kings Norton, and George Swinnock, M. A.
and Pastor of Great Kimbel.

An Exposition on the whole Book o^ Solomon's Song, commonly called Canticles By
Rich. Roboltam.

A Theater of flying Insects, wherein especially the manner of the right
ordering the Be, is excellently desribed, by Sam Purchase, M. A.

Truth brought to light, and discovered by Time, or an Historical Narration of
the first 14. years of K. James.

The Pastor and Clerk, or a debate ^eal) concerning Infant Baptism. By John
Ellis.

A Wedding-Ring fit for the finger, or ^he Salve of Divinity on the sore of
Humanity: laid open in a Sermon at a Wedding ^n Edmonton. By William Seeker,
Preacher of the Gospel. To which is adjoined the Non-such Professor in his
Meridian splendour, or the singular actions of the sanctified Christians; being
the substance of seven Sermons on Mat. 5.47. By the same Author.

The great loss, on Mat. 16.26. By the same Author.

Meditations, Divine and Moral. By Hen^y Tabb, M. A.

The Psalms of King David, translated by King James.

Wilful Impenitency the grossest Self-murder. By the Reverend Will. Fenner.

The Rudiments of Grammar; the Rules composed of English verse, for the greatet
benefit and delight of young beginners; By James Sherley.

The Ladies Dispensatory, containing the Natures, and Qualities of Herbs and
Simples, useful in Physic. Reduced into a Methodical order, for their more
ready use in any sickness or other accidents of the body.

Tentations, their Nature, Danger, Cure By Rich. Capel To which is added his
Remains.

Small Octavo's.
The Gale of opportunity, and beloved Discipline. By Tho. Froysal.

Gospel Glory without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, for the Salvation of Sinners. By Rich. Byfield.

A glimpse of Gospel-Glory, being the sum of several Sermons on 2 Cor. 13.11.
By W. Sherwin.

Sion in the House of Mourning, because of sin and suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations. By D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham in Rutlandshire.

A word of comfort for the Church of God. By Mr. Tho. Watson, Minister of
Stephens Walbrook.

A Plea for Arms, delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, on Tuesday in Easter
week, April. 13. 1658. Ibidem.

Moses unvailed, or those Figures which served unto the pattern and shadow o^
Heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained. By
Will Guild, Minister of Gods Word at King Edward in Scotland.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeons Song or instruction how to live holily and
die happily. By T. Woodriffe, B. D. Pastor at Kingstand in Herefordshire.

The Reformation, in which is reconciled God and his People; or a Catechism
unvailing the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which, Faith, Ordinances,
and Government, are professed, as in the Primitive times, in opposition to all
Errors and Heresies. By W. K. Minister of the Gospel.

The Catechism of Hugo Grotius, done into English.

Benedictio Valedictio, or the Remembrance of thy Friend, and thy End. By
Anthony Sadler.

Twelves.
The Dangerous rule, or a Sermon preached at Clonmel, in the Province of
Munster in Ireland, before the Reverend Judges for that Circuit. By S. L.

The Woman's Glory, a Treatise asserting the due honor of that Sex, by
manifesting that Women are capable of the highest improvement; By Sam. Torshel.

The discovery of the most dangerous dead faith; By J. Eaton, M. A. and
sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford.

The dying Fathers Legacy to his living Son.

Twenty four's.
Groans of the Spirit, or a trial of the truth of Prayer.

A Handkerchief for Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their Children or
Friends.

FINIS.

