THE MOUNT OF HOLY MEDITATION: OR A TREATISE Showing the nature and kinds of
Meditation; the subject matter and ends of it; the necessity of Meditation;
together with the excellency and usefulness thereof. By William Gearing
Minister of the Gospel at Lymington in the County of Southampton.

Admiratio generat quaestionem, quaestio investigationem, investigatio
inventionem; lectio ad cognoscendam veritatem materiam ministrat; meditatio
coaptat, oration sublevat, operatio componit; and contemplatio in i^^^ exultat.
Hugo in Meditat. LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet, 1662.

To the Virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs Elizabeth Ash of Alsted, in the County of
Kent; and to her Eldest and hopeful Son William Ash Esquire.
THe great God needs none of his creatures, nor any of their services, all
the service he requires of his people, tends to their own good, and is no
way beneficial to him; to think to add any thing to him, is to guild gold, or
light a Candle at noonday: God is eternal, and was everlastingly blessed,
before one Angel was created to attend him, as now there be thousands
ministering unto him, and before there was one man formed on earth to praise
him, and do him service, as now there are variety of creatures to set forth his
praise: God is infinitely above all advantages, which any of the services of
the sons of men can afford unto him: a drop is more to the Ocean, than all the
services of men are to God: If God had needed the world, or any thing therein,
he could have made it long before; but Himself is his own blessedness; he is
fully satisfied in himself; it is essential to him to be infinitely happy;
therefore as his being, so his blessedness is essential to him: he is (...),
self-sufficient, and infinitely happy in his own most glorious and transcendent
excellencies. There is then in God enough to satisfy the souls of men and
women; for if there be enough in him to satisfy himself, who is infinite, then
who cannot think but there is enough in him, to satisfy all the finite
capacities of poor mortals? the spring of all our wants arises from our
distance from God; and indeed there is no want can make us truly miserable, but
our want of enjoying God. We may cast about us, thinking to help our selves in
our straits and exigences many ways; but till we come to God, and feed upon
his excellencies, our disease will never be cured.

The proper habitation of the soul is God himself; and none are so well housed,
as they that have God for their dwelling place; when God iS a man's habitation,
there do the glorious Angels keep the door: happy is that soul that lodges in
the bosom of his love; that sees his face, and walks in the light of his
countenance; the more it is raised up above lusts and creature comforts, the
more taken up with the contemplation of the love of God, the more do the will
and affections run out after him. Naturalists tell us, that the Bees hate all
artificial savours; so he that has been at the fountain of life, and drunk a
large draught of the river of his pleasures, will not seek to quench his thirst
at any broken Cistern, that can hold no water. Our corrupt spirits think, that
unless we can satisfy such a lust, enjoy such a friend, and so much of
creature comforts, it will never be well with us; but these are but mere
delusions of the Devil; for a man that wants God, to be discontented for any
external thing, and to think to help himself by the creature, it is but to
add vanity to vanity, and in fine misery to misery: for when a man expects
satisfaction, and finds nothing less, his misery is so much the more
increased.

St Augustine tells us of three sorts of men, that be not happy in this life:
The first, he that enjoys not the thing he loves, whether the thing he
loves be good or evil: The second, he that enjoys what he loves, but the
thing that he enjoys is not good for him: The third, he that enjoys what is
good for him, but he takes no delight nor comfort in it: To all these he
answers in a word; Primus cruciatur, secundus fallitur, tertius aegrotat; The
first is disquieted, says he, vexed and tormented, because he has not what he
would have; he is not happy, because he is disquieted: The second, (he that
enjoys what he loves, but the thing he enjoys is not good for him) such a
one is deceived and deluded with a show of happiness; the thing is hurtful to
him, and therefore is not happy in his enjoyment: The third, he that possesses
what is good for him, but he loves it not, he is sick and distempered, his
heart is very much out of frame: but he that enjoys God, has that which is
best for him, and possesses him, and this is true happiness.

It is altogether impossible for man to be made happy, by any thing inferior
to himself: there is something in man, superior to any earthly creature, viz.
a reasonable soul; and there is nothing in worldly honors, riches, etc. that
is comparable to the substance or faculties of man's intellectual soul:
therefore if man cannot find happiness in himself, it is in vain to seek it in
any earthly and sublunary thing; I mean true happiness, and real satisfaction.
Man can never be happy, but by the possession of something more excellent than
himself, and cannot possess any true contentment, till he comes to the
possession of God. There is no one outward thing, that can relieve us in all
our wants: meat nourishes us, but clothes us not: our garments cover us, but
feed us not: gold enricheth us, but defends us not from any danger: one good
produces but one single advantage to us but those that daily meditate upon
God, Phil. 4.19.
do find enough in him to satisfy all their desires: he has riches enough in
himself to supply all our wants; and indeed such is the capacity of man's
heart, that none but an infinite God can fill it.

And now the design of this Treatise of Meditation (which I most humbly present
unto you) is to lead us frequently to God, who leads us to Heaven; and what
greater delight, than to be led to Heaven, by him that dwells there? our hearts
are like a spring-lock that shut themselves, but do not open to any thing that
is good; therefore we must open them every day with the key of meditation: and
as in natural things, those that be highest, and nearest to the Heavens, are
purest and clearest, and come nearest to the nature thereof; as the Element of
fire, and the upper region of the Air be more pure and free from gross matter,
than the middle and lower region, where the clouds and mists be engendered; so
those that draw near to God by holy meditation, and are frequent in this
heavenly exercise, are pure from those gross sins, with which others pollute
themselves: otherwise men in high places may not unfitly be resembled to the
Planet Saturn, of whom Astronomers and Philosophers tell us, that in sphere and
place he is nearest to the Heavens, but in nature and quality most unlike them,
and least of all partaking of the influences of Heaven.

Let me beseech you still to keep close to God, and then the Lord will stick
close to you, and vouchsafe his presence with you. Among all Rules of policy,
these are the chiefest: to be faithful and upright to the Lord; to aim at his
glory; to be guided by his Spirit; and walk according to the rule of his Word;
then may you be assured, that you are more safe under his protection, than any
arm of flesh can make you. I humbly crave your pardon for this my boldness; and
that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, may bless you with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, is, and shall be the prayer
of

Your most humble Servant in the Gospel WILLIAM GEARING.
From my Study in Lymington. Sep 30. 1661.
INDEX RERVM.
CHap. 1. The Porch or entrance into this Work. Text, Genesis 24.63. opened. Chap.
2. Sect. 1. Showing that Meditation is a duty that concerns persons of all
ranks, conditions and ages. Sect. 2. That Meditation is constantly to be
practiced.
Chap. 3. How Meditation and Contemplation differ one from the other. Chap. 4.
How Study and Meditation differ. Chap. 5. Of the Gate of Meditation. Chap. 6.
Of the kinds of Meditation; and first of rapt Meditation. Chap. 7. Sect. 1. Of
set and solemn Meditation; the definition and branches of it. Sect 2. Of the
ends of solemn Meditation.
Chap. 8. Of the subject of Meditation. Sect. 1. Of meditation on the Works of
God. Sect. 2. Of meditating on the Word of God. Sect. 3. Of meditating on Man;
his Creation, his body, his soul, his privileges. Sect. 4. Of meditation on
the fall of Adam. Sect. 5. Of the nature of sin, the number of our sins, with
the aggravations of them. Sect. 6. Of the sufferings and death of Christ. Sect.
7. Of meditation on the Resurrection of Christ. Sect. 8. Of meditation on
Death. Sect. 9. Of the fewness of them that shall be saved. Sect. 10. Of
meditation on Hell. Sect. 11. Of meditation on the glory of Heaven.
Chap. 9. Of timing our Meditations in the best manner. Chap. 10. An
Exhortation to the practice of Meditation; showing also the necessity thereof.
Chap. 11. Objections against setting about the work of Meditation, answered.
Chap. 12. Setting down the Rules about Meditation. Chap. 13. Of the excellency
and usefulness of Meditation. Chap. 14. The Motives to Meditation.
The Authors cited in this Treatise.
A
AMbrosius. Bp Andrews. Anselm. Aquila. Aretius. Aquinas. Aristotle. Arias
Montanus. Augustine. Ainsworth.
B
Ball. Sr Francis Bacon. Bp Babington. Beza. Bellarmine. Bernard. Boethius.
Bodinus. Brathwait. Bonaventure.
C
Causin. Calvin. Cassius Severus. Climacus. Chaldeus. Cassiodorus. Charron.
Cicero. Chrysostom. Columella. Clemens Alexand. Chytraeus. Cyril. Council.
Melevit.
D
Dearing. Downham. Diogenes. Drexelius.
E
Erasmus. Eusebius. Emyssen.
F
Fenner. Fulgentius. Dr Fulk.
G
Gasp. in Heracl. Gaul. Goulart. Genevens. Gerrard. Gerson. Gregor. Gualter.
Gloss.
H
Bp Hall. Hebr. Hippolit. Hieronym. Hoord. Sam. Hieron. Hugo. Hpyocrates.
I
Josephus. ^tal. Junius. Isidor. Pelus.
K
Kempis.
L
Lorinus. Lumb. Sent. Luther. Lyranus. Leo.
M
Macarius. Martial. Marc. Herem. Marlorat. Melch. Adam. Minut. Faelix. Moller
More's Demonstr. Mountague. Musculus. Montaign.
N
Gr. Nazianz. Nebrissens.
O
Onkelus. Ovid.
P
Pet. Mart. Perkins. Plato. Plinius. Philo Jud. Plutarch. Bp Pilkington.
Philips. Polan. Synt. Prosper. Priorw.
Q
Quintil.
S
Seneca. Dr Sibs. Senault. Sozomen. Styles. Strong. Struther. Suetonius.
Suidas. Symmachus. Symonds. Stella.
T
Tertullian. Theodoret. Tostatus. Turner
V
Jac. de Valent. Vatablus. Vega.
W
Wall. White. Woodward.
THE MOUNT OF Holy Meditation.
Genesis 24.63. And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide.


Chap. I. The porch or entrance into this Work.
AFter the death of Sarah, Abraham feeling himself wholly broken with old age,
and ready to go the way of all the earth, resolved to seek a match for Isaac
his son; and for that end he calls the steward of his house, and most
faithful servant, and having commanded him to lay his hand on his thigh, he
conjured him by the Name of Jehovah, to seek a Wife for his Son in the Land of
Haran; which being done, this wise Nuntio began his journey in order to the
fulfilling his Master's commands; and departing from Beersheba, he went
directly to Mesopotamia, carrying with him ten large Camels laden with the
choicest things that the house of Abraham could afford: In short time he
arriveth at the City of Nahor, ver. 10. meditating with himself of the readiest
means for the expedition of what had been given him in charge; and first he
repaireth to a place without the City, where women in their turns used to draw
water, there resting his Camels, waiting upon God's providence for the
opportunity he desired; during which expectation he powers out his request to
God, begging him propitiously to favor the designs of his Master; which he had
scarce ended when Rebeckah appeared with an earthen pitcher under her arm to
draw water; of whom no sooner had Eliezer desired a little drink, but Rebeckah
presently assented, doing all that which charity and courtesy required should
be done to a stranger: Eliezer seriously weighs all the actions of Rebeckah,
as being one in whom he was to discern the footsteps of God's conduct
concerning his Master and his Master's Son. -- This prudent Ambassador having
presented some earrings and bracelets to Rebeckah, takes occasion to inform
himself of the conveniences that were in her Fathers house for himself and
those that were with him, together with his Camels; and being well instructed
of the alliances of the Damsel, and being astonished that all should fall out
so soon and so even with his desires; throws hsmself on the ground to render
thanks to God, adoring his inexpressible goodness to his Master: Rebeckah
hastens to her Parents, to let them know what had happened; which her Brother
Laban understanding, he repaireth immediately to the well from whence Rebeckah
came; and finding Eliezer, he earnestly entreated him to follow him to his
Father's house; and having brought him thither, he gave hay and straw to his
Camels, and water to wash his feet, and the feet of those that were with him;
and meat being set before him, as a trusty servant, he is more careful to
fulfill his Master's business, than to fill his own belly; then he opens his
Commission which he had from his Master, and declares the artifices himself
had used to bring this business to good effect, laboring thereby to know the
will of God that Rebeckah should be a Wife to Isaac; then orderly and exactly
he declares, how his Master was blessed by God, and honored by men, that he was
rich and wealthy, and that Isaac was heir to all his substance: the silence of
Rebeckah testified her consent thereunto; and B^thuel and Laban readily yielded
to the disposition of didine providence: at length the promise of marriage
being given on both sides; Eliezer brings forth Jewels of silver and Jewels of
gold, and of raiment, and presents them to Rebeckah, and gives to her Mother
and Brother precious things; and after a little time spent in doing those
duties which honor and nature required, Rebeckah takes leave of her parents
and kindred, and gets up upon the Camels, and with Eliezer and the men that were
with him, advances with the best speed that could be made, to arrive at
Abraham's house: Isaac, who was always in expectation, first receives the
news of Rebeckah's arrival: Abraham's servant prays by the way when he went
out, and prays and meditates at the end of his journey, and Isaac prays and
meditates as they come home: And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at
eventide; and he lifted up his eyes, and behold the Camels were coming.

Isaac goes out to meditate, and to meet with God, and there he meets with God
and Rebeckah too, and Isaac receiving her, brings her into the same Tent, which
Sarah had while she lived, and immediately the marriage of Isaac with Rebeckah
was accomplished according to the decree of Heaven and the desires of Abraham.
But to return to the words of my Text: in them you have diverse Circumstances
considerable: 1. The name of the person [Isaac.] 2. His work [meditation.] 3.
His preparedness to it [he went out. 4. The place where [into the field.] 5.
The time when [at eventide.]


1. For the person, it was Isaac, a child that came by miracle into the world;
one that was the joy of his aged parents; he that was a child of tears and
desires, and now become an object of ravishing joy; the lively picture of
Abraham and Sarahs virtues, in whose seed all the Nations of the earth should
be blessed.

2. The work of Isaac, to meditate: the Chaldee renders it to pray; Hierom
expounds the Hebrew word Suach, to speak in prayer, (...) Orare. Chald. ad
Orandum, Onkelus. (...) Hebr.
viz. with muttering and whispering, the words not being fully and distinctly
uttered; as 1 Samuel 1.16. Hannah says; I have spoken out of the multitude of my
grief, Loqui in oratione submisse quasi mussando loqui. Hieron. (...), Symmach.
(...), Aquii. Sive secum ut meditabundi faciunt. Vatablus. (...), exerceri,
meditari, Lorinus.
whenas she spoke in her heart, only her lips moved. Symmachus renders it, to
speak, as if he went out into the field to speak with his servants about some
worldly business: Aquila, to speak with himself, as those do that are about to
meditate. The Greeks render it by a word that signifies sometime the exercise
of the body, sometime the exercise of the mind; but chiefly it denotes the
exercise of the mind, I will meditate in thy precepts, says David, Psalm.
119.15. The greek renders it (...), In mandatis suis exercebor; In Scripturis
est continua quaedam exercitatio; and meditari idem est, quod continuo
exercitati. Suidas. Exiit in campum a domesticis curis abalienare. Ambros. de
Isaac. c. 1. De rerum naturalium contemplatione praesertim caelestium. Tostat.
and Lyran. Gauls votiu. specul.
I will exercise my self in thy Commandments. Ambrose renders the words of my
Text thus; he went out in the field to sequester himself from worldly cares and
businesses; and most probable it is, that Isaac went out into the field to
contemplate of things natural, and especially of heavenly things. We may
conceive that Isaac went out to meditate what good he had done that day, what
evil avoided, what dangers escaped, what sins committed, what good he had
omitted, what grace and blessings he had received; or as one notes, what a
promise God had made, what a wife his father had provided, what a journey his
servant had undergone, the time when he departed, and when also he would
return: and while his thoughts and meditations had foreseen them, his eyes are
upon them; he lifted up his eyes, and behold the Camels were coming.

3. Consider his preparedness to it; he went out to meditate: The Scripture
sets out the intensenesse of a man's spirit upon some serious business, by the
phrase of going out: The sower went out to sow his seed, Luke 8.5. So Christ
said to the people concerning John Baptist; What went ye out in the wilderness
for to see? Luke 7.24. So Isaac went out to meditate; he did not set upon so
pious a work without serious preparation, and when he goes out in the field he
makes it his business to meditate, he comes out with a spirit bent like a bow,
ready furnished for this heavenly exercise.

4. The place, in the field.] He withdraws himself into a solitude for devout
retirement; his spirit being enlarged, could not confine himself within the
covert of a narrow tent, therefore he goes out into the field, a place
advantageous for the work of meditation, Grata est solitudo meditantibus, and
ipsa deambulatio admodum juvat animum meditationibus deditum. Muscul. ad loc.
where he might cast his eyes on various objects, and behold therein the
wisdom, power, and providence of God: Solitude is grateful to those that
meditate, and field-walks are very refreshing to the mind given to meditation.

5. The time when Isaac went out to meditate; at the eventide, when the day had
well nigh run her course, when the affairs for his calling were for that day
dispatched; Egressus vesperi propter commoditatem refrigerationis, quae post
diurnum aestum illis in locis omnium solet esse gratissima. Idem.
he is not so tired with worldly businesses, as to make himself unfit for holy
exercises, but in the evening of the day, and at the end of his outward
employment, he comes to an higher employment, his spirit is ripe for pious
thoughts and heavenly meditations; the active and the contemplative life go
together.

Chap. 2.
Sect. 1. Showing that meditation is a duty that concerns men of all ranks,
and conditions.
From this Text thus opened, I shall gather this point of Doctrine; Doct.
Quotidie certa tempora recitandis precationibus, and piis meditationibus
tribuenda sunt. Chytraus ad locum.


That it is the duty of every Christian to set apart some time and place every
day for holy meditation: some time must be allotted day by day for prayer and
meditation, says Chytraeus: meditation is a duty of Religion, commanded by
God. Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein night and day: the word [Thou] is indefinite, and
concerns every Christian as well as Joshua, it belongs to men of all degrees,
high and low, Ministers and people, young and old.

1. This exercise of meditation does well befit the Nobility and Gentry of our
Land; who have more time and opportunities than others for this heavenly
exercise: how ought they to take heed of the snares of great places and great
confluences, which are great hindrances to the composing of the mind for holy
meditations, causing them to entertain converse only with such fantastic
spirits, from whom no other profit can be derived, than what vanity has
suggested, and the conceit of a deluded fancy hatched: it lies upon you to
meditate much on your inward cure: restrain your eyes from those outward
objects that may any way darken the prospect of your inward house; it is one of
your great cares in Architecture, Hippolit. de Collib.
that your houses have a pleasant site, and be dilated to fair prospects; you
will not endure any man, whose dwelling is near you, upon any new
superstructure, or new raised story, to darken the light of your windows, Oh
then suffer not any thing to incroach upon the liberty of your higher rooms,
these glorious structures of your souls: let not pride overtop the ^uminaries
of your souls, let not covetousness stop and straiten them, let not
intemperance put out the eyes of your souls, let not lust deface them, nor
anger lacerate them, nor envy obscure them, nor idleness and wantonness
blemish them. Noble Gentlemen, reflect on your own worth, Gentility is not
known by your stately garb, your sumptuous houses, and train of attendants, as
by your noble virtues; let inward ornaments be your chiefest care, and the
renewing and repairing of them your highest cure; take a turn with God every
day upon the Mount of meditation, here you may find such choice flowers as will
more refresh your souls, than any visible odours or fragrant flowers are
delightful to your smell; you will then scarce think any earthly object worth
beholding, when you frequently converse with heavenly things: this will teach
you to contemn the vanities of the earth, to know the worth of time, and to
redeem your precious hours for the highest employment, to conquer death it
self, and to aspire to eternal excellencies; you will then be careless
observers of vain fashions, which is the affectation of this fantastic age and
desire to be clothed with the wedding garment, and be adorned with inward
beauty, that the Lord Jesus may take pleasure in you, and marry you to himself
for ever: it will be more to your honor that you have redeemed time, than that
you have followed the mode and vain fashions of a sinful time: It is said of
the Palm Tree, Plin. Not. Hist.
that when it grows dry and fruitless, ashes are applied to the root of it,
and it soon recovereth: and that the Palms of your generous minds may be
always green and flourishing, and your branches be ever blossoming, and never
wither, renew them daily with some sweet and sovereign meditation, that when
you shall return to the earth from whence you came, those that succeed and
survive you, may collect how you lived while you were on earth, by making those
high employments of yours, patterns for their perpetual imitation.

Meditation is a work you see well becoming men of high degree; Joshua Josh.
1.8.
^ great Commander is commanded to ^ake it his daily practice; and David ^
great King tells us, that meditation ^as his work all the day. Psalm. 119.^7.
Mine eyes, says he, are ever toward the Lord. Psalm. 25.15. Thou have
^ossessed my reins: Thou have covered me ^n my mothers womb: I will praise
thee, ^or I am fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, and
that my ^oul knows right well, etc. How precious also are thy thoughts unto
me O God, how great is the sum of them? if I should count them, they are more
in number ^han the sand: when I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.13, 19.

2. Meditation also may be practi^ed by men of low degree, Bishop Hall's
Contemplat.
as by men of the highest rank; A low man, says one, if his eye be clear, may
look as high as the tallest, the least Dwarf may from the lowest valley see the
Sun or Stars as fully, as a Giant upon the highest mountain: he that stands by,
may see as far into the Millstone as he that picks it: Christ is now in Heaven,
it is not the smalnesse of any man's person, nor the meannesse of his condition
can let him from beholding him; the soul has no st^ture, nor is God a
respecter of persons, if God be but pleased to clear t^^ eyes of any man's
soul, he shall high enough to behold him: a po^ man by holy meditation become
poor in spirit, and rich in grace; b^ meditation on the Scriptures he fin^eth
his condition to be an holy Asylu^ that heaven has promised a particul^
protection to the poor; Evangelizare pauperibus misit me. Luke 4.
that Christ came down from Heaven to instru^^ them; that he has pronounced
the blessed in his Sermons, chose such f^ his Disciples, has made them the
o^jects of his love, and designed the^ for his favors. All outward goo^ though
precious cannot escape the di^asters that threaten them: cunning violence may
rob us of them, the i^nocent lose their honor as well as t^ criminal;
Senault. Treat. 8. disc. 3.
the rich are as much afra^ of sickness as the poor, nor are Kin^ more secure
from death than the Subjects; but be thou outwardly ^ver so poor, yet if rich
in faith, gra^ is a good which cannot be taken from thee, no violence can
plunder thee it.

3. This exercise of meditation ought chiefly to be practiced by Ministers and
Scholars: there are three things that make a complete Minister says Luther,
Luther.
viz. temptation, prayer, and meditation; their hearts are always to be
inditing of a good matter, Psalm. 45.1.
that their tongues may be the pens of ready writers: Plin. Not. Hist.
when the people of Rome heard that the fields of some of their Colonies waxed
barren, their advice was, that the Husbandmen should melius arare and minus
serere, plow better and sow less: so when Gods field waxes barren, by reason
of a negligent kind of preaching of the Word; it were better such Preachers
spent more time in meditation, though they were less seen in the Pulpit than
they are; (I speak only against frothy preaching:) if they have fished all
night and caught nothing, it were not amiss, says one, Jer. Philip ^ Sermon.
that they should sit down a while upon the shore, and mend their nets,
afterward with Gods blessing they may fish with better success: Paul exhorts
Timothy to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; Meditate,
says he, upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear unto all, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. Ministers and Scholars must diligently
watch not only over the actions of their hands, the words of their mouths,
but also over the meditations of their minds; because they (of all men) are
most busied with meditation, they must meditate on that which is good, and
meditate upon truth, Psalm. 2.1.
lest they imagine a vain thing, or meditate on heresy, whereto all men by
nature are prone, which spreads it self so far, 2 Timothy 2.17.
and eats a^ does a Gangreen.

4. Meditation is an exercise that well becomes young men, who are strong and
vigorous; Non sufficit operandi molestia, nisi etiam accedat meditandi,
cogitandi, considerandi, ac deliberandi industria. Musculus.
they are commanded to remember their Creator in the days of their youth,
Eccles. 12.1. In the morning of thy youth sow thy seed, Eccles. 11.6. And it
may be observed, that the wise man says not in the years of thy youth, but in
the days of thy youth, that is to cut off all occasions of delay: Some idle
headed Mathematician might have made an Almanac of it, dividing it into four
quarters, allotting the first to idleness, the second to wantonness, the
third to covetousness, and the last (if any) to piety, devotion, and
meditation: but Solomon by requiring us to remember our Creator in the days
of our youth, cuts off these idle divisions, requiring the young man to spend
the flower of his age in meditating on God. Exodus 22.29. Exodus 24.19. L^v.
23.10.
Under the Law the firstborn and the first fruits were to be sanctified to the
Lord, they must offer a sheaf of the first fruits, not an handful of the
gleanings; let us not think if we offer the flower of our youth to the Devil,
God will be contented with the bran of our old age; he that is Alpha and Omega
will have the beginning of our age, and the stren^th of our affections and
meditations devoted to himself. Every man should likewise be careful that his
children may be so brought up, as they may be fit to present unto the Lord
betimes, as Samuel was, whom his mother offered to the Lord very young; and who
ministered before the Lord in his side-coats, 1 Samuel 1.28. They which plant, do
it in the spring time; youth is the spring time of ou^ age, the fittest for
holy meditation and as a new earthen Pot retains the sent of that whereof it
first took a tast^ so the mind being seasoned with piou^ meditations in youth,
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem. Testa diu --
will ever kee^ the savor thereof: though for wan^ of experience (the daughter
of time) a young man cannot attain to tha^ height of wisdom in act, whereunto
those of riper years are grown, ye^ notwithstanding if he daily meditat^ on God
and his Word, he will every day add some augmentation; for now is he for
vigor of mind and ability of body fittest to take pains, and ablest to endure
labor and study whereby wisdom is attained, and increased by practice:
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, and b^ brought to yield
obedience to the Law o^ God, but by taking heed thereto according to the Word?
Psalm. 119.9.

5. Meditation is an exercise for ol^ men as well as young: As for holy
meditations wherewith the soul is ravished, and transported above the clouds,
they require not great bodily strength; but on the contrar^ when the good old
man cannot without great pain stir hand or foot, and lies bed-red, he
comfort and cheareth u^ his spirit with divine meditations fitting to his
age; Mons. Goulart. Viell.
and while debaucht and wicked wretches confound themselves in sinful delights
and carnal pleasures, he is privately conversant with God, gives great
attention to him inwardly speaking unto him, as one well observes: what though
a holy man for age has lost his bodily sight, yet then may the eyes of his
soul be opened to behold the wonderful mysteries of heavenly knowledge; the
soul can then penetrate and enquire into things that be divine, when the eye of
the body is shut and sees nothing: with this Anthony the Hermit, Sozom. l. 3
c. 14
said to Didymus the blind man of Alexandria, a very devout and holy person,
and of singular learning (as Sozomen reports of him) Thou oughtst not, friend
Didymus, to hold it grievous to have lost thy sight, which Mice, Linxes, and
other bruit beasts have very quick and piercing, but rather to be glad, and
judge thy condition happy, that thou have eyes like the eyes of the holy
Angels, by whose help thou beholdest the Lord, and do perfectly see and
discern the causes of his works: What is the cause of the impatience and
waywardness of many old men, but this, that they have, forgotten those many
and great favors which God has bestowed upon them, having mercifully drawn
them out of their mothers belly, tenderly brought them up, protected them from
infinite dangers, upon the meditation whereof they will have great cause to
praise God at all times, as David exhorts them by his example, in the 34, 71,
and 1 18, Psalms.

Sect. 2. That meditation is constantly to be practiced.
Now as meditation is to be practiced by persons of all ranks and ages
whatsoever, so we are to be constant in it; it is the character of a godly man,
that he meditateth in the Law o^ God, and exercises himself therein da^ and
night, Psalm. 1.2. which must b^ understood either literally and naturally for
the presence and absence o^ the Sun in our Hemisphere, as Gen 1.16. or else
morally, for the time of prosperity and adversity, as 2 Kings 7.19. Luke 2.11.
in youth and age, in all estates and conditions of this life, as before has
been noted: this duty ought every one to practice day by day without
intermission: no time so well spent as that: Quocunque Deum non cogitaver is,
pura te tempus illud perdid sse. Cassiodor. in Psalm.
what time soever thou have spent not thinking of God or godliness, think that
time but lost, says Cassiodorus: this meditation (so it be of good matters) is
an exceeding good companion; it is as Tully said of friendship, nunquam
intempestiva, nunquam otiosa, never untimely, never out of season or
troublesome: if we accustom our selves to it, we may say as Scipio, that we
are nunquam minus otiosi, quam cum otiosi, nec minus soli, quam cum soli, never
less idle than when free from business, and never less solitary than when we
are alone and by our selves; but this caveat at must always be remembered, viz.
that we meditate on good matters, as David speaks, Quod animo insculptum est
nisi cum vita eripi non potest Gass. Severus.
Psalm. 45.1. for if by continual meditation we make a deep impression of evil
things on our minds, we may say as Cassius Severus, that what is printed on the
mind is not easily extinguished while life lasts: and therefore when his Books
were burnt by the command of the Senate; he is reported to have said, Nunc
restat ut ipse comburerer qui ipsos edidici, Now it remains, that I also be
burnt who have learnt them by heart; therefore it is not enough to meditate,
but we must also meditate on the thing that is good, and be constant in it.
Meditation says one, Fenner de meditat.
is a coursing of the heart, like a blood-Hound's coursing a Hare in the snow,
making her to stop here and leap there, and to go forward and backward, hunting
it out of every starting hole, till it fix where it would have it.

Chap. 3. Of the difference between meditation and contemplation.
The work of meditation is to search after things that are hidden, the work of
contemplation is to admire things that are c^nspicu^^ says Hugo: ^editationis
^st perseruta^ occulta, ^ontemplitio^is est admi^ari perspicua. Hu^o in lib. de
^rca mystica. Mountagues ^ssayes.
Contemplation, says another, is a clear intuition, and a delightfu^l
admiration of perspicu^us verities, whereby the soul does not lightly taste, but
largely glut it self with spiritual delights; it is a voluntary exile from the
earth, and an holy violence offered to Heaven; it makes Heaven to stoop, and
earth to ascend to us; it is an antepast of eternal felicity: Contemplation is
called by the Hebrews and Academicks a precious death, Bodin. de Repub. l. 5.
for that it draws the soul out of this earthly body clearly to behold heavenly
things; but meditation is an exercise more painful and difficult in matters
pertaining to God; contemplation is more sweet to them that have had the
exercise thereof: Unio intellectus cum re intellecta.
Contemplation is a work of our understanding, after a sort uniting our wills
to the will of God; the Schools tell us there is an union of the understanding
with the things understood; meditation uniteth the heart to holy objects, Psalm.
86.11. The sweetness of heavenly delights is not altogether in contemplation,
but also in an affectuous meditation: the understanding does not give
sustenance to our souls, but only prepares the meat that our souls are fed
withal; but the understanding and the affections together do minister food to
the soul: Did ac. Stella de contemp. mundi. part 2. White's art of meditat.
there is no pleasant taste nor savor in preparing that which must be eaten,
but in eating ^f that which is prepared, says Stella: Meditation, says, one,
is the blowing up of the fire, and contemplation is the flame of that fire:
Some are exercised only in the intellectual part, and not in the effectual
part of this work, not laboring to have the love of God and holy objects
kindled in their hearts, but only to have curious speculations of the heavenly
Majesty: Contemplation is an outgoing power of the soul to heavenly things,
there is no separation of the soul from the body before death so real; but
meditation makes use of all mediums whereby to gain Heaven; that which leads us
the safest way thither is the best; nor is a Christian at any time nearer to
his happiness, than when he is in the way that soonest leads him thither; and
were a man in the suburbs of Heaven; if all his exercises and actions be not
ordained for the love of God, as well as to have the knowledge of him, he may
like Moses, have a view of the promised Land (as he had of the earthly Canaan)
but never enter in thereat.

Chap. 4. How study and meditation diff^^.
Every trade and calling in the world requires study in it, and reason has
its proper work in every science, and every Mechanic that seems most excluded
from it, has his own discussive thoughts, and studieth about the several
parts and branches of his profession, and how he may bring every piece of work
he takes in hand to its just perfection: and more liberal professions think it
their element: but Divinity claims it as her property: men of other callings
are studious, but they keep still within their limits, and at their highest
reach they go no higher than the earth: Though Astronomers soar aloft, and
contemplate the nature of the Stars and Planets, the course of the Sun, and the
revolutions of the Heavens, yet their speculation is not heavenly but earthly,
because it springs only from a natural power, and leads to a natural end:
but meditation is properly, and only about things that concern our eternal
welfare: Study is the beating of the brains, the work of the head; meditation
is a work of the heart, a rouzing up of the heart, and a fixing it upon its
object: Study is the work of the understanding, meditation of the heart and
affections: the understanding o^ man since the fall of Adam is of the sam^
nature with the earth, it is fruitful only in briars, and thorns, and
thistles; if the heart be not broken up by the Plough of meditation, and tilled
by the labor of this spiritual husbandry; it is fertile only in errors, and
is delivered of nothing but doubts and scruples which rather fight against
truth, than defend it; his ingeny serves him for no other end but to raise
difficulties; his light is always mixed with darkness; and as if he were of
the nature of Spiders, extracts nothing from the first Maxims of Religion, but
that which does perplex him.

Chap. 5. Of the gate of meditation.
This is nothing else but to propound to a man's self by imagination the matter
or Subject whereon to meditate, or wherein to exercise our thoughts; as the
objects of our imagination must be good, so we must labor to present them as
good and profitable to the soul* this carries on the will after them with
delight; our affections are suitable to our imaginations and apprehensions o^
the object; affections raise the spirits, the spirits raise the humors, and so
the whole man is moved; thence it is, if a thing be presented as evil to the
imagination, it works strongly upon us; imaginary and conceited evils have the
same effect as real: Jacob was as much affected with the imagination of
Joseph's death, as if he had been really dead in his house, though fancy be but
a frothy thing, yet it produces real effects; the force of imagination we see
in other creatures: Genesis 30.38, 39.
Jacob takes rods of green Poplar, and of the Hasell, and Chesnut-tree, and
pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods,
and set the rods before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs, etc.
and the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth Cattle
ring-straked, speckled, and spotted. Austin gives this very reason wherefore in
Egypt there is never wanting a white spotted Ox, Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 18.
c. 5
which they call Apis, and worship for a God: Hypocrat^s Hypocrates.
has written a learned Discourse of the power of imagination; the looking upon
outward objects does much affect the inward senses, so that the imagination is
made as it were like unto them: Imagination is a strong conceit of the mind
touching any thing whatsoever it be, Perkins discourse of Witchcraft.
and by reason of the communion that is between body and soul being together,
it is (as one observes) of great force to work diversely within the man that
imagines:

Hence it is that Papists and superstitious persons are full of cruelty,
because superstitious devices are the brats of man's imagination; like
Nebuchadnezzar's golden image, Dr Sibs souls conflict.
wherein he pleased himself so, that to have uniformity in adoring the same, he
compelled all under pain of death to fall down before it: therefore that our
imaginations may do us no injury, we must propound and present real and
substantial things unto them; as the true excellency and abasement of the
soul, the true and false riches, the true happiness and real misery of the
soul; if false objects are presented to them, false conceits will arise
therefrom, and false meditations and discourses will arise within us: as the
taking in wholesome food expells flatuous distempers out of our bodies, so when
serious objects are presented to the soul, when the mind feeds on nourishing
truths, it is a way to expel windy fancies and vain imaginations.

If thou will meditate of Christ on the Cross, imagine thy self to be on Mount
Calvary, and to see all that he did and said in his passions and sufferings, in
that manner that the Evangelists have set down, for by such imaginations we
enclose our spirits within the bounds of the mysteries whereon we meditate, and
keep them from roving excursions, for there is nothing so wandering as
imagination, it is like to Theramenez Shoe, fit for all feet, it is as the
matters are that are presented to it. Philo the Jew says, Philo Jud.
the usual practice of the faithful (who lived in Alexandria, and made their
most holy meditations on the Scriptures) was, that they tied themselves to the
terms of the Hebrew Alphabet, and so passed into the most spiritual sense,
there to see and understand the verities which were in a manner veiled: Ogni
medaglia ha il suo riverscio, Ital
Every outside has his inside, says the Italian Proverb: meditations thus
formed, do pour good motions into the will, and holy affections into the soul;
as the love of Go^ and our brethren; longing after Heaven and eternal
happiness; the imitation of the life of Christ; rejoicing in God and his
mercies; an admiration of his wonderful works; a fear of offending God; the
consideration o^ Heaven and Hell; the last judgment, an hatred of all sin; a
confidence in God's goodness; a confusion at the thoughts of a misspent life:
in these and the like, our spirits are to be dilated and poured forth as much
as man be.

Chap. 6. Of the kinds of meditation; an^ first of rapt meditation.
I now proceed to treat of the kinds o^ meditation; (...), repent inventa
comparatque compositio. Budaeus. (...), confidenter animum ad aliquam rem
appellere, cum re praesenti deliberare. Quintil.


Meditation is of two sorts,

1. There is a rapt meditation which is both sudden and occasional (...); a
sudden invention no composed by study, whereby a min^ both pious and
ingenious, spiritualize^ every object about which it is conversant, or meets
withal: Thus did ou^ Savior, when he was upon eart^ when he called his
Disciples from the nets, he applied that vocation to a spiritual sense: Follow
me, and I will make you f shers of men; they should not alter their Trade, but
only change some circumstances of it; as they were fishers before, so they
should be still; but whereas before they caught unreasonable, now they should
catch reasonable fishes; as before with hooks and nets they caught fishes for
themselves, so now by the net of the Gospel they should catch men for God: As
David that was a shepherd, was taken from the sheepfold, and from following
the Ewes great with young, was brought to feed Jacob, God's people, and Israel
his inheritance, and though called to be a King was a shepherd still, Psalm.
78.70, 71. so they called to be Apostles, are fishers still. When the multitude
followed Christ for the loaves, he makes a spiritual, use of it, exhorting
them not to labor for the meat that perishes, Joh. 6.27.
but that which endures to everlasting life. How often did our Savior upon a
sudden teach his hearers by similitudes and parables, and what are his
parables, but similies, comparing of things, and explaining of spiritual
things? So Christ compared the Kingdom of Heaven to leaven; to a grain of
Mustard Seed; to a Merchant-man; to ten Virgins; to a net cast into the Sea.

Pet. Mart.
A parable, says a good Divine, is nothing else but a similitude or example
taken from other things to illustrate the matter in hand; it is very ordinary
for the Spirit of God in Scripture to use parables: I will open my mouth in a
parable, Psalm. 78.2. Mr Hieron.
The Learned say, that in a parable there are three things, Cortex, Radix,
Fructus.


1. Cortex, the rind or bark; that is, the words and terms wherein it is
delivered.

2. Radix, the root, which is the scope to which it drives.

3. Fructus, the fruit which is to be gathered from it.

When the bark or rind is well pu^ aside, and the root discovered, it will
soon be seen what the fruit is that grow^ thereon.

1. This way of teaching and illustration is very profitable, it is a great
help to the senses, and from things that are more known, we proceed to things
that are less known, says Aristotle. Aristot.


2. It is profitable likewise to the memory, helping us to remember manythings
that otherwise would be forgotten.

3. It makes things delightful and pleasant, it is the best way whereby the
ignorant are made to understand; for it is the easiest, readiest, and plainest
manner of instructing.

4. It has a great influence upon the heart, it works much upon the
affections, for what can quicken the hearts of people more than to hear and
see? then may we say with David; Psalm. 48.8.
As we have heard, so have we seen: we hear by doctrine, we see by similitude
and example.

Some have spoken against this manner of meditation and instruction, saying,
that herein we let out our thoughts upon every base creature; but I say,
unless a man will be wilfully blind, this way he will he made to understand;
and God would not that we should look on earthly things without a holy and
spiritual application; here each man in his Trade may learn something for his
salvation.

Art thou a Ploughman, meditate on the Parable of the Sower, Mat. 13. When thou
art ploughing up thy ground, and turnest up the furrows of the earth, this
should put thee in mind of ploughing up the fallow ground of thy heart; and
when thou art breaking the clods of the earth, remember that God calls for a
broken and contrite heart; when thou put thy hand to the Plough, take heed
of backsliding; remember that of our Savior, Luke 9.61. No man having put his
hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God; remember
Lot's wife: the son of Syrach (after Iuniu^ his translation) puts a grave
question concerning him who holds the Plough, and such persons who maintain the
state of the world; Ecclus. 28.26. Junius ad loc.
the question is, Whereby shall a man he made wise? At the last Verse of the
Chapter in the Latin translation he answers; By nothing, unless he be such a
one who will apply his mind and meditation on the Law of the most High* Woodw.
child's ^atrimony.
The Husbandman in that place, may seem to have (as he reads and s^ pleads his
case) a dispensation for his gross ignorance, but it is nothing so: That
Scripture says, that the holding the Plough, shows him the constancy of a holy
profession, as before I hinted; that his plowing up the ground shows him as in
a glass the soreness of afflictions, Psalm. 129.3. Jer. 4.3.
how the wicked plow upon the backs of the righteous, and make long their
furrows; and what pains he should take also with his own heart, so preparing it
for the true seed, the Word of life; and when he casts in the seed in the
season, he might understand his own season; and look that the seed of the Word
sown in his heart rise up with great increase; and as that which thou sowest is
not quickened except it die; so the body of man after it dies and rots in the
earth shall rise again; and he that sees not so much in the sowing and reaping
his grain, 1 Cor. 15.36
is a fool in the Apostles sense: he that thus meditates at the Plough, shall
never be without a Sermon before him, every furrow being a line or sentence,
and every grain of Corn that he sows a lesson whence he may learn something
of God.

Furthermore art thou a Vine-dresser, meditate on that Parable, Luke 13.7, 8.
of a certain man that had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came and
sought fruit thereon, and found none: By this certain man we must understand
God himself, who in many places of Scripture for our capacity and comfort, is
compared to a man, to draw them with the cords of a man, and the bands of love,
Hos. 11.4. whereby he signified, that he used his people, not like beasts or
slaves, Genevens. ad loc.
but lovingly and kindly, as men do, or should do one to another.

Had a Fig Tree planted in his Vine-yard] that is, had a people whom he had
chosen to himself, and both planted, pruned, and watered by his Word and
Sacraments; by the Vineyard was meant the Church of the Jews, Jacob de
valentia in Cant. 8.
or the Land of Jury; and by the Fig Tree, the inhabitants thereof, and people
contained therein; and this is no new thing either for the Church in the whole
world, or more particularly, for the Church of the Jews to be compared to a
Vineyard, Cant. 8.11. Isa. 5.1, 7. Yea of God's particular dealing with this
people, and planting this Vine, we read Psalm. 80.2. where the Lord says, that
God brought a Vine out of Egypt, cast out the Heathen, planted it, prepared
room for it, and caused it to take deep root, so that it filled the Land, the
hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the
goodly Cedars; therefore whenever thou walk like Adam among the trees of
the garden, and beholdest the Vine, think of that mystical union that is
between Christ and his Church, that he is the Vine, his people the branches,
Ioh. 15.5.
and that whosoever abides in him, and he in him, the same brings forth much
fruit: that the Church of God also is a Vineyard of red wine, Isa. 27.2, 3.
that the Lord does keep it and water it every moment; and lest any hurt it, he
will keep it night and day.

And as the Church is compared to a Vineyard; so also men be compared to
trees, as in Iotham's parable, who compares Abimelech to the bramble, a base
plant, usurping authority, when the more noble trees, the Fig Tree, the Olive,
and the Vine refuse it, Judge. 9.7, 16. men in Scripture are compared to trees;
All the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down the
high tree; i. e. all the people of the world shall know. Sometime you shall
find him compared to the Olive Tree, and his children to the Olive-branches
round about his table, Psalm. 128. sometime to the lofty Cedars of Lebanon;
sometime to the Oaks of Basan; sometime to the low shrubs in the valley of
Suecoth; in a word, the good man is compared to the green tree, and the wicked
unto the dry tree.

Again, art thou a traveller in this world; meditate with thy self, how the
world is like a forlorn wilderness.

1. Because it is a strange Land, a solitary place, a forsaken Country,
disertus; so that Christ says, He is not of this world, nor prays he for it,
Joh. 17.9.

Si recogitemus ^psum magis mundum carcerem esse, ^xiisse nos e carcere
intelligemus. Tertul. ad Marcion.
2. It is a Land of darkness: This gave Tertullian occasion to compare the
world to a prison; a prison is the receptacle of darkness, the Sun darteth no
beams there; the world lies in ignorance, all men are born blind, and if the
glorious Sun of righteousness enlighten them not, they live and die in gross
darkness.

3. It is like a wilderness, a place full of dangers, full of enemies; the
people of Zion cry out, Our persecutors have laid wait for us in the
wilderness, Lam. 4.19. The world is full of stinging Serpents, of lying
vanities, a filthy deceiver; Christ has foretold that in the world we shall
have tribulation, Joh. 16.33. How should the meditation hereof make us to say
with Abraham, I am a stranger; and with David, I am a stranger with thee as all
my fathers were: and not to look for delights in a roaring wilderness; nor for
meat where no Corn grows; nor a dwelling house or an abiding City where no
building is; and though we groan sometimes under the weight of our travels, yet
to acknowledge that the persecutions of the world are not so tragical as its
caresses are.

Chap. 7.
Of set and solemn meditation, the definition and branches of it. Sect. 1.
Having spoken of rapt and occasional meditation, I shall in the next place
treat of set and solemn meditation, and shall thus define it;

Meditation is a holy retirement of the soul, Definit.
and a fixed exercise of the heart upon spiritual objects, that the heart may
be affected with them, and bettered by them.

1. I say, it is a holy retirement of the soul:

A retirement from the world.

A retirement from our own passions.

Men's nostra ^d contem^anda inter^a non perdu^itur, nisi ab ^is, quae exte^us
implica^ur, studiose ^ubtrahatur. Greg. Moral. ^. 5. Nemo ad meditationem
pervenit occupatus. Senec.
1. A retirement from the world: Stars which have least circuit are nearest to
the Pole, and men who least perplex themselves with worldly business are
nearest to God: Devout Bernard confesses, he learnt much of his Divinity under
the trees of the Wood: When Elijah was in the wilderness far from his own
habitation, and the company of men, then the Angel speaks unto him; when we are
alone sequestered from worldly cares and distractions, then God opens his mind
unto us, and reveals many things to us, which he will not do, when he finds our
hearts taken up with the cares and troubles of worldly business; God is a
Spirit, and therefore when we converse with him, he requires not only a bodily
but also a spiritual retirement: Thus God call^ Ezekiel Ezekiel. 3.22.
into the plain, that he might there talk with him; and allures the Church into
the wilderness, that he might speak unto her heart: Privacy (as one observes)
is the seat of contemplation, Brathwait Engl. Gent.
though sometimes made the recluse of temptation; from which the Cell is no
more exempted than the Court; but to a pious heart privacy is a great advantage
to meditation; Mihi oppidum carcer; solitudo Paradisus. Hier. Epist. ad Rustic.
Erasm. Tom. 5. de contemp. mundi.
The City to me (says Ierom) is a prison, and solitariness is a Paradise:
Erasmus has written much concerning the liberty, tranquillity, and pleasure of
a retired life: and the Psalmist bids us to commune with our own heart upon our
bed, or within our chambers, as some translate, and be still, Psalm. 4.4. Be
still from the world, yet then must the heart be stirring toward God: they
that sail at Sea, to the end to attain to the land, they look more up to the
Heaven than down to the Sea; carnal men are drowned in fleshly delights and
worldly cares, their hearts are not purged or elevated to converse with God.

2. A retiring from our own passions: the heart must be settled and well
composed, before it ascend the hill of meditation; God requires a spirit
settled for so high a work; In quietness and confidence shall be your strength,
If a man do not first discharge both himself and his mind from the burden that
presses her, removing from place to place will press her the more; it is not
enough for a man to have sequestered himself from the concourse of the people; a
man must sequester and recover himself from himself. Montaign Essays. l. 1. c.
38.
Isa. 30.15* Be still and know that I am the Lord, Psalm 46.10. We can never
savingly know him, till our hearts be free from these perturbations: therefore
when we come to meditate, we must as well retire from the perturbations of our
hearts, as from the world: Wasps and Drones make more noise than the Bees, but
make no honey, but wax only; so they whose hearts are troubled and perplexed,
are very unfit for so high an exercise of the soul: the showers that fall
gently make Corn and grass abound, but falling violently much endanger the
Corn and meadows: it is not enough we are separated from men, if we are
entangled with our own passions; and indeed herein consists one of the most
assured means of our spiritual improvement; therefore he that will meditate on
holy objects, must call back his spirit very frequently into the presence of
God, and consider what God does, and what himself is doing crying out to God, O
Lord why do I not always look toward thee? Why do thou think on me so often,
and I on thee so seldom; our proper place is to be with thee? Thrice happy is
that soul, that can lift up himself to God, and can truly say, Lord thou art my
dwelling place, my refuge, my shadow against all temptations; it is good for
Christians to retire frequently into the lonenesse of their heart: yea when
they are in company with others, for then thy heart may be alone with God: so
says David, I am continually with thee, Psalm. 73.23. I have set the Lord
always before mine eyes, Psalm. 16.8.

2. Actus religionis, seu exercitium spirituale. Jer. Turner Sermon. in Prove.
4.23.
The second branch of meditation is, that it is a fixed exercise of the heart
upon spiritual objects.

1. It is an exercise of the heart. 2. A fixed exercise.
It is an exercise of the heart; therefore one defines it to be an act of
Religion or spiritual exercise; it is an heart-imployment, therefore may well
be called a spiritual exercise; not only because the matter of meditation is
alwaye^ some spiritual thing, but also because the act of meditation is a mere
spiritual act, proceeding from the spiritual part of man, as being an act of
the heart: other parts of man are taken up in other things; the eye in seeing,
the ear in hearing, the hand in touching and working, the tongue in speaking;
the heart is only exercised in meditation; therefore David's meditations are
called the meditations of his heart, Psalm. 19. ult. My heart says he, was
inditing of a good matter, Psalm. 45.1. Meditation is the heart of devotion, the
soul of piety, by which we sound the depths of divine love, whereby we apply
our selves really to God, and communicate much of his grace and comfort; it
fills the heart with sweet odours and spiritual refreshings, that it
resembles a pillar of smoke from Aromaticall wood, kindled with Myrrh, and
all the sweet powders of the heavenly perfumer.

2. It is a fixed exercise of the heart; the heart must be fixed on God that will
meditate upon him, Psalm. 57.1. Therefore when we begin this exercise, we must
then resolve that our minds shall not wander from him; we must lift up our
hearts to God in the Heavens, Lam. 3^ Psalm. 25.1. Christ was transfigured on a
mountain, and often withdrew himself into a mountain to pray and meditate, not
only for privacy, but to note unto us, that a man that will meet with God, must
ascend higher in his spirit. God was at the top of Jacob's ladder, where Angels
were ascending and descending: to this purpose Ambrose says, No man can see
Jesus, while he stands upon the earth: Zacheus could not see Jesus till he
climbed up a Sycamore-tree: Nemo potest videre Jesum constitutus in terra.
Ambros.
the composition of our bodies is such, as a man cannot look up to Heaven with
one eye, and down to the earth with the other, to teach us to look up to Heaven
fixedly with both.

Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 3.
reports strange things of bruit beasts; he says, There was an Elephant not so
capacious of instruction as the rest of his fellows, to learn what was taught
him by his Keeper; whereupon being oftentimes beaten for that stupidity of his,
he was found in the night (after his manner) to be as it were conning and
studying those feats, which he had been taught in the day: and Plutarch
Plutarc. de solert. animal.
tells of a Pie, that to learn certain tunes which she heard Minstrels play,
waxed dumb many days after; at length upon a sudden, she brake forth into the
same tunes which those Minstrels had played before, to the astonishment of all
that heard her. Meditation is that which in the old Law was signified by the
chewing of the Cud: transient speculation^ of things do but little good, let in
bu^ little light, unless we chew the^ Cud, and exercise the mind about them:
holy things are like unto leaven, to Corn, to rain; now unless the leaven be
put into, and by stirring and working, as it were incorporated into the dough,
it cannot season it; and though the Corn be sown in abundance, yet if it meet
not with apt ground, tilled and prepared, but fall among thorns, by the
highway side, or in stony places, it brings forth no fruit; and though the
rain fall plentifully, yet if it light ou^ hard and hilly Countries, it is not
received, it makes not such places fruitful; so fares it with holy things:
let a Minister bestow never so much of the leaven of the Word, yet if the
hearers hide it not in their hearts, like leaven i^ the meal, it will never
season them and make them fit manchet for the Lord's table: let never so much
goo^ seed be sown, yet if it take not roo^ downwards in our hearts, it will
never bring forth fruit upwards in our lives let the words of God's messengers
drop as the rain, and distill like the dew, or like the showers upon the herbs
and tender grass, yet if the heart receive it not, if it dwell not in the
heart richly, it will profit us nothing: indeed it is almost as much to find
our own heart in a duty, as to find God in it.

Sect. 2. Of the ends of solemn meditation.
The end of meditation is both to affect the heart with the objects on which we
meditate, and that the heart may be made better thereby.

1. I say, one end of meditation is to affect the heart, it is very delightful
to those that are conversant in it: he that has changed his mind or opinion
upon meditation never accuses her of tyranny; meditation is very persuasive,
clearing our judgments, calming our passions, and gaining our consent to that
which is good; it far surpasses eloquence, and like a Sovereign raigns without
arms; it has no need of our ears to win our hearts: by it self it transmitteth
it self into the inmost recesses of our souls; finds out reason in ^er throne;
carries more light into ^he mind, and kindles in the will a more fervent love
to God, Qui audit mel esse dulce, and non gustat, nomen mellis scit, gratiam
and saporem nescit: gustate ergo, and videte quam suavis sit. Dominus Bonavent.
making a man in love with what he formerly hated. Meditation opposes the
charms of grace against the allurements of sin* and so sweet and powerful is
holy meditation, that it blots out all earthly cogitations; it sets before the
eyes of our souls such taking and alluring objects, which are more prevalent
than those of sin, and by these holy delights our hearts are ravished, and
grace easily prevails against the corruptions of nature: these are the first
fruits of those everlasting pleasures the Saints shall reap in the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereby those that feed on God and his promises by holy meditation
here, do taste one part of that felicity which the blessed do feed upon in
Heaven; this has ever been very affecting to the Saints: My meditation of him,
says David, shall be sweet, Psalm. 104.34. or my word of him shall be sweet; it
signifie^ a word secretly spoken, Symonds fixed eye.
as one observes: the heart speaks of God in meditation, and those words are
music in the soul; the word imports a sweetness with mixture, like compound
spices or many flowers mixed together; such variety of sweetness this
meditation of God yields to him, whose mind is upon him, whose heart is
toward him: the operation of the mind makes up a sweet delight; there is more
content in meditating on the love of God, more refreshing to the heart, than
wine can give to the body; his love is better than wine: We will remember thy
l^ve more than wine, Cant. 1.2, 4. David tells us that the thoughts of God are
precious, Psalm. 139.17. they are so to a heart that is in a right frame; and
says he, My soul is filled as with marrow and fatness, when I remember thee
upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches, Psalm. 63.5.

Meditation Meditatio co^ memoriae.
is the rubbing up of the memory, and may not unfitly be called the whetstone
of memory; for even as a whetstone or grindstone adds an edge to the Knife or
other instrument which is whetted thereupon; so this sharpeneth our memories,
and gives us occasion to call that to mind, which otherwise would have been
forgotten; or it may be compared to the steel and stone of a Tinder-boxe,
neither of which severally will yield any fire, but being smitten together, the
fire comes forth incontinently; so fares it with men that are of good
capacities, that can conceive much at the instant, but remember little, because
they use not their memories, and exercise not themselves in pious meditations:
Meditation is the heart, life, and soul of remembrance, making whatsoever we
read and hear to abide with us, and be our own, else it will away: meditation
with ( Philip's Page) must daily knock at the doors of our hearts, and cause us
to call to mind what we have learnt, else by corruption we shall soon forget
it; this made Periander King of Corinth to say, Meditatio totum. It is an
undoubted maxim, that a thing be it never so good and excellent, yet it is not
very desirable of us, till it begit to affect our hearts, though it has more
charms than beauty, and more luster than outward glory, more invitations than
secular profits; yet if it convey not pleasure into the will, it knows not how
to beget love unto it.

2. Meditation also bettereth the heart as well as affects it: It is said that
King Mythridates having found out Mythridate, he so strengthened his body, that
endeavoring to poison himself, to avoid the servitude of the Romans, he could
by no means effect it: so whosoever shall feed on holy objects by meditation,
and use it frequently, shall so fortify his heart, that it shall not be
poisoned with any evil affections.

Meditation is a heart-warming duty; study only warms the brains, but
meditation warmeth the heart; therefore when holy truth falls upon a prepared
heart, it has a sweet and strong operation: Luther Luther. Melch. Ad in vit.
Sta^
confesses, that having heard Staupicius a grave Divine to say, that that is
kind repentance which begins from the love of God, ever after that time the
practice of repentance was sweeter to him: another speech of his likewise did
much affect Luther, viz. that in doubts of predestination we should begin from
the wounds of Christ, that is, from the sense of God's love to us in Christ;
therefore the warming of the brains in study, without the warming the heart by
meditation, is but a dead and cold speculation: serious meditation puts lively
colors upon common truths, which operate strongly upon the heart to make it
better.

Chap. 8. Of the subject of Meditation.
Sect. 1. Of medita^ion on the works of God.
I now proceed to discuss the subject matter of meditation; first subject
^editation, works of (...).
and here I am launching into a great Ocean, but like the dogs of Nilus, I
shall but lick and away.

The first subject of meditation is God's works of Creation; a fit matter for
our serious meditations: I remember the days of old, says David, I meditate
on all thy works, I muse on the work of thy hands, Psalm. 145.5. He looks up
to the Heavens, and considers the work of God's fingers, meditating on all
those works that were visible to the eye of man, ^al. 102.25.
Psalm. 8.3. called elsewhere the work of his hands. Isa. 48.13. My hand has
laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the Heavens;
it is for that they are of such excellency, as if they had been his handywork
indeed, which yet were made by his word only, as Moses, and St John do declare,
Genesis 1.6. Joh. 1.3. That great advancer of learning has an excellent passage
suitable hereunto; Sr Francis B^con's advanc^ment of lear^ing. l. 1. p. 27
It is to be observed, says he, that for any thing which appears in the
History of the Creation, the confused mass and matter of Heaven and earth was
made in a moment, and the order and disposition of that Chaos or mass was the
work of six days; such a note of difference it pleased God to put upon the
works of power, and the works of wisdom: wherewith concurreth, that in the
former it is not set down that God said, Let there be Heaven and earth, as it
is set down of the works following, but actually, that God made Heaven and
earth, the one carrying the style of a Manufaction, the other of a Law, Decree
or Council. It is not enough that we barely look on the works of God, but we
must meditate upon them; for if we do no more than see them, the Ox, the Bull,
and the Horse, do as much as we: If we see nothing in the Heavens, Dearing Heb.
Lect. 5. c. 1. verse. 10.
says a grave Divine, but that they are lightsome, and above our reach, the
Horse and Mule see this as well as we; if we see nothing in the earth, but a
place to walk in, or to take our rest upon it, the beasts and fouls see this as
well as we; if we see nothing in our gorgeous apparel, but the pride of a
goodly color, the Peacock sees that in his feathers; if in all our
refreshment from the creatures we know nothing but the pleasure and sweetness
of our sense, the Swine has as great a share herein as we; if hearing, seeing,
smelling, tasting, feeling, be all the comfort we can find in the works of God,
the dumb creatures have these senses more exquisite than we, and we have turned
the hearts of men into the hearts of beasts, who with wisdom and reason can do
nothing, ^. Isidor. ^usiot. l. 2. ^st. 135.
and the words of the Prophet are fulfilled in us, Man being in honor
understands not, and is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. therefore
the sight of God's works must affect us more than so, else shall we be but as
the beasts, and follow them.

Now you are to meditate how God brought forth all his works in the space of
six days, before he finished them; he did not create the world all at once, but
took time for the Creation of it, to teach us to take special time duly and
orderly to consider and meditate on the works of God: if he that could have
made the Heavens and the earth, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all creatures, in
a moment; yet it pleased him to take time for the creating of them; this should
teach us to select some space of time for the meditation of them: we must not
think it enough to look upon them at one view, but to pass from part to part,
from one creature to another, and in every creature to admire the workmanship,
power, wisdom and goodness of the Creator, as we are taught, Psalm. 92.4, 5.
Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, and I will triumph in the works
of thy hands: O Lord how great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep: a
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this; which Psalm as
the Title tells us, was a meditation penned for the Sabbath day: therefore I
say, God would spend six days about the Creation of the world, whereas he
might have done it in an instant, and in a moment of time, to the end that we
might the better meditate upon it from point to point, for which purpose he
presently ordained the Sabbath: Thus Job Job 36.24
tells us, that we must not idly behold the work, ^upellex or^ata hominem
^guit, and mun^us Deum. ^inut. Faelix. ^ctav.
but must magnify the workman; Remember that thou magnify his work which men
behold; this we will do coming into the Shop of an excellent Artizan. The
eternal power and Godhead is seen by the things that are made; but most of us
have great cause to be ashamed, that we have spent so little time in meditating
on the works of God; yea who can truly say, he has spent so much time in
meditating on God's works, as God spent in making them? how few are there that
have set apart so much time ever since they were born, as (if it were all laid
together) will make up six days one entire week? what a shame is it for man
whom God made on purpose to view his works, ^ria sunt ge^era meditati^num; unum
^ creaturis; ^num in Scri^turis; unum ^n moribus: ^rimum surgit ex admiratione;
secundum ex lectione; ^ertium ex circumspectione. Hug. medit.
and by them to glorify him, not to spend so much time in meditating upon
them, as God spent in making of them; therefore we have great cause to become
more careful and studious readers of this great Book of nature for time to
come: There is a threefold Book into which a Christian is to make inspection,

The Book of nature, or of the creatures.

The Book of the Scriptures.

The Book of conscience.

The Book of the creatures has a powerful conviction; meditate upon it, and
observe God's power, or thou art an Atheist.

The Book of the Scriptures has a power of conversion; meditate on it, and
learn the will of God out of it, so to serve him, or thou art an hypocrite.

The Book of conscience has a power of accusation; meditate on it, or thou art
an Infidel.

The Book of nature has God spread wide open, and before us, Seculum speculum.
that he that runs may read; Austin calls the world Gods Book in folio; every
creature should be to us a page in this Book, and every part of a creature a
line in this Book: How careful should we be to take these things into our
thoughts: our Savior says, Matthew. 24.15. When ye shall see the abomination of
desolation (sp^ken of by Daniel the Prophet) stand in the holy place, who so
reads, let him understand: So say I, let him that reads in this great Book
of nature, understand to what end these creatures were created, even to the end
that we might view them, and in them glor^fie the Creator.

And seeing God has not only acquainted us, in the gross, what he di^ in
general, but has condescended s^ far, as to tell us, what he did eve^ day;
what he did the first day, wh^ he did the second day, etc. I da^ boldly affirm,
that it were very convenient and expedient every day to ^ apart some time on
that day, to meditate on the works that were created ^ that day; it is as
convenient a method, as any I can imagine, for it is following of God in the
Creation this being considered, together with the dullness of our
apprehensions, an^ how apt our thoughts are to turn asid^ to vain and
unprofitable objects, the order will be found to be very necessary.

I shall give you a taste of such kinds meditations, from one of the days o^
the week, the first day of the wee^ called the Lord's day: on this day se^
apart some time to meditate on the works that were on that day created first,
the works of the evening, the the works of the morning.

1. The works of the evening; as the ^reating that huge body of the Heavens:
when we see that vast body, and how God stretches out the Heavens as a
curtain; the greatness of the Heavens should teach us to meditate on the
greatness of the infinite Jehovah: if ^he Heavens do so far exceed our
^houghts, how great then is he whom ^he Heaven of Heavens are not able to
contain: if the earth be so glorious (as ^t is in the spring time) how
unspeakably glorious are the Heavens which far ^xceed the earth; and here we
may ^dmire his greatness, who was able to ^et up such a rich canopy and
covering over the earth; and here also let us meditate on the unspeakable
goodness of God to man, that he has made for man not only a rich dwelling
here be^ow, but also provideth for him a dwelling place in the Heavens, there
^o sit down with him in his Throne, Rev. 3.20. That man that is but dust and
ashes, a lump of earth here below, should be exalted to the highest place of
the Creation: this should check us or our folly, in suffering the earth to
^teal away our hearts from God, as if there were no greater happiness to b^
had than here below: what stupi^ creatures are we to spend more time i^ getting
a few white and red pieces o^ earth, than in getting a glorious possession of
the Kingdom of Heaven, for the attainment whereof we should think no time too
much, no pains to^ great, no affections too strong.

Furthermore, bring your meditations to the earth, created on the sam^ day
also, that which yielded matte^ and stuff for the making of all cre^tures here
below: consider, that the earth was a formlesse lump before Go^ beautified and
adorned it, it was ^ mere nothing: Painters can draw (...) pictures without
colors; Architect^ raise no buildings without materials and if you take away
Marble or Po^phiry from Engravers, they can car^ neither Images nor Statues;
Senault. Treat. 5. disc. 8.
It is o^ God that actuateth nothing, that forms being out of a nonentity,
as one well ^teth: the earth receives its being, ^ beauty, and all it has
from God.

The meditation hereof should ^ suffer us to let any thing in the ear^ to
withdraw our hearts from God: ^ sore God made the earth it was nothing; ^ilt
thou set thine eyes upon that which is ^ot? Prove. 23.5.
Why should that which is nothing draw away our hearts from God who is full of
all perfection; the earth ^lso at first was a confused mass of things, without
form, and void: Rudis indigestaque moles. Ovid.
this should draw out from us this meditati^n; to make us to consider, that we
that are of the earth are altogether pol^uted in sin, lying in our blood, our
^ouls being all stained with sin, and without any form of holiness and
^ighteousnesse, yea void of all the saying graces of Gods Spirit: In me, ^aith
Paul, that is in my flesh, there ^welleth no good thing: and as darkness was
then upon the face of the dee^, so ^arknesse is upon the face of our souls; ^
man may see, hear, read, but can ^ave no true discerning of spiritual things,
till the Day Star arise in his ^eart, for spiritual blindness is upon ^he
face of his soul.

Here then is condemned the folly of those that think ignorance the mother ^f
devotion; but while men remain in their natural blindness, they can per^rm no
pleasing service to God; blind services may be acceptable to ^ Prince of
darkness, God made Heaven for himself principally, the earth for us: let us
consider our condition by Creation, affection, disposition; then shall we say
with Abraham, we are but earth, dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27.
but they are abominable to the Father of lights: lig^ was the first thing that
God man in the Creation; and when there w^^ light, the earth lay for some days
dead and senseless lump, and could n^ so much as bring forth one grass o^
herb, till the Spirit of God moved ^ on the face of the waters: so in ^ new
Creation, when there is so^ light wrought in the understandin^ yet can thou
not bring forth one ple^sant fruit of holiness, till the Spirit* God flutter
over thee, and by a divine heat and warmth move and stir the soul, and enable
thee to perform a^ceptable obedience to God.

2. I come to the work of the mo^ing: then he created the light on the first
day of the week, commanding t^^ light to shine out of darkness; now us set
apart some time to meditate this excellent creature, the light, which the glory
of God is greatly m^nifest: there was nothing before ^ utter darkness; then
the Lord crea^ the light without the Sun, in w^ the power of God is admirable;
should greatly wonder at midnight to see a great light to shine forth, and
expel the darkness of the night: this may lead us to this meditation; that as
God caused on this first day of the week light to arise, and break out of
darkness; so on this first day of the week also, he caused his own Son the
light of the world, to arise out of the grave of darkness, who shined through
many dark thoughts and apprehensions, into the hearts of his disconsolate
Disciples; for his own Disciples did then ^egin to doubt; We trusted, said
they, that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.21 Here
also we may meditate on the excellency of heavenly knowledge; that wisdom
^xcelleth folly, Eccl. 2.13.
even as light excels dark^esse: Light is comfortable, and sweet it ^ to
behold the light of the Sun, Eccl. 11.7. Darkness makes men sad and time^ous:
so wisdom makes a man's face ^o shine, but ignorance is uncomforta^e: light
manifests things as they ^e, but darkness hides them: light ^stinguisheth
one thing from another, ^rknesse confounds things all alike: so ^nowledge gives
us a right discerning of things, but ignorance overwhelms us with horror and
amazement: light directs a man in his way, but darkness misguids him: so
wisdom shows us the true way, whereas the ignorant wander in bypath, and
fall into the bottomless pit. I shall conclude this Section, Clamant
dupliciter, 1. Ostendunt dignitatem. 2. Ostendunt bonitatem. Quocunque te
vertis, veritas vestigiis quibusdam quae operibus suis impressit, loquitur
tibi, and te in exteri ora relabentem, ipsis exteriorum formis intus revocat.
Aug. de libero arbitrio.
with that meditation of Austin, Heaven and earth, says he, and all things
therein contained, do make a continual cry round about me, that I should love
thee; O Lord they show thy worthynesse, and declare thy bounty; such a world;
such Heavens; such an Ocean; such an earth; such earthly creatures; insensible;
sensible, reasonable; and all wonderfully framed* Lord how mighty, how
wonderful, how wise art thou that made them, and therefore worthy our love;
and being thus made thus to bless, to continue, to increase, t^ multiply them:
yea more, to fill us with them; and therefore thy bounty, thy super abundant
bounty must needs make us to lo^ thee.

Sect. 2. Of meditating on the Word of Go^
The second subject of meditat^ that I shall lay before you, is the Wo^^ of
God: The second subject of meditation, the Word of God.
It is said of the godly ^ that he meditateth in the Law of God night and day,
Psalm. 1.2. How often does David profess he will meditate in God's statutes,
Psalm. 119.48. Psalm. 119 97
and it was his practice, verse. 23. The Law of God was his meditation all the
day long. Meditation fastens the Word upon the heart; the soul for want of
meditation retains but little spiritual food; the Word of God by holy
meditating upon it, produces the same effects upon our souls, as Manna Manna
no^ solum sanitatem, sed and animum Judaeis conferebat. Josephus.
did upon the Israelites; for some Writers say that it restored health; infused
strength; and inspired courage into them; that they owed those formidable
victories they gained from their enemies, to this meat that came down from
Heaven; so pious meditation on the Word changes the qualities of men, making
them of a sound mind, producing courage and assurance in the hearts of those,
that before were full of weakness, fears and doubtings; the Devils fly such
men who lodge the Word of God, the sword of the Spirit in their souls,
beholding their Judge seated in their hearts as upon his Throne: this heavenly
bread it was that animated the Martyrs to the flames, that gave them courage to
daunt their executioners; the same food that nourishes them, defends them, and
that which cures their maladies, subdues their enemies; its strength no way
hinders its sweetness, there are charms in it, that make it pleasant to every
Palate, that by faith and meditation tastes thereof.

1. Meditate on the transcendency of the Word: that it is a transcendent rule
of holiness: every Nation has its Laws, and there is none so barbarous, whom
nature or custom has not furnished with some polity: the Greeks lived
according to the Laws of their sages; the Romans followed the twelve Tables;
and those that had neither Kings nor Lawgivers, had the Law of nature for their
guide: the Jews were governed by the Law of Moses, chiefly by the Law of the two
Tables, Senault. Treat. 7. disc. 5.
which if it gave them not strength enough to resist sin, it gave them light
enough to know and avoid it, as one well notes: for says the Apostle, By the
Law comes the knowledge of sin; now the whole Word of God both Law and Gospel,
is a most transcendent and most holy rule; God is holy in his works, but most
holy in his Word, Psalm. 138.2. in it shines the purity of his nature, not
capable of the least imperfection: the Angels (though as fine gold) yet are
unclean in his sight, says Bernard; Bernard.
how much more the sons of men, who are but clods of earth, and worms: this
meditation makes the holiest man to tremble at his presence, and cry out with
the Prophet that he is undone: they that by derivation from him are most holy,
in comparison with him are most unholy, says Austin; yea the Angels
themselves, when they draw near unto him, cover both their feet and faces: if
Angels that stand at the Mercy-seat do tremble, oh what shall sinners do that
stand at the bar of justice?

2 Meditate on the exactness of the Word of God; the Law forbids all sin,
commands all obedience; every passage in the life of man is ordered in it; as
Theodoret observes of the Ceremonial Law, and the furniture of the
Tabernacle, that every particular thereof was exactly prescribed by God:
Theodoret.
now if the Ceremonial Law were so accurate and precise, how strict is the Law
of Moral holiness; the Law of the Lord is perfect: we read that the measures
and weights of the Sanctuary, were double as much as the ordinary measures; a
man's actions may carry weight and be allowed among men in common conversation,
Aug.
which will be found too light, being weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary
of God, says Austin: bring we our actions to this standard, and our defects
will soon be discovered, and that which will seem warrantable and commendable
before men, will appear sinful and abominable before the Lord.

3. Meditate on the spirituality of God's Word; it requires exactness of soul
and spirit; it aweth the thoughts, and judges of external actions according
to the heart: I the Lord search the heart, to give to every man according to
his works, Jer. 17.10. The natural heart (it may be) will be content with
Herod to do many good things, so he may have a dispensation in one reigning
sin; and it may be to suffer a little; to do penance with a Papist, and then
sin again, this it could brook well enough; but to be restrained in every
thing, this flesh and blood cannot endure; but whatsoever liberty the flesh can
desire, whether in thinking, speaking, or doing, contrary to that duty which
belongs to a man's place; as he is inferior or superior to others; or
contrary to the good of the persons, or chastity or good name of others, though
it be but in secret corruption, or secret working of heart, still the Word of
God does oppose it in every thing: the Pharisees forbad the outward act of
uncleanness, but the Law of God forbids the impurity of the thoughts; they
make the Law like John Baptist, who had a leathern girdle about his loins; but
the Gospel represents Christ to have a golden girdle about his Paps; they
represented only the first risings and motions of sin: this makes the Saints
mourn for the first conceptions of sin, though they prove abortive, says
Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
making them to pray with David, to be purged and freed from secret sins, and
sinful cogitations.

4. Meditate upon the operativenesse of the Word; it is not a dead letter, but
has a quick power in it to work upon the heart; the Spirit of God accompanies
it, making it active, and mighty in operation: as in the frame of a man's body,
under every vein there runs an artery full of spirits; so under every vein of
truth in the Word of God, there is an artery of Spirit, quickening, searching,
cutting, discovering, condemning: What Is the reason most men's spirits rise up
against the Word; it is because as the Elephant troubles the waters before he
drinks, that he may not see his ugly visage; so the Word of God troubles the
mind of a sinner; it terrifies his conscience, making his sin appear very
sinful to him; it makes a man a burden to himself; these spectacles are too
true for the sinners false eyes: Ahab cannot endure to talk with Michajah, nor
meet with Elijah; men can endure the generalities of the Word well enough; but
when it comes near them, touches their Copyhold, corrupt hearts run away from
it, because for want of serious meditation, they are unacquainted with the
spiritual nature of the Word of God: Oh study I pray thee, ^regor. Moral.
says Gregory, and daily meditate on the words of thy Creator, and learn the
mind of God in his Word, that thou may look up to eternal things; for so
much shall thy rest be the greater in Heaven, by how much the more it has been
even now from the love of thy Creator here on earth.

Sect. 3. Of meditating on Man; The third subject of meditation is man; his
Creation, his body, his soul, his privileges.
his Creation, his body, his soul, his privileges.
Man comes in the next place, as a fit subject for our meditation and
consideration: man was the last of God's creatures, as the end of his Creation;
all made for him, and all represented in him; the rest by his word commanding;
whereas his body by his handworking, and his soul by his breath-quickning,
became alive: and here let us meditate first on man's Creation, who is, as
Plato says, Plato.
the miracle of all miracles, and as it were the soul of this world; and you
will see how every circumstance shows the Creatours goodness, and man's many
obligations.

Let us begin with the meditation of man's body, which is, as one says, More's
demonstrat.
the pattern of the universal world.

1. Meditate on the provision God made for man before he made him; God sets up
an house, and furnishes it; then puts man into this house ready furnished to
his hand: other things are but as essays of God's power, man the perfection:
Adam the last of all God's works, and the Lord and sovereign over them, under
his sovereign Lord; Heaven would have nothing wanting to man, that he might
wholly mind the things of Heaven.

2. Meditate on God's proceeding hereunto: the Father as it were calls a
Council; God deliberateth upon the enterprise of this work, and the Council
is held in the conclave of the most holy Trinity; Let us make man, Genesis 1.26.
Adam is business for the whole Trinity: all were employed about this creature,
to the end that being created, he might be wholly employed about the service of
God.

3. Meditate on the form of man's body: God has neither made us to lie along
on the earth as beasts, ^truth. Obser^at. 36. Cent. 2.
or stick on it as trees, but by upright stature set our head to Heaven, and
our feet to the earth, as one observes.

Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Ovid.
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
God with a lofty look did man endew,
And made him Heavens transcendent glory view.
God has given us an upright stature, not like other creatures that look
downwards to the earth, to teach us to look up to Heaven by holy meditations,
and to look up to the hills whence our salvation comes; our face is toward
Heaven, to teach us that our hearts should not be nuzzeling in the earth: man
has one muscle in his eyes more than any other creature, which may teach him
still to look up toward Heaven.

4. Meditate on the matter of man's Creation: Ad coelestia magis rapiatur, ad
terrestria minus capiatur. Columella l. 5. c. 9. Ecce pulchrum lapidem, putre
cadaver tegentem. Gasp. in Heraclito. Homo bis creatus, 1. Seminaliter, seu
causaliter. 2. Formaliter, seu visibiliter. Aug. de Genes.
he was made of the dust of the earth; so as howsoever we appear beautiful and
amiable in the eye of man, which is fixed only on the external part; yet when
the oil of our lamp is consumed, and we reduced again to our first original
matter, there will be left us no better Epitaph than this, Behold here a
spetious shrine covering a stinking corpse: man is twice created, says St
Augustine; Seminally or causally, Formally or visibly.


The first according to his soul: the second according to his body: man's body
of earth does represent whatsoever is between Heaven and earth; yea the very
Heavens themselves are figured; all natural causes contained; and their
several effects produced therein.

The three Heavens are resembled by the body of man; the lower serving for
generation and nutriment, are like the lowest Heaven, within the compass
whereof the elements are found: for as from them all beasts, plants, trees, and
other things have being, receive nourishment, growth, motion and sense: so of
four humors there engendered, all the members are made, fed, moved and
augmented, the same agreeing in nature and number with the elements, and
producing effects in all answerable to them: the upper part which is the seat
of the heart, may be compared to the middle Heaven, the eighth sphere wherein
the Stars are fixed, which holding one even and constant motion, gives light
and life to the world beneath, through its rays and comfortable influences: so
the heart being still in motion, preserves the whole body in life and health,
by sending forth the vital spirits, dispersing themselves into all the parts
by veins and arteries: Lastly, the head, the highest part of the body, and
noblest seat of the soul, where she acts her highest operations; and as it is
the noblest part, so it is placed nearest to Heaven, and is as the third and
highest Heaven; there sits the mind as in a Tower, beholding, governing, and
directing all the actions of the whole body, causing it to move, to rest, to
act, and to forbear; even as God from his high seat moves the Heavens,
directs the Stars, and preserves all things within the compass of the
world: God has formed all the parts of the body together; opening the eyes;
boring the ears; fashioning the nose; lengthening the arms; extending the
shoulders; fastening the legs; and perfecting all together.

2. From the meditation of man's body, let us proceed to the meditation of
man's Creation in respect of his soul: man was made last of all the creatures,
because he was to be the creature of the world, Lumb. sent. l. 1. distinct. 3.
as the Master of the sentences calls him; either propter excellentiam, by
reason of the excellency that he has above all other creatures, excepting the
Angels; or propter convenientiam, by reason of the agreement he has with them,
participating some thing o^ them all, and communicating in some things with
them all; and that he is so styled in Scripture, see Mar. 16.15. And indeed
Philosophers say, that man is Microcosmos, a little world, being as it were a
compendium of the greater world: men can represent the world in maps, but God
has drawn Heaven and earth together in the map of every man.

1. Man has his esse and being, common to him with livelesse creatures, which
only have a bare being, and no more.

2. He has his vivere to live, common to him with herbs, and plants, and
trees, which be animata, but not animalia.

3. He has his movere and sentire; to move from place to place; to see; to
hear; to taste; to smell; common to him with bruit and unreasonable creatures.

4. He has his intelligere, his reason and understanding, and discerning
faculty, common to him with Angels.

As man's body is a fair picture of the world, so his soul is a lively image of
God, the same dwelling in that earthly Tabernacle, as God sits in his
heavenly Throne: man is not the bare ^ootsteps only, but the very image of God;
reason is as it were a spark of the Divinity; our faculties a manifest em^lem
of the Trinity: this image of God in Adam consisted partly and principally in
exact knowledge: now one special part hereof, as an ancient Philosopher has
observed, consists in the knowledge of our selves; therefore he wrote over
his School door, (...), called afterward a golden sentence, being written in
golden letters: and Cicero interpreting that precept of Apol^o, says, Non
credo id praecipit, ut membra nostra aut staturam figuramve noscamus; neque nos
corpora sumus; neque ego tibi dicens hoc, corpori dico; cum igitur corpus quasi
vas est, ut aliquid animi receptaculum, ab animo quicquid agitur, id agitur a
te. Cicer. Tusc. quaest. 1.
I do not think he commands that to the end, we should know the stature ^r
feature of our outward parts; for bodies ^e are not; neither I speaking this,
do ^peak to thy body; when then he says, know ^hy self, he says, know thy
mind; for the ^ody is but as a vessel or receptacle of the ^ind, that which of
thy mind is done, is ^one of thee, for the mind of every man is ^very man: but
because these men saw but through nature's dim spectacles, a^ by Moonshine;
therefore Calvin in the beginning of his Institutions, Calvin Institut.
divides true wisdom into two parts, viz. The true knowledge of God, and The
knowledge of our selves.
Both which were in Adam after a transcendent manner: God heaped in together in
one vessel formed out o^ clay and dust, all the treasures of wisdom,
righteousness and holiness* his head was stored with all sciences* and his
heart with virtues and graces his understanding was great, being able to impose
a name upon every creature agreeable to its nature, Genesis 2.19, 20. his will and
affections were every way correspondent, and no way out of joyn^ or frame, but
in all points both we composed; his mind was free from cares, fears, grief and
sorrow: The made Austin break out into this rapso^ of spirit, Aug. Solilo qu.
c. 9.
Thy hand O Lord could have man me a stone, or a bird, or a serpent, or for
bruit beast; but it would not for thy goodness sake: This also made Anselm
Anselm. meditat.
walking in his Garden, and beholding a little worm creeping upon the ground
break forth into this meditation, De^ Lord, thou might have made me like this
crawling despicable creature; but thou would not, and it was thy mercy that
thou would not: Oh! as thou have ennobled me with the image of thy self, make
me conformable to thy self, that of a worm I may become an Angel; of a vassal
of sin, a vessel of mercy; of a shell of corruption, a star of glory in thy
heavenly mansion.

3. Let us meditate on man's privileges in his Creation, that were conferd
upon him; a privilege of power: Adam Lord Paramount over every living
creature: Princes on earth acknowledge no superior in their own dominions;
scarce was Adam created, but he found himself in a Paradise; and from the
morning of his birth, placed under the most delightful Climate that nature
could afford; he is put under the shelter of the tree of knowledge and
immortality; he treads upon beds of roses and lillies; the sight of Lions,
Bears, Tigers, and other furious beast^ do not affright him; God has give^ him
power to rule over them, and al creatures give respect unto him, he being
created to be Lord and ruler over all the creatures: and had man continued in
his integrity, he should have wrought, as appears, Genesis 2.15. but never have
been weary; it should have been a pleasure, not a pain to him; he might have
fasted, but should never have fainted or been feeble; he should have lived
still without headache, or so much as gray hairs; all the creatures should have
continued their subjection to him; the earth should have been fertile and
fruitful in all good things, there should have been no briars, and thorns and
thistles, nor any thing hurtful and noisome; the woman should never have had
sorrow and pain to bring forth, nor yet trouble and care to bring up her
children: In a word, they should have been warm without clothes; naked
without shame, for so they were before their fall. This doctrine of man's
Creation may help us to diverse frutfull meditations.

1. A meditation of our original; to look to the rock whence we were hewn; a
man's principles prove not his worst instructions to humility: O man whatever
thou now art, thou wa^ once little enough; thy Creation implies a nonentity;
thy beginning smaller than dust; he that seriously meditates on his first
nothing, will ever afterward hardly conceit himself to be any great matter.

2. Art thou God's creature; then meditate thus with thy self when thou art in
afflictions, that God takes no pleasure in the destruction of his workmanship:
preservation is a greater mercy than a simple being; God will not leave any of
his most excellent works done to halfes, but perfect what he has begun.

3. Let the meditation of thy Creation spur thee on in the service of God: even
by nature we tender him our service, from whom we receive our being, says
Aquinas: Aquinas.
in the first age of the world there was no thought of any idolatry: blessings
are then most taking with us, and work most upon us, while they are freshest in
memory; man came then but newly out of his Makers hands, and could not so soon
forget him. When we consider likewise that the creatures were made to serve us,
let us also consider, that the end why he created man, was for the service of
himself: Excellent was his meditation, who imagined the beasts to intimate thus
much to man, Qui fecit me propter te, fecit te propter se; He that made me to
serve thee, made thee to serve himself: if therefore the creatures that were
made to serve us, do now (as many times they do) annoy us, and rebel against
us; this should put us in mind of our rebellion against God by sin; for had not
Adam, from whose loins we are all descended, and who was God's Viceroy, and the
first created Ruler on earth, been disobedient to his Maker, and broken the
Laws of the sovereign Lawgiver of Heaven unrulinesse had not broken forth;
neither of subjects against their Princes* nor of the inferior creatures
against man their superior. Marvel (...) says Austin, Mirari noli, si ea
quae deseruit superiorem, paenas patitur per inferiorem. Aug. de verbis
Apostol. Sermon. 12. Bp Pilkington in Haggai. Vide Theodor. Graecor. affect.
curat. Sermon 4.
if that creature [man who forsook his superior, be punished (...) his
inferior: There is not a Horse, a Dog or an Ox, or any other living creature
but it must have many stripes, before it wa^ be brought to any good order to
serve us, Bishop Pilkington observes: In word, our disobedience to God, w^ the
cause of the disobedi^nce of oth^^ creatures to us; so that when we (...) any
disorder in nature, in what kind soever, we must neither blame God nor the
creatures, but only thank our selves and our sins.

Sect 4. Of the fall of Adam.
The next subject of our meditation is the fall of Adam: The fall of Adam the
fourth subject of meditation. Compurationes multas. Arias Montan. in Latina
versione.
Adam and Eve were happy in their Creation; but alas! this happiness is not
long lasting: Man being in honor abides not, Psalm. 49.20. God made man
upright, but man sought out many inventions; many computations, as one renders,
Eccl. 7. ult. seeking what in him lay to mar God's workmanship, and deface his
image: Eve being overcome by the Serpent, eats of the forbidden fruit; and Adam
overcome with the persuasion of his Wife, takes from her hand that fatal Apple
that choaketh all his posterity, which being done, he is smitten with sudden
fear, sees his nakedness and is ashamed, and hides himself; and his eyes are
now opened to see evil by experience; for before his fall, he had no experience
of the evil of sin, and of the curse of God: therefore he brake the command of
God and did eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; he sinned because he
knew not the miscry of sin; but after his fall he sees the difference between
grace and sin; what he is himself; and what he was before* and all the future
miseries that are like to befall his posterity; and he that before treated him
as a son, cannot no^ look upon him but as a slave and vag^bond: Adam blames his
Wife; E^^ the Serpent; and instead of pleading guilty to their indictment, to
sweeten the rigor of the Judge, they frame excuses to inflame his anger, and
to render themselves more incapable of pardon: Ah how far more wisely had both
of them done, Aug l. 11. ad lit. c. 3.
says Austin, if prostrate o^ the ground with tears in their eyes, o^ sighs
from their hearts, and humbe confe^sions from their mouths, they had crie^
out, Lord pity us and all our miserable p^sterity: Causin. Histor. sacr.
It was for this, says Gregory, the God called them, and his voice as it we^^
solicited them to humble them by the swee^ accents of his fatherly goodness;
but alas they are insensible; God passes a severe doom upon them; the woman
shall conceive with pain, and in sorrow bring forth children; the ma^^ to eat
his bread in the sweat of his ^rows, and put his hand to the Plough, and be the
companion of beasts in tilling of his ground, which though he trod under his
feet, he could not subdue without the labor of his hand; and throughout his
whole life (which is a ^ife of sorrows) he is to combat with all distempers,
never suffering him to be at rest, till he return into the bo^ome of the earth
from whence he ^ame; and immediately a flaming Cherubim bars up the gate of
Paradise, and shuts it for ever against these mise^able exiles.

And now he that was the Monarch of the world; the father of all mankind; the
first; the richest; and ^reatest Lord that ever was on earth, he began the
fray, whereof all his mi^^rable posterity have felt the blows; his fall being
their foil; and his punishment the pattern of their pain and mi^ery; and now
his heart is the fountain which powrs out its qualities into the substance of
his childrens souls; Romans ^* ^0* (...) 8.
and ^ver since this infection has passed from father to son, as by hereditary
^ght; and now man is naturally void of all goodness and righteousness, and
become a vassal of sin, Joh. 8.34. a slave of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. a slave
of Satan, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and liable to eternal death: that we are all by
nature stained with sin, appears, Job 15.14. where Eliphaz says, This is
that which our fabulous Poets have shadowed unto us, in the tale of Pandora's
Box, which she opening through her curiosity, filled the whole world full of
all manner of diseases.
What is man that he should be clean, and he that is born of a woman that he
should be righteous* and the Kingly Prophet makes this doleful ditty to a
lamentable Elegy and sad plain-song, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me; and what he says of himself in particular, Paul
affirms of all men in general, Romans 5.12. saying, that by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin; whereby he understands the bitter
root of original corruption which daily and hourly brings forth the cursed
fruits of actual transgressions, whereby we become culpable and liable to
eternal ruin.

Sin and death are two twins born at a birth; yea howsoever sin be the elder
Brother in time, because it is the cause of death, yet in nature they come ver^
near each other; for as soon as eve^ sin was committed, death entered,
according to the commination of God to Adam, Si non peccasset Adam, non erat
expoliandus corpore, sed supervestiendus immortaliter. August.
Genesis 2.17. Had it not been for the sin of man, nothing had ever discomposed
his quiet; the seasons had not been irregular; nor the Elements waged war
against him; the earth had been fruitful without the labor of man; no thorns
or briars had ever covered the face thereof; no drowning deluges; nor scorching
drought; nor raging pestilence; nor devouring sword; nor wasting famine, should
ever have made any devastation upon an innocent state; the two parts that
compose man had not been separated; nor the masterpiece of the Creation been
ruined, as Austin speaks; and the soul reigning with Angels, had not beheld her
body devoured by worms: of all the strings of the worlds great Instrument,
Adam's only brake, and caused a jar; and having run from God, has drawn all
his posterity after him: the sin of Adam is the fountain of all the evils and
miseries that befall his posterity; we sinned in him, because we lived in his
person; and the offense of one man is become the obliquity of whole nature,
because it was included in him, as the tree in the kernel: Ball's Treatise of
meditation.
now that man enriched with so many graces and privileges, should in such a
place as Paradise; and in the sight of the tree of life; and having familiar
converse with God; and leave to eat of all other trees of the Garden; yet that
he must taste of the only forbidden tree, having power from God to have resisted
the temptation of the Devil, these are great aggravations of Adam's sin, as a
judicious Divine has well observed.

Sect. 5. Of the nature of sin; the number of our sins; with the aggravations
of them.
(...) fifth subject meditation is (...) nature of (...) etc.
Order will require that we should now meditate on the nature of sin; the number
of our sins; together with their aggravating circumstances: sin came not into
the world by Creation, but was the Devil's bird, brought in afterward by
corruption, Genesis 3.1, 2, 3. Jam. 1.13, 14, 15. where the manner of sins
conception and birth is described.

Now for the nature of sin consider,

1. That sin is a spot, (...) ^s a spot.
staining the soul; the mind and conscience is defiled by sin, Tit. 1.15.
things that are unclean, clean, are vile and loathsome, so is sin; it is very
odious; it makes a man like filthy Swine; like a spotted Leopard; it corrupts
him as the flies did Egypt, Exodus 8.24. so as the Lord says, they are become
filthy or stinking, Isa. 64.6. Thence it was that so many washings and
purgations under the Law were appointed: We are all as an unclean thing, says
the Prophet, and all our best righteousness is but filthy rags: thence it is
that holy men have been so earnest with God to cleanse them, and wash them from
the filthiness thereof, Psalm. 51.2. We have need of washing and cleansing,
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there being nothing whole
^herein, nothing but wounds, bruises, ^wellings and putrefying sores: Ad
incu^iendam horrorem a peccato, tanquam a re immunda. Musculus.
This Metaphor is used in Scripture, says Musculus, to strike terror into a
man to ^un sin, and fly from it, as an unclean ^ing: They that are all clean,
have need (...) wash their feet, says our Savior; to which devout Bernard
alluding, has his meditation, That though we choose ^^r way, and cull out our
paths to walk in, ^oiding the mire and dirt, yet in the best ^^d cleanest ways
our feet will gather some

2. Sin is in Scripture called by the name of folly; Sin is folly.
sin is the greatest folly of all other: a good understanding have all they
that do Gods Commandments, Psalm. 111.10. therefore sin being the transgression
of the Law of God, the sinner is the greatest fool: to call a wilful sinner a
fool will bear no action of slander in the Court of Heaven: 1 Samuel 25.25.
thus Abigail said of her Husband, Nahal is his name, and folly is with him:
thus Job calls his Wife, Job 2.10. and God calls all Atheists so, Psalm. 14.1.
and Christ calls the rich man in the Gospel so, Luk* 12.20. Who dares call a
rich man a fool; yet so does our Savior call him that is rich to the world,
and is not rich toward God: Every one bereft of reason and judgment is a
fool, He does not ^ean that sin had abolished the substance of their hearts,
secundum esse natural, but perverted and spoiled the qualities thereof,
secundum esse morale.
so be sinners: there be some sins that take away the heart. Hos. 4.11. Ephraim
is a silly dove without heart; the sinner like a fool seeks after trifles, and
lets go things of the greatest importance; he prefers a Counter before a piece
of gold, and will not leave his babble (according to the Proverb) for the Tower
of London; he knows not where a good bargain is to be had, like children
running up the hill to catch the Moon, sweating and toiling themselves to catch
Butterflies; so the sinner chooses vain things that cannot profit him.

Sinners like fools are foolhardy, and will not be corrected or reclaimed,
being struck by Aaron's rod, or reproved by the Spirit of God; and as fools
mock at wise men's actions, so do the wicked scorn at the ways of the godly.
Fools only care for a little meat and drink for the present, pins and points,
and such like trash, but look not after an inheritance; so sinners are
creatures of sense, and like bruits are altogether for present ease, and
present contentments.

3. Sin is called a burden: Sin is a burden.
Mine iniquities, says David, are gone over my head; as a heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.3. The Prophet Zachary compares it to a talent
of lead, the heavyest of all metals: the women that are led aside by seducers,
are said to be silly women laden with sins, 2 Timothy 3.6. Salt, sand and a lump
of Iron, Ecclus. 22.
is easier to bear, than an unwise, foolish, and ungodly man, says the son of
Syrach; and it is proved to be a burden, by the effects of hanging on and
pressing down, Heb. 12.1. We see this made good by the example of Jonah, that
the sin of one private person is likely to sink a Ship in the Sea; for he being
laden with a Commission for Nineveh, and disburdening himself of this Message
of God, became such a burden to the Ship, that though the Mariners had cast out
all their wares into the Sea, yet the greatest burden was behind, the sin of
Jonas: Peter thought it of force to sink more than one Ship, Luke 5. for when
two Ships fraught with Fish were ready to sink, he fell down at the knees of
Jesus, and said, Go from me O Lord, for I am a sinful man, thinking that his
sin had so endangered them.

Quest.
Though sin be as heavy as Salt, sand, Lead, Iron, of sufficient weight to sink
Ships, yea burden enough to sink the world; what may the reason then be, that
many sinners are so merry, and go so lightly away with it?

I answer with St Austin, Resp.
that the custom of sinning has taken away the sense of s^n, and so becoming
ordinary, it is therefore not odious or irksome, by reason of custom, and the
help which Satan lends the sinner; it seems no burden; he feels not the weight
of it; sin settling it self in the heart it does quiescere in propria sede, rest
in its proper place: It is an axiom in Philosophy, Elementa in loco proprio
non ponderant.
that the Elements are not heavy in their own proper place; as the air is not
heavy nor any burden to the birds; the water to the fishes; the earth to worms
or moles, because they are in their proper places; no more is sin heavy to a
sinner, settling it self in the heart where the element of sin is, it weighs
light; and except the wrath of God fall upon the conscience, (sin lying in its
Region) the sinner never cries out like Cain, Oh my sin is greater than I can
bear: Judas his heart was laden with hypocrisy, treason, malice, and
covetousness, enough to sink him down; yet it was no burden to him, till the
wrath of God touched his conscience, then it pressed him down to his own place.

4. Sin is a debt, Sin is a debt.
and the sinner is a debtor to God's Law and justice: I have read of Augustus
Caesar, that hearing of a sale of goods belonging to a Gentleman of Rome, that
was deeply indebted; Sueton.
be demanded if the party used to sleep well, saying, that if he did, he would
buy his bed, whatever it cost him, for surely there was some extraordinary
virtue in it: and if Caesar thought a man could not sleep being indebted to men
such as himself, who at the most were able but to seize on his body; then what
may sinners think of themselves, that are indebted to God more than they are
able to pay, and who is able to lay them fast, and punish them in soul and
body, and that for ever; and yet it may be feared, that many men never break an
hours sleep, nor abridge themselves of any pleasure that comes in their way
for the matter: the reason hereof is, because they never cast about what it may
cost them, before they commit it; being like a man riding cross some great
River, or arm of the Sea, with his face toward his Horse tail, so as he never
sees nor fears the danger he is to pass, Vega in Psalm. 32.
but only looks back to the banks from whence he came, and whither he will not
return, and so at length his Horse failing him, being tired, and able to swim
no further, both be drowned. It is good therefore every day to look over our
Debt-book that we may prevent running our selves into further arrear a^^s for
time to come, and to spend all our time on the great business of our
salvation: he is a thriftlesse Farmer that suffers the debt of one year to run
in another; Struth. observe. Cent. 2.
every day has its own burden, and how shall that crop discharge two years,
that pays not one? By these Metaphors we see something of the nature of sin.

2. Let us meditate on the number of our sins: David that had not sinned so
frequently as we have done, yet when he takes a survey of the number of his
sins, he gives up this account, Mine iniquities are more in number than the
hairs of my head; they were so many that he could not count them: upon which
place Saint Austin has this devout meditation; August.
David says he, had little sins, little and small as hairs, but yet
multiplying and increasing as the hairs of his head: and thus Chrysostom
compares sins to rags, Chrysostom.
to show that as rags the longer they be worn, the more they be increased; so
sin the more it is practiced, the further it is enlarged: and Bernard Bernard.
gives this advice, When thou drawest near to God, consider O Christian,
whether thou can meet him with ten thousand sins repented of, that comes
against thee with twenty thousand sins that thou never thoughtest of? Psalm.
19.12.
Who can understand his errors, says the Psalmist? Who knows the nature of
all his actions, whether they be erroneous or no; warrantable or no? indeed for
the substantial duties of a Christian, he deserves not the name of a Christian
that knows them not; but for many particular Cases of conscience, many
Questions incident to the life of a Christian, who can resolve them? Some
actions indeed are notoriously evil, sins of the first magnitude, such as are
taxed and made manifest by the very Moonlight of nature; some are o^ weaker
evidence, as sins of infirmity; some not discerned, and scarce known as sins,
as sins of ignorance and incogitancy; you may see them represented in three
Parables, Luke 15. of the lost Son, the lost sheep the lost piece of silver;
now draw, out thy meditations, and examine thy self, see whether thou art not
like the lost Son; have not thou often run away from thy Fathers house by
wilful rebellion? and if not so, yet may thou be as the lost sheep, gone
astray from thy God by a sin of infirmity? and if not that, yet who has not
been as the lost piece of silver? have not many of thy actions slipped out of thy
hand by incogitancy and ignorance?

3. Meditate on the aggravations of your sins; a sin that at first sight seems
little, yet by aggravation becomes exceeding sinful; though the substance of
men's actions be good, and their intentions good, yet they may have some
malignant circumstances that may blemish them. Job respecting the substance of
his actions, and the good intentions of his heart, cries out, O that I were
weighed in a balance; but if he take in the erring circumstances, then if he
will be weighed, he must follow Bernards advice, The beam and standard must be
the Cross of Christ, and the worth of his merits must help down the weight or
else it will be too light. Gather together all the aggravating circumstrnces of
thy sins, meditate thus with thy self, Such a sin I committed at such a time,
in such a place, when I should have been better employed, I a man of such a
Calling, a Magistrate, a Gentleman, a Minister, a professor of Religion, a
Father of children, a Governor of a Family, a Master of servants; and so my
example has been an occasion of stumbling to many; I did it at such a time,
after confession of sin, and sorrow for sin, after I had renewed my Covenant
against sin, after some grace and strength received to resist sin; these and
such like aggravations will make a small sin to become exceeding sinful: Now
the serious meditation of our sins is very profitable.

1. It brings us to a true sight of our sins, and makes us to hate sin so much
the more, and to groan under the burden of sin bringing us to Christ, with a
desire to be eased of its burden.

2. Like Peter's Cock it will be our awakener, and bring us to weep bitterly, it
will wound our conscience, and lead us to bitterness in spirit, who by our sins
have wounded so sweet a Savior.

3. It is a great advantage to humility, that man cannot be proud that daily
meditateth upon the nature and number of his sins.

4. It makes us ply the Throne of Grace more earnestly, wherein we shall find
matter enough to beg daily for the pardon of sin, and matter of praise to God
upon the meditation of many bypast sins remitted to us.

5. It is the best salve against all our sores, knowing we have no reason to
complain of our sufferings, when we meditate on the number and greatness of our
sins; and that we suffer justly, because we suffer for our sins, and so ought
to kiss the rod, and quietly to bear the indignation of the Lord, because we
have sinned against him.

Sect 6. Of the Sufferings and Death of Christ.
The next subject of meditation I shall treat of is, The sixth sub- of
meditation, the sufferings and death of Christ.
the Sufferings and Death of Christ, who was wounded for our transgressions,
whose soul was made an offering for our sins. The sufferings of Jesus began
with his life, he had enemies, as soon as he had subjects; when the w^se men
were doing him homage at his Cradle, Herod at the same time was conspiring his
death, he commits his safety to his flight, and seeks a Sanctuary in Egypt,
passing his minority in a Country where his people had long before for four
hundred and thirty years been in bondage; his whole life varied little from his
beginning, he was not in security but while he was unknown, he never was at
rest, but while he got his living by daily labor: No sooner did this glorious
Sun appear to the world, but he was persecuted; the Pharisees hate him for his
Doctrine, and envy him for his Miracles, they plot his death, when he had
raised Lazarus from death to life, and never cease till they bring him to his
Cross, and his Grave.

The matter of his sufferings were all the miseries whereunto the life of man
was subject, whether we mean pains of body, or grief of heart, and sorrows of
mind, he suffered them all in an extraordinary measure and manner, as I have
elsewhere more largely declared.

The ends of his sufferings (wherein also I may include the form thereof, sc.
his meritorious satisfaction for the sin of man) may be discussed; for had not
the first Adam sinned, the second Adam had not suffered; and whatsoever he did
by his active obedience, or suffered by his passive obedience, was to make up
that rent and breach which was made by Adams transgression, as Au^in tells us,
Nos in Adamo immortalitate male usi ut moreremur; Christus mortalitate been
usus est ut viveremus, Aug.
We all in the first Adam, behaving our selves ill, in a state of immortality
forfeited it, and became liable to eternal death, therefore Christ the second
Adam behaving himself well in a state of mortality, recovered again for us, and
restored again to us the right of eternal life. Joh. 1.29. John Baptist calls
him the Lamb of God that takes away the sin^ of the world; and Paul tells us,
how he was delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4.25. He was apprehended,
arraigned, condemned and crucified, that we might be acquitted, pardoned and
discharged; the Death of Jesus Christ is the last testimony of his love, his
wounds are so many bleeding mouths breathing forth his love unto us.

And this is very admirable, his power was increased by his death, he was never
more absolute than upon the Cross, spoiling Principalities and Powers; this Sun
never darted forth more rays than when he was in an eclipse; nor did the Lord
Jesus ever more triumph over his enemies, than when they upbraided him with his
infirmities, and made a mock of his sufferings, then was it, that he conceived
the Church in his wounds, giving his children life by his death, and founding
his Church with his blood: His Church cost him much more pain and trouble than
Eve did the first Adam; his Spouse never broke his sleep, Sicut dormientis Adae
costa detrahitur, ut conjux efficiatur, ita and Christo morienti de latere
sanguis effunditur, ut ecclesia construatur communicantes namque corpori and
sanguinis efficimur ecclesia Christi conjux August.
rising from his side without any pang or violence, he awoke from his sleep
into a Marriage with her that was a piece of himself; but Jesus Christ laid
down his life to give it to his Church, his body was pained, and his heart
pierced to form his Bride, this Spouse was to be sought for in the bowels of
her Father, yet even then did our Lord Jesus in his lowest abasement act like a
Sovereign; he pardoned Delinquents, when himself was numbered among
transgressors; he gives eternal life, when they bereft him of a temporal life;
he disposes of an heavenly Kingdom, when they disputed his Kingdom on earth;
he made his power appear in his weakness, his glory in his shame, his innocence
in his execution, his grandeur in his reproaches; and now was the Son of man
glorified upon the Cross, making his innocence manifest at his death, that to
the confusion of the Jews, the Judge that condemned him should plead his
excuse, that the Thieves that dyed with him should publish his Sovereignty,
that the Soldiers that nailed him to his Cross should become his adorers; yea
that the Sun (the great eye of the world) should hide his head, and whole
nature be in mourning for him, lamenting his death who was the Prince and Lord
of life; and however Christ was accounted of, yet the Robes of Kings are not to
be compared with the rags of Christ, nor the Thrones of Princes with the cross
and thorns of our Savior; Joh. Wall Sermon. in Heb. 9.12.
upon which consideration, one breaks forth into this meditation, O Lord if thy
shame be glorious, what is thy glory? how shall we be advanced by the strength
of thy power, that are so dignified by the weakness of thy sufferings?

1. This may teach us in our meditations to distinguish between Christ's
sufferings, and the sufferings of all Saints and Martyrs whatsoever; for theirs
were private, and profited only themselves, but his were public, and the
virtue thereof extended and redounded to all the faithful his members, he
being the head of the Church; for,

1. Their sufferings were chastisements and loving corrections to bring them to
the sight of their sins, to be sorry for them, and forsake them; or,

2. For trials of their faith, patience and constancy to suffer for his sake,
they were no way meritorious and satisfactory either for themselves or others,
as Leo sometime Bishop of Rome affirmed, contrary to the Doctrine of the
present Papacy, The just by their sufferings received Crowns themselves, but
procured none for others, Acceperunt justi, non dedere coronas, and de
fortitudine fidelium nata sunt exempla patientiae, non data dona justitiae. Leo.
and that from their constancy in suffering, others might receive examples of
patience, but no rewards for other men's righteousness: But Christ being a
public person, and our Surety, and having no sin of his own to suffer for, his
sufferings were in regard of himself works of supererrogation and therefore not
needing them himself, he might bestow them upon us, as the Apostle tells us, he
did, Gal. 3.13.

3. Hence we may meditate on that infinite hatred that God has against sin,
seeing he will lay the punishment of it upon his only Son, rather than suffer
it to escape, and go unpunished, Christ's wounds are blew with grief, and
shining with love, therefore by the opening of his wounds we ought to enter
into the secrets of his heart, Gerrard Meditat. 7.
Lev. 44.29. The Papists use the meditation of Christ's passion to move them to
hate the Jews, let us use it rather as a motive to make us loath and leave our
sins; for had it not been for them, one hair of his head had not fallen to the
ground; nay all the Jews in the world, and all the Devils in hell could have
done nothing against him; every sin of ours was as ^ thorn to his head, a nail
to his hands and feet, a spear to pierce his tender side: Let us therefore look
upon him whom we have pierced, and mourn heartily for our sins the causes of
his sufferings: But alas! Christ's death is often the occasion of the fall of
many, who persuade themselves that he that bought them, is too much concerned
in their salvation to destroy them; upon this vain hope they give up themselves
to all wickedness, and turn this precious antidote into poison.

4. Let the meditation of Christ's sufferings make us patient in all our
sufferings; if the meditation of the sufferings of the Fathers, Confessors, and
Martyrs of the Church will cause us to endure afflictions patiently, shall not
much more the meditation on the sufferings of Jesus Christ, who is as well tam
speculum patiendi, Bernard in Cantic.
quam proemium patientis, a perfect glass to show us how to suffer, as a sure
reward for those which do suffer; for, what will not the servant suffer
willingly for his Master, when his Master has patiently endured, Nil adeo
grave est, quod non aequanimiter toleretur, si Christi passio ad memoriam
reducatur, Gregor.
things not only wonderful and grievous, but (considering Christ's person)
things unworthy to be suffered Gessit mira and pertulet dura, nec tantum dura
sed etiam indigna, says Austin, has Christ willingly endured all this for us,
and shall not we patiently endure a little for him? therefore if the water of
afflictions seem bitter to thee, cast in that sweet Tree the Cross of Christ,
and it will soon be very pleasant; he that came into the world without sin, went
not out of the world without suffering, and yet he patiently endured the same,
showing that we that came into the world full of sin, and have ever since lived
in sin, should deservedly look for correction, and when it comes, endure it
patiently. Martial's Fly played so long under a tree, till it was wrapped in
amber, Sic modo quae fuerat vita contempta manente, Funeribus facta est nunc
pritiosa suis. Martial.
congealed in the drops that came from the boughs; the best of us are but as
worms, let us not despise to to be as this Fly, still hovering about the Tree
of the cross, and the ointment of his blood, till we be entombed and enclosed
in the precious amber of his bleeding wounds, and the sacred gum that grows in
the Tree of Life; For if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; and
if we be conformed to the image of his death, we shall be transformed to the
image of his glory.

Sect. 7. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
Now it is requisite that we should meditate on the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead: The seventh subject of meditation is the Resurrection of
Christ.
The Disciples of Christ before his Resurrection had not learnt their own
Creed, which they were taught, not so much by our Savior, as by his Sepulcher,
whose opening mouth when it sent forth Christ the word of God, pronounced his
Resurrection which is the Epitaph of God: Joseph's devotion bestows a Tomb upon
our Savior, but our Savior at his Resurrection bestows it upon death, which
ever since has been buried his Tomb: If the eye of our faith will adventure to
see the active horror of the grave, behold Jonas herein a type of Christ, and
his quick Tomb made a Tomb of salvation to him; three or four days he lay in
his new night of amazement, as if he had found an Egypt in the Whale, at last
the grave by unacquainted instruction cast up the living; the Whale was no
longer a Sepulcher, but a Fish, and Jonas no longer a Corse, but a Prophet; he
had surely dyed, had he not been buried, and here was a resurrection, though
not a reviving, a resurrection from disobedience and the Whale: Thus this rare
Anchorer, and his Tomb were both alive; but the Tomb of our Savior was as
desperate as his death, what could be expcted from a grave, and a carcass, yet
behold this carcass reviveth into a man, nay into a God, he arose when night
arises into morning, and at that season when Winter is quickened into a Spring;
it was on the first day of the Jews week, a week well begun, and it was the
first day of the Christian creation. The Angel made a little Earthquake in the
grave when he removed the mighty stone with which the vain Jew tried to oppress
our Savior after his death, as if he would have sealed him up to an
impossibility of a resurrection; but since the Angel has opened the Tomb for
us, shall we go and see the place whence Christ is risen, yet shall not we make
such haste, but that the speedy devotion of the two Mary's will be there before
us, whose feet were as swift as their love, and their love as swift as time,
nay more than time which hindered them by the delay and command of their
Sabbath, a Sabbath indeed only to their bodies, which while our Savior lay in
his grave, were but the Sepulchers of their souls, which found no Sabbath till
they found the Lord, they came with prepared spices and ointments for him whose
Divinity p^^vented balm, who esteemed their piety of more value than their
ointments; but alas! they are no sooner at the Sepulcher, but they find it as
empty of our Savior as full of wonder, and instead of the body of the Lord
they behold the Angel of the Lord sitting upon the stone which be had conquered
to obedience, his raiment white as snow, his countenance like lightning; but
that which was more wonderful I the fearful women were encouraged by the
Angel, and their innocence, while the guilty Soldiers beholding the same sight
with them, were full of faintness, being at once almost disarmed of their
weapons and souls, they became as dead men, and were rather the prisoners than
the keepers of the grave; but in the mean time the Angel comfort and
instruct^th the women, who are now his Dis^iples, and receiving a Commission ^o
preach the Resurrection of our ^aviour, they hasten out of the ^omb with the
confused expedition ^ fear and joy was not this a strange ^grimage to run from
the Sepulcher of the Lord, whenas multitudes of Popish Votaries travel to his
pretended Sepulcher? but yet it was more strange, they seek the Disciples and
find Christ; here was a comfortable mistake, and indeed he comforted them with
his presence and speech, when immediately they fall upon their knees, at his
knee whose resurrection these female Evangelists are again sent to teach, and
the first Scholars they must teach must be Christ's own Disciples, who show
their obedience as ready as their love, and speedily find Peter and John for
their hearers; here was zeal and tenderness; the fierceest and mildest of the
Apostles, and these no sooner hear their words, but they ran as fast to the
Tomb, as the other ran from it: John came first unto it, but Peter went first
into it; love was swiftest, but zeal was boldest; where they were no sooner
entered, but they find Christ's victory, and his spoils of death.

And here let us meditate on the accidents that happened at his resurrection,
before his ascension into Heaven: the Evangelist tells us, he came into the
house where the Disciples were met, when the doors were shut, Joh. 20.19. We
are not bound to believe it was at the beginning, or first shutting in of the
evening, but the night might be well spent before he appeared to them; nor are
we sure it was very late, for they might go to supper betimes, and the two
Disciples going before to Emmaus, making have might come to Jerusalem before
the dead time of the nigh^ and whereas it is said, Luke 24 33. that they found
the eleven, whenas it is evident Thomas was not among them; it is a Synecdoche,
setting down all for the greater number, as Ioh. 20.12. Thomas one of the
twelve; whereas they were then but eleven in all, for Judas had lest them, and
hanged himself, and Matthias was not yet chosen, and added to the number Act. 1.

The main Question is about the manner of Christ's coming in, for St: John Joh.
20.19.
tells us, he came in the doors being shut: Diverse are the opinions of the
learned about this point.

1. Some think it probable enough that some body within might unbolt or unbar
the door, though the rest of the company took no notice thereof, nor the
Evangelists mention it, so Marlorat: Marlorat. ad loc. Aretius. Boethius.
So he came in when the doors were shut, that is, very late, when it was time
the doors should be shut, say others.

2. The Papists say, he came through the doors, as they also say, he came out
of his mother's womb, clauso utero; that his body is really present at ^he
Sacrament in an invisible manner; but they only say it, but prove it not: Dr
Fulk.
A learned man says, Some incredulous Jew perhaps will not be persuaded, that
St. Peter 's sword went between Malchus his ear and head, it wa^ so soon healed
again: so some perhaps will not believe that the doors were at all opened, they
were so soon shut again; but it is clear, though the^ were shut presently before
and afte^ his passage, yet they were open (...) the instant of his passage,
else sha^ we grant a penetration, or the there were two solid bodies at (...)
same time in one place, which (...) not be; for so Austin says even (...)
glorified bodies, Toll spacia corporibus, and corpora non erunt.

3. The soundest opinion is to acknowledge, that he came in, Creatura cessit
Creatori, Beza. Calvin. Cyril. Polan. Synt. p. 419. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.
Sect. 19.
in a most miraculous manner, clausis januis, but not per clausas januas, so
that there was not penetratio sed cessio corporum solidorum: he came not
through the wood, iron and steel of the door, but the door opened to him of its
own accord, or by his divine power, as Act. 5.19. Act. 12.10. the ^reature gave
place to the Creator.

And that they might not doubt of his resurrection, he proves it by an ^vident
demonstration, bidding them behold his hands and his feet, and ^ells them it
was he, Luke 24.29, 30. (...) if he had said, a spirit has not parts ^ad
members and dimensions as I have; ^erefore you may assure yourselves, ^^at it is
my very body which you ^ that was buried, that is now risen ^ in: We may
observe further, ^t Christ bids them make use not ^y of their eyes to see, but
also of ^r hands to feel him; and unless (...) had done so, it had not given
satisfaction to incredulous Thomas, whose faith lay in his fingers, and will
believe no more than he sees and feels, to whose infirmity our Savior
condescendeth.

Quest.
Here then a Question may arise, whether the scars remained in Christ's body
after his resurrection or not?

Resp.
I answer, It seemed they did, how else could Thomas see and feel them, as he
is bid for his full satisfaction to do, Joh. 20.27. If it be demanded whether
they be blemishes or not; I answer, they were no signs of defect, Vulnerum
signa, virtutum insignia. Aquin. Eusebius. Emiss. Perkins in Symbol.
but ensigns of victory; but that it is not likely they now remain in Heaven, or
shall be seen at the last day, Mr Perkins shows, saying, that we may as well
think that the veins of his body shall be empty, and without blood, because
they were so upon the Cross, as that the scars in his body shall then appear,
because he had them, when he appeared to Thomas.

Object.
But how comes it about that he ^loweth that to Thomas and the (...) which he
will not afford to Mary M^dalen, sc. to touch him, notwithstanding he loved her
very well. Joh. 20.27 He said unto her, Touch me not; ^e bi^ Thomas not only
touch him, but also to put his finger into his side, which is more than to
touch him.

1. Some say, Resp.
she believed the resurrection by seeing him, therefore needed not this further
confirmation by feeling; but Thomas would not believe, unless he both saw and
felt, Joh. 20.25. the rest are so affrighted, that they know not what to make
of it.

2. Others say, Marlorat. ad loc.
he would not then be touched of her, to intimate to her, that she came with too
much a carnal mind to touch him, a mind too low in regard of this glorious
occasion, Christ being now risen and glorified, for his resurrection was the
first degree of his glorification: it did not satisfy her to answer, Rabboni,
but she runs to him, and claspeth him, and clingeth about him, as the affection
of love did dictate to her: but says Christ, Touch me not in ^uch a manner; Dr
Sibs Sermon. on Ioh. 20.16. Vide Bp Andrews Sermon. in loc.
this is not a fit man^r for thee to touch me in, now I ^m risen again: She
thought to con^erse with him in that familiar manner, as she did, while he was
on earth, when she powered ointment upon his head; though he were the same
person, yet his condition was changed; he was before in the state of abasement,
now in a state of glorification; and that she must not touch him carnally,
Aretius ad loc.
nor any longer expect his bodily presence upon earth, but follow him in her
heart and affections to Heaven, but touch him by the hand of faith, when he was
ascended to his Father, as Austin says, Mitte fidem in coelum, and tetigisti,
Send up thy faith to Heaven, and then thou touchest Christ.

Calv. ad loc.
3. Others say, it was not an absolute peremptory prohibition of touching him at
all, but only of immoderate embraceing, for both she and other holy women
afterward took him, and held him by the feet, Mat. 28.9. Oh how glorious are
the feet of the Lord of the Gospel?

4. Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm.
has a conceit, that perhaps may be sound enough, that it was not a perpetual
prohibition, but only to be in forc^ for the present time, which he
conjectureth from the reason, for I am not yet ascended, or ascending; I am not
yet leaving you, but have yet many days wherein I am to be conversant with
you, during which you shall have time and leisure enough to touch me, and
therefore forbear now at this time, and do that first which is most needful,
Go to my brethren, and tell them that I am risen, and that I ascend to my
Father and your Father, to my God and your God.

1. The meditation on the Resurrection of Christ, may teach us that Christ
arose as a public person, and therefore all the faithful shall rise again;
the Resurrection of Christ is a certain pledge of their resurrection; as in the
first fruits all the rest were sanctified, so by Christ all the harvest of the
faithful is consecrated to a joyful resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20. Hence Christ
is said to be the first begotten from the dead, because he is the cause of the
resurrection of all the faithful, Joh. 11.25. Col: 1.18.

That God by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, does testify to all the
children of God, that the guilt of their sins is taken away; for if there had
been any sin that Christ had not satisfied for, he should have lain in the
grave to this day, 1 Cor. 15.17.

3. That the virtue and power of our Regeneration in this life, comes from the
power and virtue of Christ's Resurrection, Ephesians. 4.8, 10. This confuteth the
Socinians, that hold Christ's Resurrection only exemplary, and the Pelagians
that say we have power to raise our selves, therefore every one of us should
labor to know the virtue of his Resurrection, by an experimental and practical
knowledge, according to that of the Apostle, Phil. 3.8, 10. and because we
cannot have this knowledge of our selves, let us pray to the Lord to give it
us, Ephesians. 1.19.

1. Let us labor to know the power of God in raising up Christ from the dead,
our faith and hope is grounded upon the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.21. that raised
him from the dead, that therefore he will bestow all good things upon us: And
here we must consider the will of God, for his power is effectual when it is
according to his will, Joh. 6.39, 40. God has promised to be our God, and to
bestow all good upon us; thus considering of the power of God, as it is an
effectual and working power joined with his will, it is a means whereby our
faith and hope comes to be in God.

2. Let us meditate on the goodness of God in raising Christ from the dead; we
call him our Father, and Almighty Father, for otherwise if we consider the
power of God without his goodness, it will make us to fly from him, rather
than to trust in him; this goodness of God is manifest in that God raised him
up, and gave him glory, and all for us, and our glory.

Sect. 8. Of meditation on Death.
The next subject of our meditations is is Death: The eighth subject of
meditation is death.
Life and Death are common accidents to all living creatures says Aristotle,
God made not death, but death crept and entered into world through the envy of
Satan, and man's disobedience: If God had made death, he would not with tears
have bewailed dead Lazarus, whom therefore he restored to life, that the Devil
might see, it is but lost labor, with rage to pursue the children of God to
take them out of the world, forasmuch as those whom men may deem utterly lost
and destroyed do live unto God.

The meditation of Death belongs to all sorts of persons, seeing it is
appointed to all men once to dye, and that by reason of sin, Romans 6.23.

Obj. The Pelagians say, That Adam should, and must have dyed, though he had
not sinned, even by the necessity of nature, and by the condition of his
creation, being made of corruptible, or mutable matter, and with a mortal body.

Resp. I answer, That as some things are mutable, which nevertheless shall
never be changed, as the good Angels might have fallen (as the evil did) before
they were confirmed, so there may be something mortal, which ye for all that
need not dye; for as the Mortale dupliciter vocatur; viz. vel quod naturae
necessitate mori oportet, vel quod peccati merito mori potest. Quod quicunque
dixerit, Adam primum hominem, mortalem factum, ita ut si^e peccaret, sive non
peccaret, moreretur in corpore, hoc est, de corpore exiret, non peccati merito
ed neessitate naturae, Anathema sit, Council. Melevit. cap. 1.
Learned have observed, A thing may be called mortal two ways, either that
which must dye by the necessity of nature, or that which may dye by the desert
of sin.

For the first, Adam's body was not so mortal, that it must have dyed by
condition of his creation, for he was created to live, and not to dye, being
made in the Image of God, whereof immortality is a part; and therefore it was
directly concluded by one of the Councils, that whosoever should say, that Adam
the first man was made mortal, so that he should have dyed corporally, whether
he had sinned, or not sinned, that is, that he should have gone out of the
body, not by the desert of sin, but by the necessity of nature, let him be
accursed; and God does not make it the cause that Adam should dye, because his
body was made of the dust of the earth, as the Pelagians falsely collect from,
Genesis 3.19. but becauss he had disobeyed the voice of God, harkening to the
voice of his seducing wife, Vid. Polan. Syntagm.
Satan's Instrument to tempt him, and so took and eat the forbidden fruit, as
appears verse. 17. therefore he should dye; and that which comes afterward,
does not declare the cause why he should dye, but only let him understand,
Lumb. Sent. lib. 2. Distinct. 9.
that there was no impediment but that he might dye; and that his body which
was before only mortale, of that nature that it might dye, he now by sin had
made morti obnoxium, subject and liable to death; thus Paul tells us plainly,
that sin brought in death as the wages thereof.

Object.
It may be demanded, seeing Jesus Christ has abolished death, and that by him
we are reconciled to God to obtain eternal life, how is it then that we are
subject to death?

Resp.
St. Austin answers, that heretofore death came and was by sin brought into
the world; but now death takes away our temporal life, to the end we should
cease from sin, and that the meditation of our death does keep us in our duty,
and so by Gods mercy the punishment of sin is become a shield against our sins.
Chrysostom censureth those wretches, who fear death, and fear not sin wherein
they are ensnared, nor the unquenchable fire which gapeth for them; to fear
death is an evil more dreadful than death it self: Stella de contempt mundi.
A wise man's life is the meditation of death, says Stella: Good reason it is
that we should betimes meditate on death, and think upon the freedom, liberty,
life and immortality which ensue; he gives death a joyful welcome, who is
before hand prepared for it: Shall any man think that death does not approach
because he thinks not of it, or shall he think it draws nearer because he
meditateth upon it; Gerrard Meditat. 43.
Whether thou think upon it or no, says one, it hangs always over thy
head, life was lent unto thee, not given thee as a freehold. Verily, the
meditation of death is not irksome, nor ought we to defer it from one year to
another, but on the contrary, to think that nothing does so much safeguard us
in the midst of adversities and dangers as the meditation of death; it is that
which makes us sober in prosperity, and ready prepared for all events; death
would be vanquished as soon as it should come, if it were well thought on
before it comes; and indeed he is unworthy of comfort in his death, who in his
whole life is forgetful of death.

Guericus hearing those words out of Genesis 5. read in the Church, And all the
days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years, Drexel. considerat.
de aeternit.
and he dyed; and all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years and
he dyed; and all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine
years, and he dyed, etc. Hearing, I say, these words read, the very thoughts of
death wrought so strongly upon him, that he gave up himself wholly to a devout
life, that he might dye the death of the righteous, and attain to eternal life:
I have read a story of one that gave a costly Ring to a young gallant with a
death's head in it, upon this condition, that for some weeks he should spend
one hour every day in looking and meditating upon it; he took the Ring in
wantonness, but performed the condition with diligence; but it pleased God,
after a frequent view and meditation thereof, it wrought a notable change upon
him, so that he became an excellent Christian; well were it, if men of all
ranks would frequently meditate on death; and then by the grace of God they
would find a great change upon their lives; Nil sic revocat a peccato, quam
frequens mortis meditatio, August. Nebrissens. Dec. 2. lib. 3. cap. 1.
there is nothing does so effectually call a man back from sin as the frequent
meditation of death. Jews the eleventh King of France did on his deathbed
restore two Counties to the heirs of John King of Arragon, to which before in
his life time he would never condescend. Cum igitur mortem non meditamur,
molestior vitae finis expectandus nobis est. Diogenes in Epist. ad Monemum.
Death is the clock by which we set our life in an order, and the memory
thereof does restrain our immoderate love to worldly things; did we frequently
meditate on death, we should find a bitterness in those things which now seem
sweet unto us; the meditation hereof cleanses the heart, as a strainer
cleanses all the liquor that is poured into it: A man is never more heavenly
minded, then when he meditateth on his own frailty, Sicut cibis omnibus panis
utilior est and magis necessarius, ita praestat omnibus operibus mortis
cogitatio. Climacus Grad. 6. de discret.
and thinks that he must shortly dye. Let us herein take heed of the
arrogance of the Stoics, and the vain confidence of the Epicures, who never
think on death, but think they are in league with it, persuading themselves, it
shall be easy for them to put by the blows of death; and let us have no part
in their effeminency, Mons. Goulart. Viel.
who are affrighted at the very name of death, not thinking that in death it
self there is so much evil, as in the solicitudes and fears with which many
times in a day they kill themselves, without any ease to their unbeleeving
hearts. Such meditations of death are foolish and unprofitable, seeing as the
Prophet tells us, There is no man living that shall not see death, and be able
to save his life out of the hand of the grave, Psalm. 89.90.

Sect. 9. Of the fewness of them that shall be saved.
The ninth subject of meditation, The small number of them that shall be saved.
In this Section, the subject of our meditation shall be the small number of
them that shall be saved: Christ's flock in Scripture is called a little flock,
Luke 12.32. the number of the Elect is but small, and by consequent, there are
but few that shall be saved: Thus much one of the Fathers collecteth out of the
destructions mentioned in the Old TeTestament, August. de verb. Domini in Mat.
13.
whereby they say signified the manner of the last judgment, which they make
types thereof; thus at the general Deluge commonly called Noah's Flood, a very
few escaped, and a small number were preserved, but eight persons, Genesis 6.18.
At the destruction of Sodom there escaped fewer, but three only, viz. Lot,
and his two Daughters, Genesis 19. and at the destruction of Jericho not many
preserved, but only Rahab and her household, as was promised, Josh. 2. and
performed Josh. 6. 2 Esdras 8.1.
An Apocriphal Writer tells us, That the most High made this world for many,
but the world to come but for a few: he illustrateth the point by a plain
familiar similitude, saying, As the earth yields much matter for pots, but
little for gold, so there be many created, but few that shall be saved; yea
Christ himself affirms, That the gate is wide, and the way broad that leads
unto life, and there be but few that find it, Matthew. 7.13, 14. and St. Paul
out of the Prophet Isaiah tells us, That though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand on the Sea, yet a remnant only shall be saved.

A Learned man divides the world Priorw.
into thirty parts, and he says, bu^ eleven parts only have the means of
grace, the rest remain in darkness; or that have not had the Gospel purely
preached unto them: now without faith there is no salvation, and without the
Word preached, ordinarily no faith; and then how many Jews, how many Turks,
Pagans, Infidels must needs perish? for as out of Noah's Ark there was no
safety from the Flood, so out of the Church, no salvation, or escaping of
eternal destruction, Act. 4.12. And

Vide Aquin. Ainsw. and Moller. in Psalm. 14.1.
1. Among those that profess themselves to be Christians, how many secret
Atheists be there, who perhaps are afraid or ashamed to say it with their
tongues, yet never blush to say it in their hearts, yea to proclaim it by their
lives, that they believe there is no God; for, if they confess his Essence, at
least they deny his providence, thinking that he never provideth Heaven for the
godly, nor Hell for the ungodly; all which persons be of the fraternity of
fools.

2. How many Hypocrites be there, who be like Nebuchadnezzar's image, Dan.
2.22, 23. whose head was of gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and
thighs of brass, the legs of iron, but the feet partly of iron, and partly of
clay; a fit emblem of the retrograde courses of some seeming good Christians,
whom the longer a man is acquainted with, the worse he will like them; for many
times they have holy words and hollow hearts, not caring to be good, but only
to be thought so.

3. All such persons as turn piety into policy, make profession of Religion
only for preferment, and other by-respects; howsoever they be in the Church,
yet they be not of the Church, Joh. 2.19. Now if all these and their like be
cut off from the account, we shall see that Christ's flock is but a little
flock, and that there are but few that shall be saved.

But it may be said, Object.
that our Savior says, Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the East, and the
West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven; and we read likewise, Rev. 7.4. that
there were twelve thousand sealed out of each tribe of Israel, except the tribe
of Dan, all which put together make an hundred forty four thousand, besides
those numberless numbers that come out of other Nations in long white robes,
in token of their inn^cence, and palms in their hands, the ensigns of victory
over worldly vanities; and Christ is said to be the firstborn among many
brethren, Romans 8.29. how then does it hold, that Christ's flock is but a little
flock, and there are but few that shall be saved?

Resp.
1. You are to know, that all things in the Scriptures are not spoken, or to be
taken simply, but sometime by way of comparison: as for example, when Jacob is
brought before King Pharaoh, and questioned by him about his age, he told him,
that his days had been but few and evil, which must be understood in
comparison of his ancestors, for otherwise an hundred and thirty years had been
a fair age, Genesis 47.9. so Christ's flock is but little in comparison of the
Devil's drove, and there are but few that shall be saved, in comparison of the
multitude that shall be damned. Thus Austin expounds the words of our Savior
on Mat. 13. Multi salvabuntur, and pauci, multi simpliciter, pauci comparative,
pauci comparatione periturorum, multi in societate Angelorum. Aug. Sermon. 32. de
verb. Domini.
Many shall be saved, yet but few; many simply, few comparatively; few in
comparison of those that perish; there are many in the society of Angels: the
distinction may be made plain by this similitude; If a man should suddenly see
a thousand or two thousand armed men in the field, he would surely think them a
great Army, but if (but turning his head) he should see ten thousand or twenty
thousand in another company, he would alter his opinion, and think the first
company but small, even an handful only in comparison of the latter: the
Prophet complains of the number of God's elect, to be like the summer fruit,
and as the grape gleanings of the vintage, Mic. 7.1.

2. They are many in relation to Christ their Head; for he is a King, and a
King is not attended with a few; he is a Savior, and his blood was shed for
many, Mat. 26.28. By his obedience he has justified many, Romans 5.19. God the
Father is also Master of a great Family, as the Devil who is the God of this
world has many vassals, so God has many Sons and Daughters that must be
brought to glory, Heb. 2.^0 they are a numberless number that are to follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes, Rev. 14.1. In this respect the Elect are many; yet
(as I said before) compared with the multitude that shall perish, they are but
a very small number.

1. Here we may meditate on the folly of the Papists, in making universality a
note of their Church, the consent of the multitude, a note of true Religion;
whereas Christ himself tells us, His flock is but a little flock: all Abab's
false Prohets are against Michajah, all Zedekiah's Courtiers against Jeremy,
all Darius his Nobles against Daniel, all the Scribes and Pharisees against
Christ and his Apostles; all the Arrians against Athanasius: In a word, if
number and multitude might carry it, neither the Papists, nor the Protestants
would have (...) Church, but the Turks would take it from us both.

2. The meditation on the small number of them that shall be saved, will make
us take heed of following the multitude, and doing as the most do, lest we go
to the Devil for company; as it is reported of a King of Friezeland, that being
like King Agrippa, almost persuaded to be a Christian, Gualter. in Luke 13.
and demanding of the Bishop that was to have baptized him, what he thought was
become of all his Ancestors, that dyed unbaptized, and unconverted to the
faith; who answering modestly, That it was not meet for them to dive into the
secret counsel of God* who might save some of them extraordinarily, but for any
thing that was revealed in the word, he could not see but they must be damned;
but that He was infinitely bound to God in reserving him till that time, making
known to him the means of salvation, which was hid from them; whereupon my
Author says, he plucked back his foot in a rage, saying* That he would also
follow them, and go to Hell likewise for company: The meditation on the small
number that shall be saved, should make us strive to be of that small remnant.

Greg. Nazianz. ad Arian. and de seipso. Orat. 24.
Nazianzen speaking of his own time, says, Where are they now that upbraid us
with our poverty, and boast so much of their own wealth, who define a Church by
multitude, and contemn a small sheepfold? that is not always the safest way to
go where many go: Esteem not of their number says Austin, Aug. in Psalm. 39.
I grant they are many, who is able to number them? few they are that go the
strait way; bring me hither the scales, begin to weigh, see what a deal of
chafe is hoised up in one scale against a few balney corns in the other: And
Chrysostom says, What profit or advantage is it, to be rather a great deal of
chafe, than a few precious stones? Thus the Fathers: and yet says Bellarmine
Bellarm. de Eccles. milit. l. 4. c. 7.
One note of the Church is multitude of believers.

Sect. 10. Of meditation on Hell.
Let us now draw forth our meditations on Hell, Hell the tenth subject of
meditation.
and first let us consider the names of the place prepared for the damned: It
is called Tophet, Isa. 30.33. whence Jerome says, the Latin word Gehenna
comes, sometime it is called Utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13. sometime it is
called Infernus, a place beneath, a place most opposite and furthest remote
from Heaven, Nunquam erit homini pejus in morte, quam ubi erit mors sine morte.
to signify the most desperate and dejected estate of the damned, who shall be
even trod upon and trampled under the feet of the godly, Malac. 4.3. Thus they
that now would put their hands under their feet, because there is yet hope they
may do them good, shall then be so far from pitying, as they shall praise God
for plaguing and punishing them; its called also a burning lake, the second
Death or Hell.

2. Consider we the sorts of the punishments of the damned.

1. They shall be tormented with the worm of conscience, the never dying worm:
this worm that shall gnaw the wicked in hell, is nothing else but the guilt of
an evil conscience, thoroughly awakened in hell; called a Worm, because as
worms proceed from putrefaction, and do torment by biting and gnawing; so this
worm proceeds from the putrefaction of sin, afflicts by gnawing and
tormenting the sinner for ever: Though the consciences of wicked men are
sometime asleep in this life; and though they commit many notorious sins, and
they have a dull and sleepy conscience, and having no sense of what they do;
and though sometime they put out the eye of conscience, and cannot discern
between moral good and evil; and though they have a secure conscience which
thinks not of any penal evil, and so they seldom think of Hell torments; and
though sometime they put a muzzle upon conscience, and labor to stop its
mouth; and though sometime their consciences are cauterized, and become
altogether senseless, yet when they come to dye, but especially when they go
into Hell, their consciences shall be perfectly awakened and that for ever;
then wicked men will even gnash their teeth, because conscience did no sooner
use its teeth, they will then gnaw their tongues for sorrow, because conscience
had no tongue to speak, nor they no ears to hear what it spoke till it was too
late: Conscience has a reflecting power, and when sinners come into hell, all
the evils that ever they have done shall come fresh to their remembrance; as
the glorious Saints do remember all the good that ever they have done here, for
their comfort; so the wicked in hell shall remember all the evil that ever they
have done for the aggravation of their misery; they shall then call to mind
all the evil they have done, and all the good they have left undone, the means
of grace that has been offered them, and they have slighted, the thoughts
whereof shall sting them for ever.

2. They shall be tormented with fire: where we may note,

1. The universality of it, every part must go into it, and be tormented in
that infernal fire; we see many here pained many ways; one cries out of his
head; another of his teeth; another has a pain in his bladder; another in his
stomach; another in his belly; and these pains pinch so for a time, as many had
rather die than long endure them: now if the stone or gout taking and holding
us but in some one member, be thus terrible to us, what would it be to feel
them altogether? surely not so much as a flea-bite compared with the torments
the wicked endure in Hell; for they feel intolerable pain in all their senses,
both outward and inward, in all the powers and faculties of their souls, in all
the parts and members of their bodies: wanton eyes shall then be affrighted
with fearful shapes of ugly Devils; A certain Ruffian often assaulted a chaste
Lady to satisfy his lust, with many protestations that she was the only
creature whom he loved so well, as for her sake he would undertake any task,
though never so tedious: and being earnest with her to try him, she bade him,
but one hour hold one of his hands in the flame of the candle, that was burning
before her: hearing his doom, he discontentedly replied, that the request was
unreasonable; is it so said she an unreasonable suit that you for my sake
should endure but an hours pain, and hazard but one limb, and is it not more
unreasonable, that I for your sake should hazard the final loss of my soul
and body to be tormented in Hell fire for ever.
delicate ears with the hideous noise of damned ghosts; the curious taste
afflicted with hunger that never shall be staunched, and thirst that never
shall be quenched; the nice smell with the noisome savor of fire and
brimstone; and all the senses shall feel the fury of an angry God.

2. The extremity of it, it shall be in fire: such is the heat of our
elementary fire, made for our use and ^omfort, as a man would hardly be ^ired
to hold one hand in it an hour, ^o gain a Kingdom; how then shall ^he wicked
be able to endure their whole bodies in that fire, which is much hotter, and
created only for ^orment?

3. It Is everlasting fire: if a man were laid upon our fire, it would in ^hort
time consume his body to ashes, and put an end to his misery; but men's bodies
shall then be immortal, ^o that they shall ever be burning, ^ut never
consumed; yea when they have been there as many thousand years, as they have
been days or hours upon the earth, they be never the nearer the end of their
pain; and ^o strait is the allowance of that place, as nothing shall there be
obtained, as might give them the least hope of ease or refreshment: the rich
glutton whose ^ody has been finely clad, delicately ^ed, and softly lodged, is
now in a scorching surnace of fire; that ^ongue of his that was wont to be
de^ied no sauce, to make his meat relish, and go down merrily, Dives in inferno
cogente inopia, usque ad minima petenda perductus est, qui sua tenacitate ad
minima neganda pauperibus restrictus est. Gloss. in Job 27. Ibi dolor permanet,
ut affligat, and natura perdurat, ut sentiat, quia utrumque non deficit, nec
poena de ficiet. Aug. Et sic morientur damnati, ut semper vivant, and sic
vivent, ut semper moriantur. Bern. meditat. c. 19.
cannot now come by one drop of water to cool it self; what less thing could
he have desired, yet this little he is denied? There says Austin, does pain
remain, that it might always torment and there does nature endure, that i^
might ever feel the pain; and because neither of these be wanting, therefore
the punishment can never have a ceasing so shall the damned die, that they may
always live, and so live, thae they may be always dying: then those whose
iniquities could not b^ consumed with the vehement flame^ of God's burning
love, shall be for ever frying in the everlasting burnings: and the hearts of
those tha^ would not be mollified with the refreshing dews of God's blessings
o^ earth, shall be hardened to endur^ the vengeance of eternal fire.

Damascen tells us of a certain King who was desirous to breed up his So^ in
continual pleasures; for which purpose he caused him to be educate^ in a
Palace, which seemed to b^ consecrated to all kinds of pastime^ all which
nature and art could do (...) delight the senses, was here enclosed, Suetonius
reports of Tib. Caesar, that being sought to by an offender to hasten his
punishment, he answered him, Nondum tecum in gratiam redii: so if one of the
damned, after many thousand years burning in Hell should entreat for a speedy
death, God would answer him in the same manner.
nothing was permitted to be presented before his eyes, that might any way
displease him; in the end this happy creature was troubled at his golden cage,
and delightful prison, and desired to leave it, and take a view of the world:
Oh then what a horrible bondage will it be to be in a fiery lake, in an ugly,
stinking and loathsome pit of darkness, where he shall have Devils tormenting
him for ever.

4. Meditate on the contrariety of those torments in respect of their
qualities: there is a perpetual flaming fire, and yet an horrid mist of
darkness; heat continually boiling; and yet cold continually congealing, the
fire always burning, yet no light appearing: thus says Gregory, Hell torments
in the destruction of the wicked do disagree from their natures, because while
the wicked lived upon earth, they disagreed from the will of their Creator.

The serious meditation of Hell is of singular use to us: Chrysostom says,
that nothing is more profitable for people, than that Ministers preach often,
and people meditate much on Hell fire, and that the surest way to be freed from
Hell, is to meditate much upon the torments of Hell: and says he to his people
offended thereat; If you be troubled at the hearing of the torments of Hell
fire, how would you be able to feel the torments of it: and he adds; Whether
I preach of it, or you think of it or not, the fire burns, and to think often
of it is a sovereign remedy for the soul: and let me add; You that will not
now meditate on Hell fire, a time shall come that you shall have nothing else
to do but to think of it; you that will not now think of Hell to prevent it; a
time shall come that you shall have such thoughts as these; Once I had a day of
grace; God gave me space for repentance, but now there is none; once this
misery might have been prevented, but now neither ease nor end of this misery
is to be expected; then will thou cry out against thy sin that brought thee to
this place of torment; then will thou see the wickedness of depraved nature;
the deceitfulness of thy lusts; and that all the worlds enticements have been
mere enchantments. To think seriously and frequently of Hell here, Kempis de
imitat. Christi.
preserves a man from falling into Hell; have a care to repent while yet there
is time for pardon; what else shall the fire devour but thy sins; the more thou
heapest up sins, the more matter thou layest up for the fire.

Sect. 11. Of meditation on the glory of Heaven.
The last subject of our meditations here, shall be the glory of Heaven: The
last subject of Meditation, the glory of Heaven.
wonderful and unspeakable is that glory, such as all the Kings and Emperous
in the world cannot give; they can leave their Kingdoms but to one of their
sons, the rest must be put off with Dukedomes, and other dignities; as the
children of Abraham by Keturah and his Concubines, must take their portions and
be gone; Isaac only must be his heir, Genesis 25. but all God's children shall be
heirs, and crowned Kings, Rev. 20.6. and inherit such a Kingdom as the world
never saw nor dreamed of: it is sometimes called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
8.11. sometimes a bosom, a place of rest and sweet refreshment, Luke 16.
sometimes Paradise, in allusion to the earthly Paradise, a place of all
delights and pleasure, where our first Parents lived before their fall, Luke
23.43.

I dare not undertake to describe the joys of Heaven, but by circumstances we
may guess something at the greatness thereof.

1. Let us conceive of it by this world which we see, and wherein we live;
which is enlightened from the Sun, Moon and Stars; covered with the fair Canopy
of the Heavens; environed with the Sea; interlaced with many winding Rivers;
replenisht with variety and plenty of Cattle, Fowls and Fish, for the use and
service of man; and why was this world built, but to be a resting place for
man, to stay in for a short time: if then God has given us such a cottage to
be Termers in, what shall we think of our eternal Mansions, where we must
abide for ever? yea if God has afforded such entertainment to his enemies
here, what may we think he lays up for them that love him?

Some conjecture at the joys of Heaven, by comparing the three places of man's
abode together, scil. his mother's womb; this world, and the Kingdom of
Heaven: and they affirm, that the third, viz. the Kingdom of Heaven, as far
excels this world in largeness, beauty, and all manner of delights, as the
whole world does the womb of one woman; yea as much, and more than the
mightiest and wisest man on earth, does exceed a poor Infant or Embrio in the
mother's womb, in strength, beauty, wit, understanding, etc. does the least and
meanest Saint in Heaven, exceed the wisest and mightiest man on earth: yea
less comparison is there between the nine months abode of a child in his
mother's womb, and the oldest man's life on earth, than between the age of
Methuselah, who lived nine hundred sixty nine years, and the time of our abode
in Heaven; or between the thing that is finite, and that which is infinite,
there is no ^roportion.

When Ahasuerus that reigned in Asia over an hundred twenty seven Provinces,
even from India to Aethiopia, was disposed to make a Feast to all the Princes
of his Kingdoms, Esth. 1. no doubt but it was a royal Feast, and most
bountiful Banquet; but yet surely but a scambling, if we compare it with that
Feast which the Lord of Hosts will make in his holy Mountain, it must needs far
surpass the Feast of Ahasuerus in all things.

1. For continuance of time: that was to last an hundred and eighty days, and
then to have an end; but this more than an hundred and fourscore thousand
years, even for ever and ever without end.

2. For the servitours: Ahasuerus Feast was to be served in by men, who might
mistake and misplace something, or commit some oversights; but this is to be
served by the Angels, who know how to do all things in the best fashion: yea to
let the guests see how wonderful welcome they shall be, the Son of man
himself, though he be maker and Master of the Feast, yet will gir^ himself, and
serve, Luke 12.37.

3. For the company at Ahasuerus Feast: though it were great; yet a great part
of it was not very good; but here shall be none but God and good company, viz.
Angels and Saints.

4. For the provision, it far exceeds: for that was but what some few parts
of the world, whereof he had the command, might afford; but this shall be to
open the treasures, and show forth the goodness and greatness of the
Almighty, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; yea whose riches and
revenues more exceed those of Ahasuerus, than his did the poorest man's living.
Aug. Soliloq. c. 35, 36. Aug. Mannal. c. 7, 8. Bern. Medit. c. 4.
Many are the things that the Ancients have written in commendation of this
heavenly inheritance: the Scripture compares it to a City most absolute,
wherein is wanting neither beauty of building, nor order of government, nor
plentiful provision of all things. In a word, we must admire it in silence,
for it cannot be expressed by humane or Angelical eloquence: the joys of it
are so great, that they cannot enter into the possessours; therefore they must
enter into them. Mat. 25.21. Christ will say to all his friends, enter into
your Master's joy, enter friends, and take your comfort; enter servants, and
take your wages; enter children, and take your patrimony; enter brethren, and
take your portion; enter all ye that seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and take your
Crown: The poor, says one, Jo. Wall. Sermon. in Mat. 25.21.
is not shut out for want of money; the rich is not turned back for the
abundance of his comforts; the weak is not thrust out for want of strength; nor
the mighty refused for the danger of their Forces, but every one that has
right to it, takes possession of it.

And though there be degrees of glory in Heaven, Mat. 18.28. Dan. 12.3. yet is
it true what Austin tells us, that they that have least shall have no want, to
make them grudge or murmr against them that have more than themselves; and
they that have much shall have nothing too much, to move them to scorn or
contemn those that have less than themselves: for even as diverse vessels of
diverse sizes being cast into the Sea, though all be full of water, yet all
cannot hold and contain the like quantity and measure of water; so it may seem
that those persons that hold most grace on earth, shall have likewise most
glory in Heaven: but there shall be no complaining occasioned through want, nor
any contempt by reason of abundance; for that inheritance being infinite like
God himself the giver, is tanta omnibus, quanta singulis, not lessened or
diminished by the number of heirs; therefore we may conclude with David, In thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore,
Psalm. 16.11.

Here our knowledge is mixed with darkness; we see God but in Aenigmaes; the
very species that discover him, conceal him; these glasses are too scant fully
to represent his greatness to us, and our spirits are too weak to bear the
splendor of his glorious Majesty; but in Heaven the mind shall lose her
darkness, and be fortified with a capacity to behold the King in his glory: O
blessed sight to see God in his glory; to see God in us, and us in him, says
Bernard. O beata visio, videre Deum in seipso, videre Deum in nobis, and nos in
ipso. Bern.


There are three things in this world which oppose our happiness, and hinder
us from knowing God perfectly.

The first is his greatness which astonisheth us: therefore he is said to
dwell in light to which no mortal can approach, and the darkness is said to
cover him, and hide him from our sight.

The second is his absence: for though he be in every place, yet when he
pleases, he hides his face, and withdraws his presence from us.

The third is our impotency, which cannot here abide a full manifestation of
the glorious presence of God: but in Heaven all these hindrances shall be taken
away from the blessed; God's Majesty is no longer terrible; his greatness
which here is astonishing to us, shall then give being to our felicity; and the
love of God having cast out all fear from our hearts, we shall then treat with
our Sovereign as our beloved friend; we shall not then lament the absence of
the chiefest good, but be possessed by him whom we possess; we shall be as
full of God as our hearts can hold or desire.

And as the knowledge, so also the love of the Saints to God in Heaven shall be
complete: here our love to him is very slender; it is faint, because we
possess not the highest good which we most ardently affect, and being
separated from him, we are as well his Martyrs, as his lovers; Tunc implebuntur
vota: but then says Bernard, shall our longing be satisfied, and our desires
accomplished: here our love is divided, because self-love is not yet
extinguished; and the more we indulge our selves, the more we rob God of his
due: we love not God so purely, as not to seek our selves when we pretend to
seek his glory: we are here more earnest with him for riches and honors, than
for graces; but in Heaven our love shall be free from such imperfections: our
love shall not then be blind, because we shall see him whom we love; and the
splendor of God's glory that enlightens us, is a ray that shall dispell all
the darkness of our understandings: our love to God in Heaven shall not
languish, nor spend it self in its own longings, because then we shall possess
what we love, and being infinitely united to the fountain of happiness, we
shall never be separated from him: our love then shall not be divided; for the
souls of the blessed shall then be purified, when they shall quit their bodily
prisons: the glory of the great King shall be the end of all their desires; yea
in Heaven it self, the Saints shall not seek so much their own happiness, as
God's glory: St Austin says, that the knowledge and love of God, Tantum
gaudebunt beati, quantum amabunt, tantum amabunt, quantum cognoscent Deum. Aug.
shall be the two grand employments of the Saints in Heaven: the blessed in
Heaven shall so rejoice in God, as they shall love him, and so love him, as
they shall know him: the good works which the godly did on earth, shall be
banished from Heaven: there shall be no need of mercy, in estate where misery
cannot approach: there shall be no need of visiting the sick; for sickness and
death cannot annoy those that dwell in the Land of immortality: there shall be
no burying of the dead in the Land of the living: no need shall be of
Hospitals, because no pilgrims shall be there: there shall be no need of
clothing any of Christ's members, who shall be all clothed with long white
robes, dipped in the blood of the Lamb: there shall be no trouble about
reconciling enemies, because peace shall eternally reign in Emanuel's Land.

The miseries of this life, says one, Senault. Treat. 8. Disc. 8.
compel men to build houses; to protect them from the injury of wind and
weather; to make clothes to keep them from shame and cold; to till the earth
for their ^^triment; but there shall be an end put t^ all these employments,
where God shall be all in all to all his people: they shall then fear nothing,
where the possession of all good necessarily produces the exclusion of all
evil: we shall not then dread hunger and thirst, because we shall lodge in the
house of a great Lord, where is plenty of all things, where we may bathe our
^elves in the rivers of his innocent de^^ghts: neither heat nor cold shall
annoy us, because the Sun of righteousness that warms us with the beams of his
ardent love, shall also refresh us with his shadow: weariness shall not make
us faint, because God shall be our everlasting strength: there shall be no
labor that shall need repose; nor shall the night ever draw a curtain over the
day: there shall be no traffic or commerce, because in God all things shall be
possessed: there shall be none in servitude, because all the Subjects of this
Kingdom are crowned Kings: If you ask me, says Austin, what shall we do then
in a place, whence pain and trouble are banished? I shall answer with the
Prophet, Vacate and videte, quoniam ego Deus sum, Be still and se^ that I am
God: this meditation shall wholly take them up, and that for ever. This is that
glory, says tha^ devout Father, which the Angels admire, which obscures the
Sun; ye^ which (could it appear to the souls of the damned) would like the
sweet tree in the bitter waters, make even Hell it se^^ seem a Paradise of
pleasures.

Now let us draw out our medit^tions on the Heavens: they are the most glorious
part of the Creation, and their very pavement is more beautiful, than all the
earths glory: neither Art nor nature can produce, nor man can think of such
things as they contain: if the under part of that pavement be more glorious
than this lower house of the world, how glorious shall that house above be? if
the visible Heavens do so affect us, what will the Heaven of Heavens do; and
above all God himself, the glory of the Heavens? When God would stir up Abraham
to obedience, he bids him lift up his eyes, Genesis 13.14, 15
and look from the place where he was, Eastward, Westward, Northward, and
Southward, and see the Land which God would give him, and his seed: so say I to
you that hear me this day, lift up your eyes, and behold the Heavens that God
has provided for your souls, for which God requires you to leave your
pleasures, profits, credit, goods, good name, or whatsoever else is dear unto
you.

Again, Would thou be freed from the arrows of bitter tongues, meditate on
Heaven, and look u^ thither: if thou can but once get thither, thou art safe,
and shall be secretly kept in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues.

Would thou fain be rich? art thou discontented with thy poor and mean
estate? meditate on Heaven, there is riches enough for thee: be thou never so
poor in the world, if rich in faith, Heb. 10.34.
thou art an heir to a Kingdom: your substance on earth is little and
perishing, but in Heaven ye have a better and more enduring substance: you that
are godly poor, that have scarce an house to put your heads in, that cry out
for want of room on earth, meditate on Heaven, there is Rehoboth, room enough
for you all: Thus Christ comfort his Disciples, Joh. 14.2.
In my Fathers house are many mansions: it was the place whence he came, and
whither he was going before them, to take possession of it, and to prepare
places for them there; therefore they might be contented to want his bodily
presence on earth, and be a little straightened here below, they should have room
enough in Heaven. Yea meditate on Heaven, and look up thither with an eye of
faith, and thou may with Stephen, see Christ sitting there at the right hand
of God; Christ thy Head, thy Husband, thy Advocate, thy friend, thy Savior,
there making intercession for thee to his Father, presenting his own merits
continually before him. Let these meditations cheer thee up, and comfort thee
against all distracting thoughts, and dark apprehensions, and refresh thee in
the midst of all crosses and wants. It was a comfortable speech which the
Emperor used to Galba in his minority, when he took him by the Chin, and said,
Thou Galba shall one day s^t upon a Throne: Tu Galba quandoque imperium
degustabis.
and let this meditation cheer the Saints of God, how little soever they are in
the worlds eye, that one day they shall sit upon Thrones: though now they lie
among the Pots, and like Job upon the dunghill, yet one day they shall be
gathered with Princes, with the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: therefore we
should not think our selves Citizens of the world, as the Heathen Philosophers
did, but Burgesses of Heaven, as all the faithful have done, as Paul
professes, (...), our City-like conversation is in Heav^n, Phil. 3.20. and
then let us cry out, Quousque Domine, How long Lord, make have, make no long
tarrying? Lord thou have been the strength and food of all that travel by the
way, Cibus viatorum, salus beatorum. Fulgent
so be now the Crown and glory of all that are come to the end of their way.

Chap. 9. Of timing our Meditations in the best manner.
1. It is good to begin every year with holy meditations: men usually handsell
the year with some newyears gifts; let us look higher, even to God: certainly
this is our best newyears gift, to give a heart to God, fraught with heavenly
meditations. To this purpose, such meditations as these are useful; namely, to
try one year by another; whether grace thrive or decay in us; to see according
to our years, what progress we have made in the way to Heaven; if for every
year of our life, we are passed a station of the wilderness of this world, to
the heavenly Canaan; if as our outward man decays, our inner man be renewed
day by day: it is of great advantage to Christians, to begin the year with such
meditations; and better it is to fill our minds with these, than our bellies
with dainty food: this work of meditation is a part of our yearly Rent to be
paid to God: every new year we renew the lease of our lives again of God; and
therefore pious meditations are a task answerable to such a time: the new man
in the beginning of the newyear, is to meditate on his over year sins, and
heartily bewail them, and repent of them; to meditate on the renewing his
Covenant with God for new obedience; and according to the work of grace in him,
to strengthen his communion with God.

2. It is good also to begin every day with meditation: In the morning sow thy
seed, Eccles. 11.6. Psalm. 130.6.
David's meditations did prevent the morning watch; his soul was flying to
Heaven before the Sun was up, or the morning got out of its bed: and says he,
Psalm. 139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee: to which Ambrose Ambros. in
Psalm. 36. It is good to set our souls in order every morning, perfuming our
spirits with some holy meditations. Dr Sibs.
alluding, says, Let a devoted spirit prevent the morning, that it may be
enlightened by Christ, before the earth be illuminated by the rising of the Sun.
We bend our heart to God in the morning, when we lift our heart to God, and
give him our first thoughts and affections; then shall he fill us with his
mercies in the morning, that we may rejoice all the day long. Cicer. Tusc.
quaest. l. 4.
Demosthenes was troubled, that a Smith should be at his Anvil, before himself
could be at his Study; much more should it grieve us to be prevented by them.

Season your minds in the morning with such meditations as these:

1. Meditate on the great favor which God has vouchsafed to thee the night
past; and if thou have not remembered God upon thy bed; nor thy reins instructed
thee in the night season; and if God has not been in all thy thoughts, think
of humbling thy self before him, and crave his pardon.

2. In the morning meditate thus with thy self: this day is given me to give
all diligence, to make my calling and election sure; to obtain eternal life;
to take a firm resolution to employ my whole life to that purpose; and to think
seriously of the reckoning I must give to God.

3. Meditate upon what affairs thou may meet with the day following, as helps
or hindrances to thee in God's service: use the best means offered to promote
thy service of God; and think how thou may carefully resist, and overcome
whatever is contrary to God's glory, and thy salvation.

4. Meditate how unable thou art to perform any pious resolutions, be they
either to shun the evil, or do the thing that is good; and offer up thy heart
in the morning, with all thy holy purposes, to the heavenly Majesty, praying
him to take it and them into his gracious protection.

5. Think with thy self every morning: this day for ought that I know, may be
my last day; how ought I then so to spend this day, as though death were
presently to arrest me. By these or the like morning meditations, all that
shall be done the day after, may be bedewed with the blessing of Heaven.

As in the morning you are to take a spiritual repast by meditation; so in the
evening it is necessary to take a devout and spiritual collation. Isaac in my
Text went out in the evening to meditate: One advises, that meditation be our
key to open the morning, and our lock to close the evening withal. Get a
little leisure after all your wordly employments, to call up your spirits to
the consideration of some holy object, which thou may present to thy self
simply, by an inward cast of thy thought, kindling the fire of meditation in
thy heart, by a few holy inspirations and ejaculations to the Lord, either in
repeating, what thou have best relished in thy morning meditations, or by some
other as thou best likest.

Now such meditations as these in the evening, before our going to bed, may not
be unprofitable.

1. To meditate on God's great goodness, in preserving thee the day before,
from many troops of dangers, that lay in ambuscado against thee.

2. To meditate and examine thy self, how thou have carried thy self in every
part of the day; which to do the more easily, you are to consider with whom,
and in what employments you have been busied.

3. If a man has done any good, to think of praising God for it; if any ill,
in thought, word, or deed, to be humbled, and ask pardon for it, with a
resolution carefully to amend it.

4. So to end the day in holy duties, that by our morning exercise, we may open
the windows of our souls to the Sun of righteousness, and going to take such
rest as is necessary for us, we shut them up against the Prince of darkness.

Meditation is also a good night companion. David would remember God upon his
bed, and meditate on him in the night watches, Psalm. 63.6. Mine eyes prevent
the night watches, that I might meditate in thy Word, Psalm. 119.148. The night,
says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch. Hom. 42.
was not made to this purpose, that we should sleep all the time, and lie
lolling on our beds; the manuary Trades, and Horsekeepers, and Merchants, can
witness as much unto us* Rise thou at midnight as does the Church; mark the
motion of the Stars, the deep silence of all things then being, their rest they
then enjoy, and admire the providence of God above; then is thy soul more pure,
more light and subtle, more lofty and quick; the very darkness it self, and
that great silence may induce thee to much contemplation: and says he further;
Look toward the City, and thou shall hear no noise at all; cast thine eye on
thine house, and all thy family shall seem as if they lay in their graves or
sepulchers; all this may stir thee up to high and heavenly meditations: and
says the same Father elsewhere; Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 30.
In the night no body is troublesome to us; then have we a great tranquillity
of our thoughts, when our businesses are not troublesome, when there is none
that can hinder us from having access to God, when our mind knittin^ it self
together, is able diligently to mak^ reference of all to the Physician of
souls. I shall not prescribe which of these is the fittest time for meditation,
but to me the morning seems to be the fittest; but no time comes amiss to a
prepared heart.

Chap. 10. An Exhortation to Meditation; showing also the necessity thereof.
Let me now exhort you to set about, and to be frequent in this necessary duty
of meditation: Be often retiring your selves to God, and breathing after him:
question him daily about thy salvation: give him thy heart: lift up thy soul to
God: cast thine inward eyes on his mercies; give him thy hand as a little Child
does to his Father, that he may lead thee and guide thee: plant him in thy
heart, that God may be in all thy th^ughts: make many motions in thy soul after
him: from every thing in the world, may be presented many pious meditations,
and profitable discourses: unhappy are they that use ^he creatures in turning
them to sin, and happy they that turn them to the meditation of God, and his
goodness. This exercise of meditation is very necessary:

1. Because much of the work of holy devotion consists in it: it is that
which may stand in stead of many other things, but the lack of this can hardly
be supplied by any other means; for without this, rest is but idleness, pain
taking but vexation.

2. Meditation is necessary to beat down the flesh, and to keep the sensual
appetite in subjection to the Law of the Spirit. It is a great mischief, says
Austin, to enjoy those things we should but use, and but use those things we
should enjoy; we should enjoy spiritual things, and but use corporal, which
when the use is turned into enjoying, our reasonable soul is turned into a
brutish and beast-like soul.

Animae viaticum est meditatio. Bern.
3. Meditation is necessary to concoct the Word of God in our minds: There are
some that feel some tenderness of spirit, that will weep at a Sermon, that one
would think their hearts full of devotion; but when it comes to the trial, we
find that as the sudden showers in the heat of Summer, falling in great drops
enter not, but bring forth Toadstools or Mushromps; so these tears falling on a
vicious heart, a heart not mollified by constant meditation, the Word works not
upon it, but becomes unprofitable: meditation softens the heart, and fits it
for any holy impression. This made David cry out, O Lord, how sweet are thy
words unto my taste; they are sweeter than honey, and the honeycomb: and
certainly the least comforts of the Word, wrought in the heart by holy
meditation, are more worth than the most pleasing recreations in the world;
they that have tasted of them, hold all other consolations to be but gall and
wormwood in comparison of them. Oh that now I could persuade men to this
necessary duty of meditation: withdraw your selves from your worldly affairs at
least once a day, for the exercise of meditation. O holy soul, says Bernard, O
sancta anima, fuge publicum, fuge domesticos, an nescis te verecundum habere
sponsum, etc. Bern.
shun public places, and the company of those of thy household; know thou
not that Jesus Christ thy Husband is bashful, and will not be familiar in
company: Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field, there will I give
thee my loves, Cant. 7.11.

Chap. 11. Objections against setting about the practice of Meditation,
answered.
But here some will be ready to say, We are convinced that meditation is a
necessary duty, but it is a duty strange to us, and that with which we are
altogether unacquainted.

Resp.
The light though fair and pleasant to the eyes, yet dimmest then, after one
has been long in the dark: before one comes to be acquainted with the
Inhabitants of any Country, they will seem strange at first, be they never so
courteous; so upon the change of thy life, thou shall find some inward
alreration, and in this general adieu thou shall give to the world, and to all
thy sins and foolish toys, thou shall have some touch of grief and discontent:
but have but a little patience, it is but a little astonishment the novelty
brings thee; pass that by, and thou shall receive many comforts and cordial
delights, so pleasing and contenting, that thou will esteem all other as
nothing to them; he that has thoroughly tasted of this heavenly Manna, cannot
relish any worldly pleasures, nor set his affections upon them: the delights of
holy meditation are the foretasts of those immortal delights, that God gives
to the souls of those that seek him.

Oh but says the soul, this mountain

The work indeed seems harsh and difficult at first, Resp.
but when we are exercised therein, it will be familiar with us. The young Bees
at first are called Nymphs, and live on the honey that is in their Hives; but
when once their wings are grown out, they fly abroad, and gather honey for
themselves, on the flowers of the field, and on the mountains. It is true, we
are all Nymphs and worms in devotion at first, not able to ascend this hill of
meditation; but when once we be formed in our desires and resolutions, we then
put fort^, and so may hope to become spiritual Bees, and then to fly higher
and higher in our meditations; in the mean time to feed on the honey of God's
Word, and of holy instructions, praying to God to give us the wings of a Dove,
that we may swiftly and speedily fly unto him. The greatest difficulty is in
the first beginning of this exercise of meditation, it being as one says, Io.
Downham's guide to godliness.
so harsh to corrupt nature, and so cross to carnal principles; but the
constant practice of it will make it easy to us. He that goes to learn a
language, finds it difficult at first, but the Nut-shell being broken, they
soon taste the sweetness of the kernel: Doctrinae radices amarae, fructus
dulces: The roots of learning are bitter, but the fruits are sweet; so the
thoughts of the benefit we shall receive by meditation, will take away the
thoughts of tediousness.

But I am dry and barren, and have no matter for meditation.

This is no sufficient pretense against the practice of meditation. Resp.
Look but upon an earthly minded man, W. Strong. Sermon. at Westminst. 1652.
says one, and he will have matter enough to meditate upon in worldly things;
strange then it is, that any man should object want of matter. Thou complainest
of dryness and barrenness; look to the cause whence this evil comes; we are
often the cause of our own dryness and barennesse: when we neglect to gather the
fruits of the love of God, then does he take it from us, as from the
Israelites, who not gathering their Manna in the morning, found it all melted
when the Sun was up: and if thou art sensible of thy dryness, bewail it before
God; acknowledge thine unworthiness and misery, saying, Alas, what am I! how
am I left alone? I am nothing but a piece of dry ground, rent in every part,
witness the drought I have of heavenly dew: In this case cry unto God, Blow
upon my Garden, O thou gracious wind of refreshment, and take this dry wind
from me; then shall my spices flow forth, and give out the odours of their
sweetness. As God gives these heavenly dews, so sometime he takes them away,
to the end to teach us to eat dry bread, and to be more firm in pious devotion,
inured by the trial of distasts and temptations; and then we must patiently
bear those drinesses, when God has ordained them for our trial: but if we
have constant recourse to God's storehouses, we shall soon find our hearts more
fruitful in meditation; if we gape and pant for God, he shall come to us as
the rain, as the latter and former rain to the earth, Hos. 6.3.

Sometime this barrenness springs from indisposition of body: as when by much
fasting, watching, and labor, a man is overcome with weakness, drowsinesse,
and other infirmities, which though they be incident to the body, yet fail not
to hurt the spirit, by the strait bond that is between them: The remedy therein
is, to fortify the body by lawful comforts and delights; and though one
should be long afflicted with these drinesses and disheartnings, yet if we
strive against our indispositions, God will in the end and in an instant, give
us sweet refreshings.

Some will not go to meditation, except devotion bring them to it, says
Gerson; Gers de monte contemplat. part 3. c. 43.
and all seems unprofitable to them, except the duty affects them, aad goes to
their hearts: These kind of men, says he, are like him that is stiff with
cold, and will not go to the fire, except he were first warm; or like one that
is ready to starve with hunger, and will not ask meat, except he be first
filled; for why does any man give himself to meditation, but that his heart may
be more inflamed with the heat of God's love, or replenisht with his gifts and
graces. They are very much mistaken, who think the time lost in meditation, if
they presently be not refreshed with a shower of devotion: and says he, if
they strive for this as much as in them lies, doing their duty, and are in
continual fight against their own thoughts, being displeased because they
depart not, not suffering them to be quiet; such men are more accepted, than if
the heat of devotion had come to them suddenly, without any such conflict: the
reason is, because they go to warfare for God, as it were at their own cost and
charges, and serve him with greater pains and labor.

Chap. 12. Setting down the Rules about Meditation.
The next thing I shall do, is to lay down some Rules concerning meditation.

Mala men's, malus animus.
an evil mind cannot meditate well: before the heart be renewed, the judgment
of man is wholly depraved about his last end, seeking happiness where it is
not to be found; wickedness proceeds from the wicked, according to the
Proverb: were the apprehensions of sinners as large as Satan's, yet if they
have not new wills and affections, they will busy the imagination, in devising
satisfaction to themselves: the will is stirred up by the imagination; and as
the will is ^ffected, so operates the imagination: now when God by his Spirit
writes his Law upon our hearts, so that there is an holy compliance between our
hearts and God's Law, then the heart has a strong inclination to holy thoughts
and meditations.

Labor to have the love of God Amantium mos est de amato semper loqui and
meditari, says Austin; The lover is ever speaking and thinking on the thing
beloved: Psalm. 119.97.
O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day; our affections are our
wings, and our will is our guide to conduct us to Heaven. You think perhaps,
Iter tuum ad coelum voluatas tua, gradus tui, affectus tui: ambulas affectibus,
non pedibus, accedis ad Deum amando, recedis negligendo; stans in terra in
coelo es si diligas Deum. August.
says Austin, you must build a Tower to ascend thit^er; that the Angels must
be invited down to assist you; or that the wings of an Eagle must be borrowed
to carry you thither: but your love is your Pole Star; by your desires you
scale those heavenly regions; by your negligence you stand at a distance from
them; and loving God upon the earth, you may boast your selves already in
Heaven: for it is not with the soul as with the body; this cannot stir without
changing of place, but that needs only change her affection, Sicut in aquis
ignis durare non potest, ita neque turpis cogitatio in cord Dei amante. Marcus
Heremita.
and in a moment she ascends into the hill of the Lord, and stands in his holy
place, and is where she would be; and we can never be better, than when we are
with him in our meditations, whom nothing can equal in goodness; thither we
go not walking, but loving; and God is so much the nearer to us, by how much
our love is more pure and vigorous: then he brings in God speaking thus, I
command you to love me, and I assure you, that in doing so, you shall enjoy me;
sinners possess not all they love: there are some greedy worldlings that sigh
for gold, and yet are poor: ambitious persons that are passionate for glory,
and yet are despicable: but every one that loves me, finds me; I am with him
that seeks for me; his love makes me present in his soul; as soon as he longs
for me, I am in his embraces.

of our preservation, As in a race one Charet hinders another in the way
stopping the path, even so earth^y cogitations hinder heavenly when they have
gotten the start. Macarius. Ita sarcina seculi veluti somno assoler, dulciter
premebar, and cogitationes quibus meditabar in te, similes erant conatibus
expergisci volentium, qui tamen superati soporis altitudine remerguntur. August.
and endeavor it diligently, yet are they not perplex't about it, for their
care proceeds from charity: carking cares about the things of the world,
trouble a man's reason and judgment, so that he cannot meditate on God as he
ought; the Wasps and Drones make more noise than the Bees, but make no honey,
but wax only. I was overwhelmed with worldly cares, as with a deep sleep,
says Austin, and the meditations I lifted up to Heaven, were like the vain
endeavors of men striving to awake, who beaten down with the weight of
drowsinesse, fall asleep again at the very instant they awake. It is impossible
he should be heavenly minded, that dotes upon earth; or have any passionate
longings for Heaven, who is strongly wedded to the things of this world.

Spend not too much of your time these are recreations so innocent, that to use
them well, needs nothing but discretion, that gives to every thing its order,
time, place, and measure: but here we must beware of excess; for if we employ
too much time therein, it is no more a recreation, but an occupation, that
neither recreates the body, nor the spirits, but rather dulls and distracts
them: and above all take heed of setting your affections on any of them; for
let our recreations be never so lawful, it is vicious to set our affections on
any of them; to long after them; to study on them; or vex our selves about
them: there are some recreations indeed, that as they are commonly used, tend
to much evil; there is (as Physicians say of Mushromps) a quality of poison in
them, though never so well cooked; they are spungious, and full of pores, and
easily draw any infection to them, and if Serpents be about them, they take
poison from them: so such recreations are very dangerous; they divide the
spirit from pious meditations; cool charity; and awaken in the soul many sorts
of ill cogitations. Therefore when you are in the use of any recreations,
labor to wind up thy heart to Heaven; use some godly meditations; think how
thy time passes away, and death draws on; see how it calls thee to his
dance, where the music shall be elegies and lamentations; that thou shall make
but one step from life to death.

When thou go to meditate, fix Cogitatio vaga incessa semper huc and illue
divertit. Hugo in lib. de Area mystica.
variety of thoughts are like many men in a crowd or throng, where all are
stopped, and none can get out: variety of meats, if the stomach be good, do
always offend it; if weak, it overthrows it: fill not thy soul with the
thoughts of many things at once, for these will trouble and distract thee: a
soul that feels it self much purged from evil humors, has a great appetite
after spiritual things, and as half famished, the thoughts run upon many
exercises of piety at once; and this is a good sign to have so good an
appetite; but thou must look how thou can digestall that thou desire to
eat; take every thing therefore in order, and feed on them moderately, that
thou may digest them, and not be cloyed with them.

and so more and more as they do increase.

When thou meditatest on sin, examine how stands thy heart affected toward
sin: have thou a resolution in the strength of Christ, never to commit any sin?
have thou any inclination to small sins, or any affection to any of them?

When thou meditatest on God's Commandments, examine thy heart: does it find
them to be good, sweet, and amiable, and agreeable? as he that has an
exquisite taste, and good stomach, loves good food, and refuses the bad.

Examine how thy heart stands affected to spiritual exercises: do thou love
them, or are they tedious to thee? do they distaste thee? to which of them do
thou find thy self more or less inclined? to hear God's Word, or to discourse
about it; to pray; to meditate; to fly up to Heaven, etc. and what in all these
is thy heart against? and if thou find any of these, to which thou art not
inclined, examine whence this distaste arises, and what is the cause thereof.

Examine what is thy heart toward God himself: is it a delight to thee to think
on him? do thou feel a particular taste of his love? do thou delight in
meditating on his power, his goodness and mercy? if the thoughts of God do
come into thy mind in the midst of business, and worldly employments, when it
comes, do thou give place thereto? does it settle in thy heart? do thou
perceive thy heart to lean that way, and in some measure to prefer it before
any other thing? do thou love to speak to God, and of God? is his honor and
glory dearer to thee than all other things? do thou love his children, and
the glory and beauty of his worship and Ordinances? for want of this
examination, meditation does often come to nothing.

Meditation without reading is erroneous; without prayer unfruitful, says
Bernard. Meditatio sine lectione erronea, sine oratione infructuosa. Bern.
Let prayer go before it: go to God, and beg of him to inspire thee with holy
meditations; it is God that with his own hand puts them into our mouths, Noah
is commanded to make a window in the top of the Ark, and a door in the side of
it, a window is for the eye to look out at, a door is for the whole body to go
out; and he that will ever be a good Christian, must not only make a window for
contemplation, as Daniel did, at which he prayed thrice a day, but a door for
action, as Abraham did, at which he sat once a day: at the window of
meditation he must contemplate with a good heart, at the door of action, he
must go out to bring forth fruit with patience. Matt. Styles.
for of our selves we are not sufficient for one good thought: prayer of it
self lifts up the soul to God, who is our only joy and comfort; as is the
sight, so will the affection be; and as the affection is, so will the desire
be. Pray at the end of your meditations, as David does, Let the words of my
mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my
strength and my Redeemer, Psalm. 19.14. Pray that God would keep these things
for ever in the imagination of your thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.

The last Rule is, that all our meditations must be reduced to practice: Thou
shall meditate in this Bo^k of the Law, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein, Josh. 1.8. the end of meditation is practice: I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm. 119 59. In
passing from our meditations, we must resolve carefully to put them in
execution, without which meditation is not only unprofitable, but rather
hurtful to us; for virtues meditated on and not practiced, are apt to puff up
the spirit, in taking our selves to be such as we resolved to be; therefore we
must join practice to meditation. To conclude, as they that go into a goodly
Garden, go not out without gathering of some Flowers to smell to long after; so
our souls having by meditation fallen upon some pleasing points, must take two
or three most fit for our furtherance in piety, to think on the rest of the
day, and as it were spiritually to smell unto.

Now as it is necessary that all these be settled in our hearts; so in
withdrawing our selves from our meditations; we must pass very gently to other
affairs, for fear lest the liquor of our resolutions (the result of our
meditations) do leak out, and not penetrate into all parts as it should, even
into our hearts and souls; yet all must be done without violence, either of
body or mind.

Object.
But who is able to put his meditations into practice, the directions and
exercises thereof being so many?

Resp.
If one were to put them all in practice every day, he should do nothing else,
it would take up his whole time; but that is not required, but as time and
place shall serve, and as occasions shall offer themselves. Renew thy
resolutions often, and say with David, I will meditate in thy precepts, and
have respect unto thy ways, Psalm. 119.15. I will for ever keep thy Word; and
when thou failest herein, take in hand thy protestation, and offer it with thy
whole heart to God. This free confessing of our desire to serve God, and to be
wholly consecrated to him by a particular affection, is very pleasing to him.

Chap. 13. Of the excellency and usefulness of Meditation.
Having given you Rules about meditation, I shall in the next place show you
the excellency and usefulness thereof.

1. Meditation breeds knowledge, sc. the knowledge of God and his benefits, and
our sin and unworthiness. As there is no moment, wherein man uses not God; so
ought there to be no moment, wherein he has him not present in his memory:
Sicut nullum est momentum in quo homo non utatur Deo, sic nullum esse debet
momentum, quo eum praesentem non habet in memoria. Hugo l. 3. de anima.
Babingt. in Number. (...). Clem. Alex. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 21. c. 6. Aquin. in Joh
5.
this continual meditation on God and his mercies, is that blessed union of
our spirits with God, which holy men so much regarded in their times: a man
given to meditation, is a man that walks not in darkness, nor in the shadow
of death, as those do that seldom or never think of him. Clemens of Alexandria
calls the meditations of holy men, Candles that never go out, like the Candle
which was among the Pagans, in the Temple of Venu^, which was called
inextinguishable, as Austin relates: without this men are but snuffs in
respect of their use and service, as Aquinas says. Meditation does not reveal
any divine truth unto us, that only is the work of God; but after God has
revealed them, faith apprehends them: then meditation illustrates to the soul
what faith believes, and so our knowledge is increased: many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Fenner de meditat. Dan 12.4.
It is not says one, the bodily removing of man from place to place, so much
as the busy stirring of the mind from one truth to another by meditation, that
increases spiritual knowledge.

2. Meditation rectifies the affections of the soul: it opposes serious
considerations against vain imaginations; and because our imagination is apt to
raise false objects, and thereby false conceits and discourses in us, therefore
meditation propounds true objects for the mind to work upon, from the
meditation whereof, the soul rightly conceives of things, and discourses upon
true grounds of them, meditating thus with himself; if things be thus and thus
in reality, then must I live according to these principles: this is the spring
of all holy affections in the soul, as the true love of God; the true joy and
delight in him and his ways. Meditation is like the player on an Instrument,
who by touching of the strings, finds them that are out of tune, winding them
up, or letting them down; so after meditation has examined the love, the hate,
the fears, the hopes, the griefs, the joys of our souls, if it find them out
of tune in expressing their harmony, which is the glory of God, it then puts
them in tune again.

3. Meditation fills the heart with joy: My meditation of him shall be sweet; I
will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104.34. When the Spirit of God does open the
eyes of the soul, and it is brought forth into the light, then does meditation
clear up to the soul those grounds of joy, which are exceeding comfortable.
Holy meditation shows the soul the face of God reconciled; his pardon sealed;
an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom; the heart of God opened toward him;
and his name written in Heaven. Activa vira habet solicitum cursum,
contemplativa gaudium sempiternum. Prosper. l. 1 de contempl. vira.
Meditation clears up the promises to him, that he never saw before: he saw
them before as by Candlelight, by common light and reason; but now he sees
them in another complexion. Meditation clears up their interest in God and his
promises; and this is great matter of rejoicing. Meditation works in the soul a
frame of heart, suitable to the Gospel; what is more suitable to the Gospel,
than the joys of the holy Ghost? therefore when meditation works thoroughly upon
the heart, it yields comforts suitable to the Gospel. It is good for
Christians to meditate much in God's promises, which do convey much joy into
the heart: then do thou improve the promises, when thou do so relish them,
as to rejoice in them, according to that sweetness that is revealed and
contained in them.

4. Quae alii di^ pariendo levia faciunt, sapiens levia facit diu cogitando.
Charron. de sapient. Psalm. 119.150, 151.
Holy meditation is a great support to the soul under afflictions: when trouble
is near, it represents God as near, or nearer than any trouble can be: suppose
it be trouble of spirit, that is very near indeed, for that is in the vitals,
it is a soul-sicknesse; but meditation shows them: though Satan may draw near
to them to devour them, yet God is nearer to them; a God nearer to save, than
any michievous enemy to destroy. Meditation labors to affect the heart with
the sense of God's continual presence with it: this is indeed our great
weakness, and our great unthankfulness, that we are apt to muse more upon
God's afflicting of us, than of God's perpetual presence with us: there is a
savor in the ointments of the Lord Christ, sufficient to perfume any soul that
comes near him.

5. Frequent meditation on God, makes a man more holy, more like unto him; it
sees so much beauty and goodness in him, that it makes a man cast away every
unsavory lust, and all those affections that have a strong sent of the flesh,
that they may be made like to God in holiness. Those Flowers that grow in the
Sun, are far more beautiful, and fragrant, and pleasant, than those that grow
in the shade; but if we suffer our souls to be over-shadowed with carnal
thoughts and affections, these dark bodies will interpose between God and us,
and hinder the influences of his love upon us: If the Needle that is but touched
with the Loadstone, stands Northward; then the soul that is touched with God,
will stand Heavenward, and labor to be conformed more to him in holiness.

6. Meditation is a great help to perseverance in well-doing: the serious and
frequent meditation of this promise, Psalm. 94.12, 14.
that the Lord will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance, makes
them to cleave fast unto him. This is the foundation of a peoples blessedness,
that God will not forsake them, when he does most sharply correct them; that
the same privilege that belongs to the whole Church, belongs to every member
of it; for it is as possible for God to cast off his people, and his whole
inheritance, as to cast off any one particular member of it: for, for God to
cast off his people, were to disinherit himself; God would have his people to
meditate hereof. Thus says God to Jeremy, Ier. 33.24, 25, 26.
Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two families
which the Lord has chosen, he has cast them off: but in the words following,
see how God does assert his unchangeable Covenant, against this false
assertion: If my Covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not
appointed the Ordinances of Heaven and earth, then will I cast away the seed of
Jacob, etc. as if he had said, If ever you knew a day, that had not a night
succeeding it, and a winter without a summer, and ever found the Laws of Heaven
abrogated, then may you give way to your unbelief, and think that I will cast
off my people; but if you see a perpetual interchange of day and night, though
some days be more bright than others, then will I never cast off any people,
that I have taken for my own. The meditation hereof, is a special means to
keep us close to God, even then when the foundations of the earth are shaken.

Meditate seriously on such things as may serve actually to convince thee of
the unfitness and unreasonablenesse of thy yielding to the sin to which thou
art tempted, and of the mischief that may come by yielding. When we muster up
such thoughts, we levy store of good soldiers which will fight with us, and
for us, and do us good service while we are under temptation: by this means
alone (with God's grace accompanying) have many servants of God held their own,
when the Devil would have killed them. Hoord. Sermon. in Ephesians. 4.30.
7. Meditation is a strong barricado against the temptations of Satan: the soul
finds so much sweetness in God, that it strongly guardeth the heart, will and
affections, against temptations to sin; it finds such delight in the meditation
of God, that it loathes the sweetest sin. He that is used to choice meats and
drinks, can very ill brook unsavory things; so a man that is heavenly minded,
is brought to disrelish those sins, that others drink down like water with
greediness: meditation makes the heart very tender, and sensible of lesser
sins, and stirrings of corruption. In a still, silent, clear night, a little
sound will be easily heard, which will not be taken notice of in the day time,
when there is much business in hand; so when Christ and the soul do rest, and
converse together, the soul is very quick of hearing: if the old Serpent does
but hiss never so little, Satan then finds the soul upon its guard, and that
it has a wakefull enemy. A soul that is constant in the meditation of God, is
like a bright clear shiny day, when any little cloud will be taken notice of,
at the first rising; and like a calm Sea, where a little stirring of the water
will be discerned, when the water first arises.

Chap. 14. The Motives to Meditation.
I shall now proceed to lay down diverse Motives to meditation.

Meditation is delightful to God. If God took delight in any felicity, it was
in contemplation. God delights in holy meditations, because in them we come
nearest to the purity and simplicity of God: in nothing do we more converse
with him, than in our pure and active meditations: by these when we are as it
were absent in body, we are present with him; for when the body lies upon its
bed, and takes its rest, the devout soul solaceth it self with God.

2. This exercise of meditation may be done, when other duties cannot. When we
want an opportunity to hear the Word, to read, to pray solemnly, we may have
liberty to confer with God by holy meditations.

3. The Lord hears the meditations of his people. David prays to God not
only to consider his words, but also to consider his meditation, Psalm. 5.1. As
our ears, says Austin, Aug. in Psalm. 48. Hom. 16. Aug. in Psalm. 41.
are to our words, so are God's ears to our thoughts: and in another place
says he, We hear not one another, without the benefit as of our lungs, so of
our tongues; but Cogitatio tua clamor est ad Dominum, thy very thoughts are
shrill in the ears of God: and elsewhere he says, Aug. Confess. ^0. c. 2.
My confession, O my God is made in thy sight secretly, and yet not in secret;
Tacet enim strepitu, clamat affectu, it makes no noise at all by way of sound,
and yet it is clamorous by reason of her love. Gregor. in Job.
They are not our words, but our desires and thoughts, that yield a most
forcible sound in the most secret ears of God. There is, says Peter Martyr,
Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel 1.12.
no need at all of voice, when we make our private prayers to God, in regard
that God hears our hearts and minds.

4. Meditation brings the soul to rest it self in God. One says, Struth.
Observe. 87. Cent. 2.
that contemplation is both the labor and the rest of the devout soul: it
carries up the spirit of man into the bosom of God's love; it exalts a man so
high, as to make him look down upon these sublunary things with contempt, as
Peter, James, and John, Luke 9.33.
following Christ to the Mount, where he was transfigured, seeing some of his
glory, cried out, Master it is good for us to be here: so when a Christian
follows Christ upon the Mount of meditation, he is where he would be; he cries
out, it is good for me to be here.

5. A man given to meditation, is a growing Christian. As holy meditations do
thrive with us, and abide in us; so does the grace of God increase in us: holy
meditations are good tokens of present grace, and do enkindle strong desires
after more grace: the man that is barren in meditation, is barren and
unfruitful in grace.

6. Meditation is a great evidence of sincerity. As men may know us by our
actions, as the tree is known by his fruit: so a man may know himself by his
constant thoughts; for as he thinks in his heart, so is he, Prove. 23.7. And
God looks not so much upon what we do, as upon what our hearts are most upon;
not so much upon what is uttered by the lips, as upon what the heart indites:
by this we draw virtue from God himself, and are full of the life of God.

7. Meditation is a Christian's Heaven upon earth. This is, as one says, the
measure that God gives in this life; a beginning that shall be finished; an
earnest that shall be followed with the full sum. The soul that keeps daily
intercourse with God in holy meditations, is in patria, Contemplatio dicitur
cibus in hac vita, ubi in sudore vescimur pane nostro; potus in futura, ubi
libere and sine dolor sumitur; ebrietas in ultima, cum animo recepto corpore
congaudebit. Bern. Sent.
when he is in via, at home when he is in the way: he quits earth to live in
Paradise; the love and Magnificats he bestows on God, are his chiefest
employment; in this one object he finds all his happiness, and his diversion;
his heart is no longer in the earth; he mounts up to Heaven by his desires, and
converseth more with Angels, than with men, and has already a large taste of
the sweetness of heavenly pleasures*

FINIS.

