The Glorious and Living CINQVE-PORTS of our fortunate Island Thrice happy in
the Persons of HIS SACRED MAJESTY.

The Illustrious and Puissant PRINCE His Royal Highness JAMES Duke of YORK.

The two Victorious and Loyal Generals, their United EXCELLENCIES, PRINCE
RVPERT, AND GEORGE Duke of ALBERMARLE.

The Heroic and Daring Captains in this Signal VICTORY.

To whom the Author humbly presents this following EPINIKEON.

EDM. GAYTON.

OXON. Printed by H. H. 1666.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty.
STill in the Royal Oak? let it still be,
And let her Arms extend to the breadth of the Sea,
Dare Froggs (vermin Antimonarchicall)
Croke Pannick Thunder, or toss Mimmick ball
Against the Tree that is sacred unto Jove?
Which does fear Him, not Thunder from above
Nor yours below, fatt Cyclops, slaves to fire,
Aetna, and scorched Vesuvius be your hire,
Deluded Wigeons, mere decoys, no more
Your fausen proud D' Wit
Achitophell, adore
That water Oracle; Otters lift up
Your ugly snouts before your farewell Cupp:
Here is Flap- Dragon sent you from the Main,
And Brandy spouted from the Sovereign.
Insulting Froggs stand off, for the Huge Thing
You took to be a logg, it proves a King:
Amands you from her presence, which does send
You quick, unto Proserpina's grimm Friend.
But hush, not one word more, no farther on,
Be mute and hear the Canto of Sr John:
Be dumb you tinckling Rhimes, poor petite things
When such a Poet writes, and the King sings.
To his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of YORK, Lord high Admiral of England.
OH for a Vein, a Fancy, Head, or Quill,
Like his that whilom wrote of Cooper's (Hill!
Or such a style as his, who colors taught
To speak, and paint t'engage, and skirmish brought;
Yet not that Pen of his, Oh a sad work!
Which lately Panegyrckt our Olivet.
English TVRK.
Great SIR, our Oxford (near to Otmore Geese,
And VVolvercott) afford us none of these.
Such as they are your Highness they shall show,
And set Your Worth forth to the public view.
Let Opdam speak, that now with Neptune dwells,
Condemned to Sword-fish in his watery Cells,
For daring to attaque Your Roall Ship,
With his unequal and confounded skipp:
See where he flew in Sulphurous atoms, sent
To the Prince of Flames, for his most bold attempt:
Yet he did boast (audacious Wretch!) to sink
The Admiral, but paid for it I think.
Princes must die (as punished in first age)
Not in their proper Persons, but by Page:
Falmouth was thy obliged Proxy, dies
For Royal York, a surety sacrifice:
O Noble Widow! weep not for that Head,
Which lies for ever in Dame Honors bed;
The Arme-full that you want, fair Thetis lays
In her own Lap, and Tritons work his Bays.
But MINGS with swift Revenge did sell his life
At such a rate, as gratifyd a Wife.
So home we came with Captived Holland Fleet,
And JAMES Batavicus we loudly greet:
So may we shout! let thy great Spirit be
Our Genius, Guardian, and Victory.
To the most equally High and Valiant Prince RUPERT, and the Duke of
ALBERMARLE, the Incorporate Generals of the English Navy.
SO shine our Castor, and our Pollux Rays,
Which scatter Vict'ries, and Triumphant Bays.
Brave ominous Conjunction! that portends
More than Albumazars can tell, or fiends:
The Ephemerides is drunk, we laugh
To see your Height above the Iacob-staff*
Look up, and view in tail of the Waine of Charles,
Two newfound Lights, Ruperts and Albemarls.
Did ever Fortune before loss of Eyes
More justly temper these great Deities
Unto a pondus valiant? a rare rate,
Of which Physicians do but fondly prate.
That Valor and Success, which on Edg-hill
Entered the Camp, does rest upon Thee still.
It is the same with Thee (Nephew of Kings)
To baffle Squadrons, as thou once did Wings.
MONK with his Powder does sublime those loggs
Of flesh, the Dutch, and makes them flying boggs.
Where Is Negromantick dog? my Dearest Arthur Trever, Counsel to the Prince.
Trever
Scylla, and all her dogs wait on him ever,
And in his watery Cabin the dog lies,
And like the Dog Star burns their Skips and Hoyes.
The Ships are Bone-fires to themselves, that light
Saves them the charge of Beacons in the Night.
You Rascals, steal no more our English coals,
Lest your whole Navy burns in Creeks and Holes:
Remember how you rob the Seas, We can
Call our selves Vindex of the Ocean.
Your Sea-rapes, and Amboyna's murders stand
The dire account of your perfidious land,
So on the foot you owe our Admiral,
Your thorough Ruin, then it is All-to mall.
Upon the victorious Sea Captains, Generals of Squadrons, Wonders in Fire and
Water, Flag Officers that never flag'd.
WHat Lights are these create us a new day
Shine like those stars in Via Lactea?
Streamers and Flaggs of Honor, like the tail
Of Comets shooting fate where they look pale.
Our Netherlands have found their influence,
And now that they are Low Countries have a sense:
You beasts o'th people humbly bring your gelt,
And save your Dorps, let no more blood be spilt.
Fire has no mercy, your Tar-pawlin jowles
Will fry like rashers on New Castle coals.
Sr Robert's a Prometheus, if he pleases,
He Will make a Troy of your seven Provinces.
Yield, or be ashes, straight give up your Borronghs,
Before you are calcined into Gomorrah's,
And thou Grand Beaufort, that have made a halt
To see these fires, shall be a Pile of Salt:
Poor Undertakers, and forlorn in hope,
When Fleets do yield to Faufan and a Sloope,
The French Armado from the hills o'th Maine;
(As once from land) may eene go back again:
And if you want a driver in the rear,
Sr Robert make our Valiant Gardener,
He, and our Oxford Ianes shall give 'um knocks,
And pepper 'um, I Will warrant, to their Pox.
To the Valiant, Vigorous, Loyal, and Succesful SOLDIERS in the Royal Navy,
Red-coats, White-coats, and others, wherewith the GENERALS take Dutchmen and
Ships, as they take Whiting, Haddock, and Mackarel with pieces of Cloth.
NOw you have played, brave Blades, your parts,
Let us play ours, us of the Arts,
Who now in Regulation high,
Do fling our Caps, like you, to the sky.
We are distinguished by our Gowns,
As you in Squadrons on the Downs;
And in our new and disciplined joys,
Know Graduats plaudits from the Boys.
Our way of praises are the Hum,
Which you out-vapor with the Drumm.
We burn the Faggots, piles of Wood,
And you burn Ships, which is as good,
And Holland Towns, for the poor skellum
Lament their tosted Cheese, and Smell'um.
The Dog days did not hurt your Butter,
So much as MONK encountering Ruyter,
Who did so bang, and thwack, and thump
You both, you cant tell which is Trump:
Nay'tis soft whisperd, that De-Witte
Is stepped aside, that lesuit,
And proud and politic Machevael,
To take some hempen Cordial,
He might have staid at home, the people
Would fain have trussed him in the Steeple,
For he deceived them with his lies,
Flying reports, for which he flies:
De-Wit's outwitted, for he thought
That Albemarle would nere have fought,
And Rupert both, in one tall good
Ship, but in several Squadrons stood;
Nor ever did they dream, Sr. Robert
Should have the plundring of their Cupbord,
For all the frokens, and the froes,
Most Brawny Wenches fat as Does,
Do curse him day and night, for they
Make houses clean, we clean away.
Oh slave, (says Mistress Vandermast)
I Am burnt even quite below the Wast:
Holland was never in such plight;
They thought it Goshen, 'twas so light.
Mourning there is, for cuts and slashes,
Yet not in sack, nor cloth, but ashes;
For those Sr Roberts men of Cockets
Put up in Belly, and in pockets.
I think, poor Hogen Mogen Ninnies,
That Holmes has paid you for your Guinyes,
And for his polt of the pate; for Schelling
Can tell how divelshly he fell in,
And made a Bone-fire of a Dorpe that day,
By which his Soldiers ran away,
'Twas better so, then longer stay.
FINIS.

