CHARITY TRIUMPHANT, OR THE VIRGIN-SHEW: Exhibited on the 29th. of October,
1655.

Being The LORD MAYORS DAY.



LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1655.

To the Right Honorable, Alder man DETHICKE, Lord Major of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
VIEW the Roman State under which Government soever you please, whether in the
beginnings, under many happy KINGS, or in its change from Monarchy to
Democracy, or in its little resurrection to Aristocracy, under the Marian and
Scyllan Tyranny, or then in its exaltation into Empire, and absolute
Sovereignty; you shall always find every Age, and sort of Governors, adorning
and exemplifying their several Authorities by Anniversary Shows and Pomps to
the People, who are naturally pleased with such Gleames and Irradiations of
their Superiors, and gains at once Honor to the Magistrate and effects
content to the People.

The severest and in other matters most rigid Policies or Commonwealths (to
wit the Spartan, and Lacedamonian, and Athenian) smoothed the rugged Front of
their power in this Punctilio and reason of State, and Plato and Aristarchus,
and Aristides (though never so just, never so strickt) indulged always these
Ingratiations to the People. It is the public Banquet, whereunto you invite
the Commons of the City; who expect and rejoice always to see some of their
money spent upon themselves, and so for Recreations, and other Permissions of
Supreme Governors, it was always thought a piece of prudentiall and
warrantable license and wise dispensation, to let the people spend their own
time, and some of their money, where they pleased, especially in innocent and
delightful diversions. I cannot here set forth the reason of the late
extinguishing these Civick Lights, and suppressing the Genius of our
Metropolis, which for these Planetary Pageants and Pretorian Pomps was as
famous and renouned in foreign Nations, as for their faith, wealth, and
valor. The Ingenie, Artifices, Mysteries, Shows, Festivals, Ceremonies, and
Habits of a State, being amongst the Decora, and unseparable Ornaments of it.
Take away the Fasces, and the Consuls are no more feared, but scorned; Let fall
the Noble Sword of the City in any place, and you are sure the Mayor has there
no Privilege, no Livery, no distinguishing of Societies, and Fraternities, no
Caps (in days of old) no Prentices, no Truncks, no Citizens, no Robes no
Judges, no Maces, no Magestrate: And so for Anniversary Shows, and harmless
and merry Recreations, without a moderate permission of them, very little
content to the multitude. Right Honorable, I therefore, being the Son of a
Citizen, Congratulate this Return of the City-Gallantry and manifestation of
her several Splendors in your Majority to your honored self, it being most
proper that the lost Beauty and Magnificence of the place, should be restored
by One (if I mistake it not) a brother of the prime Company, and therefore most
fit to lead, that so it being begun in the Virgin society; it may like Vestall
fire never go out: And because the Scenicall Contrivement and Pageant Bravery
is but an Ephemeron, or Diurnall birth and issue of one day, and so Exit till
the next year. Poetical fancy does beg leave to supply that defect, and to
enlarge the glory of your day (my Lord) to the period of your year; And because
many a far off will be glad to hear what they could not see, and some would
willingly retain and keep, what this day was seen by them. This short Poem
shall be to those that saw it, a Remembrancer, or representation, and to the
remote Wel-wishers of the Cities honor, a written Pageant or Pegma Metricum,
and so I address my self (my Lord) to your Virgin, whom I shall labor to make
as famous, as your Honor has made her Dowagable; and by this Paperwork to give
a procession unto your Nobleness and Piety beyond the Demeans of Cheapside.

Your Honors Servant, Emd. Gayton.

NO more let Perseus Noble Story
Carry away the public Glory:
Nor let Andromeda the fairt,
With this our Virgin Star compare,
Nor Let St. George (though Englands Saint)
Of his Grand Legend longer vaunt:
Nor let the Maid, whom Dragon green,
(The fairest Monster ever seen)
For killing Maids, and such prey stealing,
If we may credit Doctor Heyling.
Let not that Maid, nor any other,
(Always except the Virgin Mother)
Stand in so great Italica
As Does the Virgin of this day.
That Virgin Sacrifice that died
With Veil unvailed, and Zone untied, [Iepth.]

Upon her Fathers Oath ill made,
And worse performed, aside belayd;
And that of Iphigenia
(If those be two) they must give way:
And Lipsius-Virgin in his Gown
Is by our Virgins Dress put down.
(Alas his Gown could naught procure,
Critics and Poets still are poor!)
See how she rides! See how she comes!
Alarmed in with Fifes and Drumms:
Not Venus with the bribed Winds
Blowing her Hair (the Snare of minds)
And all her fluttring blind array
Of Cupids, that fore-run the way;
Not in her richest Pearly Shell,
Nor yet Proserpina for Hell
When the great Lord of wealth (her love)
Did all the Intrals of his Earth improve,
To catch (the not so taken Maid)
In's Ebon Carre made Light afraid,
And richest Stones, benighted day,
Did so much Gallantry display:
As when our Virgin and her Pages,
The Pride of this, the talk of Ages
That are to come, did pass the street
In Satin all from head to feet;
'And every Virgin who stood by,
'Wish'd secretly, O would that I
'Were of the Mercers Company!
The sight was rare, but envious clouds,
The glorious day in showrs beshrowds;
And Winds in Malice, or in Love
To sport or court her highly strove.
Avaunt you hollow Issue of the Earth,
And Mountains vast unruly Birth,
Play with our Navall sights and toss The Ci^y Barges in the Thames.

The Barges; there is the smaller loss:
Prostrate your selves before that Barge
That carries now the Cities Charge;
Those red white streamers now are come,
And do command you to be dumb; The Lord Mayors Barge.

Or if you will blow, your breath dispose,
To fill them like the red white Rose:
That all the Asure Thames may tell,
The Mayor is coming by the smell. All the rest of the Barges in blew.

Will you not cease? then Canons rore,
And fire them off from Lambath shore.
The Winds they are but four, and you
Are thirty strong, in open view. Thirty Canons went off.

Gunner the Lintstock straight prepare,
And we will thin foul winds to air:
Or if our Virgin do desire,
We Will turn you all from air to fire.
When so translated you will be
More like unto Virginity.
For Rain, and Earth, and Winds are gross,
But rarefied they lose their dross:
Then you will proper Convoys be
For this great Act of Charity:
Which is of Love a grateful strife,
To deck a Virgin for a Wife?
And by the Trophies of an hour,
To make her a perpetual Dower.
'Which makes the Virgins who stood by
'Wish heartily, O would that I
'Were of the Mercers Company.
FINIS.

