THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF Great Britain, FROM THE Birth of our SAVIOR,
until the Year of our LORD, 1667.

With an exact Succession of the Bishops, and the memorable Acts of many of
them.

TOGETHER With an Addition of all the English Cardinals; and the several Orders
of English Monks, Friars, and Nuns, in former Ages.

Historia vitae nostrae Magistra. Bodin. LONDON, Printed for Philip Chetwin,
and to be Sold by most Booksellers, 1674.

Honoratissimis.
Dno. HENRICO TVLSE Aequiti Aurato: Senatori, and Vicecomiti Londonensi.

JACOBO READING. PETRO RICH. RIC^ARDO HOW. JOHANNI SHORTER.
In Agro Surriensi Armigeris:

Viris summi Candoris: Pietatis ac Literarum fautoribus: hunc Librum in
perpetuum observantiae Testimonium D. D. D.

G. G.

TO THE READER.
THere is no greater Privilege bestowed by the Lord upon one Nation above
others, than in the free use of the Sacred Scriptures and Ordinances: Israel
had much advantage above the Gentiles, chiefly, or principally, because unto
them were committed the Oracles of God, the word of grace, the Covenant of life
and peace, Romans 3. 2. S. Paul els-where reckoning up the Privileges of Israel,
mentions this in several expressions as a prime Privilege; The Covenants,
the giving of the Law, and the Promises, Romans 9. 4. all which are comprehended
under the Oracles, and word of God. So says the Psalmist, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he
has not dealt so with any nation; and as for his judgments they have not
known them. He make's no mention of the Tabernacle, or Temple, the Ark of the
Covenant, the altar of burnt-offering, the golden altar of incense, the
Ordinance of Circumcision, etc. though in these they were privileged above
other Nations; but he singleth out this as a prime privilege, that he showed
them his word, his statutes and judgments.

How deeply then is this nation of ours (even England) indebted to God, to whom
the Lord has committed his holy Oracles! how much are we bound to him for this
unspeakable gift! And herein the singular goodness of God to this nation is
much to be observed, not enely in visiting it with the Gospel for these last
hundred years and more, but also in giving it the light of the Gospel very
early, even in the Apostles days. Diverse Writers of good credit do testify,
that even in those days the Britan's in our Isle did consent to Christian
Religion, and pulickly professed it in their Churches, as well as other parts
of the World.

The Authors of the Theater of Great Britain, speaking of Theatr. Magn. Brit.
the Antiquity of the Christian Faith in Britain, testify in this manner. As
we have searched the first foundation of our Faith, so neither want we
Testimonies concerning the continuance of the same in this Land until following
Posterities; although the injury of Time and War have consumed many Records:
for the Britan's that were daily strengthened in their received Faith by the
Doctrine of many Learned and godly Men, left not their First-love with the
Church of Ephesus, but rather took hold of the Skirts, as the Prophet speaks,
Zech. 8. 23. until the Tortures of Martyrdom cut them off by death. And those
Fathers, even from the Disciples themselves, held a Succession in Doctrine
(notwithstanding some Repugnancy was made by the Pagans) and Preached the
Gospel with good success, even till the same, at length, went forth with a
bolder countenance by the favorable Edicts of Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and
Marcus Aurelius, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 9.
Emperors of Rome, as Eusebius has Noted, and in Britain was established by
King Lucius; so called, as some Learned Men have observed, because a Prince of
great luster and glory; the Light of the Gospel breaking forth in this our Isle
in such a perspicuo^s manner by his Conversion, that all Christian Churches
took notice thereof: Of whom a great Antiquary thus speaks,

Lucius in Christum credit, Christoque dicatas Vsserius. de Brit. Eccles.
Primord. P. 56.

Ecclesias dotat, distinctas ordinat urbes.
Geoffery of Monmouth tells us that King Lucius being Baptized together with
his Subjects, destroyed the Temples of Idols, and Dedicated them to the only
living God, enlargeing and augmenting them. Bishop Godwin says, we have Godwin
de de convers. Britan.
great cause with all thankfulness to Celebrate the Memory of that Excellent
Prince King Lucius, by whom God did not only bless this Land with so clear
knowledge of the truth, but in such sort did it, as thereby He has purchased
unto the same the Title of Primogenita Ecclesiae, the most Ancient, and first
begotten of all the Churches in the world: for that although Christ was
Preached els-where privately in many other Nations long before the time of King
Lucius, yet of all Nations Britain was the first that with public approbation
of Prince and State received the Profession of Christian Religion. Of the
Teachers of those times John Bale has these verses,

Sic ut erat Celebris, etc.
As were the Britan's famous for their Zeal,
To Gentile Gods, whilst such they did adore:
So when the Heavens to Earth did Truth reveal,
Blessed was that Land with Truth, and Learnings store.
Whence British Plains and Cambreas desart-ground,
And Cornwal's Crags with glorious Saints abound.
The common consent of our Protestant Writers is, that in this time I now speak
of, and from the beginning of Christianity here, Britain never wanted Preachers
of the true Faith. And when the persecuting Emperor's Reigned, and persecution
raged, not only in the Eastern parts, but in Italy, France, and other
Countries in the Continent near unto us; this our Island (as another world) was
almost quite free thereof, both before and after, until the nineteenth year of
Dioclesian, in which there was a general persecution of Christians, ( as
Gildas, and others after him do witness) in that it Gild. lib. de excid. and
Conqu. Br^tan.
ever had Kings not so depending on the persecuting Emperors; and so far from
the Name and Nature of persecutors, that they ever were friends and favorers
of Christians. And for this cause many that were persecuted for Christianity in
other Countries, fled hither for refuge, where for themselves they might more
quietly enjoy the Liberty of their Conscience and Religion; and for others
desirous to be instructed in the Truth thereof, and not kept back with such
terrors of persecution, as in other Countries, they might with more confidence
and boldness, and with great hope of fruit and increase Preach and Teach it
unto them. This was a preparative to a more general Conversion of this Nation
to Christianity which followed afterward. This Island was also the more quiet,
in respect of the situation, remote distance, and separation from the rest of
the chief commanding places of the Roman Empire.

The Name [England] some derived from the manner of the situation of this
Island in the West and North: for that Eng, in the Ancient Teutonick Tongue, as
well as in the Modern, does signify narrow, strait, or a nook. And a Portugal
alluding thereunto has this verse,

Anglia terra ferax and fertilis Angulus Orbis,
Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget orb.
A fruitful Angle, [ England] Thou,
Another world art said:
An Island rich, and have no need
of other Countrie's aid.
And although after this, many errors in Doctrine, and corruptions in Worship
crept in more and more into our Church, and the Pope encroaching by degrees,
the Churches of God in this Land did much degenerate: as they did in other
Nations, so that in Process of time the whole world wondered after the Beast,
and they Worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? Revel. 13.
3, 4. Yet even in the darkest times, when our Church suffered the greatest
Eclipse, when her Silver was become Dross, and her Wine was mixed with Water,
it pleased God then to raise up some eminent Persons to stand up for the
Defense of the Truth in this Nation, and to discover the impostures of the
Church of Rome. Yea, how many were there that suffered Martyrdom for the Gospel
here in England, who detested Image Worship, and other abominations in the
days of King Henry the fourth, King Henry the fifth, and others afterward, long
before Luther was born. These and the like in other Nations may be called the
forlorn Hope, who did obequitare Antichristi castra, and ad pugnam elicere,
advance up to, and ride round about the camp of Antichrist, and provoke him to
the main-fight.

What wonderful deliverances has God wrought for this Church and Nation in
several ways? When King Henry the eighth did renounce the Pope's Supremacy what
plots were framed by diverse Princes against this Land to ruin it, and how
graciously did the Lord protect his people here from such a storm, though then
he had but a very little flock in this place?

When Queen Mary matched with Philip of Spain, in what apparent danger was this
Land to fall into miserable servitude and bondage under the Iron-yoak of the
Spainard' s, which diverse nations that have been subject to them have found
intolerable? The blind and bloody zeal of Queen Mary was likely to have rooted
out all the plants of God's right hand in this Land, and so have banished hence
the true Church and Gospel of Christ, and so to have shut this Kingdom out of
the bounds of the Church. There was great expectation of Issue by that Marriage
between the Spanish Prince and Queen Mary, who Her self also was a Spaniard by
the Mother's side: and Solemn Forms of Thanksgiving and Prayer were made for
Her Conception and safe ^^^lvery: and besides an Act passed in Parliament, that
if ^ueen Mary died in Childbed, King Philip should have the Government of this
Land during the Child's Nonage: and if these things had succeeded, into what
misery might this Land have fallen? And (besides) had an Issue of that Marriage
lived to Reign over England, together with other Dominions of the Spaniard,
what had England been, but an Inferior Tributary Province to be Governed as it
pleased the Spanish Nation, even as was attempted in the Low Countries with
Devilish cruelties? to say nothing of their horrible Massacres in the
West Indies. But here s^e the wonderful goodness of God, who dwelt in the midst
of this Church as a Refuge. All this was prevented: Queen Marie's supposed
Conception vanished, She was soon taken away by death, and King Philip of Spain
had no longer any Interest in England.

Queen Elizabeth, a Noursing-mother to this Church Succeeded. She was born
September the seventh, 1533. One calls Her Angliae Delitias, Europae Sydus,
Mundi Phoenicem, ^.
etc. the joy of England, the Star of Europe, the Phoenix of the World: a Glass
of God's Providence, and the Mirror of His Mercy. And (as if the Devil had
presaged, what a ^cour^e She would prove to the Roman greatness, and suggested
it to Pope Clement the seventh) he is said to have made a Per^mptory Decree
against Her, whilst She was in Her Mother's b^lly. This Pope himself being the
Bastard of Julian de M^d^cis a Florentine, he avowed to make Her illegitimate,
and un^apable of the Crown. The like did Pope Paul the third attempt, viz. To
make that Royal Princess illegitimate when She was but two years Old. But as
the Lord blessed Her then, so he did wonderfully preserve her all her Sister's
R^ign, when many plots were laid to take away her life. But (as Seneca told
Nero) it was impossible for him to kill that man that must be his heir; so it
was impossible for the malice of hell to accomplish the death of the Lady
Elizabeth, whom the onlywise God had appointed to be her Sister's Heir. So
great a Ecclesiae Anglicanae reformationem desperas^^t aeta^ praeterita,
admiratur praesens, obst^p^scet futura. Scultet. Annal.
Reformation She wrought in England, that one says of it, The Gospel had a
swift passage here by diligent Preaching, by Printing good Books, by
translating the holy Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, by Catechizing youth,
by public disputations, by recording the Martyrs, such a thing, as even the
former age had even despaired of, the present age admireth, and the future
shall stand amazed at. It is evident, that the Almighty God, who delights to
show his power in Weakness, was pleased in this Renowed Queen and her brother
King Edward, to let the world see what great things he was able to effect by a
Child and a Woman.

But what a multitude of plots were contrived for the destruction of Queen
Elizabeth, when the next heir to the Crown was a Papist, and an enemy to the
truth of Christianity, and married to the Prince of France; so that had these
plots succeeded, England, in all probability, had been subjected to France in
point of Civil Government, and to the Roman power in matters of Religion.
Admire again the singular goodness of God in protecting Queen Elizabeth: and
whilst the enemies of the Church were seeking ruin in the destruction of Her
Royal Person; the French King that had Married the next heir to the English
Crown, dies and leaves her a Widow without Issue, and she not many years
after became a prisoner.

So eminent was Queen Elizabeth, that Thuanus, a professed Roman Catholic (
but very ingenious) said, he heard the old Duchess of Guise ( whose sons were
of the greatest Enemies that Queen Elizabeth had) to say, that she was
faelicissima and gloriosissima faemina, a most happy and a most glorious Woman.
We know who made her to differ, and that she had not any thing which she had
not received from above, therefore let us give the praise of all to God, who
appointed her (I am persuaded) to build the old wast places, to raise up the
foundations of many generations: she found the Kingdom weak, she left it
strong: she found it poor, she left it rich: they that were enemies to her and
the Gospel which they professed and maintained, were mighty, and likely to
oppose, viz. the French and Spaniards. They that were friends (as the
Protestants in France and the Netherlands) were weak, and needed her help. But
the Lord of Hosts made her a terror to his and her enemies, and a succor to
all his people at home and abroad. And (it seems) the Lord began betimes to
cause his terror to fall upon the Adversaries: for the Council of Trent ended
in a very few years after she began her Reign; and a motion was made, that the
Heads, or chief of the Protestants, should be excommunicated, and in particular
Queen Elizabeth. But the Emperor Ferdinand sent them a message to cool their
Hist. Council. (...). ^ib. 8.
heat, and wrote to the Pope and the Legates, that if the Council would not
yield that fruit as was desired, that they might see an union of all Catholics
to reform the Church, at the least they should not give occasion to the
Protestants to unite themselves more, which they would do in case they
proceeded against the Queen of England: for undoubtedly they would by that
means make a general league against the Catholics, which would bring forth
great inconveniences. And his admonition was so effectual, that the Pope
desisted in Rome, and revoked the Commission given to the Legates in Trent.

About that time Christianity began to dawn in the Kingdom of Ireland, and
suddenly after the Kingdom of Scotland embraced the Gospel of Christ, and Queen
Elizabeth is made Instrumental that way, who aided the Reformed party in
Scotland with great supplies of men and money against the Pope's faction both
of French and Scotch.

The Gospel did so prevail in France also at that time, and the Protestants
grew so numerous and considerable, the Queen Mother, who was an enemy, yet
seemed to temporize, and speak them fair; and wrote to the Pope for Reformation
of diverse abuses to give them content: insomuch that a Learned man, then living
in Germany, ( though born in Italy) breaks out in an Epistle to his friend,
Totus terrarum orbis parturit Christum.

But now let us mark how the enemies of the Churches peace raged in the days
of Queen Elizabeth: what hideous and damnable treasons did they commit, and how
did they thirst after the Royal blood of that peerless Princess? And when the
Lord had confounded their plots, how did they seek to overwhelm and swallow us
up with the power of Spain in the year, 1588. But after that in despite of the
Pope and his Adherents that Noble Queen was carried to her grave in peace, full
of days, riches, and honor, and her Successor both in her Kingdom and
Religion was established in his Throne; how did these Romish Cannibals seek to
exceed themselves in wickedness and horrible cruelty? they sought at one blow
(as it were) to cut off the neck of this Church and State. A French Historian
speaking Thuan. Hist. lib. 54. Anno 15^^.
of the bloody Massacre, says, Wise men which were not addicted to the
Protestants part, seeking all manner of excuse for that fact, did
notwithstanding think, that in all Antiquity there could not be found an
example of like cruelty. But the English Powder Plot does so far exceed the
French Massacre, that there is no degree of comparison. This cannot be
paralelled. It was of such a transcendency (says M. Mason) that all the Devils
may seem to have holden a black Convocation in Hell, and there to have
concluded such a Sulphurious and Acherontical device, as was never heard of
since the world began. That wicked Popish crew being made drunk with the cup of
spiritual fornications, held forth unto them by the Whore of Babylon, with
unspeakable fury and madness did violate the Sacred Laws, and break the
strongest bands of common humanity; and meant to have represented a shadow of
Hell, and Hellish-malice here upon earth, far exceeding the wickedness of Kain
their Elder-brother, and exceeding all examples of Treason, Cruelty, and
Murder, Except that of Judas.

The Pope and Court of Rome, who were wont to account England Puteum
inexhaustum, a well never drawn dry, whilst they had the drawing of it, now
seeing the golden springs like to run low, or rather to run another way, and
not to empty themselves in their Cisterns; they, like Balaam loving the Wages
of unright^^usness, were Raging mad, and cared not how much of the best Blood
in the Land were spilt, so that it might make way for them again to the English
gold. But the greater their rage was, the greater was God's mercy: the greater
the danger, the greater the deliverance. The Lord was known by executing
judgment; and those wicked wretches were snared in the work of their own hands.

Now let us consider what we were before the Christian Religion was first known
to this Nation. What were the Britains but Pagans and Barbarous people? Yea, we
read, that from the first submission of the Britans to the Romans, that
Ambassadors came from Britain to Rome, swearing Fealty in the Temple of Mars,
offering gifts in the Capitol to the gods of the Romans. And for the Saxons,
they were at first no better than the Britans: the Saxons were a Dutch and
Pagan-nation, and served Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury, till they were converted
to the Faith of Christ, and renounced their Idols to serve the true and living
God. Earcombent Reigning in Kent, after the death of his father King Ethelbald,
is said to be the first of English Saxon Kings, that commanded Idols to be
destroyed in his whole Kingdom, about the year of Christ. 640.

2. Consider we the Apostasy of our forefathers in adhereing to the Roman
faction, and then the renewed Apostasy at the death of King Edward the sixth,
together with our unworthy and unfruitful walking under the Gospel, since the
restoring of it by Queen Elizabeth.

3. Consider likewise the mighty outstretched Arm of God in protecting his
Church, and in preserving the truth of Religion among us still, notwithstanding
the plots, designs, and contrivances of Satan and his Instruments, and the many
Enterprises of the Papal power ever since the days of K. James: the great
droves of Sectaries swarming like Locusts since our late unhappy Wars, who
seemed to be Spirited and acted by the Jesuits; their crying down Magistracy
and Ministry, notwithstanding all which the Christian Religion has prevailed
against all its adversaries. The consideration of all these things may give us
ground of hope, that God will still vouchsafe to dwell with his Ancient
Inheritance: and therefore we may considently commend the care of this Church
(his old habitation) to himself, who (I trust) will never suffer the Devils
Instruments to ruin his palace, and to pull down the place of his Ancient
possession.

THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF Great Britain.
CENTURY I.
Jesus Christ the Son of God, the true Prince of Peace, was born in
Bethlehem-Judah, of the Virgin Mary, in the 42 year of the Reign of Augustus
Coesar the Roman Emperor, under the 194 Olympiad, in the XIX year of the Reign
of Kymbeline King of Britain.

Diverse Writers of note do tell us, that the Gospel Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. An.
61. Usser de Brit. Eccles. primord. c. 1. p. 7. Parker de vet^st. Eccl. Britan.
p. 2, 3. For Act. and Monum. v^l. 1. Sir H. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. P^r Josephum
(...) l^c^rna primum in Britania accensa est. Georg. Major.
was preached and received in this Land, even in the days of the Apostles.
Baronius, and the Learned Archbishop Usher tell us, that St. Peter came into
Britain in the twelfth year of the Emperor Nero, and staid a long time here,
many being by him illightned. Nicephorus says, that Simon Zelotes carried the
Doctrine of the Gospel unto the Western Sea, and to the Britannick Islands. The
Learned Archbishop Matthew Parker, Bishop Godwin, Mr. Camden, and others do
assert, that St. Paul himself, that great Apostle of the Gentiles, Preached the
Gospel to this Island after his enlargement from his first captivity at Rome;
where, some say, he continued Preaching five years. And this (say they) he did
at the instigation of Claudia, a Noble British Woman. Gildas, our own
Countryman, Polydor Virgil, Mr. Fox, Sir Henry Spelman, and many others tell
us, that Joseph of Arimathea, that Holy Man, after he had buried the body of
Christ in his own Tomb, came into this Island, and Preached the Gospel here,
being sent hither by Philip and James the Apostles. That he wa^ ^n this Land,
is confirmed not only by diverse Histories, but also by Ancient Monuments.
Bale^s alleges many other witnesses.

It does not appear, that the first Preachers of the Gospel in Britain did so
much as touch at Rome, much less that they received any command, or commission
thence to convert Britain, which should lay an Eternal obligation of gratitude
on this Island to the Sea of Rome. Insomuch that Parsons himself flies at last
to this slight and slender shift. That albeit St. Joseph came not immediately
from Rome, yet he taught in this Island the Roman Faith, whereof St. Paul h^th
written to the Romans themselves, that your Faith is spoken of through the
whole World, Romans 1. 8. Hereby the Jesuit hopes to keep on ^^ot the engagement
of this Island to Rome, for her first conversion. But why should he call the
Christian Fuller. Church Histor. ^i^. 1.
Religion the Roman Faith, rather than the Faith of Jerusalem, or the Faith of
Antioch, seeing it issued from the former, and was received and first named in
the latter City, before any spark of Christianity was kindled at Rome, as Dr.
Fuller well observes.

CENT. II.
WE read, that the Gospel in our Land had the countenance of public Authority
through the gracious providence of God very early. A Learned Writer speaking of
the dignity of this Nation, Omnium Provinciarum prima Britannia, publicitus
Christi nomen recepit. Sabel^l^. Enn. 7. l. 5.
says, That of all the Pr^vinces of the Roman Empire (yea it seems of the
whole World) this Island of Great Britain did first receive the Gospel by
public Authority. Lucius King of Britain was the first Christian King we read
of in Ecclesiastical Stories: He embraced the Faith about an hundred and fifty
years after the death of Christ. It is said of this King Lucius, that at first
he showed himself an enemy to the Christians: but observing the holiness of
their lives, he was inclined to embrace the Christian Faith, but was held off
for a time, partly by the Heathenish superstition of his Ancestors wherein he
had been bred up; and partly because he found the Christians reputed infamous
by the Romans, then the Lords of a great part of the World, under whom (it
seems) he was a tributary King: but being afterward informed, that many of
the Nobles or Senators of the Romans had embraced the Christian Religion, he
made an open profession of it, and made a notable reformation in his Dominions.
Moreover, he being much taken with the Miracles which he beheld truly wrought
by pious Christians, was the more drawn to embrace their Religion, and sent
Elvanus and Meduinus, men of known Piety and Learning in the S^riptures to
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, with a Letter, requesting several things of him;
but principally that he might be ^^s^ructed in the Christian Faith. Eleutherius
returns him this Answer, That having received in his Kingdom the Law and
Faith of Christ, Holinsh. des^rof Brit. c. 7. Annals of England, by John Stow.
and having now the Old and New Testaments, he should by a Council of his Realm
take Laws from thence to govern thereby; That he was the Vicar of God in his
Kingdoms; That the People and Nations of the Kingdom of Britain were His, even
His children; That such as were divided, he should gather them together unto
the Law of Christ his holy Church, unto peace and concord; and should cherish,
maintain, protect, govern, and defend them, etc.

When Christian Religion first was publicly received and established in this
Land by King Lucius, here were then of Heathen institution, eight and twenty
Flamines, and three Archflamines. The places of the Flamines, the King turned
to so many Bishoprics; the places of the Archflamines, to so many
Archbishopricks; the one at London* translated afterward to Canterbury; the
other at York; the third at Caerleon in Wales, where seven of those
Bishoprics, with this Archbishopric were remaining when Austin the Monk came
into England: Here were Temples also builded for the worship of Paynim-gods, of
which he made Churches for the service of Jesus Christ. Thomas Rudbourn a Monk
of Winchester, Moratus an old British Writer, and others testify, that Denotus
was Bishop of Winchester; and all the possessions of the Pagan Flamines there,
were conferred upon him and his Clergy, which were so ample, that even about
the City all the Lands, within twelve miles of it on all sides, were belonging
unto it, containing in number 32 Villages. And thus the Britains had for their
greatest glory, the happiness to see and enjoy the first Christian Prince in
the World.

It is reported, that King Lucius was the Founder of St. Peter's Church at
Cornhil in London, placing therein one Thean an Archbishop, and that the
Metropolitan See continued in a succession of Archbishops there about 400
years, until the coming of Austin the Monk, who translated the Archbishop's
seat from London to Canterbury. In that Church was a Table, wherein is written,
that King Lucius founded the same Church to be an Archbishop's See, and that it
so endured the space of 400 years. There are the name of these Archbishops of
London, Thean, Elvanus, Cadar, Obinus, Conan, Paladius, Stephen, Iltut,
Theodwyn, or Dedwin, Thedrid, Hilary, Restitutus, Guertelinus, or Guitelinus,
Fastidius, Vodinus, Theonus, etc.

Elvanus built a Library near St. Peter's Church in Cornhil; he was a Godly,
Learned and Grave Man, brought up in the School of Joseph of Arimathea, and
Converted many of the Druydes to the Christian Faith. Bishop Godwin says, That
the Archbishopric of York was founded Anno 180. by King Lucius also, who
placed Sampson there. King Lucius also founded the Academy of Bangor in the
favor of good Ar^s and Learned Men. He built the chief Cathedral Church in
Gloucester: The Church dedicated to St. Mary in Glastonbury: A Chapel in honor
of Christ in Dover Castle: A Church in Canterbury, afterward dedicated to St.
Martin. King Lucius died and was buried at Gloucester.

CENT. III.
BUT Christianity in Britain was not buried in the grave of King Lucius:
Witness Gildas, whose words are a clear evidence of the constant continuing of
the Christian Faith in Britain from the first Preaching thereof. Christ's
precepts (says he) though they were received Gildas in Epist. de ^xcid. Britan.
but lukewarmly of the Inhabitants, yet they remained entirely with some, less
sincerely with others, even until the nine years of Persecution under
Dioclesian.

To the Authority of Gildas we may add the Testimony of two Fathers, both
flourishing in this Century, Tertullian and Origin; Tertullian says, ^er^ul.
ad verse. ^udaos. ^. 7.
Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo vero subdita: There are places of
the Britains which were unaccessible to the Romans, but yet subdued to Christ.
Origin in like manner, Virtus Domini Salvatoris cum Origin in (...) 1. Homil. 6.
his est, qui ab orb nostro in Britannia dividuntur: The power of God our
Savior is even with them which in Britain are divided from our World. The
Magdeburgenses, compilers of the General Ecclesiastical Cent. 3. c. 2. col. 6.
History, speaking of the Churches through Europe in this Age, thus express
themselves: Then follow the Isles of the Ocean, where we first meet with
Britain, Mansisse and hac aetate ejus Insulae Ec^lesias, affirmare non
dubitamus: We doubt not to affirm, that the Churches of that Island did also
remain in that Age.

Gildas modestly renders the reason, why so little is extant of the British
History of this Age. Scriptapatriae, Scriptorum monumenta, siquae fuerint, aut
ignibus hostium exusta, aut civium exulum class longius deportata, non
comparent: The Monuments (says he) of our Country, or Writers (if there were
any) appear not, as either burnt by the fire of enemies, or transported far off
by our banished Countrymen.

The Christians of Britain celebrated the Passover upon the fourteenth day of
the Moon of March precisely, contrary to the constitutions of the Roman Church:
which shows, they were not brought to Christian G^ld. Epist. f. 63.
Religion by the Roman Church. And Gildas says, That the Britains used great
solemnity in their Ordination of Ministers, and had other Prayers, Lessons, and
Chapters, than are used in the Roman Church.

Britain remained under the Domination of the Romans, Pagans, as their supreme
Lords, till the year of Christ 286. in Dioclesian's time, when the Roman Senate
sent Caransius to repress the incursions of Barbarous Nations. But Caransius
made a League with the Britains, expelled the Romans, and made himself King:
And from that time, sometimes the Romans prevailing, sometimes the Natives,
Britain was but weakly possessed by the Roman Empire.

CENT. IV.
SO the Gospel flourished in this Land, and they that professed it escaped the
Persecutions raised by the Heathen Emperors of Rome, all except the last under
Dioclesian, which extended to Britain; and St. Alban is noted to be the
Proto-Martyr of Britain, who suffered death for Christ's sake with invincible
Courage and Resolution, about the year of Christ 305. He was a wealthy
Inhabitant of Verolamcester, Neccham, in his Poem on Verulam.
and a Citizen of Rome, for so Alexander Neccham reports him.

Hic est Martyrii r^seo decoratus honor
Albanus, Cives, Inclyta Roma, tuus.
Here Alban, Rome, thy Citizen renowned,
With rosy grace of Martyrdom was crowned.
Alban was a Britain by Parentage, a Roman by Privilege; naturally a Britain,
naturalized a Roman. Immediately followed the Martyrdom of Amphibalus a
Preacher of Caer-leon in Wales, who not long before was fain to fly from
Persecution into the Eastern parts of this Island, and was entertained by Alban
at his house in Verulam, who was instructed by Amphibalus in the Christian
Faith: he was cruelly put to death by the Pagans in a Village called Redburn,
three miles from Verulam. Besides Amphibalus, suffered Aaron and Julius, two
substantial Citizens of Caer-leon, and then Socrates and Stephen, and Augulius
Bishop of London, then called Augusta, with multitudes both of Men and Women in
sundry places (says Beda) as shortly after no less than a thousand Saints
suffered death at Litchfield, whereupon the place was called another Golgotha,
or field of blood: In memory whereof the City bears for Arms to this day a
field surcharged with dead bodies.

Afterward it pleased God to put a period to his Servants sufferings, and to
the rage of their Enemies; for when Dioclesian and Maximian had laid down the
Ensigns of Command, Constantius Chlorus was chosen Emperor in these Western
Provinces of France, Spain, and Britain, whose carriage toward Christians
Eusebius thus describes; (...), that he preserved such Religious people as
were under his command without any hurt or harm: So that under him the Church
in these parts had a breathing-time from Persecution. Constantius died, and was
buried at York, who bequeathed the Empire to Constantine his eldest Son by
Hellen his former Wife. That Constantine was a Britain, is shown by Eumenius
Rhetor, who, in his Oration E^men. Rheor. (...) 9.
made to Constantine himself, makes therein an Apostrophe to Britain, O
fortunata, and nunc omnibus beatior terris Britannia quae Constantinum Coesarem
prima vidisti! O happy Britain, and blessed above all other Lands, which did
first behold Constantine Caesar. There is another Testimony of His of like
nature: Liberavit Pater Constantius Britannias servitute: (...). 5.
Tu etiam Nobiles, illic oriendo, fecisti: Your Father Constantius did free the
British Provinces from slavery, and you have Ennobled them by taking thence
your original: It is said of him, that he was born, made King, and Emperor
first in Britain.

Constantine being now peaceably settled in the Imperial Throne, there followed
a sudden and great alteration in the World, Persecutors turning Patrons of
Religion. The Gospel formerly a Forrester, now became a Citizen; and leaving
the Woods wherein it wandered; Hills and holes where it hid it self before,
dwelt quietly in populous places. The stumps of ruined Churches lately
destroyed by Dioclesian, grew up into beautiful buildings; Oratories were
furnished with pious Ministers, and they provided of plentiful maintenance,
through the liberality of Constantine.

The most avouchable evidence of Christianity flourishing in this Island in
this Age, is produced from the Bishops representing Britain, in the Councils.
1. Of Arles in France, called to take cognizance of the cause of the Donatists,
where appeared for the Britains, Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of
London, Adelfius Bishop of the City called the Colony of London, which some
count Colchester, and others Maldon in Essex, Sacerdos a Priest, both by his
proper Name and Office, Arminius, a Deacon, Anno 313. In the Synod of Nice held
in Bithynia, Anno 325. British Bishops were present, being summoned to suppress
Arianism, and to establish an uniformity of the observation of Easter, as
Athanasius, and Hilary Bishop of Poictiers do testify. At the Council of Sardis
in Thracia, called by Constantius and Constans, Sons to Constantine the Great,
were present the Bishops of Britain, who concurred with the rest to condemn the
Arrians, and acquit Athanasius. The British Bishops were also present at the
Council of Ariminum assembled in Italy.

Theodoret tells us, that he wrote an Epistle to all Churches concerning
Theodoret Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 10.
the Council of Nice, wherein he says, there were then many Churches in
Britain, etc. About the year 360. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, among diverse
others dedicated his Book, De Synodis fidei Catholicae contra Arianos, Socrat.
Scholast. l. 2. c. 6. 7.
to the Bishops of the Provinces of Britain, during his exile for the Orthodox
Faith, commending them for their constancy in the profession of that Faith. And
by the testimony of Athanasius, it appears, that Sozom. l. 3. c. 11. and 12.
the Britains then had not only Churches professing the Orthodox Faith, but
Bishops famous for their Piety and Learning, summoned to foreign Councils in
remote parts for debating and deciding the highest Articles of the Christian
Faith.

In the year 383. Maximus a Christian, and Orthodox Prince governed Du Moul.
resp. ad Card-du Perro^. lib. 7 ca. 5.
Britain: for then all that part of the Island which was subject to the Romans,
was Christian Not long after the Empire being fallen in the West, and torn by
the Goths, Francs, Vandals, and Burgundians, the Romans forsook the Isle of
Britain, which moved the Natives to commit the Kingdom to one Constantine a
Britain, as one descended from their Nation, and a Christian virtuous man.

About the year 400. Chrysostom gives this testimony concerning the Chrysostom.
oper tom 5.
Britains Embracing of the Gospel Nam et Britaniae, Insuae extra hoc mare
sitae, et q^ae in ipso oceano sunt, vertutem verbi senserunt (sunt etiam illic
fundatae Ecclesiae etc.) Illius inquam verbi, quod tunc dictum, quod ^t in
omnium animabus, inque omnium labiis plantatum. Which he seconded in another
Sermon of the Feast of Pentecost.

CENT. V.
ABout the year 412 Pelagius (born in Britain) began to broach his Herefies
publicly. The same day w^^reon Pelagius was born in Britain St. Augustine was
also born in Africa: divine providence so ordering it that the poison and the
Antidote should be Twins in a manner in respect of the same time as Dr. Fuller
well observes. In the year 446. the Pelagian Heresy spread over Britain: and
the British Churches being defiled thereby, King Vortigern for the maintaining
the truth, sent for German Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troys in
Champagne out of France, men famous for their doctrine and counsel, who
refuting this Heresy, gained unto themselves a reverent esteem among the
Britains; but chiefly German, who in a Chapel near unto St. Albans did openly
out of the pulpit preach God's word sincerely to the people. This conference
was held at St. Albans, even where at this day a small Chapel is extant to the
honor of St. German.

Gemanus having baptized multitudes of Pagan converts in the river Alen,
marched with an Army of them against the Pagans whom he found in the North-East
of Wales. Here he chose an hollow dale surrounded with Usser de Prit. Eccles.
prim^rd. p. 333.
hills, near the Village, called at this day by the English, Mold by the
British Guidcrue in Flintshire, where the field at this day retains the name of
Mees Garmon or German's field. Here Germanus placed his men in ambush, with
instructions, that a Signal given, they should all shout Hallelujah three times
with their might; which all was done accordingly. Hereat the Pagans without
striking a stroke confusedly ran away, and many were drowned for speed in the
river Alen. After this victory Germanus prepared for his return.

After Germanus and Lupus were returned home into their native country,
Pelagianism began to sprout again in Britain: and after three years Germanus
came again with Severus into Britain, and the Pelagian Heresy was again
condemned in a second Synod, having been before condemned in a Synod at London.
Germanus having settled B^itain in good order, returned to his own country,
where he presently died after his return: and by God's blessing on his
endeavors, that Heresy was so cut down in Britain, that it never generally
grew up again.

About the year 453. Hengist Captain of the Saxons, who came to help the
Britans against the Scots and Picts, who having married his own daughter to
Vortigern had murdered his sovereign Lord Constans, and invaded his Crown
being called in for his help, came with diverse ships of stout Saxon Soldiers,
who under pretense of protecting them from the Picts, intended to plant
themselves in the North part of Britain, which when the Britans saw, and
fearing their own ruin, they desired the King that he would drive them out of
his Kingdom. The Nobles also of his Realm did inveigh much against the King's
marriage with a Pagan Woman.

Whereupon Anno 454. they utterly deserted King Vortigern, and unanimously
chose Vortimer, his son, to be their King, who, following their counsel, began
to expel the Barbarians, and chasing them as far as the Derwent, he slew many
of them: Vortigern also fled with them. But in the year 460 Prince Vortimer
died, being poisoned by Rowen his Mother in law, with whom the hope of the
Britains was extinguished. Hereupon Hengist returning into Britain with new
forces, treacherously slew most of the British Nobles at a pretended Treaty for
peace between both Nations. And the Saxons being enemies to Christian Religion,
and bent upon the possession of such a fruitful Coun^rey, exercised great
cruelty upon the Inhabitants, destroyed Churches and all Ecclesiastical things,
burnt the holy Scriptures, slew the Ministers in the Churches, endeavoring to
supplant Christian Religion. Vortigern had before caused Vodinus Henr.
Hunting^. Lib. 2
Archbishop of London to be put to death, because he reproved him for calling
in the Saxons, and marrying a Pagan Woman: and now Theanus Bishop of London,
and Thaodiceus Bishop of York with others were Galsr. (...). lib. 12.
forced to fly into remote places for the preservation of their lives.

Thus God sent down his heavy judgments upon the Britains for their Sins, as
Gildas writes, Britones propter avaritiam and rapinam Principum, propter
iniquitatem and injustitiam Judicum, propter desidiam praedicationis
Episcoporum, propter luxuriam and malos mores populi perdidisse patriam: that
is, the Britans for the covetousness and oppression of the Princes, for the
iniquity and injustice of the Judges, for the negligent preaching of the
Bishops, for the luxury and evil manners of the people, lost their Country.
After many bat^les with the Britains, the Pagans surprised a great part of this
Island.

Then the Britains sent Ambassadors into the lesser Britain to Aurelius
Ambrosius, and Vter-Pendragon his brother, desiring them to take the government
of Britain upon them (of which they were right heirs) and to expel the
Saxons, and King Vortigern. Hereupon they came with many armed soldiers. Then
the Britains set up Aurelius to be their King, who marched first against
Vortigern to his Castle Genorium in Wales, where he had fortified and immured
himself; but Aurelius burnt the castle, and King Vortigern in it. After this
Aurelius fought many ba^tles with the Saxons in the years 485. 487, 488. and at
last overcame them. Aurelius was one composed of valor and Religion, wholly
employing himself in time of peace, to raise new Churches, repair old, and
endow both. Johan. Timnuthens. in ejus vila.


At this time there was an Academy of learned men under Dubritius near the
river Wye in Monmouth-shire. This Dubritius taught many scholars for seven
years together in humane and divine learning; among whom the chiefest were
Theliau, Sampson, Vbelin, Merchiguin, Elquored, etc. at Dubritius removed to
Werwick, a village two miles from Cardigan, and from thence to Moch-Rhos.

The Britains being involved in perpetual Wars with the Scots, Picts, Normans,
Saxons, the Christian Britains were at last, by force and fraud, undermined,
and driven out of their native soil into Britain in France, and into Wales and
Cornwall: yet then was the Gospel preserved in those corners, where the
remainder of the Britains (those ancient Inhabitants of this land) remain^ unto
this day. Paganism was again planted in this land, and an Heptarchy was
established, this land being divided into seven Kingdoms.

The first was the Kingdom of Kent, which began Anno 457. under King Hengist.
The second of the South- Saxons, comprising Sussex and Surrey. This Kingdom
began under King Ella, Anno 491. and was the weakest of all the seven,
affording few Kings, and fewer actions of moment. The third was of the East-
Saxons, comprehending Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartford-shire. This
Kingdom began in Erchenwin about the year 527. The fourth of the East Angles,
containing Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridg-shire, with the Isle of Ely, and part of
Bedford-shire. It began Anno 575. under King Vlfa, and lay most exposed to the
cruelty of the Danish incursions. The fifth of Mercia, so called, because it
lay in the midst of the Island, being the merches or limits on which all the
residue of the Kingdoms did bound and border. It began Anno 582 under King
Cridda, and contained the Countries of Lincoln, North-hampton, Rutland,
Huntingdon, Buckingham, Oxford, Worcester, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham,
Leicester, Stafford, and Chester: besides part of Hereford and Salop (the
remnant whereof was possessed by the Welsh) Gloucester, Bedford, and Lanoaster.
The sixth of Northumberland, whereunto belonged whatsoever lies between Humber
and Edenborough Frith. It was subdivided sometimes into two Kingdoms, of
Bernicia, and Deira. The latter consisted of the remainder of Lancashire, with
the entire Counties of York, Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland. Bernicia
contained Northumberland with the South of Scotland to Edenborough: But it was
not long before both were united under King Ida. The seventh of the West
Saxons, who possessed Hantshire, Berk-shire, Wilt-shire, Somerset, Dorset and
Devon-shire; part of Cornwall and Gloucester-shire. This Kingdom began Anno
519. under Cerdicus: This Heptarchy was at last swallowed up in the West Saxons
Monarchy.

But to return to the British Church, and the year of our Lord 449. wherein the
Irish St. Patrick is no^oriously reported to have come to Glastonbury, where he
lived 39 years as Abbot of that place. And so great was the credit of St.
Patrick at Glastonbury, that after his death and burial there, that Church that
formerly was dedicated to the Virgin Mary alone, was in after-ages jointly
consecrated to her and St. Patrick.

About the year 495 Cerdicus (who was afterward first King of the West Saxons)
having overcome the Britains at Winchester, killed all the Monks belonging to
the Church of St. Amphibalus, and turned the same into a Temple of Idolatry.
Aurelius Ambrosius was poisoned in the year 498. and his Brother Vter-Pendragon
took upon him the Government of this Realm.

CENT. VI.
MOst miserable at this time was the British Commonwealth, cro^ded up into
barren Corners, whilst their Enemies the Pagan Saxons possessed the East and
South, if not the best part of the Island. Pen-dragon dying, the Nobles and
Bishops of Britain set up his Son Arthur, being about 16 years of age, to be
King of Britain, in the year 516. Of whom one writes thus, Cultum Religioni
pene debitum in Civitatibus, and viris, and oppidis, reformavit: Ecclesias a
Pagana Gente destructas vel dirut as reparavit: and in eis Res and Episcopos
cum Clericorum officiis, prout locorum dignit as cogehat, devoto Religionis
studio ordinavit. Vigente adhuc post Germani Episcopi labores, qui ob^d in
Britanniam bis venerat, Pelagiana labe, ac desperato pene remedio David ex
universae Gentis Synodo Prasul constitutus An. 519. ^^utin^ praedicatione
disceptationbus publicis eandem profligavit, at que aream Ecclesia p^rgavit.
David was Un^kle to King Arthur; he privately studied the Scriptures ten years,
before he would presume to Preach, and always carried the Gospels about him. He
kept a Synod against the Pe^agian error (which was now revived in Britain) and
confirmed many wavering Souls in the Faith. The main body of the British Church
was at this time in Wales, where Bangor on the North, and Caerleon (on Vsk in
Monmouth-shire) in the South, were the two eyes thereof for Learning and
Religion. Caerleon had in it the Court of King Arthur, the Sea of an
Archbishop, a College of 200 Philosophers, who therein studied Astronomy, and
was a populous place of great extent, though at this day reduced to a small
Village. By leave obtained from King Arthur, David removed the Archiepiscopal
seat from Caerleon to Meneva, now called St. David's in Pembrook-shire, in
which exchange (says Fuller) his devotion is rather to be admired, than his
discretion to be commended, leaving a fruitful soil for a bleach barren Girald.
Cambr.
place; though the worse it was, the better for his purpose, being a great
promoter of a Monastical life.

In those days such was the correspondency between the greater and lesser
Britain, that they seemed to possess Learned Men in common betwixt them.

About the same time flourished Cad^cus, Abbot of Llancanvan in Glamorgan
shire, Son of the Toparch of that Country: He retained part of his paternal
principality in his hand, whereby he daily fed 300 of Clergymen, Widows, and
poor People, besides guests and visitants daily resorting to him. Wilful
poverty then was not by vow entailed upon Monastical life.

Iltutus followed him, a profound Scholar, who at Llaniltut in Glamorgan
Fullers Church Hist.
shire Preached God's Word, and set up a College of Scholars, himself leading
a single life. Sampson, Scholar to Iltutus, succeeds, made Bishop at large,
sine titulo. In that Age all Bishops were not fixed to the Chair of a peculiar
Church, but some might sit down in any vacant place for their Cathedral, and
there exercise their Episcopal Authority, provided it were without prejudice to
other Bishops: This Sampson being afterward made Archbishop of Dole in
French-Britain, Bal^us says, That he carried away with him the Monuments of
British Antiquity.

Pattern for three and twenty years was a constant Preacher at Llanpatern in
Cardigan shire.

St. Petrock comes next, one of great Piety and painfulness in that Ag^,
Captain of the Cornish Saints. Then lived St. Teliau, who was Scholar to
Dubritius, and succeeded him in the Bishopric of Landaff, a pious Preacher,
and zealous reprover of the Vices of that time. About the year 560 flourished
Congel Abbot of Bangor, who much altered the discipline of that Monastery.
Kentigern, the famous Bishop of Elwy in North- Wales; St. Asaph was his
successor in the same place, in whose mouth this sentence was frequent; Such
who are against the Preaching of God's Word, do envy the salvation of mankind.

About the year 596. Pope Gregory I. sent Augustine a Benedictine Monck, a
subtle and industrious Man, into this Land, to work two ends; the one to reduce
the Christians of this Isle to the Form and Service of the Romish Church; the
other, to draw (if he could) some of those Pagan Kings to the Christian
Religion. Augustine with Mellitus, and forty more of his Companions, sent to
Preach the Gospel in Britain, landeth at Thanet in Kent: Ethelbert was then
King of Kent, and a Pagan, yet had he Married Bertha, Daughter to the King of
France, a Christian Woman, to whom he permitted the free use of her Religion,
allowing her both Luidhard, a Bishop for her Chaplain, and an old Church in
Canterbury (formerly dedicated by the Romans to St. Martin) to exercise her
Devotion therein.

Augustine with his followers (having obtained leave from King Ethelbert)
advanced unto Canterbury, to the foresaid Church of St. Martin: Here they lived
so Piously, Prayed so servently, Fasted so frequently, Preached so constantly,
and wrought Miracles (as it is said) so commonly, that Ethelbert was persuaded
by Queen Bertha to embrace the Christian Religion, and was Baptized, whose
example multitudes of Pagans followed: There were in one day about ten thousand
Men Baptized, besides Women and Children, in a River. The Water being hallowed
by Augustine, he commanded the People to go in by couples, and one to Baptize
the other, in the name of the Trinity. Thus Augustine carries away the credit
of all that came after him, because the Primitive planter of the Gospel among
the Saxons, and Kent was converted to Christianity; yet far more than half of
the Land lay some years after in the darkness of Paganism, which others
afterward illightened with the beams of the Gospel. Mean time the poor
Christian Britains living peaceably at home, there enjoyed God, the Gospel, and
their Mountains, not caring for the Ceremonies Alamode, brought over by
Augustine.

CENT. VII.
ABout the year 601. Pope Gregory I. sent two Archbishops Palls into England,
the one for London, the other for York: The former of these Cities had been
honored with an Archbishop's See some hundred years since King Lucius; but at
the Instance of Augustine, and by a new order of the foresaid Gregory, this
Pall sent to London, was removed thence to Canterbury (whereof Augustine was
made Archbishop) and there fixed and confirmed. Canterbury was the place
wherein Christianity was first received by the Saxons, and is therefore
honored to perpetuate the memory thereof; and London must hereafter be
contented with the plain seat of a Bishop.

Then Augustine by the aid of Ethelbert King of Kent, called a Council of Saxon
and British Bishops to meet in the confines of the Mercians and West Saxons, in
the borders of Worcester and Hereford-shires, under an Oak, knowing that the
Pagan Britains performed their superstition under an Oak, in some imitation,
and yet a correction of their Idolatry, as Sir Henry Spelman shows. But this
Synod proved ineffectual; Sir H. Spelm. in Conciliis. Geoffry of Monmouth,
calling the Britains the Lora's flock, says, Grex Domini re^lum ordinem
tenebat. Gals. Monum. lib. 13 c. 12.
the British Bishops, and many very Learned Men (far differing from Romish
Priests) rejected his Traditions which he brought from Rome, and would not
admit thereof, detested his Pride, renounced his Authority, and would not
accept of him for their Archbishop, as he desired to be; and for the space of
an hundred years at least, refused to communicate with those that had received
the same. And then the Bishops and Churches of Scotland joined with the
Britains against those new observations which the same Augustine brought from
Rome. At that time there were 1200. Monks at the Monastery of Bangor in Wales
(not Popish Monks, and idle Belly-gods, but) all living with the labor of
their hands, and bestowing the time of rest from their labors in Prayer and
Meditation on the Scriptures. Over that Church, at Austin's coming, was
Dinochus a Learned Man, who, when Austin required the British Bishops to be
subject to his Romish Authority, convinced them by diverse Arguments, that they
did not owe him any such subjection; whereat Augustine being highly offended,
is said to have spoken these words, Quod si pacem cum fratribus accipere
nollent, bellum ab hostibus forent accepturi: and si, Nationi Anglorum
noluissent viam vitae praedicare, per horum manus ultionem essent mortis
passuri: that if they would not accept of peace with their Brethren, they
should receive War from their Enemies; and seeing they would not join with him
in Preaching the way of life to the Saxons, they should feel the force of their
Enemies Sword: And some Writers say, that he stirred up Ethelfred King of
Northumberland against them, who, with an Army of Infidels, cruelly and
unmercifully slew them, who came forth to him in their shirts to entreat for
mercy, fifty only escaping.

But their innocent blood went not long unrevenged, for we read, how three
British Princes, viz. Blederick Duke of Cornwall, Margadus Duke of South Wales,
and Cadwan Duke of North Wales, give Battle Nicol. Trive^,
to the Northumberlanders, as they were invading Wales, and not only
dangerously wounded the foresaid Ethelfred their King, but also discomfited his
Army, and slew ten thousand and sixty of his Soldiers; forcing him at last to
Articles of composition, that he should confine himself within his own
Country, North of Trent, and leave all Wales to be entirely and peaceably
enjoyed by the Britains, the true owners thereof.

Here we are to take our farewell of the British Church, for some hundreds of
years, wanting instructions concerning the remarkable particulars thereof,
says Dr. Fuller in his Church History of Britain.

Let us now return to our Augustine, who all this while was very industrious,
and no less successful in converting the Saxons to the Christian Faith,
insomuch that a certain Author reports, how in the River Swale near Richmond
in Yorkshire, Augustine in one day Baptized above ten thousand: but B^de makes
no mention at all hereof, and ascribes this numerous baptizing to Paulinus
Bishop of York many years after. In that age nothing was used with Baptism, but
Baptism, the word and the water made the Sacrament. At Corn in Dorset-shire
Austin destroyed the Idol of Heal, or Aesculapius, which the Saxons formerly
adored.

Sebert King of Essex (Nephew to Etholbert King of Kent by Ricula his sister)
embraced the Faith, with all his Kingdom, by the Ministry of Mellitus, whom
Augustine ordained Bishop of London: making also one Justus a Roman Bishop of
Rochester.

Augustine died, and was buried in the Northern part of the new Bed. Eccl.
Hist. li. 2. ca. 3.
Church in Canterbury, dedicated to Peter and Paul. Bid says this inscription
was written upon his Monument. Here rests Lord Augustine, the first
Archbishop of Canterbury, who being in times past sent hither by blessed
Gregory Bishop of the Roman City, and supported by God with the working of
Miracles, brought King Ethelbert and his Country from the Worshipping of Idols
to the faith of Christ, and the days of his Office being finished in peace, he
died the seventh of the Calends of June, the same King reigning. But in this
Epitaph one thing is wanting, and that mainly material, namely the year that he
did.

After the death of Augustine, Laurentius a Roman succeeded him, whom Augustine
in his lifetime ordained in that place. King Ethelbert, having reigned fifty
Six, and been a Christian one and twenty years. died, and was buried nigh to
Queen Bertha (who died a little before him) in the Porch of St. Martins Church
in Canterbury; which fabric with some other Churches, by him were beautifully
built and bountifully endowed.

After the death of Ethelbert Anno 616. Eadbald, his son and the sons of Sebert
King of the East- Saxons, succeeding them, refused to be baptized, or embrace
the Christian faith, professed and set up Idolatry, expelled their Bishops,
driving them out of this land into France, til at last King Eadbald being
converted to Christianity by Laurentius Archbishop of Canterbury, presently
began to take care of the affairs of the Church, and at the desire of
Laurentius, Justus and Mellitus, returned again into England. Rochester readily
received their Bishop, but London refused to entertain good Mellitus, who led a
private life in London, til that after the death of Laurentius, he succeeded
him in the Church of Canterbury. Five years sat Mellitus in Canterbury, after
whose death Justus Bishop of Rochester succeeded him, and had his Pall solemnly
sent him by Pope Boniface.

Ethelfred being slain by the Britains, Edwin succeeds him, and was settled in
the general government of the Saxons; who by the persuasion of Paulinus
embraced and professed the Christian Religion, destroyed the Temples, Altars
and Images of their Idol-Gods, and was, with all his Nobles and much people,
baptized in the City of York, by Paulinus Anno 627.

About this time Pope Boniface V. directed diverse Epistles to England, wherein
were many passages fighting against Christ's satisfaction.

A few years after the conversion of the East Angles was advanced by King
Sigebert, and after the death of Earpwald, his successor in the Kingdom. Bid
give's him this character, that he became vir Christianissimus and Doctissimus,
being assisted by the preaching of Felix, a Monk of Burgundy, he converted his
Subjects to Christianity. This Felix was made the first Bishop of Dunwich in
Suffolk, a place formerly furnished with fifty and two Churche^, and has
scarce two now remaining, the rest being swallowed up by the Sea. This ^igebert
is generally reputed the founder of the University of Cambridge.

Edwin fell out with Cadwallan, King of the Britains, and slew many thousand
Christian Britains in battle, pu^^ing ^im and the rest to flight. Anno 633.
After the victory Edwin led his Army through the Provinces of Britain, burning
their Cities, and wasting their Colonies, and brought those Provinces under his
subjection, chasing Cadwallan into Ireland. But Cadwallan returning from thence
with ten thousand men, assisted by Penda King of Mercia, wasted the Country of
King Edwin. Both these Kings at last met in a field called Heat-fi^ld, where
Edwin was slain, and his whole Army overthrown: Cadwallan slew both the Sons
of King Edwin, and for a whole year destroyed the Provinces of the
Northumbrians. After the death of Edwin, his whole Kingdom relapsed to
Paganism; and Paulinus, Archbishop of York, ^^king with him Queen Ethelburga
sister to Eadbald King of Kent, returned into Kent, and there became Bishop of
Rochester.

After the death of King Edwin, his Kingdom of Northumberland was divided into
two parts, both petty Kingdoms. Osrich, C^usin-German of King Edwin, was King
of Deira; and Eanfrith the eldest son of Ethelfred, was King of Bernicia They
were both Christians, but became Apostates, and were slain by Cadwallan in the
first year.

Oswald, the second son of Ethelfred, succeeded unto them, and overthrew
Cadwallan, Bishop Aidan converted Oswald, which King disdained Usher's Religion
of the ancient Irish. p. 115.
not to preach, and expound to his Subjects and Nobles in the English tongue,
that which Aidan preached to the Saxons in the Scottish tongue. By the Ministry
of Aidan (the first Bishop of Linsfarn) was the Kingdom of Northumberland
recovered from Paganism. Aidan parted all Petry. Church hist. ^^^t. 7.
that was given him, by the King or Potent men, among the poor: and ceased not
to go from town to town and from house to house, not on hors-back, but on foot,
always catechizing, whether he met with rich or poor: if they were Pagans, he
i^structed^ them; if they were Christians, he confirmed them in the faith; and
exhorted unto the works of Piety and Charity, especially to read the Scriptures
diligently; he died Anno 651. From Northumberland the word of God was spread
among many others of the Saxon Kingdoms.

The Scotch, that professed no subjection to the Church of Rome, were they that
sent preachers to the conversion of these Countries, and ordained Ephr. Pagit.
Religion of the ancient Britains.
Bishops to govern them, as Aidan forementioned, Finan, and Colman: for the
East Saxons Cedd, and for the Mercians Diuma: for the paucity of Priests
(says- Beda) constrained one Bishop to be appointed over two people. Finan
converted the Kingdoms of the East Saxons, and Mercia. Pope Honorius sent
Birinus unto the West- Saxons, who by his preaching converteth many, and among
the rest Kyngils, the West- Saxon King, whom he Baptized. Oswald, King of
Northumberland was present at that time, and was first Godfather, then father
in law to King Kyngils, to whom he gave his Daughter to Wife.

Dorchester, an old City in Oxfordshire, was made the seat of Birinus his
Bishopric. Sussex, and the Isle of Wight also were converted. About this time
Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, divided England (so much thereof as was
Christian) into Parishes. Anno 640. the first lent began in those parts of
England, which obeyed the Roman celebration of Easter.

Oswald, King of Northumberland, fighting at Maserfield (since Oswastrey in
Shrop-shine) against Penda the Pagan Prince of Mercia, was Fabian. ^^^nic.
part^ 5.
overthrown, slain, and his Body most barbarously abused and chopped in
pieces. Oswy his younger brother recovered his Kingdom after one year; and
buried his head in the Churchyard of Lyndesar.

Sigebert was persuaded by his Monks to enter into a Cloister: his end was
lamentable: for when he had given over his Kingdom to his Cousin Egrick, the
forenamed Penda entered his Kingdom with an Army: his subjects forced him to go
into the field, where both he and Egrick were slain. Others say, he was
murdered by two Villains.

Penda, Prince of Mercia, having married Alfreda, Daughter of Oswy, King of
Northumberland, renounced Paganism, embraced Christianity, and propogated it in
his Dominions. Indeed, Penda his father, that persecutor of piety, was yet
alive (and survived 'two years after) pers^^ting an Heathen till death, but
mollified to permit a toleration of Christianity in his Subjects.

From Colmkil (as a most famous Seminary of learning) at that time, sprang
forth those, who not only did resist the beginnings of Antichristian pride at
home, and in our neighbour-Country, but they sowed the seed of the Gospel in
other in other Nations. Such was that samous Rumold, who was called
Mechlinensis Apostolus. Gallus brought Helvetia from Pappas in histor. convers.
Gent.
Paganism, as Pa^pas witnesses, built sundry Monasteries there. Calumban, a
man of excellent holiness and learning, lived sometime in Bangor, and thence
went into Burgundy, where he began the Monastery Lux^vien, and taught the
Monks, of his own Country especially, to live by the works of their own hands.
Also because he rebuked Theodorick for Platina in Bonifacio quarto.
his leacherous life he was forced to fly, and visited sundry parts of
Germany: thence he went into Italy, and began another Abbey on the Appennine
Hills beside Bobium in Tuscany. Levin also turned many to the faith about Ghent
and Esca.

Furseus, and his brother Fullan, with two Presbyters, Gobban and Dicul,
obtained land from Sigebert King of Essex, and built the Abbey of Cnobsherburg:
and passing into France, he began the Abbey at Latiniac, where he died. Diuma
was ordained first Bishop of Mercia, where he converted many to the Faith, in
the reign of the Christian Penda: and for his rare gifts the Bishopric of
Middlesex was committed to his charge, unto whom succeeded Cella a Scot. Also
Florentius went to Argentine, or Strausburg, and was the first Bishop thereof:
he opened the first School in Alsatia about the year 669. Kilian, the first
Bishop of Wortsburg, did first instruct the people of East- France, in the
Christian Faith, Anno. 668. Colonat a Priest, and Thomas a Deacon, followed him
in all his Travels. Burcard succeeded, to whom King Pippin gave a Dukedom: and
from thence among all the Bishops of Germany, only the Bishop of Wortsburg
carries a Sword and Priests Gown in his badge. Unto these Scots John Pappas
joyneth some Britans, as Willibrod Reformer of Frisia; and two brethren Evaldi,
the one Sir named the Black, the other the White. John Pappas says they
converted the Westphalians to the Christian Faith, and suffered Martyrdom near
Bremen. John Bale shows their Death.

Pope Agatho sent John (the Arch-chaunter of St. Peter's in Rome) into England,
to compose the difference betwixt Honoricus and Wilfrid the two Archbishops,
and withal to deliver them the Acts of Pope Martin the first, and to teach them
to sing the Liturgy according to the custom of Rome -- Bencdictus Biscopius, a
Nobleman of England, went to Rome in the service of the Church; and brought
many Books into the Monasteries of Tinmouth, and Wirmouth. The first Glass in
this Island is said to be his gift.

Mark what Beda says of the custom in those days: Then they never came into a
Church, but only for hearing the Word, and Prayer [no word of the Mass] the
King would come with five or six, and he stayed till the Prayer was ended. All
the care of these Doctors was to serve God, not the World; to feed Souls, not
their own Bodies: wherefore in those days wheresoever a Clerk or Monk did
come, he was received as a Servant of God: If he were seen journeying, they
were glad to be signed with his Hand, or blessed with his Mouth, and they gave
good heed unto the words of his Exhortation. And on the Lord's day they came in
Flocks to the Church or Monasteries, not to refresh their Bodies [nor to hear
Masses] but to hear the Word; and if any Priest entered into a Village,
ineontinently all the People would assemble, being desirous to hear the Word of
Life: for neither did the Priests go into Villages upon any other occasion,
except to Preach, or visit the Sick, or to feed Souls. At that time the Clergy
and Monks in England had liberty to Marry.

Then Theodorus, who succeeded Deus-dedit, Bishop of Canterbury, brought many
Books thither, erecting a well-furnished Library, and teaching his Clergy how
to make use thereof. He rigorously pressed Conformity to Rome, in the
observation of Easter; and to that purpose a Council was called at Hartford;
here Easter was settled according to the Romish Rite. In this Synod nine other
Articles were concluded of, as Stapleton has thus Translated them out of Bid.
Lib. 4. c. 5.


I. That no Bishop should have ought to do in another's Diocese, but be
contented with the charge of the people committed unto him.

II. That no Bishop should any-wise trouble such Monasteries as were
Consecrated, and given to God, nor violently take from them ought was theirs.

III. That Monks should not go from one Monastery to another, unless by the
leave of their own Abbot; but should continue in the obedience which they
promised at the time of their conversion, and entrance into Religion.

IV. That none of the Clergy, for saking his own Bishop, should run up and down
where he lists; nor when he came any whither, should be received without
Letters of Commendation from his Diocesan, etc.

V. That such Bishops and Clerks as are strangers, be content with such
Hospitality as is given them, and that it be lawful for none of them to execute
any Office of a Priest, without the permission of the Bishop in whose Diocese
they are known to be.

VI. It has seemed good to us all, that a Synod and Convocation should be
Assembled once a year, on the first day of August, at the place called
Clofeshooh.

VII. That no Bishop should ambitiously prefer himself above another, but
should all acknowledge the time and order of their cons^cration.

VIII. That the number of the Bishops should be increased, the number of
Christian folk daily waxing greater.

IX. That no man commit Advoutry, nor Fornication; that no man forsake his own
Wife, but for only Fornication, as the holy Gospel teaches. And if any Man
put away his Wife, being lawfully married unto him, if he will be a right
Christian Man, let him be joined to none other; but let him so continue, still
sole, or else be reconciled again to his own Wife.

This Synod Stapleton calls, the first of the English Nation, that is, whose
Canons are completely extant.

Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury envyed Wilfrid Bishop of York, and
endeavored, that the Diocese of York might be divided; whereat Wilfrid being
offended, goes to Rome, and in his passage thither, by a Tempest he is cast on
the Shore of Freezland in Belgia, where the Inhabitants (as yet Pagans) were by
his Preaching converted to Christianity. Returning into England, he returned
not unto York, but stayed in the Pagan Kingdom of the South Saxons, who also by
God's blessing on his endeavors were persuaded to embrace the Christian Faith.
These South Saxons (of all the seven Kingdoms) were the last that were
converted to Christ, and yet their Country was next in situation unto Kent,
where the Gospel was first planted. Indeed Edilwalck their King was a little
before Christened by the persuasion of Wolpher King of Mercia (who was his
Godfather, and at his Baptizing gave him for a gift the Isle of Wight, and
Provinciam Meanvarorum in Gente occidentalium Saxonum) but his Country still
remained in Paganism. And although Dicul a Scot, with six others, had a small
Monastery at Bosenham in Sussex, yet they were more careful of their own
safety, than of their Neighbors conversion. Wilfrid builded an Abbey in Selsey
in Sussex, he taught the South Saxons the craft of fishing.

Cedda the Bishop of West Saxons died, and his Deacon Wenfrede was his
successor: Soon after this time died Wina Bishop of London, after whom was
Bishop Erkenwald, who founded the Monasteries of Chertsey in Surrey, and
Barking in Essex. But that of Chertsey was thrown down by the Danes, and
re-edified by Edgar King of England.

Then Theodorus kept a Synod or Council of Bishops at Hatfield, by authority of
which Council he divided the Province of Mercia, that Sexwolphus then ruled
alone, into five Bishoprics; that is, one to Chester, the second to Worcester,
the third to Lichfield, the fourth to Cedema in Lindsey, and the fifth to
Dorchester.

Cadwallader, the last King of Wales, wearied out with Wars, Famine and
Pestilence, left his own Land, and with some small treasure fled to Alan, King
of Little Britain: He was the last King of the stock of Britains. After he had
reigned three years he went to Rome, and there died, and was buried in the
Church of St. Peter, with this Epitaph upon his Tomb.

Culmen opus sobolem pollentia regna triumphos,
Eximias proceros moenia castra lares,
Quaeque patrum virtus, and quae congesserat ipse,
Cadwald armipotens, linquit amore Dei.
The which verses are thus Englished by Fabian.

Abounding riches, kindred, triumph assured, Fabian' s Chr. part. 5.

Plenteous wealth, with clothes richly dyght,
Houses, Castles, and Towns strongly mured,
And other honors which by his Parents Might,
And his own, this Martial virtuous Knight,
Cadwald the strong, descended of Knight's blood
For Christ's love renounced all his good.
About the year 692. Ina King of the West Saxons, set forth his Saxon Laws,
translated into English by Mr. Lambert; he enacted many Laws, viz. De regula
vivendi Ministrorum Dei; de Infantibus baptizandis; de censu Ecclesiae, etc.

Anno 694. a great Council was held at Becanceld by Withred King of Kent, and
Bertu^ld Archbishop of Britain, wherein many things were concluded in favor of
the Church. Five Kentish Abbesses, namely Mildred, Ethelred, Aete, Wilnolde,
and Hereswide, were not only present, but subscribed their names and crosses
to the Constitutions concluded therein. And we may observe, that their
subscriptions are placed, not only before and above all Presbyters, but also
above Botred a Bishop present in this Council. There was likewise a Council
held at Berghamsteed by Withred King of Kent: Then Bishop Wilfrid was removed
to York again, where he continued not long, and being thence expelled again, he
was for a time made Bishop of Leicester.

CENT. VIII.
WIlfrid was troubled by the Archbishop of Canterbury, he appealeth to Rome,
and is acquitted; he is at last restored, and died in peace in the LXX VI. year
of his age, having been 45. years a Bishop, and was buried in his Monastery at
Rippon.

The Bishopric of Sherborn having been taken out of the Bishopric Camden' s
Br^t. in Wil^shire.
of Winchester by King Ina, Adelme his Kinsman was made first Bishop thereof.
This Adelme was the first of our English Nation, who wrote in Latin, and the
first that taught our English Nation to make Latin verse, according to his
promise.

Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vita supersit,
Aonio rediens ^educam vertice Musas.
If life me last, that I do see
That native soil of mine,
From Aon top I Will first with me
Bring down the Muses nine.
He wrote many Books; one of Virginity, another of the Celebration of Easter:
And about this time the Libraries of Monasteries began to be replenished with
Books, many being written in that Age.

In this age there were many Saints (such as they were) of Royal, or Noble
extraction: of these Noble Saints, St. Guthlake, a Benedictine Monk, was the
first Saxon that professed an Eremetical life in England; he was a Monk in the
Abbey of Repyndon, and the third year after he went to Crowland, that is, the
raw or crude Land, a fenny place in Lincolnshire, and there led for a while an
Anchoret's life, and there finally was buried; in which Isle and place of his
burying, was built a fair Abbey.

About the year 709. a Synod was assembled at Alncester in Worcestershire, to
promote the building of Evesham Abbey; which was done accordingly, and the same
was bountifully endowed by Offa, and other Mercian Kings, with large revenues:
And not long after, another Synod was called at London, to introduce into
England the doctrine of Imageworship, now first beginning to appear in the
public practice of it.

Now also flourished another Noble-born Saint, viz. John of Beverley,
Archbishop of York, a Learned Man, and who gave the education to one more
Learned than himself, I mean, Venerable Bede, who acknowledges, that he
received the order of Priesthood from him.

About this time it was fashionable for Kings and Queens in England, to
renounce the World, and turn Monks and Nuns, commonly in Convents of their own
Foundation: but they had an high opinion to merit Heaven thereby.

Among the Saxon Princes who thus renounced the World, in this and the next
Century, these nine following were the principal.

1. Kinigilsus, King of West Saxons. 2. Ina, King of West Saxons. 3. Ceololfus,
King of Northumberland. 4. Edbertus, King of Northumberland. 5. Ethelred, King
of Mercia. 6. Kenred, King of Mercia. 7. Offa, King of East Saxons. 8. Sebbi,
King of East Saxons. 9. Sigebert, King of East Angles.
Ina builded the Abbey at Glastonbury in the 32 year of his Reign; Sir H.
Spelm. in conciliis.
besides his bounty to other Churches, he bestowed on the Church of
Glastonbury, two thousand six hundred pounds weight, in the Utensils thereof,
of massy Gold and Silver: He was the first King of this Land, that granted a
penny out of every fire-house in England to be paid to the Court of Rome, which
was called long after Rome-scot, or Peter Pence, and was to be paid on St.
Peter's day. After this he went to Rome in Pilgrimage, in the fellowship of poor
Men, and there built a School for the English, and a Church adjoining to it to
bury their dead.

But Winnifrid, an English Man, about this time converted to Christ the
Provinces of Franconiae and Hassia in Germany.

About the same time flourished Bid, a Presbyter in the Monastery of
Weremouth, near Durham; he was born at Girwy, now in the Bishopric of Durham,
brought up by St. Cuthbert, and was the profoundest Scholar of his Age, for
Latin, Greek, Philosophy, History, Divinity, Mathematics, Music, and what
not? Homilies of his making were read in his lifetime in the Christian
Churches, a dignity afforded to him alone. He wrote the Ecclesiastical History,
and dedicated it to Ceolwolfus King of Northumberland: He is generally surnamed
Venerable, and is still acc^unted worthy of that Title: He was credulous in
believing of false Miracles, and slipped into some corruptions of the times, as
Chrism and Confession; yet, even in these, he differed from the latter times.
In the Articles of positive Doctrine he was clear: He did observe and deplore
the growing corruptions of the Church; for in an Epistle to Ecbert he did not
approve the specious and specious buildings of Monasteries; and elsewhere, he
says, Let the Reader behold with tears a thing worthy of tears, how far the
Church s^ideth daily into a worse, or (to speak moderately into a weaker
estate. He wrote many Books, as John Bale testifies: He lived 72 years, and
died Anno 734.

At that time began the general viciousness of the Saxons, occasioned by the
uncleanness of Ethelbald, King of Mercia, whose unlawful lust made no
difference of Places, or Persons, Castles, or Cloisters: Then Boniface an
English Man, having boldly reproved Ethelbald, for Adultery, and Tyranny, was
forced, by that King (who sought his life) to fly to Rome from whence Gregory
the second, Bishop of Rome sent him into Germany to convert the Saxons. He
caused the Monastery of Eulda to be built, in favor of the English, and was
slain at Borna, being Bishop of Mentz.

Afterward Ethelbald reformed himself; and not only so, but with Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, called a Council at Cliffe in Kent; the Acts of this
Synod were 31 Canons, four whereof I shall set down, as being the chief.

I. That the Priests learn, and teach to know the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and
words of Consecration in the Eucharist, in the English Tongue.

II. That the Lord's day be honorably observed.

III. That the sin of drunkenness be avoided, especially in the Clergy.

IV. That Prayers be publicly made for Kings and Princes.

King Ethelbald, and Offa were present; and they two, with many Dukes and
Counts, confirm the Decrees with their subscriptions.

About the year 755 Kenulphus, King of West Saxons conferred large privileges
on the Monastery of Abbingdon in Bark-shire. Anno 758. Bodies were first
brought to be buried in Churches, which by degrees brought in much superstition.

In the year 789 the Danes first invaded England with a considerable Danes
their first arrival i^ England.
Army. The landing of these Danes in England was ushered with many sad
Prognostics: Stars were seen strangely falling from Heaven, and sundry
terrible flames appeared in the Skies: Serpents were seen in Sussex, and blood
reigned in some parts of this Land. Lindesfern, or Holy Island, was the first
that felt the fury of these Pagans, but soon after no place was secure from
their cruelty.

At this time the Archbishopric of Canterbury was in part removed to
Lichfield, by reason of the Puissance and Ambition of Offa, King of Mercia,
commanding in chief over England. Ethelbert, King of the East Saxons, went to
Marry the Daughter of Offa, and Offa perfidiously caused him to be murdered:
After which he gave the tenth part of all that he had unto the Church, and
several Lands to the Church of Hereford; and then he went to Rome, and there
confirmed and enlarged, to Pope Adrian, the gift of Peter Pence. Then was the
corpse of St. Alban in pompous manner taken up, enshrined, and adored by the
spectators: Offa being at Rome, procured the Canonization of St. Alban, the
absolution of his own sins, and many murders, and visited and endowed the
English College there; and then returning home, he Founded the Monastery of
St. Albans, bestowing great Lands and liberties upon it, as freeing it from the
payment of Peter Pence, Episcopal jurisdiction, and the like. Next year Offa
died, and was buried at Bedford.

Then flourished Alcuinus, or Albinus, Scholar to Venerable Bede, and Tutor to
Charles the Great, who in an Epistle written to him, calls him Master; of
whom Trithemius give's this character, Vir in divinis R. Hoved^n Annal. part. ^.
Scripturis eruditissimus, and insecularium literarum peritia nulli suo tempore
secundus. He opposed the Canons of the second Ni^ene Council, wherein the
Superstitious adoration of Images was enjoined: He wrote diverse Books against
the Errors of Felix and Eliphant: Felix in reading them, wrote a Recantation to
the Presbyters and Deacons of his Church: His Books de Trinitate are written so
clearly, that Sixtus Senensis says, they were written by John Calvin, and
published in the name of Alcuinus; but Dr. James says, that ancient Copies
thereof were in the Prince's library at St. James, and they were Printed at
Lions, Anno 1525. when Calvin had not begun to write.

Egbert, King of the West Saxons in the year 800. having vanquished, Tho.
Cooper.
Mercia, Kent, Essex, and Northumberland, made himself sole Monarch of England,
and fixed the supreme Sovereignty in himself and posterity. For, though
afterward there continued some petty Kings, as Kenulph, King of Mercia, etc.
yet they shined but dimly, and in the next Age were utterly extinguished,
Egbert commanded this Land to be called Anglia, and the Inhabitants Angles, or
English Men.

CENT. IX.
ANno 801. the Archbishopric was restored to Canterbury, at the instance of
Kenulph, King of Mercia. Then Ethelard the Archbishop called a Synod at
Clivesho in Kent, where, by power from the Pope, he riveted the Archbishopric
into the City of Canterbury. The subscriptions in this Council were the most
formal and solemn of any so Ancient. There was likewise at Celichyth an eminent
Council, under Wolphred (who succeeded Ethelard) Archbishop of Canterbury.

King Egbert was now in the exaltation of his greatness; but the Danes beat the
English in a Naval fight at Carmouth in Dorset-shire, which proved fatal to our
Nation. Hence forward these Pagans settled themselves in some part of the Land.

Anno 837. Ethelwolph, his Son, succeeded his Father Egbert in the Throne; a
valiant and devout Prince, though much molested by the Danes all his lifetime.

About the year 855. Ethelwolph King of the West Saxons, summoned a Parliament
of his Princes, Nobles, and Bishops at Winchester, in the midst of the Danish
Wars and Invasions, to consult with them, how he might pacify God's wrath
against him, and his Realm? And by their advise and assent granted the Tithes,
or tenth part of all his Lands to God and his Ministers, free from all secular
services and exactions, great and small, that they might the more freely pour
out their prayers to God for him and his Realm. He subjected the whole Kingdom
to the payment of Tithes; he was the firstborn Monarch of England. Indeed
before his time there were Monarchs of the Saxon Heptarchy, but not successive,
and fixed in a Family, but fluctuating from one Kingdom to another. Egbert,
Father to this Ethelwolph achieved and left this Monarchy to this his Son; not
Monarcha factus, but natus, and so in unquestionable Power to make this Act
obligatory over all the Land, says Fuller.

King Ethelwolph the next year went in Pilgrimage to Rome, and confirmed, unto
the Pope, his Predecessors grant of Peter Pence, and (besides) bestowed upon
him the yearly Revenue of three hundred Marks, thus to be expended.

1. To maintain Candles for St. Peter, one hundred Marks. 2. To maintain
Candles for St. Paul, one hundred Marks. 3. For a free Largess to the Pope, one
hundred Marks.
After the Death of King Ethelwolph, and his two Sons Ethelbald and Ethelbert
succeeding him, this Land was in a sad condition, though in a worse estate
under the reign of his third Son, being harassed by the Danes. About sixty
years since the West Saxons had subdued the other six Kings of this Nation, yet
so, that they still continued Kings, but Homagers to the West Saxon Monarchy.
They beholding Ethelred the West Saxon King, embroiled with the invasion of the
Danes, they not only lazily looked on, but secretly smiled at this sight. Thus
the height of the Saxon pride and envy, caused the breadth of the Danish power
and cruelty.

Anno 870. the Danes made an inrode into Lincolnshire, where they met with
stout resistance: The Christians had the better the first day, wherein the
Danes lost three of their Kings, buried in a place thence called Trekingham; so
had they the second day till at night breaking their Ranks to pursue the Danes
in their dissembled flight, they were utterly overthrown.

Theodore Abbot of Crowland, hearing of the Danes approach, Shipped away most
of his Monks, with the choycest Relics and Treasures of his Convent, and cast
his most precious Vessels into a Well in the Cloister. The rest remaining were
at their morning prayers, when the Danes entering Slew

Theodore the Abbot on the high Altar. Asher the Prior in the Vestiary. Lethwin
the Sub-prior in the Refectory. Pauline and Herbert in the Quire. Wolride the
Torch-bearer in the same place. Grimketule* and Agamund, each of them an 100
years old in the Cloisters.
Then the Danes marched to Medamstead (since called Peterbrough) where finding
the Abby-gates locked against them, they resolved to force their entrance, in
effecting whereof Tulba, Brother to Count Hubba, was wounded almost to death
with a stone cast at him. Hubba enraged hereat, killed Abbot Hedda, and all the
Monks, being fourscore and four, with his own hand. Then was the Abbey set on
fire, which burned fifteen days together, wherein an excellent Library was
consumed. Having pillaged the Abbey, and broke the Tombs and Coffins of many
Saints there enterred, these Pagans marched forward into Camdridge-shire, and
passing the river Nine, two of their wagons fell into the water, wherein the
cattle which drew them were drowned, much of their rich plunder lost, and more
impared.

The Danes spared no Age, Sex, condition of people. They wa^^ed Cambridge,
burnt the (then) City of Thetford, forced Edmond, King of the East Angles, into
his Castle of Framlingham. They took, him, and because he would not deny
Christ, they tied him unto a Tree, and shot at him til he died. Then they cut
of his head, and cast it among the bushes. His own Subjects buried him both
head and body at Ha^sedon, which from thence was called, St. Edmonds-bury.
There after-ages shrined, sainted, and adored his Relics. King Ethelbert
behaved himself bravely in nine B^^tles with various success against the Danes,
and the more he slew, the more they grew, which went near his heart, therefore
he withered away in the flower of his age, desiring rather to encounter death
than the Danes, according to the observation of the English Historian, Guliel.
Malm^sbur. de ^^st^s Reg^m Anglor. lib. 2.
that the Saxon Kings in this age, magis optabant honestum exitum, quam acerbu^
Imperium.

In this sad condition God sent England a deliverer, namely King Alfred, or
Alured, fourth son of Ethelwolph by the Lady Ogburgh. He was born in England,
bred in Rome, where, by a Prolepsis, (says Fuller) he was anointed King by
Pope Leo (though then but a private Prince, and his three elder brothers alive)
in auspicium futuri regni, in hope that hereafter he should come to the Crown.
The Danes at his coming to the Crown, had London, many of the inland, more of
the maritime Towns, and Alfred only three effectual Shires Sommerset, Wiltes
and Dorset: yet by God's blessing on his endeavors, he got to be Monarch of
all England.

In the beginning of his reign, he was sorely distressed by the Danes, Anno 87^.
and one of his greatest Courts for residence, was an Island, now known by the
name of Athelney in the County of Sommerset, in the Saxon tongue called
Aethelingarg that is, Nobilium Insula, so termed by reason of the Kings abode,
and the concourse of his Nobles unto him: in this place he lived poorly
disguised in a Cow-herds house. Being excellent In Music and Songs, he
oftentimes in the habit and posture of a common Minstril, did insinuate himself
in the Danis^ Camp, where his plausible carriage and skill gained a freedom of
access and passage in the company of their Princes at banquets, and other
meetings; and thereby he discovered their conditions, and all their martial
counsels and designs. He returns to his comfortless company, and unmasking
himself and the Danish designs, cheereth them up, and with a refreshed Power
and strength suddenly issued forth, and gave a fierce assault upon the secure
Danes: he slew multitudes of them, and enforced the remainder to a shameful
flight for the safeguard of their lives. In this Isle Alfred had built a kind
of Castle, or Fortress, to receive him and his Nobles upon return from their
Sallies and Encounters during his Wars in those parts.

About a year after that memorable overthrow, viz. Anno 879. in a Battle at
Kinwich in Devon-shire, Halden, and some of the chief Leaders of the Danes,
received their death's wound, and ended their lives; hereupon the daunted and
dispersed Danes humbly present their terms of Peace to King Alfred with
Pledges and Hostages, that they would either depart the Land, or become
Christians, which was accepted by him. Guthrun, their new King, upon the death
of their other Leaders with thirty Noblemen, and almost all his People,
received Baptism in the new Castle of Athelney, where King Alfred was Godfather
to him, and gave him the name of Athelstane; and upon a confederation between
them, Alfred did assign unto him the Provinces of the East Angles, and
Northumberland; Vt eas sub fidelitate Regis jure haereditario foveret, quas
pervaserat latrocinio; that he might enjoy that by right, which before he
usurped by rapine: and unto the new-baptized Nobles, he gave many large and
rich gifts. This truce, or league, was about the ninth Lamb. Archa^. fol. 49.
year of his Reign, and thus begins, Faedus, quod Aluredus, and Gythrudus,
Reges, ex sapientum Anglorum, atque eorum omnium, qui orientalem incolebant
Angliam consulto ferierunt, in quod praeterea, singuli non solum de seipsis,
verumetiam de natis suis, ac nondum in lucem editis (quotquot saltem
misericordiae divinae aut Regiae velint esse participes) jurarunt. That is,
they did by a solemn Oath ratify this League, as well for themselves as for
those that were then born, and unborn, that would be partakers of mercy from
God or the King.

Then having set bounds to his Dominions, certain Comitial Laws and Ordinances
were made between them, enlarged and amplified by their Senators. Before all
things they proposed and preferred the strict and holy worshipping of Almighty
God, and abandoning all barbarous Idolatry, next, they took care for the
Enacting, Registring, and Enrolling of Moral Laws, for containing of Subjects
in their several duties, and due obedience, and therefore they first decreed,
That the peace of the Church within her Walls (as it was then delivered by the
hand of King Alfred) should be piously and inviolably observed. They proceeded
to the promotion and propagation of the Christian Faith, and the abolition of
all Paganism, and Heathenish Rites; for coertion of Clearks, and Men in Holy
Orders, if they committed any Perjury, Fornication, or other Offenses, or were
unconformable in the celebration of Festival-days, times of Abstinence, or
other Orders and Injunctions of the Church; prohibiting Merchandising, and
secular Negotiations upon the Lord's day. In all which the Impositions of
Penalties and Punishments upon an English Man, and a Dane, were differenced one
from the other. They also provided for the exilement of Witches, Wizzards,
common Strumpets, and other lewd Creatures; with other good Laws for avoiding
of Homicides, and for preservation of Peace and Government, and maintenance of
each Man's right of property in this their National commixture.

This adjured League quieted the Civil discords of the Danes and Saxons for the
space of four years, until the twelfth year of Alfred's Reign: And afterward
the continual inrode of the straggling unbaptized Danes issuing out of France,
and other places (who vexed that Eastern part of the Land) molested this good
King until his Death.

This King divided his movables into equal portions; the one he appointed for
uses Secular, and divided it into three parts, one for his Family, another for
building of new Works, and a third he reserved for strangers: The other half he
dedicated unto uses Ecclesiastical, and divided it into four portions; one for
relief of the Poor, another to Monasteries, the third to the Schools in Oxford,
where he had erected a School for Grammar; another for Philosophy, and a third
for Divinity; whereas before they had neither Grammar nor Sciences, because
Pope Gregory I. gave in command, that Britain should have no Schools, for fear
of Heresies, but only Monasteries. The Regents in the University, and Readers
in the Divinity-School, were Neoth, a worthy Divine, and Grimbald, well-skilled
in Divinity: In Grammar and Rhetoric, the Learned Asserius, who wrote the life
of this King: In Logic, Music and Arithmetic, the Reader was John, a Monk of
St. David's: In Geometry and Astronomy, read John a companion of Grimbald, a Man
Witty and Learned; at which Lectures, this famous King Alfred was present. He
gave many pensions to Scholars, Learned Men in all Arts, to instruct his
Subjects in Religion, and all kinds of Learning: He contributed much to the
relief of distressed Churches without his Realm: He protected his Realm from
oppression and injustice by his Sheriffs, Justices, and other Officers, whose
proceedings he frequently examined, punishing them severely when they had
judged, or injured others contrary to Law, out of Malice, Corruption, or
Partiality: He divided the Day and Night into three parts; one eight hours he
allowed himself for Eating, Drinking, Sleeping and Recreation; another eight
hours he spent in hearing Causes, and in doing Justice; and the rest of his
time spent in Prayer, Reading the Scriptures, Meditation, and other pious
Exercises. And for the instructing his Subjects in the Holy Scriptures, he
began to Translate the Psalms of David, himself, into the English Tongue, but
being prevented by Death, did not finish it: He gathered Psalms and Prayers
together into a little Book, which he called a Manual, or Hand-book, which he
always carried about him. He was the first lettered Bish. Godwin. Catal.
Prince in this Kingdom, since it had it is denomination of England, and was
disciplined under the care of Plegmundus, a Man of eminent Parts and Learning,
who was born in Mercia, and from the solitary life of an Heremite in the Isle
of Chester, was called to be Tutor to this Noble Prince. A little after his
Inauguration to the Kingdom, he had the comfortable service and attendance of
Werefridus (who was consecrated Bishop of Worcester on Whitsunday, Anno 872.)
for at his command he Translated the Dialogues of Gregory, out of the Latin
into the Saxon or English Dialect: he had all the helps, advice, and
instructions of Plegmundus, his Tutor, who was afterward Consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury. Asserius (as himself affirms) abode with the King in his Court
by the space of eight Months before his return into Wales, in which time he
constantly read diverse Books unto him: for it was his custom both day and
night, amidst all other impediments both of Mind and Body, to be ever versed in
reading Books himself, or hearing them read by others.

This unparallelled King died, Anno 900. after he had reigned 29 years and six
months, having fought 56 Battles with the Pagan- Danes. His Epitaph is the
Epitome of his life, which the happiness of thankful times have dedicated to
him as a Monument of his eternal fame, and here follows out of the Works of a
Modern Chronographer.

Nobilit as inimica tibi probitatis honorem,
( Armipotens Alfred) dedit probit asque laborem,
Perpetuumque labor nomen: immixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori, etc.
Englished by Mr. Flemming.

Nobility by birth to thee,
(O Alfred) strong in Arms.
Of goodness has thy honor given,
And honor toilsome harms.
And toilsome harms an endless name,
Whose joys ere always mixed
With sorrow, and whose hope with fear
Was evermore perplexed.
If this day thou wast Conqueror,
The next day's War thou dread'st:
If this day thou wast Conquered,
To next day's War thou spread'st
Whose clothing wet with a daily swet,
Whose blade with bloody stain,
Do prove how great a burden it is
In Royalty to reign.
There has not been in any part
Of all the World so wide
One that was able breath to take,
And troubles such abide,
And yet with Weapons weary would
Not Weapons lay aside.
Or with the Sword the toilsomness
Of Life by Death divide.
Now after labors past of Realm
And Life (which he did spend)
Christ is to him true quietness,
And Scepter void of end.
In this King's reign flourished Johannes Scotus, Erigena, (with addition
sometimes of Sophista) born in Ireland, for distinction from a former born at
M^lrose, and another in the XIII. Century, born in Duns, otherwise called
S^b^^lis: he was a man of pregnant Judgment, wondrous Eloquence; and (in those
days) rare knowledge of the Greek, Chaldean, and Arabian Languages. He wrote a
Book, De corpore and sanguine Domini, against the Opinion of Carnal presence,
which was condemned at the Synod of Vercelles. Bellarmine says, This man was
the ^
first, who wrote doubtingly of this matter: He was the Counselor to King
Alfred, and Teacher of his Children, afterward he retired to the Abbey at
Malmesbury, where his disciples Murdered him with their Penknives, ^.
being enticed thereunto by the Monks, because he spoke against the carnal
presence, and was accounted a Martyr, as was recorded by William of Malmesbury,
de gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 4.

CENT. X.
AT this time there was no Bishop in all the West parts of England: Pope
Formosus, being offended hereat, interdicted, King, and Kingdom. But Pleigmund
Archbishop of Canterbury posted to Rome, informing the Pope, that Edward
(called the Elder, the Son of King Alfred) had, in a late summoned Synod,
founded some new, and supplied all old vacant Bishoprics; and carrying with
him honorifica munera, the Pope turned his curse into a blessing, and ratified
their election.

The names of the seven Bishops which Pleigmund consecrated in one day, were,
Fridstan Bishop of Winchester, Werstan of Shireburn, Kenulph of Dorchester,
Beornege of Selsey, Athelme of Wells, Eadulfe of Crediton in Devon, and
Athelstan in Cornwall of St. Petrocks: These three last Western Bishops were in
this Council newly erected.

A Synod was called at Intingford, where Edward the elder, and Guthurn King of
the Danes, in that part of England, which formerly belonged to the East Angles,
only confirmed the same Ecclesiastical constitutions which King Alured had
made before.

King Edward remembering the Pious example of his Father Alfred in founding of
Oxford, began to repair and restore the University of Cambridge; J^h. Ressi^s
in, lib. de Regi^.
for the Danes, who kept the Kingdom of the East Angles for their home, had
banished all Learning from that place.

This King Edward the elder, expelled the Danes out of Essex, Mercia, and
Northumberland. At that time the authority of investing Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, as also of prescribing Laws unto Churchmen, as well
as unto the Laity, was in the power of the King, not of the Pope: but the Pope
would be meddling in such matters by way of Confirmation.

Athelstan, his Son, succeeded King Edward, being much devoted to St. John of
Beverley, on whose Church he bestowed large privileges. Many Councils were
kept in this King's Reign at Excester, Feversha^, Thunderfield, and London: But
one held at Greatlea is of greatest account for the Laws therein enacted;
especially that concerning the payment of Tithes, which is thus Written; I
Athelstan King, by advice Spelman. in Council. p. 405.
of Viselm my Archbishop, and of other Bishops, command all the Prelates of my
Kingdom, in the name of our Lord, and of all the Saints, that first of all
they, out of my own things, pay the Tithes unto God, as well of ^he living
Beasts, as of the Corn of the ground; and the Bishops to do the like in their
property, and the Presbyters. This I will, that Bishops, and other Head-men
declare the same unto such as be under their subjection, etc. He ordained, that
in every Borough all measures and weights should be confirmed by the Bishop's
advice and testimony. About that time Hoel King of Wales, made a Law, That no
Churchman should be a Judge in Civil affairs.

Now St. Dunstan appears in Court, born at Glastonbury, of Noble Parentage,
yea Kinsman remote to Athelstane himself: His eminencies were Painting and
Graving; an excellent Musician, and an admirable worker in Brass and Iron.
After a while he is accused for a Magician, and banished the Court. But after
the Death of King Athelstane, he was re-called to Court in the Reign of King
Edmond, Athelstan's brother, and flourished for a time in great favor; but his
old crime of being a Magician, and a wanton with Women, being laid to his
charge, he is re-banished the Court.

But King Edmond being slain by one Leoff a Thief, Edred his Brother succeeding
to the Crown, Dunstan is made the King's Treasurer, Chancellor, Councellor,
Confessor: Secu^ar Priests were thrust out of their Convents, and Monks
substituted in their rooms.

But after Edred's death Dunstan falls into disgrace with King Edwin, his
Successor, and being expelled the Kingdom, flie^h into Flanders. Mean-time all
the Monks in England of Dunstan's plantation, are rooted up, and Secular
Priests set in their places.

Soon after many commotions happened in England, especially in Mercia and
Northumberland. King Edwin died in the flower of his age.

Edgar succeeds him, and recalls Dunstan home, who has two Bishoprics
Fuller Church History.
given him, Worcester and London. King Edgar gave over his Soul, Body, and
Estate, to be ordered by Dunstan, and two more (then the Triumvirate who ruled
England) viz. Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester, and Oswald afterward Bishop of
Worcester. This Oswald was the man, who procured, by the Kings Authority, the
ejection of all secular Priests out of Worcester: which Act was called Oswald's
Law. In that Age Dunstan being made Archbishop of Canterbury, Secular Priests
were (...). hist. ^^. 1^. part. 3. ^^. ^.
thrown out, and Monks every where fixed in their rooms. Many did dispute, and
preach against Dunstan. And Alfred Prince of Mercia took part with the Priests.

Fuller makes mention of a fair and authentic gilded Manuscript, wherein he
styles himself God's Vicar in England, for the ordering Ecclesiastical
matters, a Title which at this day the Pope will hardly vouchsafe to any
Christian Princes.

Hoel-Dha then held a National Council, for all Wales, at Ty-quin, or the White
House. The Canons therein were wholly in favor of the Clergy; enacting this
amongst the rest, That the presence of a Priest and a Judge constitute a legal
Court, as the two persons only in the Quorum thereof. There were then seven
Episcopal Seats in Wales. 1. S. David's. 2. Ismael. 3. Degenian. 4. Vsyl. 5.
Teylaw. 6. T^uledauc. 7. Kenew*

King Edgar died peaceably, leaving his Crown to Edward his Son, w^om (being
under Age) he committed to the tuition of Dunstan. In this King's reign three
Councils were successively called, to determine the difference between Monks
and Secular Priests. The first was at Winchester, where the Priests being outed
of their Convents, earnestly pressed for restitution. Polydor Virgil writes,
that in the Synod it was concluded, that the Priests should be restored. But a
voice was immediately heard from the wall (as coming from a Crucifix behind
Dunstan) saying, They think amiss that favor the Priests. That was received as
a Divine Oracle, and the Priests were secluded from their Benefices and
Monasteries.

A second Council was called at Kirtlington (now Catlage in Cambridgeshire) but
to little effect. The same year a third Council was called at Caln in
Wilt-shire, hither came Priests and Monks in great numbers. Beornelm, a
Scottish Bishop, defended the cause of the Priests with S^^ipture and Reason.
But on a sudden Dunstan by his Art caused the Beams* or Joists of the Room
where they were assembled to break and fall: many were wounded; most of the
Secular Priests were slain, and ^.
buried under the ruins thereof: only Dunstan was safe with his Chair that was
fixed on a Pillar. So the controversy was ended with devilish cruelty. It
appears not what provision was made for these Priests when ejected.

King Edward went to Corff-Castle, where at that time his Mother-in-Law with
her Son Egelred lay; and by her contrivance he was barbarously murdered as he
was drinking on Horseback, and was buried at Wareham: and Ethelred, Edward's
half-brother, succeeded him in the Throne.

Dun^^an died, and was buried on the South Side of the high Altar in the Church
of Canterbury. After his death, the Monks were cast ou^ of the Convent of
Canterbury, by reason of their misdemeanors.

Siricius, the next Archbishop of Canterbury, endeavored the re-expulsion of
the Priests, which by Elfrick his Successor was effected. By him a Sermon was
appointed to be read publicly on Easter Day before the Communion. The same
Author has two other Treatises; one directed to Wolfsin Bishop of Shirburn,
and another to Wulfstan Bishop of York, about the Sacrament.

Soon after, the Danes by a firm Ejection outed the Monks, before they were
well warm in their Nests: Their fury fell more on Convents than Castles.
England for these last sixty years had been freed from their cruelty, which now
returned more dreadful than ever before. These Danes were also advantaged by
the unactiveness of King Ethelred, who with ten thousand pounds purchased a
present Peace with the Danes. The multitude of Monasteries invited the
Invasion, and facilitated the Conquest of the Danes over England.

Holy Island was forsaken by the fearful Monks, affrighted with the approach of
the Danes: and Alhunus, the Bishop thereof, removed his Cathedral and Convent
to Durham, an Inland place of more safety. The Danes having received and spent
their Money, invaded England afresh, according to all Wise men's expectation.

CENT. XI.
IN the beginning of this Century certain Danes fled into a Church at Oxford,
hoping the Sanctity thereof (according to the devout Principles of that Age)
would secure them. But by command from King Ethelred, they were all burned in
the place, whose blood remained not long unrevenged. The Danish fury fell
fiercest on the City of Canterbury with fire and sword, destroying eight
thousand people therein. Swanus the Dane tithed the Monks of S. Augustine's
Abbey, killing nine by cruel torment, and keeping the tenth alive for slaves.
They slew there of Religious men, to the number of nine hundred. And when they
had kept the Bishop Elphege in strait prison the space of eight months (because
he would not agree to give them three thousand pounds) after many villainies
done unto him, at Greenwich they stoned him to death. Next year a nameless
Bishop of London was slain by them; and a great part of the City of London was
wasted with fire. The Danes burnt Cambridge to ashes, and harassed the Country
round about.

King Ethelred sent his Wife Emma, with his two Sons, Alfred and Edward, to
Richard Duke of Normandy, which was Brother to the said Emma, with whom also he
sent the Bishop of London, whither also himself went, after he had spent a
great part of the Winter in the Isle of Wight, whither he was chased of the
Danes. Swanus hearing that Egelred was departed out of the Land, imposed great
Exactions upon the people; and among other he required a great sum of money of
S. Edmond's Lands, which the people there claiming to be free of all King's
tribute, denied to pay. Hereupon Swanus entered the Territory of St. Edmond, and
wasted the Country, threatening to spoil the place of his burial. The men of
the Country fell to fasting and prayer, and soon after Swanus died suddenly,
crying and yelling among his Knights. In fear whereof Canutus, his Son and
Successor, ditched the Land of St. Edmond with a deep Ditch, and granted to the
Inhabitants thereof great Immunities, quitting them from all Tribute, and after
builded a Church over the place of his Sepulture, ordained there an House of
Monks, and endowed them with rich possessions. After that time, the Kings of
England when they were crowned, sent their Crowns for an offering to St.
Edmond's Shrine, and redeemed them afterward with a condign price.

After the death of Egelred, great contention was in England for the Crown:
some were for Edmond Ironside the Son of Egelred, and some for Canutus. After
many bloody Fights, both parties agree to try the quarrel betwixt them two
only: in sight of both Armies they make the Essay with Swords and sharp
strokes: in the end upon the motion of Canutus they agree, and kiss one
another, to the joy of both Armies, and they covenant for parting the Land
during their lives, and they lived as Brethren. Within a few years a Son of
Edrik Duke of Mercia killed Edmond traitorously, and brought his two Sons unto
Canutus, who sent them to his Brother Swanus, King of Denmark, willing him to
dispatch them. But he abhorring such a fact, sent them to Solomon King of
Hungary, who married Edwyn to his Daughter, and soon after died. Edward married
Agatha the Daughter of the Emperor Henry the Third.

Swanus King of Denmark died; and that Land fell to Canutus, who anon after
sailed thither, and took the possession, and returned into England, and married
Emma, late Wife of Egelred, and by her had a Son called Hardiknout. He
assembled a Parliament at Oxford, wherein was agreed, that English men and
Danes should hold the Laws made by King Edgar, as most just and reasonable: He
established Laws Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil. Canutus went on pilgrimage
to Rome, and there founded an Hospital for English Pilgrims: He shrined the
body of Bernius, and gave great Lands to the Cathedral Church of Winchester: He
builded St. Bennet's in Norfolk, which was before an Hermitage. Also St.
Edmond's-bury, which King Athelstane ordained before for a College of Priests,
he turned to an Abbey of Monks of Saint Bennet's Order.

Two of his Sons succeeded him, first his base Son, called, from his swiftness,
Harold, Harefoot, a man of a cowardly disposition. He reigned but four years,
and the Kingdom fell to Hardiknout King of Denmark, his Brother, who when he
had reigned two years, being drunk at Lambeth, suddenly was stricken dumb, and
fell down to the ground, and within eight days after died without issue of his
Body. Thus ended the Danish Kings: which Danes had vexed and wasted the Land
two hundred fifty five years.

When England was freed from the Danes, they sent into Normandy, inviting over
Edward the Confessor, and brother to King Edmond He was crowned Anno 1045. In
his time was the Law made which concerned the King's Oath at Coronation. Matthew
Paris describes the Manners of the Country at his coming thus, The Nobles were
given to gluttony and leachery: they went not to Church in the morning, but
only had a Priest, which made haste with the Mass and Mattens in their
chambers, and they heard a little with their ears. The Clergy were so ignorant,
that if any knew the Grammar, he was admired by them: most men spent nights and
days in carousing. In his days England enjoyed Halcion days, free from
Danish invasions.

The Ecclesiastical Laws, made by this King in his reign, were.

I. That every Clerk and Scholar should quietly enjoy their goods and
possessions.

II. What solemn Festivals people may come and go of, without any Lawsuits to
disturb them.

III. That in all Courts where the Bishop's Proctor does appear, his case is
first to be heard and determined.

IV. That guilty folk flying to the Church should there have protection, not to
be reproved by any, but the Bishop and his Ministers.

V. That Tithes be paid to the Church of Sheep, Pigs, Bees, and the like.

VI. How the Ordal was to be ordered for the trial of guilty persons by fire
and water.

VII. That Peter Pence, or Rome-scot, be faithfully paid to the Pope.

This King is reported to have entailed (by Heaven's Consort) an hereditary
virtue on his Successors the Kings of England (only with this condition, that
they continue constant in Christianity) to cure the King's Evil.

In this King's reign lived Marianus Scotus, that wrote much of the deeds of
the Kings of England.

King Edward died childless. Harold the Son of Earl Godwin succeeded him.
Indeed the undoubted right lay in Edgar Atheling, Son to Edward the Outlaw,
Grandchild to Edmond Iron-side King of England. But he being young and tender,
and of a soft temper, and Harold being rich and strong in Knights, the Nobles
chose Harold to be their King. As soon as he was crowned, he established many
good Laws, especially such as were for the good of the Church, and for the
punishment of evildoers.

Harold was slain in a battle near Hastings in Sussex, and William Duke of
Normandy obtained the Crown of England by conquest: within a few years he made
a great alteration in England: the most part of his Knights and Bishops were
Normans; and many English with Edgar fled into Scotland, where King Malcolm had
married Edgar's Sister Margaret. They incited Malcolm to invade England, and he
entered into the North part. At last a peace was concluded, and a Mark-stone was
set up in Stanmoor, as the mark of both Kingdoms, with the Pourtraict of both
Kings on the sides of the Stone.

Although then corruptions crept into the Church by degrees, and divine worship
began then to be clogged with superstitious Ceremonies, yet that the Doctrine
remained still entire in most material points, will appear by an Induction of
the dominative Controversies, wherein we differ from the Church of Rome, as
Fuller in his Church History of Britain has observed.

I. Scripture generally read.
For such as were with the holy Bishop Aidan, either Clergy, or Laity, ^ed.
(...). hist, lib. 3. ca. 5.
were tied to exercise themselves in reading the holy Word, and in singing of
Psalms.

II. The Original preferred.
For Ricemath a Britain, a right learned and godly Clerk, Son to Sulgen, (...).
in Chron. of (...).
Bishop of St. David's, flourishing in this Age, made this Epigram on those who
translated the Psalter out of the Greek, so taking it at the second hand, and
not drawing it immediately from the first vessel.

Ebreis nablam custodit litera signis,
Pro captu quam quisque suo sermon latino
Edidit, innumeros lingua variante libellos
Ebreumque jubar suffuscat nube latina, etc.
This Harp the holy Hebrew Text does tender,
Which, to their power, whilst every one does render
In Latin tongue with many variations,
He clouds the Hebrew rays with his translation.
Thus liquors when twice shifted out, and poured
In a third vessel, are both cooled and sowr'd.
But holy Jerome Truth to light does bring,
Briefer and fuller fetched from the Hebrew Spring.
III. No Prayers for the dead in the modern notion of Papists.
For though we find prayers for the dead, yet they were not in the nature of
propitiation for their sins, or to procure relaxation from their torments: but
were only an honorable commemoration of their memories, and a Sacrifice of
thanksgiving for their salvation.

IV. Purgatory then not perfected, though newly invented.
For although there are frequent Visions and Revelations in this Age pretended,
thereon to build Purgatory (which had no ground in Scripture) yet it stood not
then as now it stands in the Romish belief.

V. Communion under both kinds.
Forbid relates, that one Hildmer, an Officer of Egfride King of
Northumberland, entreated our Cuthbert to send a Priest that might minister the
Sacrament of the Lord's Body and Blood unto his Wife, that then lay a dying.
And Cuthbert himself immediately before his own departure out of this life,
received the communion of the Lord's Body and Blood. So that the Eucharist was
then administered entire, and not maimed as it is by the Papists at this day.
And though the word Mass was frequent in that Age, yet was it not known to be
offered as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead.

King William to testify his thankfulness to God for his Victory, founded in
that place Battel-Abbey, endowing it with Revenues, and large immunities: The
Abbot whereof (being a Baron of Parliament) carried a pardon in his presence,
who casually coming to the place of execution, had power to save any
Malefactor. The Abby-Church was a place of safety for any Fellon or Murderer.
Here the Monks flourished in all abundance till the days of Henry the Eighth.

Then Doomsday Book was made, containing an exact survay of the Houses and
Lands in the Kingdom, which took up some years before it was completed.

King William called a Council of his Bishops at Winchester, wherein he was
personally present, with two Cardinals sent from Rome, Here Stigand Archbishop
of Canterbury was deposed, and Lanfrank a Lombard substituted in his room.

A learned Lawyer has observed, that the first encroachment of the Sir Jo^^
Dav^s in his Irish report.
Pope upon the Liberties of the Crown of England, was made in the time of King
William the Conqueror. For the Conqueror came in with the Pope's Banner, and
under it won the battle, which got him the Garland, and therefore the Pope
presumed he might boldly pluck some flowers from it, being partly gained by his
countenance and blessing.

Although this politic Prince was complementally courteous to the Sea of Rome;
yet 1. He retained the ancient custom of the Saxon Kings, investing Bishops and
Abbots by delivering them a Ring and a Staff, whereby without more ado they
were put into plenary possession of the power and profit of their place. He
said, He would keep all Pastoral Staves in his own hand.

2. Being demanded to do Fealty for his Crown of England unto Pope Gregory the
Seventh, he wrote thus unto him, That he would not do Fealty unto the Pope,
because neither had he promised it, nor did he find his Predecessors had
performed it.

3. This King would in no wise suffer any one in his Dominion to acknowledge
the Bishop of Rome for Apostolical without his command; or to receive the
Pope's Letters, except first they had been showed unto him. And although the
Archbishop of Canterbury by his own Authority might congregate Councils, and
sit as President therein: yet the King permitted him to appoint or prohibit
nothing, but what was according to hi^ own will, and what the King had ordained
before.

4. The King suffered no Bishop to excommunicate any of his Barons, or
Officers, for Adultery, Incest, or any such heinous crime, except by the King's
command, first made acquainted with the same.

This King gave unto the Bishops an entire Jurisdiction by themselves to judge
all causes relating to Religion, for before that time the Sheriff and Bishop
kept their Court together. He granted the Clergy throughout England Tithes of
Calves, Colts, Lambs, Milk, Butter, Cheese, Woods, Meadows, Mills, etc.

Then Thomas a Norman was preferred to the Archbishopric of York. Betwixt
Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, and this Thomas, there grew great contention
for the Oath of Obedience, but in the end, Thomas subscribed obedience to the
other. Then it was decreed, that York for that time should be subject to
Canterbury in matters appertaining to the Church: so that wheresoever within
England the Archbishop of Canterbury would hold his Council, the Bishops of
York should resort thither with their Bishops, and be obedient to his Decrees
Canonical.

Then were diverse Bishops Seats altered from Villages to great Cities; as of
Sealsey to Chichester: out of Cornwall to Exeter: from Wells to Bath; from
Shirburn to Salisbury; from Dorchester in Oxfordshire to Lincoln; from
Lichfield to Chester; which Bishopric of Chester, Robert, then Bishop, reduced
from Chester to Coventry.

At this time several Liturgies were used in England, which caused confusion,
and much disturbed men's devotions. A brawl happened betwixt the English Monks
of Glastonbury, and Thurstan their Norman Abbot, in their very Church,
obtruding a Service upon them which they disliked: eight Monks were wounded,
and two slain near the steps of the high Altar. This ill accident occasioned a
settlement, and uniformity of An uniformity of Liturgy all over England.
Liturgy all over England: for hereupon Osmund Bishop of Salisbury, devised
that form of Service, which hereafter was observed in the whole Realm.
Henceforward the most ignorant Parish Priest in England understood the meaning
of, Secundum usum Sarum; that all Service must be ordered; According to the
course and custom of Salisbury Church.

King William brought many Jews into England (for before his reign I find none
in this Land) from Roan in Normandy; and settled them in London, Norwich,
Cambridge, Northampton.

In the days of Lanfrank, Waltelm Bishop of Winchester, had placed about forty
Canons instead of Monks; but it held not, for Lanfrank cast out secular
Priests, and substituted Monks in their rooms. He also contested with Odo
Bishop of Bayeux (though half-Brother to King William, and Earl of Kent) and in
a legal Trial regained many Lordships, which Odo had unjustly invaded.

Although in this King's time there was almost no Englishman that bare Office
of honor or rule, yet he favored the City of London, and granted them the
first Charter that ever they had, written in the Saxon tongue, and sealed with
green Wax, expressed in eight or nine lines.

King William died in Normandy, and William Rufus, his second Son, Anno 1^8^.
was crowned King of England. He began very bountifully; to some Churches he
gave ten Marks, to others six, to every Countrey-Village five shillings,
besides an hundred pounds to every County to be distributed among the poor. But
afterward he proved very parcimonious, though no man more prodigal of never
performed Promises.

This year died Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, after whose death the King
seized the profits of that See into his own hand; and kept the Church vacant
for some years. He kept at the same time the Archbishopric of Canterbury, the
Bishoprics of Winchester and Durham, and thirteen Abbeys in his hand, and
brought a mass of Money into his Exchequer. All places which he parted with,
was upon present payment. He quarrelled with Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, about
the founding of his Cathedral, and forced him to buy his peace. And without a
sum of Money paid to the King, John Bishop of Wells could not remove his Seat
to Bath.

King Rufus coming to Gloucester, fell very sick: hereupon he made Anselm (the
Abbot of Beck in Normandy) one of eminent learning, and strictness of life,
Archbishop of Canterbury. The King soon after sent to him for a thousand
pounds, which Anselm refused to pay.

Then Herbert, Bishop of Thetford, removed his Episcopal Seat from Herbert
Bishop of Thetford founded the Cathedral at Norwich.
Thetford to Norwich, where he first founded the Cathedral. Then died Wolstan
Bishop of Worcester, an Englishman born, a mortified man.

Near this time began the holy War. Robert Duke of Normandy, to fit himself for
that Voyage, sold his Dukedom to King William Rufus for ten thousand Marks. To
pay this money King Rufus laid a grievous Tax over all the Realm, extorting it
with such severity, that the Monks were fain to sell the Church-plate, and very
Chalices, for discharging thereof. And when the Clergy desired to be eased of
their burdens; I beseech you (said he) have ye not Coffins of gold and Silver
for dead men's bones? intimating, that the same Treasure might otherwise be
better employed.

At this time there was contention at Rome between two Popes, Urban and Clement
the Third. Rufus took part with Clement; but Anselm stuck to Urban, and
required of the King leave to fetch his Pall of Urban. All the rest of the
Bishops were against him. Meanwhile the King had sent two Messengers to the
Pope for the Pall, who returned, and brought with them Gualter Bishop of Alban,
the Pope's Legate, with the Pall to be given to Anselm. Which Legate so
persuaded the King, that Urban was received Pope through the whole Land. But
afterward grew great displeasure betwixt them, so that Anselm went to appear
to Rome, where he remained in exile; and the King seized all his Goods and
Lands into his own Coffers. Urban gave unto Anselm the Archbishops Pall,
thereby voiding the Investiture which he received from King William, and
obliging him there-after to depend on him: as also he did, whereat the King
incensed, interdicted to Anselm his entry into England, confiscated the Lands
of the Archbishopric, and declared, that his Bishops held their Places and
Estates merely from him, and were not subject unto the Pope for the same. To
which all the Bishops of England subscribed: neither did any of them contradict
it, but the only Bishop of Rochester, as a Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

By the intervention of Friends Anselm made his peace: But being returned into
England, he soon after began to dissuade the Clergy from receiving Investitures
from the King,; wherefore he was forced again to fly out of the Kingdom, and
his estate was again seized upon and confiscated, of which he had obtained
restitution at his return.

King William the Conqueror had made the new-forrest in Hant-shire, with a
great devastation of Towns and Churches, the place (as Fuller says) being
turned into a Wilderness for Men, and a Paradise for Deer. King Ruffus hunting
in this Forest, was here slain by the glancing of an arrow, shot by Sir Walter
Tirrell, and was buried at Winchester. He gave to the Monks, called De
Charitate, the great new Church of S. Saviors in Bermondsey, with the Manor
thereof, as also of Chari^ton in Kent.

Henry Beaucleark* his Brother, succeeded him in the throne, being one of the
profoundest Scholars, and most politic Princes in his generation. To
ingratiate himself to the English, he instantly and actually repealed the cruel
Norman Laws, the good and gentle Laws of King Edward the Confessor he reduced,
with correction of them: Anselm from exile was speedily recalled, and to his
Church, Lands, and Goods, was fully restored. The late King's extorting
Publicanes (whereof Ranulph Flambard, Bishop of Durham, the principal) were
imprisoned, the Court-corruption reformed; Adultery (then grown common)
severely punished.

CENT. XII.
KIng Henry was Married to Mawd, Daughter to Malcolm King of Scots, who lived
sometime as a Nun under the tuition of Christian her Aunt, Abbess of Wilton:
She was Sister to Edgar Atheling, and Grandchild of Edmond Iron-side, whereby
his Issue might merely be both of the English Blood, and of the Ancient Saxon
Kings.

Anselm summoneth a Council at Westminster, where first he Excommunicated all
Married Priests; half the Clergy at that time being Married, or the Sons of
Married Priests: he also inhibited all Laymen to hear their Masses. He also
deprived many great Prelates of their promotions, because they had accepted
their Investitures from the King, which was done by receiving of a Pastoral
Staff and a Ring, an Ancient rite, testifying that their Donation was from
their Sovereign: in which number were the Abbots of Ely, of Romsey, of
Pershore, of St. Edmonds, of Tavestock, Peterborough, Burch, Bodiac, Stoke, and
Middleton: for which his boldness, and for refusing to Consecrate certain
Bishops advanced by the King, great contention fell betwixt them: and Anselm
appealed to Pope Paschal, and soon after fled to Rome. Hereupon the King
enjoined Gerard Archbishop of York to Consecrate William of Winchester, Roger
of Hereford, etc. But William Bishop of Winchester refused Consecration from
the Archbishop of York, and resigned his Staff and Ring back again to the King
as illegally from him. This discomposed all the rest.

But not long after by the mediation of Friends the King and Anselm are
reconciled; the King disclaiming his right of Investiture. And now Anselm who
formerly refused, consecrated all the Bishops of vacant Sees. Then did Anselm
forbid the Priests Marriage. But Anselm died before he could finish his project
of Priests divorces. His two next Successors, Rodulphus and William Corbel,
went on vigorously with the design, but met with many and great obstructions:
Other Bishops found the like opposition, but chiefly the Bishop of Norwich,
whose obstinate Clergy would keep their Wives in defiance of his endeavors
against them. But they were forced to forgo their Wives. Among those Married
Priests there was one E^lphegus flourishing for Learning and Piety; he resided
at Plymouth in Devon-shire

To order the refractory Married Clergy, the Bishops were fain to call in the
aid of the Pope. John Bishop of Cremona, an Italian Cardinal, did urge the
single Life of the Clergy, and said, It is a vile crime, that a Man rising from
the side of his Concubine, should consecrate the Body of Christ. The same Night
he was taken in bed with a Whore, after he had spoken those words in a Synod at
London. The thing was so notorious, that it could not be denied, says Matthew
Paris. This much advantaged the reputation of Married Priests: The King taking
a fine of Married Priests, permitted them to enjoy their Wives.

About this time the old Abbey of Ely was advanced into a new Bishopric, and
Cambridge-shire assigned for it is Diocese, taken from the Bishopric of
Lincoln. Spaldwick Manor in Huntington-shire was given to Lincoln, in
reparation of the jurisdiction taken from it, and bestowed on Ely. One Hervey,
who had been banished by the Welsh from the Hervey, the first Bishop of Ely.
poor Bishopric of Bangor, was made the first Bishop of Ely. King Henry
bestowed great Privileges upon that Bishopric.

Then Bernard, Chaplain to the King, and Chancellor to the Queen, was the first
Norman, made Bishop of St. David's; who soon denied subjection to Canterbury,
and would be an absolute Archbishop of himself: But William Archbishop of
Canterbury, aided by the Pope, at last forced the Bishop of St. David's to a
submission.

King Henry died at the Town of St. Denis in Normandy of a surfeit by eating of
Lampreys. He was buried at Reading in Bark-shire in the Abbey that himself had
there founded and endowed with large possessions.

Stephen, Earl of Bologn, hearing of King Henrie's Death, hastes over into
England, and seizes on the Crown. He was Son to Adela, Daughter to King
William the Conqueror; but Mawd first Married to Henry the Emperor of Germany,
was the undoubted heir of the Crown. She was constantly called the Empress
after the Death of the Emperor, though Married to Geoffery Plantagenet, her
second Husband. Unto her all the Clergy, and Nobility had sworn fealty in her
Father's lifetime.

William Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding his Oath to Mawd, solemnly
Crowned Stephen, showing himself thereby perjured to his God, disloyal to his
Princess, and ungrateful to his Patroness, by whose special favor he had been
preserved. The rest of the Bishops (to their shame) followed his example,
hoping to obtain from an Usurper, what they could not get from a Lawful King,
traitorously avowing, That it was baseness for so many, and so great Peers to
be subject to a Woman.

King Stephen sealed a Charter at Oxford, Anno 1136. the Tenor whereof is, That
all Liberties, Customs, and Possessions granted to the Speeds Chron.
Church, should be firm and in force; That all Persons and Causes
Ecclesiastical, should appertain only to Ecclesiastical Judicature, That none
but Clergymen should ever intermeddle with the Vacancies of Churches, or any
Church-mens goods; That all bad usages in the Land touching Forests,
Exactions, etc. should be utterly extirpate, the ancient Laws restored, etc.

The Clergy perceiving that King Stephen performed little of his large promises
to them, were not formerly so forward in setting him up, but now more ready to
pluck him down, and sided effectually with Mawd against him. Stephen fell
violently on the Bishops, who then were most powerful in the Land: He
imprisoned Roger Bishop of Sarisbury, till he had surrendered unto him the two
Castles of Shirburn, and the Devizes, for the which Roger took such thought,
that he died shortly after, and left in ready Coin forty thousand Marks, which
after his Death came to the King's Coffers: he also uncastled Alexande^ of
Lincoln, and Nigellus of Ely, taking a great Mass of Treasure from them. The
Dean and Canons of Paul's, for crossing him in the choice of their Bishop,
tasted of his fury, for he took their Focariaes, and cast them into the Tower
of London, where they continued many days, till at last their liberty was
purchased by the Canons at a great price. Roger Hoveden tells us plainly, that
these Focariae were those Canons Concubines. See here the fruit of forbidding
Marriage to the Clergy, against the Law of God and Nature.

Albericus, Bishop of Hostia, was sent by Pope Innocent into England, called a
Synod at Westminster, where 18 Bishops, and thirty Abbots met together. Here
was concluded, That no Priest, Deacon, or-subdeacon, Fuller. Church History.
should hold a Wife or Woman within his House, under pain of degrading from his
Christendom, and plain sending to Hell. That no Priest's Son should claim any
Spiritual Living by heritage. That none should take a Benefice of any Layman.
That none should be admitted to Cure, which had not the letters of his Orders.
That Priests should do no bodily labor. And that their Transubstantiated God
should dwell but eight days in the Box, for fear of worm-eating, moulding, or
stinking. In this Synod Theobald, Abbot of Becco was chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the place of William lately Deceased.

The most considerable Clergyman of England in this Age, for Birth, Wealth,
and Learning, was Henry of Blois, Bishop of Winchester, and Brother to King
Stephen. He was made by the Pope his Legate for Britain.

In this Council, where William of Malmesbury was present, there were three
parties assembled with their attendance.

1. Roger of Sarisbury, with the rest of the Bishops, grievously complaining of
their Castles taken from them.

2. Henry Bishop of Winchester, the Pope's Legate, and President of the Council:
with Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, pretending to Umpire matters moderately.

3. Hugh Archbishop of Roan, and Aubery de Vere (Ancestor to the Earl of
Oxford) as Advocate for King Stephen.

This Aubery de Vere was Learned in the Laws, being charactered by my Author,
Homo causarum varietatibus exercitatus, a man well versed in the windings of
Causes. This Synod brake up without any extraordinary matter effected: For soon
after Queen Mawd came with her Navy and Army out of Normandy, which turned
Debates into Deeds, and Consulations into Actions.

There were many Religious Foundations built and endowed in the troublesome
Reign of King Stephen; not to speak of the Monastery of St. Mary de Pratis
founded by Robert Earl of Leicester, and many others of this time; the goodly
Hospital of St. Katherines nigh London, was founded by Mawd, Wife to King
Stephen. So stately was the Quire of this Hospital, that it was not much
inferior to that of St. Paul's in London, when taken down in the days of Queen
Elizab^th by Doctor Thomas Wilson, the Master thereof, and Secretary of State:
Yea King Stephen himself erected St. Stephen's Chapel in Westmins^e^ He buil^
also the Cistertians Monastery in Feversham, with an Hospital n^ar the
West-gate in York.

The King earnestly urged Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury to Crown his Son
Eustace. But Theobald stoutly refused, though proscribed for the same, and
forced to fly the Land, till after some time he was reconciled to the King.
Eustace the King's Son died of a Frenzy, as going to plunder the Lands of
Bury-Abbey. Hereupon an agreement was made between King Stephen, and Henry Duke
of Normandy, Son of Mawd the Empress, the former holding the Crown during his
Life, and after his Death settling the same on Henry, his adopted Son and
Successor.

At this time Nicholas Breakspear, an Englishman, born near Vxbridge, (...) i^
Adriano. IV.
came to be Pope, called Adrian the fourth; he was not inferior to Hildebrand
in Pride. Shortly after he had Excomunicated the Emperor, he walked with his
Cardinals, to refresh himself, in the Fields of Anagnia; and coming to a Spring
of Water he would taste of it; and with the Water a Fly enters into his
Throat, and choaketh him. In the latter end of his Days he was wont to say,
There is not a more wretched Life than to be Pope. To come into the seat of St.
Peter by Ambition, is not to succeed Matthew. Paris.
Peter in Feeding the Flock, but unto Romulus in Paracide; seeing that Seat is
never obtained without some Brother's Blood.

King Stephen died, and was buried with his Son and Wife at Feversham in Kent,
in a Monastery which himself had Erected. At the Demolishing whereof, some to
gain the Lead wherein he was wrapped, cast his Corpse into the Sea.

King Henry the second succeeded him; a Prince Wise, Valiant, and generally
Fortunate. He presently chose a Privy-Counsel of Clergy and Temporalty, and
refined the Common Laws: yea toward the latter end of his Reign began the use
of our Itinerant Judges. He parcelled England into six divisions, and appointed
three Judges to every Circuit. He razed most of the Castles of England to the
ground, the Bishops being then the greatest Traders in those Fortifications.

He disclaimed all the Authority of the Pope, refused to pay Peterpence, and
interdicted all Appeals to Rome. At that time Phil^p de Brok, a Canon of
B^dford, was questioned for Murder; he used reproachful speeches to the King's
Justices, for which he was Censured; and the Judges complained unto the King,
that there were many Robberies, and Rapes, and Murders, to the number of an
hundred, committed within the Realm by Churchmen.

Thomas B^cket, Do^tor of Canon Law, was by the King made Lord Chancellor of
England. Four years after upon the Death of Theobald, Becket was made by the
King Archbishop of Canterbury.

Anno 1160. Thirty Teachers come from Germany into England, and taught the
right use of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, etc. and were put to Death. Then
John of Sarum, and others, taught, that the Roman Church was the Whore of
Babylon. Some were burnt with an hot Iron at Oxford, that dissented from the
Roman Church.

The King Commanded that Justice should be executed upon all Men alike in his
Courts: but Thomas Becket would have the Clergy (so offending) judged in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and by Men of their own Coat. This Incensed the King
against him. To re^rench these enormities of the Clergy, the King called a
Parliament at Clarendon near Sarisbury, to confirm the Ancient Laws and
Customs, to which Becket with the rest of the Bishops consented and subscribed
them; but afterward recanting his own Act, renounced the same.

The same year the King required to have punishment of some misdoings among the
Clergy. The Archbishop would not permit; and when he saw (in his judgment) the
Liberties of the Church trodden under Foot; he without the King's knowledge
took Ship, and intended toward Rome; but by a contrary Wind he was brought
back. Then he was called to account for his Receipts, that came to his hand
while he was High-Chancellor. He appealeth to the Sea of Rome; and, under pain
of Excommunication, forbad both Bishops and Nobles to give Sentence against
him, seeing he was both their Father and their Judge. Nevertheless they,
without his consent, gave Sentence against him. Then he, seeing himself
forsaken of all the other Bishops, lifted the Cross which he held in his Hand
aloft, and went away from the Court; and the next day got him over into
Flanders, and so to the Pope.

Matthew Paris has many Letters betwixt the Pope and this King, and the King
of France, and sundry Bishops of France and England, for reconciliation betwixt
the King and the Archbishop, who abode seven years in exile. Thomas Becket
quarrelled with Roger Archbishop of York for presuming to Crown Henry the
King's Son (made joint-King in the Life of his Father) a privilege which
Becket claimed as proper to him alone. He solemnly resigned his Archbishopric
to the Pope, as troubled in Conscience, that he had formerly took it as
illegally from the King; and the Pope again restored it to him, whereby all
scruples in his mind were fully satisfied.

But afterward by the Mediation of the French King, Becket had leave given him
to return into England; howsoever the King still retained his Temporals in his
Hand, on weighty considerations, namely to show their distinct Nature from the
Spirituals of the Archbishopric, to which alone they Pope could restore him.

Thomas returning into England Excommunicateth all the Bishops, which had been
at the Coronation of the young King. The King sent, and required him to absolve
them, seeing what was done to them, was done for his Cause: but Thomas refuses.

The next year after, he Excommunicated solemnly the Lord Sackvill appointed by
the King, Vicar of the Church at Canterbury, because he did derogate from the
rights of the Church to please the King. He also Excommunicated one Robert
Brook for cutting off an Horses tail, that carried Victuals to the Archbishops
House.

The King being then in Normandy, grieved very sore before his Servants at the
insolent carriage of Thomas Becket. This moved Sir Richard Breton, Sir Hugh
Morvil, Sir William Tracey, Sir Reginald Fitz-Vrse, to return into England; and
coming to Canterbury, they found the Archbishop in Cathedral Church, at three a
Clock in the Afternoon, and calling him Traitor to the King, they slew him,
and dashed his Brains upon the floor. His last words when he died, were, I
commend my self and God's Cause unto God, and to the blessed Mary, and to the
Saints Patrons of this Church, and to St. Denis.

Here see the lightness of the People; for the same Men that detested the pride
of that Thomas, began to Worship him after his Death. Thus they sang of Thomas
Becket.

Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
By the Blood of Thomas, which for Thee he did spend,
Make us O Christ to climb whither Thomas did ascend.
Multitudes of People flocked to Canterbury yearly, especially on his Jubilee,
or each fifty years after his enshrining; an hundred thousand of English and
Foreigners repaired thither. The Revenues of peoples Offerings amounted to
more than six hundred pounds a year. Before Becket's Death, the Cathedral in
Canterbury was called Christ-Church, it was afterward called the Church of St.
Thomas; though since by the demolishing of Becket's shrine, the Church has
recovered it is Ancient name.

King Henry protested himself innocent from the Death of Thomas Becket, yet was
he willing to undergo such a penance as the Pope would impose. The Pope made
him buy his Absolution at a dear rate. He enjoined him to suffer Appeals from
England to Rome; to quit his Rights and Claim to the Investitures; to keep two
hundred Men of Arms in pay for the Holy War; of which pay the Popes Assigns
were to be the Receivers; and that in England they should celebrate the Feast
of that glorious Martyr St. Thomas of Canterbury. The words of the Bull are
these, We strictly charge you, that you solemnly Celebrate every year the
Birthday of the glorious Martyr Thomas, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury,
that is, the day of his passion, and that by devout Prayers to him, you
endeavor to merit the remission of your sins.

To make the satisfaction complete, King Henry passes from Normandy into
England, stays at Canterbury, strippeth himself naked, and is whipped by
diverse Monks, of whom some gave him five lashes, some three.

Concerning which penance Machiavel speaks thus in the first Book of I^ quali
cose surono da Enrico accettare, et sotto- M^sse si a quel g^^dicio un tauto
Reche boggi ^^ huomo privat^ si vergognarebbe ottom^s^ etc. Tanto le cose che
pai^no so^o piu da^icosto che ^^ ^^presse tom de.
the Hostory of Florence; These things were accepted by Henry, and so great a
King submitted himself to that judgment, to which a private man in our days
would be ashamed to submit himself. Then he exclaimeth, So much things that
have some show, are more dreaded afar off, than near hand: Which he says,
Because at the same time the Citizens of Rome expelled the Pope out of the City
with disgrace, scorning his Excommunication. This was done in the year of our
Lord 1170. as appears by these Verses.

Anno Milleno, Centeno, Septuageno,
Anglorum primas, corruit ense Thomas.
In the year 1179. Lewis King of France, who had entertained Thomas at Sens,
passed over into England to Worship him, and made his Devotions to his Relics.
Then Richard Prior of Dover, who divided Kent into three Archdeaconries, was
made Archbishop of Canterbury. Fabian says, He was a man of evil living, and
wasted the goods of the F^bim. in Henry 2.
Church inordinately.

A Synod was called at Westminster, the Pope's Legate being present thereat,
where was a great Contention between the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York
for Precedence; words begat blows, and the Archbishop of Canterbury's party
pulled York from his Seat to the ground, and tore his Casule, Chimer, and
Rochet from his Back; and put the Legate in such fear, that he ran away. The
next day after York Appealeth to Rome. Here the Pope interposed, and to end old
divisions, made a new distinction, Entitling Canterbury, Primate of all
England; and York, Primate of England.

King Henry died at Chinon in Normandy, and was buried with very great
Solemnity in the Nunnery of Font-Everard in the same Country, a Religious
House of his own Foundation and Endowment. At that time were many Married
Priests in Britain.

His Son, Richard the first, surnamed Coeur de Lion, succeeded him, and on
September 3. was crowned at Westminster of Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury.
Then this King ordained the City of London to be ruled by two Bailiffs. The two
first Bailiffs were Henry Chornhil, and Richard Fitz-River. In the time of the
Coronation of the King, multitudes of the Jews in this Land were destroyed.

The King in part of satisfaction for his trespass against his Father (for
Queen Elianor and his Sons had sided with the King of France against him)
agreed with Philip the French King to take upon them the recovery of the Holy
Land. King Richard gave over the Castles of Barwick Fai^an Chron.
and Roxburgh to the Scottish King for the sum of ten thousand pounds. He
passed away the Earldom of Northumberland unto Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham for
a great sum of Money for term of life; scoffing, that he had made a young Earl
of an old Bishop. Besides, by the commandment of Pope Clement the third, a
tenth was exacted of the whole Realm

The King set over the Realm as principal in his absence, the Bishop Pay. Acts
and Monuments.
of Ely his Chancellor, and the Bishop of Durham; whom he ordained to be Chief
Justice of England. Ely to have custody of the Tower, with the oversight of all
other parts of the Land on this side Humber: and Durham to have charge over all
other his Dominions beyond Humber. The Pope also made William Bishop of Ely his
Legate through all England and Scotland.

As for Men and Soldiers, the Prelates, Friars, and other Preachers, had
stirred up innumerable by their manifold exhortations (the Archbishop of
Canterbury having traveled through Wales in Person for that purpose) in
Pulpits and private Conferences. Then King Richard (with some of our English
Nobility, who adventured their Persons in the Holy War) crossed the Seas into
France, to Philip King thereof. After some necessary stays, having passed the
River Rhene at Lions, they parted company: Philip marching over the Alps into
Italy, and King Richard to the Seaside at Marsilia, there to meet with his
Navy. King Richard's Fleet of Ships being not come, he embarked himself in
twenty hired Galleys, and ten great Busses (a kind of Shipping then peculiar to
the Mediterranean Seas) and set Sail toward Messana in Sicily, the Rendezvous
of both the Kings and their Armies. In which passage King Richard lying at
Anchor (on occasion) in the mouth of the River Tiber, not far from Rome,
Octavianus the Bishop of Hostia repaired unto him, desiring him in the Pope's
name, that he would visit his Holiness: which the King denied to do, alleging
that the Pope and his Officers had taken 700 Marks for Consecration of the
Bishop of Mains, 1500 Marks for the Legative power of William Bishop of Ely;
but of the Archbishop of Bordeaux an infinite sum of Money; whereupon he
refused to see Rome.

King Richard studying to fit himself for the great attempt he had in hand,
called before him his Archbishops and Bishops, that accompanied him, into a
Chapel at the House where he was lodged, where he made a penitent confession
of his sins, humbly Praying to God for Mercy, and them (as his subordinate
Ministers) for Absolution: and God (says R. Hoveden) respected him with the
eyes of Mercy, so that from thence-forth he feared God, eschewing evil, and
doing good.

King Richard sent for Joachim, Abbot of Calabria, a Man of great Learning and
Understanding in the Scriptures, who at his coming he heard expounding the
Apocalypse of St. John, touching the afflictions of the Church, and the state
of Antichrist, which (says he) was then born, and in the City of Rome, of whom
the Apostle said, He should exalt himself above all that is called God.

Afterward, at the siege of Acres, or Ptolemais in Palestine, Radulphus de
alta ripa, Archdeacon of Colchester ended his Life; there also died Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hubert Walter Bishop of Sarisbury (afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury) was a most active Commander there, besides many more
of the eminent Clergy engaged in that service. William Bishop of Ely played Rex
in the King's absence, abusing the Royal Authority committed to him. Acres was
delivered to the King's of England and France, who divided the spoil of that
City betwixt them.

King Richard after this and many other notable A^chievements in Palestine, at
his return from thence, was taken Prisoner by Leopald Duke of Austria, and
detained by him with hard and Unprince-like usage: whilst the English Clergy
endeavored the utmost for his enlargement. His fine was an hundred and fifty
thousand Marks, to be paid, part to the Duke of Austria, part to Henry VI.
Emperor of Germany: Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury with much diligence
perfected the work, and, on his ransom paid, King Richard returned into England.

Hubert Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury, had almost finished a fair Covent for
Monks at Lambeth, began by Baldwin, his Predecessor, but upon the petitions of
the Monks of Canterbury to the Pope (contrary to the King's and Archbishop's
desire) the Covent at Lambeth was utterly demolished.

As this Richard, was the first of the English Kings, who bare Arms on his
Seals; so was he the first who carried in his shield Three Lions Passant, born
ever after for the Regal Arms of England. This King's daily exercise after his
return was to rise early, and not to depart from the Church, till Divine
Service were finished. Moreover, he bountifully relieved every day much Poor,
both in his Court and Towns about, and restored Gold and Silver to such
Churches from which to pay his ransom they had been taken away.

The Bishop of Beavois being also an Earl of the Royal Blood, and the eleventh
Peer of France, valiantly fighting against John the King's Brother, was taken
Armed at all points, and bravely mounted: on whose behalf the Pope (upon the
Bishop's humble suit, pleading the Clergy's immunity) wrote somewhat earnestly
to King Richard, to set his very dear Son (for so he called the Bishop) at
liberty. The King in a pleasant manner caused the Habergeon and Curasses of the
Bishop to be presented to the Pope, with this question (alluding to that of
Jacob's Children to their Father, concerning Joseph's Garment) Vide an haec sit
filii tui tunica, an non? See whether this be thy Son's coat or not? Whereupon
the Pope replied, That he was neither his Son, nor the Son of the Church, and
therefore should be Ransomed at the King's will, because he was rather judged
to be a servitor of Mars, than a Soldier of Christ: Whom the King of England
handled sharply.

Anno 1199. One Thurical, an Englishman was in a rapture carried in the night
to Purgatory, of which S. Nicholas is Governor, where also he saw the mouth of
Hell, whence a stinking smoke issued out, which (as it was revealed to him)
came out of Tithes detained, or ill-paid, because there those Men were horribly
punished, who had ill-paid the Tithes due to the Church. This is related by
Mat. Paris, a Monk of St. Albans, (...) into (...).
superstitious according to the Age that he lived in. Then also came the
Minorite Friars into England, their Order being but lately instituted.

King Richard laying Siege to a Castle called Chaluz belonging to the
Viscountof Limoges, was shot into the Arm by a poisoned Arrow, whereupon the
Iron remaining and festering in the wound, the King within ^ine days after
died, having first forgiven the Soldier before his Death.

King John was Crowned in Westminster-Abbey, June 9. 1199. and was Sworn by
Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, Quod sanctam Ecclesiam, and ejus ordinatos
diligeret, and eam ob incursione malignantium indemnem conservaret; and
dignitates illius bona fide, and sine malo ingenio servaret illaesas, as Roger
Hoveden expresses it. This Archbishop, with all the Bishops, Abbots, Nobles,
present at, and consenting to this Oath, and doing Homage and Fealty to him.
The 13th of June following, he was solemnly Divorced, in Normandy, in the
presence of three of his Norman Bishops, from the Duke of Gloucester's
Daugh^er. Vnde magnam summi Pontificis Innocentii tertii, and Curiae Romanae
indignationem, praesumens temere contra leges and canones dissolvere, quod
eorum fuerat authoritate colligatum, as Radulphus de Diceta informs us. But he
soon after was Married to Isabel, sole Daughter and Heir of the Earl of
Angolesme, who was Crowned Queen, October. 8. by Archbishop Hubert, this Pope and
Cardinals, not daring to question, or null his Marriage.

CENT. XIII.
KIng John being no sooner possessed of the Realm of England, but in the very
first year of his Reign, evidenced to all the World his Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty, both by ratifying, protecting, enlarging the Ecclesiastical as
well as Temporal Liberties, Privledges, Churches, Chapels, Tithes, Lands,
Possessions, granted by his Ancestors to several Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Monasteries in England, Ireland, Normandy, by sundry Charters, using this
expression in the Prologue of Confirmation to the Monastery of Cirencester.
Johannes Dei gratia, etc. Quoniam Honori nostro condecens, Prynne's history of
Popes Usurpations. lib. 5. chapter 1.
and saluti nostrae necessarium, loca sancta and religiosa, quae ab Avo patris
nostri Rege H. primo sunt fundata, and a Rege H. secundo patre nostro
confirmata, defendere, custodire, and amplisicare. Inde est, quod Deo and
Sanctae Mariae de Cirencest. and Canonitis Regularibus ibidem Deo servientibus,
damus and concedimus. Dat. per manum H. Cant. Archiep. Cancel. nostri apud sag.
7. die Aug. An. Regni nostri 10. Which prologue he likewise used in other of
his Charters. K. John also authorized Hubert Archbishop of Canter. to make a
Will, which he could not then Legally do without his Royal License.

In the year 1177. no less then 30 Nuns of the Abbey of Ambresbury, were accused
and convicted at one time for their incontinency, to the dissolution and infamy
of their Order, whereof they had been publicly defamed; whereupon King Henry
the 2d. Expulsis sanctimonialibus be Abbatia de Ambresbury, propter
incontinentiam, and per alios domos Religiosos distributis; expelling the Nuns
from this Abbey for their incontinency, distributed them throughout other
Religious Houses, in stricter custody (by way of penance) and gave it to the
Abbess and Nuns of Font-Everoit, for a perpetual possession, who sending a
Covent of Nuns thither from Font-Everoit, Richard then Archbishop of
Canterbu^y, inducted them into the Abbey of Ambresbury, on the first of June,
King Hen. 2. Bartholomew, Bishop of Excester; John Bishop of Norwich, and many
other of the Clergy and People being then present. And by his Charter, Anno
1179. confirmed the Lands of this Abbey to them with many liberties, and that
by the advice and consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other
Bishops, Great Men, and Barons of the Realm. King John in the first year of his
Reign, by his Charter reciting all the premises in the Prologue, confirmed this
Charter of his Father, ratified these Nuns deprivations and imprisonments in
other Monasteries for their incontinency, with consent of his Bishops, Nobles,
and request of Pope Alexander, transferring this Abbey, and all Lands thereto
belonging, from one rank of Nuns to another; takes both these Nuns, Persons,
Lands, into his Royal protection, as if they were his own Demesnes, grants them
several Tithes, Churches, large Privileges; and prohibits, that none of his
Officers or Subjects should disturb them therein, nor implead them, but in the
presence of himself and his heirs. The same first year of King John's Reign,
the Abbot of Westminster dying, the Monks by the King's License elected Ralph
Arundel Prior of Harle for their Abbot, unto which the King gave his Assent.
Whereupon he was consecrated Abbot; no Bishops, Abbots, Priors, or other
Ecclesiastical Persons being elected to any Dignities, but by the King's
previous License, and subsequent Assent to the Person elected, who might
approve or reject him at his Royal Pleasure.

This King ratified the Charter of K. Richard, touching the exchange, between
Archbishop Hubert, and the Bishop and Monks of Rochester, of the Manor of
Lambeth for other Lands, and the Clause therein; authorizing the Pope,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishops and Clergy of England, to Excommunicate the
infringers thereof. Besides, he appropriated several Chart. 1. Johan. ^^gis
part. 2. n. 147. and n. 25.
Parochial Churches in perpetuity to the Bishopric of Coventry and Litchfield;
converted other Parochial Churches into Prebendaries, and ratified the Orders
made by Bishop Hugh for the better regulation of that Church by two Charters.
The like Charter of confirmation of Churches, Tithes, and Liberties, he made to
the Bishop of Exeter, and his Successors, the same year. In the second year of
his Reign, the Dean and Chapter of Lexoven, within this King's hereditary
Dominions in France, presuming to elect a Bishop without his consent, sent a
Prohibition to them, to preserve this Ancient right of the Crown descended to
him from his Ancestors. The same year this King by his Charter commanded all
Clerks, then Imprisoned for offenses throughout England, to be delivered to
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, upon his demand of them. Likewise he granted a
Charter to the Bish. of Norwich, to recover all Lands and Tenements belonging
to that Bishopric, unjustly alienated by his Predecessors.

The same year Geoffery Plantaginet, Archbishop of York, King John's base
Brother, obstructed the Levying of Carvage (demanded and granted to the King by
common consent paid by all others) on the Demesne Lands of his Church, or
Tenants, beating the Sheriff of York's servants, excommunicating the Sheriff
himself by name, with all his Aiders, and interdicted his whole Province of
York for attempting to levy it. Whereupon the King much incensed, summoned him
to answer these high contempts, his not going over with him into Normandy when
summoned; and also to pay him three thousand Marks due to his Brother King
Richard, and by his Writs commanded all the Archbishop's servants, wherever
they were found to be imprisoned, as they were, for beating the Sheriff's
Officers, and denying to give the King of the Archbishops Wine, passing through
York; summoned Geoffery into his Court to answer all these contempts; and
issued Writs to the Sheriff of Yorkshire to seize all his Goods, Temporalties,
and to return them into the Exchequer, which was executed accordingly. The King
and Queen repairing to York the next Mid-lent, the Archbishop made his peace
with the King, submitting to pay such a Fine for his offenses, as four Bishops,
and four Barons elected by them, should adjudge, and absolved William de
Stutvil the Sheriff, and James de Poterna, whom he had excommunicated, and
recalled his former Interdict.

The same year there fell out a great difference between this Archbishop, R.
Hoveden Annal. part. poster. p. 817.
the Dean and Chapter of York, and the Archdeacon of Richmond. The Praecentor's
place at York falling void, the Dean and Chapter would not suffer him to
present Ralph de Kyme, his Official, to it, but themselves gave it to Hugh
Murdac, Archdeacon of Cleveland, the day after he had given it to Kyme. And
when the Achbishop would have put him into the Praecentor's Stall, the Dean
told him, It belonged not unto him to put any man into a Stall, neither shall
you therein place him, because we have given it by Authority of the Council of
Lateran. Whereupon when the Archbishop could not have his will, he
excommunicated Murdac; he likewise injured Honorius Archdeacon of Richmond, by
challenging to himself the Institutions of Churches and Synodals, against the
ancient Dignities and Customs of the Archdeaconry, which the Archbishop
pretended Honorius had resigned and confirmed to him by his Charter, which he
denied. The Dean and Chapter, and Honorius, severally complained of these
injuries to the King, who thereupon issued two Writs for their relief.

This Honorius, Archdeacon of Richmond, complained to the Pope as well as the
King, of the injurious encroachments of this Archbishop, who suspended some of
his Clerks, interdicted some Churches within his Archdeaconry, and
excommunicated the Archdeacon, all which the Pope in a special Letter requires
him to retract as null and void. He also sent three Epistles more: the first to
the Dean and Chapter of York; the second to the Bishop of Ely, and Archdeacon
of Northampton; the third to King John himself, to defend Honorius his rights,
against the Archbishop's injuries and encroachments.

The Pope wrote a menacing Letter to the Archbishop; but he was no way daunted
at it, but proceeded still against Honorius, till restrained by the King's
Writs, Appeals being but then in their infancy; and that not as to a supreme
judicature, but only by way of complaint, as a voluntary persuading Arbitrator,
and that by the King's license first obtained, as learned Sir Roger Twisden
truly observes. An Historical Vindication o^ the Church of England in point of
S^hism.


The same year Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, intending to celebrate a
Council at Westminster, without the King's special Writ, thereupon (the King
being then in Normandy) Geoffery Fitz-Peter, Earl of Sussex, being then Chief
Justice of England, sent a Prohibition to inhibit it; yet the Archbishop held
the Council wherein he made and promulged several Decrees, Statuens ea a suis
subditis inviolabiliter observari.

But those Decrees made concerning Procurations, Fees for Orders, Institutions,
Inductions, Licenses of Ministers, etc. were not esteemed obligatory, nor were
they regarded. Lyndwood, Aton, and most Histories, take no notice of them,
because made against the King's Prohibition.

The third year of King John, Gilardus, Archdeacon of Brecknock, pretending
himself to be elected Bishop of St. David's in Wales with the King's consent, by
provision from Pope Innocent the Third, intruded himself into the possession of
the Temporalties thereof, and likewise endeavored to make it an Archbishopric.

About that time a certain number of Greeks came from Athens into England, and
asserted, that the Latins had erred from the way of Truth in the Articles of
Christian Faith; and they would show the right way by invincible Arguments,
which all should receive if they will be saved. This was reported unto King
John: He answered, Our Faith is grounded upon the Authority of Christ and the
Saints, and I will not suffer that it be tossed with disputes and janglings of
men; nor will we change the certainty for uncertainty, let me hear no more of
you: So they departed.

Gilardus had procured Pope Innocent's Procuration and Provision to elect him
Bishop of St. David's, at which King John (though then in Normandy with his
Queen) was much incensed, and sent out four successive Writs and Proclamations,
directed to all the Clergy and Laity both of England and Wales in general, and
the Chapter of St. David's in special, strictly enjoining them all to oppose and
resist Gilardus his rash attempts and innovations against Him, to their power,
according to their Allegiance; and no ways to aid or countenance him therein,
by advice or otherwise, it being unjust to do it.

Giraldus, notwithstanding all his pretended submission to the Archbishop,
proceeding afresh in the Court of Rome to obtain his ends, thereupon the King
issued ou^ a severe Proclamation against him, as a public Enemy and disturber
of the Peace of his Kingdom.

In the same year Pope Innocent takes upon him (upon pretext of necessity for
relief of the holy Land) only to advise and recommend to all the Prelates of
the holy Church the levying of the fortieth part of their Estates and
Benefices, and in what manner to levy ^t, not absolutely to impose it to their
prejudice. Whence Matthew Westminster thus expresses it: Ad instantiam
Innocentii Papae, data est quadragesima pars redditum omnium Ecclesiarum ad
subsidium terrae promissionis. Therefore a free Gift, not an imposed Tax.
Neither would the King of England or France suffer it to to be levied in their
Realms by the Pope's Authority, but only by their Royal Order, Grant, and
Assent thereto. But no Archbishop or Bishop did put this in execution.

The same year the King licensed Peter Builler by Charter to enter into what
Religion he pleased. Rex, etc. Omnibus, etc. Sciatis nos dedisse licentiam
Petro Builler transferendi se ad quam voluerit Religionem, and inde has liter
as nostras patentes ei rei relinquimus in testimonium. Test meipso apud
Barnevil, 29 die Octobris.

The French King perfidiously breaking his Truce with King John, made in the
first year of his reign, to carry on that War, he not only demanded a supply of
Moneys from his Nobility and Clergy, but likewise from the Cistercian Abbots.

The same year the Church and City of Rhoan being consumed with fire, King John
granted them his Letters Patents for a liberal contribution throughout all
England, toward the repair of that Church, principally for the Virgin Mary's
sake, to whom it was dedicated, then adored more than God himself. This is the
first Patent of such a Collection that we have yet met with.

Pious this King was in offering one ounce of Gold to God every Lord's Day and
Holy Day, which the Archbishop of Canterbury then offered and disbursed for
him, or claimed as his Fee, being allowed it in the Exchequer upon his account.

In the fourth year of King John, some Irish Bishops and Archdeacons,
Suffragans to the Archbishop of Dublin, endeavored, without this King's
precedent License and Assent, to elect an Archbishop, and get him confirmed at
Rome by the Pope, against the King's Right and Dignity. Whereupon he entered an
Appeal against them before himself, to Preserve his Right and Dignity therein.

The same year there being many contests between the Dean and Canons, and
Geoffry Archbishop of York, who by his Archiepiscopal authority and violence,
did much oppress them: the King upon their complaint, by his Authority and
Letters Patents granted them a Protection against Him and his Instruments.

In the fifth year of King John, Godfrid Bishop of Winchester deceasing, Petrus
de Rupibus, a Knight and great Soldier, Vir equestr^s ordinis, and in rebus
bellicis eruditus procurante Rege Johanne, being chosen to the Bishopric,
succeeded him; who going to Rome, Vbi magni^ zeniis liberaliter collat is ad
Ecclesiam Wintoniense^^, maturavit Episcopus consecrari.

This year the Men of Holderness refusing to pay their Traves due to St. John
of Beverly out of their Ploughed-lands to the Farmer of them, as they did to
the Provost and Chapter before; the King issued out a Writ to the Sheriffs of
York to seize the Persons and Goods of those the Provost and Chapter should
excommunicate, and detain them till payment, since He and his Tenants duly paid
them out of his and their Demesnes.

In the sixth year of King John, the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter of Durham, the
Dean and Chapter of York, with sundry other Deans and Chapters, Abbots and
Priors within the Province of York, to prevent the unjust arbitrary
Excommunications, Suspensions, and Interdicts of Geoffry Archbishop of York,
against their own Tenants, Lands and Possessions, by reason of some differences
between them concerning their Jurisdictions and Ecclesiastical Privileges,
which they complained the Archbishop invaded, appearing before the King at
York, did there in the King's own presence appeal him before the Sea of Rome,
prefixing a certain day, to which the King by his Letters Patents gave his
Royal Testimony and Assent, they not daring to appeal without his License.

About two years after King John and his Nobles meeting at Winchester, placing
his hope and strength in his Treasures, required and received through all
England the thirteenth part of all Movables and other things, as well of the
Laity as of all other Ecclesiastical Persons and Prelates, all of them murmuring
at it, and wishing an ill event to such rapines, but not daring to contradict
it. Only Geoffry Archbishop of York openly contradicting it, privily departed
from England, and in his recess, Anathematis sententia innodavit, actually
excommunicated all Men, especially within his Archbishopric, making this
rapine, and levying this Tax, and in general all Invaders of the Church or
Ecclesiastical things, for non-payment of this Tax, wherewith this King was so
highly offended, that he seized his Temporalities, and banished him the Realm
till his death about seven years after.

Anno 1205. died Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury. Before his body was yet
committed to the earth, the younger sort of the Monks elected Reginald their
Superior, and placed him in the Metropolitan See, without the King's License
and knowledge: who being sent unto by the elder sort of Monks, requiring his
gracious License to choose their Archbishop, consented thereunto, requiring them
also instantly at his request, that they would elect John Gray, Bishop of
Norwich, into that See; which they also did. And the King sent to the Pope to
confirm it. The two Suffragans of Canterbury not being made acquainted with the
matter, sent speedily to Rome, to have both the Elections stopped, whereupon
arose a great tumult: for the Pope condemning both their Elections, created
Stephen Langton with his own hand in the high Church of Viterbo. Upon which
occasion the King banished sixty four of the Clergy and Monks of Canterbury out
of the Land, and sharply expostulated Fox Acts and Monuments.
with the Pope, for that he had chosen Stephen Langton, a Man brought up long
among his Enemies in France; besides the derogation to the Liberties of his
Crown; threatening, except he would favor the King's liking of the Bishop of
Norwich, he would cut off the trade to Rome, and the profits that came thither
from the Land. The Pope writes, in the behalf of Stephen Langton, a froward
and arrogant Letter, and not long after sends a commandment and charge into
England to certain Bishops, that if the King would not yield, they should
Interdict his Realm. For the execution whereof four Bishops were appointed,
viz. William Bishop of London, Eustace Bishop of Ely. Mauger Bishop of
Worcester, and Giles Bishop of Hereford, who pronounced the general
Interdiction through the Realm of all Ecclesiastical service, saving Baptism of
Children, Confession and the Eucharist to the dying in case of necessity. No
sooner had they interdicted the Kingdom, but they with Joceline, Bishop of
Bath, as speedily, as secretly, fled out of the Land. And the King took all the
possessions of those Bishops into his hands. He also proclaimed, that all those
that had Church-living, and went over the Sea, should return at a certain day,
or else lose their Livings for ever: and charged all Sheriffs to enquire, if
any Churchman received any Commandment that came from the Pope, that they
should apprehend them, and bring them before him, and also take into their
hands for the King's use, all the Church Lands that were given to any man by
the Archbishop Stephen, or by the Priors of Canterbury from the time of the
election of the Archbishop.

England remained under the Interdict six years, three months and an half,
whereby not only the King and his Court, but also all the people of England,
who had nothing to do with that Quarrel, were Excommunicated. In that long time
how many thousands of men died in England, who by the Rules of the Roman
Church, and by the Pope's Judgment, are eternally damned? and that but for a
Quarrel between the King and the Pope about some Investitures of Churches, and
Collations of Benefices, and Money-matters.

Then (says Matthew Paris, who was an eyewitness of all that disorder) Ma^ch.
^ a^^
All the Sacraments of the Church ceased in England, saving only the
Confession, and the Communion of the Host in the last necessity, and the
Baptism of Infants. The dead bodies were carried out of the Towns, as if they
had been the bodies of Dogs, and buried by the Highways, and in Ditches,
without Prayers, and without service of Priests. By the same Interdict all
Masses, Vespers, all public Service and ringing of Bells was forbidden, and
the Kingdom was exposed to rapine and prey, and given to any that would conquer
it. Only the King was not excommunicated by name, but that was done the next
year after.

Next, Pope Innocent deposed King John from the Kingdom of England, and
absolved the English from the Oath of their Allegiance, and commanded Philip
August King of France, that for the remission of his sins he should invade the
Kingdom of England with force of Arms, giving to those that should follow the
King in that Conquest, the pardon of all their sins, and the same Graces and
Pardons, as to them that visit the holy Sepulcher. Whereupon the said King
Philip, partly to obtain the remission of his sins, partly to make himself
Master of England, raised a mighty Army, whilst Innocent was stirring up the
English to rise against their King.

This moved King John to humble himself under the Pope, and to receive such
Conditions as liked him best. The Conditions were,

That the King should yield unto the Pope the whole right of Patronage of all
the Benefices of his Kingdom. That to obtain Absolution of his sins, he should
pay to the Cl^rgy of Canterbury, and to other Prelates, the sum of eight
thousand pounds Sterling That he should satisfy for the damages done to the
Church according to the Judgment of the Pope's Legate. That the said King should
resign his Crown into the Pope's hand, with his Kingdoms of England and
Ireland; for which Letters were formed and given to Pandulphus the Pope's
Legate.
King John being informed that his Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, intended to
hold a Council at St. Albans by the command of Pope Innocent the Third, about
the payment of Rome-scot against custom, and sundry other unusual Exactions, to
the great destruction of the whole Realm, upon complaint thereof by his Nobles
and People, issued out a Prohibition to them, expressly forbidding them upon
their Allegiance, not to hold any Council there, by the Popes or any other
Authority, nor to consult or treat of those things, nor to act or ordain any
thing against the custom of the Realm, as they tendered his Honor, or the
tranquillity of the Kingdom, until he conferred with the general Council of his
Realms about it.

During this Interdict, Alexander Cementarius, Abbot of the Benedictines Tho^^s
Sprot. Speed's Histo^y, p. 57^.
at Canterbury, Vir corpore Elegantissimus, facie Venerabilis, literarum
pl^^tudine imbutus, ita ut Parisiis celebris haberetur, Magister et ^^ctor, et
Lector in Theologia, was sent by King John unto Rome, where he openly pleaded
and fomented the King's Cause against the Pope. He maintamed there, That there
is no Power under God, higher than a King; and That the Clergy should not have
Temporal government. He proved these two Articles by Scripture and Reason, and
by testimony of Anno 1209. ^n the tenth year of King John, Henry Fitz-Alan was
sworn first May or of L^ndo^, and P^t^^ Duke with Thomus N^al sworn ^or
Sheri^^s: And Londonbridge began to be built with Stone; and St. Saviors in
Southwark the same year
Gregory the First in an Epistle to Augustine Bishop of Canterbury. He wrote
three Books against the Popes Usurpations and Power, viz. De Cessione Papali,
De Ecclesiae potestate, De potestate Vicaria, in defense of his Sovereign King
John; for which his Loyalty he was afterward, by the Pope's Power, deprived of
all his Benefices by Pandulphus the Pope's Legate (after King John's surrender
of his Crown) and enforced to beg his Bread.

King John having seized and detained in his hands the Temporalties of the
Archbishopric of Armach in Ireland, for that the Bishop was elected without
his License, against his Will and Appeal, two Monks coming to him, proffering
him three hundred Marks in Silver, and three Marks a year in Gold, for to have
the Lands, Liberties, and Rights thereof, he by his Writ returned them to his.
Chief Justice there, to do what was fitting in it

John Reumond coming from Rome to lay claim to a Prebendary in Hastings, sued
to the King for his License and safe conduct to come into and return from
England, which he granted upon this condition, that upon his arrival he should
give security, that he came hither for no ill to the King, nor for any other
business but that Prebendary. The like License he granted to Simon Langton the
Archbishop's Brother, upon the same and stricter conditions.

King John sent a memorable Letter to the Pope by special Messengers, to claim
and justify this ancient and undoubted Right which He and his Royal Ancestors
enjoyed; to provide and prefer Archbishops and Bishops to the Sea of
Canterbury, and all other Cathedrals, attested by the Letters of the Bishops of
England, and other credible persons, desiring him to preserve the rights of the
Church and Realm of England entire and inviolable by his Fatherly provision.

Then the King entered into a League with Otho the Emperor, and Mat. Westmin^.
forced John King of Scots, who received his fugitive Subjects, and harbored
them in his Kingdom, to send to him for peace, to pay him eleven thousand Marks
to purchase his peace with him, and to put in Hostages for his fidelity without
any Fight between them. Yea, the the Welch-men themselves, formerly rebellious,
soon after his return from Scotland, voluntarily repaired to him at Woodstock,
and there did homage to him.

After which, Anno 1211. he entering into Wales with a great Army as far as
Snowdown, Reges omnes and Nobiles sine contradictione sub^ugavit, de
subjectione in posterum obsides vigintiocto suscepit, and inde cun prosp^ritate
ad Albani Monasterium remeavit, Lewellin Prince of North Wales being enforced
to render himself to mercy, without any Battle at all.

When the Pope's Absolution of the Nobles and all other Subjects from the
King's Allegiance would not shake his magnanimous resolution, nor his Peoples
loyalty; the Pope's Legates, Pandulphus* and Durance, forged P^y^n^'s History.
Book 3. chapter 3.
new devises to effect their designs by fraud and terror; to which purpose they
procured sundry Letters from diverse Quarters to be brought unto him, whilst he
sat at dinner at Nottingham, intending to set upon the Welch-men with a potent
Army (whom they had stirred up to rebel against him, and invade England) to
divert him from his design; all to this effect, That there was a secret Plot
laid to destroy him. He marched to Chester, where he met with new Letters to
the like effect: which caused him to dismiss his Army, and design against the
Welchmen.

Besides, the Popish Priests set up one Peter an Hermit, a counterfeit
Prophet, to terrify the King, and alienate the peoples hearts from him by his
false Prophesies. This counterfeit Sooth-sayer prophesied, That King John
should reign no longer than the Ascension-day, within the year of our Lord,
1213. which was the fourteenth from his Coronation; and this, (he said) he had
by Revelation.

When the Ascension-day was come, the King commanded his Regal Tent to be
spread abroad in the open field, passing that day with his noble Council and
Men of Honor, in the greatest solemnity that ever he did before, solacing
himself with musical Songs and Instruments, most in sight of his trusty
Friends. This day being past in all prosperity and mirth, the King commanded,
that Peter the Hermit, that false Prophet, should be drawn, and hanged like a
Traitor.

Now behold the misery of King John, perplexed with the French King's daily
preparation to invade England, assisted by many English malcontents, and all
the exiled Bishops. Hereupon he sunk on a sudden beneath himself, to an act of
unworthy submission and subjection to the Pope. For on Ascension-Eve, May 15.
being in the Town of Dover (standing as it were on tiptoes, on the utmost edge,
brink, and label of that Land, which now he was about to surrender) King John
by an Instrument, or Charter sealed, and solemnly delivered in the presence of
many Prelates and Nobles, to Pandulphus the Pope's Legate, granted to God and the
Church of Rome, the Apostles Peter and Paul, and to Pope innocent the Third and
his Successors, the whole Kingdom of England and Ireland. And took an Estate
thereof back again, yielding and (...) Church History. Boo^. 3.
paying yearly to the Church of Rome (over and above the Peter Pence) a
thousand Marks Sterling, viz. seven hundred for England, and three hundred for
Ireland. In the passing hereof, the King's Instrument to the Pope was sealed
with a Seal of Gold, and the Pope's to the King was sealed with a Seal of Lead.
This being done, the King took the Crown off his Head, and set it upon
Pandulphus his Knees (at whose feet he also laid his Scepter, Robe, Sword and
Ring, his Royal Ensigns, as John de Serres relates) and these words said he in
hearing of all the great Lords of England. Here I resign up the Crown and the
Realm of England into the hands of Pope Innocentius the Third, and put me
wholly in his mercy, and in his ordinance. Then Pandulph received the Crown of
King John, and kept it five days in his hands, and confirmed all things by his
Charter.

Now the Pope's next design was, how to take off, and pacify the French King
from his intended Invasions, and so sent the Archbishop and his Confederates
into England, there to insult over King John, as they had done abroad.

Next year the Interdict was taken off the Kingdom, and a general joy was over
the Land.

The seventeenth of August following the exiled Bishops landed at Dover, and
were conducted in State to the King at Winchester: the King's extraordinary
humbling to, and begging pardon of them, prostrating himself to the ground at
their feet, and their insolent carriage toward him, is related by Matthew Paris.

The next day after their coming to Winchester, the King issued out Writs to
all the Sheriffs of England, to enquire of their damages. There were other
Writs sent to the Kings Judges, to proceed in the said Inquisition.

After this general compliance with them, the King conceiving he had given them
full-content, and settled ^ll things in peace, resolved to pass with an Army
into Picardy, whither the Nobles refused to follow him. In the mean time the
Archbishop, Bishop, Nobles, m^e^ing a^ St. Albans about the damages to be
restored by the King to the Prelates, during their exile, fell to demand the
confirmation of their Liberties, granted by his Grandfather King Henry the
first, which the King condescended unto.

Soon after the Archbishop caused all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, and
Nobles of the Realm to meet together at London, upon pretext of satisfying his
and the exiled Bishops damages, but in verity to engage in a new Rebellion
against the Crown, and confer it on Lewis the French King's Son, as they did in
the conclusion, under pretense of demanding the confirming the Charter and
Liberties granted by King Henry the first, there produced by the Archbishop,
which the King had bu^ newly ratified at St. Albans.

Pandulphus, besides his former insolences, endeavored to wrest, out of the
King's hand, the power of imprisoning Clerks for Fellonies, that so they might
be at his own disposal, and act any villainies wi^h impunity.

King John being thus distressed, sent a base and unchristian-like Embassage to
Admiralius Murmelius, a Mohammedan, King of Morocco, then very potent, and
possessing a great part of Spain; offering him, if he would send him succor,
to hold the Kingdom of England as a Vassal from him, and to receive the Law of
Mahomet, says Matthew Paris. The Moor offended at his offer, told the
Ambassadors, That he lately had read Paul's Epistles, which for the matter
liked him well, save only ^.
that Paul had renounced that Faith, wherein he was born, and the Jewish
profession. Wherefore he slighted King John as one devoid both of piety and
policy, who would love his liberty, and disclaim his Religion. A strange
tender, if true.

But Mr. Prynne proves it to be a most scandalous malicious forgery of this
Monk of St. Albans against the King for sequestring that Abbey.

Philip King of France, together with his Son Lewis, and his Proctor, and all
the Nobles of France, Anno 1216. with his own mouth protested against this
Charter and resignation to Walo the Pope's own Legate, (when purposely sent to
them by Pope Innocent, to dissuade them from invading England, as being then
St. Peter's Patrimony) not only as null, void in it self for several Reasons,
but of most pernicious example.

King John out of his piety, to prevent profanations of the Lord's Day, removed
the Market of the City of Exeter from the Lord's Day, whereon it was formerly
kept, to the Monday.

This King to ingratiate himself with the Romish Cardinals and Court, granted
them annual Pensions out of his Exchequer, the Arrears whereof he ordered to be
satisfied in the first place, and likewise gave Benefices or Prebends to their
Nephews and Creatures. Moreover to gratify Stephen Langton, his great Enemy,
he granted the Patronage of the Bishopric of Rochester to him and his
Successors: and to the Bishop of Ely he granted the Patronage of the Abbey of
Torney.

Mr. Prynne, who kept the Records of the Tower, tells us, that upon strictest
search he could find no payment of the foresaid Annuity, or Oblation to Pope
Innocent by King John himself who granted it, but only for one year before
hand, when he sealed his Charter, who dying about three years after, during
which time his Kingdom was infested with Civil Wars between him and his Barons,
invaded by Lewis of France, who was made King by the Barons in his stead, his
Lands, Rents seized, his Treasure exhausted, and the People every where
miserably plundered, it is probable that there neither was nor could be
expected any other punctual payment of it.

The Pope and his Legate Nicholas, having in a manner bereaved King John of his
Regal Dignity, and Authority, began forthwith to play Rex: they usurped the
Sovereign Authority both in Church and State, presenting to all Bishoprics,
Abbeys, Spiritual promotions, and Benefices M^^th. Paris. H^st. Anglic. p. 237,
238.
then void, without the Patrons consent, by way of Provision and Collation, to
the prejudice of the Crown, and enthralling of the Church of England, not
vouchsafing to consult either with the King himself, the Archbishop, or Bishops
concerning their disposal.

This was the very original of Pope's Provisions, and disposals of Bishoprics,
Abbeys, with all sorts of Spiritual promotions and Benefices in England: no
Pope presuming to confer any Bishopric, Benefice, or Prebendary, in France, or
England, Vsque ad tempora Domini Innocentii ^ertii, qui primus assumpsit sibi
jus istud in tempore suo, as the French Agent remonstrated to Pope Innocent the
Fourth. These Provisions soon overflowed the Church of England (and France too)
for many succeeding Ages, notwithstanding all oppositions and complaints
against them. Which the Archbishop and Bishops foreseeing, perceiving withal
the Legate more ready to gratify the King and his Clerks in the disposal of
Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical preferments than themselves, meeting together at
Dunstaple, drew up an Appeal against his proceedings, which he slighting and
sending to Rome by Pandulphus, together with King John's Charter, so highly
magnified the King, and made such complaints to the Pope against the Archbishop
and Bishops, as frustrated their Appeal.

King John having satisfied and secured the damages of the Exiled Bishops and
Monks before the Interdict released, according to his agreement; other Abbots,
Priors, Clergymen and Laymen repaired to the Legate, craving full satisfaction
also for their damages, sustained by the King's proceedings during the
Interdict, though never insisted on before.

The King issued out two Writs on behalf of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Bishop of Lincoln, to restore them to the possession of their Temporalties
in the Cinque Ports, and other places. Yet on the contrary, all the Bishops and
Clergymen, who saithfully adhered to the King, and communicated with him, or
any other excommunicated person, or received any Benefices from them during the
Interdict, were by these Prelates (now made their Judges) and Pope's censures,
ordered to be suspended from all their Ecclesiastical Offices, Benefices,
Preferments, and ordered to appear personally at Rome before the Pope, to be
examined, ^re their Suspensions released, except only such as had given
satisfaction to the Church for this offense.

The turbulent Archbishop stirred up the Barons to a new Insurrection, against
the King, about their Liberties, who coming all to the King after Christmas,
Anno 1215. demanded the confirmation of their Charter, who craved time to
advise thereon till after Easter, the Archbishop and two more becoming his
Sureties, that then he should give satisfaction to all of them. The Barons
against the time, rather preparing themselves for a Battle, than Conference
with the King, assembled together at Stamford with a mighty Army, having
Archbishop Stephen their principal Abettor, who yet seemed to side with the
King, and was most assiduous about him. The Barons marching as far as Brackley,
the King sent the Archbishp to treat with them, who brought back a Schedule of
their claimed Liberties, with this Message, That if he presently confirmed them
not to them by his Charter, they would force him to it, by seizing all his
Castles and Provisions. Whereupon the King replied, Why do they not also demand
the Kingdom? swearing never to enslave himself to such a concession. The
Archbishop returning with this peremptory Answer, the Barons forthwith seized
Bedford-Castle, and were admitted into London, the Citizens siding with them.
Whereupon the King appointed to treat with them at Running-mead, whither the
Barons came with armed multitudes from all parts of the Realm, where after some
parley, the King granted them their desires, not only for their Liberties
specified in Magna Charta, and Charta Forrestae, which he then sealed, and by
his Writs commanded to be put in due execution, but also that twenty five Peers
elected by them (to whom all were sworn to obey) should force the King to
observe these Charters (if ever he receded from them) by seizing all his
Castles. Juratum est a part Regis; Quod Anglicana Ecclesia libera sit, etc. It
was sworn on the Kings part, that the Church of England is free, and all men of
our Kingdom, have and do hold all the foresaid Liberties, Rights and Customs,
well and peaceably, freely and quietly, fully and wholly to themselves and
their Heirs, etc. All the Barons and Commons of the Realm then and afterward
taking the same Oath. The Archbishop and Barons thrust into this new Charter
many Articles and Clauses, for their own, the Churches, and Pope's advantage,
not extant in the Charter of King Henry the First, as may be seen in Matthew
Paris his History.

This Charter (though it saved a great part of the King's Prerogative to
petition him and his Heirs for Licenses to elect, and for his Assent) gave a
great wound to his Ecclesiastical Supremacy; and made all Chapters, Covents,
Bishops, Monks, yea Popes and their Agents to slight his Regal Authority and
Licenses too, insomuch that he could prefer no person to any Bishopric,
Monastery, or elective Dignity, but whom the Electors pleased to make choice of.

King John withdrawing and obscuring himself from his Bishops and Barons in the
Isle of Wight, sent Messengers secretly to Rome, to complain and appeal to the
Pope against their Treasons, Rebellions, and the Charters forcibly extor^ed
from him, whilst under the Pope's protection; who thereupon vacated the
Charters.

Then the Archbishop to demonstrate his gratitude to King John, for the
Patronage and Royalty of the Bishopric of Rochester, newly conferred on him
and his Successors, delivered up Rochester Castle, with all the Ammunition
therein to the Barons. King John after three months siege took it, by force,
out of the Barons hands, who proceeding in their Rebellions against the King,
the Pope excommunicated them The Pope's Agents gave the Archbishop a personal
command to execute the Excommunication, which he delayed to do, whereupon they
suspended him.

King John complained to the Pope of the Barons obstinacy, and how the
Archbishop refused to Excommunicate them. Soon after there was a General
Council held at Rome, to which the Archbishop was summoned, and there suspended
from his Archbishopric upon the King's complaints against him. When this
suspension of the Archbishop was executed, the Pope commanded all his
Suffragans and Subjects to disobey him, till by his humiliation, and giving
sufficient caution for his future deportment, he should demerit it. A just
retaliation inflicted by God's providence on this Arch-enemy to King John.

The Archbishopric of York becoming void, the King, by his Letters Patents,
granted the Chapter of York a License to elect a new Archbishop, in the
presence of five Commissioners therein specially named, and with their
consents, to prevent the Election of Simon Langton, the Archbishop's Brother,
this being the first License after his forecited Charter to the Archbishop and
Bishops, for the freedom of Elections. After which the King sent his Patent of
Appeal to the Chapter of York, in general terms, not to Elect any Person for
their Archbishop, suspected to be an enemy to him, to avoid all
misconstructions of his former Charter for freedom of Elections. He also
secretly prohibited them to Elect Simon Langton by name, to whom he would never
give his Royal Assent.

This Chapter, notwithstanding the King's and Pope's Inhibition likewise, to
gratify Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, Elected Simon Langton, his Brother,
Archbishop of York. And the Canons of York appearing in the Council at Rome,
justified their Election, and presented Simon Langton to the Pope for their
Archbishop Elect, and pressed his Confirmation of him.

The Covent and Monks of Durham affronted King John in the Election of their
Bishop, whereupon he was enforced to make use of the Pope's and Legate's power,
and yet could not effect his ends. But the Pope obtains His, to dispose of all
Elections and Bishoprics at his pleasure.

The same year the King, with some struggling, procured R. de Marisco, to be
Bishop of Winchester. Yet we find not, in any of our Historians, that he was
ever Consecrated Bishop of Winchester, notwithstanding his Election, and the
King's approbation, and Letters to the Pope's Legate on his behalf; so that, he
miscarried in this design, as he did in that of Hugh Foliot to St. David's.
Neither did he succeed in his recommendation of three several Persons to the
Prior and Covent of Ramsey.

Then the Monks of Glastonbury prevailed, with Money, to have their Abbey
severed from the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, and to be governed by an Abbot
as formerly, parting with no less than four Manors, and the Patronage of six
Benefices to Joceline Bishop of Bath and Wells, and his Successors, by way of
composition, to obtain this disunion.

Then the Pope exempted King John's Chapels from Episcopal Excommunication and
Jurisdiction, without the Pope's special command^, which by the Laws of the
Realm were exempted from them long before.

The Barons and the Londoners slighted the Pope's Excommunication, and so does
Lewis of France, the Inibition of the Pope and his Legate, not to invade
England. In the mean time Lewis his Proctors at Rome pleaded, that King John
had no good Title to the Crown of England, showing Lewis his Title thereunto:
which put Pope Innocent to a great dilemma. But the Pope himself became King
John's Advocate, as well as Judge, not as King of England, but only because he
was his Vassal.

Then was England miserably wasted by Lewis and his Army in the East and South,
and by King John in the West and North, whereupon forty of the Barons became
sensible of their error in rejecting King John, and in calling in and Crowning
Lewis for their King; and being likewise informed by Viscount Melun on his
deathbed, upon his Salvation, That Lewis, and XVI. others of his chief Barons
and Earls, whereof himself was one, had taken an Oath, That if ever the Crown
of England were quietly settled on his Head, he would condemn to perpetual Exile
all the English who now adhered to him against King John, as Traitors to their
Lawful Sovereign, and would actually extirpate all their kindred: advising them
timely to prevent their miseries, and lock up his words under the Seal of
secrecy; thereupon addressed themselves with their Letters of submission to
King John, but before these Letters were delivered, or any Answer returned, the
King was poisoned by one Simon a Monk of Swinshed-Abbey in Lincolnshire, of
which poison he died. When he saw his Death approaching, he with penitent
Confession of his sins, and great Devotion, received the holy Eucharist, having
the Abbot of Croxton both for his Bodily and Ghostly Physician; and then not
only forgave all his Mortal Enemies, but also sent Command to Henry his Son to
do the like, to whom he caused all present to Swear Fealty, and sent Letters to
all his Officers abroad to assist him. After which he commended his Soul to
God, and his Body to be interred in the Church of Worcester: Where he was
afterward solemnly buried near the Body of Bishop Wolston.

In this year 1216. flourished Walter Mapez, Archdeacon of Oxford, a very Witty
Man, who in his Verses, painted forth in lively Colors the Life of the Pope,
the Affections and Rape of the Court of Rome, the Excess and Pride of the
Popish Prelates, as may be Read in his Book, Entitled, Diverse Poems of the
corrupt state of the Church. He composed a Treatise, Entitled, Apocalypsis
Pontificis Goliath, by which name he signified, that Antichrist was revealed in
the Pope. Also Praedicationem Goliath; and other Treatises against the Pope and
his Court, and of the days of the Court of Rome. Giraldus Cambrensis
mentions him in his Mirror of the Church, and says, That he was a Man in
that Age in great estimation.

His Poetical description of the City, Popes, and Court of Rome, I shall here
set down.

Roma caput mundi, sed nil caput mundum:
Quod pendet a Capite, totum est immundum.
Trahit enim vitium primum and secundum;
Et de fundo redolet, quod est juxta fundum.
Roma capit singulos, and res singulorum,
Romanorum Curia non est nisi forum:
Ibi sunt venalia jura Senatorum,
Et solvit contraria, copia nummorum.
In hoc consistorio si quis causam regat,
Suam vel alterius, hic inprimis legate:
Nisi det pecuniam, Roma totum negat,
Qui plus dat pecuniae, melius allegat.
Romani capitulum habent in decretis,
Vt potentes audiant manibus repletis.
Dabis, aut non dabitur, petunt quando petis,
Qua mensura seminas, eadem tu metis.
Munus and petitio currunt passu pari,
Opereris munere, si vis operari.
Tullium nec timeas, si velit causari,
Munus Eloquentia gaudet singulari.
Nummis in hac Curia non est qui n^n vacet.
Crux placet, Rotunditas placet, totum placet,
Et cum it a placeat, and Romany placet,
Vbi munus loquitur, and lex omnis tacet.
Cum ad Papam veneris, habe pro constanti:
Non est bonus P^up^ri, soli favet d^^i.
Et si munus praestitum non sit aliquanti,
Respondet hic tibi sic, non est mihi tanti.
Papa quaerit, Chartula quaerit, Bulla quaerit,
P^rta quaerit, Cardinal quaerit, Cursor quaerit:
Sed si dares omnibus, at uni deerit;
Totum mare salsum est, tota causa perit.
About that time Nigellus Vireker, a Learned Monk at Canterbury, wrote a Book,
De abusu rerum Ecclesiae, and sent it to William, Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of
England. In this Book he not only rebuked him, but all Teachers under the
Pope's Tyranny: because they committed the Cure of Souls unto Children,
Belly-gods, and despisers of the Sacred Word

Henry the third of that name, succeeded his Father King John, being about ten
years old, and was Crowned at Gloucester by a part of the Nobility and Clergy
(upon the persuasion of William Earl Mareshall, Earl of Pembrook, a Nobleman of
great Authority) the rest siding with the French Lewis: within little more than
a twelve Month he recovered the entire possession of his Kingdom.

In Whitsun-week the Pope's Legate encouraged the King's Army to fight the
French King's Forces at Lincoln: and after a sharp conflict they routed the
Barons and Lewis's Forces, slew and took many of them Prisoners, with the loss
only of three Men, and took the City of Lincoln, with all the Treasure and
baggage of the Enemy. The King's Ships watching the French Fleet at Sea,
transporting Soldiers and supplies unto Lewis, took Eustachius a Monk, their
Admiral, Prisoner, whose Head the King's Brother Richard cut off with his
Sword, despising the great sum of Money which he proffered for his Ransom. Soon
after which defeats by Land and Sea, both Parties had a conference at Stanes,
and came to an Agreement, September. 3. and Lewis shamefully departed this Realm.

But notwithstanding this Agreement with the Barons, yet the Pope's Legate
exempted all the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy, out of this Act of pacification,
for their contempt of the Pope's Authority, that he might dispose of their
Ecclesiastical promotions and Benefices to his Instruments, and put them to
excessive fines at the present, to fill the Pope's and his own Coffers.

This Legate Gualo did bear chief sway in the King's Council, and the (...).
Anno 1. ^^. ^. m. 21. and ^^^. 1. ^^. 3. m. 16. ^ntus.
King sealed some Letters Patents; Sigillis venerabilium Patrum, Domini
Gualonis Sancti Martini Presbyteri Cardinalis, Apostolicae sedis Legati, and
Domini Petri Wintoniensis Episcopi; and sent them abroad under their Seals, in
the first year of his Reign, because as yet he had no Seal.

The Canons of Carlisle contemning both the Pope's and his Legates Authority
and Censures, contumaciously celebrating Divine Service and Sacraments,
notwithstanding their Interdicts, adhering and Swearing Fealty to the King of
Scots, King Henrie's and the Pope's declared enemy; yea electing an interdicted
Clerk for their Bishop, against the King's and Legate's Wills, and dividing the
Revenues of the Bishopric among themselves.

The King's Council thereupon sent an Epistle to Pope Honorius the third, (who
succeeded Innocent the third that year) in the King's name, totally to remove
these Schismatical Canons, and place Prebends in their rooms, to augment the
Bishop's Revenues, which were small, and displace the intruded Bishop. Upon
which Letter the Pope ordered Gualo his Legate, by the King's Royal assent, to
constitute Hugh Abbot of Beaulieu, Bishop of Carlisle.

In the second year of King Henry III. the Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, and
other Bishops there, Usurping upon the King's Crown and Temporal Courts,
presumed to hold pleas, in their Courts Christian, of Lay fee, whereupon there
issuing Prohibitions, from the King's Court, to stay these Suits, they
proceeded contemptuously notwithstanding, upon which there issued out a Writ of
Attachment against them, to appear before the chief Justice of Ireland, to
answer the contempt.

In the third year of King Henry the third, the Bishopric of Leismore (united
formerly to the Bishopric of Waterford, by the Pope's Legate in Ireland, while
the Bishop was in England, at the Consecration of the Bishop of Carlisle)
Macrobius a Canon of Leismore, procuring an election from the rest of the
Canons, pretending the Sea to be then void, obtained the Legate's and King's
Royal assent to the Election and Restitution of the Temporalties; whereof the
Bishop of Waterford complaining to the King, the King nulled that election, and
commanded the Bishop to be put in possession of his Temporalties.

The Bishop of Ely going into France, after Lewis his return thither, reported
King Henry to be dead, and labored to stir up a new War against him: whereupon
the King wrote to the Pope to deprive him, and bestow his Bishopric (by
provision) upon some other: in which Letter the King acknowledges the Pope's
great favors and assistance to him during his Infancy, puts himself and his
Realms under the protection of his wings, and (by way of Complement) styles
them the Patrimony of the Church of Rome, to gain the Pope's readier protection
and assistance in his Suits, and Wars.

In the fourth year of his Reign, King Henry, taking notice of diverse
Usurpations upon the right of his Crown in Ireland, by Covents, Deanes, and
Chapters, electing Abbots and Bishops as they became void, and the chief
Justices approving them without his Privity, License, or Royal assent, he
issued out a Writ to his chief Justice of Ireland to reform and prevent this
dangerous Usurpation for the future.

This year the Earl of Albemarle refusing to deliver up, to the King, some of
his Castles and Lands committed to his custody, for which he was Excommunicated
by the Bishop of Norwich, and the Pope's Legate, thereupon the King issued out
a prohibition to all his Barons and Subjects in Lancashire, and five Counties
more, not to Aid him or his accomplices, but to avoid them as Excommunicated
Persons, till they had submitted to the King.

Ecclesiastical Censures were then commonly inflicted in that Age for Temporal
Offenses and Rebellions, to reduce Men to obedience to the King, as well as to
the Church and Pope. At last the Earl came to the King under the conduct of
Walter Archbishop of York, and by the mediation of Pandulphus the Legate, was
reconciled to him.

Anno Domini 1221. The King being under the Wardship of Peter Bishop of
Winchester, was, on Whitsunday, Crowned the second time at Winchester by
Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury.

Soon after which there being a difference concerning the Bishopric of Ely,
between Galfridus de Burgo, Archdeacon of Norwich, and Robert of York, the Pope
at last nulled both their Elections, and conferred the Bishopric upon John
Abbot of Fontain, who was Consecrated at Westminster.

The same year and day, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln was Canonized a The translation
and enshrining of Thomas Becket.
Saint, by the procurement of the Archbishop. He likewise caused his
Predecessor Thomas Becket, to be Translated, Enshrined, and Adored with great
Solemnity. Most of the English, many of the French Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Clergy, and of other Countries, were, by the Archbishop's
invitation, present a^ Thomas Becket's Translation.

The King by the Legat's, and his Council's advice, changed the Heathenish, and
long-continued Trials in criminal Causes by Fire and Water, into other ways of
Trial, and Punishments, by Imprisonment or abjuring the Realm

Benedict Bishop of Rochester, Richard Bishop of Sarum, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln,
William Bishop of Bath and Glastonbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, Henry Abbot
of Ramsey, and other Clergymen, were all made Justices Itinerants this year.

Henry Bishop of Landaff dying, thereupon Pandulphus, the Pope's Legate,
conferred it upon William Prior of Goldcliff.

William de Marisco Bishop of London, of his own accord resigning his
Bishopric, Eustachius de Fa^cumberge, then Treasurer of the Exchequer, was
chosen Bishop of London, whose Election was confirmed by the Legate Pandul^hus.
This Legate sent a Letter to Peter Bishop of Winton, and Hugh de Burgh, to
prohibit and suppress the Usury of the Jews, taken from Christians, and to stay
a Suite brought by a Jew against the Abbot and Covent of Westminster before the
Justices of the Jews, wherein he exacted usury from them, to the great scandal
of Christianity, and the King's dishonor, and to join some discreet Persons
with the Sheriff in each County for the collection of Amerciaments, to prevent
their Malice and Extortions.

About this time was taken an Impostor at Oxford having five wounds in his Body
and Members, sc. in his Side, Hands and Feet, who counterfeited himself to be
Christ, with two Women his followers, counterfeiting themselves to be the
Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ, and Mary Magdalen. They were immured
together with him without any Victuals, and starved to Death.

Then was a Council held at Oxford under Archbishop Stephen, where many
Constitutions were made, most of them being very useful to reform Extortions,
Abuses, Procurations in Visitations, the taking of any Fees for Letters of
Order, Funerals, or Administering any Sacrament, as also against Pluralities,
Non-residence, and other abuses of Clergymen.

Soon after this, the Archbishop and the Bishop of Lincoln, commanded, by their
Injunctions, That none should sell any victuals to the Jews, nor have any
communion with them; of which the Jews complaining, the King issued a Writ to
the Majors of Canterbury, Oxford, and Norwich, to countermand the Bishop's
Injunctions, that all should sell victuals and other necessaries to them, and
that they should imprison every one refusing to do it, till further order.

Then the Prior of St. Patrick of Dune in Ireland, sent a Petition to the King
to grant him and others some small Cell to reside in, in England, their Houses
in Ireland being frequently burnt in the Wars, for St. Patrick's, and other
Irish Saints sake, whose Relikes he then sent to the King for a present.

The King to satisfy the Archbishop, wrote a Letter to the Pope, to give way
for the return of his Brother Simon Langton into England, out of which he was
formerly banished (as well as Excommunicated, and deprived of all his
Ecclesiastical Benefices) for adhering to Lewis, and contemning the Pope's
Excommunications. But we find not, that the Pope consented to this request.

Our Kings by reason of their manifold Affairs in the Court of Rome, relating
to the Pope and other Foreign States, usually constituted, sometimes general,
otherwise special Proctors, by their Letters Patents, to implead and defend in
their Names and Rights, all matters there depending for or against them, of
which there are many different Forms in our Records.

King Henry standing in need of a subsidy from the Bishops and Clergy, Pope
Honorius thereupon sent his Bull to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
and Clergy, entreating them to grant him a competent subsidy, to be disposed of
by common consent only, for public benefit of the Realm, leaving the grant
free to the Bishops and Clergy to impose and proportion it.

This year ( s^. 1225.) the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Suffragans,
instead of granting the King a subsidy, or punishing leacherous Clearks, passed
severe Decrees against their Concubines only, principally intended against the
Wives of Clergy men, whom they styled Concubines in that Age.

The Bishop of Cork in Ireland, having obtained the King's Royal assent, at the
Pope's request, to be Archbishop of Cassel, taking a journey to Rome to procure
it, received his Writ for the restitution of his Temporalties after his return.

Then the Pope dispatched Otto his Legate into England, with Letters to the
King, for his own filthy lucre. The King assembling a Parliamentary Council of
his Nobles and Prelates, Otto read the Pope's Letters and Proposals, wherein
the detestable Avarice, Extortion, and Rapine of the Pope and Court of Rome
were clearly discovered, related by Matthew Paris.

Otto pursuing his Rapines in England, by exacting Procurations from Matthew.
Paris. Hist. Angl.
the Clergy, was by the Archbishop's means suddenly recalled thence, by the
Pope, to his great discontent: and the prosecuting the Pope's former proposals
committed to the Archbishop.

This year Pope Honorius the third, sent his Bull to Geoffry de Lizimaco the
King's sworn Vassal, absolutely subverting all Papal dispensations with
Subjects just Oaths to their Sovereignes. The Pope also sent prohibitory
Letters to the King of England, to stop his intended Military Voyage into
France, to recover his just Rights. Then the King paid ten thousand Marks,
being all the Arrears of the sum granted by King John to the Pope by his
Charter.

Richard de Marisco, Bishop of Durham, dying suddenly at Peterborough-Abbey,
^^dwin. Catal. of Bish. p. 515. 516.
as he was posting to London with a great troop of Lawyers, to prosecute his
Suits against the Monks of Durham; thereupon they bestowed this Epitaph upon
him.

Culmina qui cupi it is Lauds pompasque siti it is. Est sedata si Si me pensare
veli Qui populos regi Memores super omnia si Quod mors immi Non parcit honor
poti Vobis praeposi Similis fueram, been sci Quod sum vos eri Ad me currendo
veni

Upon his Death there grew a great difference between King Henry the third, and
the Monks of Druham, about the election of a Successor. There was an Appeal
about this Election, pending before the Archbishop of York, before whom the
King constituted his Proctor by Patent. But after two years expensive contests,
the Monks election of William Archdeacon of Worcester, a Man Learned and
honest, says Matthew Paris, was cancelled at Rome, Luke the King's Chaplain
put by; and Richard Bishop of Salisbury Elected Bishop by the Pope's favor;
the Pope only gaining by such contests.

The Emperor Frederick the third, being justly incensed with the publication of
diverse Libellous, and Scandalous Excommunications of Pope Gregory IX. against
him, in England, and all other Kingdoms and Churches, endeavored to vindicate
himself and his innocence against the Pope's calumnies, by dispatching Letters
into all parts, and particularly into England. These proceedings of the Pope
against the Emperor, so exasperated the Citizens of Rome, that they expelled
the Pope from the City, and chased him to Perusium.

Anno 1228. died Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, after whose death
there grew a new contest between the King and Monks of Canterbury, about the
Election of a new Archbishop. The Monks chose Walter de Hevesham, a Monk, whom
the King refused to allow of, resolving to make Richard, his Chancellor,
Archbishop. Walter posting to Rome to get Confirmation and Consecration from
the Pope, and the King's Proctors there excepting against him, pressing the
vacating of his Election, and making Richard Archbishop, with much importunity;
they could not prevail with the Pope or Cardinals to stop Walter's
Confirmation, or promote Richard, till they had promised, in the behalf of the
King, unto the Pope, the tenths of all things moveable, from both his Kingdoms
of England and Ireland. Whereupon the Pope and Cardinals forthwith vacated
Walter's Election, for his insufficiency, and made Richard Archbishop. So the
Pope got two years payment of his annual pension, granted by King John, and a
Tenth in promise.

Yet where the King gave his Royal assent to Bishops duly Elected by his
License, where there was no competition, the Pope interposed not.

This Archbishop Richard going to Rome, to complain against the King, that all
affairs of his Kingdom were disposed by the counsel of his chief Justice
Hubert, when he had there accomplished his designs against the King, was
presently taken away by sudden Death.

Then the King issued out a prohibition to the Monks of Canterbury, not to do
any thing prejudicial to the rights of his Crown, nor to elect any Person
Archbishop, without his special License, nor to send any Monks to Rome by the
Pope's command, to Elect an Archbishop there.

The Monks in pursuance of this Prohibition by the King's License, elected John
their Prior Archbishop, whom the King by his Letters Patents approved, desiring
the Pope to confirm him, and likewise made new Proctors in the Court of Rome
concerning this Election. And the King to promote his Affairs the better in the
Court of Rome, granted Annuities to some Cardinals to obtain that justice from
them by such Pensions, which he could not procure without them. But yet the
Pope vacated this second election as well as the first. Hereupon the Monks
proceed to a third election; but this third Person was also cashiered by the
Pope.

This See continued three years after Richard's death, and Edmond (...) being
nominated Archbishop by the Pope, who sent him a Pall, was consecrated by Roger
Bishop of London in April, Anno 1234. the King being present with thirteen
Bishops, in Christ-Church Canterbury.

In the year 1232. the Cavrsines first came into England, proving the Fuller
Church-Histor. lib. 3. ^
bane of the Land. These were Italians by birth, terming themselves the Pope's
Merchants, driving no other Trade than letting out of Money, great Banks
whereof they brought into England, differing little from the Jews, save that
they were more merciless to their Debtors. Now because the Pope's Legate was
altogether for ready Money, when any Tax by Levy, Commutation of Vows, Tenths,
Dispensations, etc. were due to the Pope, from Prelates, Convents, Priests, or
Lay-persons, these Cavrsines instantly furnished them with present Coin upon
their solemn Bonds and Obligations. These Cavrsines were generally hated for
their Extortions. Roger Black, that learned and pious Bishop of London, once
excommunicated these Cavrs^nes for their oppression: but they appealing to the
Pope, their good friend, forced him after much molestation to desist.

These Cavrsines were commonly known by the name of Lombards, from Lombardy,
the place of their nativity, in Italy. And although they deserted England on
the decaying of the Pope's power and profit therein; yet a double memorial
remains of them: one of their Habitation, in Lombard Street in London: the
other of their Employment; a Lombard unto this day signifies a Bank for Usury,
or Pawns, still continued in the Low Countries and elsewhere. See here the
Pope's hypocrisy, forbidding Usury, as a sin so detestable, under such heavy
penalties in his Canon Law, whilst his own Instruments were the most
unconscionable practisers thereof without any control.

Elias Rubeus, an Englishman, wrote a Book, wherein he said, That ^ 2. ^. 3. ^
4.
the Monks had converted Religion into superstition, making salvation to
consist in things, of themselves, vain and indifferent: that there was no kind
of men more blind in concupiscence, or infamous for uncleanness, than the
Popish Clergy, etc.

Certain years after, one Laurence, an Englishman, in a Sermon of his,
admonished the Church, That a great danger hung over her head by the Monks,
that they were seducers, and the Ministers of Antichrist.

Matthew Paris informs us, That Hubert de Burgo, Anno 1232. being chief Justice
of England, the King's principal faithful Counselor, the greatest opposer of
the Pope's Usurpations and Extortions, was, by the power of the Pope, and of
Peter Bishop of Winchester, suddenly removed from all his Offices, and
impeached of several Crimes, some of them amounting to high Treason. Hubert, to
prevent the rage of his Enemies, fled to the Church of Merton, and there took
Sanctuary. Whence the King commanded the Mayor of London by his Letters (the
Londoners being his mortal Enemies) to pull him out forcibly, and bring him to
him alive or dead. Which the Mayor and Citizens readily undertaking, and
marching thither with great Forces, the King, by the advice of the Earl of
Chester, suddenly countermanded them thence to their great discontent. After
which Godfry of Cranecumb (whom the King sent to apprehend him, in Essex, with
three hundred men armed) finding the Chapel doors shut, violently brake them
open, apprehended Hubert, and carried him thence, bound with cords, a prisoner
to the Tower of London.

This breach of Sanctuary being made known to Roger Bishop of London, (whose
Diocese it was) he tells the King, that if the Earl were not restored to the
Chapel, he would excommunicate all the Authors of that outrage. The Earl is
accordingly restored, but the Sheriffs of Essex and Hertford at the King's
command, with the Powers of their Countries, besiege the Chapel so long, that
at last the Earl was compelled to come forth, and render himself, bearing his
affliction patiently. Hubert is again imprisoned in the Tower. Nothing could
appease the King's Ire, but that Mass of Gold and other Riches, which the
Knights Templers had in their custody, upon trust, which Hubert willingly
yielded up. This mollified the King's mind toward him. Hereupon he had all such
Lands granted unto him, as either King John had given, or himself had
purchased. There undertook for him as Sureties, the Earls of Cornwall, and
Warren, Marshal and Ferrars; and himself Sp^^d's ^^^^or. in H. 3.
was committed to the Castle of Devizes, there to abide in free Prison under
the custody of four Knights, belonging each of them to one of these four Earls.
Afterward, though he was restored to the King's favor, yet upon new
accusations of his Enemies, he was condemned to give to the King Blanch Castle,
Grosmount in Wales, Skenefrith, and Hafield, and then also was deprived of
Title of Earl of Kent.

King Henry erected a special Church, House, and form of Government for the
Jews converted to the Christian Religion.

The Bishops meeting together at Gloucester, Anno 1234. the King, being jealous,
that they intended to consult of some other things, prejudicial to his Crown,
State and Dignity, sent a Writ of Prohibition to them, not to treat of any
thing of this nature. After this, the King and Bishops meeting at a Conference
at Westminster, the King charged some of the Bishops with a design to deprive
him of his Crown, which they denied: whereupon one of them, in a great rage,
excommunicated all those who raised such a report of them.

Then the King commanded all common Whores and Concubines of Priests, to be
imprisoned, and banished out of the University of Oxford, (...). 18. H. 3.
M^mb. 1^.
by his temporal Officers, unless they had Lands therein, and by Oath and other
security have good assurance for their chaste and honest demeanor for the
future, and not to resort to Clerks Lodgings.

If a Clerk, or Beneficed person were indebted to the King, or incurred his
just displeasure, the King commanded the Bishop of the Diocese to sequester all
his Ecclesiastical Benefices, till his debt was satisfied, his displeasure
remitted, and the sequestration discharged by special Writ.

The Pope was grown so proud in this Age by his Usurpations, that he would not
vouchsafe to hear and admit the King's Proctors and Agents, sent to Rome upon
his urgent Affairs, without most humble suits and supplications in his Letters
of credence and procurations.

The King made a Remonstrance to the Pope of the several injuries done to him
by the Earl of Britain, in seizing on his Castles, and revolting to the King of
France; desiring the Pope by his Ecclesiastical censures to compel him to
restore his Castles to him. The Pope instead of excommunicating this
treacherous Earl, sent for him to Rome, and made him General of the Crossadoes
by Sea and Land against the Grecians.

The Pope commanded Peter Bishop of Winchester to assist him both with his
purse and advice in his Military affairs against the Grecians and Romans.

The Pope, as he encroached upon the election and confirmation of the
Archbishops and Bishops of England, so did he likewise upon the election and
confirmation of Abbots, who must go to Rome to attend his pleasure for their
approbation and confirmation, as in the case of the Abbot of St. Albans does
appear. The Pope condescended to the Abbot's election, but upon this condition,
that he should take an express Oath of Fealty to the Pope and Church of Rome,
and his Successors, prescribed in his Bull, directed to the Bishops, which Oath
suddenly tendered to him, by way of surprise, he took publicly, before the
Covent, and all the Clergy and People, at his Consecration and Instalment,
related by Matthew. Paris. p. ^^^.
Matthew Paris, a Monk of this Monastery.

This new Oath of Allegiance to the Pope and See of Rome, being the highest
encroachment upon the King's Rights and Prerogative, making all who take it the
Pope's Subject, and Vassals, not the King's, was concealed both from the King
and Abbot, till the very nick of his Consecration and Benediction, for fear it
should be opposed and refused.

The Prior of the preaching Friars presuming to arrest and imprison some
persons in Yorkshire, pretended to be Heretical, when he had no legal power to
arrest or imprison such, the King thereupon issued a Mandate to the Sheriff of
Yorkshire, to arrest and imprison all Heretical persons, till his further
order therein,

Anno 1236. the Archbishop of Canterbury being sued by the Prior and Monks of
Canterbury, for certain Advousons of Churches, Possessions, Pryn. claus. 20. H.
3. m. 12. dorso.
Rents, and Services in the Ecclesiastical Court, by authority of the Pope's
Letters, despising the remedy of the King's Court, where they ought to sue for
them, thereupon the King issued forth his prohibition to the Archbishop,
prohibiting him, in his Faith and Allegiance to him, not to answer them in that
Court, it being prejudicial to his Crown and Dignity, etc.

The King by several Writs of Prohibition countermanded the Pope's own Bulls
and Delegates, as contrary to the Rights and Dignities of his Crown, and
prohibited their proceedings, which gave some check to his Usurpations of this
Kind.

The King's Clerks and Household Chaplains in those days wearing Pat. 21. H. 3.
m. 3. dorso. Long Hair and Peruwigs forbidden in the clergy.
long Hair and Peruwigs, thereupon the King to reform this abuse, issued out a
Writ to William de Perecat, authorizing and strictly commanding him to cut
their Hair, and pull off their yellow Peruwigs, under pain of being shaven and
polled himself.

The Monks and Converts of the Cistercian Order, contrary to their Vows and
Rules, becoming common Merchants, buying, and selling again, Wools and Skins,
to the prejudice of other Merchants, and scandal of their Profession, the King,
for redress thereof, issued out a Writ of Prohibition to all the Sheriffs of
England, to seize the Goods and Moneys of those Monks and Converts, to his use,
who should offend therein.

There being a great difference between the Bishop of Clochor in Ireland and
the Archbishop of Armagh, and their Tennants, concerning injuries and
grievances touching their Churches; the Archbishop of Armagh procuring the
King's Letters to his Chief Justice by misinformation, whilst he was
excommunicated; the King thereupon revoked his former Letters, and commanded
his Chief Justice in Ireland, to hear and determine the Controversies between
them.

Upon the death of Richard Bishop of Durham, the King upon the Petition of the
Prior and Convent, granted his License to elect a new Bishop. The Bishop of
Norwich dying this year, the Monks elected Simon, their Prior, for their
Bishop, whom the King disapproving, made a special Proctor against him before
the Archbishop to hinder his confirmation, and to appeal against him to the Sea
of Rome, if it were expedient, where he likewise constituted his Proctor.

Then the Pope upon the King's request, under a pretext to rectify some of
those abuses (against which there was an universal complaint) sent Ottobone,
his Legate, into England, who soon proclaimed himself a ravening Wolf, as well
as his Predecessors.

Then was a Council called by the Pope's Legate unto St. Paul's Church in
London, where most of the Prelates, Abbots and Priors assembled together. The
Canons that were made and promulged in this Council who so please, may peruse
at leisure in Matthew Paris, and in Johannes de Aton, his Constitutiones
legitimae Ecclesiae, totiusque Ecclesiae Anglica^ae, ab Legatis a latere
summorum Pontificum collectio, fol. 1. ad 121. with his Gloss upon them. The
first Canon was for the Dedication and Consecration of Churches, many Cathedral
as well as Parish-churches being then unconsecrated. The second and third
concerning Ecclesiastical Sacraments and Baptism. Others concerning the
covetousness of Priests, their hearing Confessions, the qualities of such as
were to be ordained; their Farmers and Vicars, Presentations to Churches; not
dividing one Church into more; the Residence of Bishops and Priests;
Pluralities; the Habit of Clerks, clandestine marriage of Priests, Priests
Concubines; their Sons succession in their Benefices; their Judges,
Procurations, undue, unjust Citations; Exactions by Procurations, Registers;
abuses by Proctors and Ecclesiastical Judges; and an Oath to be prescribed The
first use of Oaths in Ecclesiastical Courts in England.
to them, to prevent the like abuses for the future. In this Council this Legate
introduced the use of Oaths in Ecclesiastical Courts and Causes, never formerly
used in England, by color whereof other Oaths were introduced by the Popish
Prelates, against the Laws and Customs of the Realm, till the King, by his
Prohibition, restrained these Usurpations.

Then was a private Letter sent from Rome to the Pope's Legate in England,
advising him to moderation, to prevent a total rejection of the Pope and See of
Rome.

In the 22th year of Henry the Third, the Greek Churches renounced all
obedience to, and communion with, the Church of Rome: which made the Pope and
his Court fear the like Schism and revolt in England, occasioned by the Legat's
violent Extortions, and advancement of Strangers to Benefices; whereupon he
intended to recall him thence to prevent these ill consequences; but the Legate
loath to depart, prevailed with the King and others to solicit the Pope for his
continuance in England, upon pretense of public good.

This year there happening a difference between the King and Monks of Durham
about their Bishop elect, whom the King would not approve, he thereupon issued
his Letters Patents to the Archbishop of York, appointing his Proctors to
appeal to the Sea of Rome against this election, only for delay to preserve his
right.

After the death of Henry de Sandford, Bishop of Rochester, the Monks of
Rochester elected Richard Windeley, a learned Man, for their Bishop, who being
presented by the Monks to Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury for his confirmation,
he refused to admit him, Vnde Monachi Domini Papae presentiam appellarunt. Upon
this Appeal the Pope gave Judgment for the Monks against the Archbishop, and
condemned him in costs of suit, confirming their election in despite of the
Archbishop, with whom the Pope was very angry for opposing his intolerable
exactions in England, whereupon this Bishop Elect was consecrated at Canterbury
in St. Gregory's Church by the Archbishop, the Bishop of London and other
Bishops.

Then the Monks of Coventry chose Nicholas de Fernham for their Bishop, who
refused to accept thereof: whereupon at last they chose Simon de Pateshul, who
accepted it.

The Pope having excommunicated the Emperor Frederick, Otto, the Pope's Legate,
was very diligent to see the Pope's scandalous Excommunications and Bulls
against him published throughout all England.

In the twenty fourth year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, the Monks of
Cambridge having apprehended an Heretic (as he was called) the King thereupon
issued forth a Precept to the Sheriff of Cambridge, to bring this Heretic
before him, at Westminster, to be examined, and disposed of as he should
direct. Who he was, and what his Heresies were, Matthew Paris tells us, saying,
He was a man of an honest and severe life; and that he openly asserted, that
Pope Gregory was not the Head of the Church, but there was another Head of the
Church; that the Church was profaned, the Devil was let loose; the Pope was an
Heretic: that Gregory, who was called Pope, had defiled the Church, and the
world too. This and diverse other things of like nature, he spoke, before the
Pope's Legate, in the hearing of many.

Pope Gregory before his death, to carry on his Wars against the Emperor
Frederick, Anno 1240. intended by way of provision to confer all the Benefices
in England (especially of the Clergy) on the Sons of Romans, and other
Foreigners, upon condition to assist him against the Emperor, sending his
Bull to three Bishops, to confer no less than three hundred of the next
Benefices, that fell void within their Diocese, on these Aliens.

Anno 1241. Otto, the Pope's Legate, having long pillaged the Realm and Church
of England, was sent for the third time by the Pope. And the King to oblige the
Legate, as well to promote his Affairs at Rome, as in England, before his
departure hence, Knighted and conferred an Annual pension on his Nephew,
feasted the Legate publicly at Westminster, and placed him at the feast in his
own Royal Throne, to the great offense of his Nobles and Subjects.

Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury deceasing, the King commended Boniface (his
Queen's Uncle, a Forreigner, and every way unfit for such a trust) to the Monks
of Canterbury, to succeed him, whom they accordingly elected.

There being a great contest between the King, and the Prior and Monks of
Winchester, about the election of their Bishop, they electing first William de
Raley, Bishop of Norwich, whom the King and Pope opposing, thereupon they
Elected Ralph Nevil, whose election was likewise vacated. After which they
Elected the Bishop of Norwich again, whose election was suddenly made, and
quickly confirmed at Rome. Yet the King commanded the Major of Winchester to
forbid the new Bishop entrance Matthew. (...).
into the City; which he did; who thereupon Excommunicated him for his labor,
and interdicted the whole City. The King thereupon so persecuted the Monks,
that he imprisoned diverse of them, and forced the Bishop to fly the Realm, and
pass into France for a season.

Then there arose a new contest, between the Archbishop and Monks of
Canterbury, about Jurisdiction and Visitation, wherein they Excommunicated one
the other; and yet slighted these their mutual Anathemae's, as ridiculous
nullities.

The King being in France, sent his Writ to the Archbishop of York, then Custos
Regni, to confer Benefices that should fall void on such Clerks of His, who, to
their great danger and expense, continued with him, and incurred many various
casualties, in his services, beyond the Seas, commanding them all in general,
and one of them only in special, by Name, to be first provided for in this
kind.

Anno 1246. Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, upon a feigned pretext, that his
Church of Canterbury was involved in very great debts by his Predecessor, but
in truth by himself, to carry on Foreign Wars, and gratify the Pope,
procured, from Pope Innocent, a grant of the first years Fruits of all
Benefices, that should fall void within his Diocese for seven years space, till
he should raise out of them the sum of ten thousand Marks, besides two thousand
Marks yearly out of the Bishopric. This Grant of first fruits of Benefices to
Boniface, made way N. B.
for Popes appropriating first fruits, and Annats to themselves soon after.

About this time was Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury Canonized for a Saint by
the Pope, to gratify the King, and facilitate the imposing and levying of his
Papal exactions upon the Clergy and Realm.

The Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, to avoid the turbulent
visitation and exactions of Archbishop Boniface, made a Tax and Collection to
defray the expenses of their Appeals and oppositions against him in the Court
of Rome.

Some Abbots and Convents perceiving that Robert Grosthed, and other Bishops,
intended to vex and oppress them, by their new powers to visit them, derived
from the Pope, combined together to make a common purse to oppose and withstand
them by Appeals to the Pope; whom they hoped would back them for Money, as the
Bishops combibined together to withstand the Archbishop's Visitation in his
Province. Notwithstanding this combination, the Bishop of Lincoln, proceeded to
Visit both the Monasteries and Nunneries in his Diocese, with great severity
and Tyranny.

But although Robert Grosthed at first was a great stickler for the Pope, and
an oppressor of the Nobility and Laity of his Diocese, with his Visitations,
appeals to Rome, and Excommunications; yet afterward he opposed the Pope's
Provisions directed to him, for which the Pope suspended him from his
Bishopric: Whereupon he sent a notable Letter to Pope Innocent, rendering him
the reasons why he was not bound to obey his unjust Letters and Provisions, as
most contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, tending
to the ruin of Peoples Souls; and that no Bishop or other Person was bound to
obey any of the Pope's Mandates as Apostolical, but what were warranted by the
Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles. The Letter is to be seen at
large in Mr. Prynne's late History of Pope's Usurpations, etc. Tom. 2.

A little before his death, this Robert Grosthed called some of his Clergy to
him, and by strong reasons and arguments informed them, That the Pope was
Antichrist, because he was a destroyer of Souls, etc. Matthew Paris gives this
character of him; Migravit ab hujusmode mundi, quem nunquam dilexit, exilio,
sanctus Lincolniensis Episcopus, Robertus secundus, apud Bugedonam, manerium
suum, in nocte sancti Dionysii, Papae and Regis Redargutor manifestus,
Praelatorum correptor, Monarchorum corrector, Presbyterorum director;
Clericorum instructor, Scholarium sustentator; Populi praedicator;
Incontinentium persecutor; Scripturarum sedulus perscrutator diversarum;
Romanorum malleus and contemptor; in mensa refectionis corporalis dapsilis,
copiosus and civilis, hilaris and affabilis: in mensa vero spirituali devotus,
lacrymosus and contritus: in officio Pontificali sedulus, venerabilis, and
indefatigabilis. Vide Ranulph C^strens. Polychron. lib. 7. ca. 36. and H^ur. de
Knighton de eventib. Angliae. Lib. 2. ca. 36.


He died Anno 1253. Of which year Matthew Paris gives this Character, Transiit
igitur annus ille Papae Papalibus augurialis. The Pope being much incensed
against Grosthed, wrote a Letter to the King of England, to cause his bones to
be dug up, and to be cast out of the Church: whereupon the Bishop's ghost
appeared unto him that night, expostulated with him, pricked him in the side,
and haunted him till his death.

The Canons of Lincoln chose Henry of Lexinton to succeed him, who was then
Dean of the Church of Lincoln; the King approved of his Election, being
Consecrated soon after by Bishop Boniface beyond the Seas.

Then the King issued out a Writ to the Bishop of Chichester to publish
throughout his Diocese the privileges he had granted to all such, who should
cross themselves for the holy Land, being the same in terms with those, the
year before, sent to the Archbishop of York to publish, the Writ running in the
same form.

In the 38^h. year of King Henry the third, the Archbishops and Bishops having
agreed to grant the King a Disme toward the relief of the holy Land, by advice
of the King's Council in Parliament; appointed it to be collected by the
Bishops of Norwich and Chichester, and Abbot of Westminster, for which they
assigned them an annual stipend. In August following, the King issued forth
Pa^ents to the Archbishops, Bishop^, Abbots, etc. in Ireland, specially to
promote this Croysado and Disme in Ireland, and to assist those sent thither to
promote it, whereof one was the Pope's Subdeacon.

The King being in France, issued his precept to the Barons of the Exchequer,
to issue Moneys for the repair of the Church of Westminster, which he intended
to have consecrated before his voyage to the holy Land.

He issued Writs to enquire of the real values of the Manors, Lands, (...)'s
Hist. Tom. 2.
Rents, and Revennes of Religious persons (in nature of Doomsday Book) that he
might the better improve them when they fell into his hand by vacancies, or
deaths of Abbots and Priors, toward the debts he contracted by his foreign
Wars.

Matthew Paris tells us, of strange forgeries and devices set on foot ^.
by the Pope and his Agents, to oppress the Clergy of England, and involue them
in bonds and debts to the Pope and King (who served each others turns) and that
by the treachery of the Bishop of Hereford and and others to ingratiate
themselves with both. And the Bishop of Hereford and Rustand, the Pope's
Legate, oppressed the Clergy of England that year 1254. and great complaints
were made against them.

The King being unable by his absence to be personally present at the Feast of
St. Edward at Westminster, which he annually consecrated, constituted several
persons to solemnize this Feast, and make Offerings, Processions, and give
alms in his stead, and commanded the Parishoners of St. Margaret, and the
Londoners to go to Westminster in Procession with Wax Tapers, and other
formalities for the honor of this Saint and holy day.

The King in the 39th. year of his Reign sent a pious Writ to the Ci^tercians
and other Abbots in their general Assembly, to make a special devout Prayer
unto God for him, his Queen and Children.

The Bishop Elect of Winton having forcibly and unjustly by his power deprived
the Prior of Winton, and thrust another into his place without his due
Election, the deprived Prior thereupon Appealed to the Pope and Court of Rome,
where he expected to be restored with great confidence: but to show how much
more prevalent Money then was in that corrupt Court than Justice; this intruder
was confirmed, and he returned after great expense frustrate of his
expectation, having some Manors assigned him for his support during life, ou^
of which the Pope had an annual pension of 365. Marks to support (...) Table.

The Jews of Lincoln having crucified a Christian Child, to the great dishonor
and disgrace of Jesus Christ, the King appointed special Justices, diligently
to enquire of, and severely to punish, this grand offense, by his Patent and
Commission.

The King this year, fearing some designs against him from Rome, issued a Writ
to the Barons and Bailiffs of Dover, and to the Wardens of the Cinque Ports,
not to permit any Clerks to pass out of their respective Ports beyond the Seas,
unless he would first take an Oath, that if he went to the Court of Rome, he
should demand nor require nothing against the King's Crown and Dignity, nor the
Pope's grant or Ordinance concerning the Realm of Sicily. And the King, by his
Letters Patents, constituted two distinct Proctors in the Court of Rome,
concerning the affairs of the Kingdom of Sicily, and other occasions there to
be transacted.

The Pope had a greater share in the Disme than the King, who could dispose of
none of it, but by His and Rustand's consents. He likewise issued his Mandate
to the Sheriff of Kent, to provide a speedy passage at Dover for Rustand the
Pope's Agent, and to defray the charges of it, which should be allowed him.

The King understanding the Archbishop's and Bishops designs, intended to be
prosecuted in a Council of the Bishops of his Province, which Archbishop
Boniface had convocated, against his Crown, Dignity, Courts, Judges, etc.
Prohibited him and them to meet therein, under pain of forfeiting their
Temporalties. The Archbishop and Bishops, notwithstanding these Writs, met and
proceeded in their Convocation, in a very presumptuous manner, as those fifty
Articles then drawn up, and tendered to the King, and their Papal decrees in
pursuit of them, will most evidently demonstrate. They were tendered to the
King, by the Archbishops and Bishops, for which they resolved to contend to the
uttermost.

These Constitutions are collected and Printed in John de Aton, quoting
Lindewood, who cites and glosseth upon most of them under several Titles, in
the Margin of every one of them, where you may peruse them with his Canonical
gloss. These were made Anno Dom. 1261.

What Procurations the Archbishop of Messana (arrived in England this year, as
the Pope's Legate) exacted and extorted from the Bishops and Abbots with great
violence, and what injuries the Archbishop of Canterbury did to the Bishop of
Rochester, you may read in Matthew Paris.

The King and his Council resolving to banish the Poictovin Clergymen out of
the Nation, and not to imprison them in England, issued a Writ to the
Constables of the Castles of Winton and Dover, of the banishment and
transportation, of the Archdeacon of Winton, out of the Realm, and to see he
carried away no Moneys with him.

In the 42 year of this King, the Friars Minorites sent a Petition to King
Henry to confirm their intrusion, into St. Edmonds, by his second Charter, not
deeming the Pope's Bull they had got sufficient, which the Abbots and Monks
contemned and set at naught.

The King to satisfy the Pope's demands, and the easier to get in the Dismes
the Pope had granted him to gain Sicily, which the Archbishop, Bishops, and
Religious Persons in England refused to pay, assigned thirty thousand Marks
thereof to the Pope.

Godfry de Kimeton, Dean of York, was elected Archbishop of that See, and
forced to travel to Rome for his Confirmation.

Fulco Bishop of London died of the Plague, and Wengham then Chancellor of
England, notwithstanding his insufficiency, and want of learning and Knowledge,
in Divinity, procured Letters Patents from King Henry by advice of his Council
(in imitation of the Pope's Commendae's, then grown very common) to hold and
retain all his former Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices, whereof the King
was Patron, together with his Bishopric, for so long time as the Pope should
please to grant him a dispensation: whose dispensation alone would not bar the
King to present to those Dignities and Benefices, being all void in Law, by
making him a Bishop. He had the like Patent to retain his Benefices and The
first Pate^^ of a Commenda retinere, granted by the King to any Bishop elect.
Ecclesiastical preferments in Ireland. This is the first Patent of a Commenda
retinere, granted by the King to any Bishop Elect, says Mr. Prynne, being made
by the advice of his Lords and Judges, which makes it more considerable.

The King in the 44th year of his Reign issued a Writ to the Barons of Dover,
and other Ports, to search for, and apprehend all Italian Clerks and Laymen,
and all others that should bring any Bulls from Rome, prejudicial to him and
his Realm, and not to permit any to arrive with Horse and Arms in the Realm,
without his special License; and to arrest all such as should there Land, till
they received further order from him

The Bishop of St. David's and his Clerks complaining to the King how much the
privileges of their Churches, Monasteries, Houses, Goods, and Persons, were
violated in Wales, in an hostile manner, throughout his Diocese, issued out a
Writ and Prohibition to his Officers for their future protection and indemnity
against such injuries and oppressions.

Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, being an Alien, and forced to fly out of
the Kingdom by the Barons, was, upon a Treaty between the King and his Barons,
permitted to return into England upon certain conditions.

The King and the Barons having by common consent, entered into Articles of
Agreements under their hands, and referred themselves therein to the
determination of the French King, or the Pope's Legate, the King thereupon
constituted three Proctors, to conclude and consent on his behalf, to whatever
should be therein agreed, submitting himself to the Legate's Ecclesiastical
Censures and Excommunication to compel him to the performance thereof.

During the Wars between the King and his Barrons, diverse Vicars and Parsons
desirous to reside upon their Cures, so as they might be protected from
violence therein, the King thereupon granted protection^ to those who desired
them.

An Oxford Jew; having in contempt of Christ and Christian Religion, in a
solemn Procession there held by the University, cast down and broken the
Crucifix carried before them, and escaping; and the Jews not producing his Body
as the King ordered them; the King thereupon commanded the Sheriff of Oxford,
by several Writs to seize the Bodies and Goods of all the Jews in Oxford, till
they gave sufficient security, at their proper costs, to erect a beautiful
high Marble Cross, with the Images of Christ on the one side, and the Virgin
Mary with Christ in her Arms on the other side, curiously and decently guilt,
and the cause thereof engraven on it, in the place where the offense was
committed, calling the Major of the Town and Cofferers of the Jews to his
assistance; and till they made and delivered to the Proctors of the University
another portable Cross of Silver handsomely gilded, with a Spear as large as
that carried before the Archbishop to be carried before the Masters and
Scholars of the University in their future processions. And because diverse
Jews, to prevent it, had secretly convayed away their goods to others, to
enquire diligently after such goods and sell them, that the work might be
speedily effected before St. Edwards Feast.

The Money hereupon being levied of the Jews, to make these Crosses, and the
King being informed, that the Marble-cross could not be erected in the place
prescribed, without damage and prejudice to some Burgesses of Oxford, whereupon
they purposed to erect it just over against the Jews Synagogue there: The King
and his Council conceiving that place inconvenient, ordered it to be set up
within the place of Merton College, near the Church; and the other portable
Cross to be delivered to the Scholars thereof, to be kept in their House, and
carried in Processions of the University, as aforesaid.

Of the Dismes granted to the King by the Pope, the King had usually Parker.
Antiqu. Eccles. Britan. p. 194
the least share; the Pope; the Cardinals, and Legates, swallowing up the
greatest part of them, as the Learned Archbishop Matthew Parker has observed.

Boniface, the Military Archbishop of Canterbury, died beyond the Seas, Anno
Dom. 1271. when he had reaped the profits of that See, and pillaged that
Province twenty six years, six months, and sixteen days; most of which he
spent in Wars and negotiations beyond the Seas, and never Preached one Sermon
all that time, for ought we find. That year there was so great an inundation of
Rain at Canterbury, such Lightening and Tempest, as had not been seen nor heard
for a long time: The Thunder was dreadful, and continued a whole day and night,
and such an inundation of Water followed, that it overthrew Stones, Vines, and
Trees, Cattle were drowned, and much Corn spoiled; and the City was so
over-flown, that Men nor Horses could pass. After this Flood, there followed a
great Famine, and the Plague swept away many in the City and Country round
about.

Mr. Fox rela^es, That a little before King Henry's death, there fell out a
con^roversie between the Monks and Citizens of Norwich, about certain Tallages
and Libert^es that after much altercation and wrangling words, the furious rage
of the Citizens so much increased, that they set upon the Abbey and Priory, and
burned both the Church and Bishop's Palace. At the last King Henry calling for
certain of his Lords and Barons, sent them to Norwich, that they might punish,
and see Execution done on the chiefest Malefactors; some of them were condemned
and burnt; and some were drawn by the heels with Horses through the Streets of
the City, and so in much misery ended their lives. King Henry having in his
company the Bishop of Ro^hester, and the Earl of Gloucester, followed his
Justi^e Thomas Trivet to Norwich. The Bishop having Excommunicated all who
consented to this wickedness, and the Judge Executed the nocent; the King
condemned the Town in three thousand Marks of Silver, to be paid by a day,
toward the ^epairing of the Church so burnt, and also to pay one hundred pounds
in Silver, toward the repair of a Cup arising to twenty pounds in Gold. He
returning thence toward London, fell grievously sick at the Abbey of St.
Edmonds in Suffolk, where after he had in a Religious manner acknowledged his
sins, he rendered up the same to his Redeemer, when he had reigned fifty six
years and twenty days.

A Prince (writes Speed) whose devotion was greater than his discretion, as we
see, in permitting the depredation of himself, and his whole Kingdom, by Papal
overswayings.

After the Death and Funeral of King Henry (who was Buried at Westminster
Church, Founded and almost finished by him) Prince Edward his Son, being at
that time in the holy Land, where he obtained many notable Victories against
the Saracens: Who thereupon suborned an Assassinate to kill him, under pretext
of delivering a Message to him from the Sultan of Babylon, who stabbed him into
the Body with a poisoned Knife, to the hazard of his Life; his Nobles
notwithstanding his ^.
remote absence, were so Loyal as to Proclaim him King, and Swear Fealty and
Allegiance to him, as their Sovereign Lord. They sent out Writs whereby they
Proclaimed the King's peace: They first of them were directed to all the
Sheriffs of England, to Proclaim in their respective Coun^ies: the other to the
King's chief Justice of Ireland, to be there Proclaimed, who, with others, was
authorized likewise to receive the Fealty, as well of all the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Clergy, as Nobles and other Lay-subjects in Ireland, due unto
him as their King and Sovereign Lord.

In the third year of this King's Reign Walter de Merton, Bishop of Rochester
and Chancellor of England, finished the College of his own Name in Oxford.
This Walter de Merton, was one of the Guardians of the Realm in the King's
absence.

A Writ was issued to Lewellin Prince of Wales, requiring an Oath of Fealty
from him to King Edward, as his Sovereign Lord; and two Abbots thereby made
Commissioners to receive his Oath, who refused to appear, or give any answer to
them. The Abbots made a special return of their proceedings therein to the Lord
Chancellor.

The first thing this King and his Council did, was to make a public
Declaration and Protestation against Pope Clement the fifth, his late
Usurpation, who a little before King Henry his death, had, by his Papal
Provisions, conferred the Bishopric of Winton on John de Pontissera, and the
Archbishopric of Canterbury upon Robert Kilwardby, without the King's
precedent License, or Monks Election: rejecting William de Chilenden (duly
Elected by the Monks of Canterbury by King Henry's License) that so he might
Usurp the disposal of all other Bishoprics by these and other former like
Presidents.

After the death of Pope Clement the fourth, the Sea of Rome continuing void
for two years and ten months, by reason of the Cardinals discord about a
Successor: at last they Elected Theobald Archdeacon of Liege, Pope, who was
with King Edward the first, in the holy Land: of him these two Verses were made.

Papatum munus tenet Archidiaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
Prince Edward in his return from the holy Land, repaired to this new Pope's
Court, his late Chaplain, and fellow-souldier, who, at his request,
Excommunicated the Murderers of his kinsman Henry, Son and heir to the King of
Germany, at Viterbium, and disinherited some of them by his Imperious Decree,
till they should come personally to Rome, to purge themselves, or submit to his
absolute order in all things.

This new Pope Gregory, sent a special Nuncio into England, under pretext to
compel all Ecclesiasti^^^ Persons to pay two years Dismes of their
Temporalties, and Ecclesiastic^^ Livings, to the King and his Brother, but in
truth to himself, who ^^^^ted most of it to his own use: whereupon sundry of
the A^bots (...) of the Realm refused to pay the premised Disme,
notwithstanding the Pope's Nuncio's Excommunications denounced against them,
contemning his. Ecclesiastical Censures: whereupon the Nunci^ wrote to the
Chancellor to command the Sheriffs to assist the Collectors of it by their
fecular power, and levy it by force where there was need. Hereupon the
Chauncellor issued Writs to all the Sheriffs of England, and some others, to
assist the Collectors accordingly.

It seems the Bishop of Winton compounded, and paid a fine of five hundred
Marks for his two years Dismes to the Pope's Collector.

At the same time the King wanting Moneys, appointed special Collectors of the
Arrears due upon the Dismes granted to his Father, by the Pope, toward the
relief of the holy Land.

A new Archbishop of Dublin, being elected the second year of this King's
Reign, who resided with the Queen of Scots in Scotland, the ^ing, at ^er
special request, granted him this privilege, to make Attorneys to appear for
him in all his Courts, and to exempt him from all Amercements, for not
appearing personally in them.

Pope Gregory the tenth, usurping the Emperor's Sovereign authority, of
Summoning general Councils, sent forth general Letters through every Nation,
concerning the gathering together a Council, on May the first, at Lions. Whence
it was said of him.

Gregorius denus, Colligit omne genus. What Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Clergymen repaired to ^.
this Council by the King's special License, who constituted Attorneys and
Proxie^ for them in the King's Courts, to sue and be sued, during their
absence, may be seen in the Records mentioned by Mr. Prynne.

King Edward the first, himself sent four special Proctors to this General
Council, to propound, assent, or dissent unto in his Name and behalf, whatever
they or either of them should deem fit or expedient. A clear evidence, that He
and his Proxies had an affirmative and negative voice in General Councils.

Matthew Westminster renders us an account of the proceedings in this Council,
and of the Greek Emperors, Patriarcks, and Bishops acknowledgement of the
Supremacy of the Pope and Church of Rome, over all other Prelates and Churches,
as an Article of their Faith, which they never before assented to.

The Executors of John Maunsel Treasurer of York. having, by his last Will,
assigned to the Vicars of St. Peter's in York, a Message of His in York, to
maintain an Anniversary for his Soul, of which they were afterward
dispossessed by others; the King upon complaint thereof, issued a Writ of
Inquisition, to examine the truth thereof, and restore the said Message to the
Vicars, to maintain the Anniversary for the salvation of John Maunsel's soul.

The next year the King issued Commissions for the apprehending some vagrant
and Apostate Friars of the Order of St. Augustine, who had deseted their Houses
and Order, to the prejudice of their Souls, and scandal of their Order.

King Edward the first, made at Westminster at his first Parliament General,
Vide Cok^s 2. Instit. p. 156. 157.
after his Coronation, on Easter-Monday in the third year of his Reign, many
excellent useful Statutes, some of them relating to the Privileges and
Jurisdiction of the Clergy, controlling some Canons of the Pope, formerly used
to the obstruction of public Justice.

Soon after the Council of Lions, Pope Gregory the tenth, sent Reymund de
Nogeriis, his Chaplain, as his Nuncio into England, Wales, Scotland, and
Ireland, for certain affairs of the Church, especially to demand and receive
from the King eight years Arrears of the annual Tribute, and Peter Pence, then
due to the Church of Rome.

The Abbot and Covent of Feversham being greatly indebted to Merchants and
others (by their expenses at Rome, and Papal exactions) the King to preserve
Them and their House from ruin, took them, and all their Lands, Moneys, Goods,
into his Protection, and committed them to the management of certain persons
for discharge of their debts, and necessary support. The like Protections were
granted, in the same form, to the Abbot and Covents of Bordesley and Byndon the
same year; and to the Prior and Covent of Thornholm; but the custody of them,
their Lands and Goods, to other Persons.

The Chalices, Books, Ornaments, Goods and Lands of the Hermitage near
Cripple-gate, London, being usually imbezilled for want of good Government and
Regulation, the King being Patron thereof committed it to the care and
Government of the Lord Major of London, for the time being.

The Chancellor and University of Oxford, having at their proper costs founded
a Chappelry in the Church of St. Mary's, in the midst of the Town, to pray for
the safety of the King, his Queen, and Children, Ancestors, and all their
Benefactors; the King highly commending their Piety therein, and endeavoring
to promote it, wrote to all the Archbishops and Bishops of England and Ireland,
to grant some special Indulgences to all who should resort to this Chappelry to
hear Mass or Prayers.

The King upon the Petition of the Prior and Covent of Bath, and of the Dean
and Chapter of Wells, granted his License to them to elect a new Bishop, that
See being then void. Upon this License they Elected Robert Burnel. This Bishop
soon after his Conse^ration, to end the frequent Controversies between the
King, Abbots of Glastonbury, and Bishops of this See, by consent of the Dean
and Chapter of Wells, and of the Prior and Covent of Bath, exchanged the
Patronage of the Abbey of Glastonbury, and some other rights therein granted to
him by former Kings Patents, for the City of Bath. In pursuit and execution of
which exchange, the King issued two Patents to the Citizens of Bath, and
others, to make Livery and Seisin thereof to the Bishop.

The King gave License, upon the Petition of the Dean and Chapter of Hereford,
to Elect a new Bishop in the place of John Breton after his Decease: and
confirmed their Election of Thomas de Cantilupo, and restored Pat. 3. Edw. 1.
the Temporalties to him after his Confirmation by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, without the Pope's approbation or privity.

This King in the fourth year of his Reign, to prevent the ruin of the Abbey
of Redding, issued Patents of protection, and regulation of the expenses of it,
and of the Cell belonging to it, founded by his Ancestors, committing it is
Revenues to certain persons to defray the Debts thereof.

In the fifth year of his Reign he issued a Commission, to enquire of all
Christians, who used usury in London and elsewhere, and punish them according
to Law, by seizing their Goods, as a thing unbeseeming Christians and
Christianity.

About the same time Walter Bronescomb, Bishop of Exeter, and his Officials,
cited sundry of the King's Subjects, and Officers, into his Ecclesiastical
Courts for Debts and Chattels, that concerned not Matrimony or Testament, and
for Trespasses, Free-holds, and other things, of (...). Catal. of Bish. p. 320.
327.
which they had no legal jurisdiction, Excommunicating, and putting them to
pecuniary Redemptions, and grievous penalties, and withal exacted illegal
Oaths and obligations from them: the King upon the complaints of Edmond, Earl
of Cornwall, and his Officers, and of the whole County of Cornwall, of these
his exorbitances, issued a speedy Commission, in the sixth year of his Reign,
to some Judges, to enquire of, hear and determine these his Exorbitancies and
Usurpations, before whom he was Prosecuted at the King's Suite, to his damages
of ^^000 l. which the Bishop denying in some sort, appealed to the King, Pope,
and Court of Rome, from the King's Justices: for which his high affront to the
King's Crown and Dignity, he was adjudged undefended, ordered to satisfy the
King his ten thousand pound damages; and likewise to answer his contempt for
this his enormous Appeal to the Pope, in affront of the King's Crown and
Dignity, before the King and his Council.

In the nineth year of King Edward the first, John Peckham, Archbishop of
Canterbury, held a Council at Lambeth with his Suffragans, of which Thomas
Walsingham, and others, render us this account. Friar (...) Johan. Peckham,
Cantuariens^s (...) convocat Conci^ium apud Lambeth, in quo non Evangelii Regni
Dei praedicationem impos^^it, s^d Const^tuti^^s Othonis and Ottobonis quondam
Legatorum in Anglia innovans, jussit eas ab (...) s^^vari, etc. Thomas
Walsingham in Edw. 1.
John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, least he might seem to have done
nothing, calls a Council at Lambeth, in which he imposed not the Preaching of
the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, but innovating the Constitutions of Otto and
Ottobon, sometimes Legates in England, commanded them to be observed of all.
Moreover, he made sixteen Ecclesiastical Laws, which are contained among the
Provincial Constitutions.

The King suspecting the Archbishops and Bishops Loyalty, and proceedings in
this their Council, sent a Writ to them, strictly commanding them upon their
Oaths of Fealty they had all taken, to be faithful to him, and defend his Crown
and Royal Dignity in all things, to their Power; to observe this their Oath
therein with all diligence, and not to act, agitate, or assent to any thing
against him, or the ancient Rights of the Crown enjoyed by his Progenitors,
under pain of losing all their Temporalties.

But how far this Archbishop and his Suffragans were from obeying this Royal
Mandate, will appear by the Prologue to their Canons and Constitutions made
therein, wherein they highly extol Thomas Becket, as a most glorious Martyr,
for opposing the ancient Rights of the Crown, as inconsistent with the Churches
pretended Liberties, and revived and confirmed the Constitutions of Archbishop
Boniface and his Suffragans, (against which the King had solemnly Appealed to
the Pope, as prejudicial to the Rights, Privileges, Customs, Liberties of his
Crown) by several Canons made therein, and the Excommunications re-published in
it: but more especially by the Archbishop's insolent Epistle to the Vide (...).
in E^w. 1.
King, in answer to this his Royal Inhibition and Mandate sent unto them.

Archbishop Peckham (Magnus and robustus Antichristi satelles, as John Bale not
improperly styles him) in his Epistle to the King, justifies what they had
done: wherein he advances the Ecclesiastical and Papal Jurisdiction, Power,
Laws, Canons, far above the Regal, to which all Princes and Temporal Laws ought
to submit.

Sundry Canons and Converts of the Order of Sempingham, this year, turning
Apostates, and deserting their Houses in diverse Priories of that Order, to the
scandal of their Profession, the King upon complaint issued a Writ to apprehend
and punish them for it, and to deliver such of them who were then apprehended,
to those of that Order to be chastised.

The King to prevent the imbezilling of the Rents, Chalices, Books, Pat. (...).
1.
Vestments, Images, Relikes, Charters, and Bulls of the Hermitage by
Criple-gate, granted the custody thereof, in his Name, to the Constable of the
Tower for the time being.

This year the King recited and confirmed the ancient Charter of King John to
the Nuns of Ambresbury.

The King to advance Learning, and for the good of the Church, Priesthood, and
Commonwealth, gave his Royal assent for translating the Friars of the Hospital
of St. John in Cambridge, into a College of Scholars, after the pattern and
Rules of Merton College in Oxford.

The Archbishop this year, to supply, his occasions, entered into several
recognizances to the Bishops of Bath, and of Coventry and Litchfield, two
wealthy Prelates and great Usurers.

Pope Nicholas the third deceasing, Anno 1280. and Pope Martin the fourth
succeeding, he in the first year of his Papacy sent two Friars into England,
intending by his Agents, and Foreign Merchants, to export or return out of
England the six years Dismes therein collected, and retained for Aid of the
holy Land, granted in the general Council of Lions, and convert them to his own
or other uses; King Edward upon notice hereof, to reserve the Moneys for his
Brother's expedition to the holy Land, and supply the present exigences for
defense of the Kingdom, issued out a Writ to prohibit Merchants, or others,
under pain of loss of Life and Member, and all their Goods and Chattels, to
export or convay the said Dismes, or any part thereof, out of the Realm, and to
imprison all such who did the contrary, to the Pope's great disappointment.

In the tenth year of King Edward the first, Pope Martin sent a Bull to the
King, to require his Favor to, and Protection of the Monks of the Order of
Cluny, whose piety he highly extolled.

The King now and then during the vacancy of Bishoprics, disposed of some of
their Stocks to others.

The Bishopric of Durham becoming void by the death of Robert de Insula,
Anthony Beck being elected Bishop by the King's License, and Confirmed and
Consecrated Bishop thereof by Wickwane Archbishop of York, in St. Peter's
Church of York, the King, Queen, and most of the ^a^. 11. Ed. 1.
Nobles of England being present; the King issued out Writs for the restitution
of his Temporalties, and the stock thereon, which he bought of the King.

Richard Sw^^fled being elected and Confirmed Bishop of Hereford, by the King's
License and assent, he issued a Writ to restore his Temporalties.

John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, resolved to visit all his Provinces
more accurately, and punish offenders more severely than in former times, to
prevent all obstructions by Appeals to Rome. In this Visitation (says Mr.
Prynne) he domineered over his whole Province, and subjugated it to his
arbitrary Power, which none of his Predecessors had attempted, much less
effected, till then. Having visited England, (...). 2. p. ^43.
he passed by Chester into Wales, Anno 1284. to reform the state of the Church.
In this Visitation he made and published a Decree, what Ornaments of Churches
the Parishoners should provide and pay for, and what the Priests or Incumbents.

King Edward in the twelfth year of his Reign issued Warrants for the payment
of two years Arrears of 1000 Marks for England and Ireland, granted by King
John, then due and demanded by the Pope; as likewise for payment of seveal
arrears of pensions he had granted to Cardinals and others.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, having interdicted some of the Tenants belonging
to the Abbey of Fiscan in England, the Abbot thereupon Appealed to Rome against
him, and likewise to the King against this oppression, desiring his favor,
that no Process might issue out of his Court against them, and that he might
constitute Attorneys in this Case, since he could not come into England without
great damage to his house.

The King this year constituted a special Proctor for three years, by Patent,
to defend the Rights and Liberties of his free Chapels and Crown, against all
Papal and Episcopal invaders and opposers of them.

The King seizing the Advousons of several Churches in Wales, as forfeited by
their Patrons Rebellions against him, gave them to the Bishop of St. David's,
with power to appropriate them to his Church of St. David's, and Lekadeken
(Lancaden) and make, or annex them to Prebendaries there. Hereupon the Bishop
of St. David's, by his Charter, with consent and approbation of the King, and
his Dean and Chapter, made and erected a new Collegiate Church of Canons in Lan
Caden in Wales, constituted several Canons and Prebendaries therein, annexing
and appropriating the forecited Churches thereunto, the Patronages whereof were
granted him by the King, who set his Seal to the Bishop's Charter, and ratified
it with his own Charter, to make it valid in Law.

In the year 1285. a Parliament at Westminster laid down the limits, and fixed
the boundaries, betwixt the Spiritual and Temporal jurisdictions.

The King having totally subdued the Welsh, the Archbishopric of York
becoming void, by the death of William Wickwane Archbishop thereof, the King
applied the profits thereof during the vacancy, toward the building of Castles
in Wales, to secure it.

This year Stephen Bishop of Waterford, was made chief Justice of Ireland.

In the fifteenth year of this King, Henry de Branceston was elected and
confirmed Bishop of Sarum. The King granted and confirmed to the Bishop of
Bangor, and his Successors, all the Rights, Liberties, Possessions, and
Customs, they had formerly used and enjoyed.

In the sixteenth year of this King's Reign, Gilbert de Sancto Leofardo, was
elected, and confirmed Bishop of Chichester, by the King's Royal assent.

This year there was a great contest between the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Abbot of St. Augustines, about the carrying up his cross.

First, The Abbot opposed the bearing up his own Cross before him in the
Monastery of St. Augustines, even within his own Metropolis and See of
Canterbury, when specially sent for thither to dine with the King.

Secondly, Observe the Archbishop's pride and obstinacy, in refusing to
subscribe such a Letter, as the King directed, to reconcile this difference,
and preserve the Abbot's Privildges, or repair to the King, without his Cross
carried before him; together with his malice against the Abbot and Covent, for
not admitting him to carry up his Cross within their Monastery.

Bishop Godwin observes, That from the year 1284. the Sea of Salisbury Pat. 17.
(...).
had five Bishops within the space of five years, whereof William de Corner (as
he styles him) was the fourth. But Mr. William de Corner was his name, as the
King's Writ for restoring of his Temporalties, together with the Patent of the
King's Royal assent to his election, assure us.

The King having Conquered Wales, confirmed all the ancient Rights, Liberties,
Possessions, and Customs of the Church of Asaph, to the present Bishop and his
Successors, which they formerly used and enjoyed, and that he might freely make
his Testament.

Pope Nicholas the fourth, being settled in his Pontifical Chair, in the first
year of his Papacy, sent a Bull to King Edward the first, to demand five years
Arrears of the Annual pension of one thousand Marks, granted by King John. The
King hereupon, the better to promote his cousin Charles to the Realm of Sic^ly,
and expedite his own affairs in the Court of Rome, concerning a dispensation
for his Son, to Marry the heir of the Crown of Scotland, and other business
touching Gascoign and France (for which he had then sent special Ambassadors to
Rome, with Letters both to the Pope and Cardinals) issued a Writ for the
payment of these five years Arrears accordingly. Mr. Prynne says, That this
was the last payment made by King Edward the first, of this Annual pension.

The Pope upon receipt hereof, granted a dispensation to the King's Son, Prince
Edward, to Marry with the heir of the Crown of Scotland, thereby to unite these
two Crowns and Kingdoms, and prevent the long bloody Wars between them, though
within the prohibited degrees of Consanguinity.

King Edward, upon the receipt of this Dispensation, sent Letters and Proxies
to Ericus King of Norway, and likewise to the Guardians of the Realm of
Scotland, to consummate this Marriage, upon diverse Articles and agreements.

King Edward likewise to perfect the Marriage between his Son, Prince Edward,
and Margaret Queen of Scots, with the general approbation of the Keepers,
Nobles, and Natives of that Realm, granted and ratified to the Nobles and
People of Scotland diverse Articles, agreed on by special Commissioners sent on
both sides, and approved by him, by Letters, under his great Seal, which he
took an Oath to observe, under the penalty of forfeiting one hundred thousand
pounds to the Church of Rome, toward the holy Wars, and subjecting himself to
the Pope's Pat. 8. Edw. 1. m. 8.
Excommunication, and his Kingdom to an Interdict, in case of Violation, or
Nonperformance, as the Patent attesteth, enrolled both in French and Latin.

The King, after this, appointed the Bishop of Durham, to be this Queen
Margaret's, and his Son Prince Edward's, Lieutennant in Scotland, for the
preservation of the Peace and Government thereof. At which time he and his Son
likewise constituted Proctors to Treat with the King of Norway in his, and his
Son Edward's, Name, concerning his Sons Marriage, and Espousals, with his
Daughter Margaret Queen of Scotland. To facilitate this Marriage, the Bishop of
Durham, at the King's request, obliged himself to pay four hundred pounds by
the year, to certain persons in Norway; to discharge which annuity, the King
granted him several Manors amounting to a greater value.

But the sickness and death of this Queen, in her voyage toward Scotland and
England, frustrated this, much desired, Marriage between Prince Edward and her,
and raised new questions between the Competitors for the Crown.

Thomas Walsingham says, That about this time (the Pope requiring it) the
Churches of England were taxed according to their true value, to raise his
Dismes and exactions higher.

In the same year 1290. the King, our of his zeal to Christian Religion, The
Jews banished out of England by Act of Parliament.
banished all the Jews out of England, by a public Act in Parliament, and
Confiscated all their Houses and Lands, for their Infidelity, Blasphemy,
Crucifying of Children, in contempt of Christ Crucified, and clipping of his
Coin. In August they were commanded to depart the Land, with their Wives and
Children, between that time and the Feast of all Saints, with their moveable
Goods.

Their number was said to be sixteen thousand five hundred and eleven; they
were banished, never to return again into England.

There happening many contests between the Bishop of Lincoln, and the Masters and
Scholars of the University of Oxford, concerning the Presentation and
Confirmation of their Chancellor, whether he ought to come out of the
University in Person to the Bishop, or to be admitted by his Proxies: the King
by his Prerogative to advance Learning, and settle Peace between them, made a
friendly accord for the future.

Pope Nicholas preferring his own lucre, and favor of King Edward and his
Chaplains, before God's Service, or Peoples Souls, against sundry Canons,
Licensed twenty of the King's Clerks employed in his service, which he should
nominate to be Non-residents from their Ecclesiastical Benefices for ten years
space.

This year the King confirmed the grant of several Tithes, Churches, and
Advousons, formerly made by Robert de Candos to the Monastery of B^k and
Goldclive.

Then Peter de Divion, Abbot of Rewley, an Alien, born in France, and most
Abbots and Priors that were Aliens, took an Oath, and gave sufficient Pledges
for their Fidelity and true Allegiance to the King in that Age (especially in
time of War) and not to send the Goods of their Monasteries out of the Realm,
which they frequently did to the Kingdoms prejudice. The King issuing a Dedimus
potestatem to the Abbot of Them to take this Oath of Peter de Divion, the
Abbot endorsed this return thereon.

Ego Frater Johannes, Abbas de Them, virtute istius Mandati, recepi
Sacramentum Dom. Petri de Divione, Abbatis de Regali loco juxta Oxon. apud
Oxon. Dominica in festo Apostolorum Simonis and Judae: and etiam recepi
Manucaptores ipsius Domini Petri Abbatis de Regali loco, viz. Johannem de
Doclynton Majorem Villae Oxon. Johannem de Crokesford Juniorem, Ricardum Carry,
Johannem de Fallee, and Johannem le Peyntour, Burgensis dictae Villae Oxon. Qui
conjunctim and divisim manuceperunt dictum Dom. Petrum Abbatem de Regali loco,
quod idem Abbas been and fideliter erga dominum Regem se habebit; and omnia
alia in Brevi isto contenta perficiet and observabit.

The King granted two hundred pounds to the Pope's Chaplain in Scotland for his
expenses, pains, and labor therein taken in the service of Queen Margaret
deceased.

The same year William de Luda was elected and confirmed Bishop of Ely. This
year the King gave several sums of Money to buy Books and Ornaments for
Religious Houses, that were burnt in Gascoign and England.

The King converted the Profits of the Archbishopric of York (then void) to
the repairing and building the Castle of Carnarvan in Wales, after his Conquest
thereof.

Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, storieth, that John Parker de
Antiqu. Eccle. Anglic. f. 205. Anno 1290.
Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, this year, after the visitation and
subjugation of his whole Province, summoned a Council of his Clergy at Reding,
wherein he propounded the drawing of all causes concerning Advousons, merely
belonging to the King's Temporal, to their Ecclesiastical Courts, and to cut
off all Prohibitions to them from the King's Courts in personal Causes. Which
the King hearing of, expressly commanded them by special Messengers, to desist
from it, whereupon this Council was dissolved.

In the nineteenth year of King Edward the First, Queen Eleanor deceasing in
December, the King thereupon out of his devotion (according to the practice of
that blind Age) on January the fourth, issued a Writ to all the Religious
Houses and Monks of Cluny in England, to sing Masses and Prayers for her Soul,
to purge it from all the remaining spots of sin, and to certify him the number
of the Masses they would say for her, that proportionably he might thank them.

William Thorn says, that the Prior of Christ-church in Canterbury granted to
the King, in the Feast of the Translation of St. Edward, fifty Hymns, and two
thousand three hundred and fifty Masses for the Souls of his Progenitors, and
Queens of England, as a great extraordinary Liberality and Spiritual Alms. The
Abbot of Condam also sent a Letter to the King, to inform him, what Prayers,
Masses, and Anniversaries, He, and his Monastery, had ordered for the Queens
speedy translation to Heavenly Joys.

Anno 1292. died John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Pope Nicholas also
died, who sat four years, one month, and eighteen days, after whose death,
one delivered this Verse for an Epitaph.

Gloria, laus, speculum fratrum Nicolae Minorum,
Te vivente vigent, te moriente cadunt.
The Friar Minors pride, insolency, and avarice was great while they lived, who
were both of their Order. Archbishop Peckham's death this year, put a period to
the Contests between him, and the Abbot of St. Augustines.

King Edward in the twentieth year of his Reign, out of his blind devotion, and
love to his late deceased Consort, Queen Eleanor, instituted a solemn
Anniversary to be kept for her every year, issuing sums of Money, and granting
several Manors, and Lands to the Abbot and Covent of Westminster for that end,
wherein he prescribed how many Tapers, Claus. 20. Edw. 1.
and of what weight, they should find; how many and what Masses, Dirges,
Pater-nosters, Ave-Maries they should sing; and what Alms they should
distribute to the poor for her Soul; obliging the Abbot, Prior, and Monks by a
solemn Oath duly to perform the same, under pain of forfeiting all their Goods,
Chattels, and the Lands thus given to them for this end.

Anthony, Bishop of Durham, erecting the Parish-Churches of Chester, and
Langechester, which were very rich and large, into a Deanary and seven
Prebendaries, for the advancing of God's Service, and the good of the peoples
Souls, and obliging the Dean and Prebends by Oath, to personal Residence
thereon, and discharge of their duties and God's Service therein, according as
he had prescribed by his Ordinances and Charters. The King to promote God's
Service, and the good of his Peoples Souls, ratified the Bishop's Ordinances by
two Charters which recite them, warranting the division of great and rich
Parishes and Bishoprics into many; and obliging the Dean, Prebends, Ministers,
Chaplains thereof, by Oath, to personal Residence, and discharge of their
Duties, and Divine offices therein.

John Lythgraines, and Alice his Wife, erecting a Chapel and Chauntry to the
Virgin Mary in their Manor of Lasingby, consisting of one Master and six
Chaplains, to sing Mass for their Souls, and the Souls of their Ancestors, and
of King Edward and his Heirs, of the present Bishop of Durham and his
Successors, and of all faithful Souls deceased, prescribing an Oath to them of
perpetual Residence, and discharge of the particular Divine Services, and
trusts reposed in them, procured the King to ratify this his Charter, by his
Royal Charter enrolled in the (...). 20 Ed. ^^ 5.
Tower.

King Edward the First, in the twenty one year of his Reign, as Superior Lord
of Scotland in that Age, exercised a Sovereign Authority, in and over the King,
Clergy, and Kingdom of Scotland, in Causes and Inheritances which concerned the
Church, Clergy, or Religious Persons, as well as in Secular men's cases,
notwithstanding any Pretenses, or Appeals to Rome, where Justice was delayed,
or refused to them by the King of Scots, whereof there are sundry Presidents in
the Patent, and Plea-Rolls of Scotland in this and succeeding years.

Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, was no sooner consecrated at
Rome, but he procured a Bull from Pope Celestine the Fifth, by Vid. Godw.
Cata^^. ^. ^27.
his Papal provision to confer the Bishopric of Landaff (which had been void
for nine years space, and thereby devolved to the Pope by lapse, as he
pretended) on any Person he should think meet for that employment. Whereupon,
without the King's previous Authority, he conferred it, by way of provision,
upon John de Monmouth. Yet the King was not forward to restore the Temporalties
of the Archbishopric of Canterbury to this Archbishop, o^ of Landaff to John
de Monmouth, thus intruded into it against his Prerogative, but detained them
near two years after in his hands as vacant, receiving the profits, and
presenting to the Benefices belonging to them.

Upon the death of Robert Burnel, Bishop of Bath and Wells, the King's
Chancellor, William de Marchia (then Treasurer of England) was elected to
succeed him in that Bishopric.

This year John de Langton succeeded Robert Burnel in the Chancellors Office of
England.

The King in the twenty two year of his Reign, notwithstanding a Matthew. W^s^m.
Subsidy granted to him, wanting Moneys, searched all the Monasteries and
Churches throughout England, where any Moneys were deposited by Religious
persons or others, and forcibly carried it away to supply his occasions, by the
advice of his Treasurer William de Marchia, Bishop of Bath and Wells.

The same year the King granted Protections to diverse Abbots and Clergymen,
who aided him with their Contributions against the French. He also desired the
assistance of their devout Prayers unto God for a blessing upon him and his
Military Forces, in defense of his Inheritance against their armed Powers, as
appears by his Writs, under his Privy Seal, issued to his Bishops, and other
Religious persons.

John Duke of Brabant (the King's dear Friend and Kinsman) dying this year, the
King issued Writs to all his Bishops, and sundry Abbots and Priors, to make
Prayers, and chaunt Masses for him, according to the superstition of that Age.

Then the Roman See (through the Cardinals divisions) continuing void about
three years and three months after the decease of Pope Nicholas the Fourth, the
Cardinals at last elected Peter de Murone, an Hermit, and Monk of the Order of
St. Benedict, whom they named Celestine the Fifth. He, during his short
continuance in the Papacy, granted our King Edward the First a Disme for seven
years from all the Clergy of England, out of zeal to the relief of the Holy
Land. But his Wars with the French, Welch-men and Scots, wasted all these
Dismes. Pope Celestine in the month of September created twelve Cardinals,
among whom were two Hermits. But the Cardinals being weary of this precise,
reforming Pope, persuaded him to resign his Papacy, as being unfit to manage it
without the Churches ruin, and his own destruction. So after he had sat five
months and seven days, he resigned the Papacy. Then Benedict Cajetan, his
grand Counselor, was chosen Pope, and called by the name of Boniface. How
unsuitable, yea contradictory, his actions were to both his good names, he
immediately discovered, which occasioned this Distich to be made of, and
applied to him.

Audi, tace, lege, been dic, been fac Benedicte,
Aut haec perverte, male dic, male fac, Maledicte.
Celestine returned to his Cell, from whence Boniface drew him forth, and cast
him into a close Prison, where he abode till his death; whence it is reported,
that Celestine prophesied of him,

Ascendisti ut Vulpes, Regnabis ut Leo, Morieris ut Canis, Thou have ascended
into the Papacy like a Fox, thou shall reign like a Lion, and die like a Dog:
and so it came to pass.

This Pope Boniface by his Bull having appropriated the Church of Wermington to
the Abbey of Peterburgh, whereof they had the Patronage, the King authorized
them accordingly to appropriate it to them and their Successors, against him
and his Heirs, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain.

This Pope sent two Cardinal Legates a latere, first to the King of France, and
from him to the King of England, then engaged in Wars against each other, under
a specious pretext of mediating a Truce between England and France: but instead
thereof these Cardinals did twice prey upon the English and Irish Churches and
Clergy, and transported their Treasure into France, to enrich themselves and
the King's Enemies there.

Then King Edward sent Writs to his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and others,
to make Prayers, sing Masses, and do other Works of Piety for the Soul of his
Brother Edmond, and after that of Margaret Queen of France, according to the
superstition of that Age.

In the twenty fourth year of King Edward's Reign, there arose a great T^o.
Walsingh. Hist. Angl, ^. ^4.
Sedition and Combat between the Scholars and Townsmen in the University of
Oxford, wherein many were slain on both sides, and the Goods of the Scholars
plundered and carried away: upon complaint whereof to the King by the Scholars,
he sent his Justices thither to punish the Malefactors, and repair the Scholars
damages.

King Edward strenuously opposed Pope Boniface's Anti-monarchical Constitution,
against demanding or imposing Subsidies on the Clergy. Robert Winchelsey,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was stout in the prosecution of the Popes Bull which
he had procured for it: for which all his Tempoporalties were seized; and he
being forced to hide his head, and reduced to great extremities, was restored
to the King's favor by the earnest mediation of his Suffragan Bishops on his
behalf. Whereupon the King issued out Writs to restore his Temporalties, with
all his Oxen, Goods, and Chattels formerly seized, in the state now they were.

In the twenty fifth year of this King's Reign, Henry de Newark being elected
Archbishop of York, and his election approved by the King, his Proctors sent to
Rome, procured the Pope's confirmation of his election, together with a License
to be consecrated in his own Church at York by the Bishop of Durham. The King,
upon the receipt of the Pope's Bull, issued a Writ for the restitution of his
Temporalties.

Pope Boniface having confirmed the election of David Martyn to the Bishopric
of St. David's in Wales, the King upon notice given accepted thereof.

The Bishopric of Ely becoming void by the death of William Luda, the minor
part of the Chapter elected John their Prior, but the better John de Langten,
the King's Chancellor. The King confirmed the election of his Chancellor.

The King, by his Prerogative, having granted a License to the Bishop of Anno
Reg. 26.
Coventry and Lichfield, to hold the Hospital of St. Leonards in York in
Commenda with his Bishopric during his life, out of his free Gift, and special
Grace, confirmed it by his Patents, so as this Dispensation should no^ prove
prejudicial to him or his Heirs.

The Monks of Battel-Abbey, by ancient Charters, having the custody of the Abbey
and Lands, during the vacancy upon their Abbot's death, the King issued a Writ
to restore them to their custody.

Mr. Prynne observes, and relates diverse things of this year.

1. That the Contests between the Archbishop, Abbots and Monks of Prynne's
Hist. of Popes U^urpations, To^. 3.
Canterbury, about Exemptions, Privileges, and Jurisdictions, was a great
cause of advancing the Pope's usurped Jurisdiction over them both, and over the
Rights, Prerogative of the Crown and Church of England.

2. The Pope's Insolency in exempting the Abbots, and Monks of Canterbury, and
all their Lands, Hospitals, Churches, Impropriations, Priests, Tenants, from
all Archiepiscopal, and other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and subjecting them
solely to the Sea of Rome: as likewise in subjecting the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of London and Rochester, to the commands and censures
of the Abbots of Westminster, Waltham, and St. Edmond.

3. The pride of the Abbots in erecting Deanaries, Officials, Ecclesiastical
Consistories, and in prescribing Oaths of Canonical obedience upon the Priests
and Curats of their Churches belonging to their Monastery.

4. The strange injustice and contradiction of Popes Bulls, nulling, repealing
each other by Non obstantes, with all former Privileges granted by themselves,
and Contracts made or ratified by others through bribery and corruption.

CENT. XIV.
IN the beginning of this Century King Edward the First waged cruel Wars
against the Scots. Then Pope Boniface the Eighth sent his Letters Fox Acts and
Monum. lib. 1. p. 444, 445.
to the King, to quit his claim to Scotland* to cease his Wars, and release his
Prisoners of the Scotch Nation, as a people exempt, and properly belonging to
his own Chapel. He grounded his Title thereunto, because (it was said)
Scotland was first converted, by the Relics of S. Peter, to the unity of the
Christian Faith. Hereupon King Edward called a Council of his Lords at Lincoln,
where he returned a large Answer to the Pope's Letter, endeavoring by evident
Reasons, and ancient Precedents to prove his propriety in the Kingdom of
Scotland. This was seconded by another from the English Peerage, subscribed
with all their hands; declaring that the King ought by no means to answer in
judgment in any case, or should bring his Rights into doubt, and ought not to
send any Proctors or Messengers to the Pope, etc. The Pope foreseeing the
Verdict would go against him, wisely nonsuited himself.

Then Pope Boniface sent forth a Declaration in favor of the Archbishop,
Chron. (...), Thorn col. 1997. ad 2003.
and proceeded so violently against the Abbot, Monks, and their Adherents, by
Excommunications, Interdicts, etc. that he enforced them to submit, and sue
unto him for Absolution, and a friendly agreement between them.

After the death of Henry de Newark, Thomas Corbridge being elected Archbishop
of York, repaired to Rome for his Confirmation, where he was forced to resign
his right of Election into the Pope's hands, and to receive the Archbishopric
from him by way of provision, who thereupon not only confirmed, but consecrated
him Archbishop at Rome, and gave him his Pall; and the King restored his
Temporalties upon receipt of the Pope's Bull.

Thomas Stubs tells us of an high Contest that happened soon after betwixt the
King and him, about the Chapel of St. Sepulchers in York, for which the King
seized his Temporalties, and detained some of them till his death, for obeying
the Pope's Provision and Commands before the King's Writ, in re^using to admit
his Clerk to this Chapel, and to remove the Pope's Clerk, whom he had placed
therein by his Papal Provision. This Archbishop's Liberties in Beverley were
seized into the King's hands, Anno 29. of his Reign, for a contempt committed
by him in the King's presence.

The King's Daughter Mary, being a Nun, professed at Ambresbury, the King
granted her forty Oaks each year, ^wenty tun of Wines, and several Manors of
above the value of two hundred pounds a year, for her maintenance.

In the thirtieth year of t^^ Reign of King Edward, the French King Philip,
with all the Peers, Earls, Barons, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Clergy, University of Paris, and the Citie^ and Commonalty of France, did
Appeal, and Article against Pope^ Boniface the Eighth his Person, Crimes,
Interdicts, Excommunications, to the next General Council, in the ruff of his
Papal pride, as a most detestable (...) Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 450, 451.
Heretic, Simoniack, Adulterer, Sorcerer, and Monster of Impiety: and soon
after seized, imprisoned, and brought him to a shameful Tragical end. The
particular Articles are recorded by Mr. Fox. Of this Pope a certain Versifier
wrote thus.

Ingreditur Vulpes, Regnat Leo, sed Canis exit.
Re tandem vera, si sic fuit ecce chimera.
Alter vero sic.

Vulpes intravit, tanquam Leo Pontificavit;
Exiit utque Canis, de divite factus inanis.
Then was the Bishop of Ostia created Pope, and called Benedict the Eleventh:
Of whom one says,

A te nomen habe, been dic, been fac, Benedicte:
Aut rem perverte, maledic, malefac, Maledicte.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Winchelsey, having plotted Treason, with
some others of the Nobility, against the King, projecting to depose him, and
set up his Son Edward in his Room, lurked in a Covent at Canterbury, till
fourscore Monks were, by the King's Command, thrust out of their places, for
relieving him out of their Charity, and were not restored till the Archbishop
was banished the Kingdom.

In the year 1305. the King sent a Letter to the Pope for the Canonizing of
Thomas de Cantelupe, late Bishop of Hereford deceased, famous for sundry
Miracles (as was suggested) that so he and his Realm might enjoy the benefit of
his Intercession for them in Heaven, according to the Superstition of that
blind Age.

After the death of Pope Benedict, Pope Clement was no sooner elected, and
enthroned in France, but he began to exercise his new Rapines in England, by
complying with King Edward, in granting him a two years Disme from his Clergy
for his own use, though pretended for the aid of the Holy Land, that himself
might more easily exact the First Fruits of vacant Ecclesiastical Benefices to
fill his own Coffers, though out of his Dominions. Which occasioned these
Satirical Verses to be made of him and the King this year:

Ecclesiae navis titubat, Regni quia navis
Errat, Rex, Papa, facti sunt unica Capa.
Hoc faciunt do, des, Pilatus hic, Alter Herodes.
This is the first president of any Pope's reserving, or exacting Annates, When
First Fruits were first brough^ into England
or First Fruits of all Ecclesiastical Dignities, and Benefices throughout
England, extant in our Histories: which, though reserved but for two years by
this Pope at first, grew afterward into custom by degrees, both in England and
elsewhere.

As this Pope thus introduced these First Fruits into England, so he likewise
frequently sent abroad his Bulls of Provisions for Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Promotions therein for his Favorites and Clerks, which were then void, or
should afterward fall void by death, or otherwise.

Manifold were the Cautions inserted into Pope's Provisions for poor Clerks,
though Learned and Honest, which must be confined to an Archbishop's Living in
one Diocese of small value, and those not formerly granted to any others, and
they bound to personal residence thereon; when as others, that were rich, and
more able to pay great sums for them, were not clogged with so many Cautions.
Many Instruments, under the hands of public Notaries, these poor Clerks must
procure, with vast solicitation, travel, and expense, before they get the
least hopes of enjoying any small Prebend, or Benefice, by Popes Bulls, and
yet, in fine, not enjoy actual possession of them. Many of the Pope's
Provisions to every small, as well as great, Prebendary, nor Benefice, were
granted to several persons, in possession, or expectacy, by sundry Bulls at
once, contradicting, repealing each other by Non obstantes, engendring infinite
Suits, and Appeals in the Pope's Court, to the great vexation of the Patrons,
Provisors, and other Competitors, and neglect of the Peoples souls, during such
Contests concerning them.

The King granted the Tithes and Appropriations of all his new Assarts within
his Forest of Deane, which were extraparochial to the Bishop of Land^ff, to
augment his small Bishopric, and maintain a Chauntry in the Church of Newland.
The like Grant the King made this year of extraparochial Tithes, within the
Forest of Sherwood, to the Prior of Fell^y. The King likewise ordered the
Tithes of all his Mills in Holderness to be paid to the Parsons of all
Parish-churches, wherein they were, as the Nobles and others there used to pay
them.

Then the King (according to the manner of that Age) commanded Prayers and
Masses to be made for the Soul of Joan, late Queen of France, and for Blanch,
late Duchess of Austria, deceased.

In Scotland there arose a great Rebellion through the treachery of the
perjured Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Bishop of Glasgo, and Abbot of Schone,
who confederating with Robert Brus, Earl of Carrick, and others of the Scottish
Nobility, resolved to make and Crown Robert King of Scotland: who being opposed
therein by John Common his Cousin German, a man of great power in Scotland, he
set upon and murdered the said John Common in the Church of Dunfrees, and was
soon after ^^owned King by the premised Bishops and Abbot.

Pope Clement the Sixth, being informed of this murder of John Common by King
Robert, ordered the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Carlisie to excommunicate
him, and his Accomplices, with sound of Bells and Candles in all places of
England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and elsewhere (though without their Diocese)
and to Interdict all their Lands and Castles, till they should submit
themselves. This Bull was executed accordingly.

King Edward sent a great and strong Army into Scotland against Robert Brus.
And Aymery de Valence, Earl of Pembrook, put to flight King Robert, took his
Wife, his Brother Nigellus, and others: but himself escaped into the utmost
Isles of Scotland. The Earl of Athol was put to death at London, and Nigellus
at Barwick. The Bishops of St. Andrews, and Glasgo, and the Abbot of Scone,
were put in Iron chains, and kept close prisoners in Porches^^^-castle. King
Robert was brought to such misery, that he was sometime naked, and hungry,
without meat or drink, save only water and roots of Herbs, and his life always
in danger.

Robert Brus came forth at length out of the Scottish Islands, with such forces
as he had gotten together, taking the Castles of Carrick, Innerness, and many
other.

To put an end to all which trouble, King Edward appointed a great Daniel's
Chron. in Edw. 1
Host to attend him at Carlisle, three weeks after Midsummer-day. There he held
his last Parliament, wherein the State got many Ordinances to pass, for
reformation of the abuses of the Pope's Ministers, and his own former
exactions, wringing from the elect Archbishop of York, in one year, nine
thousand five hundred Marks. And Anthony, Bishop of Durham, to be made
Patriarch of Jerusalem, gave the Pope and his Cardinals mighty sums. The Pope
required the Fruits of one years revenue, of every Benefice that should fall
void in England, Wales, and Ireland, and the like of Abbeys, Priories, and
Monasteries.

King Edward in July enters Scotland with a fresh Army, and dies at Burgh upon
Sands, having reigned thirty four years, seven months, aged sixty eight.

This King had founded the Abbey of Val-royal, in Cheshire, for the
Cistercians, and by Will bequeathed thirty two thousand pounds to the Holy
Land. He was obedient, not servile to the Sea of Rome.

Edward the Second, his Son, called of Caeernarvan, succeeded in the Kingdom,
in July 1307. He soon caused Walter de Langton, Bishop of Chester, Treasurer of
England, and principal Executor of the last Will of the deceased King, to be
arrested by Sir John Felton, Constable of the Tower, and imprisoned in
Wallingford-castle, seizing upon all his Temporalties, till afterward, by
means of the Papal authority, he was restored, and they were seemingly
reconciled. The Bishop's crime was a good freedom which he used in the late
King's days, in gravely reproving this Prince for his misdemeanors, and
shortening his wast of coin by a frugal moderation. All the Bishop's Goods he
gave to Piers Gaveston, makes a new Treasurer of his own; removes most of his
Father's Officers, and all without the advice and consent of his Council.

The King was married to Isabel, Daughter of Philip the fair, King of France,
which was performed magnificently at Boleign. Piers Gaveston was the King's
great Favorite, who filled the Court with Buffoons, Parasites, Minstrels,
Stage Players, and all kind of dissolute persons.

King Edward the Second, by Letters to the Pope, requested, that Robert
Winchelsey might be restored to his Archbishopric, which was done accordingly;
though he returned too late to Crown the King, which solemnity was performed by
Henry Woodlock, Bishop of Winchester.

Shortly after his Coronation, all the Knights Templers throughout The Order of
the Knights Templars abolished throughout Christendom.
England were at once arrested, and committed to prison. In the General Council
of Vienna, this Order was utterly abolished through Christendom. The French
King caused fifty four, of that Order, together with their great Master, to be
burnt at Paris: And the Pope and Council annexed their possessions to the Order
of the Knights Hospitallers, called commonly Knights of the Rhodes. But in
England the Heirs of the Donors, and such as had endowed the Templars here with
Lands, entered upon those parts of the ancient Patrimonies, after the
dissolution of the Order, and detained them, until not long after they were by
Parliament wholly transferred unto the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem.

Guy, Earl of Warwick, surprised Gaveston, carried him to his Castle Guy, Earl
of Warwick surpriseth P^^rs Gaveston, and causes him to be beheaded.
of Warwick, where in a place called Blacklow (afterward Gaveshead) his head
was stricken off, at the commandment, and in the presence of the Earls of
Lancaster, Warwick, and Hereford.

A great Battle was fought, between the English and Scots; at Bannocksborough.
There perished in this Battle Gilbert Clare, Earl of Gloucester, Robert Lord
Clifford, the Lord Tiptoft, the Lord Marshal, the Lord Giles de Argenton, the
Lord Edmond de Maule, and seven hundred Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of
Quality; of common Soldiers ten thousand. There were taken prisoners, Humphry
Bohun, Earl of Hereford, Ralph de Monthelmere (who married Joan de Acres,
Countess Dowager of Oxford) with many others. The Earl of Hereford was
exchanged for King Robert's Wife, who was all this while detained in England.

This disaster was attended with Inundations, which brought forth Dearth;
Dearth Famine; Famine Pestilence, all which exceeded any that ever before had
been known.

Anno 1313. died Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, in whose room
Robert Cobbam was elected by the King and Church of Canterbury. But the Pope
did frustrate that election, and placed Walter Reynold, Bishop of Worcester.

About this time died Pope Clement, and John XXII. succeeded, who sent two
Legates from Rome, under pretense to make agreement between the King of England
and the Scots. They, for their charges, required of every Spiritual person four
pence in every Mark, but all in vain: for the Legates, as they were in the North
parts, about Derlington, with their whole Family and Train, were robbed and
spoiled of their Horses, Treasure, Apparel, and whatsoever else they had, and
so retired back again to Durham: thence they returned to London, where they
first excommunicated all those Robbers, Then for supply of those losses they
received, they exacted of the Clergy, to be given unto them eight pence in
every Mark. But the Clergy would only give them four pence in every Mark: So
they departed to the Pope's Court again. This King Edward refused to pay the
Peter Pence.

In the time of this King the College in Cambridge, called Michaelhouse, was
founded by Sir Henry Staunton Knight.

King Edward the Second builded two Houses in Oxford for good Letters, Orial
College, and St. Mary Hall.

England may dare all Christendom besides, to show so many eminent
School-Divines, bred within the compass of so few years. And a foreign Writer
says, Scholastica Theologia, ab Anglis, and in Anglia sumpsit exordium, fecit
incrementum, pervenit ad perfectionem.

Of these Schoolmen Alexander Hales leads the way, Master to Thomas Aquinas,
and Bonaventure. He was in the time of Henry the Third. At the command of Pope
Innocent the Fourth, he wrote the Body of all School Divinity in four Volumes.

Roger Bacon succeeded him, who lived in the time of King Edward the First; he
was excellently skilled in the Mathematics.

The next was Richard Middleton, entitled Doctor Fundatissimus.

Then flourished John Duns Scotus, in the time of Edward the Second: he was
Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford. He was called Duns by abbreviation for
Dunensis, that is, born at Down, an Episcopal See in Ireland.

In this King's Reign Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, founded and endowed
Exeter-colledge in Oxford

It is charged on this King Edward the Second, that he suffered the Pope to
encroach on the Dignity of the Crown. His Father had recovered some of his
Privileges from the Papal usurpation; which, since, his Son had lost back
again.

About that time an English Hermit preached at Paul's in London, That some
Sacraments that were then in use in the Church, were not of Christ's
Institution; therefore he was committed to prison.

King Edward went into Scotland with another great Army: King Robert thought so
great an Army could not long continue, therefore he retired into the
High-lands. King Edward wandered from place to place, till many died for hunger,
and the rest returning home half starved. James Douglas followed the English,
and slew many of them; and King Edward himself hardly escaped. Then a Peace was
concluded at Northampton, Anno 1327. That the Scots should abide in the same
estate, as in the days of King Alexander the Third; the English should rend^r
all subscriptions and tokens of bondage, and have no Land in Scotland, unless
they shall dwell in it.

In England the two Spencers ruled all things, till the Queen and her Son (who
politickly had got leave to go beyond the Seas) returned into England, with a
Navy and Army, landing in Suff^lk: She denounced open war against her Husband,
unless he would presently conform to her desires. The young Spencer was taken
with the King at the Abbey of Neath, and is hanged on a Gallows fifty foot high.
Many Persons of Quality were sent down to the Parliament, then sitting, to King
Edward, to Kenelworth-castle, to move him to resign the Crown, which at last he
sadly surrendered: and Prince Edward, his Son, is crowned King.

The late King is removed from Kenelworth unto Barkley-castle, where he was
barbarously butchered, being struck into the Postern of his Body with an hot
Spit, as it is commonly reported.

Among the Clergy, besides Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, whose head the
Londoners caused to be smitten off at the Standart in Cheapside; only John
Stratford, Bishop of Winchester, heartily adhered to him. Robert de Baldock,
though no Bishop, yet as a Priest, and Chancellor of England, may be ranked
with these, who attended the King, and was taken with him in Wales, Hence he
was brought up to London, and committed to Adam Tarlton, Bishop of Hereford.

Many of the Bishops ungratefully sided with the Queen against her Husband, and
their Sovereign. Walter Reynolds, Archbishop of Canterbury, led their Van,
preferred to that See at the King's great Importunity, and by the Pope's power
of Provision.

Henry Burwash, Bishop of Lincoln, lately restored to the favor of King
Edward: yet no sooner did the Queen appear, in the field, with an Army against
him, but this Bishop was the first who publicly repaired to her.

Adam Tarlton, Bishop of Hereford, was the grand contriyer of all mischief
against the King. Witness the Sermon preached by him at Oxford before the Queen
(then in hostile pursuit against her Husband) taking for his Text the words of
the Son of the sick Shunamite) my Head, my Head. Thence he urged, That a bad
King (the distempered Head of a State) is past cure. His writing was worse than
his preaching: for when such Agents, set to keep King Edward in Berkley-castle,
were (by secret order from Roger Mortimer) commanded to kill him, they by
Letters addressed themselves for advice to this Bishop (then not far off at
Hereford) craving his counsel what they should do in so difficult and dangerous
a matter. He returned unto them a ridling Answer unpointed, which carried in it
Life and Death, yea Life or Death, as variously construed.

Life and Death. To kill King Edward you need not to fear it is good. Life. To
kill King Edward you need not, to fear it is good, Death. To kill King Edward
you need not to fear, it is good.
The Body of King Edward, without any Funeral Pomp, was buried among the
Benedictines in their Abbey at Gloucester.

Edward of Windsor, called King Edward the Third. being scarce fifteen years of
age, took the beginning of his Reign on January the twentieth; his Throne was
established upon his Fathers ruin. Upon Candlemas-day Anno 132^.
he received the Order of Knighthood by the hands of the Earl of Lancaster,
while his deposed Father lived; and within five days after he was Crowned at
Westminster, by Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury.

Twelve men were appointed to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom during the
King's minority: the Archbishop's of Canterbury and York: the Bishops of
Winchester, Hereford, and Worcester; Thomas Brotherton Earl Marshal, Edmond
Earl of Kent, John Earl Warren, Thomas Lord Wake, Henry Lord Piercy, Oliver
Lord Ingham, and John Lord Ross: but the Queen, and Roger Lord Mortimer,
usurped this charge.

Adam Tarlton was accused of Treason in the beginning of the Reign of this
King, and arraigned by the King's Officers, when in the presence of the King he
thus boldly uttered himself. My Lord the King, with all due respect unto your
Majesty, I Adam, an humble Minister, and Member of the Church of God, and a
consecrated Bishop, though unworthy; neither can, nor ought to answer, unto so
hard Questions, without the connivance and consent of my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, my immediate Judge under the Pope, and without the consent of other
Bishops who are my Peers.



Three Archbishops were there present in the place, Canterbury, York, and
Dublin, by whose Intercession Tarlton escaped at that time. Not long after he
was arraigned again at the King's Bench: whereupon the foresaid Archbishops set
up their Crosses, and with ten Bishops more. attended with a numerous Train of
well-weaponed Servants, advanced to the place of Judicature. The King's
Officers frighted at the sight, fled away, leaving Bishop Tarlton the prisoner
alone at the Bar: whom the Archbishops took home into their own custody,
denouncing a Curse upon all such who should presume to lay violent hands upon
him.

The King offended hereat, caused a jury of Laymen to be impannelled, and to
enquire according to form of Law, into the Actions of the Bishop of Hereford.
This was the first time that ever Laymen passed their verdict upon a
Clergyman. These Jurors found the Bishop guilty, whereupon the King seized his
Temporalties, proscribed the the Bishop, and despoiled him of all his
movables. But afterward he was reconciled to the King, and by the Pope, made
Bishop of Winchester, where he died.

The former part of this King's Reign affords but little Church History, as
wholly taken up with his Achievements in France and Scotland, where his
success by Sea and Land was to admiration. He had both the Kings he fought
against, viz. John de Valois of France, and David King of Scotland, his
prisoners, at one time, taken by fair Fight in open Field.

There was granted to the King of England, for these Wars, a Fifteenth of the
Temporalty, a Twelfth of Cities and Boroughs, and a Tenth of the Clergy, in a
Parliament holden at London. And afterward in a Parliament at Northampton
there was granted him, a Tenth penny of Towns and Boroughs, a Fifteenth of
others, and a Tenth of the Clergy. All such Treasure as was committed to
Churches throughout England for the holy War, was taken out for the King's use
in this:

The next year after, all the Goods of three Orders of Monks, Lombards,
Cluniacks, and Cicestercians, are likewise seized into the King's hands, and
the like Subsidy as before, granted at Nottingham. Now the Cavrsines, or
Lombards, did not drive so full a trade as before: whereupon they betook
themselves to other Merchandise, and began to store England with Foreign
Commodities, but at unreasonable rates, whilst England it self had as yet but
little and bad Shipping, and those less employed.

About this time the Clergy were very bountiful in contributing to the King's
necessities, in proportion to their Benefices. Hereupon a Survay was exactly
taken of all their Glebeland, and the same (fairly Fuller. Church History.
engrossed in Parchment) was returned into the Exchequer, where it remains at
this day, and is the most useful Record for Clergymen (and also for
Impropriators as under their claim) to recover their right.

It was now complained of, as a grand grievance, that the Clergy engr^ssed all
places of Judicature in the Land. Nothing was left to Laymen, but either
Military commands, as General, Admiral, etc. or such Judges places, as
concerned only the very letter of the Common Law, and those also scarcely
reserved to the Students thereof. As for Ambassies into Foreign parts,
Noblemen were employed therein: when Expense, not Experience was required
thereunto, and Ceremony the substance of the Service: otherwise when any
difficulty in Civil Law, then Clergymen were ever entertained. The Lord
Chancellor was ever a Bishop, yea, that Court generally appeared as a Synod of
Divines, where the Clerks were Clerks as generally in Orders. The same was also
true of the Lord Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer.

Robert Eglesfield, Chaplain to Queen Philippa, Wi^e to King Edward the third,
founded a College on his own ground in Oxford, by the name of Queens College;
and diverse Queens have been nursing Mothers to this Foundation, as Queen
Philippa, Wife to King Edward the third; Queen Elizabeth, Wife to King Edward
the fourth; Queen Mary, Wife to King Charles; and our Virgin Queen Elizabeth.

In the mean time the Pope bestirred him in England, while the King was busied
about his Wars in France: so that before Livings were actually void, he
pre-provided Incumbents for them. But at last the King looking into it, this
Statute of Provision was made, whereby such forestalling of Livings to
Foreigners was forbidden.

Another cause of the King's displeasure with the Pope, was, that when the Pope
created twelve Cardinals at the request of the King of France, he denied to
make one at the desire of the King of England.

The Papal party (notwithstanding this Law of Provision) strugled for a time,
till the King's Power overswayed them. Indeed this grievance continued, all
this, and most of the next King's Reign, till the Statute of praemunire was
made: and afterward the Land was cleared from the encumbrance of such
provisions.

Three years after the Statute, against the Pope's Provisions, was made, the
King presented unto the Pope Thomas Hatlif, to be Bishop of Durham, one who was
the King's Secretary, but one void of all other Ep^scopal qualifications.
However the Pope confirmed him, and being demanded why he consented to the
preferment of so worthless a person, he answered, that rebus sic stantibus, if
the King of England (...) presented an Ass unto him, he would have confirmed
him in the Bishopric.

In this King's Reign were diverse Learned Men in England, John ^^conthorp, a
Man of a very low stature, of whom one says, Ingenio magnus, Corpore parvus
erat. Ba^^us in ejus rit^.


His wit was Tall, in Body small.



Coming to Rome, he was hissed at in a public Disputation, for the badness,
forsooth, of his Latin and pronunciation: but indeed, because he opposed the
Pope's power in dispensing with Marriages contrary to the Law of God. He wrote
on the Sentences, where he follows the truth in many things; especially he
refuteth the subtilties of John Scotus, as Baptist Mantuan has marked.

Iste tenebrosi damnat vestigia Scoti,
Et per sacra novis it documenta viis.
Hunc habeant quibus est sapientia grata, redundat
Istius in sacris fontibus omne sophos.
He wrote De dominio Christi, where he proves, that the highest Jo^. Bal^.
(...). 4. Sword^. 82.
Bishop in every Kingdom should be in subjection to Princes.

Richard Primate of Ireland (alias Armachanus) was his Disciple, and taught the
same Doctrine: he Translated the Bible into Irish. He discovered the hypocrisy
of Friars, in that though they professed poverty, yet they had stately Houses
like the Palaces of Princes, and more costly Churches than any Cathedral;
richer Ornaments than all the Princes, etc.

William Ockham an English Man sided with Lewis of Bavaria against the Pope,
maintaining the Temporal Power above the Spiritual. He was forced to fly to the
Emperor for his safety. He was a Disciple of John Scotus, but became Adversary
of his Doctrine. He was the Author of the Sect of Nominales. He was a follower
of Pope Nicholas the fourth, and therefore was Excommunicated by Pope John.
This Ockham was Luther's chief School-man, who had his Works at his finger's
end.

Robert Holcot was not the meanest among them, who died of the Plague at
Northampton, just as he was reading his Lectures on the seventh of
Ecclesiasticus.

About that time a Book was written in English, called, The complaint and
prayer of a Plough-man. The Author of it is said to have been Robert Langland,
a Priest. After a general complaint of the Iniquity of the time, the Author
wrote zealously against Auricular Confession, as contrary to Scripture, and
prosit of the public, and as a device of man: against the Simony of selling
Pardons: against the Pope as the Adversary of Christ. He complains of the
unmarried Priests committing wickedness, and by bad example provoking others;
of Images in Churches as Idolatry; of false Pastors, which feed upon their
flocks, and feed them not, nor suffer others to feed them. He wrote also
against Purgatory.

In this King's Reign were diverse Archbishops of Canterbury.

I will begin with Simon Mepham, made Archbishop in the first year of his Reign.

John Stratford was the second, Consecrated first Bishop of Winchester.

The third was Thomas Bradwardine, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, and
afterward Chancellor of London, and commonly called The profound Doctor. He
had many disputes with the Schoolmen against the errors of Pelagius, and
reduced all his Lectures into three Books, which he entitled, De causa Dei. He
was Confessor to King Edward the third. He died a few Months after his
Consecration.

Simon Islip was the fourth, he founded Canterbury College in Oxford. This
College is now swallowed up in Christ-Church.

Simon Langham is the fifth, much meriting by his Munificence to
Westminster-Abbey.

William Witlesee succeeded him, famous for freeing the University of Oxford
from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincoln, formerly the Diocesan thereof.

Simon Sudbury was the last Archbishop of Canterbury in this King's Reign.

In his Reign also flourished Nicholas Trivet, a black Friar, born in Norfolk,
who wrote two Histories, and a Book of Annals. Richard Stradley, born in the
Marches of Wales, a Monk and a Divine, who wrote diverse excellent Treatises of
the Scriptures. William Herbert, a Welchman, who wrote many good Treatises
in-Divinity. Thomas Wallis, a Sir Rich. ^aker's Chron.
Dominican Friar, and a writer of many excellent Books. Walter Burley, a Doctor
in Divinity, who wrote many choice Treatises in Natural and Moral Philosophy.
Roger, a Monk of Chester, and an Historiographer. John Burgh, a Monk, who wrote
an History, and also diverse Homilie^. Richard Aungervil, Bishop of Durham, and
Lord Chancellor of England. Richard Chichester, a Monk of Westminster, who
wrote a good Chronicle, from the year 449. to the year 1348. Matthew
Westminster, who wrote the Book, called, Flores Historiarum. Henry Knighton,
who wrote an History, entitled, De gestis Anglorum. John Mandevil Knight,
Doctor of Physic, a great Traveller; and Sir Geoffry Chaucer, the Homer of our
Nation.

About the fortieth year of his Reign, there was a Priest in England, called
William Wickham, who was great with King Edward, so that all things were done
by him, who was made Bishop of Winchester.

Toward the latter end of this King's Reign arose John Wickliff, a Learned
Divine of Oxford, who did great service to the Church in promoting Reformation,
and in opposing Papal power, for he wrote sharply against the Pope's authority,
the Church of Rome, and diverse of their Religious Orders. Certain Divines, and
Masters of the University entertained his Doctrine, viz. Robert Rigges,
Chancellor of the University, together with the two Proctors, and many others.
He not only Preached this Doctrine in Oxford, but also more publicly in
London: At the Court before the King himself, the Prince of Wales, his Son,
John Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Latimer, and others:
likewise the Lord Montacute, who defaced Images throughout all his
Jurisdiction; and John Earl of Sarum, who at the point of death refused the
Popish Sacrament, with diverse others of the chiefest Nobility, the Major of
London, with diverse other worthy Citizens, who many times disturbed the
Bishop's Officers, who were called for the suppressing of Wickliff.

This Man being much encouraged by the Duke of Lancaster, and Sir Henry Piercy,
Marshall, went from Church to Church Preaching his Opinions, and spreading his
Doctrine; whereupon he is cited to answer before the Archbishop, the Bishop of
London, and others, in St. Paul's London. At the day appointed, the Duke of
Lancaster, and the Lord Marshall, go to conduct him: there the Archbishop and
Bishop declared the Judgment of the Pope concerning Wickliff's Doctrine. The
Archbishop sent Wickliff's Condemnation to Robert Rigges, Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, to be divulged. Rigges appointed them to Preach that day,
whom he knew to be the most zealous followers of Wickliff; and among others he
ordered one Philip Rippinton, a Canon of Leicester, to Preach on Corpus-Christi
day, who concluded his Sermon with these words: For speculative Doctrine (says
he) such as is the Sacrament of the Altar, I will set a bar on my lips, while
God has otherwise instructed, or illuminated the hearts of the Cle^^y.

King Edward the third, died June 21. Anno 1377. in the sixty fifth year of his
Age, when he had Reigned fifty years four Months, and odd days, whose Body was
solemnly buried at Westminster. Richard the second, born at Bordeaux, the Son
of Edward, called, The black Prince, being but eleven years old, succeeded his
Grandfather in the Kingdom.

In the first year of his Reign Pope Gregory fendeth his Bull, by the hands of
one Ed nund Stafford, directed to the Chancellor and University of Oxford,
rebuking them sharply for suffering so long the Doctrine of John Wickliff to
take root.

At the same time also he directed Letters to Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to William Courtney, Bishop of London, with the Conclusions of
John Wickliff therein enclosed; commanding them to cause the said Wickliff to
be apprehended, and cast into prison, and that the King and the Nobles of
England should be admonished by them, not to give any credit to the said John
Wickliff, or to his Doctrine, in any wise.

Wickliff was summoned personally to appear before the Archbishop, and the rest
of the Bishops, at his Chapel at Lambeth. He came accordingly: when in comes a
Gentleman and Courtier, named Lewis Clifford, on the very day of examination,
commanding them not to proceed to any definitive sentence against the said
Wickliff. The Bishops affrighted, Linwood's provi^^. lib. ^. fol. 183.
proceeded no farther: only the Archbishop summoned a Synod at London, in
which he made four Constitutions, three whereof concerned Confession, grown now
much into disuse by Wickliff's Doctrine.

The Popish Bishops and Monks obtained of King Richard, that Wickliff should be
banished out of England. He therefore repairing into Bohemia, brought a great
Light to the Doctrine of the Waldenses, where John Husse, being but yet a young
man, had diverse Conferences with Comen. histor. Sclavon. Eccles.
him about diverse divine matters But at length he was recalled home again from
Exile; and the year before he died, he wrote a Letter to John Husse,
Encouraging him to be strong in the grace that was given to him, to fight as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ, both by word and work, Doctrine and
conversation, etc. John Husse hereby took heart very daringly, in the
University Church at Prague, to inveigh against the overflowing abominations of
the times; and not only at Prague, but throughout the whole Kingdom of
Bohe^^ia, did he Preach against them. The same year Jerome of Prague returning
out of England, and carrying Wickliff's Books with him, rooted up the [then]
prevailing error with the like boldness in the Schools, as John Husse did in
the Church.

Wickliff died the last of December 1387. and was buried in his Church of
Lutterworth in Leichestershire.

In the second year of the Reign of King Richard the second, a Parliament was
called at Westminster, where the Laity moved, That no Officer of the Holy
Church should take pecuniary sums, more or less, of the people, for correction
of sins; but only enjoin them Spiritual penance, which would be more pleasing
to God, and profitable to the Soul of the offonder. The Clergy stickled hereat,
for by this craft they got their gain. But here the Ex Ro^ul^s ^. T^^^i L^nd.
King interposed, That Prelates should proceed herein as formerly, according to
the Laws of the Holy Church, and not otherwise. Yea, diverse things passed in
Parliament in favor of the Clergy. As,

That all Prelates and Clerks shall from henceforth commence their Suits
against Purveyors and Buyers disturbing them (though not by way of crime) by
actions of Trespass, and recover treble damages.

Also, That any of the King's Ministers arresting people of the Holy Church, in
doing Divine Service, shall have imprisonment, and thereof be ransomed at the
King's will, and make gree to the parties so arrested.

In the Parliament held at Gloucester the same year, the Commons complained that
many Clergymen; under the notion of Sylva caedna, lopwood, took Tithes even of
Timber it self: requesting, that in such cases, Prohibition might be granted,
to stop the proceedings of Court Christian. But this took no effect. Then the
Archbishop of Canterbury inveighed as bit^erly, of the Franchises infringed of
the Abbey-Church of Westminster; wherein Robert de Hanley Esquire, with a
Servant of that Church, were both horribly slain therein, at the High Altar,
even when the Priest was singing high Mass, and pathetically desired reparation
for the same. Complaints were also made against the extortion of Bishops
Clerks; to which (as to other abuses) some general Reformation was promised.

In the next Parliament called at Westminster, one of the greatest grievances
of the Land was redressed, namely, Foreigners holding of Ecclesiastical
Benefices; for many Italians had the best livings in England by the Pope
collated on them: yea many great Cardinals resident at Rome, were possessed of
the best Prebends and Parsonages in the Land, who generally farmed out their
places to Proctors their own Countrymen; and by this means the wealth of the
Land leaked out into Foreign Countries, to the great impoverishing of this
Land. Therefore the King and Parliament now enacted. That no Aliens should
hereafter hold any such preferments, nor any send over unto them the Revenues
of such Benefices.

Then burst forth the dangerous rebellion of Wat Tyler, and Jack Sir Rich.
Baker's Chron. in Rich. 2.
Straw, with thousands of their wicked company, who burnt the Savoy, the Duke
of Lancaster's house: from the Savoy they went to the Temple, where they burnt
the Lawyers lodgings, with their Books and Writings: also the house of St.
John's, by Smithfield, they set on fire, which burned for seven days together.
Then came they to the Tower, where the King was lodged, where they entered, and
finding there Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Chancellor, and
Sir Robert Hales Lord Treasurer, they led them to the Tower Hill, and there in
most cruel manner struck off their Heads, as also of diverse others. Neither
spared they Sacred places, for, breaking into the Church of the Augustine
Friars, they drew forth thirteen Flemmings, and beheaded them in the open
Streets, as also seventeen others out of others Churches. They committed
outrages afterward at St. Albans, cancelling the ancient Charters of the
Abbots and Monks there. At the same time there were gathered together in
Suffolck to the number of fifty thousand, by the instigation of one John Wraw,
a lewd Priest. These destroyed the Houses of the Lawyers; they beheaded Sir
John Cavendish the Lord Chief Justice of England, and set his Head upon the
Pillory in St. Edmunds-bury. Then Henry Spencer, the valiant Bishop of Norwich,
gathered together a great number of Men Armed, with which he set upon the
Rebels, discomfited them, and took John Littester, and their other Chieftaines,
whom he caused all to be Executed: and by this means the Country was quieted,
Jack Straw, John Kirkby, Alane Tredder, and John Sterling, lost their Heads;
Wat Tyler was slain by William Walworth Lord Mayor of London. These had to
their Chaplain a wicked Priest, called Stowes Chro, in Rich. 2.
John Ball, who counseled them to destroy all the Nobility and Clergy, so that
there should be no Bishop in England, but one Archbishop, which should be
himself: and that there should not be above two Religious persons in one house;
and their possessions should be divided among the Laymen, for the which
Doctrine they held him as a Prophet. But he was executed at St. Albans.

William Wickham about this time finished his Beautiful College in Oxford,
called new College, which gives the Arms of Wickham, viz. two Cheverons
betwixt three Roses, each Cheveron alluding to two beams fastened together
(called couples in building) to speak his skill in Architecture. There is
maintained therein, a Warden, seventy Fellows, and Scholars, ten Chaplains,
three Clerks, one Organist, sixteen Choristers, besides Officers and Servants
of the Foundation, with other Students, being in all one hundred thirty five.

Within few years after the same Bishop finished the College at Winchester,
wherein he established one Warden, ten Fellows, two Schoolmasters, and seventy
Scholars, with Officers and Servants, which are all maintained at his charge:
out of which School he ordained should be chosen the best Scholars always to
supply the vacant places of the Fellows of this College.

Anno 1391. There was a Synod in England, which (because many were vexed for
causes which could not be known, at Rome) ordained, That the authority of the
Pope of Rome should stretch no farther than to the Ocean Sea; and that who so
Appealed to Rome, besides Excommunication, should be punished with loss of all
their goods, and with perpetual imprisonment.

Then came the Parliament wherein was Enacted the Statute, called the Statute
of Praemunire, which gave such a blow to the Church of Rome, The Statute of
Praemunire.
that it never recovered it self in this Land. The Statute of Mortmain put the
Pope into a sweat, but this put him into a Fever. That concerned him only in
the Abbeys, his darlings; this touched him in his person.

About this time died that faithful, Learned, and aged Servant of God, John de
Trevisa born at Crocadon in Cornwall, a Secular Priest, and Vicar of Berkley,
painful in Translating the Old and New Testament into English, with other great
Books.

The History of William Swinderby Priest in the Diocese of Lincoln, whereunto
be was forced by the Friars: the Process of John Tresnant, Bishop of Hereford
(into whose Diocese he removed) had against him, in the cause of Heretical
pravity, as the Papists call it: the Articles that were exhibited against him,
with his protestation and answer to the same. The Process against William
Swinderby, with his answer and declaration to certain Conclusions: the Bishop's
sentence against him, and his Appeal from the Bishop to the King with the
causes thereof, together with Swinderby's letter to the Parliament, may be read
at large in Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments of the Church.

Then were there Articles exhibited against Walter Bru^e, of the Diocese of
Hereford, a Layman and Learned, touching the cause of Heresy, as they called
it, unto the Bishop of Hereford; his examination and answer is also largely
described by Mr. Fox. (...). 2.


Then were there two Bulls sent out by Pope Boniface the ninth, one against the
Lollards; another to King Richard the second. Queen Anne Wife, to King Richard,
at the same time had the Gospels in English, with four Doctors upon the same.

King Richard wrote a notable Letter to the Pope, wherein he shows, That the
election of the Pope was not as before, comparing the Popes to the Soldiers
that crucified Christ. That Secular Princes are to bridle the outrages of the
Pope; and seems to Prophecy of the desolation of the Roman Pope.

King Richard was not long after deposed, and barbarously murdered at
Pomfret-castle. In the time of the conspiracy against King Richard, among all
the Bishops, only Thomas Merks Bishop of Carlisle was for him. For, when the
Lords in Parliament, not content to depose King Ri^hard, were devising more
mischief against him, up steps the foresaid Bishop, and thus expresses
himself. There is no man here worthy to pass his sentence on so great a King,
as to whom they have obeyed as their lawful Prince, full two and twenty years.
This is the part of Traitors, Cutthroats, and Thieves: None is so wicked; none
so vile, who though he be charged with a manifest crime, we should think to
condemn before we heard him. And you, do ye think it equal to pass sentence on
a King anointed and Crowned giving him no leave to defend himself? How unjust
is this? But let us consider the matter it self. I say, nay openly affirm, that
Henry Duke of Lancaster (whom you are pleased to call your King) has most
unjustly spoiled Richard (as well his Sovereign as ours) of his Kingdom.



More would he have spoken, but the Lord Marshal enjoined him silence: and the
other Bishops said, he discovered (having (...) a Monk) more Covent-devotion,
than Court-discretion, in dissenting from his Brethren: yet at that time no
punishment was imposed upon him. But the next year 1400. when some discontented
Lord's arose against King Henry the fourth, this Bishop was taken prisoner, and
judicially arraigned for high Treason, for which he was condemned, and sent to
St. Albans The Pope gave unto him another Bishopric in Samos, a Greek Island.
But before his translation he died.

CENT. XV.
KIng Henry the fourth, held a Parliament at Westminster, during which Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury had convocated a Synod, which was held in St.
Paul's Church, to whom the King sent the Earls of Northumberland, and
Westmorland, who declared to the Trussel in vit. Henrici. IV.
Clergy, That they were from the King to acquaint them, that the King resolved
to confirm all their Privileges unto them, and to join with them as they
should desire him, in the punishment of all Heretics, and opposites to their
Religion received: for which so doing he craved but their supplications to God
for him and his posterity, and prosperity of the Kingdom, which was by all
there present religiously promised.

In the second year of his Reign, King Henry ordained, That if any person
should obtain from the Bishop of Rome, any provision, to be exempt from
obedience Regular or Ordinary; or to have any Office perpetual in any House of
Religion, he should in our the pains of Praemunire. He also gave authority unto
Bishops and their Ordinaries, to imprison and fine all Subjects who refuse the
Oath ex Officio. In the same Parliament it was The Statute made, pro Haeretico
combur^^do.
ordained, That all Lollards [that is, those who professed the doctrine which
Wickliff had taught] should be apprehended; and if they should remain
obstinare, they should be delivered to the Bishop of the Diocese, and by him
unto the secular Magistrate to be burnt. This Act was the first in this Island
for burning in case of Religion, and began to be put in execution, Anno 1401.

The first on whom his cruel Law was hanselled, was William Sautre, formerly
Parish Priest of St. Margaret in the Town of Lyn, but since of St. Osith in the
City of London. It seems, he had formerly abjured those Arcticles (for which
he suffered death) before the Bishop of Norwich. Therefore he was first
adjudged to be degraded and deposed, which was in order, as follows.

From the Order of 1. Priest, by taking from him, 1. The Patin, Chalice, and
plucking the Chasule from his Back. 2. Deacon, 2. The New Testament and the
Stole. 3. Subdeacon, 3. The Alb and the Maniple. 4. Acolyte, 4. The
Candlestick, Taper, Vrceolum. 5. Exorcist, 5. The Book of Constitutions. 6.
Reader, 6. The Book of Church-Legends. 7. Sexton, 7. The Key of the Churchdoor
and Surplice.

How many steps are required to climb up to the top of Popish Priesthood! how
many trinkets must be had to complete a Priest? and here we behold them
solemnly taken asunder in Sautres degradation. And now he no longer Priest, but
plain Layman, with the Tonsure on his crown rased away, was delivered to the
Secular Power, with this complement worth the noting. Beseeching the Secular
Court, that they would receive favorably the said William unto them thus
recommitted. But see their hypocrisy; The Popish Bishops at the same time (for
all their fair language) called upon the King to bring him to speedy execution.

Hereupon the King in Parliament issued out his Warrant to the Mayor and
Sheriff of London, that the said William, being in their custody, should be
brought forth into some public place within the liberty of the City, and there
really to be burnt to the great horror of his offense, and manifest example of
other Christians; which was done accordingly.

After this, Richard Scroop, Archbishop of York, with the Lord Moubray,
Marshall of England, gathered together a great company against King Henry, in
the North Country, to whom was adjoined the aid of the Lord Bardolf, and Henry
Piercy, Earl of Northumberland. They drew up ten Articles against the said
King, and fastened them upon the doors of Churches and Monasteries, to be read
of all men in English. The Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf were
slain in the field, fighting against the Kings part, Anno 1408. But the
Archbishop of York, and the Lord Moubray were taken and beheaded.

Anno 1409. Thomas Badby, a Tailor, was by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury, condemned for the Testimony of the truth. He was brought into
Smithfield, and there being put into an empty barrel, was bound with Iron bars
fast to a stake, and dry wood put to him, and so burned.

Some Professors of the Gospel at that time did shrink back, as John Purvey,
who wrote many Books in defense of Wickliff's Doctrine, and among others a
Commentary upon the Apocalypse, wherein he declares the Pope of Rome to be
that great Antichrist. He recanted at Paul's Cross. John Edwards Priest revoked
at the Green-yard at Norwich. Richard Herbert, and Emmot Willy of London, and
John Beck also at London. John Seynons of Lincolnshire revoked at Canterbury.

Then was William Thorp examined before the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
rehearsed his belief before the Archbishop; afterward he was committed to
close Prison, where he was so straightly kept, that either he was secretly made
away, or else there he died by sickness. John Ashton also, another follower of
Wickliff, who, for the same Doctrine of the Sacrament held by Thorp, was
committed to close Prison, after he was condemned, where he continued till his
death.

Philip Rippington was made Bishop of Lincoln, who of a Professor, became a
cruel Persecutor of the Gospel.

Synods of the Clergy were very frequent in this King's Reign; but most of
these were but Ecclesiastical meeting^ for secular Money.

Sir John Tiptoff (made afterward Earl of Worcester) put up a Petition to the
Parliament touching Lollards, which so wrought on the Lords, that they joined
in a Petition to the King, that they and every of them be taken, and put in
Prison, without being delivered in Bail, or otherwise, except by good and
sufficient mainprise, to be taken before the Chancellor of England, etc.

The Popish Clergy had gained Prince Henry (set as a Transcendent by himself in
the Petition) to their Side, entering his youth against the poor Wickliffists:
and this earnest engaged him to the greater Antipathy against them, when
possessed of the Crown.

A Petition was put up in the Parliament, That the King might enjoy half of the
profits of any Parson's Benefice, not resident thereon: whereunto the King
answered, That Ordinaries should do their duties therein, or else he would
provide further remedy, or stay their pluralities.

The ninth year of the King's Reign, the Commons desired of the King, That none
presented be received by any Ordinary, to have any Benefice, of any Incumbent,
for any cause of privation, or inhabitation, whereof the Process is not founded
upon Citation made within the Realm: and also that such Incumbents may remain
in all their Benefices, until it be proved by due Inquest in the Court of the
King, that the Citations whereupon such privations, and inhabitations are
granted, were made within the Realm: and if such Ordinaries do, or have
presented, or others do present to the contrary, that then they and their
Procurators, etc. incur the pain contained in the Statute made against
Provisoe's, Anno 13. Ric. 2.

Also that no Pope's Collector should from thence-forth levy any Money within
the Realm, for first Fruits of any Ecclesiastical dignity, under pain of
incurring the Statute of Provisoe's.

The Commons in the same Parliament put up a Bill to the King to take the
Temporalties out of the Hands of the Spiritualty, which amounted to three
hundred and two and twenty thousand Marks by the year.

Then came the Cardinal of Burges into England, being sent from the College of
Cardinals, to inform the King and Clergy of the unconstant dealing of Pope
Gregory.

After the Feast of the Epiphany, the Archbishop of Canterbury Convocated Anno
1409. Stow^s Chro. in Henry 4.
an Assembly of the Clergy at London, to choose meet persons to go to the
General Council holden at Pisa: whereunto were chosen Robert Holam, Bishop of
Salisbury; Henry Chisely, Bishop of St. David's, and Thomas Chillindon, Prior of
Christ-Church in Canterbury: and the King had sent before, Sir John Colvil
Knight, and Nicholas Rixton Clerk, with letters to be given to them. A letter
also was sent unto the Pope, wherein the King charge him with Perjury.

At Pisa there assembled a great number of Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and
Mitred Prelates, who elected a new Pope, viz. Alexander the fifth (a man
trained up at Oxford) rejecting the two other Schismatical Popes, Gregory and
Benedict.

Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, came with a Pompous train to Oxford.
His intent was Juridically to visit the University, expecting to be solemnly
met, and sumptuously entertained according to his place and dignity. But
Richard Courtney, the Chancellor of Oxford, with Benedict Brent, and John
Birch, the two Proctors, denied the Archbishop entrance into the University
under the notion of a Visitor. The Archbishop angry at the affront, fairly
retreated, re infecta to London.

King Henry at the joint instances of both parties, summoned them to Lambeth,
to hear and determine the Controversy: where the King pronounced sentence on
the Archbishop's side. Afterward the King confirmed the same, with the consent
of the Lords and Commons in Parliament; as in the Tower-Rolls does plainly
appear.

The King though courteous, was not servile to the Pope, and the Clergy
terrified with the wavering doubtfulness of the King, granted him a tenth every
year for diverse years.

King Henry the fourth, is not observed (as all English Kings before Fuller.
Church Hist. of Brit.
and after him) to have erected and endowed any one entire house of Religion,
as first or sole-founder thereof, though a great Benefactor to the Abbey of
Leicester, and College of Fothringhay in Northamptonshire. His picture is not
so well known by his Head, as his Hood, which he wears upon it in an odd
fashion peculiar to himself. He died Anno 1413.

Henry the fifth, his Son, succeeded in the Kingdom. An universal Synod of all
the Bishops and Clergy was called at London, where, among other weighty
matters, it was determined, That the day of St. George, and also of St.
Dunstan, should be a double Feast in holy Church.

At the Petition of the Commons in Parliament, to the King, all Irish Rotul. in
Turri Land.
begging Priests, called Chamberdakyns, were ordered to depart the Realm by
Michaelmas following, upon pain of loss of goods, and imprisonment during the
King's pleasure.

In the beginning of this King's Reign arose Sir John Oldcastle, who Camd.
Brit. in Kent.
Married Joan de la Pole, Baroness of Cobham, the Lord whereof he became: a Man
(says one) Regi propter probitatem, charus and acceptus, in great favor with
King: Henry the fifth, for his honesty, and likewise renouned for his valor,
and great skill in feats of Arms: who sent into the Diocesses of London,
Rochester, and Hereford, some to publish the truth of the Gospel, without the
leave and License of the Ordinaries, who were especially in their Sermons to
confute the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Popish Sacrament of Penance,
Peregrinations, worshipping of Images; the Keys usurped by the Church of Rome.

At that time there resorted to the Synod in London, twelve Inquisitors for
Heresy, whom they appointed at Oxford the year before, to search out for
Heretics, withal Wickliff's Books; who brought two hundred forty six
Conclusions, which they had collected as Heresies out of the said Books.

The Names of the Inquisitors, were these; John Witnam, a Master in New
College. John Langdon, Monk of Christ-church in Canterbury. William Vfford,
Regent of the Carmalites; Thomas Clayton, Regent of the Dominicks; Robert
Gilbert, Richard Enthisdale, John Luck, Richard Sindisham, Richard Fleming,
Thomas Rotborn, Robert Rouberry, Richard Grafdale; who all concluded, that the
chief favorers of Wickliff's Doctrine, were to be first dealt against. The
Lord Cobham was complained of by the General Proctors, to be the chief,
principal abettor of suspected Preachers, contrary to the mind of the
Ordinaries, and to have assisted them by force of Arms.

The King sent for the Lord Cobham, and when he was come, he admonished him
secretly to submit himself to his Mother the holy Church: Unto whom he made
this Answer. You most Worthy Prince (says he) I am always ready to obey,
forasmuch as I know you a Christian Prince, and the Minister of God, bearing
the Sword to the punishment of evil do^rs, and safeguard of them that do well:
Unto you (next unto my eternal God) owe I most reverence, and submit thereunto
(as I have done ever) all that I have either of Nature or Fortune, ready at all
times to fulfill whatsoever You in the Lord command me. But as touching the
Pope, and his Spiritualty, I owe them neither Suit nor Service, forasmuch as I
know him by the Scriptures to be the Great Antichrist, the Son of Perdition,
the open Adversary of God.



The King having heard this, would talk no longer with him, but utterly left
him: And the Archbishop resorting to the King, he gave him authority to Cite
him, Examine, and Punish him according to their Decrees.

The Archbishop Cited him to appear before him at the Castle of Leeds in Kent,
and because he appeared not, he Excommunicated him. Then the Lord Cobham wrote
a draught of the Confession of his Faith, and Sealed it with his own Hand, in
which he answered the four chiefest Articles that the Archbishop laid against
him; and that done, he took the Copy with him, and went therewith to the King,
who would not receive it, but commanded it to be delivered to those who should
be his Judges. Then he desired in the King's presence, that an hundred Knights
and Esquires might be suffered to come, as upon his Purgation, which he knew
would clear him of all Heresies.

Moreover, he offered himself, after the Law of Arms, to fight for Life, or
Death, with any man living, Christian, or Heathen, in the quarrel of his Faith,
the King's Majesty and the Lords of his Council excepted: and furthermore
protested, That he would obey all manner of Laws agreeable to the Word of God:
yet for all this, the King suffered him to be summoned personally in his own
Privychamber.

He appeared before the Archbishop sitting in the Chapter House of Paul's, with
Richard Clifford, Bishop of London, Henry Bullinbrook, Joh. Capgrave. lib. 2.
de nobilib. Henrici^.
Bishop of Winchester. He professed, That the Pope was true Antichrist, That he
is his Head, and that the Popish Bishops were his Members; the Friars his Tail.
And as touching the other Points (says he) they are Ordinances of the Church
of Rome, made against the Scriptures, after it grew rich, and the poison had
dispersed it self therein, and not before. Another Annalist says, That he had
openly said in Parliament, that it would never be well in England, till the
Pope's power were banished beyond the Seas.

The Archbishop read a Bill of Condemnation against him, after which Bill read,
the Lord Cobham said with a cheerful countenance, Though you judge my Body,
which is but a wretched thing, yet I am sure ye can do no harm to my Soul, no
more than Satan could do to the Soul of Job. And as concerning these Articles,
I will stand to them to the very death by the grace of my eternal God. And
after a short instruction to the people, he fell down upon his Knees, holding
up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, And prayed God to forgive his Prosecutors. The
Lord Cobham was condemned to dye, being led back to the Tower, he escaped out
of the Tower, and fled into Wales, where he continued by the space of four
years.

In January 1414. Sir Roger Acton Knight, Mr. John Brown, and John Beverley a
Minister, suffered Martyrdom in the Fields of St. Giles, with thirty six more.
Some say, that Sir Roger Acton was hanged naked at Tyburn, saving that certain
parts of him were covered, and after certain days, a Trumpetter of the King's,
called Thomas Cliffe, gat leave of the King to take him down, and bury him.

The next Month after the Execution of these Men, died Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, famished to Death, not for want of Food, but of a
Throat to swallow it: such the swelling therein, that he could neither speak
nor eat for some days.

After him succeeded Henry Chichely, whose mean birth interrupted Godwin's
Catal, of Bish.
the chain of Noble Archbishops, his two Predecessors and Successors being
Earls Sons by Extraction. Although many Laws had been made against the Pope's
usurped Authority in bestowing Ecclesiastical preferments by way of Provision;
yet durst not this man consent unto his election made by the Covent of
Canterbury, but committed the matter unto the Pope's determination, who first
pronounced the election of the Monks void, and then bestowed the Archbishopric
upon him.

The same year the King began the Foundation of two Monasteries: one of the
Friars observants on the one side of Thames; and the other on the other side of
the same River, called Shene, and Sion, dedicated unto the Charter House Monks,
with certain Nuns of St. Briget, to the number of sixty, dwelling within the
same precinct: so that the whole number of these, with Priests, Monks, Deacons,
and Nuns, should equal the number of thirteen Apostles, and seventy two
Disciples. These were to eat no Flesh, to touch no Money, to wear no Linen.

The King held a Parliament at Leicester, in which the Commons put up their
Bill again, which was put up, Anno 11. Henry the fourth, that the Temporalties
wasted so disorderly by the Clergy, might be converted to the use of the King,
and of his Earls, and Knights, etc. In fear of which Bill, the Clergy put him
upon a long War with the French, offering to him in behalf of the Clergy, great
and notable sums, by reason whereof the Bill was put off again.

The Archbishop, Henry Chichley, condemned John Claydon's Books, and condemned
him, and shortly after ^^e was burnt in Smithfield with Richard Turning, Baker,
Anno 1415.

The next year the said Archbishop, in his Convocation holden at London, made
sharper Com^itutions, than were before, against the Lollards. There two
Priests, noted for Heretics, were brought before the Bishops, the one John
Barton, the other Robert Chapel. Barton was committed to Philip, Bishop of
Lincoln, to be kept in prison, till otherwise it were determined. Chapel
submitted himself, and with much ado received pardon: and was (in stead of
penance) enjoined certain Articles to publish at Paul's Cross.

Then diverse persons were forced to abjure, as John Tail^r of the Parish of St.
Mary's at Quern, William James Physician, who had long lain in prison. John
Courdley of Lincolnshire, a learned man, John Duerfer, Katherine Dertford, the
Parson of Higley in Lincolnshire, named Mr. Robert, William Henry of
Tenterden; John Gaul, a Priest of London, Richard Monk, Vicar of Chesham in
Lincolnshire, with diverse others.

During the time of ^he Provincial Convocation, Pope Martin had sent to the
Clergy of England for a Subsidy to maintain the Pope's Wars against the
Lollards of Bohemia. Another Subsidy was demanded to persecute William Clerk,
Master of Arts in Oxford, who sailing out of England, was at the Council of
Basil disputing on the Bohemians side. A third Subsidy was also required, to
persecute William Russel, Warden of the Grey-Friers in London, who was fled,
having escaped out of prison.

Ralph Mungin, Priest, refusing to abjure, was condemned to perpetual prison.
The recantation of Thomas Granter, and Richard Monk, Priests, was read openly
at Paul's Cross, after which Granter was put to seven years imprisonment, under
the custody of the Bishop of London. Edmond Frith recanted, who was Butler to
Sir John Oldcastle.

Besides these, many other Wicklivites were sore vexed in Kent, in the Towns of
Romney, Tenterden, Woodchurch, Cranbrook, Staplehurst, Bennenden, and
Rolvenden; where Men and their Wives, and whole Families were driven to forsake
their Houses, and Towns, for fear of persecution. Among whom were William
White, and Thomas Greensted, Priests, Bartholomew Chronemonger, Joan Waddon,
Joan his Wife, Thomas Evernden, Stephen Robins, William Chineling, John Tame,
John Facolin, William Somer, Marian his Wife, John Abraham, Robert Munden,
Laurence Cook: which persons, because they appeared not, were excommunicated by
the Archbishop.

The Lord Cobham, having lived four years in Wales, and being at last
discovered, was taken by the Lord Powis: yet so, that it cost some blows and
blood to apprehend him, till a Woman at last with a stool broke the Lord
Cobham's legs, whereby being lame, he was brought up to London in an
Horse-litter. At last he was drawn upon an Hurdle to the Gallows, and there was
hanged and burnt.

In the ninth year of King Henry the Fifth, he suppressed the French Houses of
Religious Monks and Friars, and such like, in England, because Stow's chroh, in
Hen. 8.
they spoke ill of the King's Conquest over France. Their Lands were given by
him, and King Henry the Sixth, to Monasteries, and Colleges of learned men.

King Henry died in France, and was brought over, and buried at Westminster,

This King ordained the King of Heralds over the English; which is called
Garter.

In this King's Reign Richard Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln, founded a College,
named Lincoln-colledge in Oxford.

King Henry the sixth, an Infant of eight months old, succeeded his Father in
the Kingdom of England, Anno 1422.

In the eighth year of his Age he was crowned at Westminster, and in the tenth
year crowned King at Paris; Cardinal Henry, Bishop of Winchester, being present
at them both.

The Clergy had then a strong party in the Privy Council, viz.

1. Henry Chicheley, Archbishop of Canterbury.

2. John Kemp, Bishop of London.

3. Henry Beauford, Bishop of Winchester, lately made Cardinal.

4. John Wackaring, Bishop of Norwich, Privy Seal.

5. Philip Morgan, Bishop of Worcester.

6. Nicholas Bubwith, Bishop of Bath and Wells, Lord Treasurer.

In the first year of this King's Reign, was burned a faithful Witness of God's
Truth, William Tailor, a Priest, under Henry Chich^ley, Archbishop of
Canterbury, March 1. Anno 1423.

In the year 1424. John Florence, a Turner, appeared before Will. Bernam,
Chancellor to the Bishop of Norwich being accused for holding and teaching
diverse Heresies. But being threatened, he submitted himself, and abjured: and
for his penance he was whipped three Sundays, in a solemn procession, in the
Cathedral Church of Norwich, before all the people. The like also was done
about his Parish Church of Shelton three other several Sundays, he being
bare-headed, barefooted, and bare-necked, after the manner of a public
Penitentiary, his body being covered with a canvass shirt and breeches,
carrying in his hand a Taper of a pound weight.

In the same year John Goddesel of Dichingham, Parchment* maker, abjured and
was set at liberty till the year 1428.

Richard Belward of Erisam swear, that he would neither teach nor assist any
against the Church of Rome, and was dismissed.

The like happened to Hugh Pie, Chaplain of Ludney.

In the year 1428. King Henry the Sixth sent down Letters of Commission to John
Exeter, and Ja olet Germain, keeper of the Castle of Colchester, for the
apprehending of William White Priest; and others suspected of Heresy. John
Exeter attached six persons in the Town of Bungay, in the Diocese of Norwich,
and three of them were committed to the Castle of Fremingham, belonging to the
Duke of Norfolk, namely John Waddon of Tenterden in Kent; Bartholomew Monk of
Ersham, and William Skutt.

In the Towns of Beckles, Ersham and Ludney, a great number both of Men and
Women were cast into prison, and after their abjuration brought to open shame
in Churches and Markets by the Bishop of Norwich, and his Chancellor William
Bernham, John Exeter being Register: so that within the space of three or four
years about one hundred and twenty Men and Women were examined, and suffered
great vexation for the profession of Christian Faith. Some taken upon suspicion
only, more easily escaped, as Robert Skirring of Harlstone, William Skirring,
and some others. Some were burned, among whom special mention is made of these
three, Father Abraham of Colchester, William White, and John Waddon, Priests.
The residue abjured, and suffered penance, as John Beverley, J. Wardon, John
Capper, Vicar of Tunstal, with more than threescore others. They had their
Doctrine from William White who was a Scholar and follower of John Wickliff.

Such was the Spleen of the Council of Sienna, as they not only cursed Anno
1428.
the memory of John Wickliff, as dying an obstinate Heretic, but ordered, that
his bones should be taken out of the ground, and thrown far off from any
Christian burial. In obedience hereunto, Richard Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln,
Diocesan of Lutterworth, sent his Officers to ungrave him accordingly, who took
his bones out of the grave, and burnt them to ashes, and cast them into Swift,
a neighboring Brook running hard by.

Anno 1430. R. Hovedon, a Wool-winder, and Citizen of London, was burnt at the
Tower Hill for the Doctrine of Wickliff. The year following Thomas Bagley, a
Priest, Vicar of Monenden besides Malden, was condemned of Heresy at London,
about the midst of Lent, degraded, and burned in Smithfield.

At St. Andrews in Scotland, Anno 1431. Paul Craw was burnt for Petries Church
History.
denying that the substance of the Bread and Wine are changed in the Eucharist;
or that Confession is necessary to be made unto Priests, or Prayers unto Saints
departed. At his condemnation they put a Bull of Brass in his mouth, to the end
he should not speak unto the people, nor tell for what he was burnt.

Henry Beauford, Bishop of Winchester, Cardinal Sancti Eusebii, Ex Archivis
Turris Land.
was by consent of Parliament made one of the King's Council, with this
condition, that he should make a protestation to absent himself from the
Council, when any matters were to be treated betwixt the King and Pope. The
Cardinal took the Protestation, and promised to perform it.

The Clergy complained to the King in Parliament, that their Servants, which
came with them to Convocations, were often arrested, and they prayed that they
might have the same Privilege, which the Peers and Commons of the Kingdom
have, which are called to Parliament, which was granted accordingly.

Great at this time was the want of Grammar-schools, and the abuse of them that
were even in London it self, it being paenal for any (to prevent the growth of
Wicklivism) to put their Children to private Teachers. Hence it was, that some
hundreds were compelled to go to the same School, where (to use the words of
the Records) The Masters waxen rich in money, and Learners poor in cunning.
Whereupon this grievance was complained of by four eminent Ministers in London,
viz.

Mr. William Lichfield, Parson of Alhallowes the Great. Gilbert, Parson of St.
Andrew's Holborn. John Cote, Parson of St. Peter's Cornhil. John Neele, Master
of the House of St. Thomas Acre's, and Parson of Colchirch.

To these it was granted, by the advice of the Ordinary, or Archbishop of
Canterbury, to erect five Schools ( Neele having a double License for two
places) in their respective Parishes. Know, that the House of St. Thomas Acre's
was where Mercers Chapel stands at this day.

Then was the Lady Eleanor Cobham (so called from the Lord Cobham, her Father,
otherwise Eleanor Plantagenet by her Husband, Humfry Duke of Gloucester) and
Roger Only, Priest, her Chaplain, condemned: the Duchess (after solemn
penance, and carrying a Taper barefoot at Paul's Cross) to perpetual
banishment, for plotting with Only (say Hall and Fabian in their Chronicles) an
abominable Necromancer) with three others, by Witchcraft to destroy the King,
so to derive the Crown to her Husband, who was next Heir in the line of
Lancaster: And Roger Only was burned. But the main cause of their condemnation
was for the profession of the Truth, although Treason was pretended against
them. Polydor Virgil makes no mention thereof, otherwise quick-sighted enough
in matters of this nature.

At this time William Heiworth sat Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, being
translated thither from being Abbot of St. Albans.

At this time William Lynwood finished his industrious and useful Work Fuller's
Chur. History of Britain.
of his Constitutions. He was bred in Cambridge, first Scholar of Gonvil, then
Fellow of Pembrook-hall. His younger years he spent in the Law; afterward he
became Keeper of the Privy Seal unto King Henry the Fifth, who employed him in
an Embassy into Spain and Portugal, which he exactly performed. After the
King's death he reassumed his Official's place of Canterbury, and then at
spare hours collected and digested the Constitutions of the fourteen latter
Archbishops of Canterbury, from Stephen Langton unto Henry Chichley, unto whom
he dedicated the Work, a worthy Work, highly esteemed by foreign Lawyers, his
Comment thereon is a Magazine of the Canon Law. It was printed at Paris, Anno
1505. (but at the cost and charges of William Bretton, an honest Merchant of
London) revised by the care of Wolfangus Hippolius, and prefaced unto by
Iodocus Badius. This Linwood was afterward made Bishop of St. David's.

Anno 1434. began the active Council of Basil, to which our Ambassadors were to
represent both their Sovereign, and the English Nation, where they were
received with honor and respect. This was a troublesome Council, and continued
seventeen years. In this Council it was concluded (as before at Constance) that
the General Councils were above the Pope. Fourteen Ambassadors were sent from
the King unto Basil. One Earl (not that he was to vote in the Council, but only
behold the transactions thereof) viz. Edmond, Earl of Morton. Five Bishops,
viz. Robert, Bishop of London, Philip, Bishop of Lisieux, John, Bishop of
Rochester John, Bishop of Baieux, and Bernard, Bishop of Aix. Two Abbots,
Nicholas, Abbot of Glaston, William, Abbot of St. Mary's in York. One Prior,
William, Prior of Norwich. Two Knights, Henry Brounfleet, and John Colvil. Mr.
Thomas Brown, Doctor of Laws, Dean of Sarum. Peter Fitz-Maurice, D. D. and Mr.
Nicholas David, Archdeacon of Constance, and Licentiate in both Laws.

John, Bishop of Rochester, here mentioned, was John Langdon, intruded by the
Pope into that Bishopric, to the prejudice of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
But he was indeed a Learned man, and died this year in his Ambassy at Basil.
This Council deposed Pope Eugenius, and substituted in his room Amideus, the
most devout Duke of Savoy, who was called Felix the Fifth, and was crowned in
the City of Basil.

Anno 1437. Henry Chichley, Archbishop of Canterbury, founded a College in
Oxford, by the name of All Souls, for a Warden, and forty Fellows: which
number, by Statute, was never to be augmented, or impaired; and all void places
(by death or otherwise) once in a year to be supplied. Six years did he survive
the first founding of this College. He founded another College in Oxford,
called Barnard-colledge, suppressed by King Henry the Eighth, and renewed by
Sir Thomas White, who named it St. Iohn's-colledge, one of the fairest of the
University. This Archbishop bestowed much money in repairing the Library at
Canterbury, Goodwin's Catal. of Bishops.
and then replenished the same with a number of goodly Books. He gave unto his
Church many rich Ornaments and Jewels of great price, and built a great part of
the Tower, called Oxford-tower, in the said Church. He founded a goodly
College, and an Hospital, at Higham-ferries, where he was born, for eight
secular Priests, Fellows, four Clerks, and six Choristers: it was so endowed,
as at the suppression of the same, it was valued at 156 pounds per annum. The
Hospital was for poor people likewise liberally endowed.

John Stafford, Son unto the Earl of Stafford, succeeded in the place of Henry
Chichley deceased. Pope Eugenius the Fourth translated him from Bath and Wells.

About the year 1446. King Henry the Sixth founded Eaton College, incorporate
by the name of Praepositi and Collegii Regaliis, Col. Beata Maria de Eaton
juxta Winsor.

This College consists of one Provost, Fellows, a Schoolmaster and Usher;
besides many Oppidanes maintained there at the cost of their Friends. This
Eaton is a Nursery to King's-colledge in Cambridge.

Humfry, Duke of Gloucester, the King's Uncle, at a packt Parliament at Bury,
was condemned of High Treason, and found dead in his Bed, not without rank
suspicion of cruel practices upon his person. He gave to the Library in Oxford
many precious voluminous Manuscripts. He was buried in St. Albans, to which
Church he was a great Benefactor.

The same month, with the Duke of Gloucester, died Henry Beanfort, Bishop of
Winchester, and Cardinal. He was a man of such Wealth, that at once he lent
King Henry the Fifth twenty thousand pounds, who pawned his Crown to him. He
built the fair Hospital of St. Cross, near Winchester.

The Clergy moved in vain against the recalling of the Statute of Praemunire.

About the year 1453. began the broyls to break out out between the two Houses
of Lancaster and York, so mutually heightened, that scarce a County betwixt
York and London, but a set Battle has been fought therein, besides other
Counties in the Marches of Wales: besides many other Skirmishes (Corrivals with
Battles) so that such, who consider the blood lost therein, would admire
England had any left. And such as observe how much it had left, would wonder it
had any lost.

In the midst of these Civil wars, William, Surnamed Patin from his Parents,
but Wainfleet, from the place of his Nativity, now Bishop of Winchester,
founded the fair College, dedicated to Mary Magdalen, in Oxford, for one
President, forty Fellows, thirty Demies, four Chaplains, eight Clerks, and
sixteen Choristers. This William Wainfleet first founded Magdalen-hall, hard
by, and afterward undertook and finished this most stately piece of
Architecture. There is scarce a Bishopric in England, to which this College
has not afforded one Prelate at the least, doubling her files in some places.
At this day (besides those forementioned) there are one Schoolmaster and an
Usher, three Readers, viz. of Divinity, Natural and Moral Philosophy, besides
diverse Officers and Servants of the foundation, with other Students, being in
all two hundred and twenty.

John Kemp, Archbishop of Canterbury, built the Divinity-School in Oxford, and
Paul's Cross.

King Henry being conquered in a fatal Battle at Touton in Nottinghamshire,
fled with his Queen into Scotland, and to make himself the more welcome,
resigned Berwick to the King thereof. Edward, Duke of York, reigned in his
stead. This King's Reign affords very little Church-story. This good was done
by the Civil Wars, it diverted the Popish Prelates from troubling the Lollards.

Thomas Bourchier (Son unto Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex) Archbishop of
Canterbury, kept a Synod of his Clergy at London. The Parliament sitting at the
same time bestowed many privileges on the Clergy.

In the time of this Archbishop, Raynold Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, was
afflicted by the Popish Prelates for his Faith and profession of the Gospel,
after he had labored many years in translating the Holy. Scriptures into
English. He was accused and convicted for holding and S^r Rich. Baker's Chron.
publishing certain Opinions, at that time held Heretical, which at last openly
at Paul's Cross he revoked, but was notwithstanding deprived of his Bishopric;
only a certain Pension was assigned him to live on in an Abbey, where soon after
he died.

About the year 1465. there was here in England one Thomas Holden, Fox Acts and
Monuments Luke 8. 3.
a Carmelite Friar, who preached in Michaelmas Term at Paul's Cross in London,
That our Lord Jesus Christ was in poverty, and did beg in the world. A manifest
untruth! For great is the difference betwixt begging, and taking what the
bounty of others does freely confer, as our Savior did from such who did
minister unto him of their substance: This Sermon caused a great stir. The
principal Champions on both sides, whose Pens publicly appeared, were

For Mendicants.
1. Henry Parker, a Carmelite, bred in Cambridge, living afterward in
Doncaster-Covent, imprisoned for preaching.

2. John Milverton, bred in Oxford, Carmelite of Bristol, being excommunicated
by the Bishop of London, and appealing to the Pope, found no favor, but was
kept three years captive in St. Angelo.

Against Mendicants.
1. Thomas Wilson, Doctor of both Laws, and say some, Dean of S. Paul's, a
zealous Preacher and Disputant.

2. William Ivy, Canon of S. Paul's, who wrote in the Defense of Richard Hill,
Bishop of London, who Imprisoned two Mendicants for their proud Preaching.

But after Pope Paul the second had interposed herein, concluding that this
ought to be declared in all places for a dangerous Doctrine, and worthy to be
trodden down under all men's feet, the controversy ceased.

At this time George Nevil, brother to Richard Nevil, the Great Earl of Warwick
that set up and pulled down Kings at his pleasure, was Archbishop of York. He
was famous for a prodigious feast made at his Installation, unto which he
invited, as Guests, all the Nobility, most of the prime Clergy, many of the
Great Gentry of the Land. The Bill of Fare may be read in Bishop Godwins
Catalogue of Bishops. Seven years after, King Edward seized on all his Estate,
to the value of twenty thousand pounds, among which he found so rich a Mitre,
that he made himself a Crown thereof. The Archbishop he sent over prisoner to
Callis, where he was kept bound in extreme poverty, justice punishing his
former prodigality. He was afterward restored to his Liberty and
Archbishopric, but went drooping till the day of his death. It added to his
sorrow, that the Kingdom of Scotland, with twelve Suffragan Bishops therein
(formerly subjected to his See) was now, by Pope Scotland freed from the Sec.
of York.
Sixtus, freed from any further dependence thereon; S. Andrews being advanced
to an Archbishopric, and that Kingdom in Ecclesiastical matters made entire
within it self: whose Bishops formerly repaired to York for their consecration.

Anno 1473. in August, John Goos^, sole Martyr in this King's Reign, was
condemned and burned at Tower Hill. This man, when ready to suffer, desired
meat from the Sheriff which Ordered his Execution, and had it granted unto him.
I will eat (says he) a good competent dinner, for I shall pass a sharp shower,
ere I come to Supper.

King Edward IV. died April 9. 1483. In his Reign flourished Thomas Littleton,
a Reverend Judge of the Common Pleas, who brought a great part of the Law into
method, which lay before confusedly dispersed, and his book called Littletons
Tenures. Then John Harding Esquire wrote a Chronicle in English verse. John
Fortescue a Judge, and Chancellor of England, wrote diverse Treatises concerning
the Law, and Politic Government. Rochus, a Charter House Monk, born in London,
wrote diverse Epigrams. William Caxton also wrote a Chronicle.

Miserable King Edward v. ought to have succeeded his Father, but he, by the
wicked practice of his Uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, chosen Protector, was
quickly made away. The Protection of the young King's Person was by the last
King appointed to Earl Rivers the Queen's brother, and by the mother's side
U^ckle to the said Prince, who kept his Residence and Court at Ludlow. The
Queen with the Earl Rivers, her brother, and with her Son Richard Lord Gray,
and other Friends, being guarded with a strong power of Armed men and
Soldiers, intended to bring the Young King from Ludlow to London to be
Crowned. But the Duke of Gloucester wrought so cunningly with the Queen, that
she dispatched messengers to her Brother and Son, who (though unwilling) upon
her request were persuaded to Disband and Cashier all their Soldiers: and
attended only with their own Menial Servants, they set forward, with the Young,
King toward the Queen. They came to Northampton; and soon after the Dukes of
Gloucester and Buckingham dismounted themselves in the Earls Inn, being
accompanied with great store of resolute attendants. There they surprised the
Earl! Rivers, and committed him to sa^e Custody. Then the two Dukes rode to
St^nystratford, Mart. Chron. in Edw. v.
where the King then was. There they seized on Richard Lord Gray, the King's
half-brother, and on Sir Richard Vaugham, and some others, all which they sent
under a strong guard to Pomfret-castle, where without any judicial sentence, or
legal trial, they were beheaded upon the same day that the Lord Hastings, (who
conspired in that action with the two Dukes) lost his head.

The Queen with the rest of her Children enters the Sanctuary at Westminster.
The young King is brought to London, and the Duke of Gloucester by the
contrivement of the Duke of Buckingham is made Protector of the King and
Kingdom, by the Decree of the Councel-Table: and now he wickedly plotteth to
make away the young King and his Brother, and in order thereunto he labors
first to get into his hands the Duke of York, the King's brother; And to that
end the Archbishop of Canterbury was employed with instructions to procure the
Queen to part with her younger son, to accompany the elder. The Protector
having gotten both the brothers into his hand, causes them within few days in
great pomp and State to be convayed through London to the Tower. The Sunday
following he caused Doctor Shaa at Paul's cross to blazon the Honorable birth
and parentage of the Protector, to relate his virtues, to commend his valor,
to weaken the Fame and Honor of the deceased King Edward, by reason of his
lascivious wantonness with Shore's wife and others, to bastardize all his
Children; because the King was in the person of Richard Earl of Warwick (before
his said marriage) affianced unto the Lady Bona, sister to the wife of the
French King. He also accused the Protector's own mother of great incontinency.
When King Edward, and George Duke of Clarence were begotten. Then setting forth
the worthiness of the Protector, he supposed, that the people could not choose
but receive him for their King.

Pynkney the Provincial of the Augustinian Friars, who in the same place used
so loud adulation, lost his credit, conscience, and voice altogether. These two
were all of the Clergy, who engaged actively on his party.

His Coronation was performed with more pomp than any of his Predecessors. Soon
after followed the murder of King Edward, and his Brother Richard, Duke of
York.

After this bloody act, having visited his Town of Gloucester, which he endowed
with ample Liberties and Privileges, he took his journey toward York. At a
certain day appointed the whole Clergy assembled in Copes richly vested, and so
went about the City in Procession, after whom followed the King with his Crown
and Scepter, apparrelled in his Circot Robe Royal, accompanied with many of the
Nobility of the Realm: after whom marched in order Queen Anne, his wife,
Crowned, Sir Th. Moors History of King Rich. 3.
leading in her left hand Prince Edward her Son, having on his head a
demy-crown appointed for the degree of a Prince. The Northern people hereupon
extolled and praised him far above the Stars. After this glorious pomp, and a
solemn feast, having done all things discreetly, he returned by Nottingham, and
afterward came to London, whom the Citizens more for fear than love, received
in great Companies. Now King Richard made good Laws in that sole Parliament
kept in his time. He began to found a College of an hundred Priests, which
foundation with the founder shortly had end. He built a Monastery at Middleham
in the North, and a College at Alhallows Barking hard by the Tower: and
endowed Queens-Colledge in Cambridge with five hundred marks of yearly revenue.
Soon after the Duke of Buckingham requires the Earldom of Hereford, and the
Hereditary Constableship of England, laying title to them by descent. The King
rejected the Duke's request with many spiteful and minatory words. Buckingham
storms thereat, and withdraws to Brecknock in Wales, with his Prisoner John
Morton Bishop of Ely (committed to him by the King on some distaste) who
tampered with him about the marriage of Henry Earl of Richmond with the eldest
daughter of King Edward IV. But the Duke was surprised by King Richard, and
beheaded before this marriage was completed; More cunning was Bishop Morton to
get himself over into France, there to contrive the union of the two Houses of
York and Lancaster.

In the year 1485, Henry Earl of Richmond landeth with small Forces at
Milford-Haven. From Milford he marches North-East through the bowels of Wales,
and both his Army and the fame thereof increased by marching. Into
Leichestershire he came, and in the navel thereof is met by King Richard, The
next day the Armies joined in battle. The scales of Victory seemed for a long
time so equal, that none could discern on which side the beam did break. At
length the coming in of the Lord Stanley with three thousand fresh men, decided
the controversy on the Earl's side King Richard fighting valiantly in the
midst of his enemies was slain, and his Corpse were disgracefully carried to
Leicester, without a rag to cover his nakedness. The Crown ornamental being
found on his head, was removed to the Earl's, and he Crowned in the field, and
Te Deum was solemnly sung by the whole Army. The body of King Richard lay for a
spectacle of hate and scorn by the space of two days bare, and uninterred. At
last without solemn funeral pomp, scarce with ordinary solemnity, by the
charity of the Gray-friers he was inhumed in their Monastery there.

King Henry VII. coming to London the Mayor and Companies received him at
Shoreditch, whence with great Honorable attendance, Lord V^^^. Histor. of
H^^r. VII.
and Troops of Noblemen and persons of quality he entered the City, himself not
being on horseback, or in any open Chair, or Throne, but in a close Chariot, as
one that chose rather to keep State, and strike a reverence into the people
than to fawn upon them. He went first into S. Paul's Church, where he made
offertory of his Standards, and had Orizon, and Te Deum again sung, and went to
his lodging prepared in the Bishops palace.

Thomas Bourchier, Cardinal, and Archbishop of Canterbury, Crowned the King on
the last of October. At which day for the better security of his person the
King did institute a band of fifty Archers under a Captain to attend him, by
the Name of Yeomen of his Guard. The Archbishop also Married King Henry to the
Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth. And then having sat
in a short Synod at London (wherein the Clergy presented their new King with a
tenth) died, having sat in his See two and thirty years.

He gave to the University of Cambridge an hundred and twenty pounds, which was
joined with another hundred pound; which Mr. Billingforth (Master of
Bennet-Colledge) had some years before given to the said University.

John Morton, born at S. Andrews Milbourn in Dorset-shire, succeeded him in the Sea at Canterbury. He was formerly Bishop of Ely, and appointed by King Edward
IV. one of the Executors of his will, and on that account hated of King Richard
the third, the Executioner thereof. He was (as aforesaid) imprisoned, because
he would not betray his trust, fled into France and returned, and was justly
advanced by King Henry, first to be Chancellor of England, and then to be
Archbishop of Canterbury He was also created Cardinal of S. Anastasius.

Now began the Pope to be very busy by his Officers to collect vast sums of
money in England, presuming at the King's connivance therea^, whom he had
lately gratified with a needless dispensation, to legitimate his marriage with
the Lady Elizabeth, his Cousin so far off, that it would half pose a Herald to
recover their kindred.

The Pope in favor of the King, and indeed of equity it self, ordered
concerning Sanctuaries.

1. That if any Sanctuary man did by might, or otherwise, get Lord V^rul. in
Henry VII.
out of Sanctuary privily, and commit mischief and trespass, and then come in
again, he should lose the benefit of Sanctuary for ever after.

2. That howsoever the Person of the Sanctuaay-man was protected from his
Creditors, yet should not his goods out of Sanctuary.

3. That if any took Sanctuary for cause of treason, the King might appoint him
keepers to look to him in Sanctuary.

The King Confined the Queen Dowager (his wives mother) to a Religious house in
Bermondsey, because three years since she had surrendered her two daughters out
of the Sanctuary at Westminster to King Richard.

A Synod was holden by Archbishop Morton at London, wherein the Antiq. Bri^.
page 298.
Luxury of the London Clergy in Clothes, with their frequenting of Taverns was
forbidden: Such Preachers also were punished, who inveighed against Bishops in
their absence. John Giglis, an Italian, about this time employed by the Pope,
got an infinite mass of money, having power from the Pope to absolve people
from all crimes whatsoever, saving smiting of the Clergy, and conspiring
against the Pope. This Giglis gat for himself the rich Bishopric of Worcester.
Yea, in that See four Italians followed each other,

1. John Giglis. 2. Silvester Giglis. 3. Julius Medices, afterward Pope
Clement VII. 4. Hieronymus de Negutiis.
The Pope gave power to Archbishop Morton, to visit all places formerly exempt
from Archiepiscopal jurisdiction; and to dispense his pardons where he saw just
cause. Hereupon R^chester-bridge being broken down, the Archbishop bestowed
Remission from Purgatory, for all sins whatsoever committed within the compass
of forty days, to such as should bountifully contribute to the building
thereof.

King Henry VII. desired much that King Henry VI. might be Canonized. Camd.
Brit. in Surry.
But Pope Alexander III. delayed, and in effect denied the King's desire
herein. The reason given by Mr. Camden, was the Pope's Covetousness, who
demanded more than thirfty King Henry would allow. This King removed the Corpse
of Henry VI. from Chertsey in Surrey, where it was obscurely interred to a
place of greater note, viz. Windsor Chapel.

But the Saintship of Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury was procured by
Archbishop Morton on cheaper terms.

King Henry was submissive to Pope for his own ends, never servile. The
deserving Clergy he employed in State affairs more than his Nobility. To the
vicious Clergy he was very severe, ordaining that Clerks Convict should be
burnt in the hand, both that the^ might taste a Corporal punishment, and carry
a brand of infamy.

To the Lollard's (so godly men were called) ^e was more cruel than his
Predecessors: for he not only in the beginning of his Reign connived at the
cruel persecutions which John Halse Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield Anno 1494.
raised against them, but in the middle and toward the latter end of his Reign
he appeared very bloody to them. An Aged old man was burnt in Smithfield, and
one Joan Boughton widow, mother to the Lady Young (who was afterward Martyred)
she being fourscore years of Age, was burnt for an Heretic. In the year 1497.
Janu. 17. being Sunday; Richard Milderal, and James Sturdy bare faggots before
the Procession of S. Paul's, and after stood before the Preacher in the time of
his Sermon. And the Sunday following stood other two men at Paul's Cross all
the Sermon-time; one garnished with painted and written papers, the other
having a Faggot on his neck. Upon Passion Sunday one Hugh Glover bare a Faggot
before the Procession of S. Paul's, and after with the Faggot stood before the
Preacher all the Sermon-while. And on the next Sunday following four men stood,
and did their open penance at Paul's Cross, and many of their books were there
burnt before them.

Anno 1498. The King was in Canterbury, where was an old Priest Fox Acts and
Monum. p. 556
so resolute in his opinions, that none of the Clergy there could convince him
of the contrary. Some say the King, by what Arguments we know not, converted
this Priest, and then presently gave Order he should be burnt.

About this time William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, began the foundation, of
Brason-nose College in Oxford. The work was after his death accomplished by
Richard S^tton Esquire. It maintains a Principal, twenty Fellows, besides
Scholars and Officers of the Foundation in all amounting to one hundred eighty
six.

In the year 1499. a constant Martyr of Christ, named Babram, was burnt in
Norfolk.

In the year 1500. died John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, at his Manor of
Knoll. He gave much to good uses, and was very bountiful to his Servants.

CENT. XVI.
HEnry Dean succeeded in the place of Archbishop Morton deceased, and sat but
two years in that See. His Pall was sent unto him by Hadrian de Castello the
Pope's Secretary, and delivered by the Bishop of Coventry in these words: Ad
honorem D^i omnipotentis, and B. Mariae Virginis, ac Bb. Petri, and Pauli
Apostolorum, and D. N. Alexandri P. VI. and S. Romanae Ecclesiae, neonon and
Cantuariensis Ecclesiae tibi Commissae, t^adimus pallium de corpore B. Petri
sumptu^, plenitudinem viz. Pontificalis officii; ut utaris eo infra Ecclesiam
tuam certis diebus qui exprimuntur in privilegiis ei ab Apostolica sede
concessis. Having received his Pall, he was to take his Oath unto the Pope,
which I will set down once for all.

Ego H^nricus Archiep, Cantuar' ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens
Godwins Catal. of Bishops
ero B. Petro Sanctaeque Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Domino m^o
Alexandro P. VI. suisque successioribus canonice imrantibus. Non ero in
Consilio aut consensu, vel facto, ut vitam perdant vel membrum, seu capiantur
mala captione, Concilium vero quod mihi credituri sunt, per se aut nuntios ad
little damnum me sciente nemini pandam Papatum Romans and Regalia S. Petri,
adjutor ero cis ad retinendum and defendendum, salvo ordine meo, contra omnem
hominem Legatum sedis Apostolicae ineundo and redeundo honorifice tractabo, and
in suis necessitatibus adjuvabo. Vocatus ad Synodum veniam, nisi praepeditus
fuero Canonica praepeditione. Apostolorum limina Romans Curiae existente citra
Alps singulis annis, ultra vero montes singulis Bienniis visitabo, aut per me,
aut per meum Nuntium, nisi Apostolica absolvar licentia. Possessiones vero ad
mensam mei Archiepiscopatus pertinentes non vendam neque donabo, neque
impignerabo, neque de novo infeudabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo inconsulto
Romano Pontifice, sicut me Deus ad^uvet, etc. he enjoyed his honor but two
years, and left it to William Warham. Archbishop Dean bequeathed to his Church
a Silver Image of fifty one ounces weight, and appointed five hundred pounds to
be bestowed on his funerals. He built the most part of Oxford-house, and made
the Iron-work upon the coping of Rochesterbridge.

Buckinghamshire a small County, had more Martyrs in it before Luther's time,
than all the Kingdom besides. William Tylsworth was burnt at Amersham (the
Rendezvous of God's children in those days) and Joan his only daughter, and a
faithful woman was compelled with her own hand to set fire to her dear Father.
At the same time more than sixty Professors did bear Faggots for their penance,
and were enjoined to wear on their right sleeves for some years after, a square
p^ece of cloth, as a badge of disgrace to themselves, and difference from
others. And a new punishment was found out of branding them in the cheek. The
manner thus, Their necks were tied fast to a post with towels, and their hands
holden that they might not stir, and so the hot Iron was put to their cheeks
whether branded with L. for Lollard* or H. for Heretic, I am not certain; but
this is sure, they bare in their bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus. Father
Reive, though branded at that time, did afterward suffer at a stake. One
Father Roberts was burned at Buckingham. Father Rogers was in the Bishop's
prison fourteen weeks together, and was so pinched with cold, hunger, and Iron,
that after his coming out of prison he was so lame in his back, that he could
never go upright, as long as he lived.

A^. 1506. Thomas Chase of Anersham, (was after other sore afflictions)
strangled in the prison at Wooburn, who to cover their cruelty gave it out that
he had hanged himself, and in color thereof caused his body to be buried by
the High-way's side, with a stake knocked into his grave. One Thomas Novice was
burnt at Norwich, Anno 1507. and Laurence Glest at Sarum, at whose burning
William Russel was burnt in the Cheek.

After this a Godly-woman was burnt at Sadbury by the Chancellor of Gloucester,
Doctor Whittington, after she was burned, as the people were returning
homeward, a Bull brake loose from a Butcher that was in hand to have killed
him, and singled out Doctor Whittington from all the Company; and (hurting
neither old nor young) took him alone, gored him thorough and thorough,
carrying his guts upon his horns all the streets over, to the great amazement
of the people.

All the Arrears of money due to the Pope for pardons in the year of Jubil^^,
five years since were fully collected, and safely returned to Rome by the Popes
Officers: the money which was sent last thither, came soon enough to be
received there. This payment was the last in this kind which Rome did generally
receive out of England. Meantime the King did share with the Pope, to connive
at the rest, he had a part allowed to him.

King Henry VII. died of a Consumption at his palace of Richmond, Sir Rich.
Baker's Chron.
April 22. 1508. Of our own Country there lived in his time, George Ripley. a
Carmelite Friar of Boston, who wrote diverse Treatises in the Mathematiques.
John Rouse, born in Warwickshire, a diligent searcher of Antiquities.

Thomas Scroop entered into diverse Orders of Religion, and after withdrew
himself to his house, where for twenty years he lived the life of an Anchoret;
and after coming abroad again was made a Bishop in Ireland, and went to Rhodes
in Embassage; from whence being returned he went barefooted up and down in
Norfolk teaching the ten Commandments, and lived till near an hundred years
old. Now also lived Robert Fabian, a Sheriff of London, and Historiographer.
Edmond Dudley, who wrote a book Entitled, Arbor Reipublica. John Bockingham, an
Excellent School-man. And William Blackney D. D. a Carmelite Friar, and a
Necromancer.

Henry VIII. succeeded his Father. On June 3. He was Married to the Lady
Katherine Dowager, formerly wife to his brother Prince Arthur deceased. Pope
Julius by his dispensation, removed all obstructions, against the Laws of God
or man, hindering or opposing the said Match.

Cruelty still increased on the poor Lollards (as they were called) after
abjuration forced to wear the fashion of a Faggot wrought in thread, or painted
on their sleeves as long as they lived, it being death to put on their clothes
without that cognizance. Their case was sad, if they put it off, they must be
burned, if they put it on, they must be starved; for none generally would set
them on work that wore that badge. On this account were William Sweeting, and
James Brewster re-imprisoned. In vain did Brewster plead, that he was commanded
to leave off his badge, by the Controller of the Earl of Oxford's house. And as
little did Sweeting's plea prevail, that the Parson of Mary Magdalen's in
Colchester, caused him to lay his faggot aside. Soon after they were both burnt
together in Smithfield, Anno 1511.

One John Brown, who had born a faggot before in the days of King Henry the
Seventh, was burned at Ashford in Kent for the Profession of the Truth,
condemned by Archbishop Warham, first having had his Feet burned to the Bones,
to compel him to deny the Truth.

Richard Hunn, a wealthy Citizen of London, imprisoned in Lollards Tower, for
adhering to Wickliff's Doctrine, had his neck therein secretly broken. To cover
their cruelty, they gave it out, that he hanged himself on December 20. 1514.
the dead Body of the said Richard Hunn was burnt in Smithfield Sixteen days
after he was murdered. But the matter having been fully examined by the Council
and Judges, and Justices of the Realm, it was evidently proved, that Dr. Horsey
the Chancellor, Charles Joseph the Sumner, and John Spalding the Bel-ringer had
committed the Murder.

Thomas-Man and John Stil^man, were also burned in Smithfield. Thomas Man
confessed, he had converted Seven hundred from Popery to the Truth. Robert
Cousin was also condemned, and burned at Buckingham, for holding against
Pilgrimages, Confession to Pri^sts, and Worshipping of Image. Christopher
Shoemaker was burned at Newbery upon the like account.

Cardinal Bainbrigg, Archbishop of York, being then at Rome, was so highly
offended with Rivaldus de Modena, an Italian, his Steward, that he cudgelled
him: but being soon after poisoned, his Body was buried in the English Hospital
at Rome.

Richard Fox, Bishop of Winch^ster, Founded and Endowed Corpus ^uller. Church
Hist.
Christi-Colledge in Oxford, bestowing thereon Lands to the yearly value of
Four hundred and one pounds, eight shillings and two pence. There are
maintained in it a President, Twenty Fellows, Twenty Scholars, Two Chaplains,
Two Clerks, and Two Choristers, besides Officers and Servants of the
Foundation, with other Students. Hugh Oldham. Bishop of Exeter, was a great
Benefactor to this College.

Anno 1519. died John Golet at Shene in Surrey, he had learned humane (...)
Chur. Hist.
Sciences at home, and traveled into France and Italy: when he returned, ^e
studied the Scriptures, and expounded St. Paul's Epistles publicly at Oxford.
Henry the Seventh promoted him to the Deanery* of Paul's: He professed to distaste
many things that he had heard in Sorbon. He called the Scotists men without
judgment, and the Thomists arrogant. He said, He reaped more fruit by the
Books which the Doctors of Sorbon called Heretical, than by their Books that
were full of divisions and definitions, and were most approved of them He never
married, and yet regarded not Monks without Learning. In his Sermons he said,
Images should not be Worshipped, and Clerks should not be Covetous. Two Fria^s,
viz. Bricot and Standish accused him for Heresy unto Richard Fitz-James Bishop
of London; and He unto the Archbishop first, and then unto King Henry the
Eighth. But both the King and the Archbishop became his Patrons. He was the
eldest, and sole surviving child of Sir Henry Collet Mercer, twice Lord Mayor
of London; who with his ten Sons and as many Daughters, were depicted in a
Glass-window on the Northside S^^w's Survay, p. 265.
of St. Anthonie's (corruptly St. Antlin's) to which Church he was a great
Benefactor. His Son John Founded the Free School of St. Paul's; in it are One
hundred fifty and three Scholars, whereof every year some appearing most
pregnant, have salaries allowed them for Seven years, or until they get better
preferment in the University, or in the Church. William Lily was the first
Schoolmaster thereof by Colet's own appointment. An excellent Scholar, born at
Odiam in Hamp-shire, and afterward he went on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. In his
return through Italy, he applied himself to his Studies. His Teachers and
Instructers were John Sulpitius, and Pomponius Sabinus, two eminent Critics.
Returning home into his native Country well accomplished with Latin, Greek,
and all Arts and Sciences, he set forth a Grammar, which still goes under his
Name, and is generally taught over all England.

Anno 1517. Luther wrote against Popish Indulgences, showing the abuses of them.

King Henry the Eighth, set forth a Book against Luther, endeavoring the
Confutation of his Opinions, as novel and unsound. To requite his pains, the
Pope honored him and his Successors with a specious Title, Defender of the
Faith. Luther sharply answered that Book.

Cardinal Wolsey was now the Pope's Legate de latere, by virtue whereof he
visited all Churches and Religious houses, even the Friars observants
themselves, notwithstanding their stoutness and stubbornness that first opposed
him. Papal and Royal power met in him, being the Chancellor of the Land; and
keeping so many Bishoprics in Commendam, his yearly income is said to equal,
if not exceed, the Revenues of the Crown.

Being to found two Colleges, he seized on forty small Monasteries, turning
their Inhabitants out of House and home, and converting their means principally
to a College in Oxford. This alienation was confirmed by Pope Clement the
Seventh, so that in some sort the Pope may thank himself for the demolishing of
Religious houses in England.

His College in Oxford did thrice change it is name in seven years, first
called Cardinals College, then King's College; and at last Christchurch,
which it retains at this day.

King Henry took just offense that the Cardinal set his own Arms above the
King's on thy Gate House, at the entrance into the College. There have been
maintained in this College, one Dean, eight Canons, three public Professors
of Divinity, Hebrew, and Greek, sixty Students, eight Chaplains, eight
Singing-men, an Organist, eight Choristers, twenty four Almes-men: at this
present Students of all sorts, with Officers and Servants of the Foundation, to
the number of two hundred twenty three.

John Higdon, first Dean of this College, was a great Persecutor of
Protestants, viz.

John Clark, John Frith, Henry Sumner, Baley, + John Friar, Goodman, + Nicholas
Harmar, + Michael Drum, William Betts, Lawney, Such whose names are noted
with Across, did afterward turn zealous Papists.
Richard Cox, Richard Taverner.
All these were for their Religion imprisoned in a deep Cave underground,
where the Salt-fish of the College was kept. Some of them died soon after with
the stench thereof, and others escaped with great difficulty. Taverner was
well-skilled in Music, on which account he escaped, though vehemently accused,
the Cardinal pleading for him, that he was but a Musician, though afterward he
repented to have set Tunes to so many Popish ditties.

The example of Wolsey's haughtiness, made the English Clergy so Martin's Chr.
in Henry 8.
proud and insolent, that their labors formerly applied to the studies of
moral ver^ues, and of Divinity, were now employed to devise curious fashions in
their behavior, in their apparel, and in their diet.

In the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth year of King Henry's Reign, this
proud Cardinal (under color of the King's partaking with the Emperor in his
Wars against the French King) of his own authority, and without the King's
commandment, granted forth Commissions, under the Great Seal of England, into
every Shire and Province of the Kingdom, and directed them unto the chiefest
men. And therein every man was required to depose the true value of their
Estates; and then of every fifty pounds there was demanded four shillings in
the pound. And in London he made himself the chief Commissioner, The like
Commissions he granted forth against all the Clergy of the Land, of whom he
demanded four shillings in the pound of all their livings.

These things grieved the Clergy and Common People at the heart. The Cardinal
perceiving this, recalled those Commissions, and sent forth others, which also
being not endured, the King by his Letters directed into every County,
commanded a present cessation of all executions of the said Commissions, and
protested they were granted forth without his knowledge or consent. But, if
they would by way of a Benevolence, of their own accord, enlarge themselves
toward him, he would take it as an infallible proof of their love toward him.

The Cardinal now resolved to revenge himself on the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
for not doing him right, and improving his power in preferring him to the
Papacy, according to his promises, and intends to smi^e Charles through the
sides of his Aunt, Katharine, Queen of England, endeavoring to alienate the
King's affections from her. Wolsey now put this scruple into the head of Bishop
Longlands, the King's Confessor, and he insinuated the same into the King's
Conscience. King Henry greedily resented the motion; and principles of pure
Conscience puts him upon endeavors of a divorce.

The business is brought into the Court of Rome, there to be decided by Pope
Clement the Seventh. But the Pope at this time was a prisoner to the Emperor,
who constantly kept a guard about him: Yet after some delay, the Pope
dispatched a Commission to two Cardinals, Wolsey and Campegius, an Italian, to
hear and determine the matter at London. The Pope draws back the cause unto
himself, and the King being impatient, having the consent of both Universities,
as also of that of Paris, he forsakes Katharine, and Marries Anna Bolen, Anno
1533.

And in the year 1534. he denies obedience to the Pope, and charge all his
Subjects, that they send no Money unto Rome, nor pay Peter Pence unto any of
the Collectors, which vexes the Roman Court.

Then he published an Edict, whereby he declares himself under Christ, The
supreme Head of the Church of England, and charge upon pain of Death, that no
man ascribe any Power to the Pope within England, and commands all the
Collectors of Peter Pence to be gone. These things were confirmed by the
Parliament, who also enacted, That the Archbishop of Canterbury should invest
all the Bishops of England, and that the Churchmen shall pay to the King
yearly one hundred and fifty thousand pounds for defense of the Kingdom.

Wolsey was accused in Parliament for exercising his power Legantine without
leave, to the prejudice of the King's Crown and dignity. Mr. Cromwell, Servant
to the Cardinal, being a Burgess, defends his Master: yet were all his goods
of inestimable value confiscated to the King and he outed of most of his
Ecclesiastical promotions. His enemies get the King to command him away to
York, leaving him the whole revenues of York-Archbishoprick (then worth little
less than four thousand pounds yearly) besides a large pension paid him out of
the Bishopric of Winchester.

As he was preparing there in a Princely Equipage for his Installation, he is
Arrested by the Earl of Northumberland, by Commission from the King, in his own
Chamber at Cawood.

By slow and short Journeys he sets forward toward London, and coming to
Leicester he died, where he was obscurely buried.

Then John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, was imprisoned for refusing the Oath of
Supremacy. The Clergy in the Province of York did a long time deny the King's
Supremacy. Edward Lee, Archbishop of York, fomented this difference. He was a
virulent Papist, one that wrote against Erasmus, and a persecutor of
Protestants, witness John Bale, Convented before him for suspicion of Heresy,
who in vain pleaded Scripture, in his own defense, till at last he casually
made use of a distinction out of Scotus, which the Archbishop more valued, than
all which he had before more pertinently alleged out the Old and New Testament.

The King wrote a fair and large Letter to the Convocation of York, claiming
nothing more than what Christian Princes in the Primitive times assumed to
themselves in their own Dominions, so that it seems he wrought so far on their
affections, that at last they consented thereunto.

Soon after the Clergy in the Convocation so submitted themselves to the King,
that each one severally promised, in verbo Sacerdotis, never henceforth to
presume to Allege, Claim, or put in ure any new Canons, unless the King's most
Royal assent might be had unto them; and soon after the same was ratified by
Act of Parliament.

After the Statute of Praemunire was made (which did much restrain the Papal
power, and subject it to the Laws of the Land) Archbishops called no more
Convocations by their sole and absolute command, but at the pleasure of the
King, as often as his necessities and occasions with the distresses of the Church
did require it. Yea now their meetings were by ver^ue of a Writ or Precept from
the King.

For, it was Enacted in the Parliament of the twenty fifth, of Henry the Eight,
That all Convocations shall be thenceforth called by the King's L. Herbert's
Hist. of Hen. 8.
Writ, and that in them nothing shall be promulged or executed without his
Highness License, under pain of imprisonment of the Authors, and Mulct at the
King's will. And that his Highness shall, at his pleasure, appoint thirty two
men, to survay the said Canons or Constitutions, for the Confirmation or
Abolition of the same.

And as concerning Appeals, they shall be made from inferior Courts to the
Archbishop's, and for lack of Justice there, to the King's Majesty in his Co^rt
of Chancery.

Bishop Fisher was Arraigned of high Treason, I will insert the Sting of the
indictment out of the Original.

Diversis Domini Regis veris subditis, false, malitiose, and proditorie
loquebatur, and propalabat, viz. The King owre Sovereign Lord is not Supreme
Head in earth of the Cherche of England. In dicti Domini Regis immund. despect.
and vilipendium manifest.

Of this he was found Guilty, had Judgment, and was remanded to the Tower.

The King by the advice and consent of the Clergy, in Convocation, and Great
Council in Parliament, resolved to reform the Church, under, his inspection
from gross abuses crept into it.

Thomas Hitten, a Preacher at Maidstone, for the Testimony of the Truth, after
long Torments and sundry imprisonments, by William Warham Bishop of Canterbury,
and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, was burned at Maidstone for the Testimony
of the Truth, Anno 1530.

In the year 1531. Thomas Bilney of Cambridge, Professor of both Laws,
converted Thomas Arthur, and Mr. Hugh Latimer, then Crossbearer at Cambridge,
on procession days. Afterward Bilney recanted, but for the space of two years
after his abjuration, Bilney lived in great anguish of mind: and repenting,
Preached publicly the Doctrine which he before abjured. He was afterward
taken, condemned, and burned without Bishops-gate, in a low Valley, called the
Lollards pit, under St. Leonard's Hill.

Going to Execution, one of his friends wished him to stand sure and constant:
to whom he answered, That whatsoever storms he passed in this venture, yet
shortly after, my Ship, says he, shall be in the Haven

There came forth in print a Book called, The Supplication of Beggars, made by
Simon Fish, which Book, the Lady Anna Bolen delivered to the King, who gave him
his protection. Sir Thomas Moor wrote an Answer to that Book, under the Title
of, Poor silly Souls pewling out of Purgatory; to which John Frith made a pithy
and effectual Reply.

Tindal's Translation of the New Testament came forth in English.

Richard Bayfield suffered for the truth, and was burned in Smithfield. He was
sometime a Monk of Surrey, and converted by Doctor Barnes.

After him John Tewksbury was burned in Smithfield.

Valentine Freese, and his Wife, gave their Lives at one Stake for the
testimony of the Truth.

Afterward, the Bishops, which had burned Tindal's Testaments, were enjoined
by the King to cause a new Translation to be made, but they did nothing at all.
And on the contrary, the Bishop of London caused all the translations of
Tindal, and many other Books which he had bought, to be burnt in Paul's
Churchyard.

James Bainham, a Gentleman of the Middle Temple, was put in a Prison in Sir
Thomas Moore's House, and whipped at a Tree in his Garden, called The tree of
Truth, and was by him afterward sent to the Tower to be racked: by racking he
was lamed, because he would not accuse the Gentlemen of the Temple of his
acquaintance, nor show where his Books lay. He abjured, had his liberty, but he
asked God and the world forgiveness, before the Congregation in those days, in
a Warehouse in Bow-lane. And immediately the next Sunday after, he came to St.
Austin's, with the New Testament in his hand in English; and the obedience of a
Christian-man in his bosom, and there with tears declared before the people,
that he had denied God, and prayed the people to Fox Acts and Monuments.
forgive and beware of his weakness. He was shortly after apprehended, and
committed to the Tower of London, and after three appearances, he was
condemned, and burnt in Smithfield.

About this time John Benet, a Tailor, was burnt at the Devizes in Wilt-shire,
for denying the Sacrament of the Altar.

In the year 1532. Robert King, Nicholas Marsh, and Robert Gardener, men of
Dedham, and one Robert Debnam, had overthrown and burned the Rood of
Dover-court, ten miles from Dedham: for which fact, half a year after, they
were hanged in Chains. King at Burchet in Dedham, Debnam at Cattaway-causey,
Marsh at Dover-court. Gardener escaped and fled.

Many Images were cast down, and destroyed in many places. As the Crucifix by
Coggeshal in the Highway. St. Petronel in the Church of Great Horksleigh; St.
Christopher by Sudbury; St. Petronel in a Chapel by Ipswich: Also John Seward,
of Dedha^, overthrew a Cross in Stok^park, and took two Images out of a Chapel
in the same Park, and cast them into the water.

John Frith, who was first a Student in Cambridge, and afterward one of those
whom Cardinal Wolsey gathered together to furnish his new College, was
condemned by the Bishop of London, and was burnt in Smithfield. Great was his
learning, gravity and constancy, though but six and twenty years of age. With
Frith was Andrew Hewet burned, after he had given testimony to the truth.

Thomas Benet, a Schoolmaster, of fifty years of age, born in Cambridge, was
burned at Exeter. Diverse others were condemned to perpetual prison.

During the time of Queen Anne, no great persecution, nor abjuration was in the
Church of England.

Sir Thomas Moore, Doctor Nicholas Wilson, and Bishop Fisher, refused the Oath
to the Act of Succession, made Anno 1534. and Sir Thomas Moor, and Doctor
Wilson, were also sent to the Tower. The Doctor dissembled the matter, and so
escaped, but the other two remained obstinate.

On November the third this Parliament was again assembled, in which the Pope
and Cardinals with his Pardons and Indulgences, were wholly abolished: to the
abolition of which, and to the ratifying of the King's Title of Supreme Head,
Stephen Gardener gave his Oath; so did John Stokesley* Bishop of London, Edward
Lee, Archbishop of York, Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham, and all the rest of the
Bishops in like sort: to this Title also agreed the sentence of the University
of Cambridge. Edmond Bonner, then Archdeacon of Leicester, was also of the same
judgment.

To this also agreed the whole Clergy of the Church of England, and subscribed
with the hands of the Bishops, and other learned Men, to the number of forty
six Doctors of Divinity, and of both Laws.

Polydor Virgil, who being sent into England, had been the Pope's Collector
General of the Peter Pence, exacting them in the notion of a Rent and Tribute
due to the Pope his Master, was made Archdeacon of Taunton, and Dignitary of
the Cathedral Church of Wells, on the Quire whereof he bestowed Hangings
flourished with the Lawrel-tree, and wrote upon them.

Sunt Polydori munera Virgilii. He wrote a Latin History of Britain, until the
year of our Lord 1533. out of many rare Manuscripts which he had collected
together.

John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester; was beheaded, soon after the Pope Anno 1535.
had made him Cardinal of St. Vitalis. He was Chaplain and Confessor to the
Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, at whose Instance, and by whose advice,
she founded, and endowed Christ's and St. John's College in Cambridge. He died
in the seventy seventh year of his Age, on June 22.

Sir Thomas Moor was beheaded the next month after Bishop Fisher, and was
buried at Chelsey. He was a great Enemy to the Protestants.

On June the eighth began a Parliament, which was dissolved on July the
eighteenth following. A parallel Convocation began the day after, wherein the
Lord Cromwell, Prime Secretary, sat in State above all the Bishops, as the
King's Vicar, or Vicegerent General in all Spiritual matters. Deformi satis
spectaculo (says Bishop Godwin) indocto Laico Godwin Annals. Anno 1536.
caetui Praesidente Sacratorum Antistitum, omnium, quos ante haec tempora
Anglia unquam habuisset, doctissimorum. But the Lord Cromwell had in Power and
Policy what he wanted in Learning. In that Convocation the said Lord tendered
unto them an Instrument to be publicly signed by all the Convocation,
concerning the nullity of the King's Marriage with the Lady Anna Bolen. Some
ten days before Archbishop Cranmer had pronounced it invalid, frustrate and of
none effect at Lambeth. No particular cause is specified in that sentence. Sure
I am! there is no dashing on the credit of the Lady, nor any the least
insi^uation of unchastity in that Instrument. Praeclara Domina, and Serenissima
Regina, being the worst Titles that are given her therein. King Henry got her
Divorce confirmed both by Convocation and Parliament. She was beheaded May 19.
1536. The King on the next day was married to the Lady Jane Seymour.

Soon after by little and little began the ruin of the Abbeys and Religious
Houses, for all Religious Houses, whose possessions in yearly revenue exceeded
not the sum of two hundred pounds, were suppressed and dissolved, and all their
Sites and Possessions whatsoever were given for ever to the King. The Clergy
also at the same time, of their own accord, and to insinuate themselves into
grace and favor with the King, composed and published in printed Books,
certain Articles, for the ordering and governing of the Church, in which
mention was made of three Sacraments only, and the rest of them (which former
times did superstitiously receive and maintain) were left out of the said Books.

These proceedings of the King and Clergy against the Pope and Holy Church,
were so generally disliked by the rude and ignorant people, that they openly
affirmed, that the King's Council irreligiously directed him amiss, and that
the temporizing Clergy of the Land practiced by all means possible, to
extinguish all Devotion, and utterly to subvert all the ancient Rites,
Ceremonies, and commendable Government of the Church. And the unruly people in
Lincolnshire, to the number of twenty thousand, assembled themselves in Arms,
taking upon themselves to frame better Orders for the governing of the Church
and Commonwealth. But the King approaching near them with an Army, they ran
away, and Doctor Mackarel, their Ringleader, with some others, were shortly
after apprehended and executed.

Then there arose another Insurrection in the North, and the number of those
Rebels exceeded the number of forty thousand men, who termed themselves, The
holy Pilgrims, who intended nothing, but the establishing of true Religion, and
the reformation of great abuses, which defaced the Government of the Church.
The King's Army drawing near (upon the faithful promise of the Dukes of
Norfolk, and Suffolk, that commanded his Army, that the King should pardon
them) the Rebels left the field, and quietly departed to their own houses.

Now the King waxed more absolute in his Government, especially concerning his
Clergy, and the ordering of the Church.

William Tindal, who translated the New Testament in English, and the five
Books of Moses, with many other godly Works, was burned at the Town of Filford
in Flaunders, by virtue of the Emperor's Decree, made in the Assembly at
Ausburgh. He was first strangled, and after consumed with fire. At the Stake he
cried with a loud voice, Lord open the King of England' s eyes.

The King began with a little Book of Articles, for the instruction of the
people, bearing this Title, Articles, devised by the King's Highness, to
establish Christian quiet and unity among the people. It contained the Creed,
three Sacramen^s, Baptism, the Eucharist, and Penance, how Images might safely
be worshipped, and how Saints departed ought to be reverenced; that the Parsons
should teach their people, that Christ is their only Mediator, and how the
Ceremonies of holy Water, holy Bread, Candles, etc. should without superstition
be used. It took away also the abuses which arose upon the imagination of
Purgatory, as Masses for Souls departed, Pardons, etc. Not long after these
Articles, certain other Injunctions were also given out about the same year:
whereby a number of Holy Days were abrogated, especially such as fell in
Harvesttime. Other Injunctions were also given out by the King concerning
Images, Relics, and blind Miracles: for abrogating of Pilgrimages. Also for
the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and ten Commandments, and the Bible to be done into
English.

Anno 1538, the Parsons of Churches, and the Parishes together, were bound to
provide in every Parish Church a Bible in English. Also for every Parishioner
to be taught by the Minister, to understand and say the Lord's Prayer and Creed
in their own vulgar tongue, with other necessary Injunctions, as for the free
preaching of the Word of God, against Images, Pilgrimages, Avies, Suffrages of
Saints, etc. and for a Register-book to be kept in every Church.

This year was Friar Forest burned quick, hanging in Chains in Smithfield, for
denying the King's Supremacy: with this Forest was Darvel Gatheren, an
abominable Idol of Wales, burned. The Firstfruits Office first s^t up in (...).


Great was the King's profit at this time from the Office for the receipt of
Tenths and First Fruits, which was now first set up in London. Such moneys were
formerly paid to the Pope, who had his Collectors in every Diocese, which
sometimes by Bills of Exchange, but generally in specie (to the great
impoverishing of the Land) yearly returned the Tenths and First Fruits of the
English Clergy to Rome.

The Pope being now dead in England, the King was found his Heir at Common Law,
as to most of the power and profit the other had usurped. But now as the Clergy
had changed their Landlord, so their Rents were new rated, Commissioners being
employed in all Counties (the Bishop of the Diocese being always one of them)
to value their yearly Revenue, that so their Tenths and First Fruits may be
proportioned accordingly. These Raters were the chiefest in all Counties under
the degrees of Barons.

These Commissioners were empowered by the King, to send for the Scribes and
Notaries of all Bishops and Archdeacons, to swear the Receivers, Fuller. Church
history.
and Auditors of Incumbents, to view their Register-books, Easter-books, and
all other Writings, and to use all other ways to know the full value of
Ecclesiastical preferments, with the number and names of persons enjoying the
same. They were to divide themselves by Three and Three, allotting to every
number so many Deaneries, and to enquire the number and names of all Abbeys,
Monasteries, Priories, Brotherships, Sisterships, Fellowships, etc. Houses
Religious and Conventual, as well CHARTER-HOVSE as others (these Carthusians
being specified by name, because pretending privilege of Papal exemption) and
meeting together to certify into the Exchequer (at the time limited in their
Commission) the true value of such places or preferments.

This work took up some years in the effecting thereof; Devon-shire and
Sommerset were done in the twenty seventh; Staffordshire, and many other
Counties, in the thirty fourth year of King Henry the Eighth, and most of Wales
not till the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. In Ireland the Commissioners found
the work so troublesome, that they never came into the County of Kerrey, the
South-West extremity of that Island, so that the Clergy thereof are put into
their Benefices without any payments. But in England all were unpartially
rated, and Vicaridges valued very high, according to their present Revenue, by
personal Requisites. Idem ibid.
In that Age he generally was the richest Shepherd that had the greatest Flock,
where Oblations from the living, and Obits for the dead (as certainly paid as
predial Tithes) much advanced their Income. In consideration whereof Vicaridges
(mostly lyinig in Market Towns and populous Parishes) were set very high,
though soon after those obventions sunk with superstition. And the Vicars, in
vain, desired a proportionable abatement in the King's Books; which once drawn
up, were no more to be altered.

Now Queen Mary did by Act of Parliament, exonerate, acquit, and discharge the
Clergy from all First Fruits.

As for Tenths, the same Statute ordered them to be paid to Cardinal Pool, who
from the same was to pay the Pensions allowed to Monks and Nuns by her Father
at the dissolution of Abbeys: yet so, that when such persons, who were but few
and aged, (all named in a Deed indented) should decease, all such payments of
the Clergy, reserved Nomine Decimae, should cease, and be extinct for ever.

But her Sister, Queen Elizabeth, succeeding her, was exact to have Vide (...).
1 El^^. cap. 4.
her Dues from the Clergy. Sir Christopher Hatton, who was Master of this
First Fruits Office, was much indebted to her for Moneys received. All which
Arrears her Majesty required so severely and suddenly from him, that the grief
thereof cost him his life. I say, this Queen, in the first of her Reign,
resumed First Fruits and Tenths, only with this case, to Parsonages not
exceeding ten Marks, and Vicaridges ten pounds, that they should be freed from
First Fruits.

In the months of October and November, Anno 1538. the Abbeys and Monasteries
in England were dissolved. Cromwell being made General Visitor, employed Richard
Layton, Thomas Lee, William Detre, Doctors of the Law, Doctor John London, Dean
of Wallingford, with others, giving them instruction, in eighty six Articles,
for visiting Monasteries every where, by which they were to enquire into the
government, behavior, and education of the persons of both Sexes: to find out
all their offenses, and to this purpose give them encouragements, to accuse
both their Governors, and each other. To command them to exhibit their
Mortmains, Evidences, and Conveyances of their Lands: to produce Lord Herbert
in vit. Henr. 8.
their Plate and Money, and give an Inventory thereof.

The King also gave forth Injunctions to be observed, some tending to the
establishing of his Supremacy: Some touching the good Government of the Houses.

As that no Brother go out of the Precinct.

That there be but one entrance.

That no Woman frequent the Monks, nor any Man the Nuns, etc.

And some for Education:

As that a Divinity-lecture be every where read and frequented.

That the Abbot daily expound some part of the Rule of their Order, showing
yet, that these Ceremonies are but Introductions to Religion, which consists
not in Apparel, shaven Heads, etc. but in purity of mind.

That none shall profess, or wear the Habit, till twenty four years of age.

That no feigned Relics, or Miracles be showed: no Offerings to Images, etc.

Lee, and the rest at their return, gave that account of their feigned Miracles
and Relics, as well as sinful and sluggish life of the Religious O^ders, as
not only Cromwell said, their Houses should be thrown down to the foundation;
but the whole Body of the Kingdom, when it was published to them, became so
scandalized thereat, as they resolve, if the King ever put it into their hands,
to give remedy thereunto. Yet were not all alike criminal, for some Societies
behaved themselves so well, as their life being not only exempt from notorious
faults, but their spare times bestowed in writing Books, Painting, Carving,
Graving, and the like Exercises, their Visitors became Intercessors for them.
But these being not many, were at last involved in the common fate.

Not long after this, the King caused all Colleges, Chantries, and Hospitals,
to be visited, not omitting to take a particular survey of all the Revenues and
Diguities Ecclesiastical within his Kingdom; which was returned to him in a
Book, to be kept in the Exchequer.

Then King Henry sent Fox, Bishop of Hereford, to the Protestant Princes in
Germany, assembled at Smalcald, to exhort them to an unity in Doctrine, wherein
he offered his assistance by conference with their Divines.

Immediately after the ruin of Monasteries, in the Month of November followed
the condemnation of John Lambert, that faithful Servant of Christ. On a set day
Lambert was brought forth, where he had not only the King's fierce countenance
against him, but also ten Disputers against him, from twelve of the clock till
five at night, among which were the Archbishop, Stephen Gardener, C. Tunstal,
Bishop of Durham, and J. Stokesley, Bishop of London. Through Winchester's
persuasion, to gratify the people, the King himself condemned Lambert, and
commanded Cromwell to read the Sentence. He was burned in Smithfield, where he
suffered most horrible torments before he expired.

The King, after the burning of many Images, caused the bones of Thomas Becket,
Archbishop in the time of Henry the Second, to be burned. He also seized on
that immense Treasure and Jewels that were offered to his Shrine; there being
few, since the time of Henry the Second, that passed to Canterbury, that did
not both visit his Tomb, and bring rich Presents to it. Among which there being
one Stone eminent, which, it was said, Lewis the Seventh, coming hither on
Pilgrimage from France, Anno Dom. 1179. bestowed: Our King wore it in a Ring
afterward.

The number of Monasteries, first and last, suppressed in England and ^.
Wales, were (as Mr. Camden accounts them) six hundred forty five; whereof
these had voices among the Peers. The Abbot of St. Albans, declared the first
Abbey of England: St Peter's in Westminster, St. Bennet of Holm; Berdsey,
Shrewsbury, Crowland, Abingdon, Evesham, Gloucester, Ramsey, St. Mary's in York,
Tewksbury, Reading, Battle, Winchcomb, Hid^ by Winchester, Cirencester,
Waltha^, Al^^lmesbury, Thorney, St. Augustine in Canterbury, Selby;
Peterboro^^^, (...) in Colchester, Coventry, Tavestock.

Of Colleges were demolished, in diverse Shires, ninety. Of Chauntries, and
Fire-chappels, two thousand three hundred seventy four; and Hospitals one
hundred and ten; the yearly value of all which were, one hundred sixty one
thousand, one hundred pounds, being above a third part of all our spiritual
Revenues, besides the money made of the present stock of Cattle and Corn, of
the Timber, Lead, Bells, etc. and lastly, but chiefly of the Plate and
Ornaments, which was not valued, but may be conjectured by that one Monastery
of St. Edmond's-bury, whence was taken five thousand Marks of Gold and Silver,
besides Stones of great value.

But the King not only augmented the number of the Colleges and Professors in
his Universities, but erected, out of the Revenues gotten L. Herbert's Hist. of
Hen. 8.
hereby, diverse new Bishoprics, whereof one at Westminster, one at Oxford, one
at Peterborough, one at Bristol, one at Chester, and one at Gloucester; all
remaining at this day, save that at Westminster: which being revoked to its
first Institution, by Queen Mary, and Benedictines placed in it, was, by Queen
Elizabeth afterward, converted to a Collegiare-church, and a School for the
teaching and maintenance of young Scholars. Besides many of the ancient
Cathedral-churches, formerly possessed by Monks only, were now supplied with
Canons, and some new ones erected and endowed; the Revenues allotted by the
King to those new Bishoprics, and Cathedrals, amounting to about eight
thousand pounds per Annum. Besides, the King in demolishing the Abbeys, did not
only prefer diverse Learned men which he found there, but took special care to
preserve the choicest Books of their well-furnished Libraries, wherein John
Leland, a curious searcher of Antiquities, was employed.

These Houses, Sites, Possessions, were by the Parliament settled on Martin's
Chronic. in H^^. 8.
the King, who (to prevent the future restoring of them back again to their
former uses) exchanged them liberally for other Lands with the Nobles and
Gentry of his Realm, many of whose Estates at this day do wholly consist of
Possessions of that nature, or else are greatly advanced by those Lands.

A Match being made up betwixt King Henry, and the Lady Anne of Cl^eve, by the
Lord Cromwell's contrivance, many Dutchmen flocked into England, whose heads
were busied about points of Divinity, whilst their hands were busied about
their Manufactures. Soon after they broached their strange Opinions, being
branded with the general name of Anabaptists.

This year 15^9. their name first appears in our English Chronicles: for I
read, that four Anabaptists, three Men, and one Woman, all (...) chron. ^. 5^6.
Dutch, bear Faggots at Paul's Cross, and three days after a Man and Woman, of
their Sect, were burnt in Smithfield.

The King liked not Anne of Cleeve. who was a very virtuous Lady, but in her
countenance not well composed, fair, nor lovely. Some feminine impotency was
objected against her, though only her precontract with the Son of the Duke of
Lorrain was publicly insisted on, for which, by Act of Parliament now sitting,
she was solemnly divorced. And the Bishops and Clergy of this Land, in their
solemn Convocation, published an authentical Instrument in writing, under the
Seals of the two Archbishops, That the King's Marriage with the said Lady Anne
of Cleve was void, and of none effect.

From thenc^forth the King frowneth upon the Lord Cromwell.

Then the six Articles, called by some, The bloody Statute, by others, The Whip
with six strings, by the persuasion of Bishop Gardener (in defiance of
Archbishop Cranmer, and the Lord Cromwell, opposing it) was enacted, being

I. That in the Sacrament of the Altar, after Consecration, no substance of
Bread or Wine remains, but the natural Body and Blood of Christ.

II. That the Communion in both kinds is not necessary, ad salutem, by the Law
of God to all persons.

III. That Priests, after Orders received, may not marry by the Law of God.

IV. That Vows of Castity ought to be observed.

V. That it is meet and necessary, that private Masses be admitted and
continued in Churches.

IV. That Auricular confession must be frequented by people, as necessary to
Salvation.

The Lord Cromwell was soon after arrested, and ten days after his Arrest, he
was attainted of High Treason in Parliament, and he, with the Lord Hongerford,
the next week after, was beheaded on Tower Hill.

After the execution of the Lord Cromwell, the Parliament still sitting, a motly
Execution happened in Smithfield: three Papists hanged by the Statute, for
denying the King's Supremacy, viz.

Edward Powel. Thomas Abley. Richard Fetherston.
And as many Protestants burned at the same time and place, by virtue of the
six Articles, viz.

Robert Barnes, Doctor of Divinity. Thomas Gerard, William Jerome, Batchelors of
Divinity.
This was caused by the difference of Religions in the King's Privy Council,
wherein the Popish party called for the execution of these Protestants, whilst
the Protestant Lords in the Council, cried as fast, that the Laws might take
effect upon the Papists.

In the Parliament a Statute was made, commanding every man, Fully, A Statute
made for the recovery of Tithes. 32 Hen. 8. c. 7.
truly, and effectually to divide, set out, yield, or pay all and singular
Tithes and Offerings, according to the lawful customs and usages of the
Parishes and places where such Tithes, or Duties, shall grow, arise, come, or
be due. And remedy is given for Ecclesiastic persons before the Ordinary; and
for Laymen, that claimed appropriated Tithes by grant from the Crown, in the
secular Courts, by such Actions, as usually Lay-possessions had been subject
to. This Statute, in favor of Lay-impropriators, was beneficial to the Clergy,
to recover their Predial Tithes at Common Law.

A Statute also was made, That it was lawful for all persons to contract
marriage, who are not prohibited by the Law of God: for after the time of Pope
Gregory, other Popes did not only forbid the marriage of Cousin-Germans, but
other degrees farther off, thereby to get money for Dispensations.

This Law came seasonably to comply with King Henry's occasions, who had the
first fruits thereof, and presently after married Katherine Howard.
Cousin-german to Anna Bolen, his second Wife, which by the Canon Law formerly
was forbidden, without a special Dispensation* first obtained.

In the third Session of the Convocation at St. Paul's several Bishops were
assigned to peruse several Books of the Translation of the new Testament.
Cranmer stickleth for the Universities approbation.

The Parliament, Anno 1544. mitigated the six Articles; for it was required,
that all Offenders should first be found guilty by a Jury of twelve men, before
they should suffer.

Anno 1545. began the last Parliament in this King's Reign, wherein many things
of consequence were enacted.

1. Against Usury.

2. For Tithes in London.

3. For an exchange of Lands betwixt the King's Majesty, and Thomas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Holgate, Archbishop of York, and Edmond
Bonner, Bishop of London; which the King annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster.

4. An Act for union of Churches, not exceeding the value of six pounds.

5. That Doctors of the Civil Law might exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

At this time also, by the King's command, were the Stews suppressed.

The Favorers of the truth among the Noblemen were, the Earl of Fox. Acts and
Monuments.
Suffolk, Viscount Beauchamp, Viscount Lisle, Lord Russel Treasurer, Lord
Awdley Chancellor, Lord Paget, and Sadler, and Thomas Cranmar Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The Patrons of Popery were, the Bishop of Winchester and Durham, the Duke of
Norfolk, and Earl of Southampton, Anthony Brown, William Pawlet, John Baker,
Richard Chancellor of the Augmentation, Winckfield Vice Chancellor.

Four and twenty were Executed for Traitors, in the time of King Henry, for the
cause of Supremacy.

Adam Damlip, who before had escaped, and lay hid in the Westcountrey, teaching
a School about a year or two, by the miserable Inquisition of the six Articles,
was again taken and brought up to London, where he was by Stephen Gardener
commanded to the Marshal-sea, and after two years space he was Condemned and
Executed for Treason. One Henry was burnt at Colchester, and one Kerby at
Ipswich, for the Testimony of the Truth.

In the year 1546. in June, Anne Ashcough, alids Kyme, Daughter of Sir William
Ashcough of Kelsey in Lincolnshire, of the age of 25. years, whose Wit,
Beauty, Learning and Religion, procured her much esteem on the Queens side of
the Court, and as much hatred from the Popish Bishops, was burned for the
profession of the Truth, in Smithfield, with three men, Nicholas Belevian,
Priest of Shrop-shire, John Lacels, Gentleman of the household of King Henry the
Eighth, and John Adams a poor Tailor of London. Her several examinations penned
by her self are extant in Mr. Fox.

Then began the troubles of Queen Katherine Parr, whom the King had married
some two years since. She was one of great piety, beauty, and discretion: next
to the Bible, she studied the King's disposition, observing him to her utmost:
yet sometimes she would presume to discourse with the King about points of
Religion, defending the Protestant Tenets by Scripture, and sometimes would
hold up the King very close hard at it. This displeased him, who loved
looseness and liberty in his Clothes, Arguments, and Actions, and was quickly
observed by Gardener, and others, the Queen's enemies.

Hereupon Gardener drew up Articles against her, and got them subscribed with
the King's own hand, to send ^her to the Tower. But Chancellor Wriothesley put
the paper of those Articles in his own bosom, which casually fell out, was
taken up by one of the Queen's Servants, and brought to the Queen, who on her
sickness and submission to the King, obtained his Pardon, Signed and Sealed
unto her with many kisses and embraces. And her enemies that came to attach
her, were sent back with the Taunts and Threats of the enraged King against
them. King Henry made his Will, and died a month after, and was buried at
Windsor.

After the Death of King Henry, succeeded King Edward his Son, Sir John
Hayw^^d's Hist. of K. Edw. 6.
being scarce ten years old, full of as much Worth as the model of his Age
could hold. He attained not only commendable Knowledge, but speech in the
Greek, Spanish, and Italian Languages, having always great Judgment in
measuring his Words by his Matter; his Speech being alike, both fluent and
weighty, such as best beseemed a Prince. As for Natural Philosophy, Logic,
Music, Astronomy, and other Liberal Sciences; his perfections were such, that
the great Italian Philosopher Cardan, having tasted him by many Conferences,
seemed to be astonished between admiration and delight, and divulged his
abilities to be miraculous.

These his acquirements, by industry, were very much enriched and enlarged by
many excellent Endowments of nature; for in disposition he was mild, gracious,
and pleasant, of an heavenly wit; in Body beautiful, but especially in his
Eyes, which seemed to have a Starry liveliness and luster in them. Generally he
seemed to be, as Cardan reported of him. A Miracle of Nature.

Because he was young, he was committed to sixteen Governors, the Lord Edward
Seimour, Duke of Sommerset, his Uncle, was assigned unto him Protector, by
whose endeavor the six bloody Articles forementioned were abolished.

This King restored the holy Scriptures in the English Tongue, he abolished
Masses, and such as were banished were received home, as John Hooper, Miles
Coverdale, etc. He changed most part of the Bishops of Diocesses, and compelled
dumb Priests to give place to those that would Preach: he suppressed Idolatry,
restored the Gospel and worship of God, encouraged Godly Preachers, sent for
Eminent Men, both for Learning and Piety, from beyond the Seas, to Teach in
both Universities, viz. Peter Martyr in Oxford, and Martin Bucer, and Paulus
Fagius in Cambridge, and was a Refuge to all the Godly that fled for Religion
out of other Countries; and therefore is called by Melchior Adam, Summae spei
Princeps, qui omnibus piis and doctis, Polanis, Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ.
Theolog.
Germanis, Gallis, Scotis, Italis, Hispanis, hospitium and patrocinium dederat:
A Prince of singular hope, who gave protection and entertainment to all Godly
and Learned Men, Polonians, Germans, French, Scots, Italians, Spaniards. In
consideration whereof an eminent Martyr in Queen Mary's days, in an
effectionate Speech of His, before a Popish Persecutor, cried out, Blessed be
God for King Edward.

This King was much inclined to Clemency, especially in matters of Blood, and
most especially if i^ were for Religion, insomuch, that albeit he was greatly
affected to that Religion wherein he had been brought up, yet none were
executed in his time for other Religion, but only two blasphemous Heretics,
Joan Butcher, and George a Dutchman. And when Joan Butcher was to be burned,
all the Council could not procure him to set his hand to the Warrant: wherefore
they employed Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, to deal privately with
him for his subscription. But the King remained firm in resolution, affirming,
That he would not drive her heaalong to the Devil. The Archbishop was violent
both by persuasions and entreaties: and when with mere importunity he had
prevaled, the King in subscribing his name said, That he would lay all the
charge thereof upon the Archbishop before God.

Then the Professors of the Gospel were in all places relieved, and many
Prisoners appointed to die, were enlarged and preserved: Only Thomas Dobby,
Fellow of St. John's in Cambridge, committed to the Counter in Bred-street, and
condemned for speaking against the Mass, died of a natural death in Prison;
his speedy death prevented the pardon which the Lord Protector intended to send
him.

The Lord Protector ordered all in Church and State. The King in his
protection, took speedy order for Reformation of Religion, and having chosen
Wise, and Learned, Men to be his Commissioners in that behalf, divided them
into several Diocesses, to be visited, appointing likewise unto every company
one or two Godly Learned Preachers, to instruct the people at every Session in
the true Doctrine of the Gospel. To those Commissioners were delivered thirty
six Injunctions, and Ecclesiastical Laws, which they should enquire of, and
also command in his Majesty's name and behalf, all tending to the abolishing of
Popish superstition, and establishing the Truth of the Gospel.

Besides which general Injunctions, for the estate of the whole Realm, there
were also certain others particularly appointed for the Bishops only; whereby
they were enjoined to see the other put in Execution; besides others which did
more particulary confirm them. These Injunctions may be seen at large in the
first Edition of the Acts and Monuments Fuller. church History, p. 372 373.
( fol. 684.) and you may read them in a smoother Abstract in Fuller's Church
History. Some Homiles were left with the Parish Priests, which the Archbishop
had composed, not only for the help of unpreaching Ministers, but for the
regulating and instructing even of the Dr. P. Helyns History of K. Edw. 6.
Learned Preachers. Besides the points contained in the said Injunctions, the
Preachers, above mentioned, were more particulary instructed to persuade the
people from Praying to the Saints, from making Prayer for the Dead, from
Adoring of Images, from the use of Beads, Ashes and Processions, from Mass,
Diriges, Praying in unknown Languages, and from other such like things,
whereunto long custom had brought a Religious observation.

All which was done to this intent, That the people in all places being
prepared by little and little, might with more ease and less opposition, admit
the total alteration in the face of the Church, which was intended in due time
to be introduced.

While these Commissioners were occupied abroad, the King desirng a
Reformation, appointed a Parliament, November. 4. in the first year of his Reign,
Anno 1547. wherein all Acts made before against the Professors of the Truth
were Abrogated. In the same Parliament also it was Decreed, That the Sacrament
should be ministered to all under both kinds. Then also were Candles on
Candlemas-day forbidden, and Ashes on Ash Wednesday, according to the Popish
custom.

About the sa^e time also all Images were taken away in most places of the
Kingdom.

The first who declared his aversness to the King's proceedings, was Dr.
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, who stomaching his being left out of
the list of the Council, appeared more Cross to all their doings than others of
his Order: for which being brought before their Lordships, they sent him
Prisoner to the Fleet.

Albeit Edmond Bonner, Bishop of London, at first seemed to comply, yet at
length he bewraied himself, by suffering daily to be Sung the Apostles Mass, and
our Ladies Mass, etc. in diverse of his Chapels in Paul's, ^l^aking them with
the name of the Apostles, and our Ladies Communions, whereof the Council being
informed, caused him to reform the abuse.

Sir Anthony Cook, and Sir John Goodsale, Knights; John Goodsal, and
Christopher Nevinson, Doctors of the Laws, and John Madew, Doctor of Divinity,
the King's Commissioners, called before them the said Edmond Bonner, John
Royston, Polydor Virgil, and many others of the Dignitaries of the said
Cathedral, to whom the Sermon being done, and their Commission openly read,
they ministered the Oath of the King's Supremacy, according to the Statute of
thirty one of King Henry the eighth, requiring them withal to present such
things as needed to be reformed. Which done, they delivered to Bishop Bonner a
Copy of the Injunctions forementioned, together with the Homilies set forth by
the King's authority, received by him with protestation, That he would observe
them, if they were not contrary to the Law of God, and the Ordinances of the
Church. But afterward he revoked his protestation, and humbly submitted
himself to his Majesty's pleasure. Yet for a Terror to others, Bishop Bonner
was committed to the Fleet.

During the short time of his restraint ( viz. September. 18.) the Litany was
Sung in the English Tongue in St. Paul's Church, between the Quire and the High
Altar, the Singers kneeling half on the one side, and half on the other. And
the same day the Epistle and Gospel was also read at the High Mass in the
English Tongue. And in November next following (Bishop Bonner being then
restored to his former liberty) the Image of Christ, then called the Rood, and
all other Images in that Church, as also in all the other Churches of London
were taken down. And in speeding of this work, as Bishop Bonner, together with
the Dean and Chapter, did perform their part in the Cathedral of St. Paul; so
Bellassere, Archdeacon of Colchester, and Doctor Gilbert Bourn (being at that
time Archdeacon both of London and Essex) were no less diligent in doing the
like in all the Churches of their respective Jurisdictions, according to the
charge imposed upon them by his Majesty's Visitors.

The first Translation of the Bible was set forth in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth, Anno 1541. with a Grave and Pious preface of Archbishop Cranmer,
and Authorized by the King's Proclamation, Dated May 6. Seconded also with
Instructions from the King. It was called the Bible of the greater Volume. Few
Countrey-parishes could go to the cost of them, though Bishop Bonner caused six
of them to be chained in the Church of St. Paul's in convenient places.

The second Translation of the Bible was set forth in the Reign of King Edward
the Sixth, and not only suffered to be read by particular persons, but ordered
to be read over yearly in the Congregation, as a principal part of Divine
Service. Two Editions there were thereof, one set forth 1549. the other 1541.
but neither of them divided into verses.

The third Translation of the Bible was set forth in the second year of Extant
in Sir Tho. Cotton. Library.
Queen Elizabeth. The last Translation was again reviewed by some of the most
Learned Bishops (appointed thereunto by the Queen's Commission) whence it took
the name of the Bishops Bible, and by the Queens sole commandment Reprinted.

Then diverse Proclamations were issued out in the King's name, relating to
Ecclesiastical matters, in the four first years of his Reign, among which there
was a Proclamation inhibiting Preachers, Anno secundo, Edwardi sexti, whereof
this was the occasion. Certain Popish Preachers, disaffected to the King's
Government, in their Sermons declared, That the King intended to lay strange
exactions upon the people. To prevent further mischief, the King ordered by
Proclamation, That none should Preach except Licensed under the Seals of the
Lord Protector, or Archbishop of Canterbury. At this time many Popish Pulpits
sounded the Alarm to Kets Rebellion, and the Devon-shire Commotion.

There was also a Proclamation for the payment of the late Incumbents of
Colleges, and Chanteries lately dissolved.

Anno 3. Edwardi sexti, A Proclamation also for the Inhibition of Players, Aug.
6.

The Parliament not long before, passed an Act for Election of Bishops, and
what Seals and styles should be used by Spiritual persons: in which it was
Ordained.

That Bishops should be made by the King's Letters Patents, and not by the
election of the Deans and Chapters.

That all their Processes and Writings should be made in the King's name only,
with the Bishops Test added to it, and sealed with no other Seal but the
King's, or such as should be authorized and appointed by him.

The Intent of the Contrivers of this Act (says Dr. Heylin) was Heylin Hist.
Edw. 6.
to weaken the authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them from their
strong-hold of Divine Institution, and making them no other than the King's
Ministers only. And of this Act such use was made, that the Bishops of those
times were not in a capacity of conferring Orders, but as they were thereunto
empowered by special License. The Tenor whereof was (if Sanders may be
believed) in these words following, viz.

The King to such a Bishop, Greeting. Whereas all and all manner of
Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, flows from the King, as from the
Supreme Head of all the Body etc. We therefore give and grant to Thee full
Power and License, to continue during our good pleasure, for holding Ordination
within thy Diocese of N. and for promoting fit persons unto holy Orders, even
to that of the Priesthood. Queen Mary caused this Act to be repealed in the
first year of her Reign, leaving the Bishops to depend on their former Claim,
and to Act all things which belonged to their Jurisdiction in their own Names,
and under their own Seals, as in former times. In which estate they have
continued without any legal interruption from that time to this.

Doctor Nicholas Ridley was promoted to the Sea of Rochester, to which he had
been nominated by King Henry the Eighth, a man of great Learning, and
well-studied in the Fathers, and an excellent Preacher. Doctor Barlow was
preferred to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells.

The Commissioners authorized to take away Images out of Churches, were in many
places entertained with contempt and railing, and the farther they went from
London the worse they were handled: one of them called Body, as he was pulling
down Images in Cornwall, was stabbed in the body by a Priest.

Many there were that then cried down all the observations of Days and Times,
and particularly of keeping Lent: complaint whereof being made by Bishop
Gardener in a Letter to the Lord Protector, a Proclamation was sent out
commanding all people to abstain from Flesh in the time of Lent, and the King's
Lenten diet was set out, and served as in former times.

Hugh Latimer having by the power of Cromwell, and his favor with the King,
been made Bishop of Worcester, Anno 1535. continued in that See, till on the
first of July 1539. he chose rather to resign the same, than to have any hand
in passing the six Articles, then agitated in the Convocation, and confirmed by
Parliament: full eight years he betook himself to the retiredness of a private
life. On New Years day he Preached his first Sermon at Paul's Cross (the first I
mean after his readmission to his former Ministry) and two Lords-days after
again in the same place, and on January 25. such multitudes flocked to hear his
Sermon, that being to Preach before the King the first Friday in Lent, a pulpit
was placed in the King's privy Garden, where he might be heard of four times as
many Auditors, as could have thronged into the Chapel. Which as it was the
first Sermon that was Preached in that place, so afterward a fixed and standing
Pulpit was erected for the like occasions, especially for Lent-sermons on the
Sundays in the Afternoon, and has so continued ever since till these latter
times.

At the return of the King's Commissioners, dispatched throughout the Realm, to
take a Survay of all Colleges, Free-chappels, Chanteries, and Brotherhoods, in
the first place (as lying nearest) came in the free Chapel of St. Stephen,
originally founded in the Palace at Westminster, and reckoned for the Chapel
Royal of the Court of England. The whole Foundation consisted of thirty eight
persons, viz. one Dean, twelve Canons, thirteen Vicars, four Clerks, six
Choristers, besides a Verger, and one that had the charge of the Chapel. This
Chapel has been since fitted, and employed for an house of Commons in all
times of Parliament.

At the same time also fell the College, commonly called St. Martins le Grand,
near Aldersgate in London: the King gave the same, with the Liberties and
precincts thereof to the Church of Westminster. These two, St. Stephen's and
St. Martin's, were the richest of all the rest.

Then the Lord Protector being unfurnished of a Palace proportionable to his
Greatness, doubted not to find room enough upon the dissolution of the
Bishopric of Westminster lately erected, to raise a Palace equal to his vast
designs. Which coming to the ears of Benson, the last Abbot, and first Dean of
Westminster, he was willing to preserve the whole; by parting for the present
with more than half of the estate belonging to it. And thereupon a Lease is
made of seventeen Manors, and good Farms, lying almost altogether in the
County of Gloucester, for the Term of ninety nine years, which was presented to
the Lord Thomas Seymor, to serve as an addition to his Manor of Sudley.
Another present of almost as many Manors, lying in the Counties of Gloucester,
Worcester, and Hereford, was made for the like Term to Sir John Mason, f^r the
use of the Lord Protector, which after the Duke's fall came to Sir John Bourn,
principal Secretary of Estate, in the time of Queen Mary. The Manor of ^slip
was also put into the s^ale, conferred upon that Church by King Edward the
Confessor, to which two hundred Tenants owed their soil and service, and being
one of the best wooded things in those parts of the Realm: was to be granted
also without impeachment of waste, as it was accordingly. Thus Benson saved the
Deanery, but fell into great disquiet of mind, and died a few months after. To
whom succeeded Doctor Cox, being then Almoner to the King, Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, and Dean of Christ-Church.

Bishop Latimer in his printed Sermons complains, That the Gentry Latimer.
Ser. p. 38. 71, 91, 114.
at that time invaded the profits of the Church, leaving the Title only to the
Incumbent; and that Chantery Priests were put by them into several Cures, to
save their pensions; that many Benefices were laid out in Fee-farmes, and for
making of Gardens: and finally, that the poor Clergy being kept to some sorry
pittances, were forced to put themselves into Gentlemen's houses, and there to
serve as Clerks of the Kitchen, Surveyours, Receivers, etc. All which
Enormities, were generally connived at by the Lords and others, who only had
the power to reform the same, because they could not question those who had so
miserably invaded the Churches patrimony, without condemning of themselves.

Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, having long lain Prisoner in the Fleet
was enlarged, and permitted to return to his Diocese, where contrary to the
promise made at his enlargement, he showed himself cross to the King's
proceedings in case of Images and other things, that he was sent Prisoner to
the Tower, where he abode till he was set at liberty by Queen Mary.

Notwithstanding the King's great care to set forth one uniform order of
Administering the holy Communion in both kinds, yet among the inferior Priests
and Ministers of Cathedral and other Churches in this Realm, there arose
variety of Factions in Celebrating the Communion Service, and Administra^ion of
the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church. Some followed the Order of the
King's proceedings: others patchingly used some part of them only: but many
causelessly contemning them all, would still continue in their former Popery.
Moreover, many of those who had been licensed, appeared as active in Preaching
against the King's proceedings, as any of the unlicensed Preachers had been
found to be. Which being made known to the King, and the Lords of the Council,
it was advised, that a public Liturgy should be drawn, and confirmed by
Parliament, which was done, An. 1548. and in the next year a penalty was
imposed by Act of Parliament on such who should deprave, or neglect the use
thereof.

The King caused those Godly Bishops, and other Learned Divines (whom he had
form^rly employed in drawing up the order for the holy Communion) to frame a
public Liturgy, containing the order of Morning and Evening Prayer, together
with a Form of Ministering the Sacraments, and for the celebrating of all
public Offices in the Churches.

This was done accordingly: Some exception being taken at it by Mr. Calvin
abroad, and some zealots at home, the Book was brought under a review, and by
Statute in Parliament, it was appointed, it should be faithfully perused,
explained, and made fully perfect.

And here take notice, that those who had the chief stroke in this Affair, were
beforehand resolved, that none but English Heads or hands should be used
therein. Calvin offered his assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, as himself
confesses, but he refused the offer. And though it was thought necessary, for
the better seasoning of both Universities in the Protestant Reformed Religion,
that Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, two eminent Divines of Foreign Churches,
should be invited to come over, yet had the Liturgy passed the approbation of
the King and Council, if not both Houses of Parliament before their coming.
Which being finished, they all subscribed it, except Doctor Day, Bishop of
Chichester.

Then in Parliament it was enacted, that all such positive Laws and
Ordinances, as prohibited the marriages of Priests, and pains and forfeitures
therein contained, should be repealed.

In this Parliament also it was enacted, that no person should from
thence-forth take, or carry away any Tithe or Tithes which had been received or
paid within the space of forty years next before the date thereof, etc. under
the pain or forfeiture of the Treble value of the Tithes so taken or carried
away. To which a clause was also added, enabling the said Parsons, Vicars, etc.
to enter upon any man's Land for the due setting out of his Tithes, and
carrying away the same without molestation.

There also passed another Act for Abstinence from flesh upon all such days, as
had been formerly taken and reputed for fasting-dayes, viz. fall Fridays and
Saturdays in the year, the time of Lent, the Emberdays, the Eves or Vigils of
such Saints, as had been anciently used for Fasts by the Rules of the Church.
On September. 5. 1548. Doctor Farrar's was consecrated Bishop of S. David's, as
Doctor Heylin notes, and not in the year 1547. as Mr. Fox makes it, nor in
1549. as Bishop Godwin says.

The Lord Protector pulled down two Churches, two Chapels, and three Episcopal
Houses for the materials of the building of his new intended Palace, called
Sommerset-house.

About this time there arose a sort of men, who were termed Gospellers, against
whom Bishop Hooper inveigheth, in the Preface to his Exposition on the ten
Commandments. Some Anabaptists also discovered themselves. Some of the Chiefs
of them were convented before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Westminster, Doctor Cox Almoner to the King and others: and being convicted of
their errors, some of them were dismissed only with an Admonition, some
sentenced to a Recantation, and others (among which I find one Champney's)
condemned to bear their Faggots at S. Paul's Cross.

Then brake forth two dangerous Rebellions, one in Devonshire, the other in
Norfolk. That of Devonshire was found to be chiefly raised in maintenance of
their old Religion. On Whitsun Monday, being next day after the first
exercising of the public Liturgy, some few of the Parishioners of the Parish
of Sampford-Courtney, compelled their Parish Priest, who is supposed to have
invited them to that compulsion, to let them have the Latin Mass as in
former-times. These being seconded with many others, Henry Arundel Esquire,
Governor of the Mount in Cornwall, Winslade and Coffin, Gentlemen, headed them.
The seditious exceeding the number of ten thousand, march in a full body to
Exeter. They send their demands to the King, among which one more specially
concerned the Liturgy. It was demanded by the Rebels, That forasmuch as we
constantly believe, that after the words of Consecration spoken by the Priest
being at Mass, there is very really the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ. God and man, and that no substance of Bread and Wine remains after,
but the very self-same body that was born of the Virgin Mary, and was given
upon the Cross for our Redemption; Therefore we will have Mass Celebrated as it
was in times past without any man Communicating with the Priests, forasmuch as
many presuming unworthily to receive the same, put no difference between the
Lord's body, and other kind of meat, etc.

To which demand of theirs the King thus answered, viz. that for the Mass I
assure you, no small study nor Travel has been spent, by all the Learned
Clergy therein: and to avoid all contention, it is brought even to the use that
Christ left it, as the Apostles used it, as the Holy Fathers delivered it:
indeed somewhat altered from that to which the Popes of Rome, for their lucre,
had brought it. And although (says he) you may hear the contrary from some
Popish evil men; Yet we on our Honor assure you, that they deceive, abuse you,
and blow these opinions into your Heads to finish their own purposes. But this
answer satisfying not, they marched with all their forces to the siege of
Exeter, carrying before them in their march the Pix or Consecrated Host under a
Canopy, with Crosses, Banners, Candlesticks, Holy-bread, and Holy Water, etc.
But the Lord Gray and the Lord Russel with forces conjoined, so strongly
charged the Rebels, that they beat them out of their works, and then forced
them with great slaughter to raise their siege. After the like success in some
following fights, the Lord Russel enters that City on August 6. where he was
joyfully received by the half-starved Citizens. Miles Coverdale gave public
thanks to God for the Victory in the view of Exeter, and soon after was made
the Bishop thereof.

Arundel, Berry, Winslade, and Coffin were sent to London, and there executed.
Six Popish Priests were hanged, and the Vicar of S. Thomas (one of the Grand
Incendiaries) hanged on the top of his own Steeple, apparrelled in his Popish
Weeds, with his Beads at his Girdle.

The Norfolk Rebellion brake forth on June 20. and that especially for a
grievance about Enclosures. The Rebels had gotten one Robert Ket, a rich Tanner
of Wimondham for their Leader, and were grown to a Body of twenty thousand,
seating themselves at Moushold near Mount Surrey, where they carried a face (as
it were) of Justice and Religion, for they had one Coniers, an idle fellow, to
be their Chaplain, who read solemn Prayers to them Morning and Evening, Sermons
also they had often. And as for Justice, they had a bench under a Tree (which
Tree was called by them, and so has ever since been called, the Tree of
Reformation) where Ket usually sat, and with him two Companies of every
Hundred, whence their Companies had been raised, to hear complaints, and give
judgment. They sent certain complaints to the King, requiring he would send a
Herrald to them to give them satisfaction. The King returned this answer, that
in October following he would call a Parliament, wherein their complaints
should be heard, and their grievances should be redressed, requiring them in
the mean time to lay down Arms, and return to their houses, and thereupon
granting them a general pardon. But this not satisfying the seditious, hereupon
they first assaulted the City of Norwich, took it, and made Thomas Cod the
Mayor of Norwich attend them as their servant. At length He and others of the
Gentry detained Prisoners in Ket's Camp, were admitted to the Counsels of the
Rebels for the better credit thereof.

Doctor Matthew Parker (afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) getting up into the
Oak of Reformation, Preached to the Rebels of their Duty and Obedience, where
his life was in danger, many Arrows being Shot at him. Conyers set the Te Deum,
during the singing whereof the Doctor withdrew, and went to his own house.

William Par Marquess of Northampton, with the Lords Sheffield and Wentworth,
Sir Anthony Denny, Sir Ralph Sadler and other persons of Honor, is sent to
quell this Rebellion. But success sailed them: the Lord Sheffield was
barbarously butchered, Sir Thomas Cornwallis taken prisoner, and the City fired
by the Rebels, but the clouds melting into tears pitying the Cities calamity,
quenched the flames, and the Marquess quitting the service, returned to London.

Then was John Dudley, Earl of Warwick sent to undertake the task, and was
attended by the Marquess of Northampton. Coming to Norwich he easily entered the
City, and entertained the Rebels with many Sallies with various success, but
generally the Earl of Warwick came off with the better.

The Rebels deserted Moushold-hill, and came down into Dussing-dale. Here their
superstition fancied themselves sufficiently fenced by the virtue of an old
prophecy.

Hob, Dick, and Hick, with Clubs, and Clouted Shun.
Sall fill uy Dussmdale with blood of slaughtred bodies soon.
In this place was a bloody battle: two thousand of the Rebels were slain in
the fight and chase, the Residue of them scattered all over the Country: the
Principals of them taken, and Executed: Robert Ket hanged on Norwich-Castle,
William his brother, on the Top of Wimondham steeple, nine of his followers on
as many boughs of the Oak where Ket held his Courts. On August XXIX. a solemn
thanksgiving was made to God for their deliverance, in the City of Norwich, and
is Annually observed. As for the Rebellion at the same time in Yorkshire, it
was soon quelled on the Execution of Omler and Dale, the chief promoters
thereof.

These things quickened the Lords of the Council to a sharper course against all
those whom they suspected not to advance the public Liturgy. Among whom none
was more distrusted than Bishop Bonner of London, who is commanded to attend
the Lords of the Council on Aug. 11. by whom he was told, that by his
negligence not only many people within his Diocese forgot their duty to God in
frequenting the Divine Service than by Law established, but diverse others
despising the same, did in secret places often frequent the Popish Mass.
Therefore he is commanded to Preach against the Rebels at Paul's Cross on
September. 1. and there to show the unlawfulness of taking Arms on pretense of
Religion. But on the Contrary, he spent most part of his Sermon in maintenance
of the Cross, Carnal and Papistical presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist: complaints whereof being made, a Commission is
Issued out to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Rochester and
Peterborough, Sir Thomas Smith, and Doctor May, before whom he was convented at
Lambeth, where after many shifts on his part, and much patience on theirs, he
is taken pro confesso, and in the beginning of October deprived of his
Bishopric. To whom succeeded Doctor Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rochester.

There passed an Act of Parliament in the following Session (which took
beginning November. 4) for taking down of such Images, as were still remaining in
the Churches, as also for the bringing in of all Antiphonaries, Missals,
Breviaries, Offices, Horaries, Primars and Processionals, with other Books of
false and superstitious worship. The Tenor of which Act signified to the
Subject by the King's Proclamations, and seconded by the Missives of Archbishop
Cranmer to the Suffragan Bishops, requiring them to see it diligently put in
execution. Also the Bishops were required to punish all those that refused to
give to the charge of bread and wine for the Communion. Now was there no
further opposition against the Liturgy by the Romish party during the rest of
the King's Reign.

But then there started up another faction, as opposite to the public Liturgy,
as were those of Rome. The Archbishop and the rest of Prela^es which
co-operated with him in the work of Reformation, were resolved now to go
forwards with a Reformation in point of Doctrine. And therefore Letters were
directed by Archbishop Cramner to Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr, two eminent
Divines. Martyr came over in Heylin^s Hist. Edw. VI.
the end of November, and having spent sometime with the Archbishop in his
house at Lambeth, was dispatched to Oxford, where he was made the King's
Professor for Divinity, and about two years after made Canon of Christ-Church.
His readings were so much disliked by some of that University, that a public
disputation was shortly had betwixt him, and some of those that disliked his
doings, about some points in the Sacrament. Doctor Cox, Chancellor of the
University, assisted by Mr. Morrison a right learned man, being Moderators,
declared that Martyr had sufficiently answered all Arguments which were brought
against him by Chadsey the chief of the opponents, and the rest of those who
disputed with him.

Bucer came not over till June, and, being, here receives letters from Mediis
consiliis vel Authoremesse vel Approbatorem, Calvin. Epist. ad Bucer.
Calvin, by which he was advised to take heed of his old fault (for a fault he
thought it) which was to run a moderate course in his Reformations. The first
thing that Bucer did after his coming hither, was to acquaint himself with the
English Liturgy, translated for him into Latin by Alexander Alesius, a Learned
Scot, and generally well approved of by him, as to the main Frame and Body of
it. Of this he gives an account to Calvin. Having received a courteous
entertainment from the Lord Protector, and being heartily well-commed by
Archbishop Cranmer, he is sent to take the Chair at Cambridge. But he had not
held that place long, when he left this life, deceasing on January 19. Anno
1550. to the great loss and grief of that University.

Calvin writes to the Protector to this effect, That the Papists would grow
more insolent every day than other unless the difference were composed about
the Ceremonies. But how? not by reducing the Opponents to Conformity, but by
encouraging them rather in their opposition.

John Rogers, Lecturer in S. Paul's, and John Hooper Vicar of S. Sepulchers The
Founders of Nonconformity.
were founders of Nonconformity. This John Hooper was bred in Oxford,
well-skilled in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and afterward traveled over into
Switzerland. He was preferred to be Bishop of Gloucester by the favor of his
Pa^ron, John Earl of Warwick, afterward Duke of Northumberland.

But when Hooper came to be consecrated Bishop of Gloucester, he scrupled the
wearing of certain Episcopal Ornaments (Rochet, Chimere, Square Cap, etc.)
producing a letter from the Ea^l of Warwick, that he might be favorably
dispensed with therein. The King also thirteen days after wrote to Archbishop
Cranmer to the same effect. All would not do, Resolute Bishop Ridley stood
stiffly to his tackling, and here was bandying of the business betwixt them,
and arguments urged on both sides. The Earl of Warwick deserted his Chaplain,
and Hooper was sent to prison, and kept sometime in durance, till he
condescended to conform himself in his habit, and so was consecrated Bishop of
Gloucester. After this, Hooper bare a great grudge against Ridley, who enforced
him thereunto: but God's providence sanctified their sufferings afterward into
an agreement. We must not forget, that this earnest contest was not about the
vocation, but about the vestments of Bishops. Thus we have the first beginning
of that opposition, which has continued ever since against the Liturgy, etc.
and other Rites and Usages of the Church of England.

About this time John a Lasco, free Baron of Lasco in Poland, with his
Congregation of Germans and other strangers, took Sanctuary this year in
England, hoping that here they might enjoy that liberty of conscience, and
safety for their goods and persons, which their own Country had denied them.
The King graciously vouchsafed to give them both entertainment and protection:
assigned them the west part of the Church, belonging to the late dissolved
house of Augustine-friars for the exercise of Religious Worship, made them a
Corporation, consisting of a Superintendent and four other Ministers, with
power to fill the vacant places by a new Succession, whenever any of them
should be void by death or otherwise, the parties by them chosen to be approved
by the King and Council. He commanded the Lord Mayor of London, the Aldermen
and Sheriff^ thereof, as also the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all other
Bishops of this Realm not to distrub them in the free exercise of their
Religion and Ecclesiastical Government, although they differed from the
government and forms of Worship established in the Church of England. All which
he granted by his Letters Patents. This John a Lasco quickly publishes a book,
Entitled, Forma and Ratio totius Ecclesiastici Ministerii, wherein he maintains
the use of sitting at the Holy Communion, contrary to the custom of the Church
of England, to the encouragement of those who impugned her Orders. A
controversy moved by Bishop Hooper touching the Episcopal Habit, was presently
propagated among the rest of the Clergy touching Caps and Surplices. And in
this quarrel John a Lasco engages, countenancing those that refused to wear
them, and Writing to Martin Bucer, to declare (...) Hist. (...) VI.
against them. But that Moderate and Learned Man severely repr^hended him, and
solidly answered all his Objections. Which being sent to him in the way of
letter, was afterward Printed and dispersed for keeping down that opposite
humor. This controversy was countenanced by Peter Martyr, for besides his
judgment which he gives of these things in some of his Epistles about things
of this nature, he has told us of his own practice in one of his Epistles,
Dated at Zurick, November. 4. 1559. being more than five years after he had left
this Kingdom. That he had never used the Surplice, when he lived in Oxford,
though he were then a Canon of Christ-church, and frequently present in the
Quire. While this controversy was on foot between the Bishops and the Clergy,
John Rogers (one of the Probends of S. Paul's, and Divinity Reader of that
Church then newly returned from beyond the Seas) could never be persuaded to
wear any other than the round cap when he went abroad. And being further
pressed unto it, he thus declared himself: That he would never agree to that
point of Conformity, but on this condition, that if the Bishops did require the
Cap and Tippet, etc. then it should also be declared, that all Popish Priests
(for a distinction between them and others) should be constrained to wear upon
their sleeves a Chalice with an Host upon it. Nay, such peccancy of humor
began then to break out, that it was Preached at Paul's Cross by one Steven,
Curate of Katherine Cree-Church, Stow's Chro. Edw. VI.
That it was fit the names of Churches should be altered, and the names of the
days in the Week changed; that Fish-dayes should be altered, and the Lent kept
at any other time, except only between Shrovetide and Easter. John Stow says,
that he had seen the said Steven to leave the Pulpit, and Preach to the People
out of an high Elm, which stood in the midst of the Churchyard, and that being
done, to return into the Church again.

The wings of Episcopal Authority had been so clipped, that it was scarce able
to fly abroad: the sentence of Excommunication had not been in use since the
first year of this King; which occasioned not only these disorders among the
Ministers of the Church but also tended to the great increase of vitiousness in
all sorts of men. So that it was not without cause that it was called for so
earnestly by Bishop Latimer in a Sermon Preached before the King. Bring into
the Church of England (says he) the open Discipline of Excommunication, that
open sinners may be stricken withal.

Then upon the Complaint of Calvin to Archbishop Cranmer, and Peter Martyr's
bemoaning the miserable condition of the Church for want of Preachers, it was
ordained by the advice of the Lords of the Council, that of the King's six
Chaplains, which attended in Ordinary, two of them should be always about the
Court, and the other four should travel in Preaching abroad. About this time
Sermon^ ^t Court were increased also.

Then followed the taking down of Altars by p^blick A(...) This being resolved
on, a Letter comes to Bishop (...) of the King, subscribed by Sommerset, and
other of the Lords of the Council, concerning the taking down of Altars, and
setting up Tables in the stead thereof. He appointed the form of a right Table
to be used in his Diocese, and caused the wall standing on the backside of the
Altar in the Church of S. Paul's to be broken down for an example to the rest.
No universal change of Altars was there into Tables in all parts of the Realm,
till the repealing of the first Liturgy, in which the Priest is appointed to
stand before the midst of the Altar in the Celebration; and the establishing of
the second, (in which it is required, that the Priest shall stand on the
North-side of the Table) had put an end to the Dispute.

About this time David's Psalms were Translated into English meter, by Thomas
Sternhold, Esquire and of the Privy Chamber to King Edward the sixth, John Hopkins,
Robert Wisdom, etc. and generally permitted to be Sung in all Churches.

Bishop Gardener having been a Prisoner in the Tower almost two years, the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Warwick, and some others are sent with certain Articles
Signed by the King and Lords of the Council unto him. According to the tenor
hereof; he is not only to testify his consent to the establishing the
Holy Days and Fasting-days by the King's Authority, the allowance of the
public Liturgy, and the abrogating of the Statute for the six Articles, but to
subscribe the confession of his fault in his former obstinacy, after such form
and manner as was there required. To which Articles he subscribed, but refused
to put his hand to the said Confession.

Then a Book of Articles is drawn up, containing all the alteration made by the
King and his Father, as well by Act of Parliament as their own injunctions, of
all which doings he is required to signify his approbation, to make Confession
of his fault with an acknowledgment that he had deserved the punishment which
was laid upon upon him: but no such submission and acknowledgment being made as
was required, on Feb. 14. 1550. he was deprived, and so remitted to the Tower.

Notwithstanding this severity, yet some of the Bishops were so stiff in their
old opinions, that neither terror nor persuasions could prevail upon them,
either to approve of the King's proceedings, or otherwise to advance the King's
commands. And some complied so coldly with the King's commands, as that they
were laid open to the spoil, though not to the loss of their Bishoprics: of
which last sort were Kitching Bishop of Landaff, Salcot Bishop of Salisbury,
and Sampson of Coventry (...) Hist. ^^w. VI.
and Lichfield, Heath of Worcester, Voysie of Exeter, Day of Chichester, and
Tonstal of Durham would not any way comply. Voisy made such havoc of his
Lands, before he was brought under a deprivation, that he left but seven or
eight of the worst mannours, and those let out into long Leases and those
charged with pensions, and not above two houses, both bare and naked. He was
deprived a sew months after Gardener, but lived to be restored again (as
Gardener also was) in the time of Queen Mary. Day and Heath were both deprived,
October 10. and were both restored in Queen Mary's Reign. Tunstal was cast into
the Tower, December 20. and was there kept until the dissolution of his
Bishopric by Act of Parliament.

To Gardener, in the Sea of Winchester, succeeded Doctor John Poynet, Bishop of
Rochester. To Voisy, in the Sea of Exeter, succeeded Doctor Miles Coverdale,
one who had formerly assisted Tyndal in translating the Bible into English, and
for the most part lived at Tubing, an University belonging to the Duke of
Saxony, where he received the degree of Doctor. Scory being Consecrated Bishop
of Rochester, in the place of Poynet, on the thirtieth of August, in the next
year following, succeeded Day of Chichester. Of which Bishopric he was
deprived in the time of Queen Mary, and afterward preferred by Queen Elizabeth
to the Sea of Hereford, in which place he died. The Bishopric of Worcester was
given in Commendam to Bishop Hooper.

The Princess Mary, having been bred up in the Romish Religion, would not
change her mind. And although the King and the Lords of his Council, wrote many
Letters to her, to take off those affections which she bear to the Church of
Rome, yet she keeps up her Mass, with all the Rites and Ceremonies belonging to
it, and suffers diverse persons (besides her own domestic Servants) to be
present at it. By the Emperor's mediation, her Chaplains were permitted to
celebrate the Mass, but with this Restriction, that they should do it in her
presence only. For the transgression of which bounds, Mallet and Barkley, her
two Chaplains were imprisoned.

Then a Plot is laid to convey the Princess Mary out of the Realm by stealth;
but the King being secretly advertised of the design, puts a stop thereunto.
She is brought to the King, and appointed to remain with him, but none of her
Chaplains permitted to have any access unto her.

And notwithstanding the mediation of the Emperor in her behalf, and his
threatening War, in case she were not permitted the free exercise of her
Religion, and although the Lords of the Council generally seemed very
inclinable thereunto, yet the King would not be persuaded thereunto. And when
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, sent by the Lords to
the King, used diverse Arguments to persuade him, he declared a Resolution
rather to venture life, and all things else that were dear unto him, than to
give way to any thing, which he knew to be against the Truth. Then the King
burst forth into a flood of tears, and the Bishops, on sight thereof, wept as
fast as He.

The Bishops thereupon withdrew, admiring at such great Abilities in so young a
King, and blessed God for giving them a Prince of such eminent piety.

Then the reviewing the Liturgy, and the composing of a Book of Articles, were
brought under consideration: This last for the avoiding diversities of
Opinions, and for the establishing consent touching true Religion, the other
for removing such offenses as had been taken by Calvin, and his followers, at
some parts thereof. The Liturgy, so reviewed, was ratified by Act of Parliament
in the year following. By the learned Writings of Erasmus and Melancthon,
together with the Augustan Confession (a Book of Articles being thought
necessary to be composed) the Composers of those Articles were much directed,
using them as subservient Helps to promote the service.

Now followed the fatal Tragedy of the Duke of Sommerset, and we must recoyl a
little to fetch forward the cause thereof. Thomas Seymour, Baron of Sudely, and
Lord Admiral, the Protector's younger Brother, had married the Lady Katherine
Par, the Relict of King Henry the Eighth. A contest arose between their Wives
about place. The Women's discords derived themselves into their Husbands
hearts: whereupon, not long after, followed the death of the Lord Thomas
Seymour, arraigned for designing to translate the Crown to himself.

Soon after the Lords of the Council accuse the Protector of many high
offenses; his greatest Enemy and Accuser was John Dudley, Earl of Warwick.
Hereupon he was imprisoned at Windsor, yet he was acquitted, though outed his
Protectorship, restored, and continued Privy Counselor. But after two years
and two months his Enemies assault him afresh. He was indicted of Treason and
Felony: he was condemned for Felony, by a new made Statute, for plotting the
death of a Privy Counselor, namely, the Earl of Warwick. Here a strange
oversight was committed, that he craved not the benefit of the Clergy, which
could not legally be denied him. Not long after he was beheaded on Tower Hill,
with no less praise for his piety and patience, than pity and grief of the
beholders.

In the beginning of the year 1551. happened a terrible Earthquake at Croydon,
and some other Villages thereabouts, in the County of Surrey. Afterward six
Dolphins were taken up in the Thames, three at Queenborough, and three near
Greenwich, the least as big as any Horse. Their coming up so far, beheld by
Statesmen, as a presage of those storms and Tempests, which afterward befell
this Nation in the death of King Edward, and the tempestuous Reign of Queen
Mary. But the saddest presage of all was, the breaking out of a Disease, c^ll^d
the Sweating-sickness, appearing first at Shrewsbury, on April 15. and
afterward spreading by degrees over the Kingdom; wherewith, if any man were
attacqued, he died, or escaped, within nine or ten hours: if he slept (as most
persons desired to do) he died within six hours: if he took cold, he died
within three hours.

Sir Michael Stanhop, Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Miles
Partridge, were arraigned, and condemned to dye. The two first were beheaded,
and the two last hanged, at what time they solemnly protested, (taking God to
witness) that they never practiced Treason against the King, etc. Vane adding,
after all the rest, that his Blood would make the pillow of the Earl of Warwick
(lately made Duke of Northumberland) uneasy to him.

Then fifty six Articles are drawn up against Robert Farrars, Bishop of St.
David's, and a Commission issued March 9. to enquire into the merit of those
Articles charged against him: on the return whereof he is indicted of a
Praemunire at the Assizes at Carmarthen, committed thereupon to prison, where
he remained all the rest of King Edward's time; never restored to liberty till
he came to the Stake in Queen Mary's Reign.

On the twenty ninth of January, 1552. The Bishopric of Westminster was
dissolved by the King's Letters Patents, by which the County of Middlesex,
which had before been laid unto it, was restored unto the Sea of London.

The Book of Articles made in the Synod at London, may be truly said to be the
work of that Convocation, though many Members of it never saw the same till the
Book was published: in regard (as Mr. Philpot says) that they had a Synodical
Authority, to make such spiritual Laws, Fox Acts and Monuments fol. 1282.
as to them seemed to be necessary or convenient, for the use of the Church.
Moreover the Church of England, for the first five years of Queen Elizabeth,
retained these Articles and no other, as the public Tenants of the Church in
point of Doctrine; which she had not done, had they been commended to her by a
less Authority than a Convocation. These R^gia authoritate in lucemed^ti.
Articles were confirmed and published for such, by the King's Authority, as
appears further by the Title in due form of Law. And so it is resolved by
Philpot, in behalf of the Catechism which came out, Anno 1553. with the
approbation of the said Bishops and learned Men.

The Liturgy being settled and confirmed in Parliament, was by the King's
command translated into French, for the use of the ^sles of Guernsey and
Jersey, and such as lived within the Marches and command of Calais. But no such
care was taken for Wales, till the fifth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
nor of the Realm of Ireland from that time to this, as Doctor Heylin observes.

Then that which concerns as well the nature, as the number of such Feasts and
Fasts, as were thought fit to be retained, were determined and concluded on by
an Act of Parliament. Which Statute (though repealed in the first of Queen
Mary, and not revived till the first year of the Reign of King James, yet) in
effect it stood in force, and was more punctually observedin the time of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, than after the reviving of it*

The next care was, that Consecrated places should not be profaned by fighting
and quarrelling, as they had been lately since the Episcopal Jurisdiction, and
the ancient Censures of the Church were lessened in Authority and reputation.

This Parliament ending on April 15. the Book of Common Prayer was printed and
published, which had been therein authorized. And the time being come which was
set for the officiating it, there appeared much alteration in the outward
solemnities of Divine service, to which the people had formerly been so long
accustomed. For by the Rubric of that Book, no Copes, or other Vestures were
required, but the Surplice only, whereby the Bishops must forbear their
Crosses, and the Prebends of St. Paul^s leave off their Hoods. To give a
beginning hereunto, Bishop Ridley, then Bishop of London, did the same day
officiate the Divine service of the Morning in his Rochet only, without Cope or
Vestment: he preached also at St. Paul's in the afternoon, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Companies in their best Liveries in their Companies being present
at it, the Sermon tending (for the most part) to the setting forth the said
Book of Common Prayer, and to acquaint them with the Reasons of such
alterations as were made therein. On the same day the new Liturgy was executed
also in all the Churches of London. Not long after, the upper Quire in St.
Paul's Church, where the high Altar stood was broken down, and all the Quire
thereabout, and the Communiontable was placed in the lower part of the Quire,
where the Minister sang the daily Service.

Then public care was had for the founding and establishing of the new
Hospital in the late dissolved House of Gray-Friers near Newgate in London, and
that of St. Thomas in the Borough of Southwark: of which ye are to know, that
the Church belonging to the said House, together with the Cloisters, and almost
all the public building which stood within the liberties and precincts
thereof, had the good hap to escape that ruin, which generally befell all
other Houses of that nature. And standing undemolished till the last times of
King Henry, it was given by him, not many days before his death, to the City
of London, together with the late dissolved Priory, called Little St.
Bartholomews. In which Donation there was reference had to a double end: The
one for the relieving the poor out of the Rents of such Messuages and
Tenements, as in the Grants thereof are contained and specified. The other for
constituting a Parish Church in the Church of the said dissolved Grey-friers,
not only for the use of such as lived within the precincts of the said two
Houses, but for the Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Nicholas in the Shambles,
and of St. Edwin's, situate in Warwick Lane, near Newgate-market. Which
Churches, with all the Rents and profits belonging to them, were given to the
City at the same time also, and for advancing the same ends, together with five
hundred Marks per annum for ever: The Church of the Gray-friers to be from
thence-forth called Christ-church, founded by King Henry the Eight. All which
was signified to the City, in a Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, by the Bishop
of Rochester, on January 13. being but a fortnight before his death: Mass was
said in this Church by the Parishoners that resorted to it according to the
King's donation. After which (in the first year of King Edward) followed the
taking down of the said two Churches, and building several Tenements on the
ground of the Churches and Churchyards, the Rents thereof to be employed about
the further maintenance and relief of the Poor, Living and Loytering, in and
about the City.

But these things being not sufficient to carry on the work to the end desired,
it happened that Bishop Rialey, Preaching before King Edward, insisted much upon
some constant course for relief of the poor: which Sermon wrought so far upon
him, that having sent for the Bishop, he gave him great thanks for his good
Exhortation, whose advice was, that Letters should be written to the Lord Mayor
and Alderman. By whom it was agreed, that a general contribution should be made
by all rich and well-affected Citizens, toward the advancement of a work so
necessary for the public good. Every man subscribed according to his ability,
and Books were drawn in every ward of the City. containing the sum of that
Relief which they had contributed: Which being delivered to Sir Richard Dobbs,
Lord Mayor of London, were by him tendered to the King's Commissioners, February
17. The buildings in the Gray-friers were forthwith repaired: The like
reparation was also made of the ruinous buildings belonging to the late
dissolved Priory of St. Thomas in Southwark, which the Citizens had then newly
bought of the King, to serve for an Hospital for such Sick, Wounded, and
Impotent persons, as were not fit to be intermingled with the sound: on
November 23. the Sick and Maimed people were taken into the Hospital of St.
Thomas; and into Christ-church Hospital, to the number of four hundred
Children; all of them to have Meat, Drink, Lodging and Clothes, at the charge
of the City; till other means could be provided for their maintenance.

On April 10. this King gave for ever to the City his Palace of Bridewel
(erected by King Henry the Eighth) to be employed for such Vagabonds and
thriftless poor, as should be sent thither to receive chastisement, and be
forced to labor. He caused the Master and Brethren of the Hospital in the
Savoy, founded by King Henry the Seventh, to resign the same into his hands,
with all the Lands and Goods thereunto belonging: out of which he presently
bestowed the yearly rent of seven hundred Marks, with all the Beds, Bedding,
and other Furniture found therein toward the maintenance of the said
Workhouse, and the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark; The Grant whereof he
confirmed by his Letters Patents, adding thereunto a Mortmain for enabling the
City to purchase Lands to the value of four thousand Marks per annum, for the
better maintenance of those and the other Hospitals. Thus he was entitled to
the Foundation of Bridewel, St. Bartholomews, and St. Thomas, ^^^hout any
charge to himself.

Nothing else memorable about this time, but the coming of Cardan, the death of
Leland, and the preferment of Doctor John Tailor to the Sea of Lincoln.

Then for raising Money, a Commission was speeded into all parts of the
Kingdom, under pretense of selling such of the Lands and Goods of Chanteries as
remained unsould, but in plain truth (says Dr. Heylin) to seize upon all
Hangings, Altar-clothes, Fronts, Parafronts, Copes of all sorrs, with all
manner of Plate, which was to be found in any Cathedral or Parochial Church.
Certain Instructions were likewise given to the Commissioners, by which they
were to regulate themselves in their proceedings. This was done generally in
all parts of the Realm, into which the Commissioners began their Circuits in
the month of April; which general seizure being made, they were to leave one
Chalice, with certain Table-clothes for the use of the Communion Table, as the
said Commissioners should think fit; the Jewels, Plate, and ready Money, to be
delivered to the Master of the King's Jewels, in the Tower of London; the Copes
of cloth of Gold, and Tissue to be brought into the King's Wardrobe; the rest
to be turned into ready Money, and that Money to be paid to Sir William Peckham
the King's Cofferer, for the defraying the charges of his Majesty's household.

But some there were, who were as much before hand with the Kings Commissioners
in embezeling the Plate, Jewels, and other Furnitures, as the Commissioners did
intend to be with the King, in keeping all or most part to themselves.

The King grew Sick, and weak in Body, in which Estate Duke Dudley so prevailed
upon him, that he consented to a transposition of the Crown, from his natural
Sisters, to the Children of the Dutchefs of Suffolk.

His dying Prayer, as is was taken from his mouth, was in these words following.

Lord God, deliver me out of the miseries of this wretched and sinful life, and
take me among thy chosen. Howbeit, not my will, but thy will be done, Lord, I
commit my Spirit to Thee. O Lord, thou know, how happy it were for me to be
with Thee; yet for thy chosens sake send me life and health, that I may truly
serve Thee. O my Lord God, bless thy people, and save thine inheritance. O Lord
God, save thy chosen people of England, O my Lord God, defend this Realm from
Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my people may truly praise
thy Name for Jesus Christ his sake. Thus ends the Reign of that good King
Edward the Sixth, sufficiently remarkable for the progress of Reformation, but
so distracted unto Sides and Factions, that in the end the King himself became
a prey to the strongest party, which (says Dr. Heylin) could not otherwise be
safe but in his destruction, contrived on purpose (as it was generally
supposed) to smooth the way to the advancement of the Lady Jane Gray (newly
married to Guilford Dudley, fourth Son to Duke Dudley) to the Royal Throne.

King Edward being dead, the Princess Mary hearing of her Brothers death, and
knowing her own right, writes to the Lords of the Council, and challenges
them for their doing, making her claim to the Crown. To whom the Council
writes again, as to a Subject, requiring her to rest so contented: The Lady
Jane was on the same day that these Letters were dispatched, brought by Water
to the Tower, attended by a Noble Train of both Sexes, from Durham-house in the
Strand, where she had been entertained, as part of Dudley's Family, ever since
her Marriage: When she came into the presence of the two Dukes, her Father and
Father in Law, it was signified to Her by the Duke of Northumberland, that the
King was dead, and that he had declared her for his next Successor in the
Crown. After a pithy speech, the poor Lady found her self in a great
perplexity. But being wearied at last with their importunities, and overcome by
the entreaties of her Husband whom she dearly loved, she submitted unto that
necessity which she could not vanquish.

Hereupon the two Dukes, with all the rest of the Lords of the Council, swore
Allegiance to he^. And on the same day about five a Clock in the afternoon,
they solemnly caused her to be Proclaimed Queen of England, France and Ireland,
etc. in many of the principal Streets of London; and after by degrees, in most
of the chief Cities, Towns, and places of greatest concourse. In which
Proclamation it was signified, That by the Letters Patents of the late King
Edward, the Lady Jane Gray, eldest Daughter to the Duchess of Suffolk, had
been declared, to be his true and lawful Successor to the Crown of England, the
same to be enjoyed after her decease by the heirs of her Body, etc. Which
Proclamation, though it was published in the City with all due solemnities, and
that the concourse of the people was great, yet their acclamations were few.

The next day the Lords were advertised, that many persons of quality were
drawn together at Kenning-hall Castle in Norfolk, to offer their service and
assistance to the Princess Mary; as the Earl of Bath, Sir Thomas Wharton, Son
of the Lord Wharton, Sir John Mordant, Son of the Lord Mord^nt, Sir William
Drury, Sir John Shelton, Sir Henry Beddingfield, Sir Henry Jerningham, Sir John
Sulierd, Mr. Richard Higham of Lincolns-Inne. It was advertised also, that the
Earl of Sussex, and his Son, were coming toward her with their Forces.
Therefore they persuade Duke Dualey to take the conduct of some Forces, that
might scatter those small companies before they grew unto an Head. Swelled with
vainglory, he suffered himself to be entreated to an action of such same and
merit, as that which they presented to him. So the Duke with the Marquess of
Northampton, the Lord Gray, and diverse others of note, on July 14. 1553. set
forward with eighth thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse. The Duke's March was
slow. In the mean time, Edward Hastings, the Earl of Huntingdon's Brother,
having an Army of four thousand Foot, committed to him by the Duke of
Northumberland, left his party, and went to the Lady Mary. And six great Ships
which lay before Yarmouth to intercept her, if she should attempt to fly, now
at the persuasion of Mr Jerningham, came to her aid. Upon news hereof, the
Lords themselves assembled at Baynards Castle: first the Earl of Arundel, then
the Earl of Pembrook, fell to Invectives against Northumberland, and then all
the Lords consenting with them, they called for the Lord Mayor, and in London
Proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen. She was also Proclaimed by diverse other Lords
and Knights in diverse other Counties; which the Duke (being then at Bury)
hearing of, he returns to Cambridge, and there himself Proclaims the Lady
Mary Queen: but the next morning he was arrested by Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of
Arundel, by Order from Queen Mary.

Together with the Duke, his three Sons, John, Ambrose, and Henry, the Earl of
Huntingdon, Sir Andrew Dudley, the two Gates, Sir Thomas Palmer, and Doctor
Sands, were committed to the Tower: and the next day the Marquess of
Northampton, the Lord Robert Dudley, and Sir Robert Corbet. Before which time,
the Duke of Suffolk, entering his Daughter the Lady Janes Chamber, told her, she
must now put off her Royal robes, which she willingly did.

Doctor Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, was also sent to the Tower, on July
27. Sir Roger Cholmley, Chief Justice of the King's Bench; and Sir Edward
Mountague, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; the Duke of Suffolk, were sent
also to the Tower; Sir John Cheek, on the morrow after, bringing up the Rear:
But the Duke of Suffolk (Father to the Lady Jane) was released within three
days after.

The Duke of Northumberland, together with John Earl of Warwick, his eldest
Son, and William, Marquess of Northampton, were brought to their Trial, on
August 8. before Thomas Duke of Norfolk, then sitting as Lord High Steward in
Westminster Hall: they all confessed the Indictment, and received Judgment in
the usual form. The like Judgment passed on the morrow after, on Sir John
Gates, Sir Henry Gates, Sir Andrew Dudley, and Sir Thomas Palmer. The Duke was
on August 22. beheaded, and professed himself a Papist at his death, whose
Recantation the Papists published abroad with great rejoicing, with him died
also Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer: which Palmer confessed the Faith he
learned in the Gospel, and lamented that he had not lived more as became the
Gospel.

The Queen had dissolved her Camp at Farmingham, consisting of fourteen
thousand men, and prepared for her journey toward London. Being met on the way
by the Princess Elizabeth, her Sister, attended with a thousand Horse, she
entered London on the third of August. Taking possession of the Tower, she was
first welcomed thither by Thomas, the old Duke of Norfolk, Anne Duchess of
Sommerset, Edward Lord Courtney, eldest Son to the late Marquess of Exceter,
and Dr. Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, all which she lifted from the
ground, called them her Prisoners, graciously kissing them, and restoring them
shortly after to their former liberty. Taking the Great Seal from Dr. Goodrick,
Bishop of Ely, within two days after she gave it for the present to Sir
Nicholas Hare, whom she made Master of the Rolls, and afterward committed it
together with the Title of Lord Chancellor to the said Bishop of Winchester,
then actually restored to that See.

Having performed the obsequies of her Brother, on the ninth and tenth, she
removes her Court to Whitehal; on September she passes thence to the Tower by
Water, attended by her Sister, and a great Train of Noble Ladies, and made her
return through the principal Streets of the same City, on the last of the same
month, in a most stately manner: and the next day proceeded in like pomp to
the Abbey-Church at Dr. P. Heylins History of Queen Mary.
Westminster, where she was met by the Silver Crosses, and eighty Singingmen,
all in rich Coaps (so sudden a recruit was made of these sacred Vestments)
among whom went the new Dean of Westminster, Dr. Weston, and diverse Chaplains
of her own, each of them bearing in their hand some ensign or other. After them
marched ten Bishops (which were all as remained of her persuasion) with their
Miters, rich Coaps, and Crosier-staves. The Sermon was preached by Doctor Day,
whom she had restored to the Sea of Chichester. The solemnity of the Coronation
was performed by the Bishop of Winchester, the new Lord Chancellor. Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, being then committed to the Tower. Till this time
none was more dear to her than her Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, but after her
Coronation she estranged her self from her.

She preferred Henry Ra^cliff, Earl of Sussex, to the society of the Garter,
which honor she conferred on his Son Thomas after his decease, and to be
covered in her presence at all times and places, according to the custom of the
Grandees in the Realm of Spain. She also advanced the Earl of Arundel, to the
Office of Lord Steward. She made Sir Edward Hastings Master of the Horse, and
Knight of the Garter, and afterward Lord Chamberlain of the Household, and Lord
Hastings of Loughborough. She honored Sir John Williams, with the Title of
Lord Williams of Them. She preferred Sir Henry Jerningham, to be Captain of
her Guard: and afterward Sir Thomas Tresham was created Lord Prior of the
Order of St. John of Jerusalem. She preferred her old Servants, Hopton, her old
Chaplain, to the Sea of Norwich, Rochester, to be Comptroller of her Household,
Inglefield to be Master of the Wards, and Walgrave to be Master of the Wardrobe.

Sir John Gage (a zealous Papist) was made Lord Chamberlain of her Household,
when she came first to the Tower. Bishop Bonner was discharged of the
Marshalsey, and Bishop Tunstal from the King's Bench, within two days after.
Bonner is restored to his See of London, and Tunstal to Durham, and an Act of
Parliament procured for the restoring of the Church of Durham to all its Lands,
and Jurisdictions, of which it stood divested by the late Act of Dissolution,
made in the last year of the deceased King.

Coverdale was displaced from the Sea of Exeter, Scory from that of Chichester,
and Hooper from the Commendatory of the Sea of Worcester: to which Sees Voisy,
Day, and Heath, were again restored. The like course also followed for the
depriving of all Deans, Dignitaries, and Parochial Ministers, who had succeeded
into any of those preferments, during the Reign of the two last Kings.

Doctor Cox was on August 5. brought to the Marshalsey, and spoiled of his
Deaneries of Christ-church and Westminster, to make room for Doctor Richard
Marshal in the one, and Doctor Hugh Weston in the other.

Peter Martyr coming from Oxford to London, where for a time he was commanded
to keep his House, but was soon after suffered to return into his own Country.

A Letter was sent at the same time to the Mayor of Coventry, to set at liberty
Hugh Simons, if he would recant his Sermon, or else to stay him.

A little before Mr. Bradford, Mr. Vernon, and Mr. Beacon, Preachers^ were
committed to the Tower: A Letter was sent to the Sheriffs of Buckingham and
Bedford, for the apprehending Mr. Fisher, Parson of Amersham: Another Letter
was sent to the Bishop of Norwich, not to suffer any to Preach or Expound
openly the Scriptures, without special License from the Queen. Mr. John Rogers,
Preacher, was confined to his own house.

Hooper and Coverdale being cited to appear before the Lords of the Council,
did appear. Hooper was committed to the Fleet, and Coverdale commanded to
attend the pleasure of the Lords.

Fisher of Amersham, and Hugh Sanders, Vicar of St. Michaels in Coventry,
appeared also before the Council.

Hugh Latimer appeared also, and was committed to the Tower.

Doctor Bourn, Archdeacon of London, Preaching at Paul's Cross, in favor of
Bishop Bonner (there present at the Sermon) inveighed against some proceedings
in the time of the late King Edward,: which so incensed the people, that a
great tumult arose upon it, some pelting with Stones, others crying aloud, Pull
him down; and one (who could never be known) flinging a Dagger at his Head,
which after was found sticking in a post of the Pulpit. The Preacher with
difficulty was secured in a School adjoining: By reason of which tumult the
Lords of the Council with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, took order, that every
Householder should cause their Children and Apprentices to keep their own
Parish-churches upon Holidays: order was taken for preventing the like Tumult
on the Sunday following. A Sermon was Preached at the Cross by Doctor Watson,
who (afterward was Bishop of Lincoln) for whose security many Lords of the
Council were there present, and Jerningham, Captain of the Guard with two
hundred of his Yeomen, standing round about the Pulpit with their Halberts.

Then care was taken, that nothing should be Preached in private Churches,
contrary to the Doctrine which was, and should be Taught at the Cross, by them
which were appointed to it. It was further ordered, that every Alderman in his
Ward should send for the Curates of every Church within their Liberties, and
warn them not only to forbear Preaching themselves, but also not to suffer any
other to Preach, or make any open reading of Scripture in their Churches,
unless the said Preachers were severally, Licensed by the Queen.

For eight weeks after the Proclaiming of Mary Queen, Protestantism and Popery
were together set on foot, the former hoping to be continued, the latter
laboring to be restored. Seeing by the fidelity of the Norfolk and Suffolk
Protestant Gentry, the Queen was much advantaged for the speedy recovering of
her Right, they conceived, that as she by them had regained the Crown, so they
under her should enjoy their Consciences. The Papists put their Ceremonies in
execution, presuming on the Queens private practice, and public countenance.

The Queen on August 18. puts forth a Proclamation, declaring her self for the
Popish Religion, which she resolves to observe for her self, wishing her
Subjects to follow her example; yet that she minds not to compel any
thereunto, until such time as further order by common Assent may be taken
therein: forbidding all her Subjects to move Seditions at their perils; and the
Printing of any Book, Rhyme, Interlude, or Treatise, without her special
License for the same: and likewise to Preach, or by way of reading in Churches,
or other public or private places (except in Schools of the Universities) to
Interpret or Teach any Scripture, or any points of Doctrine concerning Religion.

Hereupon many of the people in diverse places, received their old Religion,
erected again their Altars, and used the Mass, and Latin Service, as was wont
to be in King Henrie's time.

In Cambridge the Vice Chancellor challenged one Peirson, on October. 3. for
officiating the Communion, in his own Parish Church, in the English Tongue: and
on the 26. displaced Doctor Madew, Master of Clarehall, for being Married. In
like manner, some of the Popish party in King's College, on the 28th of the
same month, officiated the Divine Service in the Latin Tongue.

At Oxford, John Jewel was chosen to pen the first gratulatory Letter to the
Queen, in the name of the University, an Office imposed on him by his Enemies.
Doctor Tresham, a Van-eurrier, before authority, repaired the great Bell in
Christ-church and named it Mary.

Harley, Bishop of Hereford, and Tailor of Lincoln (two of the last of King
Edward's Bishops) were present at the opening of the Parliament, October. 10. But
no sooner was the Mass begun (though not then restored by any Law) than they
left the Church. For which the Bishop of Lincoln, being first examined, and
making profession of his Faith, prevented the malice of his enemies by a timely
Death. And Harley (upon information of his Marriage) was presently excluded
from the Parliament House, and not long after from his Bishopric also.

Hereupon Bishop Barlow of Wells, and Scory of Chichester, passed beyond the
Seas, followed not long after by Bishop Poinet of Winchester.

On November 3. Archbishop Cranmer was arraigned at the Guildhall in London,
with the Lord Guilford Dudley, the late Queen Jane, his Wife, and others, all
of them being attainted and condemned of Treason.

After Peter Martyr had quit the Realm, his Wive's Body having been buried in
the Church of St. Frideswid, was afterward by public order taken out of the
Grave, and buried in a common dunghill.

John a Lasco, was forced to dissolve his Congregation, and He with his
Strangers to quit the Country: The like have made the French Protestants also.
At which time many of the English (as well Students as others) depar^ed also.
The principal of those were Katherine, the last Wife of Charles Brandon, Duke
of Suffolk, Robert Berty Esquire Husband to the Duchess, the Bishops of Winchester
and Wells (as before was said) Sir Richard Morison, Sir Anthany Cook, and Sir
John Cheek, Doctor Cox, Doctor Sands, and Doctor Grindal.

The News of Queen Mary's succeeding her Brother to the Crown of England,
posted to Rome, and was very welcome to Pope Julius the Third, because it gave
him some assurance of his readmission into the Power and Jurisdiction of his
Predecessors in the Realm of England; in pursuance of which hopes, it was
resolved, that Cardinal Pool should be sent Legate into England, who being of
the Blood-royl, and a man of eminent Learning and of exemplary life, was looked
on as the fittest Instrument to reduce that Kingdom.

The Parliaments first Act was to take away all Statutes passed by the two last
Kings, wherein certain Offenses had been made High Treason, and others brought
within the compass of a Pramunire. This was done especially for Pool's
security; that neither He by exercising his authority, nor the Clergy by
submitting to it, might be entangled in the like snares, as Cardinal Wolsey,
and the whole Clergy of his time had before been caught.

Then an Act was passed for repealing certain Statutes of King Edward: thereby
they took away all former Statutes for administering the Sacraments in both
kinds, for establishing the first and second Liturgy, etc. In a word! by this
one blow the Queen cut down all that had been done in the Reformation in seven
years before. And then for want of Canonical Ordination on the one side, and
under color of Uncanonical Marriages on the other, there was presently such a
remove among the Bishops and Clergy, as it is not any where to be paralelled in
so short a time.

An Act was passed likewise, Entitled, An Act against offenders of Preachers,
etc which two Acts were seconded by the Queen, with two Proclamations, December
5. By one of which it was declared, that all Statutes made in the time of the
late King Edward, which concerned Religion, were repealed by Parliament: and
therefore that the Mass should be said as formerly, to begin on the twentieth
of that month. And by the other it was commanded, that no person should dare
from thenceforth to disturb any Priests in saying Mass, or executing any other
Divine Office. Accordingly the Mass was publicly officiated in all parts of
the Kingdom, and so continued during the Reign of the Queen without
interruption.

Another Act was passed, wherein it was Enacted. That the Marriage between King
Henry the Eighth, and Queen Katherine, his first Wife, was lawful, and to stand
with God's Laws and his Holy Word, etc. That the Decree of Divorce heretofore
passed between the said King Henry, and the said Queen, by Thomas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, should be reputed to be void and null, with a Repeal
of all such Statutes, wherein the Queen had been diclared to be Illegitima^e.

There also past another Act, in which there was a clause for the invalidating
of all such Commissions as had been granted in the time of the late Queen Jane,
and one in confirming the Attainders of the late Duke of Northumberland, Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.

Together with this Parliament the Queen summoned a Convocation, that all
matters of Religion might first be debated and concluded in a Synodical way,
before they were offered to the Parliament. In the Writs of which Summons, she
retained the Title of Supreme Head on Heylin. Hist. of Q. Mary.
Earth of the Church of England, etc. the want whereof in those of the present
Parliament occasioned dispute among some of the Members; Whether they might
lawfully proceed, or not, in such public business as were to be propounded to
them in that Session. The Presidentship of the Convocetion was transferred upon
Bishop Bonner, privileged in respect of his See to preside in all such
Provincial Synods, which were either held during the vacancy of the Sea of
Canterbury, or in the necessary absence of the Metropolitan.

The lower House of the Clergy also was fitted with a Prolocutor of the same
affections, Doctor Hugh Weston, Dean of Westminster, in the place of Doctor
Cox. So partially had the elections been returned from the several Diocesses,
that we find none of King Edward's Clergy among the Clerks; and but six of the
Deans and Dignitaries to have suffrage in the Convocation, viz. James Haddon,
Dean of Exeter; Walter Philips, Dean of Rochester; John Philpot, Archdeacon of
Winchester; John Elmer, Archdeacon of Stow, in the Diocese of Lincoln; Richard
Cheiney, Archdeacon of Hereford; one more mentioned by Mr. Fox, without a name,
joined himself to the other five in the disputation.

The Prolocutor would admit of no more, though desired by Philpot, that some of
the Divines which had the passing of the Book of Articles, in King Edward's
time, might be assembled with them in the defense thereof.

The main point in debate, concernded the manner of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament: It was not denied by Philpot, and his Brethren, That Christ was
present in the Sacrament rightly administered, according to his Institution, but
only that He was not present in the gross and carnal manner, which They of the
Popish party had before subscribed unto. Six dys the disputation lasted, but to
little effect At length Weston put an end to the dispute, saying, It is not the
Queen's pleasure, that we should spend any longer time in these debates, and
yet are well enough already: For you (says He) have the Word, and we have the
Sword.

After the end of the Evensong on St. Katherine's day, Bonner caused the Quire
of St. Paul's to go about the Steeple, singing with lights after the old
custom. And on St. Andrew's day, next following, he began the Procession in
Latin himself, with many Parsons and Curates, and the whole Quire, together
with the Lord Mayor and diverse of the Aldermen, the Prebendaries of the Church,
attired in their old gray Amises (as they used to call them) in which manner
they continued it for three days after: on January 14. he restored the solemn
Sunday's procession about the Church, with the Mayor and Aldermen, the Preacher
taking his Benediction in the midst of the Church, according to the ancient
custom; likewise he sent out his Mandates to all Parsons and Curates within his
Diocese; for taking the names of all such as would not come the Lent following
to Auricular Confession, and receive at Easter: he likewise enjoined the
blotting out of all such paintings, and sentences of holy Scripture, as had
been pensiled on the Church-walls in King Edward's days.

Mr. Jewel continued some weeks in Broad-gates Hall, whither his Scholars
repaired unto him, whom he instructed in Learning and Religion: He had not long
lived there, but being persuaded by the Popish Fuller. Church History of Q.
Mary.
Inquisitors to subscribe, he took a pen in his Hand, and smiling said, Have
you a mind to see how well I can write? and thereupon under-writ their Opinions.

The Papists trusted him not any whit the more for this his subscription. His
life being waylaid for, with great difficulty he escaped into Germany. But on
a Sunday after his Forenoon-sermon (by the advice of Dr. Edwin Sandys,
afterward Archbishop of York, Mr. Chambers, and Mr. Sampson, his bosom
Friends) in the Congregation of Franckfort, he bitterly bewailed his fall, and
heartily requested pardon from God and his people, whom thereby he he had
offended.

On November 20. the Mayor of Coventry sent up to the Lords of the Council, one
Baldwin Cleark, John Careless, Thomas Wilcocks, and Richard Estlin; Careless
and Wilcocks were committed to the Gatehouse, and Cleark and Estlin to the
Marshalsey.

In the month of December the Parliament broke up, in which there was a
Communication of Marriage betwixt the Emperor's Son Philip, and the Queen. In
the meanwhile Cardinal Pool hasteneth toward England. The Emperor invites him
to come into Germany by his way, and entertains him with great show of Honor,
until by his Ambassador Petri. Church Hist. C^nt. 1^.
he had finished a Contract of Marriage between his Son Philip and Queen Mary.

This match was generally distasted. To hinder it Sir Thomas Wyat, a Kentish
Knight, took Arms with a great party assisting him. But albeit he wanted
neither, Wit, Wealth, Learning, yet all were (...) employed about him. Wyat
demands the Person of the Queen, the Tower of London to be committed unto
him, with power to displace evil Counselors; his demands were refused with
scorn^ Queen Mary came to Guildhall and there made a long Oration, which
secured the affections of the Citizens unto her.

Wyat came up to London. He was taken at Temple Bar, carried thence be
examined, and thence to the Tower to be committed. Some days after, he suffered
penitently and patiently on the Scaffold, condemning his own Act.

Of his accomplices were hanged fifty persons, and four hundred more led through
the City with halters about their necks to Westminster, where they were all
pardoned in the Tilt-yard by the Queen.

Doctor Crome, for his Preaching without License on Christmas day, was
committed to the Fleet; Thomas Wotton Esquire, was for matters of Religion
committed also to the Fleet.

The Duke of Suffolk, Father to the Lady Jane, but lately pardoned of life in
the midst of the Kentish tumult, secretly departs into Leicester and
Warwick-shires, instigating the people to withstand the Queen's Marriage agreed
upon with Philip. The Duke was betrayed Speeds Chron. in Q. Mary.
by one Underwood, his Servant, in Ashley-park, with his Brother John Lord
Gray, unto the Earl of Huntington, whence they were by him convayed prisoners
to the Tower of London. This seemed to hasten the death of the Lady Jane and
the Lord Guilford her Husband, who were both beheaded, February 12. 1554. he
was beheaded on a Scaffold on Tower Hill, and she upon the Green within the
Tower. Two days before her death Mr. Fecknam was sent unto her, by the Queen,
to reduce her to the Popish Religion, whom she constantly, and with great power
of God's Spirit, resisted. Eleven days after her death, her Father the Duke of
Suffolk, was beheaded on Tower Hill.

And on April 23. his Brother, the Lord Thomas Gray suffered death in the same
place.

Now for putting the Affairs of the Church into a posture, Articles are sent
into every Diocese, and Letters writ unto their several and respective Bishops
on the third of March, to see them carefully put in execution: the substance
whereof were,

1. That the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Henry the Eighth, should be put in
practice, being not directly against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

2. That no Bishop do use the Clause (in any of their Ecclesiastical writings)
Regia authoritate fulcitus.

3. That no Sacramentary be admitted to Benefice.

4. That all Bishops do labor to suppress Heresies, especially in the Clergy.

5. That they should suppress all unlawful Books and writings.

6. The next Article was against Priests Marriages, and that such as would
depart from their Wives, should be admitted to the same function.

7. That for want of Priests, one Priest should serve two places.

8. That Processions be used.

9. That Holy Days and Fasts be frequented.

10. That the Ceremonies be used, and Confirmation of Children be put in
practice.

In the same month of March the Lord Courtney (whom the Queen at her first
entry delivered out of the Tower) and the Lady Elizabeth also, the Queen's
Sister, were both (by the suggestion of Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester)
suspected to have been of Wyat's Conspiracy, and for the same were apprehended
and sent to the Tower, although Wyat at his death cleared them both, as
unacquainted with the matter. Many trains were laid to ensnare the Lady
Elizabeth; And being on a time asked, what she thought of the words of Christ,
This is my Body; whether she thought, it is the true Body of Christ? it is
said, that after some pausing, she thus Answered.

Christ was the Word that spoke it, Sir Richard Bakers Chron.

He took the Bread, and brake it:
And what the Word did make it,
That I Believe, and take it.
One Elizabeth Crofts, about eighteen years old, was by practice put into a
Wall (and therefore called, The Spirit in the Wall) who with a whistle made for
that purpose, whistled out many Seditious words against the Queen, the Prince
of Spain, the Mass, Confession, etc. for which she did Penance, standing upon a
Scaffold at Paul's Cross, all the Sermon-time, where she made open Confession of
her fault.

Queen Mary alters her style, leaving out the latter part of her Title, which
is, Supreme Head of the Church of England and Ireland, because in this
Parliament holden at Westminster in April, the Supremacy being given away from
the Crown of England to the Pope, thereupon this Parcel of the Title was also
taken away.

Then followed a communication between Bishop Ridley, and Secretary Bourn, Mr.
Fecknam and others at the Lieutenants Table in the Tower, (described at large
by Mr. Fox) touching the Sacrament. On April 10. Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, and Latimer were sent down to Oxford by the Lord Williams of Them,
there to dispute with the Divines of both Universities, about the presence,
substance, and sacrifice of the Sacrament. Of Oxford, Dr. Weston prolocutor,
Dr. Tresham, Dr. Cole, Dr. Oglethorp, Doctor Pie, Doctor Harpsfield, Mr.
Fecknam. Of Cambridge, Dr. Young Vice Chancellor, Doctor Glyn, Dr. Seaton, Dr.
Watson, Dr. Sedgwick. Dr. Atkinson. The Questions whereon they should Dispute,
were these, 1. Whether the natural body of Christ be really in the Sacrament
after the words of Consecration be spoken by the Priest? 2. Whither any
substance do remain after the words, saving the body and blood? 3. Whither the
mass be a sacrifice propitiatory? The order and manner of the disputation
against these three worthy Martyrs, the disordered usage of the University men,
the rude tumult of the multitude, the fierceness and interruption of the
Doctors, the full pith and ground of all their Arguments the Censure of the
Judges, the railing Language of the Prolocutor, with his blast of triumph in
the latter end, is set forth fully by Mr. Fox

The disputation being ended, on April 20. they were again brought upon the
stage, and then demanded, whether they would persist in their opinion, or else
recant? And affirming that they would persist, they were all Three adjudged
Heretics, and condemned to the fire, but their execution was respited to a
longer time.

May 19. the Lady Elizabeth was brought out of the Tower, and committed to the
custody of the Lord of Them, who gently entreated her: afterward she was had
to Woodstock, and there committed to the keeping of Sir Henry Bennefield, who
dealt hardly with her.

Prince Philip arriveth at Southampton, July 20. 1554. and on the twenty third
came to Winchester, where the Queen met him, and on the twenty fifth day the
marriage between them there was openly Solemnized. At which time the Emperor's
Ambassador presented to the King a donation of the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily, which the Emperor, his Father had resigned unto him. Which presently
was signified, and the Titles of the King and Queen Proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet in this following Style. Philip and Mary by the Grace of God, King and
Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Milan, Burgundy and
Brabant, Counts of Auspurg, Flanders, and Tirrol, etc. At the Proclaiming of
which Style (which was performed in French, Latin and English) the King and
Queen showed themselves hand in hand with two Swords born before them for the
greater State, or in regard of their distinct capacity in the Public
Government. From Winchester they removed to Basing, and so to Windsor, where
Philip on August the fifth was Installed Knight of the Garter: On the eleventh
of the same Month they made a Magnificent Passage through the Principal
Streets of the City of London. The King prevailed with the Queen for discharge
of such Prisoners as stood committed in the Tower, either for matter of
Religion, or on the account of Wyat's Rebellion, or for engaging in the
practice of the Duke of Northumberland: which was done accordingly, among which
were the Arcbishop of York, ten Knights, and many other persons of name and
quality. He also procured the enlargement of the Lady Elizabeth, and of the
Earl of Devonshire, who traveled through France into Italy, and died at Padua,
Anno 1556. the eleventh and last Earl of Devonshire of that Noble Family of the
Courtneys.

Marriage and Heresy were the crimes of Holgate, Archbishop of York, for which
being deprived during his imprisonment in the Tower, Dr. Nicholas Heath
succeeded him in the Sea of York, and leaves the Bishopric of Worcester to
Doctor Richard Pates, who had been nominated by King Henry VII^. Anno 1534. and
having spent the intervening twenty years in the Court of Rome, returned a true
servant to the Pope. Goodrick of Ely died April. 10. leaving that Bishopric to
Dr. Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Norwich. And Dr. John Hopton is made Bishop of
Norwich, Doctor Gilbert Bourn, Archdeacon of London, Heylin's Hist. of Q. Mary.
is made Bishop of Wells, Harley of Hereford is succeeded by Purefoy of S.
Asaph; Old Bush of Bristol, and Bird of Chester (the two first Bishops of those
Sees) were deprived also. The first succeeded to by Holiman, once a Monk of
Reading: the last by Coals, Master of Baliol College in Oxford. Dr. Randolph
Bayn, who had been Hebrew Reader in Paris in the time of King Francis, was
Consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Litehfield.

The Parliament began November. 12. where a way was opened for Cardinal Poole's
Reception by preparing a Bill, whereby he was to be discharged of the Attainder
which had passed upon him, Anno 1539. restored in Blood, and rendered Capable of
all those Rights and Privileges, of which he had stood possessed in this
Kingdom. This Bill was quickly passed into an Act, and on November. 24. the
Cardinal came first to London. Then it was concluded, by both Houses of
Parliament, that a petition should be made in the name of the Kingdom, wherein
should be declared, how sorry they were, that they had withdrawn their
obedience from the Apostolic See, and consenting to the Statutes made against
it, promising to endeavor hereafter, that the said Laws and Statutes should
be repealed, beseeching the King and Queen to intercede with his Holiness for
their Absolution. Then the Cardinal having read his Authority given him from
the Pope, they all kneeled upon their knees, and imploring the mercy of God,
received Absolution for themselves and the rest of the Kingdom; Which
Absolution was pronounced in these words

Our Lord Jesus Christ, which with his most precious blood has redeemed us
from all our sins, etc. and whom the Father has appointed Head over all his
Church, absolve you. And we by Apostolic Authority given unto us (by the most
holy Lord Pope Julius the third, His Vicegerent here on earth) do absolve and
deliver you, and every of you, with the whole Realm and the Dominions thereof,
from all heresy and schism, and from every judgment, censure, and paein, for
that cause incurred. And also we do restore you again unto the unity of Our
Mother the Holy Church. In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.
Which words of His being seconded with a loud Amen, by such as were present, he
concluded the days work with a solemn Procession to the Chapel, for rendering
thanks to God. Then did the Cardinal dispense with much irregularity in several
persons, confirming the Institution of Clergymen in their Benefices,
legitimating the Children of forbidden Marriages, ratifying the processes and
sentences in matters Ecclesiastical: and his dispensations were confirmed by
Acts of Parliament. Then was Anthony Brown, Viscount Montacute, Thursby Bishop
of Ely, and Sir Edward Carn, sent on a gratulatory Embassy to Pope Paul IV. to
tender England's thanks for the favors conferred thereon.

The Convocation that then was held, knew that the Cardinal was to be
entreated, not to insist upon the restoring of Church Lands, rather to confirm
the Lords and Gentry in their present possessions. And to that end a Petition
is presented to both their Majesty's, that they would be Herlin. Hist. of Q.
Mary.
pleased to intercede with the Cardinal concerning it: Which Petition was
offered to the Legate in the name of the whole Convocation by the Lord
Chancellor, the Prolocutor, and six others of the Lower House. Concerning which
the Legate was not ignorant, that a Message had been sent to the Pope in the
name of the Parliament, to desire a confirmation of the Sale of all the Lands
belonging to Abbeys, Chanteries, etc. or otherwise to let him know, that
nothing could be granted on his behalf. And it is likely, they received some
fair promises to that effect, in regard that on New Years day next following,
the Act for restoring the Pope's Supremacy was passed in both Houses of
Parliament. The whole matter being transacted to the content of all parties
(the poor Protestants excepted only) on January 25. there was a solemn
procession throughout London, to praise God for their Conversion to the
Catholic Church: wherein were ninety Crosses, an hundred and Sixty Priests and
Clerks, each of them attired in his Cope, and after them eight Bishops in their
Pontificalibus, followed by Bonner carrying the Popish Pix under a Canopy, and
attended by the Lord Mayor and Companies in their several Liveries. Which
Procession being ended, they all returned to S. Paul's Church, where the King
and Cardinal, together with all the rest, heard Mass, and the next day the
Parliament and Convocation were dissolved.

The English Ambassadors came to Rome on the first day of the Papacy of Pope
Paul IV. and in the first consistory after his Inauguration they were brought
before him, who granted the pardon desired, and lovingly embraced the
Ambassadors, and as an over plus, the Pope conferred the Title of King's of
Ireland on their Majesty's. In his private discourses with the Ambassadors, he
said that the Church-goods ought to be wholly restored, saying also that his
Authority was not such, as to profane things dedicated unto God. He also told
them, that the Peterpence ought to be paid as soon as might be, and that
according to the custom, he would send a collector for that purpose. He closed
his discourse with this, that they could not hope, that S. Peter would open to
them the Gates of Heaven, as long as they usurped his goods on earth.

A rumor was spread of the Queen's being with Child, and that she was quick,
and thereupon Letters were sent from the Lords of the Council to Bonner Bishop
of London, that prayers and thanksgivings should be made in all Churches. The
Parliament also while it was sitting, passed an Act, desiring the King that if
the Queen should fail, he would be pleased to take upon him the Education of
the Child. Set forms of prayer were also made for her safe delivery. Great
preparations were also made of all things necessary against the time of her
delivery. And upon a sudden rumor of her being delivered, the Bells were rung,
and Bonfires made in most parts of London. But it proved in fine that the Queen
neither was with Child for the present, nor had any hopes of being so for the
time to come.

A Gun was shot at one Doctor Pendleton, as He Preached at Paul's Cross, June
10. 1554, the pellet whereof went very near him, but the Gunner was not to be
heard of. Upon which the Queen published a Proclamation prohibiting the
shooting with hand-guns, and the bearing of weapons. A little before this, some
had caused a Cat to be hanged upon the Gallows, near the Cross in Cheapside,
with her head shorn, the likeness of a vestment cast upon her, and her two feet
tied together, holding between them a piece of Paper, in form of a Wafer,
tending to the disgrace of the Popish Religion. Then were some Ancient Statutes
revived that were made in the time of King Richard the second, Henry the
fourth, and Henry the fifth, for the severe punishment of obstinate Heretics,
even to death it self, and an Act was passed for that purpose.

Hereupon followed, that Inquisition for Blood, which raged in London, and more
or less was exercised in most parts of the Kingdom. Mr. John Rogers, a Learned
man, and a great companion of that Tyndal, by whom the Bible was translated
into English in the time of King Henry, after whose Martyrdom, he retired to
Wittenberg in the Dukedom of Saxony, where he abode till King Edward's coming
to the Crown, and was by Bishop Ridley presented to the Lecture of S. Paul's,
and made one of the Prebendaries. He was convented, and condemned, and
publi^kly burnt in Smithfield on Feb. 4 He was the first Martyr in Queen Mary's
days: On the nineth day of which month John Hooper late Bishop of Gloucester,
was burnt in that City. The like course was taken with Bishop Farrar, Bishop of
S. David's, but that I do not find him restrained from speaking his mind unto
the people as the other was. He was cast into prison by the Protestants in King
Edward's days. Being continued in prison in Queen Mary's days, and called
before Bishop Gardener, he gave such offense, that he was sent back again to
prison, and being sent back into his own Diocese, he there received the
sentence of condemnation at the hand of Morgan, who had supplanted and
succeeded him in the Sea of S. David's. He desisted not till he had brought him
to the Stake.

On Feb. 8. Laurence Saunders, an excellent preacher, was burnt at Coventry,
where he had spent the greatest part of his Ministry. On Feb. 9. Anno 1555.
Doctor Rowland Tailor was burned at Hadley, the Town whereof he was Pastor,
where calling on the name of God, he endured the Torment, till one Soice with
an Halbert struck him on the Head, that the brains fell out, and the dead
Corpse fell into the fire. Thomas Tomkins on March 16. suffered in Smithfield.
William Hunter an Apprentice of nineteen years of age was burnt at Burntwood in
Essex.

Within the compass of less than four years there died for the testimonial
Sp^^ds Chron. of Q. Mary.
of their conscience for the truth, no less than two hundred seventy and seven
persons.

In the heat of the fire were consumed five Bishops, one and twenty Divines,
eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen and Laborers;
twenty six Married-women, twenty widows, nine Virgins, two Boys, and two
Infants, one of them whipped to death by Bishop Bonner, and the other springing
out of his mother's womb from the stake as she burned, was by the Sergeants
thrown again into the fire.

Ridley and Latimer were both degraded on October. 15. and brought unto the stake
in the Town-ditch in Oxford, over against Baliol-^^ll^^^ on the morrow after,
where with great courage and constanc^ ^^ey ^ndured that death, to which they
had been precondemned before they were heard. Cranmer was a prisoner at that
time in the North-gate of the City, called Bocardo, from the top whereof he
beheld that most doleful Spectacle, and casting himself down on his Knees, he
humbly entreated the Lord to give them strength of faith and hope, which he
also desired for himself, whenever he should Act his part on that bloody
Theater.

When Ridley understood Hooper (before his Execution) to have been marked out
for the slaughter, he remembered that controversy which had been between them
in the time of King Edward about the Episcopal Habit, and thought it not enough
if he left not to the world some testimony of their mutual Charity, as well as
their consent in Doctrine. Concerning which he wrote to him in this manner
following.

My dear brother, forasmuch as I understand by your Books, that we thoroughly
agree, and wholly consent together in the substantial points of our Religion,
against which the world now so furiously rages, however in times past in
certain circumstances of Religion your wisdom and my simplicity (I must
confess) have a little jarred, each of us following the abundance of his own
spirit. Now (I say) be assured, that even with my whole heart (God is my
witness) in the bowels of Christ, I love you in the Truth, and for the Truth's
sake which abides in us, as I am persuaded, and by the Grace of God shall
abide in us for evermore. And because the world, as I perceive, Brother,
cease not to play his pageant, and buisily conspireth against Christ our
Savior, with all possible force and power, exalting high things against the
knowledge of God: let us join hands together in Christ, though we cannot
overthrow, yet to our power, and as much as in us lies, let us shake those
high Altitudes, not with carnal, but with spiritual weapons: and withal
(brother) let us prepare our selves to the day of dissolution, by that which
after the short time of this bodily affliction by the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ we shall triumph together with him in eternal glory. Comforted with
^^ciprocal Letters of this holy nature, they both prepared themselves for death
in which Hooper. had the honor to lead the way, as has been shown.

It is memorable, that the same day in which Bishop Ridley, and Latimer were
burnt at Oxford, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, would not go to dinner
till four a Clock in the afternoon, though the old Duke of Norfolk was come to
dine with him. The reason was, because he would first hear of their being
burnt. And as soon as word of that ^as brought unto him, he presently said, now
let us go to dinner: (...)ing down, and eating merrily, upon a sudden he fell
into such extremity, that he was fain to be taken from the Table, and carried
to his bed, where he continued fifteen days without voyding any thing by
Urine, or otherwise, which caused his Tongue to swell in his Mouth. He died at
Whitehall, November the twelfth, from whence conveyed by water to his house in
Southwark, his body was first lapt in Lead, kept for a season in the Church of
St. Saviors and afterward solemnly interred, under a fair and goodly
Monument, in his Cathedral. The custody of the Great Seal, with the Title of
Lord Chancellor, was, upon New-years-day, conferred upon Doctor Nicholas Heath,
Archbishop of York. But the Revenues of the Bishopric were appropriated to the
use of the Cardinal-Legat. But Doctor John White, Bishop of Lincoln, having
been born at Winchester, and educated in that School, of which he was afterward
chief Master, and finally Warden of that College, so far prevailed, by his
Friends at Court, that, on the promise of an annual Pension of a thousand
pounds, to the use of the Cardinal, he was permitted to enjoy the Title, with
the rest of the profits. But he was not actually translated till the next year
following. Voisy, Bishop of Exeter dies, and Doctor James Turbervil succeeds
him.

Queen Mary caused that clause of Prayer [ That God would deliver the Th^^^
Histor. lib. 13.
Kingdom from sedition, and tyranny of the Church of Rome] to be blotted out of
the Litany: and would not suffer her Father's name to be mentioned in public
Prayers, because he had made Apostasy from the Church.

She restored all Ecclesiastical Livings, assumed to the Crown, saying, That
she set more by the salvation of her Soul, than she did by ten Kingdoms.

And shortly after John Fecknam, late Dean of St. Paul's, was made Abbot of
Westminster, and had possession delivered him, and with him fourteen Monks
received the Habit at the same time.

Doctor Henry Cole was made Dean of St. Paul's.

Besides those that suffered in the flames for the Gospel, in this Queens
days, sixty four more were persecuted for their Faith and Profession, ^u^^er.
Church Hist^ry.
whereof seven were whipped, sixteen perished in prison, and were buried in
dunghils: many lay in captivity condemned, but were released by the happy
entrance of Queen Elizabeth, and many fled the Land in those days of distress;
among whom were many persons of Quality, as Katharine, Duchess of Suffolk,
last Wife of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, with her Husband, Richard Berty
Esquire, Sir John Cheek, Sir Richard Morison, of Caishobury in Hertford-shire,
Sir Francis Knollys, afterward Privy Counselor to Queen Elizabeth; Sir
Anthony Cook, Father-in-law to Cecil, after Lord Burghley, and famous for his
learned Daughters; Sir Peter Carew, renowned for his Valor in Ireland, where
he died, Anno 1576. Sir Thomas Wroth, of Middlesex, the Lady Dorothy Stafford,
afterward of the Bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth, (...) Lady Elizabeth Berkley.

Some of the English Exiles seated themselves at Emden in East-Frizland, a
Staple Town of English Merchants. John Scory, late Bishop of Chichester, was
Superintendent of the English Congregation in Emden.

Some settled themselves at Weasel, then in the Dominions of the Duke of Cleve,
but bordering on the Low Countries in the King of Spain's possession: but they
quickly left this place: some of them went to Arrow, a small City in
Switzerland, on the banks of the River Arrola, belonging to Bern. The most
eminent English seated themselves at Strasburgh, as James Haddon, Edwyn Sandys,
Edmond Grindal, John Huntington, Guido Eaton, John Geoffry, John Peader, Thomas
Eaton, Michael Raymuger, Augustine Bradbridge, Arthur Saul, Thomas Steward,
Christopher Goodman, Thomas Lakin, Humfrey Alcocson, Thomas Crafton. Some went
to Zuric, styled the Students at Zuric, viz. Robert Horn, Richard Chambers,
Thomas Leaver, Nicholas Carvil, John Mullings, Thomas Spencer, Thomas Bentham,
William Cole, John Parkhurst, Roger Kelk, Robert Beaumont, Laurence Humfrey,
Henry Cockcraft, John Pretio.

At Franckford on the Meine was the most conspicuous English Church beyond the
Seas, consisting of John Bale, Edmond Sutton, John Makebray, William
Whittingham, Thomas Cole, William Williams, George Chidley, William Hammon,
Thomas Steward, Thomas Wood, John Staunton, William Walton, Jasper Swift, John
Geoffry, John Gray, Michael Gill, John Fox, Laurence Kent, William Kethe, John
Hollingham, John Samford, John Wood, Thomas Sorby, Anthony Carier, Hugh Alford,
George Whetnal, Thomas Whetnal, Edward Sutton.

Besides these (the first Founders of these Congregations) many additional
persons, coming afterward out of England, joined themselves thereunto.

Now followed the sad troubles of Frankford, rending these Exiles into diverse
Factions: The English had a Church granted unto them in c^parcenie with the
French Protestants, they one day, and the English another. Which was granted
them with this proviso, That they should not dissent from the French in
Doctrine or Ceremony, lest thereby they should minister occasion of offense.

The English constituted their new Church, choosing a Minister and Deacons for a
time, and, out of conformity to the French, abrogated many things, formerly
used by them in the Church of England.

1. They concluded there should be no answering aloud after the Minister.

2. That the Litany, Surplice, etc. should be omitted.

3. Instead of the English Confession, they used another, framed according to
the state and time.

4. The same ended, the people sang a Psalm in meter in a plain tune.

5. That done, the Minister prayed for the assistance of God's Spirit, and so
proceeded to the Sermon.

6. After Sermon a general Prayer for all States, and particularly for England
was devised.

7. Then followed a Rehearsal of the Articles of Belief, which ended, the
people sang another Psalm.

8. Lastly, The Minister pronounced the Blessing, and so the people departed.

Thus settled in their Church, they write Letters to all the English
Congregations at Strasburgh, Zuric, Emden, etc. to invite them with all
convenient speed to join with them at Franckford. This occasioned several
reiterated Letters from Franckford, requiring those of Zurich, to weigh the
necessity of joining themselves in one Congregation. Those of Zurich, by many
dilatory Letters, excused themselves from coming thither. But the main reason
was, those of Zurich were resolved to recede no whit from the Liturgy used in
England under King Edward the sixth; and unless, coming thither they might be
assured, they should have the full and free use thereof, they utterly refused
any Communion with their Congregation.

Then came Mr. John Knox from Geneva, and was chosen by the Congregation at
Frankford for their Pastor. At which time Mr. Chambers, and Mr. Edmond Grindal,
came thither as Agents, with a Letter from Troubles of Frankford. p. 24.
the Congregation of Strasburgh. These made a motion* that they might have the
substance of the Common Prayer Book, though such Ceremonies, and things, which
the Country could not bear, might well be omitted. But Knox and Whittingham
were as much bent against the substance of the Book, as against any of the
Circumstantials which belonged to it. Hereupon Grindal and Chambers return back
again to Strasburgh.

Knox, and others in Frankford, drew up, in Latin, a platform of the English
Liturgy, and sent it to Geneva, tendering it to the judgment of Mr. John Calvin:
who answers, that in the English Liturgy he had observed multas tolerabiles
ineptias, many tolerable fooleries, adding, that there wanted that purity which
was to be desired in it, that it contained many Relics of Popish dregs; that
seeing there was no manifest impiety in it, it had been tolerated for a season,
because at first it could not otherwise be admitted. But howsoever! though it
was lawful to begin with such beggarly rudiments, yet it behoved the learned,
grave, and godly Ministers of Christ, to endeavor further, and set forth
something more refined from filth and rustiness.

This being sent unto Knox and Whittingham, those who formerly approved, did
afterward dislike the English Liturgy. But in the end it was agreed on, that a
mixed form, consisting partly of the order of Geneva, and partly of the Book of
England, should be digested, and received till the first of April.

In this condition of affairs, Doctor Richard Cox, the late Dean of
Christ-church, and Westminster, first Schoolmaster, and afterward Almoner to
King Edward the Sixth, puts himself into Frankford, March 13. accompanied
with many English Exiles. Being a man of great learning, of great authority in
the Church, and one that had a principal hand in drawing up the Liturgy by Law
established, he could not patiently bear these innovations in it. He thereupon
first begins to answer the Minister, contrary to the order there agreed on, and
the next Lord's Day after causes one of his company to go into the Pulpit, and
read the Litany. Against which doings of his Knox, in a Sermon the same day,
inveigheth most bitterly, affirming many things in the English book to be
imperfect, and superstitious: for which he is both rebuked by Cox, and
forbidden to preach. Hereupon Whittingham procures an Order from the
Magistrates, requiring that the English should conform themselves to the Rules
of the French.

Cox his party being depressed, they accuse Knox to the State, for high Treason
against the Emperor, in an English book of his, entitled, An Adnonition to all
Christians, first privately preached in Buckinghamshire, and now publicly
printed to the world, wherein he called the Emperor no less an enemy to Christ,
than Nero. Hereupon the State of Frankford willed Knox to depart the City, who
on March 25. to the great grief of his Friends, left the Congregation, and
ret^^eth himself to Geneva. Whittingham and the rest of his party were
commanded to receive the Book of England, against which Order Whittingham, for
a time, opposes, encouraged therein by Goodman; but finding Cox and his party
too strong for them, they also left Franckford shortly after.

Then Doctor Cox and his Adherents proceed to elect Officers in the
Congregation. Mr. Whitehead is chosen their Pastor, yet so, as two Ministers,
four Elders, and four Deacons were joined to assist him. And because this was
then an University, as well as a Congregation, of the English, Mr. Robert Horn
was chosen to be Hebrew Reader, Mr. Mullings to read the Greek Lecture, and Mr.
Trahern the Lecture in Divinity.

Here a moderate motion was made, that the difference might be compremised, and
referred to Arbitrators, which should be equally chosen on both sides.

To this Doctor Cox his party would in no wise consent, and lost much
reputation by the refusal.

The Names of those who separated themselves from this Congregation were as
follows. William Williams. William Whittingham. Anthony Gilby. Christopher
Goodman Thomas Cole. John Fox. Thomas Wood. William Kethe. John Kelk. John
Hilton. Christopher Scothous. Nicholas Purfote. John Escot. Thomas Grafton.
William Walton. Laurence Kent. John Hellingham. Anthony Carier.


Of these Mr. Fox, with a few more, went to Basil: the rest settled themselves
at Geneva, where they made choice of Knox and Goodman for their constant
Preachers, under which Ministry they reject the whole frame and fabric of he
Reformation made in England, conformed themselves wholly to the fashions of the
Church of Geneva.

It was not long after the settling of the Liturgy at Franckford, before
Whit^head left the Ministry of the English Congregation, which Cox obtained for
Mr. Horn. That being done, he withdrew himself to Strasburg, there to enjoy the
company of Peter Martyr, with whom he was well acquainted, while he lived in
Christ-church.

By Doctor Cox his departure a new gap is open for another dissension. Some
words had passed, at a Supper, between Horn the Pastor, and Ashley, a Gentleman
of note, intended rather for increase of charity, than breach of friendship.
Ashley is three days after cited to appear at the house of one of the Elders,
to answer for some words he had spoken in contempt of the Ministry. But, from
the Elders, he appeals to the Congregation, among whom he prevails so far, that
they send a Message, by two of their company, to the Pastor, and Elders, to
proceed no further in the cause. Horn being backed by Chambers, the public
Treasurer, excepts against this Message, as not decreed by the whole
Congregation, and resolves to maintain that authority, which had been conferred
on him and the rest of the Elders, Ashley, and his party, on the other side,
protest against the Pastor and Elders, as an adverse party, and therefore not
in a capacity to sit as Judges in the present case, and do consult about the
making of a Book of Discipline for the curbing the exorbitant power (for so
they thought it) of the Pastors and Elders. Thereupon the Pastor and Elders
forsake their Offices, and on the next day of public meeting take place among
the rest as private persons. The Congregation full, but the Pulpit empty, which
put the rest upon a humor of electing others to take the Pulpit charge upon
them. The noise of these disorders awakens the Magistrates, who command Horn
and Chambers to forbear the Congregation until further order, and afterward
restoring them to their former authority, by public edict, were contradicted
in it by Ashley's party, who, having got some power into their hands, were
resolved to hold it.

In the mean time a Book of Discipline had been drawn, and tendered to the
Congregation, according to the Rules, whereof the Supreme power, in all
Ecclesiastical causes, was put into the hands of the Congregation, and the
disposing the public moneys committed to the trust of Heylin's Hist. of Q.
Mary.
certain Officers, by the name of Deacons. This makes the breach wider than
before. The Magistrates write their Letters to Strasburg, desiring Doctor Cox,
Doctor Sandys, together with Robert Berty Esquire, to undertake the closing of
the present Rupture. To their arbitrament each party is content to submit the
controversy. In the end a form of Reconciliation is drawn up by some of the
English, who really sought the peace of the Church. But those, who stood for
the new discipline, refused to submit themselves to any establishment, by which
the power of the diffusive body of the Congregation might be called in
question. Whereupon Horn and Chambers depart to Strasburg, from whence Chambers
writ his Letters to them twice, but to no effect. They had before elected some
new Ministers, and though Horn, and his party, opposed it, yet they concluded
it for the present, and now they mean to stand to the conclusion, let Horn and
Chambers go or tarry, as best pleased themselves. Such were the troubles and
disorders in the Church of Frankford, occasioned first by a dislike of the
public Liturgy, before which they preferred the nakedness and simplicity of
the French and Genevian Churches, (says Doctor Heylin) and afterward
continued by the opposition made by the general body of the Congregation,
against such who were appointed to be Pastors and Rulers over them.

And now it is time to return to England, and look back upon Cranmer, who had
been cited to the Court of Rome; for nothing could be done against the person
of a Metropolitan, before the Pope had taken cognizance of the cause, and
eighty days had seemingly been given to Cranmer, for making his appearance in
the Court of Rome. And though the Pope knew well enough, as well the
Archbishop's readiness to appear before him, if he were at at liberty, as the
impossibility of making any such appearance, as the case then stood; yet at the
end of the said eighty days he is pronounced by the Pope, to be contumacious,
and for his contumacy to be degraded, excommunicated, and finally delivered
over to the secular Magistrate. According unto which Decree a Commission is
directed unto Edmond Bonner, Bishop of London, and Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of
Ely, to proceed in the Degradation of the said Archbishop, who caused him to be
degraded. After this, and before his death, great pains was taken by a Spanish
Friar, in the University, to persuade him to a retraction of his former
Opinions, by whom it was suggested to him, How acceptable it would be to the
King and Queen, how gainful to himself, in regard both of his soul and of his
temporal being, putting him in good hope, that he should not only have his
life, but be restored again to his ancient Dignity, etc. if he would but
subscribe his name to a piece of Paper, which was made ready for his hand.

By these and the like alluring temptations he was prevailed upon to sign the
Writing, in which were briefly comprehended the chief points of Doctrine
defended in the Church of Rome, and by him formerly condemned, both in public
and in private. But all this could not save him from being made a Sacrifice to
revenge and avarice.

The Queen had still a vindicative spirit against him, for the injury which she
conceived had been done to her Mother: and the Cardinal (who hitherto had
enjoyed the profits of the Sea of Canterbury as an Usufructuary) was altogether
as solicitous for getting a right and title to them as sole proprietary. No way
to pacify one, and to satisfy the desires of the other, but by bringing him
(when he least looked for it) to the fatal Stake. And thither they brought him,
and first he retracts his retraction, and after punishes that hand which had
subscribed it, by holding it forth into the flame, and suffering it to be
consumed before the rest of his body had felt the fire. The residue of his body
being burnt to ashes, his heart was found entire and untouched in the midst of
the cinders: which possibly may serve as a witness for him, that his heart
stood fast unto the Truth, though with his hand he had subscribed some Popish
errors.

Cardinal Pool received Consecration to the Sea of Canterbury, the very next
Sunday after Cranmer's death.

No fewer than two hundred are reported to have been burnt by bloody Bonner,
the most eminent of all which number was Mr. John Philpot, Archdeacon of
Winchester, who, though of Gardiner's Diocese, was condemned by Bonner,
Gardener being well enough contented to find out the Game, and leave it to be
followed by that bloody Hunter. Dr. John Christopherson, Bishop of Chichester,
is recorded to have burnt ten in one fire at Lewis, and seventeen others at
several times in sundry places, among which was Richard Woodman, of Warbleton
in Sussex, that notable Martyr; and four at Mayfield, viz. John Heart, Thomas
Ravensdal, a Shoemaker, and a Collier. Harpfield, Archdeacon of London, and
Thornton, the Suffragan of Dover, are said to have poured out blood like water.
The same is said of Griffin of Rochester, and Downing, Chancellor of Norwich.
The same character is given of Bishop Bayn of Coventry and Litchfield, who
burned many faithful Ministers and others.

In all the Province of York I find none brought to the Stake but George Marsh
of Chester, condemned thereto by Bishop Coals. Besides the burning of Bishop
Farrar, at Carmarthen, by Bishop Morgan, and of Rawlins, and White, at Cardiff,
by Bishop Kitching: No great cruelty seems to have been acted in the four Welsh
Diocesses. In the Diocese of Exeter, Wells, Peterborough, and Lincoln (though
this last the greatest in the Kingdom) I find mention but of one a piece: of
two in that of Ely, and of no more than three apiece in that of Bristol, and
Sarisbury; for at Newbury were burnt that famous Julius Palmer, with two
others. Doctor Tunstal, Bishop of Durham, was in Queen Mary's time no great
persecutor, his Bishopric had days of quiet under him. When Mr. Russel, a
Preacher was brought before him, and Doctor Himner, his Chancellor, would have
had him examined more strictly, the Bishop stayed him, saying; Hitherto we have
had a good report among our Neighbors, I pray you bring not this man's blood
upon my Head. The Bishop of Carlisle also was a man of a moderate temper.

The Pope had published a Bull in print, Anno 1556. in which he threatened
excommunication to all persons that kept any Church Lands unto themselves, as
also all Princes and Magistrates, that did not put the same in execution. Which
though it did not edify much in the Realm of England, yet it found more
obedience in that of Ireland, in which a Parliament being called, in June 1557.
there passed an Act for repealing of Statutes, Articles, and Provisions made
against the Sea of Rome, since the twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, and
for abolishing of several Ecclesiastical possessions, conveyed to the Laity, as
also for the extinguishment of First Fruits and Twentieth parts (no more than
the yearly payment of the Twentieth part, having been laid by Act of Parliament
upon the Clergy of Ireland) in the first and last clause whereof, as they
followed the example of the Realm of England, so possibly they might have given
a dangerous example to it in the other point, if by the Queens death, which
followed shortly after, King Philip, and the Popes, had not lost all their
power and influence on the English Nation; by means whereof there was no
farther progress in the Restitution of the Abbeylands, no more re-edifying the
old Religious houses, and no intention for the founding any new.

Cardinal Poole, having visited his own Diocese, and given out diverse printed
Articles, to show his great care for the suppressing the growth of Heresy,
sent his Commissioners to Cambridge, who interdicted the two Churches, wherein
Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius, had been interred; and the Writ being taken
out de comburendo Haer^tico, and being come down, and sent to the Mayor of
Cambridge, on February 6. the two dead Bodies were taken out of their Graves,
and being laid in their Coffins, on men's shoulders, were carried to the
Marketplace with a guard of men, well armed and weaponed, chained unto several
posts, as if still alive, the wood and fire put to them, and their Bodies
burned, together with so many of their Books as could be gotten, which were
cast into the same flames also.

Queen Mary now engages in her Husband's quarrel, and King Philip having made
up an Army of thirty five thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse, besides a
thousand Horsemen, four thousand Footment, and two thousand Pioners sent out of
England, under the command of the Earl of Pembrook, sat down before St.
Quintin, the chief Town of Piccardy. On August the tenth the Battles join, in
which the French were vanquished, and their Army routed, the Constable of
France, the Prince of Mantua, the Duke of Montpensier and Longueville, with six
others of the prime Nobility, and many others of less note, being taken
prisoners. The Duke of Anguien, the Viscount Turin, most of the Foot-Captains,
and the common Soldiers, to the number of two thousand five hundred, were
slain upon the place. King Philip stormed St. Quintin on the eighteenth day.
After which service, the English finding some neglect from King Philip, desired
to be dismissed into their Country, which was indulged unto them. By whose
dismission King Philip could do no action of importance in the rest of the War.

But the Queen shall pay dearly for this Victory. The English were then
possessed of the Town of Calais, with many other Forts thereabout, as Guisness,
Hames, Ardres, etc. together with the whole Territory, a Town situate on the
mouth of the English Chanel, opposite to Dover, and distant not above twenty
five miles from it. King Edward the Third, after a Siege of more than eleven
months, became Master of it, Anno 1347. by whom it was first made a Colony of
the English Nation, and after one of the Staple-Towns for the sale of Wool:
kept with great care by his Successors, who, as long as they had it in their
hand, were said to carry the Keys of France at their Girdle: a Town which, for
more than two hundred years had been in possession of the English. The Queen
had broke the peace with France, and taken no care to fortify this place in
this time of War. Then the Duke of Guise, one of the best Soldiers of that
Age, now called back out of Italy, being informed by the Governor of Bulloign,
that the Town was neither so well fortified, nor so strongly garriloned, but
that it might easily be taken, on New-years-day sat down before it, and on
Twelfth-day had it surrendered up unto him, by the Lord Deputy Wentworth, who
had the chief government of it. Guisnesse, Hames, and all the other Forts in
the County of Oye were reduced under the power of the French within few days
after.

The Pope is displeased with Cardinal Pool, by whose persuasion, it was
thought, that the Queen had broke her League with France, to take part with her
Husband: therefore he deprives Pool of the Legantine power, confers the same
upon Friar Peitow, an Englishman by birth, and of good descent, whom he
designs also to the Sea of Sarisbury, then void by the death of Capon. Karn,
the Queens Agent with the Pope, advertiseth her of these secret practices. Pool
lays by the Cross of his Legation, and abstains from the exercise of his Bulls
and Faculties. Peitow, the new Cardinal-Legat, puts himself on the way to
England, when the Queen commands him, at his peril, not to adventure to set
foot on English ground. Peitow died in April following, the rupture was made up
again, and Pool was confirmed in the possession of his former powers. And
thereupon followed the burning diverse persons in the Diocese of Canterbury,
whereof two suffered at Ashford, and six in his own Metropolitan City. These
Godly Martyrs, in their prayers which they made before their Martyrdom, desired
God, that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and so it came to
pass.

The number of prohibited Books increasing every day more and more, a
Proclamation was set forth on June the sixth, to hinder the continual spreading
of so great a mischief. Which Proclamation, though it were very smart, yet not
so full of rigor as another, which came out at the burning of seven persons in
Smithfield, published both at Newgate, where they were imprisoned, and at the
Stake where they were to suffer, whereby it was straightly charged and commanded,
That no man should either pray for, or speak to them, or once say, God help
them. Which Proclamation notwithstanding, Bentham, the Minister of one of the
London Congregations, seeing the fire set to them, turning his eyes unto the
people, and cried, We know they are the People of God, and therefore we cannot
choose but wish well to them, and say, God strengthen them. And so he said,
Almighty God, for Christ's sake strengthen them. With that all the people, with
one consent, cried, Amen, Amen.

It was very admirable, that the Protestants should have a Congregation under
Bonner's nose, yet so it was: and in one of those Congregations, whereof
Bentham was Minister, there assembled feldom under forty, many times an hundred
and more: the Ministers whereof successively were Mr. Edward Scambler, after
Bishop of Peterborough, Mr. Thomas Foul, Mr. John Rough convented and
condemned by Bonner, and burnt for the Truth. After whom followed Mr. Augustine
Bernher, a moderate and learned man, and finally Mr. Thomas Bentham
forementioned, who continued in that charge till the death of Queen Mary, and
was by Queen Elizabeth preferred to the Sea of Lichfield, Anno 1589.

And notwithstanding all the care of the Queens Inquisitors, many good Books of
true Christian Consolation, and good Doctrine, did either find some Press in
London, or were sent over to their Brethren by such learned men as had retired
themselves to their several Sanctuaries.

Then raged a contagious Fever in most parts of the Land, and no former Plague
was thought to have destroyed a greater number, so that diverse places were left
void of Justices, and men of worth, to govern the Kingdom. At which time died
also so many Priests, that a great number of Parish-Churches, in diverse places,
were unserved, and no Curates could be gotten for money. Much corn was also
lost in the field for want of Workmen to get it in. Physicians died as well as
the Patients, two of the Queens Doctors dying of it a little before the death
of the Queen. It spared the Prelat no more than the Priest, insomuch, that
within less than the space of twelve months almost one half of the English
Bishops had made void their Sees.

Now God put an end to those calamities of his Children by the death of Queen
Mary, who died of a Dropsy, November the seventeenth, 1558. Within few hours
after her death, died Cardinal Pool, Archbishop of Canterbury. He procured of
the Queen the Patronage of nineteen Benefices unto his See, promised, and
intended, to repair the Palace at Canterbury. He was buried in his own
Cathedral, with this short and modest Epitaph upon his plain Monument,
DEPOSITVM CARDINALIS POLI.

The Parliament sat at Queen Mary's death, after which they only continued so
long, as jointly and publicly to proclaim Elizabeth Queen, and then they were
dissolved: Queen Mary's body, was enterred in the Chapel of King Henry the
Seventh, in the Isle on the North side thereof.

ELIZABETH, the only Child then living of King Henry the Eighth, succeeded her
Sister in the Throne, on November the seventeenth, Anno 1558. She was
proclaimed by the King at Arms, first before Westminster Hall door, in the
presence of the Lords and Commons, and, not long after, at the Cross in
Cheapside, and other places in the City, in the presence of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and principal Citizens, to the great joy of all peaceable and
well-affected people.

The news whereof, being brought unto her by some of the Lords, she removes
from Hatfield on the nineteenth of that month, and with a great and royal Train
sets forward to London. At Highgate (four miles from the City) she was met by
all the Bishops then living, who presented themselves before her upon their
knees. In which address, as she expressed no small contentment, so she gave to
each of them particularly her hand to kiss, except only unto Bonner of London.
At her first coming to the City, she took her lodging in the Charter House,
where she staid some days, till all things in the Tower might be fitted for
her reception. Attended by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with a stately Train of
Lords and Ladies, she enters by Cripple-gate into the City, passes along the
Wall till she came to Bishops-gate, where all the Companies of the City, in
their several Liveries waited her coming, in their proper and distinct ranks,
reaching from thence until the further end of Mark-lane, where she was
entertained with a peal of great Ordinance from the Tower. At her entrance into
which place she rendered her most humble thanks to Almighty God, for the great
and wondrous change of her condition, in bringing her from being a prisoner in
that place, to be the Ruler of her people, and now to take possession of it as
a Royal Palace. Here she remained till December the fifth, then next following,
and from thence removed by water to Sommerset-house. In each remove she found
such infinite throngs of people, which flocked from all parts to see her, both
by land and water, and testified their public joy, by such loud acclamations,
as much rejoiced her heart to hear, and could not but express it in her words
and countenance.

As she passed through London, the Bible was presented to her at the little
Conduit in Cheapside, which she received with both her hands; and kissing it,
laid it to her breast, saying, That the same had ever been her delight, and
should be the rule by which she meant to frame her Government.

She was crowned by Owen Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, on January Camden's
Hist. of Q. Elizab.
the fourteenth, for that the Archbishop of York, and the rest of the Bishops
refused to perform that office, suspecting her Religion, who had been first
bred in the Protestants Religion, and also for that she had very lately
forbidden the Bishop, in saying Mass to lift up the Host to be adored, and
permitted the Litany, with the Epistle and Gospel, to be read in the vulgar
tongue.

For the first six weeks things stood in their former state, without the least
alteration. She being now twenty five years of age, and taught by Experience
and Adversity, had gathered wisdom above age; the proof whereof she gave in
choosing her Counselors, which were as follow.

Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York. William Pawlet, Marquess of Winchester,
Lord Treasurer. Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel. Francis Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury. Edward Stanley, Earl of Darby. William Herbert, Earl of Pembrook.
Edward, Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of the Sea. William, Lord Howard of
Effingham, Lord Chamberlain.
Sir Thomas Cheiney. Sir William Peter. Sir John Mason. Sir Richard Sackvill.
Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury.
All these were Papists, and of Queen Mary's Council.

To these she joined of her own, William Par, Marquess of Northampton. Francis
Russel, Earl of Bedford. Edward Rogers. Ambrose Cave. Francis Knollys. William
Cecil, who had been Secretary to King Edward the Sixth, and soon after Nicholas
Bacon, whom she made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.


All these were of the Protestants Religion, and had been in no place under
Queen Mary.

Proclamations came forth, that Preachers should abstain from questions
controverted in Religion. Then care was taken for sending new Commissio^s unto
such Ambassadors, as resided in the Courts of several Princes, both to acquaint
them with the change, and to assure those Princes of the Queen's desire to
maintain all former leagues between them and the Crown of England.

To her Agent in the Court of Spain, it was given in charge, to represent to
the King the dear remembrance which she kept of those many Humanities received
from him in the time of her Troubles.

Instructions are sent also to Sir Edward Karn, the late Queen's Agent with the
Pope, and now confirmed by her in the same employment, to make the Pope
acquainted with the death of Queen Mary, and her succession to the Crown, not
without some desire, that all good Offices might be reciprocally exchanged
between them. But the Pope answered, That the Kingdom of England was held in
Fee of the Apostolic See: H^ylin. Hist. of Q. Elizab. An. ^eg. 1.
That she could not succeed, being Illegitimate. That He could not contradict
the declaration of Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third. That it was a great
boldness to assume the Name, and Government of it, without him: yet being
desirous to show a Fatherly affection, if she would renounce her pretensions,
and refer her self wholly to his free disposition, He will do whatsoever may be
done with the Honor of the Apostolic See.



The new Queen having performed this office of Civility to him, as she did to
others, expected no answer, nor took much thought of it when she heard it.

Many who were imprisoned for Religion, she restored to liberty at her first
coming to the Crown: which occasioned Rainsford, a Gentleman of the Court, to
make a suit to her in the behalf of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, who had been
long imprisoned in a Latin Translation, that they also might walk abroad (as
formerly) in the English Tongue. To whom she made answer, That he should first
endeavor to know the minds of the prisoners, who perhaps desired no such
liberty as he demanded.

King Philip fearing least he should lose the strength and title of the Kingdom
of England, and that the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and Ireland, would by
Mary Queen of Scots be annexed unto France, dealt seriously with Queen
Elizabeth, about a Marriage to be contracted with her, promising to procure a
special dispensation from the Bishop of Rome. The Queen weighing in her mind
the unlawfulness of such a Marriage, puts off King Philip by little and little,
with a modest answer, but indeed out of scruple of Conscience. And now she
thought nothing more pleasing to God, than that Religion should be forthwith be
altered. Thereupon the care of correcting the Liturgy, was committed to Doctor
Matthew Parker, Bill, May, Grindal, Whitehead, and Pilkinton, Learned and
moderate Divines, and to Sir Thomas Smith Knight; the matter being imparted to
no man, but the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, Sir John Gray of
Pyrgo, and Sir William Cecil.

A Parliament was summoned to begin on January 25. which opened with an
Eloquent and Learned Sermon, Preached by Dr. Cox. In the House of Commons there
were some furious Spirits, who eagerly opposed all propositions, which seemed
to tend unto the prejudice of the Church of Rome. Of which number none so
violent as Scory, Doctor of the Laws, and a Great Instrument of Bonner's
Butcheries in Queen Mary's Reign: who being questioned for the cruelty of his
Executions, declared himself to be sorry for nothing more, That instead of
lopping off some few boughs and branches, he did not lay his Ax to the Root of
the Tree: Yet passed He unpunished for the present, though Divine Vengeance
brought him in the end to his just reward.

In this Parliament passed an Act for recognizing the Queen's just Title to the
Crown, but without any Act for the validity of her Mother's Marriage, on which
her Title most depended.

There passed an Act also for restoring the Tenths, and first Fruits, to the
Crown; first settled thereon in the time of King Henry the Eighth, and
afterward given back by Queen Mary to the Pope.

They passed an Act also for the dissolution of all such Monasteries, Convents,
and Religious Orders, as had been Founded and established by Queen Mary. By
virtue of which Act Queen Elizabeth was repossessed of all those Lands, which
had been granted by her Sister, to the Monks of Westminster and Shen, the
Knights Hospitallers, the Nuns of Sion, together with the Mansion houses
re-edified for the Observants of Greenwich, and the Blackfriars in Smithfield.

In passing the Act of the Supremacy there was some trouble; it seemed to be a
thing even abhorrent in Nature and Polity, that a Woman should be declared to
be the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England. But the Queen declined
the Title of Head, and assumed the name of Governor of the Church of England.
This Act having easily passed the House of Commons, found none of the Temporal
Lords in the House of Lords to oppose it, save only the Earl of Shrewsbury,
and Anthony Brown Viscount Montacute. As for the Bishops, there were but
fourteen, and the Abbot of Westminster, then alive: of whom four being absent,
the rest could not make any considerable opposition.

In the Convocation of the Clergy there passed certain Articles of Religion,
which they tendered to the Parliament, which were these.

I. That in the Sacrament of the Altar, by the virtue of Christ assisting,
after the word is duly pronounced by the Priest, the natural Body of Christ,
conceived by the Virgin Mary is really present, under the Species of Bread and
Wine, also his natural Blood. II. That after the Consecration, there remains
not the substance of Bread and Wine, nor any other substance, save the
substance of God and Man. III. That the true Body of Christ, and his true Blood
is offered a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead, IV. That the
supreme power of feeding and governing the Militant Church of Christ, and of
confirming their Brethren, is given to Peter the Apostle, and to his lawful
Successors in the Sea Apostolic, as unto the Vicars of Christ. V. That the
Authority to handle and define such things which belong to Faith, the
Sacraments, and Discipline Ecclesiastical, has hitherto ever belonged, and
only ought to belong unto the Pastors of the Church, whom the Holy Spirit has
placed in the Church of God, and not unto Laymen.
This Remonstrance exhibited by the lower house of Convocation to the Bishops,
was, according to their Requests, presented by Edmond Bonner, Bishop of London,
to the Lord Keeper of the Broad-seal of England in the Parliament.

Both Universities did concur to the truth of the foresaid Articles, the last
only excepted.

This Declaration of the Popish Clergy hastened the disputation appointed on
the last of March, in the Church of Westminster, wherein these Questions were
debated.

I. Whether Service and Sacraments ought to be celebrated in the vulgar Tongue?
II. Whether the Church has not power to alter Ceremonies? III. Whether the
Mass be a propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead.
Popish Disputants. White Bishop of Winchester. Watson Bishop of Lincoln.
Baynes Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Scot Bishop of CHESTER.

Protestant Disputants. John Scory late Bishop of Chichester. David Whitehead.
Robert Horn. Edmond Gwest. Edwyn Sandys. John Elmer. Edmond Grindal. John Juel.

Moderators. Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal.

Besides the Disputants, there were present many of the Lords of the Queens
Council, with other of the Nobility, as also many of the lower House of
Parliament. For the manner of their conference, it was agreed it should be
performed in writing, and that the Bishops should deliver their Reasons in
writing first. Many differences arose between them, so that the conference
broke off, and nothing was determined. The Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
thought meet, that the Queen and the Authors of this defection from the Church
of Rome, should be Excommunicated, who for this cause were imprisoned.

Then a Peace being made, was Proclaimed over all England, betwixt the Queen of
England, the King of France, the Daulphin, and the Queen of Scots. The
Parliament being dissolved, by Authority of the same the Liturgy was forthwith
brought into the Churches in the Vulgar Tongue; the Oath of Supremacy offered
to the Popish Bishops, and others of the Ecclesiastical profession, which most
of them had sworn unto, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. All the Bishops
refused, except Anthony Bishop of Landaff.

As many as refused, were turned out of their Livings, Dignities, Bishoprics.

In the Sees of the Prelates removed were placed Protestant Bishops: Matthew
Parker was made Archbishop of Canterbury, who was Consecrated by three that
formerly had been Bishops, namely, William Barlow of Bath and Wells, John Scory
of Chichester, and Miles Coverdale of Exeter. And being Consecrated himself, he
afterward Consecrated Edmond Grindal Bishop of London, Richard Cox Bishop of
Ely, Edwyn Sandys Bishop of Worcester, Rowland Merick Bishop of Bangor, Thomas
Young Bishop of St. David's, Nicholas Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln, John Juel
Bishop of Salisbury, Richard Davis Bishop of St. Asaph, Edward Guest Bishop of
Rochester, Gilbert Barkley Bishop of Bath and Wells, Thomas Bentham Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, William Alley Bishop of Exeter, John Parkhurst Bishop
of Norwich, Robert Horn Bishop of Winchester, Richard Cheiney Bishop of
Gloucester, Edmond Scambler Bishop of Peterborough, William Barlow Bishop of
Chichester, John Scory Bishop of Hereford, Thomas Young Archbishop of York,
James Pilkinton Bishop of Durham, John Best Bishop of Carlisle, and William
Dounham Bishop of Chester.

Nicholas Health Archbishop of York, lived privately many years in his Manor
of Chobham in Surrey, never restrained to any one place, and died in great
favor with the Queen, who bestowed many gracious visits upon him, during his
retirement. Tonstal of Durham spent the remainder of his time with Archbishop
Parker, by whom he was kindly entertained, and honorably buried. The like
civility was afforded to Thurlby Bishop of Ely in the same house, and unto
Bourn of Wells, by the Dean of Exon, in which two houses they both died about
ten years after. White, though at first imprisoned for his faults, after some
cooling himself in the Tower of London, was suffered to enjoy his liberty, and
to retire himself to what friend he pleased: Which favor was vouchsafed unto
Turbervil also, who being a Gentleman by extraction wanted not friends to give
him good entertainment. Watson of Lincoln, after a short restraint, spent the
remainder of his time with the Bishops of Rochester and Ely; till having
practiced against the State, he was shut up in the Castle of Wisbech, where at
last he died. Oglethorp died soon after his deprivation, of an Apoplexy, Bayn
of the Stone, and Morgan in December following. Pool enjoyed the like freedom,
and died in a good old age. Christopherson lived on his Estate. Bonner alone
was doomed to a perpetual imprisonment; the prison proving to that wretch
(says Dr. Heylin) his greatest Sanctuary, whose horrid Butcheries had
otherwise exposed him to the popular sury.

We find no more to have been deprived of their preferments, than fourteen
Bishops, six Abbots, Priors, and Governors of Religious Orders, twelve Deans,
and as many Archdeacons, fifteen Presidents or Masters of Colleges, fifty
Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about eighty Parsons or Vicars. The
whole number not amounting to two hundred men, which in a Realm consisting of
nine thousand Parishes, and twenty six Cathedral Churches, could be no great
matter.

But there was not a sufficient number of Learned men to supply the Dr. P.
Heylins History of Queen Eliz.
Cures, which filled the Church with an Ignorant Clergy, whose Learning went no
further than the Liturgy, or the Book of Homilies, but otherwise conformable
(which was no small felicity) to the Rules of the Church. And on the other side
many were raised to great preferments, who having spent their time of exile in
such Foreign Churches as followed the platform of Geneva; returned so
disaffected to Episcopal Government, unto the Rites here by Law established, as
not long after filled the Church with most sad disorders: On which account we
find the Queens Professor in Oxford, among the Non-conformists, and Cartwright
the Lady Margaret's in Cambridge. VVhittingham the Ringleader of the
Franckfort dividers, was preferred to the Deanery of Durham: Sampson to the
Deanery of Christ-church, and within few years after turned out for a rigid
Nonconformist. Hardiman, one of the first twelve Prebendaries of the Church of
Westminster, deprived soon after for throwing down the Altar, and defacing the
Vestments of the Church.

Whether it were by the Pope's instigation, or by by the ambition of the
Daulphin who had then Married the Queen of Scots, the Scottish Queen assumeth
unto her self the Style and Title of Queen of England, quartereth the Arms
thereof upon all her Plate, and in all Armories and Eschutcheons as she had
occasion. A folly that Queen Elizabeth could never forget nor forgive; and this
engaged her the more resolutely in that Reformation so happily begun. And to
that purpose she sets out by advice of her Council a certain Body of
Injunctions, accommodated to the temper of the present time: wherein severe
course was taken about Ministers Marriages, the use of Singing, and the
Reverence in Divine Worship to be kept in Churches; the posture of the
Communion Table, and the Form of Prayers in the Congregation.

By the Injunctions, she made way to her Visitation, Executed by Commissioners
in their several Circuits, and regulated by a Book of Articles printed and
published for th^^ purpose. Proceeding by which Articles, the Commissioners
removed all carved Images out of the Church, which had been abused to
Superstition, defacing, also all such Pictures, Paintings, as served for the
setting forth feigned Miracles. They enquired also into the life and doctrine
of Ministers, their diligence in attending their several Cures; the decency of
their apparel, the respect of the Parishioners toward them; the reverent
behavior of H^yli^'s Hist. of Q. Elizab.
all manner of persons in God's Worship, etc. by means whereof the Church was
settled and confirmed in so good an Order, that the work was made more easy to
the Bishops, when they came to Govern, than otherwise it could have been.

In London, the Visitors were Sir Richard Sackvil, Father to Thomas Earl of
Dorset; Robert Horn, soon after Bishop of Winchester; Doctor Huick, a
Civilian; and one Salvage, a Common Lawyer; who calling before them diverse
Persons of every Parish, gave them an Oath to enquire and present upon such
Articles and Injunctions as were given unto them. In pursuance whereof they
burnt in St. Paul's Churchyard, Cheapside, and other places of the City, all
the Roods and other Images which had been taken out of the Churches. And in
some places the Copes, Vestments, Altar-cloathes, Books, Banners, Sepulchers,
and Rood-lofts were burned altogether.

A Peace being concluded betwixt England and France, although Queen Elizabeth
had just cause to be offended with the young King Francis the Second, for
causing the Queen of Scots his Wise, to take upon her self the Title and Arms
of England, yet she resolved to bestow a Royal obsequy upon the King deceased,
which was performed in St. Paul's Church on the eighth and nineth of September
in most solemn manner.

Kellison the Jesuit, and Parsons from him, slanderously affirmed, That
Archbishop Parker was consecrated at the Nags-head Tavern in Cheapside. This
slander was raised on this occasion: In order to his Consecration, the first
thing to be done after the passing the Royal Assent for ratifying the election
of the Dean and Chapter, was the confirming it in the Court of the Arches,
according to the usual form in that behalf; Which being accordingly done, the
Vicar General, the Mason's Consecration of Bishops in the Church of England,
lib. 3. cap. 4.
Dean of the Arches, the Proctors and Officers of the Court, whose presence was
required at this Solemnity, were entertained at a Dinner provided for them at
the Nags-head Tavern in Cheapside, for which though Archbishop Parker paid the
shot, yet shall the Church be called to an after-reckoning. But the Records of
the Archbishopric declare, that he was Consecrated in the Chapel, within his
Manor of Lambeth.

These slaunderers knew right well, that nothing did more justify the Church
of England in the eye of the World, than that it did preserve a Succession of
Bishops, and consequently of all other sacred Orders in the Ministration;
without which as they would not grant it to be a Church, so could they prove it
to be none by no stronger Argument, than that the Bishops (or the pretended
Bishops rather in their Opinion) were either not Consecrate at all, or not
Canonically Consecrated as they ought to be.

And now we may behold the face of the Church of England, as it was first
settled and established under Queen Elizabeth. The Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops. These Bishops nominated and elected according to the
Statute in the twenty sixth of King Henry the Eighth, and Consecrated by the
Ordinal, confirmed by Parliament, in the fifth and sixth year of King Edward
the Sixth, never appearing publicly but in their Rotchets, nor Officiating
otherwise than in Copes of the Altar: the Priests not stirring out of doors in
their square Caps, Cowns, or Canonical Coats, nor Executing any Divine Service
but in their Surplice. The Doctrine of the Church reduced Heylin. Hist. of Q.
Elizab.
unto it is ancient purity, according to the Articles agreed upon in
Convocation, Anno 1552. The Liturgy conform to the Primitive paterns. The
Festivals preserved in their former dignity, observed with their distinct
Offices peculiar to them; the weekly Fasts, the time of Lent, the Embring
weeks, and Rogation severely kept, not now by virtue of the Statute, as in the
time of King Edward, but as appointed by the Church in her public Calendar
before the Book of Common Prayer. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper celebrated
in a Reverend manner, the Table seated in the place of the Altar.

In the Court the Liturgy was officiated every day, both Morning and Evening,
not only in the public Chapel, but the private Closet, celebrated in the
Chapel with Organs, and other Musical Instruments, and the most excellent
voices both of men and children that could be got in all the Kingdom. The
Gentlemen and Children in their Surplices, and the Priests in Copes as often as
they attended the Divine Service at the Altar. The Altar furnished with rich
Plate, two fair gilt Candlesticks with Tapers in them, and a Massy Crucifix in
midst thereof: Which last remained there for some years. The ancient Ceremonies
customably observed by the Knights of the Garrer in their Adoration toward the
Altar were by this Queen retained a^ formerly in her Father's time. The solemn
Sermons Preached upon each Wednesday, Friday, and Lordsday in the time of Lent,
Preached by the choycest of the Clergy, she devoutly heard, attired in black,
according to the custom of her Predecessors.

The Bishopric of Carlisle was first proffered to Bernard Gilpin, Rector ^uller.
Church History of Britain
of Houghton in the North, but Mr. Gilpin refused the offer, not that he had
any disaffection to the Office, but because he had so much kindred about
Carlisle, at whom He must either connive in many things, not without hurt to
himself, or else deny them, not without offense to them. It was afterward given
to Dr. John Best, as was showed before. As for Miles Coverdale, formerly Bishop
of Exeter, he hever returned to his See, but remained a private Minister to the
day of his death.

Such of the Scots as desired a Reformation of Religion, taking advantage by
the Queen's abscence, and want of power in the Queen Regent to suppress their
practices, had put themselves into a Body. Headed by some of the Nobility, they
take unto themselves the name of the Congregation, managing their own Affairs
apart from the rest of the Kingdom. They petition the Queen Regent, and the
Lords of the Council, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper might be
administered in both kinds. That divine Offices might be celebrated in the
vulgar Tongue, and that they might have the choice of their own Ministers. The
chief of the party well backed by the common people, put themselves into Perth,
the news whereof occasioneth Mr. Knox to leave Geneva, and join himself to the
Lords of the Congregation. At Perth he Preaches against Images, Idolatry, and
other Superstitions of the Church of Rome so bitterly, that the people in a
popular fury deface all the Images in that Church, and presently demolish all
Religious Houses in that City. Those of Couper hearing of it, forthwith
destroyed all Images, and pulled down the Altars in that Church also. The like
was done after his Preaching at Craile and St. Andrews, in those places. They
burnt down the rich Monastery of Scone, and ruined that of Cambuskenneth,
demolished all the Altars, Images, and Covents of Religious persons in
Sterling, Lithgow, Glascough, Edinburgh, which last they possess, and put up
their own Preachers into all the Pulpits of that City, not suffering the Queen
Regent to have the use of one Church only for her own devotions. They alse
deprive the Queen Regent of all place and power in the public Government. But
she gathering Forces recovereth Edenborough, and the chief key of all that
Kingdom garisoned by the French. In their extremity Maitland and Melvin being
dispatched to the Court of England, imploring aid from Queen Elizabeth. And an
Army is sent into Scotland of six thousand Foot and three thousand Horse,
commanded by the Lord Gray. Some Ships were also sent to block up the haven,
and hinder all Relief which might come by Sea to the Town of Leith. At length
after diverse Articles signed and confirmed for both Kingdoms, the French take
their leave of Scotland, and the English Army was disbanded at Berwick.

As the Congregation was by the Queen put upon a present confidence of going
vigorously on in their Reformation, so it concerned them to proceed so
carefully in pursuance of it, as might comply with the dependence which they
had upon her.

First, Therefore they bound themselves by their subscription to embrace the
Liturgy, with all the Rites of the Church of England, which for a time remained
the only form of Worship for the Kirk of Scotland.

In the next place, They cause a Parliament to be called in the month of
August: for the Boroughs there appeared the accustomed number. but of the Lords
Spiritual no more than six Bishops of thirteen, with thirteen Abbots and
Priors: and the Temporal Lords to the number of ten Earls, and as many Barons.

Three Acts were passed to the advantage of the Reformation.

The first, was for the abolishing the Pope's Jurisdiction and Authority within
the Realm.

The second, for annulling all Statutes made in former times for maintenance of
Idolatry and Superstition.

The third, for the punishing the Sayers and Hearers of the Mass.

To this Parliament also some of the Ministers presented a Confession of the
Faith and Doctrine to be believed and professed by the Protestants of the Kirk
of Scotland: which being put to the Vote, was opposed but by three of the
Temporal Lords. The Popish Prelates were silent in it: which being observed by
the Earl Marshal, he broke out into these words, Seeing (says He) that my
Lords the Bishops, who by their Learning can, and for the zeal they should have
to the Truth, ought, as I suppose, to gainsay any thing repugnant to it, say
nothing against the Confession we have heard, I cannot think but that it is the
very Truth of God, and that the contrary of it is false Doctrine.

The Queen was now as active in advancing the Reformed Religion in Ireland, as
she had been in either of the other Kingdoms. A Parliament is therefore held on
January 12. where past an Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Persons. By which Statute were
established both the Oath of Supremacy, and the High Commission, as before in
England. There past also an Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. with
a permission Heyli^'s Hist. of Q. Elizab.
for saying the same in Latin, in those Churches where the Minister had not the
knowledge of the English Tongue. The people by that Statute are required, under
several penalties, to frequent their Churches, and to be frequent at the
reading the English Liturgy, which they understand as little as the Mass; by
which means the Irish were kept in ignorance, as to the Doctrines and Devotions
of the Church of England.

There also past another Statute for restoring to the Crown the firstfruits,
and twenty parts of all Ecclesiastical promotions within that Realm, as also of
all Impropriate Parsonages. The like Act passed for restoring all such Lands
belonging to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem. An Act was also past for the
recognition of the Queen's just Title to the Crown, as before in England. The
Queen left the prosecution of the work to her Bishops and Clergy: But they so
dissipated the Revenues of their several Bishoprics, by long Leases,
Fee-farmes, and plain Alienations, that to some of their Sees they left no more
than a Rent of five Marks per annum, to others a bare yearly Rent of forty
shillings, to the great dishonor of God, disservice of the Church, and the
perpetual Ignominy of themselves.

Now Return we again to England, where we find Reverend Jewel, newly
consecrated Bishop of Salisbury, to have Preached a Sermon at Paul's Cross, on
1 Cor. 11. 23. That which I delivered to you, I received of the Lord, etc. on
March 30. 1560. There he published that memorable Challenge, which so much
exercised the Pens and Studies of the Romish Clergy.

Bishop Jewel's Challenge.
If any Learned man of our Adversaries, or all the Learned men that be alive,
be able to bring any one sufficient sentence, out of any old Catholic Doctor,
or Father, or General Council, or Holy Scripture, or any one Example in the
Primitive Church, whereby it may be clearly and plainly proved, during the
first six hundred years.

I. That there was at that time any private Mass in the World. II. Or that
there was then any Communion ministered unto the people in one kind. III. Or
that the People had their Common Prayer in a strange Tongue. IV. Or that the
Bishop of Rome was then called the Head of the Universal Church. V. Or that the
People were then taught to believe, that Christ's Body is really,
Substantially, Carnally, Corporally or Naturally in the Sacrament. VI. Or that
his Body is or may be in a thousand places or more at one time. VII. Or that
the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his head. VIII. Or that the
People did then fall down and Worship it with godly honor. IX. Or that the
Sacrament was then, and now ought to be hanged up under a Canopy. X. Or that in
the Sacrament, after the words of Consecration, there remained only the
accidents and shows, without the substance of Bread and Wine. XI. Or that then
the Priests divided the Sacrament into three parts, and afterward received
Himself all alone. XII. Or that whosoever had said the Sacrament is a Figure, a
Pledge, a Taken, or a Remembrance of Christ's Body, had therefore been judged
for an Heretic. XIII. Or that it was lawful then to have thirty, twenty, etc.
Masses said in one day. XIV. Or that Images were then set up in the Churches to
the intent the people should worship them. XV. Or that the Lay People were then
forbid to read the Word of God in their own Tongue. XVI. Or that it was then
lawful for the Priest to pronounce the words of Consecration closely, or in
private to Himself. XVII. Or that the Priest had then authority to offer up
Christ unto his Father. XVIII. Or to receive the Sacrament for another as they
do. XIX. Or to apply the virtue of Christ's death to any man by the means of
the Mass. XX. Or that it was then thought a sound Doctrine to teach the People,
that Mass, Exopere operato, is able to remove any part of our sin. XXI. Or that
any Christian man called the Sacrament of the Lord, his God. XXII. Or that the
People were then taught to believe, that the Body of Christ remains in the
Sacrament as long as the Accidents of Bread and Wine remain there without
corruption. XXIII. Or that a Mouse, or any other Worm or Beast, may eat the
Body of Christ. XXIV. Or that when Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum, the word
[Hoc] pointed not the Bread, but Individuum Vagum, as some of them say. XXV. Or
that the Accidents, Forms, or Shows of Bread and Wine, be the Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood, and not rather the very Bread and Wine it self. XXVI.
Or that the Sacrament is a Token, or sign of the Body of Christ that lies
underneath it. XXVII. Or that Ignorance is the Mother and Cause of true
devotion. The Conclusion is, That then I shall be content to yield and
subscribe.
This Challenge being published in so great an Auditory startled the English
Papists both at home and abroad. The business was first agitated by the
exchange of friendly Letters betwixt Bishop Jewel, and Dr. Henry Cole, the late
Dean of St. Paul's; more violently followed in a Book of Rastals; followed
therein by Dorman and Marshal: Dorman was well answered and foiled by Nowel,
and the other by Calfhil. But the main encounter was between the Chalenger
himself and Dr. John Harding, who had the better of the day will easily appear
to any that consults their Writings: But these Discourses came not out till
some years after.

Pope Paul the Fourth dying, Pope Pius the Fourth succeeds him, who being
moved to Excommunicate Queen Elizabeth, by the Count of Feria, takes a more
moderate course, by sending Vincent Parpalia, Abbot of St. Savior's, with
courteous Letters unto her. Parpalia was instructed to offer in the Name of the
Pope, That the English Liturgy should be confirmed, the use of the Communion in
both kinds allowed of: And that all sentences passed, in the Court of Rome,
against her Mother should be rescinded, upon condition she would own the Pope's
Primacy, and cordially unite her self to the Catholic Church: yea some
thousands of Crowns (but all in vain) were promised to the effecters thereof.
But for all this the Abbot came no nearer than Bruxels with his Bulls and
Faculties, not being suffered to set Foot on English ground.

Now another Enemy quarrels at the Rites and Extrinsecals of the Church: Those
that for Religion fled to Frankford in Queen Marie's days, after her death
hastened into England: followed not long after by the Brethren of the
Separation, which retired from thence unto Geneva. Some Friends they had about
the Queen, and Calvin make's use of all his power and credit, both with the
Queen and Cecil (as appears by his Letters unto both) to advance their ends.
And he was seconded therein by Peter Martyr. But the Queen resolved to keep up
the Church in such outward splendour, as might make it every way considerable in
the eye of the World: when therefore they saw the Liturgy imposed by Act of
Parliament, and so many Episcopal Sees supplied with able Pastors, they began
to revive the quarrels raised in King Edward's time, about Caps, and Surplices,
etc. says Dr. Heylin. And herein they were seconded (as before in King
Edward's time) by the same Peter Martyr, as appears by his Letters to a
nameless friend, bearing date at Zurich, November 5. 1560. to which he added
his dislike in another of his Letters, touching the Cap, the Episcopal Habit,
the Church's Patrimony: the manner of proceeding to be held against Papists;
the Perambulation used in the Rogation week, etc. in which his judgment was
desired.

But these helps being too far off, another project was set on foot. Gryndal,
the new Bishop of London, was known to have a great respect to Calvin; the
business therefore is so ordered, that by Calvin's Letters to Gryndal, and the
friends they had about the Queen, way should be given to such of the French
Nation, as had repaired hither; to enjoy the freedom of their own Religion, to
have a Church unto themselves, and in that Church not only to erect the
Genevian Discipline, but to set up a Form of Prayer (says Dr. Heylin) which
should hold no conformity with the English Liturgy. This was effected. And now
there is another Church in London, as different from the Church of England in
Government and Forms of worship, as that of John Alasco was in the Augustine
Friars.

Upon the news of which success, diverse both French and Dutch came into
England, planted themselves in the Sea-Towns, and openly professed the Reformed
Religion. But some of them proved to be Anabaptists, and others infected with
corrupt O^inions of as ill a nature; which being made known to the Queen, she
commands them all by Proclamation to depart the Kingdom, whether they were
Aliens, or naturalborn English, within twenty days upon pain of imprisonment,
and loss of all their goods; yet notwithstanding many of them lurked in England
without fear of discovery, especially after the erecting of so many French and
Dutch Churches in the Maritime parts. The French and Dutch Churches in London
were infected with their frenzies; and such disputes were among them on that
account, that Peter Martyr interposed his Authority with them, to the composing
of those differences which had grown among them: for which see his Letter
bearing date at Zurich, on February 15. next following after the date of the
said Proclamation (which seems to have been about September 16.) and
superscribed, Unto the Church of Strangers in the City of London.

By another Proclamation she labors to restrain a sacrilegious kind of people,
which under pretense of abolishing Superstition, demolished ancient Tomb^s,
razed the Epitaphs, and Coat-armors of most Noble Familes, and other Monuments
of venerable Antiquity, took the Bells out of Churches, and plucked off the Lead
from the Churchroofs.

The Abbey of Westminster, most renouned for the Inauguration of the Kings of
England, their Sepulture, and the keeping of the Regal Ensigns, she converted
to a Collegiat Church: and there she instituted a Dean, twelve Prebendaries, a
Schoolmaster, an Usher, forty Scholars (called the Queen's Scholars, whereof
six or more are preferred every year to the Universities) Petit Canons and
others of the Quire to the number of thirty, ten Officers belonging to the
Church, and as many Servants belonging to the Colledge-diet, and twelve
Almesmen, besides many Officers, Stewards, and Collectors for keeping Courts,
and bringing in of their Revenue. The principal of which (called the High
Steward of Westminster) has ever since been one of the prime Nobility. The
Dean entrusted with keeping the Regalia, honored with a place of necessary
service at all Coronations, and a Commissioner for the peace within the City of
Westminster, and the lib^rties of it by Act of Parliament. The S^holars
annually preferred by election either to Christ-church in Oxford, or Trinity
College in Cambridge. Since this new Foundation of it it has given breeding
and preferment to four Archbishops, two Lord Keepers of the Great Seal of
England, twenty two Bishops, and thirteen Deans of Cathedral-churches, besides
Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and other Dignitaries in the Church to a
proportionable number.

The death of Francis the second, the young King of France, who had married
Mary Queen of Scots, encouraged the Scots to proceed boldly with their
Reformation.

The Duke of Guise labored with the Pope to fulminate his Excommunications
against Queen Elizabeth, as one that had renounced his authority, apostatized
from the Catholic Religion, and utterly exterminated the profession of ^t out
of her Dominions. But the Duke sped no better in his negotiation than the Count
of Feria did before.

About this time one Geoffrys was committed Prisoner to the Marshalsey in
Southwark, and More to the house of Madmen (commonly called Bethlem) without
Bishop's-gate in London. More professed himself to be Christ: Geoffrys believed
him to be such, and reported him so. Having remained a whole year in prison,
without showing any sign of their repentance, Geoffrys was whipped, on April 10.
1561. from the said Marshalsey to Bethlem, with a paper bound about his head,
which signified, That this was William Geoffrys, a most blasphemous Heretic,
who denied Christ to be in Heaven At Bethlem he was whipped again in the presence
of More, till the lash had extorted from him a confession of his damnable
error. After which More was stripped and whipped in the open Streets, till he had
made the like acknowledgment, confessing Christ to be in Heaven, and Himself to
be a vile, sinful man. Which being done, they were again remitted to their
several prisons for their further cure.

On June the fourth, a lamentable fire about four a Clock in the afternoon,
first showed it self near the top of the Steeple of St. Paul's Church in
London, and from thence burnt down the Spire, to the Stone-work and Bells, and
raged so terribly, that within the space of four hours the Timber and Lead of
the whole Church, and whatsoever else was combustible in it, was miserably
consumed, to the great terror of all Beholders: Which Church said to be the
largest in all the Christian World for all dimensions, contains in length seven
hundred and twenty foot, in breadth one hundred and thirty foot, and in height
from the pavement to the top of the roof one hundred and fifty foot. The
Steeple from the ground to the Cross or Weathercock, contained in height five
hundred and twenty foot, of which the square Tower only amounted to two
hundred and sixty, the Pyramide or Spire to as many more; which Spire being
raised of massy Timber, and covered over with sheets of Lead, as it was the
more apt to be enflamed, so was the mischief more incapable of a present remedy.

The Queen hereupon directed her Letters to the Lord Mayor and City of London
to take care therein. In obedience to whose Royal Pleasure the Citizens granted
a Benevolence, and three Fifteens to be speedily paid, besides the great bounty
of particular persons, etc. The Queen also sent in a thousand Marks in ready
money, and Warrants for one thousand load of Timber to be served out of Her
Majesty's Woods. The Clergy of the Province of Canterbury contributing to this
work the fortieth part of their Benefices which stood charged with
first fruits, and the thirtieth part of those which had paid the same. The
Clergy of the Diocese of London bestowed the thirtieth part of such of their
livings as were under the burden of that payment, and the twentieth part of
those which were not. To which the Bishop added at several times the sum of
nine hundred pound one shilling eleven pence, the Dean and Chapter one hundred
thirty six pound thirteen shillings four pence. By all which, and some other
little helps, the work was carried on so fast, that before the end of April
1566. the Timber-work of the Roof was not only fitted, but completely covered.

And now the Pope's Nuncio being advanced already in his way to England as far
as Flanders, expects the Queen's pleasure touching his admittance: for the
Pope could not be taken off from sending his Nuncio to the Queen, with whom he
conceived himself to stand upon terms of Amity. But the Queen persevered in
her first intent, affirming she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose
authority was excluded out of England by consent of Parliament. The greatest
obstacle to the Nuncio's coming was partly laid by the indiscretion of some
Papists in England, and partly by the precipitancy of the Pope's Ministers in
Ireland; for sundry ill-disposed persons upon the noise of the Nuncio's coming,
not only brake the Laws made against the Pope and his Authority, but spread
abroad slanderous reports, that the Queen was at the point to change her
Religion, and alter the government of the Realm. Some also had practiced with
the Devil by Conjurations, Charms, and casting of Figures, to be informed in
the length of her Majesty's Reign. And on the other side the Pope's Legate
being at the same time in Ireland, joined himself to some desperate Traitors,
who stirred up rebellion there, and as much as in him was had deprived the
Queen of all Right and Title to that Kingdom. Upon which grounds it was carried
clearly at the Council-boord against the Nuncio, notwithstanding the
Intercession of the French, the Spaniard, or the Duke of Alva.

Yet notwithstanding the Emperor Ferdinand sends to persuade the Queen to
return to the old Religion, at least that she would set apart some Churches to
the use of the Catholics. To whom she answered, That she had settled her
Religion on so sure a Bottom, that she could not easily be changed, And for
granting Churches to the Papists, it did not consist with the Polity and good
Laws of the Land.

Then diverse abuses arising in the Church, Archbishop Parker found it necessary
to have recourse unto the power which was given to him by the Queen's
Commission, and by a clause of the Act of Parliament, For the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and service in the Church, etc. As one of the Commissioners for
causes Ecclesiastical, he was authorized with the rest of his Associates, To
reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever, as might from time to
time arise in the Church of England.

And in the passage of the Act forementioned it was provided, That all such
Ornaments of the Church and the Ministers thereof should be retained, as were
in the Church of England, by Authority of Parliament, in the second year of
King Edward the Sixth, until further order should be taken therein from the
Queen's Majesty, etc. And also if there shall happen any contempt or
irreverence to be used in the Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the
Orders of the said Book of Common Prayer, the Queen might by the advice of the
Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain or publish such further Ceremonies or
Rites, as should be most for the advance of God's glory, the edifying the
Church, etc. Hereupon the Archbishop, by the Queen's consent, and the advice of
some of the Bishops, sets forth a certain Book of Orders to be diligently
observed, and executed by all persons whom it might concern.

In which it was provided, That no Parson, Vicar, or Curate of any Heylin.
Hist. of Q. Elizab. An. Reg. 3.
exempt Church, should from thenceforth attempt to conjoyn, by solemnization of
Matrimony, any not being of his or their Parish Church, without good Testimony
of the Bains being asked in the several Churches where they dwell, or otherwise
were sufficiently Licensed. That no other days should be observed as Holy Days
and Fasting-days, but only such as be expressed in the Calendar, lately set
forth by the Queen's Authority. That neither the Curates or Parents of Children
which are brought to Baptism, should answer for them at the Font, but that the
ancient use of Godfathers and Godmothers should still be retained; and that in
all such Churches in which the steps to the Altar were not taken down, the said
steps should remain as before they did. That the Communion Table should be set
in the said place where the steps then were, or had formerly stood: and that
the Table of the Decalogue should be fixed upon the wall over the said
Communion Table.

This year the Merchants Tailors School in London was founded, first by the
Master, Wardens, and Assistants, of the Company of Merchants Tailors, whence it
had the name, and by them founded for a Seminary to St. John's in Oxford, built
and endowed at the sole costs of one of their Livery. But of a far more private
nature was the Foundation of another Grammar School in the Town of Sandwich,
built at the charge of Sir Roger Manwood, and endowed with forty pound per
annum.

The Council of Trent being now opened, it was said in that Council, that i^
was good to let the Protestants alone, and not name them, alleging the danger
of moving ill humors in a Body which was then quiet. To give a safe conduct to
the Englishmen, which neither They nor any of them did require, were a great
indignity. They were content it should be given to the Scots, because their
Queen would demand it, but so as that the demand should first be made. But the
English Protestant Bishops would not venture themselves into that Council on
such weak assurance, considering how ill the safe conduct had been formerly
kept to John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, at the Council of Constance. And the
Queen kept the Papal party safe from gadding thither.

Then Scipio, a Venetian Gentleman (formerly acquainted with Master Jewel,
whilst he was a Student at Padua) wrote now an expostulating Letter unto him,
being lately made Bishop of Sarisbury, in which he much admireth, that England
should send no Ambassador, nor Letter, nor Message, to excuse their Nation's
absence from the General Appearance of Christianity in that Council, etc.
Bishop Jewel returned him such an Answer, that neither Scipio himself, nor any
other of that party durst reply upon him. The Answer is to be found at large at
the end of the History of this Council, Translated by Sir Nathanael Brent.

At this time it was advised, by Lewis Prince of Conde, the Cardinal
Chastilion, and other principal leaders of the Protestant party in France, that
they should put themselves under the protection of the Queen of England, who
had not long before so seasonably relieved the Scots in the like distress.

The Queen had been secretly advertised of all passages there by Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, her Majesty's Resident in that Kingdom.

It being agreed on between them, that the Queen should supply the Prince of
Conde, and his Associates with a sufficient quantity of Money, Corn, and
Ammunition, for the service of the French King, against the practices of the
House of Guise, and that the Town of New Haven should be put into her
Majesty's hands, to be garrisoned by English Soldiers. Immediately a manifest
was published in the name of the Queen, wherein was declared, that she had
observed, how the Guisian Faction, in the names of the Queen Mother of France,
and the young King, had endeavored to root out the Professors of the Reformed
Religion, and what massacres had been made at Vassey, Paris, Seen, Toulouse,
Bloys, Touers, Angier, and other places; that there were thought to be
Butchered no less than an hundred thousand of the natural Franch, between the
first of March and the twentieth of August then last past: that with the like
violence they had caused to be spoiled and imprisoned such of her Majesty's
Subjects as Traded in the Ports of Bretaign, and such as sought to preserve
themselves, to be killed, their goods and Merchandise to be seized, without
charging any other crime upon them but that they were Hugonots; and that in
consideration of the premises she could do no less than endeavor the
preserving the Reformed Religion, from an universal destruction, and the
maintaining her own Subjects and Dominions in peace and safety. The aid
amounting to six thousand men, was divided into two equal parts, of which the
one was destined to the defense of Roven and Deep, then being in the hands of
the Confederates, the other to take possession of the Town of New Haven, which
by the Inhabitants was joyfully surrendered to the English. The Lord Ambrose
Dudley, the eldest Son then living of the late Duke of Northumberland, she sent
to command that place, whom on December. 26. She had created Lord Lisle, and Earl
of Warwick, where he was solemnly received with a peal of Ordnance.

A petit Rebellion happened in Merton-colledge in Oxford. The Wardenship of that
house being void by the death of Gervase, one Man is chosen to the place; one
Hall and his Popish faction opposed his admission, and raised such a
persecution, that it was poenal for any to be a Protestant. Archbishop Parker
hearing of it, summoneth Hall to appear before him, but the seal of the
citation was torn off by some of that party. Hereupon the Archbishop made a
solemn visitation of that College, wherein all were generally examined, Man
confirmed Warden, Hall justly expelled, his party publicly admonished; the
young Scholars relieved, Papists curbed and suppressed, Protestants
countenanced, and encouraged in the whole University.

Now many strange whispers were abroad, and no small hopes conceived by those
of the Popish faction, for suppressing the Protestants in all parts of the
Kingdom, and setting up their own Religion as in former times: of the plot were
Arthur Pool, younger brother to Reginald Pool the late Cardinal Legate, and
Geoffry Fortescue, who had married his sister, and others. The substance of
their charge was, a design of levying War against the Queen, etc. with a
particular intention of advancing the Queen of Scots to the Crown of England,
and Pool himself unto the Title of Duke of Clarence. All which they Confessed
upon the Indictment, and did all receive the sentence of death; but were all
afterward pardoned by the Queen, out of that great respect which she bare to
their Royal Extraction.

Then was that elegant discourse published by Bishop Jewel, Entitled, The
Apology of the Church of England, first writ in Latin, translated presently
into English, French, Italian, Dutch, and at last in Greek, to the publishing
whereof he was much encouraged by Peter Martyr, with whom he had spent the
greatest part of his time when he lived in exile. But Martyr lived only to see
the Book which he so much longed for, dying at Zurich on the twelfth of
November following, and laid into his grave by the Magistrates and people of
that City with a solemn funeral.

The five Bishoprics erected by King Henry the eighth, were so impoverished in
this Queen's Reign that the new Bishops were necessitated to require the
benevolence of their Clergy at their first coming to them, to furnish their
Episcopal houses, and to enable them to maintain some tolerable degree of
Hospitality in their several Diocesses.

The Parliament called January 12. 1562. passed an Act for Assurance of the
Queen's Royal power over all Estates and Subjects in her Dominions. In which it
was provided, That no man Residing in the Queen's Dominions, should from
thence-forth either byword or writing, etc. endeavor willingly to maintain
the power and jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome heretofore usurped within this
Realm. It was also enacted, that none should be admitted unto Holy Orders, or
to any Degree in either of the Universities, or to be Barrester, or Bencher in
any of the Inns of Court, or to Practice as an Attorney, etc, till He or They
should first take the Oath of Supremacy on the Holy Evangelists; with a power
given to every Archbishop and Bishop within this Realm and the Dominions of the
same, to Minister the said Oath to all and every Spiritual Person in their
proper Diocesses, as well in places exempt as els-where; It had been declared
by the Bishops and Clergy assembled at the same time in their Convocation, To
be a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the Custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public Prayer in the Church, or to administer the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood by the People: therefore it was Enacted,
That the Bishops of Hereford, S. David's, Bangor, Landaff and S. Asaph, should
take care for Translating the whole Bible with the Common Prayer Book, into the
Welsh Tongue: The like care was also taken for Translating the Books of
Homilies.

Then were the Nine and thirty Articles (composed in the Convocation The 39.
Articles compiled in Convocation.
at London) published soon after both in English and Latin with this following
Title, viz. Articles agreed upon by the Archishops and Bishops of both
Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, Anno 1562.
for the avoiding of Diversities of opinions, and establishing consent touching
true Religion.

These Articles came forth much about the time that the Decrees of the Council
of Trent were published. Many of which Decrees begin with lying, and all end
with Cursing, threatening Anathema's to all dissenters. Anno 1571. the
Parliament confirmed these Articles so far, that every Clerk should before
December. 25. next following subscribe the same. And hereafter every person
promoted to an E^clesiastical living, should within a time prefixed, in the
time of Divine Service publicly read and profess his consent to the same, on
pain of deprivation ipso facto, if omitted. This subscription was extended only
to men of Ecclesiastical Function.

After the return of the Queen of Scots out of France into Scotland, Besides
the Ratifying the Act of Oblivion, (formerly condescended to in the Treaty at
Edinburgh) there were also past some other Acts, viz. one Act for repairing and
upholding Parish Churches, and the Churchyards of the same for burial of the
dead. Another against letting Parsonages, Gleabes, or Houses, into long Leases
or Fee. But on the other side no safety or Protection could be found for the
Queen's own Religion, no not so much as the Chapel Royal, or the Regal City.
In contempt whereof a force was violently committed in the month of August in
the Chapel of the Palace of Holy-rood house, where certain of the Queen's
servants were assembled for their own devotions, the doors broke open, some of
the Company haled to the next prison, and the rest dispersed, the Priest
escaping with difficulty by a private passage, the Queen being then absent in
the North.

In France the City and Castle of Cane besieged by the confederate forces both
French and English, was finally surrendered to the Admiral Chastilion to the use
of the Princes. After which followed the surrendry of Baieux, Faleise, S.
Lod's, and diverse other Towns and Castles. The Town of Har^flew on the Seine
was gallantly taken by the help of the English of Newhaven on the tenth of
March, and garrisoned by such Soldiers and Inhabitants as were sent from
thence. These successes amazed the Guisian faction, that they agreed unto an
Edict of Pacification, by the which the French forces were restored to the
King's Favor, the Hugonots to the free exercise of their own Religion. But
they must buy this happiness by betraying the English, whom they had brought
into the Country, and join their forces with the rest to drive them out of
New Haven, if they would not yield it on demand. The French closely besiege the
Town, and the Plague raging sore among the English, they capitulate, and leave
the Town to the French on July the twenty ninth, and carry the Plague with them
into England.

The Pope was so incensed against Queen Elizabeth, that he dispatched a
commission to the Fathers of Trent, to proceed to an excommunication Hist.
Council. (...).
of the Queen of England. But the Emperor Ferdinand wrote Letters both to the
Pope and to the Legates, in which he signified unto them, That if the Council
would not yield that fruit which was desired, at least they should not give
occasion to the Heretics to unite themselves more; which certainly they would
do, in case they proceeded so against the Queen of England, by means whereof
they would undoubtedly make a league against the Catholics, Hereupon the Pope
desisted at Rome, and revoked his Commission sent before to the Legates at
Trent.

The Plague brought out of France by the Garrison Soldiers of New Haven, had
so dispersed it self, and made such desolation in many parts of England, that
it swept away above twenty thousand of the City of London, which was the
greatest at that time which any man living could remember. Soon after this the
Queen makes peace with France.

Then the Queen went in progress to take the pleasures of the Country, and
visited the University of Cambridge, where being with all kinds of honor
received by the Students, and delighted with Comedies, Tragedies, and
Scholastical disputations, she survayed every College: and in a Latin Oration
takes her leave of Cambridge, giving them encouragement to pursue their Studies.

The English Bishops being empowered by their Canons, began to show their
Authority in urging the Clergy of their Diocesses, to subscribe to the Liturgy,
Rites, and discipline of the Church; and such as refused the same were branded
with the name of Puritans.

The Non-conformists in this Age were divided into two Ranks: some mild and
moderate, contented only to enjoy their own conscience. Others fierce and
fiery, to the di^turbance of Church and State, says Fuller. Among the former
was Father John Fox (for so Queen Elizabeth termed him) summoned to subscribe
by Archbishop Parker. The old man produced the New Testament in Greek, To this
(says he) will I subscribe. But when a subscription to the Canons was
subscribed of him, he refused it, saying, I have nothing in the Church save a
Prebend at Salisbury: and much good may it do you, if you will take it away
from me. However such respect did the Bishops (most formerly his fellow-exiles)
bear to his Age, parts, and pains, that he continued his place till the day of
his death. With Mr. Fox we may join his dear friend Laurence Humfery, who was
Regius Prof^ssor of Divinity in Oxford. But such was his quiet carriage, that
notwithstanding his nonsubscribing, he kept his Professors place, and Deanery
of Winchester as long as he lived.

A second sort of Non-conformists were fierce sticklers against
Churchdiscipline, we will begin with Anthony Gilby bred in Christ's College in
Cambridge. His fierceness against the Ceremonies ^ake from his own pen, They
are (says he) known Liveries of An^^christ, accursed leaven of the blasphemous
popish Priesthood, cursed patches of Popery and Idolatry, etc. William
Whittingham succeeds, who after his return from his exile in Germany, was made
Dean of Durham. Christopher Goodman is the third, who wrote a book stuffed with
much dangerous Doctrine, wherein he maintained, that Sir Thomas Wait was no
Traitor, that his cause was God's, etc. These three (says Mr. Fuller) were the
Antesignani of the fierce Non-conformists: for David Whitehead is not mentioned
with them. Yet find we none of them silenced; Only we meet with Thomas Sampson
Dean of Christ-church in Oxford, who was displaced out of his Deanery for his
Nonconformity. This Deanery was then conferred on Dr. Thomas Godwin, Chaplain
in Ordinary to the Queen, who was after advanced to the Bishopric of Bath and
Wells, who was Father to Francis Godwin, late Bishop of Landaff, the Author of
the Catalogue of the English Bishops.

Bullinger and Gualter, two Divines of Switzerland, men eminent in all points
of Learning being solicited by some zealous brethren to signify their
judgment in the present controversy about the Habit of the Clergy, return an
approbation of it, but send the same enclosed to Sandy's, Horn, and Grindal.

Now the Queen thought fit to make a further signification of Her Royal
Pleasure, legally declared by Her Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical,
according to the Acts and Statutes made in that behalf. The Archbishop is
thereupon required to consult together with such Bishops and Commissioners as
were next at hand upon the making of such Rules and O^ders as they thought
necessary for the peace of the Church, with reference to the present estate
thereof. Which being accordingly performed, presented to the Queen, and by her
approved, the said Rules and Orders were set forth, and published in a certain
Book Entitled, Advertisements, partly for due Order in the public
Administration of the Common Prayers, and using the holy Sacraments; and partly
for the Apparel of all Persons Ecclesiastical, by virtue of the Queen's
Majesty's Letters Commanding the same, January fifteenth, etc.

In this year 1564. died the Emperor Ferdinand, and Mr. John Calvin. What
Peter Lombard was esteemed to be in the Schools at Rome, the same was Calvin
reckoned to be in all those Churches which were Reformed according to the
Zuinglian Doctrine in the point of the Sacrament. Yet the Royal and Prelatical
Divines conceived otherwise H^y^in's Hist. of Q. (...).
of him (says Dr. Heylin) and the learned Adrian Seravia (though by birth a
Dutch^an) Yet being once preferred in the Church of England, could not endure
to be called Calvinian.

About the middle of February the Lord Darly came to the Court of Scotland, who
being not fully twenty years old, of lovely person, sweet behavior, and a most
ingenuous disposition, exceedingly prevailed in short time on the Queen's
affections. About the middle of July the Marriage-Rites were celebrated in the
Royal Chapel by the Dean of Restalrig, and the next day (the Queen having made
him before Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay) the new Duke was proclaimed King
by sound of Trumpet, and declared to be associated with the Queen in the
public government. The news whereof being brought unto Queen Elizabeth, she
seemed more offended than indeed she was. But never was marriage more
calamitous to the parties themselves, or more dishonorable to that nation, or
finally more scandalous to both Religions: in nothing fortunate but in the
birth of James the sixth, born in the Palace of Edinburgh on July 19. Anno
1566. Solemnly Crowned King of the Scots on the same day of the Month, Anno
1567. and joyfully received to the Crown of England on March 14. 1602.

Of such a temper were the devotions of the Church of England at this time,
that generally the English Papists, and the Ambassadors of Foreign L. Coke's
charg given at Norwich Assize^, 1606.
Princes still resorted to them. For the first ten years of Her Majesty's
Reign, the Papists in general came to our Churches. In the beginning of the
eleventh year of her Reign, Cornwallis, Beddingfield and Selyard were the first
Recusants.

Now we are come to the settling the Episcopal Government by as good Authority
as could be given to it by the Laws of the Land. By a Statute made in the last
Parliament for keeping Her Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience, a power
was given unto the Bishops to tender and receive the Oath of Supremacy of all
manner of persons residing and dwelling in their several Diocesses. Bonner was
then Prisoner in the Marshalsey, which being within the Borough of Southwark,
brought him within the Jurisdiction of Horn Bishop of Winchester, by whose
Chancellor the Oath was tendered to him. On the refusal of which Oath he is
Indicted at the King's Bench upon the Statute, to which he appeared in some
Term in the year foregoing, and desires that Council be assigned to plead his
cause. The Court assigns him Christopher Wray, afterward Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, that famous Lawyer Edmond Ploydon, and one Mr. Lov^lace.

But the business came under consideration in the following Parliament; which
began on September thirty, where the Legality of Horn's Episcopacy (which was
objected against in the behalf of Bonner) was cleared by Statute, by which the
Parliament did only publish, notify, and declare the Legal Authority of the
English Bishops, whose call and Consecration to their place was formerly
performed.

In the year 1566. Queen Elizabeth came to Oxford, Honorably attended with
Robert Dudley, lately made Earl of Leicester, and Chancellor of Oxford, the
Marquess of Northampton, the Lord Burl^igh, and the Spanish Ambassador. She
was lodged in Christ-Church, where many Comedies were acted before Her. Many
Acts were kept before Her in Philosophy, and one most eminent in Divinity. She
concluded all with a Latin Oration, which you may read in Fuller's Church
History, as it was taken by Dr. Laurence Humfrey, and by him Printed in the
Life of Bishop Jewel. Having stayed seven days, she took Her leave of the
University.

Anno 1567. Another Generation of Active Non-conformists succeeded the former.
Of these Coleman, Button, Benson, and Halingham, were the chief, inveighing
against the established Church Discipline, endeavoring to conform the English
Church in all things to that of Geneva. To these three more may be added, viz.
William White, Thomas Rowland, Robert Hawkins, all Beneficed within the Diocese
of London. This year these three were cited to appear before Edmond Grindal
Bishop of London: one who was not very forward to press Conformity. The Bishop
asked them this question, Have we not a godly Prince? speak is she evil?


To which they made their several answe^s in manner following.

William White. What a question is that? the fruits do show.


Thomas Rowland. No, but the servants of God are persecuted under Her.


Robert Hawkins. Why, this question the Prophet answers in the Psalms, How
can they have understanding that work iniquity, spoiling my people, and that
extol vanity?


The Queen proceeded severely against some of them, commanding them to be put
in prison, though still their party daily increased.

And now to strengthen the Romish party, two most Active fugitive Papists,
Thomas Harding, and Nicholas Saunders, return into England. Very earnest they
were in advancing the Catholic Cause, and perverted very many to their own
erroneous opinions.

A month or two after the Prince of Scotland's baptizing, the King her Husband
in the one and twentieth year of his age was in the dead time of the night, by
bloody and barbarous hands, was strangled in his bed, and thrown forth into an
Orchyard, the house being blown up with Gunpowder. The Queen afterward
marries Earl Bothwel, but he is forced to fly out of Scotland. And the Queen
is thrust in prison at Loch-levin. But what should be done with Her the
Conspirators could not agree among themselves. At length they extort from her a
resignation of her Kingdom to her Son, who was scarce thirteen months old. But
she being ill-used at home by her own Subjects, made an escape into England,
and landed at Wirkington in Comberland, and the same day wrote a letter in
French to Queen Elizabeth. The Countess Vid. Fuller's Church Hist. Cent. 16.
of Lenox complains against her to Queen Elizabeth, and besought her, that
she might be brought to her trial for the murder of her Son. The Queen of
Scots wrote a letter to the Pope, to manifest her devotion to the Sea of Rome,
written from Castle Boulton, November. 30. 1568.

Then Thomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and Charles Nevil Earl of
Westmorland brake out into open Rebellion against the Queen. Their first valor
was to fight against the English Bible and Service Book in Durham, tearing them
to pieces. They set up Mass in most places where they came, Richard Norton an
aged Gentleman carrying the Cross before them, and others bearing in their
banners the five wounds of Christ, or a Chalice, according to their different
devices. But the Earl of Sussex advancing out of the South with an Army to
oppose them, they fled Northwards, and mouldered away to nothing.
Northumberland fled into Scotland, lurked there awhile, was betrayed to Earl
Murrey, sent back into England, and beheaded at York. Westmorland fled into
Flanders, where he long lived very poor, on a small pension. Many were executed
by Sir George Bows Knight Marshal, in every Market Town betwixt New Castle and
Witherby. Leonard Dacres the next year labored to raise a New Rebellion, but
by the valor and vigilance of the Lord Hunsdon, his design was seasonably
defeated.

Commissioners were appointed by Queen Elizabeth to take cognizance of the
cause of the Queen of Scots, Murrey comes to York being the City appointed for
that purpose, and with him seven of his Inwardest friends as Delegates for the
Infant-King; and for the Queen of Scots Delegates also appeared. After
Lidington's admonition to the Scots, and the Scots Protestation, the Delegates
for the Queen delivered a Declaration in Writing. Some few days after Murrey
the Regent, and the Delegates for the Infant-King gave in their Answer. To this
the Queen of Scots Delegates renewing again their former Protestation, opposed
their Replication. Murrey refuses to yield reasons for deposing the Queen.
Then were the English Commissioners Revoked, and their Authority abrogated to
the great rejoicing of the Duke of Norfolk, who had ever favored the Queen of
Scots Title to the Succession to the Crown of England.

New Commissioners were appointed to hear and examine the matter: but the
matter comes to nothing. Murrey propounds to Norfolk a Marriage with the
Queen of Scots, yet spreads rumors against her. The Queen of Scots was
committed to the Earl of Shrewsbury. Queen Camden's Hist. of Q. Elizab.
Elizabeth relieveth the Protestants in France, Edicts being published there,
whereby the exercise of the Reformed Religion was utterly forbidden, the
Professors thereof removed from Public Offices, and the Ministers of the word
commanded to depart the Realm within a prefixed time. She also graciously
received the Netherlanders, of whom a great multitude had withdrawn themselves
into England as into a Sanctuary, from the cruelty of the Duke of Alva.

John Story, Doctor of the Laws, a great persecutor in Queen Mary's days,
being allured by a wile into a Ship, which was reported to have brought over
English Merchandises and Heretical Books, the Master of the Ship presently set
Sail, and brought him into England, where afterward he was executed as a
Traitor to his Country, at Tyburn. Then were the English Merchants in the
Netherlands and Spain, drawn into the Inquisition, and condemned to the
Galleys, and their goods confiscate.

The old store of Papists in England began now much to diminish, prisons
consumed many, Age more of their Priests, and they had no place in England
whence to recruit themselves. Hereupon they resolved to erect Colleges beyond
the Seas for English youth to have their education therein. This project begun
Anno 1569. was so effectually prosecuted, that within the compass of fifty
years nine Colleges were by them founded, and furnished with Students, and
they with maintenance. Doway-colledge in Flanders was founded 1569. by Philip
the second King of Spain; all the Recusants in England were Benefactors to it.
The first Rector was William Allen, afterward Cardinal He died Anno 1594. The
second Thomas Worthington, Rector Anno 1609. The third Matthew Kellison, Rector
1624. Whereas the government of all other English Colleges belongs to
Jesuits; this only is ruled by Secular Priests.

The second College was at Rome, founded Anno 1579. Pope Gregory the
th^rteenth exhibited maintenance, first to six, then to fourteen, at last to
threescore Scholars therein, to the yearly value of four thousand Crowns. The
Welsh Hospital in Rome, founded and endowed many hundred years since by
Cadwallader King of Wales for Welsh Pilgrims, with the Rich Lands thereof, were
conferred by the said Pope on this College. Now whereas Anno 1576. there were
but thirty old Priests remaining in this Realm, these two Colleges alone
within two years sent above three hundred Priests into England. The first
Rector was Dr. Maurice. The second Ferdinando, a Neapolitan Jesuit. The third
Robert Parsons. The fourth Thomas Fitz-herbert. 1623.

The third College was founded by Philip the second, King of Spain at
Valladolit in old Castile. Donna Luysa de Caravaial, a rich Widow Lady in
Spain, gave all her estate (being very great) to this College, and came over
into England, where she died. Father Walpool by pretending to have gained Mr.
Pickering Wotton (Son and Heir to the Lord Wotton) to the Romish Church, got
above five hundred pounds to this College. Sir Francis Inglefield, Privy
Counselor to Queen Mary, forsaking his fair estate in Berk-shire in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, was a bountiful Benefactor to this College.

The fourth College was of Sivil, founded by Philip the second, King of Spain,
Anno 1593.

The fifth was at S. Omers in Artois, founded 1596. by Philip the second, who
gave them a good Annuity, for whose soul they say every day a Mass, and every
year an Obitum. Their Rector generally is a Fleming, though this College be of
English only.

The sixth College is at Madrid, in new Castile, founded 1606. Joseph Creswel,
the Jesuit, with money of the two Colleges, of Valladolit and Sivil, bought
an House here, and built a College thereon.

The seventh, a College of Lovain in Brabant, founded 1606. by Philip the
third, King of Spain, who gave a Castle, with a Pension, to the English
Jesuits, to build them a College therewith.

The eighth College was at Liege in Lukeland, founded 1616. The Archbishop of
Collen (being at this time also Bishop of Liege) gave them a Pension to live
on, and leave to build a fair College here. Many of the English Nobility and
Gentry, under pretense of passing to the Spaw to recover their healths, dropped
here much of their Gold by the way.

The ninth College was of Gaunt in Flanders, founded 1624. by Philip the
Fourth, who gave them a Pension.

The College of St. Omers generally is for Boys to be taught in Grammar: Rome
for Youths studying the Arts; All the rest for Men (Novices or professed
Jesuits) save that Doway is for any, of what age or parts soever. It is
incredible what a mass of money was yearly made over out of England for the
maintenance of these Colleges: having here their Provincials, Sub-provincials,
Assistants, Agents, Coadjutors, Familiars, etc. who collected vast sums for
them.

The solemn Oath which each Student (arrived at man's estate) ceremoniously
swears, when admitted into one of these Colleges is as follows:

I A. B. one bred in this English College, considering how great benefits
Continuation of Sanders de Schismat. Anglicano. p. 116.
God has bestowed upon me, but then especially when he brought me out of my
own Country so much infected with Heresy, and made me a member of the
Catholic Church, as also desiring with a thankful heart to improve so great a
mercy of God, have resolved to offer up my self wholly to Divine service, as
much as I may, to fulfill the end for which this our College was founded. I
promise therefore, and swear, in the presence of Almighty God, that I am
prepared, from my heart, with the assistance of Divine grace, in due time to
receive holy Orders, and to return into England, to convert the Souls of my
Contrymen and Kindred, when, and as often, as it shall seem good to the
Superior of this College, etc.

Now Pope Pius the Fifth thunders out his Excommunication against Queen
Elizabeth, and the Heretics (as he calls them) adhering to her: wherein also
her Subjects are declared absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, and every other
thing due unto her whatsoever: and those, which from henceforth obey her, are
innodated with the Anathema. The news thereof flying over into England,
variously affected the Catholics, according to their several dispositions.
John Felton, who fastened the Pope's Bull to the Palace of London, being taken,
and refusing to fly was hanged on a Gibbet before the Pope's Palace.

Then Hugh Price, Doctor of the Civil Law, procured the foundation of Jesus
College in Oxford, on a Ground where White hall had been formerly situated;
which with Edifices and Gardens thereto belonging, being then in the Crown,
Queen Elizabeth gave to so pious an use, and therefore is styled the Foundress
in this Mortmain.

In the year 1570. Murray sueth to have the Queen of Scots delivered unto him.
But soon after he was shot with a leaden Bullet, beneath the Navil, at Lithguo,
as he rode in the street. Hamilton, the murderer, escaped into France. Then
Matthew Lenox, the young King's Grandfather, was made Regent of Scotland.

Now began Popery to increase, and the word [Recusant] to be born and bred in
men's mouths.

A Parliament sat at Westminster, which acted against Papists, That to write,
print, preach, or affirm, that the Queen was an Heretic, Schismatic, etc.
should be ad^udged Treason. Also, That it should be so accounted, and punished,
to bring, and put in execution, any Bulls, Writings, Instruments, etc. from the Sea of Rome from the first of July following.

A severe Act was made also against Fugitives (who being natural born Subjects
of this Realm, departed the same without license. Against Non conformists it
was provided, That every Minister should, before December the twenty fifth next
following, in the presence of his Diocesan, or his Deputy, declare his assent
to all the Articles of Religion, agreed on in the Convocation 1562. upon pain
of deprivation on his refusal thereof. Against covetous Conformists it was
provided, That no Spiritual person, College, or Hospital shall let, lease,
other than for the term of one and twenty years, or three lives; the usual
rent, or more, reserved payable yearly, during the said Term.

Now began Queen Elizabeth's favor to decline toward the Queen of Scots,
principally for practicing with the Pope and foreign Princes.

Anno 1571. Queen Elizabeth went in Royal state to see a most beautiful Burse,
which Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, Citizen of London, had built for the use of
Merchants, and by the voice of the Crier, and the found of Trumpets, as it it
were by way of Dedication, she named it, The Royal Exchange.

A little before that, Florentine Ridolpho, who had for the space of fifteen
years exercised Merchandise at London* secretly conveyed Letters from the Pope
to the Queen of Scots, wherein he promises all kindness, and aid for advancing
the Catholic Religion, and Her, etc. Ridolpho also, by his own Letters apart,
prays the Queen to acquaint the Duke of Norfolk with these things, etc.

Anno 1572. died William Alley, Bishop of Exeter, a diligent Preacher, and John
Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury.

The Canons made in 1563. were not for nine years after confirmed by Act of
Parliament: but now being ratified by Parliamentary Authority, the Bishops
began the urging of them more severely than before; which many dissenters keep
their private meetings in Woods, Fields, their Friends Houses, etc. And now
Thomas Cartwright (chief of the Non-conformists) presents the Parliament with a
Book called, An Admonition. This was seconded with another more importunate to
the same effect. Great bandying there was of Books between two eminent Authors
of opposite parties.

1. The Admonition first and second made by Mr. Cartwright. 2. The Answer to
the Admonition by Doctor John Whitgift. 3. The Reply to the Answer, by Mr.
Thomas Cartwright. 4. The Defense of the Answer, by Doctor John Whitgift.
This last kept the field, and received no solemn refutation.

The Non-conformists, after the dissolution of the Parliament, presumed The
first Presbytery in England.
to erect a Presbytery at Wandsworth in Surrey. Eleven Elders were chosen
therein, and their Offices, and general Rules (by them to be observed) agreed
upon, and described, as appears by a Bill endorsed with the hand of Mr. Field,
Lecturer (it is supposed) of that place, but living in London: Mr. Smith of
Micham, and Mr. Crane of Roughampton, are mentioned for approving all passages
therein. This was the firstborn of all Presbyteries in England.

Here were two sorts of Ministers. First Mr. 1. Field. 2. Wilcox. 3. Standen.
4. Jackson. 5. Bonham. 6. Seintloe. 7. Crane. 8. Edmonds.
Afterward Mr. 1. Chark. 2. Travers. 3. Barber. 4. Gardener. 5. Cheston. 6.
Crook. 7. Egerton.



The former of these were principally against Ministers Habits, and the
Common Prayer Book.

The latter endeavoring the modelling of a new Discipline.

But it was not long before both Streams uniting together, Nonconformity began
to bear a great Channel in the City of London.

Then Ross, the Queen of Scots Ambassador, and the Duke of Norfolk, were sent
to the Tower, for plotting against Queen Elizabeth. The Duke of Norfolk was
arraigned and condemned by his Peers, and beheaded on Tower Hill.

This year happened a cruel Massacre in Paris, the Queen of Navar, and all the
choicest of the Protestants being bidden thither to a Marriage, between Henry
of Navar, and Madam Margarite, the King's Sister. No sooner was the Marriage
solemnized, but there followed bloody Butcherings, committed upon men of all
estates, throughout all the Cities of France. And Admiral Coligny (the Pillar
of the Reformed Church) was slain in his Bed on Bartholomew-eve.

In November following a new Star was seen in the Constellation of Cassiopeia,
which continued full sixteen months, being carried about with the daily motion
of the Heaven. Theodor. Beza wittily applied it to that Star, which shone at
the Birth of Christ, and to the murdering of the Infants under Herod, and
warned Charles the ninth, King of France, who had confessed himself to be the
Author of the Massacre at Paris, to beware, in this Verse.

Tu Vero Herodes sanguinolente cave. Camden's History of Queen Eliz.


And look thou, bloody Herod, to thy self.

And he was not altogether deceived in his belief: for the fifth month, after
the vanishing of this S^ar the said Charles, after long and grievous pains,
died of exceeding bleeding.

Now begin the Anabaptists to increase in England: On Easter Day was disclosed
a Congregation of Dutch Anabaptists, without Aldgate in London, whereof twenty
seven were taken, and imprisoned, and four bearing Faggots at Paul's-cross,
solemnly recanted their Opinions. In the next month one Dutchman, and ten
Women, were condemned: of whom one Woman renounced her errors; eight were
banished the Land: Two more so obstinate, that command was issued out for their
burning in Smithfield, where they died in great horror, with crying and roaring.

Anno 1573. one Peter Burchet, who had persuaded himself, that it was lawful to
kill any that had opposed the truth of the Gospel, drew his Dagger upon
Hawkins, that famous Navigator, in the open street, and wounded him, supposing
him to be Hatton, who was then in great favor with the Queen, whom he had
heard to be one of the Innovators. Being cast into the Tower of London, he slew
one of his Keepers with a Billet, which he snatched up out of the Chimney, for
which he was condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off, and nailed to
the Gallows, and then he was hanged.

In the year 1574. certain Ministers of London were deluded by a Maid, which
counterfeited her self to be possessed of the Devil.

So powerful was the party of the Non-conformists grown at this time, that
Doctor Humfrey, then President of Maudlins, and Mr. John Fox himself (both
which scrupled subscription in some particulars) were deserted by them as
lukewarm and remiss in the cause. Coleman, Burton, Hallingham, Benson, out-did
all of their own Opinions. Then died Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury,
an excellent Antiquary, a great Benefactor to Bennet-colledge in Cambridge, on
which he bestowed many Manuscripts. Edmond Grindal succeeded him in his place.

Not long after died James Pilkinton, Bishop of Durham. He was (as appears by
many of his Letters) a great conniver at Non conformity.

The same year died Edward Deering, an eminent Divine, born of an ancient
Family in Kent, bred Fellow of Christ's-colledge in Cambridge, a pious and
painful Preacher, but disaffected to Bishops and Ceremonies

Rowland Jenkes, a Popish Bookseller, was indicted, at the Summer-Assizes in
Oxford, for dispersing of scandalous Pamphlets, defamatory to the Queen and
State.

Then the Queen labors to compound the Netherland differences; but it had
little effect. She relieveth the Estates and the Prince of Orange with twenty
thousand pounds of English money upon condition they should neither change
their Religion, nor their Prince, nor receive the French into the Netherlands.

Then one Cuthbert Mayn, a Priest, was drawn, hanged, and quartered at Launston
in Cornwall, for his obstinate maintaining of the Papal power: and Trugion, a
Gentleman of that Country, which had harbored him, was turned out of his
Estate, and condem^ed to perpetual imprisonment.

In this year 1577. died Nicholas Bullingham, Bishop of Worcester. And the same
year died William Bradbridge, Bishop of Exeter, and Edmond Guest, Bishop of
Salisbury.

Anno 1579. died Richard Cheiney, Bishop of Bristol. Robert Horn, Bishop of
Winchester, succeeded. Thomas Centham, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
followed him. And not long after died Richard Cox, Bishop of Ely.

Now the Sect (called The Family of Love) began to grow so numerous, that the
Privy Council thought fit to endeavor their suppression. They persuaded their
followers, That those only were elected, and to be saved, which were admitted
into that Family, and all the rest Reprobates, and to be damned: and that it
was lawful for them to deny, upon their Oath, before a Magistrate, whatsoever
they list. Of this Fanatical vanity they dispersed Books among their followers,
translated out of the Dutch Tongue into English, which they entitled, The
Gospel of the Kingdom; Docu^ental Sentences; The Prophesy of the Spirit of
Love; The pub^ishing of Peace upon Earth: The Author was Henry Nic^olas of
L^rden, who blasphemously said, That he did partake of God, and God of his
Humanity. This Man came over into England in the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth, joined himself to the Dutch Congregation in London, where he seduced
many Artificers* and silly Women, among The Ab^^ration may be read in F^^^er.
church Hist. ^^ A^. 1580.
whom two Daughters of one Warwick (to whom he dedicated an Epistle) were his
principal P^rverts. Mr. Martin Micronius, and Mr. Nicholas Charineus, then the
Ministers of the Dutch Congregation, zealously confuted his errors, but it
seems their Antidotes pierced not so deep as his Poisons. The Privy Council now
tendered unto them an Abjuration; but with what success we find not. The Queen
commanded by Proclamation, That the Civil Magistrate should be assistant to the
Ecclesiastical, for the timely suppressing of them, and that their Books should
be burnt.

Then diverse Seminary Priests were sent forth into several parts of England and
Ir^land, to administer (as they pretended) the Sacraments of the Romish
Religion, and to preach. But the Queen, and her Council found, that they were
sent underhand, to withdraw the Subjects from their Allegiance, and Obedience,
due to their Prince, to bind them, by Reconciliation, to perform the Pope's
Commandments, to raise intestine Rebellion under the Seal of Confession, and
flatly to execute the Sentence of Pope Pius the Fifth against the Queen.

To these Seminaries, for as much as there were sent daily out of England, from
the Papists, very many Boys, and young Men of all sorts, and admitted into the
same, making a Vow to return; and others from thence crept secretly into
England, there came forth a Proclamation in the month of June, That whosoever
had Children, Pupils, Kinsmen, or others, in the parts beyond the Seas, should,
after ten days, deliver their names to the Ordinary; and to those which
returned not, they should not directly, or indirectly, supply any money. That
no Man should entertain in his horse, or lodge, Priests sent forth of the
Seminaries, and Jesuits, or cherish and relieve them: And whosoever did the
contrary, should be accounted a favourer of Rebels, etc.

But Robert Parsons, and Edmond Campian, Jesuits, living at Rome, (...)'s Hist.
of Queen E^i. Anno 1580.
obtained of the Pope license to come over into England. Parsons was born in
Sommerset-shire, of Baliol-colledge in Oxford, a man of a fierce nature, and
rude behavior, he professed openly the Protestants Religion, until he was, for
his dishonesty, expelled the University, then fled he to the Papists. Campian
was born in London, and bred in St. John'scolledge in Oxford, one of a sweet
nature, and fluent tongue. These two notably advanced the Roman cause^
traveling up and down the Country secretly, and, to Popish Gentlemen's houses,
in disguised habits, sometimes of Soldiers; sometimes of Gentlemen; sometimes
of Ministers of the Word; sometimes of Apparitors. Campian, by a Writing set
forth, challenged the Ministers of the English Church to a Disputation, and
published a Book in Latin, of ten Reasons, for maintenance of the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome; and Parsons another virulent Book, in English, against
Chark, who had written soberly against Campian's challenge. But to Campian's
Reasons Whitaker answered soundly. He was taken a year after, and put to the
rack, and afterward being brought forth to dispute, hardly maintained the
expectation raised of him. Parsons hardly escaping at Norwich in Cheshire,
politickly returns to Rome.

This year Edmond Grindal, Archbishop of Canterbury, groaning under the Queens
displeasure, was forbidden access to the Convocation. But a Petition was drawn
up, in the name of the whole Convocation, for the restitution of the
Archbishop, by Toby Matthew, Dean of Christchurch.

This Petition, after delays, ended in a final denial; it being daily
suggested to the Queen, that Grindal was a great Patron of Prophecyings (now
set up in several parts of the Land) which, if permitted, would in fine prove
the bane of the Church and State.

These Prophecyings were thus modelled.

1. The Ministers of the same Precinct, by their own appointment, Fu^^er.
Church Hist. An. 158.
met at the principal place therein.

2. The Junior Divine went first into the Pulpit, and for about half an hour
treated upon a portion of Scripture, formerly by a joint agreement assigned
unto him. After him four or five more observing their seniority, successively
dilated on the same Text.

3. At last a Grave Divine made the closing Sermon, somewhat larger than the
rest, praising the pains of such who best deserved it, and mildly reproving the
mistakes of such of those, if any were found in their Sermons. Then all was
ended (as it was begun) with a solemn Prayer. And at a public refection of
those Ministers, together (with many of the Gentry repairing to them) the next
time of their meeting was appointed, Text assigned, Preachers deputed, a new
Moderator elected, or the one continued, and so all were dissolved.

But some incoveniences were seen, and more foreseen, if these Prophecyings
might generally take place in the Land. However the A^chbishop, to vindicate
himself, wrote a large Letter to the Queen. But all in vain, for the Earl of
Leicester had so filled the Queens ears with complaints against him, that there
was no room to receive his Pe^ition. Indeed Leicester cast a covetous eye on
Lambeth-house, and maliced him, because he stoutly opposed the alienating this
his principal Palace.

Now began Priests and Jesuits to flock fa^^er into England than ever before,
having exchange of clothes, names, and professions. Hereupon the Parliament,
now met at Westminster, enacted severe Laws against them. John Pain, a Priest,
was executed at Chelmsford, Thomas Ford, John Shert, and Robert Johnson,
Priests, were executed at London.

This year died Gilbert Berkley, Bishop of Bath and Wells.

The Presbyterian party met at Cockfield (Mr. Knewstub's Cure) in Suffolk, even
sixty Ministers of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire, to confer of the
Common Prayer Book, what might be tolerated, and what refused in every point of
it, apparel, matter, form, days, fastings, injunctions, etc. whilst the
severity of the State was at this time great against Jesuits, some lenity of
course fell to the share of the Nonconformists.

The City of Geneva being now reduced to great extremities by the Duke of
Savoy, Beza addressed himself by Letters to Mr. Walter Travers, one of the
chief of the Presbyterian party, then Chaplain to the Lord Treasurer: in which
Letter may be seen much of the secret sympathy betwixt England and Geneva about
Discipline; Geneva helping England with her Prayers, England aiding Geneva with
her purse.

The Duke of Anjou came into England, and was an earnest Suitor to Queen
Elizabeth. A Book was set forth against the Marriage, entitled, The Gulps
wherein England will be swallowed by the French Marriage. The Queen, by open
Proclamation, commended the Duke of Anjou's affection toward her, and the
Protestants Religion, sorrowed that so great an injury was offered to so high a
Prince, she condemned the Author of the Book, as a publisher of Sedition, and
commanded the Book to be burnt before the Magistrates face. From this time she
began to be more incensed against the Innovators, from whom she believed that
these things proceeded. And within few days after, John Stubs, of
Lincoln's Inn, (whose Sister Mr. Cartwright, formerly mentioned, had married)
the Author of this Book, William Page, who d^^persed the Copies, and Singleton,
the Printer, were apprehended. Stubs and Page had their right hands cut off
with a Cleaver driven through the wrist with the force of a Beetle, upon a
Scaffold, in the Marketplace at Westminster. The Printer was pardoned. Stubs
having his right hand cut off; put off his hat with his left, and said with a
loud voice, God save the Queen.

The Queen also, to take away the fear which had possessed many men's minds,
that Religion would be altered, and Popery tolerated, permitted that Edmond
Campian, Jesuit, Ralph Sherwin, Luke Kirby, and Alexander Briant, Priests,
should be arraigned they were condemned and executed for Treason. This was done
during the abode of Anjou in England.

The Earl of Leicester improved his power (at this time very great with the
Queen) to obtain great Liberty for the Non-conformists. Hence it was, that many
Bishops active in pressing subscription in their Diocese, when repairing to
Court, were checked by this great Favorite, to their great discouragement.
Hereupon the Brethren (who hitherto The sorm o^ Discipline by the Brethren
considered of in a solemn Synod with the Decrees thereof, may be read in
Fuller. Church Hist. Cent. 16. Anno 1582.
had no particular platform of Discipline among themselves, as universally
practiced by their party) began, in a solemn Council held by them, to conclude
on a certain form, as may be seen in their Decrees, faithfully translated out
of their Latin Copy. The Title thereof, These be the things that (do seem) may
well stand with the peace of the Church.

This year died three that seemed Pillars in the Romish Church. Frist Richard
Bristow, born in Worcestershire, bred at Exeter-colledge in Oxford, when^e he
fled beyond the Seas, and by Cardinal Allen was made Overseer of the English
College, first at Doway, then at Rhemes. For the recovery of his health, he
returned into his native Land, and died quietly near London.

The second Nicholas Harpsfield, bred first in Winchester-school, then in
New-colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of Law, and after became
Archdeacon of Canterbury: Under King Edward the Sixth he banished himself:
Under Queen Mary he returned, and was advanced: Under Queen Elizabeth
imprisoned, for denying her Supremacy. Yet such was his mild usage in his
Restraint, that he wrote much therein and among the rest his Ecclesiastical
History. He wrote also six Dialogues in favor of his own Religion. He set it
forth under the name of Alan Cope. Yet caused he these Capital letters to be
engraven at the end of his Book.

A. H. L. N. H. E. V. E. A. C. Hereby mystically meaning.

Auctor Hujus Libri Nicolaus Harpfeldus. Edidit Vero Eum Alanus Copus. The
third Gregory Martin, born at Mayfield in Sussex, bred with Campian at St.
John's-colledge in Oxford, Tutor to Philip, Earl of Arundel, eldest Son to
Thomas, Duke of Norfolk. Afterward he went over beyond Sea, and became
Divinity Professor in the College of Rhemes, and died there.

Now as touching the Controversy of Church Government, the Ministers of Kent,
having been called to subscribe to certain Articles propounded to them by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, send their Petition to the Privy Council: Subscribed
thus, Your Honors daily and faithful Orators, the Ministers of Kent, which are
suspended from the execution of their Ministry.

The Lords of the Council sent this Petition, with another Bill of complaint,
exhibited unto them, against Edmond Freak, Bishop of Norwich, unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury. What his Answer was thereunto, may be seen at large
in Fuller's Church History.

Doctor John Whitgift was now Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1583. who wrote a
Letter to the Lord Treasurer, complaining of Mr. Beal, Clerk of the Council,
who brought these Letters to him, his insolent carriage toward him.

Now that the Presbyterian party were befriended at the Councilboard, who
endeavored to mittigate the Archbishop's proceeding against them appears
also from the Privy Counselors Letter to the Archbishop, in favor of the
Non-conformists. Signed W. Burleigh, G. Shrewsbury, A Warwick, R. Leicester, C.
Howard, J. Croft, Chapter Hatton, Fr. Wal^ingham. But albeit Sir Chr. Hatton
subscribed among the Privy Counselors for moderation to Non-conformists, yet
that he was a great countenancer of Whitgift's proceedings against them,
appears in an immediate Address of the Archbishop unto him. As for the Lord
Burghleigh, he was neither so rigid, as to have Conformity pressed to the height,
nor so remiss, as to leave Ministers at their own liberty: He would argue the
case, both in Discourse and Letters, with the Archbishop; and one Letter he
wrote to the Archbishop for some Indulgence to the Ministers; Mr. Travers seems
to have an hand in all this, who being the Lord Burghleigh's Chaplain, by him
much respected, and highly affected to the Geneva Discipline, was made the
mouth of the Ministers, to mediate to his Lord in their behalf. But the
Archbishop's unmoveableness appeared by his Letter sent to the Lord Treasurer,
at some passages whereof he took exception, and sends a smart Letter to the
Archbishop.

That which concerns the Non-conformists therein is this.
I deny nothing that your Grace thinks meet to proceed in, with those whom
you call factious; and therefore there is no controversy between you and me,
expressed in your Letter: the controversy is passed in your Graces Letter in
silence, and so I do satisfy. Your Grace promised me to deal, I say only with
such as violated Order, and to charge them therewith, which I allow well of.
But your Grace not charging them with such faults, seeks, by examination, to
urge them to accuse themselves; and then, I think, you will punish them. I
think your Grace's proceeding is, I will not say rigorous or captious, but I
think it is scan^ charitable, etc. If I had known the fault of Brown, I might
b^ blamed for writing for him; but when by examination only it is to sift him
with twenty four Articles, I have cause to pity the poor man.

Your Grace's as friendly as any W. Burghleigh.


The Archbishop writes a calm Letter in answer to the Lord Treasurer's Letter,
sending him enclosed therein certain Reasons to justify the manner of his
proceedings, praying his Lordship not to be carried away, either from the
cause, or from the Archbishop himself, upon unjust surmises, and clamours, lest
he be the occasion of that confusion which hereafter he would be sorry for.
Professing that in these things he desired no further defense, neither of his
Lordship, nor of any other, than Justice and Law would yield unto him.

Sir Francis Walsingham was a good Friend to Non-conformists, he wrote a Letter
to the Archbishop, to qualify him for a Semi-Non-conformist, one Mr. Leverwood.

Grindal being sensible of the Queens displeasure, had desired to resign his
place, and confine himself to a yearly Pension. This place was proffered to
Whitgift, but he, in the presence of the Queen, refused it: yet what he would
not snatch, suddenly fell into his hands by Grindal's death, who out of his
contempt of the world, left not much wealth behind him. That little he had, as
it was well gotten, was well bestowed in pious uses in Oxford and Cambridge,
with the building and endowing of a School at St. Bees in Cumberland, where he
was born: yea he may be held as a Benefactor to this Nation, by bringing in
Tamarix first over into England, that Plant being very excellent in mollifying
the hardness of the Spleen.

Now Robert Brown, a Cambridge-man, and young Student in Divinity (of whom the
Separatists in those days, and long after, were called Brownists) born in
Rutland-shire of an ancient Family, near allied to the Lord Treasurer Cecil,
began, with one Richard Harison, a Schoolmaster, to vent their Opinions. They
set forth Books in Zealand, whither they traveled. Brown returning home,
disperseth these Books all over England. But their Books were suppressed by the
Queens Authority, confuted by Learned men; and two of his followers were
executed one after another at St. Edmonds-bury. Brown coming to Norwich, there
infected both Dutch and English, for which he was confined.

The Lord Treasurer writes a Letter to the Bishop of Norwich in his behalf.
Brown being thus brought up to London, was wrought to some tolerable
compliance, and being discharged by the Archbishop, was by the Lord Treasurer
sent home to his Father, Anthony Brown, at Tolethorp in Rutland Esquire. But,
it seem^, Brown's errors were so inlaid in him, no conference with Divines
could convince him to the contrary, whose incorrigibleness made his own Father
weary of his company.

He, and Harison, inveighed against Bishops, Ecclesiastical Courts, Ceremonies,
Ordination of Ministers, fancying here on earth a platform of a perfect Church.
Doctor Fulk learnedly proves, that the Brownists were, in effect, the same
with the ancient Donatists.

Nicholas Saunders (more truly Slanders) died this year 1583. being starved to
death among the Bogs and Mountains in Ireland. Near the same time one John
Lewis was burnt at Norwich for denying the Godhead of Christ, and holding other
detestable Heresies. At this time the Jesuits set forth many slanderous
libels against her Majesty; one of their principal Pamphlets, was a Treatise of
Schism. William Carter, the Stationer, was executed at Tyburn for publishing
it. Soon after five Seminaries, John Fen, George Haddock, John Munden, John
Nutter, and Tho. Hemmerford, were hanged, bowelled, and quartered for Treason
at Tyburn, and many others about the same time executed in other places. Yet at
the same time the Queen by one Act of Grace pardoned seventy Priests, some of
them actually condemned to die, all legally deserving death.

Among these were, 1. Gasper Haywood, Son to that eminent Epigrammatist, the
first Jesuit that ever set foot in England.

2. James Bosgrave.

3. John Heart a zealous disputant.

4. Edward Rushton, an ungrateful wretch, who afterward railed on the Queen in
Print, who gave him his life.

In the year 1584. Two conferences were kept at Lambeth, about the Discipline
and Ceremonies of the Church. For the same were the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, and Cooper, Bishop of Winchester. Unconforming Ministers against it.
The Lords of the Privy Council, and some other Honorable persons, Auditors
thereof. This conference effected nothing on the Disputants as to the altering
their Opinions. Some of the Lords afterward secretly acted against the
Archbishop in favor of the other party.

The Archbishop now take's another course, enjoining all admitted to the
Ecclesiastical Orders and Benefices, the subscription of the following Articles.

I. That the Queen had supreme Authority over all persons born within her
Dominions, of what condition soever they were. And that no other Prince,
Prelate, or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, within her Realms, or Dominions. II. That the Book of
Common Prayer, and the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, contains
nothing contrary to the Word of God, but may lawfully be used; and that they
will use that, and none other. III. That the Articles of Religion agreed in the
Synod holden at London, Anno 1562. and published by the Queens Authority they
did allow of, and did believe them to be consonant to the word of God.
Now came forth the Rhemish Translation of the New Testament, every where
bespeckled with hard words, which transcend common capacities; taxed by our
Divines as full of abominable errors.

Secretary Walsingham soliciteth Mr. Thomas Cartwright to undertake to refute
this Rhemish Translation; and sent him an hundred pounds out of his own purse,
the better to enable him for the work. Walsingham's Letters, to Cartwright,
were seconded by another from the Doctors and Heads of Houses (and Dr. Fulk
among the rest) at Cambridge, besides the importunity of the Ministers of
London, and Suffolk, to the same purpose. Cartwright prepares for the work. But
Archbishop Whitgift having notice thereof, prohibiteth his further proceeding
therein. Cartwright hereupon desisted. But some years after, encouraged by an
honorable Lord, he resumed the work, but prevented by death, he perfected no
further than the fifteenth Chapter of the Revelation. Many years lay this
worthy work neglected, and the Copy thereof Mouse-eaten in part, at last came
forth (though late Anno 1618. a Book to which the Rhemists never durst return
the least answer. But whilst Cartwrights work lay retarded, Dr. William Fulk,
Master of Pembrook-hall in Cambridge, entered the list against the Rhemists, and
Judiciously and Learnedly performed his undertaking therein.

This year came forth the Exposition of Mr. Thomas Rogers* on the Articles of
the Church of England; not only the two extremes, Papists and Schismatics,
but many Protestants of a middle temper were offended thereat. Mr. Rogers his
restrictive Comment, shut out such from their concurrence with the Church of
England, which the discreet laxity of the Text admitted thereunto.

On November 23. 1585. The Parliament was begun and holden at Westminster,
wherein the Statute against Jesuits and Priests, their departing out of
England, and not returning thither, was made, with penalty for relieving them.
A Convocation was kept in St. Paul's Church in London; and from hence removed to
St. Peter's in Westminster, where William Redman D. D. was chosen and presented
Prolocutor. An Assembly of Ministers met at the same time: but the certain
place of their meeting not known, being Clandestine, Arbitrary, and changeable,
as advised by their Conveniences. Some Agents for them were all day at the door
of the Parliament House, and some part of the night in the Chambers of
Parliament Men, effectually soliciting their business with them.

What impression was made by the Agents of the Ministers, may appear by an
ensuing Letter sent to her Majesty, by Archbishop Whitgift, wherein he
complains of several Bills that had, the day before the dating of his Letter,
passed in the House of Commons, in favor of the Non-conformists, about
Marrying at all times in the year, concerning Ecclesiastical Courts, and
Episcopal Visitations, which (says he) may reach to the overthrow of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and study of the Civil Law. But the Queen would
alter nothing material to Churchgovernment.

The Parliament being dissolved, the Convocation ended the next day after,
having effected nothing of moment, save that in the ninth Session thereof John
Hilton Priest, made a solemn Abjuration of his blasphemous Heresies.

The Non-conformists now missing their mark, abated much of their former
Activity; insomuch as that Mr. Cartwright began to make by the mediation of the
Earl of Lei^ester (who now designed to make him Master of his new-built
Hospital in Warwick) compliance with the Archbishop, though he not over-fond of
his friendship, warily kept him at distance, as appears by the Earl of
-Leicester's Letter to the Archbishop, in Cartwright's behalf, and the
Archbishop's answer thereto.

Now the Earl of Leicester went over into the Low Countries, commanding a great
Army, with the Title of General of the Auxiliaries of the Queen of England; and
the Non-conformists lost their best friend in Court. And afterward the
Archbishop being sworn one of the Privy Council, it fared worse with them.

Three Protestant Bishops died this year, viz. Richard Curteys, Bishop of
Chichester; Nicholas Robinson, Bishop of Bangor; and John Scory, Bishop of
Hereford. The same year also died John Fecknam, late Abbot of Westminster.

The Jesuits began now to possess their English Proselites, with high Opinions
of the Spanish power, as the Nation designed by God's providence to work their
restitution in England: and they sent into England (as Pasquier says) one
Samier, a man of their Society, to draw Noblemen, and Gentlemen to the
Spaniards party, and to thrust forward the Queen of Scots to dangerous
practices, by telling her, That if she were refractory, neither She nor her Son
should Reign: and by exciting the Guises her kinsmen to new stirs, against the
King of Navar and the Prince of Conde, that they might not be able to aid her.

In the year 1586. a firm League of Amity was concluded and ratified betwixt
the Queen of England and James King of Scotland.

A dangerous conspiracy against the Queen of England (begun by John Savage, but
prosecuted by Anthony Babington and others) was discovered. The chief discover
of this Conspiracy was one Gifford, a Gentleman of a good house at Chellington
in Staffordshire, not far from Chartley, where the Queen of Scots was kept
prisoner. He was sent by the English fugitives in France, under the counterfit
name of Luson, to put Savage in mind of the vow which he had made, to kill
Queen Elizabeth, and to convey Letters between them and the Queen of Scots.
Gifford revealed the plot to Secretary Walsingham, who sent him down into
Staffordshire to do the work he had undertaken.

Here Gifford bribing the Brewer of the house where the Queen of Scots lay, so
contrived the matter with him, that by a hole in the wall, in which a loose
stone was put, he should give in, and receive forth Letters, the which, by
Messengers purposely laid by the way, came ever to Walsingham's hands, who
broke them open, copied them out, and by the cunning of Thomas Philips, found
out the meaning of the private Ciphers: and by the Art of Arthur Gregory sealed
them up again, so neatly, that no man could have imagined them to be opened,
and ever sent them to the parties to whom the superscription directed them. In
like manner were the former Letters from the Queen of Scots to Babington
intercepted; as also other Letters written at the same time to Mendoza the
Spanish Ambassador, Charles Paget, the Lord Paget, the Archbishop of Glasco,
and Francis Englefied. Then Ballard was apprehended. Babington seeks to escape,
and is taken. The Queen of Scots has her Closets broken open, and her Boxes
searched. Fourteen of the Conspirators were Arraigned, Condemned of
High Treason and executed. Afterward in the Star Chamber sentence was
pronounced against the Queen of Scots. And in a Parliament presently following,
the Lords petition the Queen, that the sentence passed against her may
presently be promulged. The King of Scots and the King of France solicit for
her life. But when this would not prevail, L' Aubespine, the French Ambassador
thinks no way so effectual, for saving the Queen of Scots life, as to take away
the life of Queen Elizabeth. The plot was discovered. And at length the
Sentence against the Queen of Scots was put in execution, and she ended her
doleful life at Fothringhay Castle. She was buried in the Quire of
Peterborough, and Doctor Wickham Bishop of Lincoln Preached her Funeral-sermon.
Some twenty yaars after King James caused her Corpse to be solemnly removed from
Poterborough to Westminster, where in the South Side of the Chapel of King
Henry the Seventh, he erected a stately Monument to her Memory.

The Earl of Leicester having raised great offense, is called home again into
England by the Queen, gives over his Government, and the free Administration
of his Government is left to the States.

Now Conformity was pressed to the height. The power of the High Fuller. Church
Hist. in An. 1537.
Commission began to extend far, and penalties to fall heavy on offenders:
whereupon the favorers of Non-conformists much opposed it in their Printed
Books; some questioning the Court as not warranted by Law; others taxing their
proceedings, as exceeding their Commission. But the most general exception
against the High Commission was this, That proceeding, Ex Officio mero, by way
of enquiry against such whom they suspected, they tendered unto them an Oath,
which was conceived unjust, that in cases criminal a party should be forced to
discover what might be penal to himself. The lawfulness of which Oath was
learnedly canvassed with arguments on both sides.

Because many did question the Legal^ty and Authority of the High Commission,
Archbishop Whitgift so contrived the matter, that the most sturdy
Non-conformists (especially if they had any visible Estates) were brought into
the Star Chamber, the power whereof was above dispute; where some of them
besides imprisonment, had very heavy fines imposed on them. And because most of
the Queens Council were present at the Censures, this took off the odium from
the Archbishop.

This year died Mr. John Fox, the Industrious compiler of the Acts and
Monuments of the Church, and was buried at St. Giles near Cripplegate in
London. It is said he foretold the destruction of the Invincible (so called)
Spanish Armado, in the year 1588. which came so to pass though he survived not
to see the performance of his own prediction.

About this time Mr. William Lambert finished his Hospital at Greenwich, Camd
Brit. in Kent.
founded and endowed by him for poor people. He was the first Protestant who
erected a charitable house of that nature, says Camden: But King Edward the
Sixth, ^ounded Christ-church and St. Thomas Hospital.

Now the sticklers against the Hierarchy appeared more vigorous, though for a
time they had concealed themselves.

The Parliament now sitting a^ Westminster, the House of Commons presented to
the Lords a petition, complaining how many Parishes, especially in the North of
England and Wales, were destitute of Preachers, and no care taken to supply
them. Sixteen were the particulars, whereof the six first were against
insufficient Ministers. Of all the particulars the House fell most fiercely on
the debate of pluralities, and Non-residents.

The Archbishop pleads for Non-residency in diverse cases. He affirmed
(whatever was pretended to the contrary) that England then flourished with able
Ministers, more than ever before, yea had more than all Christendom besides.
The Lord Gray rejoyned to this Assertion, saying, That England had more able
Ministers than all the Churches in Christendom, was only to be attributed to
God, who now opened the hearts of many to see into the truth, and that the
Schools were better observed. The Lord Treasurer seemed to moderate betwixt
them. Matters flying thus high, the Archbishop with the rest of the Clergy
Petition the Queen: To the Petition were annexed a Catalogue of those
inconveniences to the State present, State to come, Cathedral Churches,
Universities, to her Majesty, to Religion, in case pluralities were taken away.
Nothing was effected in relation to this matter, but things left, in statu quo
prius, at the dissolution of this Parliament.

This year died Richard Barnes Bishop of Durham.

In the year 1588. when there was a Treaty of Peace between England and Spain,
out comes their Invincible Navy and Army, perfectly appointed for both
Elements, Land and Water, to Sail and March complete in all Warlike Equipage:
but that great Fleet was wonderfully defeated by the English, and dissipated by
stormy Winds: and many of the Spaniards were Barbarously butchered by the Irish.

For the happy success of this action Queen Elizabeth appointed Prayers and
Thanksgivings over all the Churches in England: and she with a great Train of
the Nobility came into St. Paul's Church, (where the Banners taken from the
Enemy were placed in view) and there in most humble manner gave thanks to
Almighty God the giver of all Victory. About this time many Papists were
committed to custody in Wisbych Castle.

At this time many Libels flew abroad, thus named.

1. The Epitome. 2. The Demonstration of Discipline. 3. The Supplication. 4.
Diotrephes. 5. The Minerals. 6. Have ye any work for the Cooper. 7. More work
for the Cooper. 8. Martin Senior Mar-prelate. 9. Martin Junior Mar-prelate.
The main drift of these Pamphlets was to defame the English Prelates, scoffing
at them for their Garb, Gate, Apparel, Vanities of their Youth, natural
Defects, and personal Infirmities. It is strange how secretly they were
Printed, how speedily Dispersed, how generally Bought, how greedily Read, how
firmly Believed, especially of the Common sort. Some precise men of that side,
thought these jeering pens well employed: but these Books were disclaimed by
the more descreet and devoutsort of men.

And how highly the State distasted these Books, will appear, by the heavy
censures inflicted on such as were but accessory thereunto, To pass by John
Vdal and John Penry Ministers accused for making some of them, together with
the Printers, and Humfry Newman a Cobbler, chief disperser of them. The
Star Chamber deeply fined Sir Richard Knightly, and Sir (...) Wigston, for
entertaining and receiving the press Gentlemen. But upon their submission they
had their liberty, and were eased of their fines.

A Synod of the Presbyterians of the Warwickshire Classis was called at
Cov^ntry, wherein the questions brought the last year from the Brethren of
Cambridge-Synod, were thus resolved.

I. That private Baptism was unlawful. Ep. ^^^cro^t's Book, called, Englands
Sco^izing for Discipline by practice.
II. That it is not lawful to read H^miles in the Church. III. That the sign of
the cross is not to be used in Baptism. IV. That the faithful ought not to
communicate with unlearned Ministers, although they may be present at their
service, etc. V. That the calling of Bishops is unlawful. VI. That as they deal
in Causes Ecclesiastical, there is no duty belonging unto, nor any publicly to
be given them. VII. That it is not lawful to be Ordained Ministers by them, or
to denounce either Suspensions, or Excommuntcations sent from them. VIII. That
it is not lawful to rest in the Bishop's deprivation of any from the Ministry,
etc. IX. That it is not lawful to appear in a Bishop's Court, but with
protestation of their unlawfulness. X. That Bishops are not to be acknowledged
either for Doctors, Elders, or Deacons, as having no ordinary calling. XI. That
touching the restoration of their Ecclesiastical Discipline, it ought to be
taught to the people as occasion shall serve. XII. That (as yet) the people are
not to be solicited (publicly) to the practice of the Discipline, (till) they
be better instructed in the knowledge of it. XIII. That men of better
understanding are to be allured privately to the present embracing of the
discipline, and practice of it, as far as they shall be well able, with the
peace of the Church.
Likewise in the same Assembly, the aforesaid Book of Discipline was approved
to be a draught essential and necessary for all times. And certain Articles
(devised in approbation, and for the manner of the use thereof) were brought
forth, treated of, and subscribed unto by Master Cartwright and others, and
afterward tendered far and near to the several Classes for a general
ratification of all the brethren.

After a solemn humiliation of the Ministers at Northampton, one Mr. Johnson,
formerly a Nonconformist, but afterward falling from that side, discovered
many passages to their disadvantage in the Highcommission Court.

This year also the Popish Clergy set forth a Book, called the Admonition,
Watson. Q^od^^^t^.
d^spe^sed among the Papists, and much cried up. But the Spanish Navy presently
miscarying after it is publishing, Rarsons procured the whole impression to be
burnt (save some few sent abroad aforehand to his friends) that it might not
remain a monument of their falsehood.

This year died Edwyn Sandys, Archbishop of York, an excellent Preacher, and of
a pious Life: and Dr. Laurence Humfrey, President of Magdalen College.

On September 1. 1596. Mr. Cartwright was brought before the Queen's
Commissioners, there to take his Oath, and give in his positive answer to
diverse Articles objected against him. The Articles were tendered to him in the
Consistory of St. Paul's before John Elmar Bishop of London, the two Lord Chief
Justices, Justice Gaudy, Sergeant Puckering, (afterward Lord Keeper) and
Attorney General Popham. The Commissioners assured him on their credits, that
by the Laws of the Realm he was to take his Oath, and to answer as he was
required. But Mr. Cartwright pleaded, That he thought he was not bound by the
Laws of God so to do. Hereupon he was sent to the Fleet unto the rest of his
Brethren.

Now the main pillars of the Presbyterian party, being some in Prison, more in
Trouble, all in Fear, applied themselves by their secret solicitors to James
King of Scotland, and procured his Letter to the Queen in their behalf. But
this Letter prevailed little. But Archbishop Whitgift, on Mr. Cartwright's
general promise to be quiet, procured his dismission out of the Star Chamber
and prison wherein he was confined. And henceforward Mr. Cartwright became very
peaceable.

Then one Hacket, born at Owndle in Northamptonshire undertook to be a
discoverer of, and Informer against Recusants, a confident Fellow, one that was
great with Wigginton and that Faction. Always Inculcating, that some
extraordinary course must be presently taken with the obstructors of the
Genevian discipline. Once he desperatley took his dagger, and violently struck
it into the picture of the Queen. He pretended also Revelations, Immediate
Raptures, and Discourses with God, as also to Buffetings of Satan, attesting
the truth thereof with most direful Oaths and Execrations. He railed also
against Archbishop Whitgift, and Chancellor Hatton, with other privy
Counselors, pretending himself sent from Heaven to reform Church and State. He
gave it out, that the principal Spirit of the Messiah rested in him, and had
two Attendants. Edmond Coppinger (the Queen's Servant, and one of good descent)
for his Prophet of Mercy. And Henry Arthington, a Yorkshire Gentleman, for his
Prophet of Judgment. These Proclaimed in Cheap Side, That Christ was come in
Hacket, with his fan in his hand, to purge the godly from the wicked, etc. They
cried Repent, Repent, etc. The next day all three were sent to Bridewel. Hacket
was arraigned, drawn, hanged, and quartered, continuing even at his death his
blasphemous assertions. Coppinger starved himself to death in prison,
Arthington made his Recantation in a public writing, and became the object of
the Queen's mercy.

This accident was unhappily improved against the Non-conformists, and rendered
them so hated a^ Court, that for many months together, no favorite durst
present a petition in their behalf to the Queen, being loath to lose himself to
save others.

The same day wherein Hacket was executed, Mr. Stone, Parson of F^ller. Church
Hist. C^nt. 16. l. 9.
Warkton in Northamptonshire, by virtue of an Oath tendered him the day before
by the Queen's Attorney, and solemnly taken by him, was examined by the
Examiner for the Star Chamber in Grays Inn, from six a clock in the morning
until seven at night, to answer unto thirty three Articles, but could only
effectually depose to some of them: but by his confession he discovers the
meetings of the Brethren, with the circumstances thereof, the Classes more
formally settled in Northamptonshire, than any where else in England. When the
news of Mr. Stone's answer was brought abroad, he was generally censured by
most of his party: So that he found it necessary, in his own vindication, to
impart the reasons of his Confession to such as condemned him, if not for a
Traitor, at least for a coward in the cause. What satisfaction this gave to his
party I know not. Certainly the Bishop till his dying day beheld him as an
ingenuous man, carrying his conscience with the reason thereof in his own
breast. He was permitted peaceably to possess his Parsonage (being none of the
meanest) though he continued a stiff Nonconformist, only quietly enjoying his
own opinion. He died an old man at Warkton, Anno 1617.

Stone's discovery marred for the future all their formal meetings, as
Classically or Synodically methodized.

Then began the foundation of an University in Dublin in Ireland. Henry Usher,
then Archdeacon of Dublin (afterward Archbishop of Armagh, and Uncle to James
Usher late Archbishop thereof) took a journey into England, and procured the
Mortmain from Queen Elizabeth, who graciously granted it, naming the
corporation, Collegium Sanctae ac Individuae Trinitatis, ex fundatione Reginae
Elizibethae, juxta Dublin. The Lord Burgley is appointed first Chancellor of
the University. Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Debuty of Ireland, issued out
his Letters to all the Counties in Ireland to advance so good a design. The
Irish Papists were very bountiful thereunto. The Mayor and Aldermen of Dublin:
Sir Warham St. Ledger, Sir Francis Shane, Robert D'eureux Earl of Essex,
afterward Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and second Chancellor of this
University, were Benefactors to it. King James confirmed the revenues of this
College in perpetuum, endowing it with good Lands in the Province of Vlster.
Adam Loftus, Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of Ireland, was the first
Master of the College. Mr. Luke Chaloner received and disbursed the moneys,
had the oversight of the Fabric, which he faithfully procured to be finished.
The first stone in this foundation was laid, March 13. 1591. and in the year
1593. Scholars were first admitted: and the first of them James Usher, since
Bishop of Armagh, that mirror of Learning and Religion.

Now began a sad contest betwixt Mr. Richard Hooker, Master, and Mr. Walter
Travers, Lecturer of the Temple. Hooker was born in Devonshire, bred in Oxford,
Fellow of Corpus Christi College: one of a solid Judgment, and great Reading.
A great defender both by Preaching and Writing of the Discipline of the Church
of England, yet never got (nor cared to get) any eminent dignity therein. Mr.
Travers was bred up in Trinity College in Cambridge. Travers traveling to
Geneva, contracted familiarity with Beza, and other foreign Divines. Then
returned He, and commenced Bachelor of Divinity in Cambridge, and after that
went beyond Sea again, and at Antwerp was ordained Minister by the Presbytery
there, where he continued some years and Preached (with Mr. Cartwright) unto
the English Factory of Merchants, until at last he came over into England, and
for seven years together became Lecturer in the Temple (refusing all
presentative preferment to decline subscription) and lived Domestic Chaplain
in the house of the Lord Treasurer Cecil, being Tutor for a time to Robert, his
Son, afterward Earl of Sarisbury.

Yea now so great grew the credit of Mr. Travers, that (by the advice of Mr.
Andrew Melvin) he and Mr. Cartwright were solemnly sent for, to be
Divinity-professors in the University of St. Andrews. This proffer being
jointly refused, Travers quietly continued Lecturer in the Temple, till Mr.
Hooker became the Master thereof. Mr. Hooker's voice was low, stature little,
gesture none at all, standing still in the Pulpit. His style was long and
pithy, so that when the copiousness of his style met not with proportionable
capacity in his Auditors, it was unjustly censured for tedious and obscure. His
Sermons were for the most part on Controversies, and deep points of
School Divinity.

Mr. Travers his utterance was graceful, gesture plausible, matter profitable,
and method plain. But these two Preachers acted with different Principles, and
clashed one against another: so that what Mr. Hooker delivered in the
Fore-noon, Mr. Travers confuted in the Afternoon. Here Archbishop Whitgift
interposed his power, and silenced Travers from Preaching in the Temple or any
where else; Travers Petitions the Lords of the Council: his Petition is
publicly extant in Print, with Master Hooker's answer thereunto. But Mr.
Travers, notwithstanding his friends at Court, was overborn by the Archbishop.

Adam Loftus, Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of Ireland, invited him over
to be Provost of Trinity College in Dublin. Embracing the motion, he accepted
the place, and continued some years therein, till for fear of their Civil Wars
he returned into England, and lived here many years after very obscurely.

In the year 1592. In London more than ten thousand died of the Plague, and
among them Reverend Mr. Richard Greenham. He was one that always bitterly
inveighed against Non-residents, he ended his days at Christ Church in London.

Mr. Vdal was indicted, and arraigned at Croidon, for defaming the Queen her
Government, in a Book by him written and entitled, A Demonstration of the
Discipline which Christ has prescribed in his Word for the Government of his
Church in all times and places unto the World's end. But the mortal words (as
they may be termed) are in the Preface of the Book, written, To the supposed
Governors of the Church of England, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and are
inserted in the Body of his indictment.

To this Indictment he pleaded Not guilty, denying himself to be the Author of
the Book. Next day he was cast by the Jury, but was remanded to the Marshalsey;
March following he was brought again to the bar before the Judges, to whom he
had privately presented a Petition with all advantage, but it found no
entertainment, insomuch that in this month of March, he at the Assizes held in
Southwark, was there condemned to be executed for a Felon.

Various were men's Censures on these proceedings against him. The proof was not
pregnant (says Mr. Fuller) and it is generally believed, that he made only
the Preface, out of which his indictment was chiefly framed) and not the body
of the Book laid to his charge. But without any other sickness, save
heart-broken with sorrow, he died peaceably in his bed. The Ministers of London
flocked to his Funeral, and he was decently interred in the Churchyard of St.
George in Southwark, not far from Bishop Bonner's grave. He was Father to
Ephraim Vdal, a pious and solid Divine, but in point of Discipline differing in
Opinion from his Father.

Anno 1593. Henry Barrow Gentleman, and John Greemoood Clerk, were condemned,
and executed at Tyburn, for writing certain Seditious Pamphlets. And not long
after, John Penry, a Welch-man, was arraigned and condemned of Felony, at the
King's Bench Bar, for being a principal penner, and publisher of a Libellous
Book, called Martinmar-prelate, and executed at St. Thomas Waterings.

This year Queen Elizabeth took her last farewell of Oxford, where a Sir John
Haringt. addit. supply to Bish. Godwin. p. 134.
Divinity-Act was kept for her. Next day her Highness made a Latin Oration to
the Heads of Houses, in which she gave a check to Dr. Rainolds for his
Nonconformity.

The same year died John Piers, Archbishop of York, highly esteemed by Queen
Elizabeth:, whose Almoner he was many years; and John Elmar, Bishop of London.
He was one of a low stature, but stout spirit, a witty man, a stiff-champion of
the Church Discipline, on which account none was more mocked by
Martin-mar-prelat, or hated by Non-conformists.

Of the Papists died, Anno 1594. two principal pillars beyond the Seas: first
William Rose, bred in Winchester-school, then in New-colledge in Oxford. He
went to Rome, and there solemnly abjured the Protestant Religion: from Rome he
removed to Rhemes in France, where he became Professor of Divinity and Hebrew
in the English College: He died at Antwerp in the fiftieth year of his Age, as
he was making a Book, called Calvino-Turcismus, which after by his dear friend,
William Gifford, was finished, set forth, and dedicated to Albert Duke of
Austria. Cardinal William Allen died also the same year. The King of Spain
bestowed on him an Abbey in the Kingdom of Naples, and nominated him to be
Archbishop of Machlin: but he died, and was buried in the Church Pitraeus de
illustr. Angl. script. p. 793.
of the English College at Rome. His loss was much lamented by the Catholics:
for he had done many good offices in composing the grudgings which began to
grow between the Secular Priests and Jesuits. Until this time the prime
Catholics in Wisbich Castle, had lived there in restraint, with great concord.
And the Papists do brag, that then and there the English Church was most
visible, until one Father Weston, a Jesuit coming thither, erected a
Government among them, making certain Sanctions and Orders, which all were
bound to observe, claiming a superiority over all the Catholics there. Besides
those of his own society, many of the Secular Priests submitted unto him,
though the greatest number and Learned sort of the Secular Priests resisted his
superiority. If any Order might pretend to this Priority, it was most proper
for the Benedictines, extant in England above a thousand years ago: one might
admire why Father Weston should so earnestly desire so silly a Dominion, having
his power, as well as his own person confined within the walls of Wisbich
Castle.

Anno 1595. Began throughout England the more solemn and strict observation of
the Lord's day, occasioned by a Book then set forth by P. Bound. D. D. and
enlarged with additions.

Anno 1606. Hereupon the Lord's day (especially in Corporations) began to be
precisely kept, people forbearing such sports as yet by Statute permitted; yet
Learned men were much divided in their Judgments about the Sabbatarian
Doctrines. The first that publicly opposed Dr. Bounds Opinions, was Mr. Thomas
Rogers of Horninger in Suffolk, in his Preface to the Book of Articles: yet
notwithstanding were these Sabbatarian Doctrines published more generally than
before. The price of the Doctor's Book began to be doubled, as commonly Books
are then most called on, when called in. Yea six years after Bounds book came
forth, with enlargements publicly sold.

Now also began some Opinions about Predestination, Free Will, Perseverance,
which much troubled the Schools and Pulpit. Wherein Archbishop Whitgift caused
a solemn meeting of many Learned Divines at Lambeth, where (besides the
Archbishop) Richard Bancroft, Bishop of London; Richard Vaughan, Bishop of
Bangor; Humfrey Tyndal, Bishop of Ely; Dr. Whitaker, Queen's Professor in
Cambridge, and others were assembled. These after a serious debate, resolved on
the now following Articles. Fu^^er. Church Hist. An. 1595.


I. God from eternity has Predestined certain men unto life, etc. II. The
moving cause of Predestination unto life, is not Faith and good Works foreseen,
etc. but only the good will and pleasure of God. III. There is predetermined a
certain number of the predestinate, etc. IV. Those who are not predestined to
Salvation, shall be necessarily damned for their sins. V. A true, living,
justifying Faith, etc. is not extinguished, vanishes not away in the elect
either finally or totally. VI. A man truly faithful, i. e. such a one who is
endued with justifying Faith, is certain with the full assurance of Faith of
the Remission of his sins, and of his everlasting Salvation by Christ. VII.
Saving Grace is not given, granted, communicated to all men, by which they may
be saved if they will. VIII. No man can come unto Christ, Unless it shall be
givenll unto him, and unless the Father shall draw him. And as men are not
drawn by the Father, that they may come to the Son. IX. It is not in the will
or power of every one to be saved.
Matthew Hutton, Archbishop of York, did also fully and freely in his judgment
concur with those Divines, as appears by a Letter of his sent to a most
Reverend Prelate. Mountague in his Appeal. p. 55. 56, 71, 72.


When these Articles came abroad into the World, some had an high Opinion of
them; others valued them at a low rate. Some flatly condemned both the Articles
and the Authors of them. One affirms, that these Articles were forbidden by
public Authority, but when, where, and by whom, he says nothing.

Foreign Divines raised, or decryed, the esteem of these Articles just as they
were biassed in judgment. Some Printed, set forth, and cited them, as the sense
of the Church of England; others as fast slighted them as the narrow positions
of a few private and partial persons. Although those Learned Divines be not
acknowledged as competent Judges to pass definitive sentence in those points,
yet their testimony is an infallible evidence, what was the general and
received Doctrine of England, in that Age, about the forenamed Controversies.

This year died first Dr. William Wickham, bred in King's College in
Cambridge, first Bishop of Lincoln, after of Winchester. Secondly, Worthy Dr.
William Whitaker.

And among the Romanists, Daniel Halesworth. More infamous was the death of
Robert Southwel, a Jesuit, who was executed for a Traitor at London.

In the year 1596. died Bishop Fletcher of London, who died suddenly, and John
Coldwel, Bishop of Sarisbury.

About this time also died Doctor Laurence Humfrey, a moderate Nonconformist,
Dean of Winchester, and Master of Magdalen College in Oxford.

Master Baltazar Zanchez, a Spaniard, born in Estremadura, founded an
Almes-house at Totnam-Highcross in Middlesex, for eight single people, allowing
them competent maintenance.

Thomas Stapleton this year ended his life at Lovain: he was born at Henfield
in Sussex, and was a Learned assertor of the Romish Religion.

This year also died Richard Cosins, Doctor of the Law, and Dean of Arches, one
of the greatest Civilians which our Nation has produced.

The death of Robert Turner was now much lamented by the Papists. He was born
at Barstable in Devonshire, bred for awhile in Oxford, whence flying beyond the
Seas, he became Canon of Breslaw in Silesia, and at the same time Privy
Councellor to the Duke of Bavaria. Ferdinand of Gratz (afterward Emperor) took
him from the Duke to be his own Secretary in the Latin Tongue. He lies buried
at Gratz under a handsome Monument.

In the year 1599. died Richard Hooker, of whom largely before. He was much
lamented by Protestants.

Anno 1600. died two eminent Roman Catholics; John Saunderson, born in
Lancaster, bred in Trinity College in Cambridge, from whence he fled to
Cambray in Artois. The other Thomas Case of St. John's in Oxford, Doctor of
Physic; always a Papist in heart, but never expressing the same, till a little
before his Death.

CENTURY XVII.
THe difference betwixt the Seculars and the Jesuits still continuing and
increasing, Bishop Bancroft afforded the Seculars countenance and maintenance
in London-house, furnishing them with necessaries to write against their
Adversaries, hoping the Protestants might assault the Romish cause with the
greater advantage, by the breach made to their hands by the others own
dissentions.

Archbishop Whitgift founded and endowed an Hospital at Croydon in Surrey, for
a Warden and twenty eight Brethren: as also a free School with liberal
maintenance for the training up of Youth.

The Queen and Her Council finding both the Jesuits and the Secular (...).
Ba^^^^ Chron.
Priests dangerous to this Common Wealth both the one and the other, commands
them to depart out of the Kingdom presently.

The last Parliament in this Queen's Reign was now begun at Westminster, and
dissolved the Month next following. In this Parliament it was Enacted, That
overseers of the poor should be nominated yearly in Easter-week under the Hand
and Seal of two Justices of peace, and that these with the Churchwardens
should take care of the poor, binding out of Apprentices, etc. As also, That
the Lord Chancellor should award Commissions under the great Seal into any part
of the Realm (as cause should require) to the Bishop of every Diocese, and his
Chancellor, etc. to enquire by oaths of twelve men, into the misemployment of
any lands or goods given to pious uses.

Francis Godwin, D. D. Subdean of Exeter, son of Thomas Godwin Bishop of Bath
and Wells, was made Bishop of Landaff. He was born in the fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and was made a Bishop within Her Reign, Anno 1601.

Now came forth a notable book against the Jesuits, written Scholastically by
Watson a secular Priest, consisting of ^en Quodlibets, each whereof is
subdivided into as many Articles, which discovers the Jesuits in their
Colors.

Anno 1602. died Herbert Westphaling, Bishop of Hereford, being the first
Bishop of that foundation, a man very pious, and of such gravity, that he was
scarce ever seen to laugh. There died also Alexander Nowel, D. D. and Dean of
S. Paul's in London. He fled into Germany in the Reign of Queen Mary, and was
the first of English exiles that returned in the days of Queen Elizabeth: an
holy and Learned Man. He bestowed two hundred pound a year rent on Brazen-nose
College, wherein he was educated, for the maintenance of thirteen Students. He
died at ninety years of age, a single man, fresh in his youthful Learning; his
eyes were not dim, nor did he ever make use of Spectacles.

Mr. William Perkins who was born in the first, died also in the last year of
Queen Elizabeth. Gregory Sayer also, and William Harris, two Popish Writers,
bred the one at Cambridge, the other at Oxford, died this year beyond the Seas.

At this time the City of Geneva was in a low estate; for the Duke of Savoy,
addicted to the Spanish faction had banished all Protestants of his Dominions.
By the Liberal example of Archbishop Whitgift large sums of Money were
Collected, and seasonably sent over for the Relief of Geneva.

Queen Elizabeth, the mirror of her Sex and Age, died having Reigned over this
Kingdom above forty years. Her Corpse were Solemnly interred under a fair Tomb
in Westminster Abbey.

Now the Defenders both of Episcopacy and Presbitery, with equal hopes of
success, make (besides private and particular Addresses) public and visible
Applications to King James, the first to continue, the last to set up their
Government. Dr. Thomas Nevil, Dean of Canterbury sent by Archbishop Whitgift to
his Majesty in the name of the Bishops and Clergy of England, brought back a
well-come answer, which was to uphold the Government of the Late Queen, as she
left it settled.

Then Watson a Secular Priest with William Cleark another of his Profession,
having fancied a notional Treason, impart it to George Brook. These break it to
Brook's brother, the Lord Cobham, to the Lord Gray of Wilton, and Sir Walter
Rawleigh besides some other discontented Knights. Watson devised an Oath of
secre^y for them all. The ends they propounded to themselves were to kill the
King, raise Rebellion, alter Religion, and procure a Foreign invasion, etc.
The treason was discovered. The two Priests alone with G. Brook were executed,
the rest were pardoned.

No sooner was King James settled on the English throne, but Mr. Cartwright
presented unto him his Latin Comment on Ecclesiastes: and died soon after. Mr.
Dod Preached his funeral Sermon.

Now there being a general expectation of a Parliament to succeed; the
Presbterian party went about to get hands of the Ministers to a petition which
they intended seasonably to present to the King and Parliament. A conference
was appointed at Hampton Court, which began on January 14. 1603. The names of
the Persons which were employed therein, are as follow.

For Conformity. Archbishop of Canterbury, Whitgift. Bishops of London Durham
Winchester Worcester S. David's Chichester Carlisle Peterborow Bancroft. Matthew.
Bilson. Babington. Rudd. Watson. Robinson. Dove.
Deans of The Chapel. Christ-Church. Worcester. Westminster. S. Paul's.
Chester. Sarisbury. Windsor.
Doctor Field. King.



Against Conformity. Doctor Reinolds. Sparks.
Master Knewstubs. Chadderton.
Moderator King James. Spectators All the Lords of the Privy Council.


On the first days Conference the Bishops and five of the Deans were called in
severally by themselves, then the King reduces some special points wherein he
desires to be satisfied, to three Heads.

1. Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, etc. used in the Church.

2. Excommunication in Ecclesiastical Courts.

3. The providing of fit and able Ministers for Ireland.

In the Common Prayer Book he required satisfaction about three things,

1. About Confirmation. 2. Absolution. 3. Private Baptism.
Touching Confirmation, he said he abhorred the abuse wherein it was made a
Sacrament, or Corroboration to Baptism, As for Absolution, he said he had heard
it likened to Pope's Pardons.

And Concerning Private Baptism, he would be satisfied, if called private from
the place, or if so termed that any besides a Lawful Minister may Baptize,
which he disliked.

Concerning excommunication he offered two things to be considered of,

1. The Matter. 2. The Persons.
For the first, whether it were executed in light Cases, which causes the
undervaluing thereof, For the persons, he would be resolved, why Chancellors
and Commissaries being lay men should do it, and not rather the Bishops
themselves, etc. As for providing Ministers for Ireland; he said he would refer
it in the last days Conference to a Consultation.

The Archbishop of Canterbury answered, that Confirmation has been used in the
Catholic Church ever since the Apostles. The Bishop of London. That it is an
Apostolical Institution, named in express words. Heb. 6. 2. The Bishop of
Carlisle Learnedly urged the same. And the Bishop of Durham urged something out
of S. Matthew, for the Imposition of hands on Children.

The Conclusion was this, for the fuller explanation, that we make Confirmation
neither a Sacrament, nor a Corroboration thereof, their Lordship should
consider whether it might not without alteration, be entitled an Examination
with a Confirmation.

As for Absolution, the Archbishop told His Majesty that it is clear from all
Superstition as it is used in the Church of England, as will appear on the
Reading both of the Confession and Absolution following it, in the beginning of
the Communion-book. Here the King perused both, liked and approved them.

The Particular and Personal Absolution in the Visitation of the sick, was also
Read by the Dean of the Chapel, and approved by the King.



The Conclusion was this, That the Bishops should Consult, whether unto the
Rubric of the General Absolution, these words [Remission of sins] might not be
added for explanation-sake.

To the point of Private Baptism, the Archbishop of Canterbury said, the
Administration thereof by women and Lay-persons is not allowed in the Practice
of the Church, etc. The King answered, the words of the Book cannot but intend
a permission of such persons to Baptize. The Bishop of Worcester said, that the
Compilers of the book did not so intend them, as appears by their contrary
practice. The Bishop of London said, those men intended a permission of private
persons to baptize but in case of necessity. Here he spoke much of the
necessity of Baptism. The King answered, this necessity of Baptism I so
understand, that it is necessary to be had, if lawfully to be had, i. e.
Ministered by lawful Ministers, by whom alone, and no private person in any case
it may be administered.

The result was this, To consult, whether in the Rubric of Private baptism,
these words [Curate, or lawful Minister] may not be inserted.

For the point of Excommunication, His Majesty propounded, whether in causes of
lesser moment the name might not be altered, and the same censure retained.
Secondly, whether in place thereof another coertion equivalent thereunto might
not be invented. Which all sides yielded unto, and so was an end of the first
days conference.

On Monday January 16. they all met in the same place with all the Deans and
Doctors aforementioned (Patrick Galloway Minister of Perth in Scotland,
admitted also to be there) and Prince Henry sat on a Stool by his Father.
After the King had made a pithy speech to the four opposers of conformity. He
willed them to begin.

Then Dr. Rainolds said, All things disliked, or questioned, may be reduced to
these four heads.

I. That the Doctrine of the Church might be preserved in purity according to
God's word. II. That good Pastors might be planted in all Churches to preach
the same. III. That the Church Government might be sincerely Ministered
according to God's word. IV. That the book of Common Prayer might be fitted to
more increase of Piety.
For the first, he desired, that the book of Articles of Religion concluded on
1562. might be explained where obscure, enlarged where defective, viz. Art. 16.
where it is said, After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from
Grace, Those words may be explained, with this addition* yet neither totally
nor finally.

He propounded also, that the nine Assertions concluded on at Lambeth, might be
inserted into the Book of Articles. Some other things also he added.

The Bishop of London speaks passionately against Dr. Rainolds: for which the
King reproves him.

As for Private Baptism, His Majesty said, he had already with the Bishops
taken order for the same.

Then came they to Confirmation. And after some debate thereon betwixt Dr.
Rainolds, and the Bishops of London and Winchester, his Majesty said, he
intended not to take confirmation from the Bishops which they had so long
enjoyed; seeing as great reason that none should confirm, as none should Preach
without the Bishop's License.

Dr. Rainolds said. It were well, if this proposition might be added to the
book of Articles, The Intention of the Minister is not of the Essence of the
Sacrament. He urged again, that the nine Orthodoxal Assertions concluded at
Lambeth may be generally received.

The King thought it unfit to thrust into the book of Articles every position
Negative, which would swell the book into too great a volume. And as to the
nine Assertions, his Majesty said, he knew not what they were. The Bishop of
London told the King the occasion of them. He answered, the better course would
be to punish the broachers of false Doctrine than to multiply Articles.

Then Dr. Rainolds requested, that one Uniform Catechism may be made, and none
other generally received.

His Majesty thought the Doctor' s request very reasonable, yet so, that the
Catechism may be made in the fewest, and plainest affirmative terms that may
be. And herein (said he) I would have two Rules to be observed. 1. That curious
and deep questions be avoided in the fundamental instruction of a people. 2.
That there should not be so general a departure from the Papists, that every
thing should be accounted an error wherein we agree with them.

Dr. Rainolds said, Great is the profanation of the Sabbath day, and contempt
of your Majesty's Proclamation which I earnestly desire may be Reformed.

This motion found an unanimous consent.

Then the Doctor desired that the Bible be New Translated, etc. His Majesty
answered, that he never yet saw a Bible well-translated in English; and he
wished some special pains were taken for an Uniform Translation, which should
be done by the best Learned in both Universities; then reviewed by the Bishops,
presented to the Privy Council, lastly ratified by Royal Authority to be read
in the Church, and none other.

Dr. Rainolds moved also, that unlawful and Seditious Books be suppressed. The
Lord Cecil, that these had done much mischief, but especially one, called
Speculum Tragicum. His Majesty said, that was a dangerous book indeed.

Concerning the planting of Learned Ministers in every Parish, His Majesty said
he had consulted with his Bishops about it; whom he found willing and ready
herein.

The Bishop of London moved, that there might be a praying Ministry among us,
saying, that men now thought it is the only duty of Ministers to spend their
time in the Pulpit. His Majesty well liked his motion. His second motion was,
that until Learned men may be planted in every Congregation, Godly Homilies may
be read therein. The King liked this motion, especially where the living is not
sufficient to maintain a Learned Preacher. Also where were multitudes of
Sermons, he would have Homilies read diverse times. The Plain^iffs confessed, A
Preaching Ministry is best; but where it may not be had, Godly Prayers and
exhortations do much good. The Bishop's last motion was, that Pulpits may not
be made pasquils, wherein every discontented person may traduce his Superiors.
His Majesty approved thereof.

Then Dr. Rainolds came to Subscription, as a great impeachment to a Learned
Ministry, and therefore entreated it might not be exacted as heretofore, for
which many good men are kept out, though otherwise willing to subscribe to the
Statutes of the Realm, Articles of Religion, and the King's Supremacy. He
objected against the enjoining of the Apocrypha Books to be read in the Church,
some Chapters therein containing manifest errors repugnant to Scripture.

His Majesty said, he would not have all Canonical books read in the Church,
nor any Chapter out of the Apocrypha, wherein any error is contained.

The next scruple against Subscription was, because it was twice set down in
the Common Prayer Book, Jesus said to his Disciples, when by the Text in the
Original it is plain, that he spoke to the Pharisees. His Majesty answered, let
the word [Disciples] be omitted; and the words [Jesus said] be Printed in a
different Character.

Mr. Knewstubs took exceptions at the Cross in baptism, and said, it is
questionable whether the Church has power to institute an outward significant
sign. The Bishop of London answered, The Cross in Baptism is not used otherwise
than a Ceremony.

His Majesty desired to be acquainted about the Antiquity of the use of Cross.
Dr. Rainolds said, it has been used ever since the Apostles time, but the
question is, how Ancient the use thereof has been in Baptism. The Bishop of
Winchester said, in Constantine's time it was used in Baptism. His Majesty
replied, it so, I see no reason but we may continue it.

Mr. Knewstubs said, put case the Church may add significant signs, it may not
add them where Christ has already ordained them; which is as Derogatory to
Christ's Institution, as if one should add to the great Seal of England. His
Majesty answered, the case is not alike, seeing the Sacrament is fully
finished, before the use of the Cross.

Mr. Knewstubs demanded then, how far the Ordinance of the Church binds
without impeaching Christian Liberty? The King answered, I will have one
Doctrine, one Discipline, one Religion in substance, and in Ceremony. Never
speak more to that point, how far ye are bound to obey.

Doctor Rainolds wished, that the Cross (being Superstitiously abused in
Popery) were abandoned, as the Brazen-serpent was stamped to powder by
Hezekiah, because abused to Idolatry.

His Majesty answered, Inasmuch as the Cross was abused to Superstition in time
of Propery, it does plainly imply, that it was well used before. He said, he
detested their courses, who peremptorily disallow of all things which have been
abused in Popery, and know not how to answer the Objections of the Papists,
when they charge us with Novelties, but by telling them, we retain the
Primitive use of things, and only forsake their Novel corruptions. Secondly,
no resemblance between the Brazen-Serpent (a material visible thing) and the
sign of the Cross made in the Air.

Thirdly, Papists did never ascribe any spiritual grace to the Cross in
Baptism. Lastly, material Crosses to which people fell down in time of Popery
(as the Idolatrous Jews to the Brazen-serpent) are already demolished, as you
desire.

Mr. Knewstubs proceeded, excepting at the wearing of the Surplice, a kind of
garment (said he) used by the Priests of Isis. His Majesty answered, he did not
think till of late, it had been borrowed from the Heathen, because commonly
called a Rag of Popery. And seeing we border not upon Heathens, etc. I see no
reason (said he) but for comeliness sake it may be continued.

Dr. Rainolds said, I take exception at these words in Marriage, With my body I
thee worship. His Majesty answered, I find it an usual English Term, A
Gentleman of Worship: and it agrees with the Scriptures, Giving honor to the
wife The Dean of Sarum said, some take exception at the Ring in Marriage. Dr.
Rainolds said, he approved it well enough. Then said he, some take exceptions
at the Churching of women by the name of Purification. His Majesty said, I
allow it very well.

Unto Doctor Rainolds his last exception against committing Ecclesiastical
censures to Lay-chancellors, His Majesty answered, that he had conferred with
the Bishops about that point, and such order should be taken therein as was
Convenient.

Doctor Rainolds desired, That according to certain Provin^ial Constituions the
Clergy may have meetings every three weeks. 1. In Rural Deaneries, therein to
have prophesying, as Archbishop Grindal, and other Bishops, desired of her late
Majesty. 2. That such things as could not be resolved on there, might be
referred to the Archdeacons Visitations. 3. And so to the Episcopal Synod, to
determine such points before not decided.

His Majesty answered. If you aim at a Scottish Presbytery, it agrees as well
with Monarchy, as God and the Devil. Then Jack and Tom, etc. shall meet, and
censure me and my Council.

Then the King asked the Doctor, whether they had any thing else to say?

He answered, No more, if it please your Majesty.

If this be all your party have to say, said the King, I will make them
conform, or else I will harry them out of the Land, or do worse.

Thus ended the second days Conference.

The third began on the Wednesday following, many Knights, Civilians, and
Doctors of the Law, being admitted thereunto, because the High Commission was
the principal matter in debate.

His Majesty thus began I understand, that the parties named in the
High Commission are too many, and too mean, and the matters they deal with,
base, such as Ordinaries might censure in their Courts at home.

Archbishop of Canterbury.] Were not their number many, I should oftentimes sit
alone. I have often complained of the meanness of matters handled therein, but
cannot remedy it: for though the offense be small, that the Ordinary may, yet
the Offender oft-times is so great, that the Ordinary is forced to crave help
at the High Commission to punish him

A nameless Lord said, The proceedings in that Court are like the Spanish
Inquisition, wherein men are urged to subscribe more than Law requires; and by
the Oath Ex officio, forced to accuse themselves, being examined upon many
Articles on a sudden, and for the most part against themselves.

The Lord Chancellor said, There is necessity, and use of the Oath Ex officio,
in diverse Courts and Causes.

His Majesty said, That it is requisite that fame and scandals be looked unto
in Courts Ecclesiastical, and yet great moderation is to be used therein. And
here he soundly deseribed the Oath Ex officio for the ground thereof, the
wisdom of the Law therein, the manner of proceeding thereby, and profitable
effect from the same.

After much discourse between the King, the Bishops, and the Lords, about the
quality of the Persons, and Causes, in the High Commission, rectifying
Excommunications in matters of less moment, punishing Recusants, providing
Divines for Ireland, Wales, and the Northern borders, the four Preachers were
called in, and such alterations in the Liturgy were read unto them, which the
Bishops, by the King's advice, had made, unto which, by their silence, they
seemed to consent.

Then the King said to Doctor Rainolds, and his Associates, I expect obedience
and humility from you (the marks of honest and good men) and that you would
persuade others abroad by your example.

Doctor Rainolds answered, We here do promise to perform ^ll duties to Bishops,
as Reverend Fathers, and to join with them, against the common Adversary, for
the peac^ of the Church.

Thus ended the three daye^ Conference. Doctor Sparks soon after set forth a
Treatise of Unity and Uniformity.

This Conference produced some alterations in the Liturgy; Women's baptising
formerly frequent, hereafter forbidden; in the Rubric of Absolution, Remission
of sins inserted, Confirmation termed also an Examination of Children, and some
words altered in the Dominical Gospels, with a resolution for a new translation
of the Bible. Henceforward many, that wavered before, for the future quietly
digested the Ceremonies of the Church.

About this time a Petition, called the Millenary Petition for Reformation, was
solemnly presented to his Majesty, in the name of the Ministers of the Church
of England, desiring Reformation of certain Ceremonies and abuses of the
Church. Subscribed, Your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Ministers of the
Gospel, that desire not a disorderly Innovation, but a due and godly
Reformation. The Episcopal party gave this Petition a lash, some with their
Pens, more with their Tongues. The Universities were justly netled thereat.
Cambridge passed a Grace in their Congregation, That whosoever, in their
University, should by word, or writing, oppose the received Doctrine, and
Discipline, of England, or any part thereof, should be suspended from their
former, and excluded from all future Degrees. Oxford followed, making a sharp
and strong confutation of the Petition. After his Majesty had discountenanced
it, some of the opposite party maintained, That now the property thereof was
altered, from a Petition to a Libel.

Soon after died Archbishop Whitgift of the Palsy, and was buried at Croidon,
the Earl of Worcester, and Lord Zouch, his Pupils attending his Hearse; and
Bishop Babington (his Pupil also) made his Funeral Sermon. Richard Bancroft,
Bishop of London, brought up in Jesus-colledge, succeeded him in the
Archbishopric.

Now a Parliament was assembled, in which it was enacted, That neither the King
himself, nor his Successors, should be capable of any Churchland, to be
conveyed unto them, otherwise than for three lives, or twenty one years. Thus
the King was pleased to bind himself for the liberty of the Church: and hereby
he eased himself of many troublesome Suitors.

In the Convocation many Canons were made. A Book of Canons was compiled, not
only being the sum of the late Queens Articles, Orders of her Commissioners,
Canons of 1571. and 1597. which were in use before, but also many more were
added, the whole number amounting unto 141 An explanation was made in one of
the Canons of the use of the Cross in Baptism. Bishop Rudd, of St. David's,
opposed the Oath of Simony.

Anno 1564. the Family of Love presented a tedious Petition to King James,
wherein, by fawning expressions, they seek to insinuate themselves into his
Majesty's good opinion. We find not what effect this Petition produced.

This year died two Romanists beyond Sea much lamented, one Richard Hall, bred
in Christ's-colledge in Cambridge, whence he ran over to Rome, and after died
Canon and Official at St. Omers Cathedral. The other Humfrey Ely, born in
Hereford-shire, Fellow of St. John's-colledge in Oxford; whence going beyond
Sea, at Rome he commenced Doctor of Law, and afterward died Professor thereof,
in the University of Ponta M^u^an in the Duchy of Lorrain.

Now the Romish Cotholicks despairing of getting any free and public exercise
of their Religion, some of them entered into a devilish Conspiracy to blow up
the Parliament House with Gunpowder.

In this Plot were engaged. Robert Catesby. Thomas Piercy. Sir Everard Digby.
Francis Tresham. Thomas Winter. John Wright. Christopher Wright. Ambrose
Rookwood. Robert Keys. Robert Winter. John Grant. Thomas Bates, Catesbies man.
Guido Faux.


The principal Contriver of this Plot was Robert Catesby, a Gentleman of good
account in Northamptonshire, who drew in many other Papists to assist him.
Gerard tyeth them together with an Oath of secrecy. Garnet and Tismond
encourage the design. But here an important scruple was injected, how to part
their Friends from their Foes in the Parliament. Here Garnet, instead of
untying, cut this knot asunder. That in such a case as this it was lawful to
kill Friend and Foe together.

Now though these Plotters intended at last, with honor, to own the Action,
when success had secured all things; yet they purposed, when the blow was first
given, to father the fact upon those that were called Puritans. But for the
discovery of this Plot, God's Providence so ordered it, that a Letter was
framed, and sent to the Lord Mounteagle, brought him by one of his Footmen,
which he received from an unknown man in the street, in manner following

My Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation. Therefore, I would advise you, as you tender your life, to
forbear your attendance at this Parliament: for God, and man, have concurred to
punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of this
advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may expect
the event in safety: for, though there be no appearance of any stir, yet, I
say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not
see who hurts them, This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you
good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past as soon as you have burnt
the Letter. And, I hope, God will give you the grace to make use of it, to
whose holy protection I commend you.

The Lord Mounteag'e communicates the Letter to the Earl of Sarisbury, He to
the King, who on the second perusal expounded the mystical blow meant therein,
must be by Gunpowder, and gives order for searching the Rooms under the
Parliament House. The first search, about evening, discovered nothing but
Percie's Cellar full of Wood, and Johnson his man (under that name was Faux
disguised) attending therein. At midnight a more strict and secret search was
made by Sir Thomas Fuller. Church Hist.
Knevet, Gentleman of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, and others, in the Vault
under the Parliament House. There was quickly discovered, a pile of fuel,
faced over with Billets, lined under with thirty six Barrels of Powder, besides
Iron bars to make the force of the sire more effectual. Guido Faux was
apprehended in the outward room, with a dark Lanthorn in his hand, and three
Matches ready to give fire to the Train. Mean-time Catesby, Percy, Rookwood,
both the Wrights, and Thomas Winter, were hovering about London, to attend the
issue of the matter. They, and their Servants, post down into the Country,
through Warwickshire, Worcestershire, into Staffordshire; Sir Richard
Verney, High Sheriff of Warwickshire, chased them from thence, and Sir Robert
Walsh, Sheriff of Worcestershire, overtook them at Holbeck in Staffordshire,
the House of Mr. Stephen Littleton, where, upon their resistance, the two
Wrights were killed, Rookwood, and Thomas Winter, grievously wounded. Percy,
and Catesby, setting back to back, fought desperately against all that
assaulted them; after many Swords drawn upon them, they were both slain with
one shot of a Musket. Francis Tresham was taken about the Court, and sent to
the Tower, where he confessed all, and within a few days after died of the
Strangury.

The rest were solemnly arraigned, convicted, condemned at London. Jan. 30.
First Sir Everard Digby, Robert Winter, Grant, and Bates, were hanged, drawn,
and quartered at the West End of St. Paul's. Three of them (but especially Sir
Everard Digby) died very penitently. Grant expressed most obstinacy at his
death.

The next day Thomas Winter, Ambrose Rookwood, Keys, and Faux, were executed,
as the former, in the Parliament-yard in Westminster. Keys followed Grant in
his obstinacy: and Faux showed more penitency than all the rest.

On March twenty eight following* Henry Garnet, Provincial of the English
Jesuits, was arraigned in Guild Hall, for concealing the foresaid Treason,
where he had judgment to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, and accordingly, on
May the third, was drawn from the Tower to the West End of Paul's-church, and
there executed. At his death he confessed his fault, asked forgiveness, and
exhorted all Catholics never to plot any Treason against King or State, as a
course which God would never prosper.

The memory of this deliverance was perpetuated by Act of Parliament

Anno 1605. died that Religious Prelat, Matthew Hutton, Archbishop of York: one
of the last times ^e preached in* his Cathedral was on this occasion: The
Papists in Yorkshire were commanded, by the Queens Authority, to be present at
three Sermons, and at the two first were so uncivil that some of them were
forced to be gagged before they would be quiet. The Archbishop preached the
last Sermon most gravely and solidly, taking for his Text, John 8. 47. He that
is of God, hears God's Word: y^ therefore hear them not, because ye are not
of God. Not long after died John young, Bishop of Rochester, and Anthony
Watson, Bishop of Chichester.

The Parliament enacted many things for the discovering and repressing of
Popish Recusants. Whereof none was more effectual, than that Oath of
Allegiance, which every Catholic was commanded to take. The Pope hereupon
dispatched two Breves into England, prohibiting all Catholics to take this
Oath, so destructive to their own souls, and the Sea of Rome, exhorting them to
suffer persecution, and manfully to endure Martyrdom. Notwithstanding all
which, this Oath being tendered to, was generally taken by Catholics, without
any scruple. And particularly, George Blackwell, Archpriest of the English,
being apprehended, and cast into prison, by taking this Oath wrought his own
enlargement. This Oath was ministered immediately after the putting forth of a
Proclamation, which commanded all Seminaries and Jesuits to depart the Land.

Now the Alarm being given, whether this Oath was lawful or no, both parties,
of Protestants and Papists, wrote against each other. King James wrote an
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, together with a Premonition to all most
mighty Monarchs, Kings, free Princes, and States of Christendom, effectually
confuting the Pope's Breves. Bishop Andrews wrote against Bellarmine, Bishop
Barlow against Parsons, Doctor Morton, Doctor Robert Abbot, Doctor Buckeridge,
Doctor Collins, Doctor Burrel, Mr. Tomson, Doctor Peter Du-moulin, maintain the
legality of the Oath against Suarez, Eudaemon, Becanus, Coftetus, Peleterius,
and others.

Anno 1607. That Religious design of King James, for a new Translation of the
Bible, was now effectually prosecuted; and the Translators being forty and
seven in number, were digested into six companies, and several Books were
assigned them, according unto the several places wherein they were to meet,
confer, and consult together; so that nothing should pass without a general
consent.

Westminster X. The Pentateuch; the Story from Joshua to the first Book of the
Chronicles exclusively. Doctor Andrews, then Dean of Westminster, after Bishop
of Winchester. Doctor Overal* then Dean of St. Paul's, after Bishop of Norwich.
Doctor Saravia. Doctor Laifield, Rector of St. Clement Danes: Being skilled in
Architecture, his judgment was relied on for the fabric of the Tabernacle and
Temple. Doctor Leigh, Archdeacon of Middlesex, Parson of Alhallows-Barking. Mr.
Burley. Mr. King. Mr. Tompson. Mr. Bedwel, Vicar of Tottenham, nigh London.


Oxford VII. The four great Prophets, with the Lamentations, and the twelve
lesser Prophets. Doctor Harding, President of Magdalen College. Doctor
Rainolds, President of Corpus Christi College. Doctor Holland, Rector of
Exeter College, and Regius Professor. Doctor Kilby, Rector of Lincoln
College, and King's Professor. Mr. Smith, after D. D. and Bishop of Gloucester.
Mr. Brett, of Quainton in Bu^kingham-shire. Mr. ^airclough.


Cambridge VIII. From the first of the Chronicles, with the rest of the Story
and the Hagiographa, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes. Mr.
Edward Lively. Mr Richardson, after D. D. Master first of Peter-house, then of
Trinity College. Mr. Chaderton, after D. D. and Master of Emmanuel College.
Mr. Dillingham of Christ's College. Mr. Andrews, after D. D. Brother to the
Bishop of Winchester, and Master of Jesus College. Mr. Harison, Vice-master of
Trinity College. Mr. Spalding, Fellow of St. John's in Cambridge, and Hebrew
Professor therein. Mr. Bing, Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge, and Hebrew
Professor therein.


Cambridge VII. The Prayer of Manass^h, and the rest of the Apocrypha. Doctor
Duport, Master of Jesus College. Doctor Branthwait, after Master of Gonvil and
Caius College. Doctor Radcl^ffe, a Senior Fellow of Trinity College. Mr.
Ward, after D. D. Master of Sidney College, and Margar^t* Professor. Mr.
Downs, Greek Professor. Mr. Boys, Fellow of St. John's College, Parson of
Boxworth in Cambridge-shire. Mr. Ward, Regal, after D. D. Rector of Bishop's
Waltham in Hampshire.


Oxford VIII. The four Gospels, Acts of the Apostles, Apocalypse. Doctor Ravis,
Dean of Christ-church, after Bishop of London. Doctor George Abbot, Master of
University College, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury. Doctor Eedes. Mr.
Tompson. Mr. Sa^^l. Doctor Beryn. Doctor Ravens. Mr. Harmer.


Westminster VII. The Epistles of St. Paul, the Canonical Epistles. Doctor
Barlow, of Trinity-hall in Cambridge, after Bishop of Lincoln. Doctor
Hutchinson. Doctor Spencer. Mr. Fenton. Mr. Rabbet. Mr. Saunderson. Mr. Dakins.


The King's Instructions to the Translators were these following.

I. The ordinary Bible read in the Church, to be followed, and as little
altered, as the Original will permit. Fuller. Church History. Anno 1607.


II. The names of the Prophets, and the holy Writers, with the other names in
the Text, to be retained as near as may be, accordingly as they are vulgarly
used.

III. The old Ecclesiastical words to be kept, etc.

IV. When any word has diverse significations, that to be kept which has been
most commonly used by the most eminent Fathers, being agreeable to the
propriety of the place, and the Analogy of Faith.

V. The division of the Chapters to be altered, either not at all, or as little
as may be, etc.

VI. No Marginal notes at all to be affixed, but only for the explanation of
the Hebrew, or Greek words, which cannot without some circumlocution, so
briefly and fitly be expressed in the Text.

VII. Such Quotations of places to be marginally set down, as shall serve for
the fit reference of one Scripture to another.

VIII. Every particular man, of each company, to take the same Chapter, or
Chapters; and having translated or amended them severally by himself, where he
thinks good, all to meet together, confer what they have done, and agree for
their part what shall stand.

IX. As any one company has thus dispatched any one Book, they shall send it
to the rest, to be considered of seriously and judiciously.

X. If any company, upon the review of the Book so sent, shall doubt, or differ
upon any places, to send them word thereof, no^e the places, and therewithal
send their Reasons: to which, if they consent not, the difference to be
compounded at the General meeting; which is to be of the chief persons of each
company at the end of the work.

XI. When any place of special obscurity is doubted of, Letters to be directed
by Authority, to send to any learned in the Land for his judgment in such a
place.

XII. Letters to be sent from every Bishop to the rest of his Clergy, etc. to
move and charge as many as, being skilful in the Tongues, have taken pains in
that kind, to send his particular Observations to the company, either at
Westminster, Cambridge, or Oxford.

XIII. The Directors in each Company to be the Deans of Westminster, and
Chester, for that place; and the King's Professors in the Hebrew and the Greek
in each University.

XIV. These Translations to be used, when they agree better with the Text, than
the Bishops Bible ordinarily read in the Church: Viz. Tindals. Mathews.
Coverdales. Whitchurch. Geneva.


Three or four of the most grave Divines in either of the Universities, not
employed in translating, to be assigned by the Vice Chancellor, upon Confer^nce
with the rest of the Heads, to be Overseers of the Translatio^s, as well Hebrew
as Greek.

The untimely death of Mr. Edward Lively (much weight of the Work lying on his
Skill in the Oriental Tongues) happening about this time, much retarded their
proceedings.

On May 21. 1607. died Doctor John Rainolds, King's Professor in Oxford, and
one of those Translators of the Bible. So great was his Memory, that he could
readily turn to all material passages in every Leaf, Page, Volume, Paragraph,
in all his voluminous Books. A man of a solid Judgment, and great Humility. His
disaffection to the established Discipline was not so great, as some Bishops
did suspect, or as more Non-conformists did believe. He desired the abolishing
of some Ceremonies for the ease of others Consciences, to which, in his own
practice, he did willingly submit, kneeling at the Sacrament, and constantly
wearing Hood and Surplice. On his deathbed he desired Absolution, according to
the form of the Church of England, and received it from Doctor Holland. Doctor
Featly made his Funeral Oration in the College, Sir Isaac Wake in the
University.

In this year died Richard Vaughan, D. D. successively Bishop of Bangor,
Chester, and London: Mr. Thomas Brightman died the same year. He was born in
the Town of Nottingham, bred in Queens College in Cambridge, where a constant
opposition, in point of Judgment, about Ceremonies, was maintained betwixt him
and Doctor Meryton, afterward Dean of York. He died snddenly (according to his
desire) and was buried at Haunes in Bedford-shire, whereof he had been Minister
fifteen years, Doctor Bulkley preaching his Funeral Sermon.

King Janes founded a College at Ch^lsey, and bestowed on the same, by his
Letters Patents, the Reversion of good Land in Chelsey, then in possession of
Charles Earl of Nottingham. Doctor Matthew Sutcliffe, Dean of Exeter, bestowed
on this College, The Farms of Kingston, Hazard, Appleton, Kramerland,
In the Parish of 1. Staverton. 2. Harberton. 3. Churchton. 4. Stoke-rivers.
All in the County of Devon, and put together worth 300 l. per Annum.


Besides these, by his Will he bequeathed unto Doctor John Prideaux, and Doctor
Clifford (as Feoffees in trust to settle the same on the College) the benefit
of the extent on a Statute of four thousand pounds, acknowledged by Sir Lewis
Steukly, etc.

Here we will insert the number and names of the Provost and first Fellows.

Matthew Sutcliff, Dean of Exceter, Provost. 1. John Overal, Dean of St.
Paul's. 2. Thomas Morton, Dean of Winchester. 3. Richard Field, Dean of
Gloucester. 4. Robert Abbot. Doctors of Divinity. 5. John Spencer. 6. Miles
Smith. 7. William Cevit. 8. John Hewson. 9. John Layfield, 10. Benjamin
Carrier, 11. Martin Fotherby, 12. John Boys, 13. Richard Bret. 14. Peter Lilie.
15. Francis Burley.
16. William Heslier, Archdeacon of Barstable. 17. John White, Fellow of
Manchester College. Historians. William Camden, Clarenceaux, John Haywood,
Doctor of Law,

To promote this Work, his Majesty sent his Letters to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to stir up all the Clergy in his Province to contibute to so pious
a Work. The Archbishop sent his additional Letter to his Clergy to the same
intent: yet for all these endeavors, and Collections in all the Parishes of
England, slow and small were the sums of money brought in to this Work, Many
things obstructed those hopeful proceedings, especially the untimely death of
Prince Henry, the chief Author of this design, as some conceived.

At this present it has but little of the case, and nothing of the Jewel, for
which it was intended. Almost rotten before ripe, and ruinous before it was
finished.

Anno 1609. died William Overton, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, Martin
Heton, Bishop of Ely, and Thomas Ravis, successively Bishop of Gloucester, and
London

Anno 1610. Gervas Babington, Bishop of Worcester, ended his pious life. The
same year expired Bishop Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury. He bequeathed his
Library, the confluence of his own Collections, with his Predecessors,
Whitgift, Grindal, Parker, to Chelsey College: and if that took not effect, to
the public Library in Cambridge, where at this day they remain. George Abbot
succeeded him in the Sea of Canterbury.

Now after long expectation, and great desire, came forth the new Translation
of the Bible, most beautifully printed, by a select and competent number of
Divines, appointed for that purpose; whose Industry, Skilfulness, Piety, and
Discretion, has therein bound the Church unto them in a debt of thankfulness,
as Mr. Fuller well notes.

The Romanists take exceptions at the several senses of words noted in the
Margin. And some Brethren complained of this Translation, for lack of the
Geneva Annotations. But those Notes could no way be fitted to this new Edition
of the Bible. And as some perchance over-valued the Geneva Notes, out of that
special love they bear to the Authors, and place whence it proceeded; so on the
other side, some without cause did slight, or rather uncharitably did slander
the same: for about this time (Anno 1611) a Doctor in Oxford publicly, in his
Sermon Fuller. Church History. Anno 1611.
at St. Mary's, accused them as guilty of misinterpretation touching the
Divinity of Christ, and his Messias-ship, as if symbolizing with Arrians and
Jews against them both; for which he was afterward suspended by Doctor Robert
Abbot, Propter conciones publicas minus orthodoxas, and offensio^is plenas.

This year King James was careful for the seasonable suppression of the
dangerous Doctrines of Conradus Vorstius. This Doctor had lived about fifteen
years a Minister at Steinford, within the Territories of the Counts of
TECLENBVRG, BENTHAM, etc. the Counts whereof were the first in casting off the
Romish yoke, and ever since continuing Protestants. This Vorstius had written
to, and received Letters from certain San osatenian Heretics in Poland and
became infected therewith. Hereupon he set sorth two Books; the one entitled,
TRACTATVS THEOLOGICVS DE DEO, dedicated to the Land-grave of HESSEN: the other
EXEGESIS APOLOGETICA, dedicated to the States, both of them stuffed with many
dangerous Positions concerning the Deity.

This Wretch debased the Purity of God, assigning him a material body,
confining his Immensity, as not being every where, shaking his Immutability, as
if his Will were subject to change; darkening his Omnisciency, as uncertain in
future contingents, with many more monstrous Opinions. Notwithstanding all
this, the said Vorstius was chosen by the Curators of the University of Leyden,
to be their public Divinity-Professor, in the place of Arminius lately
deceased; and to that end the States General, by their Letters sent, and sued
to the Count of TECKLENBOVRGH and obtained of him, that Vorstius should come
from Steinford, and become public Professor in Leyden.

King James being this Aucumn in his hunting Progress, did light upon, and
perused the aforesaid Books of Vorstius; he observed the dangerous Positions
therein, determining speedily to oppose them. Hereupon he presently dispatched
a Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, his Ambassador, Relident with the States,
requiring him to let them understand, how highly he should be displeased, if
such a Monster as Vorstius, should be advanced in their Church. This was
seconded with a large Letter of his Majesty's to the States, dated October the
sixth, to the same effect. But the States entertain not the motion of King
James against Vorstius, according to expectation. They said, That if Vorstius
had formerly been faulty in offensive expressions, he had since cleared himself
in a n^w Declaration. For lately he set forth a Book, entitled, A Christan and
modest Answer, but he gave no satisfaction in his new Declaration.

King James therefore gave Instructions to his Ambassador, to make public
protestation against their proceedings, which Sir Ralph Winwood most solemnly
performed. And after his Majesty's Request, Letter, and Protestation, had
missed their desired effect, he wrote in French a Declaration against Vorstius,
which since, by his leave, has been translated into English, among his other
Works. Vorstius his Books were also, by the King's Command, publicly burnt at
St. Paul's-cross in London, and in both Universities.

The same year, in March, Bartholomew Legate, an Arrian, was burnt in
Smithfield, for denying the Deity of the Son of God, and holding, that there
are no Persons in the Godhead, with many other damnable Tenets.

In the next month Eaward Wightman, of Burton upon Trent, was burnt at
Litchfield, for holding ten several Heresies, viz. those of Ebion, Cerinthus,
Valentinian, Arrius, Macedonius, Simon Magus, Manes, Manicheus, Photinus, and
of the Anabaptists. Only a Spanish Arrian, who was condemned to die, was
notwithstanding suffered to linger out his Life in Newgate, where he ended the
same.

This year died Richard Sutton, the Founder of Charter House Hospital, Esquire.
The Manors which in several Counties he settled, for the maintenance of this
Hospital, were these.

1. Balsham Manor in Cambridge-shire. 2. Blastingthorp Manor in
Lincolnshire. 3. Black-grove Manor in Wilt-shire. 4. Broad-Hi^ton Land in
Wilt-shire. 5. Castle-Camps Manor in Cambridge-shire. 6. Chilton Manor in
Wilt-shire 7. Dunby Manor in Lincolnshire. 8. Elcomb Manor and Park in
Wilt-shire. 9. Hackney Land in Middlesex. 10. Hallingbury-Bouchers Manor in
Essex. 11. Missunden Manor in Wilt-shire. 12. Much-Stanbridge Manor in Essex.
13. Norton Manor in Essex. 14. Salthrop Manor in Wilt-shire. 15.
South-minster Manor in Essex. 16. Tottenham Land in Middlesex. 17. Vfford
Manor in Wilt-shire. 18. Watelscot Manor in Wilt-shire. 19. Westcot Manor in
Wilt-shire. 20. Wroughton Manor in Wilt-shire.
Anno 1612. On November the sixth, died Prince Henry of a burning Fever. He was
generally lamented of the whole Land, both Universities publishing their Verses
in print.

Prince Henry's Funerals are followed with the Prince Palatine's Nuptials,
solemnized with great state.

Anno 1613. Nicholas Wadham Esquire, of Merrifield in the County of Sommerset,
bequeathed, by his Will, four hundred pounds per annum, and six thousand pounds
in Money, to the building of a College in Oxford, leaving the care of the
Whole to Dorothy his Wife: This year the same was finished, built in a place
where formerly stood a Monastery of the Augustine Friars. This year Anthony
Rudd, Bishop of St. David's ended his Life,

Some three years since (on the death of King Henry the Fourth) Isaac Causabon,
that learned Critic, was fetched out of France by King James, and preferred
Prebendary of Canterbury. Presently he wrote, First to Fr^nto Duraeus, his
learned Friend; then to Cardinal Perron, in the just vindication of our English
Church.

After these he began his Exercitations on Baronius his Ecclesiastical Annals,
which more truly may be termed, The Annals of the Church of Rome. He died, and
was buried in the South-Isle of Westminster-Abby. His Monument was erected at
the cost of Thomas Morton, Bishop of Durham.

Anno 1614. Mr. John Seldom set forth his Book of Tithes, wherein he
Historically proves, that they were payable jure humano, and not otherwise.
Many wrote in answer to his Book.

Anno 1616. Mr. Andrew Melvin was freed from his imprisonment in the Tower,
whither he had been committed for writing some Satirical Verses against the
Ornaments on the Altar in the King's Chapel. He afterward became a Professor
at Sedan, in the Duke of Bovillon's Country. Here he traduced the Church of
England, against which he wrote a Scroll of Saphicks, entitled,
TAMI-CHAMI-CATEGERI^. When first brought into the Tower, he first found Sir
William Seymour (afterward Marquess of Hertford, and Duke of Sommerset,) there
imprisoned for marrying the Lady Arabella, so nearly allied to the Crown,
without the King's consent: To whom Melvin sent this Distick.

Causa mihi tecum communis carceris, Ara
Regia, Bella tibi, Regia sacra mihi.
Anno 1615. died Thomas Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, a profound Scholar, well
read in the Fathers.

Anno 1616. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, came over into
England.

The same year King James went into Scotland, with a Princely Train, to visit
his native Country.

This year died Doctor William James, Bishop of Durham.

Two other prime Prelates also followed him, viz. Doctor Henry Robinson, Bishop
of Carlisle, and Robert Bennet, Bishop of Hereford, termed (says Mr. Fuller)
Erudit us Benedictus.

Doctor Mocket, Warden of All Souls in Oxford, set forth a Book in pure Latin,
containing,

The Apology of the Church of England. The greater and lesser Catechism. The
nine and thirty Articles. The Common Prayer. The Ordination of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. The Polity, or Government of the Church of England.
He epitomized the Homilies into certain Propositions faithfully extracted. The
Book fared the worse for the Author; the Author had for his Patron the
Archbishop, against whom many Bishops began then to combine. Dr. Mocket's Book
was censured to be burnt, which was done accordingly: soon after he ended his
life.

Anno 1617. died Robert Abbot, Bishop of Salisbury: he died of the Stone, and
was much lamented by the University of Oxford.

About this time William Perry, a Boy dweling at Bilson in Staffordshire, not
full fifteen years of Age, was practiced on by some Jesuits (repairing to the
House of Mr. Gifford, in that County) to dissemble himself possessed. But the
Boy having gotten a habit of counterfeiting, leading a lazy life thereby, to
his own ease and Parents profit, would not be undeviled by all their
Exorcismes, so that the Priests raised up a Spirit which they could not allay.
At last by the Industry of Dr. Morton, then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
the juggling was laid open to the World by the Boys own confession and
repentance.

All this King's Reign was scattered over with Cheaters in this kind. Some
Papists, some Sectaries; some neither.

Papists. Sarah Williams. Grace Sourbuts of Salmisbu^y in Lancashire. Mary and
Amy two Maids of Westminster. Edward Hance, a Popish Priest.
No Papists. Richard Heydock, Fellow of New College in Oxford, Preached in his
dreams Latin Sermons against the Hierarchy. He recanted, and lived long after
in Sarum, practicing Physic, being also a good Poet, Limner, and Engraver.
Anne Gunter, a Maid of Windsor, had strange extatick phrensies, and gave out
she was possessed of a Devil. A Maid at Standon in Hertford-shire, so
personated a Demoniack, that she deceived many.

The King having the last year in his progress, into Scotland, through
Lancashire, observed, that by the strictness of some Magistrates and Ministers,
in several places, people were hindered from their recreations on the Sunday,
the Papists being thereby persuaded, that no recreation was tolerable in our
Religion; whereupon the Court being at Greenwich, he set forth a Declaration
for liberty on the Lord's day: When this Declaration came abroad, many were
offended at it. But no Minister was enjoined to read the Book in his Parish,
wherewith they had so affrighted themselves.

Yet many conceived, that the Declaration came forth seasonably, to suppress
the endeavor of such, who now began to broach the dregs of Judaism, whereof
John Thrask was a principal, who asserted, That the Lord's day was to be
observed with the same strictness by Christians, as it was by Jews, and that
all meats drinks forbidden in the Levitical Law bound Christians to the same
observance, thereby opening the door to let in the rabble of all Ceremonies. He
seduced many souls with his Tenets, and his own wife among many others. For
these he was censured in the Star Chamber, but afterward recanted his Opinions.

He afterward relapsed, not into the same, but other Opinions. He Sclater.
Exposit. in 1 These. chapter 1. v. 4.
asserted, That one may know Another's Election: or, That one that is the child
of God may infallibly know the Election and Regeneration of Another. Dr.
William Sclater, says, That for his outrageous behavior he received public
stigmatical punishment.

At this time began the troubles in the Low Countries about matters of
Religion, heightened between two opposite parties; Remonstrants, and
Contra-remonstrants. Their controversies being chiefly reducible to five
points, Of Predestination and Reprobation, of the latitude of Christ's death;
of the power of Man's free will, both before and after his conversion; and of
the Elect's perseverance in Grace. To decide these difficulties, The States of
the United Provinces, resolved to call a National Synod at Dort, desiring some
foreign Princes to send them the aid of their Divines for so pious a Work.
Especially, they requested our King of Great Britain, to contribute his
assistance thereunto, who out of his Princely wisdom made choice of, George
Carleton, D. D. then Bishop of Landaff, and afterward Bishop of Chichester.
Joseph Hall, D. D. then Dean of Worcester, and after Bishop of Exeter and
Norwich. John Davenant, D. D. then Margaret-Professor, and Master of Queens
College in Cambridge. Samuel Ward, D. D. then Master of Sidney College in
Cambridge, and Archdeacon of Taunton.


These repairing to his Majesty at New Market, received Instructions from him
concerning their behavior in the Synod; on October 27. they came to the Hague,
where they kissed the hand of his Excellency, Grave Maurice, to whom the Bishop
made a short speech, and by whom they were all courteously entertained. Hence
they removed to Dort, where November 3. the Synod began. Every one at his first
entrance taking an admission Oath. These four Divines had allowed them by the
we^k threescore and ten pounds; weekly Intelligence was communicated to the
King from his Divines.

On December 10. Walter Balcanqual B. D. and Fellow of Pembrookhall, came into
the Synod, being added to the four English Colleagues in the name of the Church
of Scotland. Dr. Hall finding that Air not agreeing with his health, on his
humble request, obtained his Majesty's leave to return: whereupon with a Latin
speech gravely delivered, he publicly took his solemn farewell of the Synod
and returned into his own Country. On January 7. Dr. Thomas Goad, Chaplain to
George Archbishop of Canterbury came into the Synod, sent thither by his
Majesty of Great Britain, (...)

April the twentieth, the Belgic Confession was brought into the Synod,
containing matter both of Doctrine and Discipline, and the public consent
thereunto was required. Here Bishop Carleton, in the name of the rest, approved
all the points of Doctrine. But as for matter of Discipline, that his own
Order, and his Mother Church, might not suffer therein, and he seem by silence
to betray the cause thereof, a Protest was entered by him as mouth for the rest,
to preserve the same. These things he professed himself to have hinted, not to
offend those Churches therewith but to defend their own Church of England To
this In^erpellation of the British Divines, nothing at all was answered. And
such as desire further satisfaction herein, may peruse the joint Attestation
which those English Divines did set forth, Anno 1626. to justify their
proceedings therein.

On April 29. the Synod ended. The S^ates to express their gratitude, gave to
the English Divines two hundred pounds at their departure, to bear their
charges in their return; besides a Golden Medal of good value was given to
every one of them, wherein the sitting of the Synod was artificially
represented. When their work was ended, they viewed the most eminen^ Cities in
the Low Countries, and at all places were bountifully received, Leiden only
excepted: for the Great ones of that University Fuller. Church Hist. Ad. ^^.
1618.
at this time being Remonstrants, were disaffected to the decisions of the
Synod. This gave occasion to that passage in the speech of Sir Dudley Carleton,
the English Ambassador, when in the name of his Master he tendered public
thanks to the States for their Great respects to the English Divines, using
words to this effect, That they had been entertained at Amsterdam, welcomed at
the Hague, cheerfully received at Rot^erdam, kindly embraced at Utrecht, etc.
and that they had seen L^iden.

How high an esteem the STATES GENERAL, had of our English Divines will appear
by their Letters which they sent to King James, written in Latin. With which
Letters they came over into England and presen^ed themselves to the King at
Court, where after courteous entertaining of them, he favorably dismissed
them, Removing Bishop C^rleton to Chichester, preferring Dr. Davenant to the
Bishopri^k of Salisbury, and bestowing the Mastership of the Savay upon
Bal^anqual.

The decisions of this Synod have been since approved, applauded, Joh. Goodwin.
in his Redemption Redeemed, c. 15. parag. 24.
magnified by some; vilified, condemned by others. Of such as dislike the
Synod, none falls heavier upon it, than Mr. John Goodwin, charging the
Synodians to have taken a previous Oath to condemn the opposite party on what
terms soever.

Mr. Fuller desirous to be rightly informed herein, wrote a Letter to Bishop
Hall, who was pleased to return him this answer. Whereas you desire from me a
just relation of the carriage of the business of the Synod of Dort, and the
conditions required of our Divines there, at, or before their Admission to that
Grave and Learned Assembly; I, whom God was pleased to employ, as an unworthy
Agent in that great work, and to reserve still upon Earth, after all my
Reverend and Worthy Associates; do, as in the presence of that God, to whom I
am now daily expecting to yield up my account, testify to you, and (if you
will) to the World, that I cannot without just indignation read that
slanderous Imputation which Mr, Goodwin, in his Redemption Redeemed, reports
to have been raised, and cast upon those Divines, eminent both for Learning and
Piety: That they suffered themselves to be bound with an Oath, at, or before
their Admission into that Synod, to vote down the Remonstrants howsoever; so as
they came deeply preingaged to the decision of those unhappy differences. All
the Oath that was required of us was this, After that the Moderator,
Assistents, and Scribes were chosen, and the Synod formed, and the several
members allowed, there was a solemn Oath required to be taken by every o^e of
that Assembly, which was publicly done in a grave manner, by every person in
their order, standing up, and laying his Hand upon his heart, calling the great
God of Heaven to witness, that he would u^partially proceed in the judgment of
these Controversies, which should be laid before him, only out of, and
according to the written Word of God, and no otherwise; so determining of them,
as he should find in his Conscience most agreeable to the holy Scriptures.
Which Oa^h was punctually agreed to be thus taken by the Articles of the
States, concerning the Indiction, and ordering of the Synod, as plainly
appears in their tenth Article; and this was all the Oath that was either
taken or required, etc.

The same year died Dr. James Mountague, the worthy Bishop of Winchester, son
to Sir Edward Mountague of Boughton in Northamptonshire, highly favored by
King James, preferring him to the Bishopri^k first of Bath and Wells, then to
Winc^ester. In Bath he lies buried under a fair Tomb, though the whole Church
be his Monument, which his Bounty repaired.

Anno 1619. died John Overal, Bishop of Norwich, accounted one of the most
Learned Controversial Divines of those days.

Anno 1620. the Protestant States of the Upper and Lower Austria, upon the
approach of the Bavarian Army, seeing nothing but manifest ruin, renounce their
Confederacy with the Bohemians, and submit to the Emperor, saving to themselves
their Rights and Privileges in Religion. R^shworth. Histor. Coll^ctions.
And the Elector of Saxony assists the Emperor, and executes the Ban against
the Palatine. King James soon after receives the news of the Palsgrave's
overthrow. After the Assembly at Segenbergh,, the Palatine and his Princess
took their journey into Holland, where they found a refuge, and noble
entertainment with the Prince of Orange. The Embassage of Weston and Conway
prevailed little. More Princes of the union reconcile themselves to the
Emperor. The Imperial Protestant Towns, Strasburgh, Worms, and Norembergh,
subscribe to conditions of Peace. The reconciled Princes and States intercede
for the Elector Palatine, but in vain.

In England the Parliament petition the King for the due execution of Laws
against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish Recusants.

On July 10. 1621. John Williams D. D. and Dean of Westminster, was sworn
Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Then the King was solicited from Spain
and Rone, to enlarge his favors to Popish Recusants.

The House of Commons presented to the King a petition and Remonstrance, which
laid open the distempers of those times, with their Causes and Cures.

They Represented to Him, I. The Vigilance and Ambition of the Pope of Rome,
and his dearest Son, the one aiming at as large a Temporal Monarchy, as the
other at a Spiritual Monarchy. II. The devilish Doctrines whereon Popery is
built, and taught with Authority to their followers, for advancement of their
Temporal ends. III. The miserable estate of the professors of true Religion in
foreign parts. IV. The disastrous accidents to his Majesty's children abroad,
etc. V. The strange confederacy of Popish Princes, etc. VI. The interposing of
foreign Princes and their Agents in the behalf of Popish Recusants, etc. VII.
Their usual resort to the Houses and Chapels of foreign Ambassadors. VIII.
Their more than usual concourse to the City, and their frequent Conventicles
and conferences there. IX. The education of their Children in several
Seminaries and Houses of their Religion in foreign parts, appropriated to the
English fugitives. X. The licentious Printing and dispersing of Popish and
Seditious Books, even in the time of Parliament. XI. The swarms of Priests and
Jesuits dispersed in all parts of the Kingdom.


From these Causes they offered to his Majesty, what dangerous Effects, they
foresaw, would follow. I. The Popish Religion is incompatible with ours, in
respect of their positions. II. It draws with it an unavoidable dependancy on
foreign Princes. III. If once it get but a connivency, it will press for a
Toleration, etc.


Then they propounded Remedies against these, some whereof were, That for
securing the peace at home, his Majesty would be pleased to review the parts of
their petition formerly delivered to him, and to put in execution, by the ear
of choice Commissioners to be thereunto appointed, the Laws already, and
hereafter to be made, for preventing of dangers by Popish Recusants. That the
Children of the Nobility, and Gentry, of this Kingdom, and of others, suspected
in their Religion, now beyond the Seas, may be forthwith called home. That the
Children of Popish Recusants, etc. be brought up during their minority with
Protestant Schoolmasters. That his Majesty will be pleased to revoke all
former Licenses for such Children to travel beyond the Seas, and not grant any
such License hereafter, etc.


The House had sufficient Cause to set forth the danger of true Religion, when
besides the great wound made in Germany, and the cruelties of the prevailing
House of Austria, the Protestants in France were almost ruined by Lewis the
Thirteenth; being now besieged in Montauban by the King, and in Rochel by Count
Soisons, and the Duke of Guise. And for their Relief the King of England
prevailed nothing by sending of Sir Edward Herbert, since Baron of Cherbury,
and after him the Viscount Doncaster, Ambassador for Mediation.

About this time a sad misfortune befell George Abbot, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, for shooting at a Deer with a Cross-bow in Bramshil Park, belonging
to the Lord Zouch; he casually killed the Keeper. The King made choice of the
Lord Keeper, the Bishop, of London, Winton, Rochester, St. David's, and Exeter,
Sir Henry Hobart, Justice Doderidge, Sir Henry Martin, and Doctor Stuart, to
inform him of the nature of this cause, and the scandal that might arise
thereupon, whether to an Irregularity, or otherwise. However this consultation
was managed, the Archbishop was not deprived. In this business, Bishop Andrews
proved the Archbishop's great friend. The Archbishop gave twenty pound a year
to the man's Widow. He kept a monthly fast on a Tuesday, as the day whereon
this casualty befell.

About this time young Merick Casaubon set fort a Book in defense of his
deceased Father, against Herbert Roswed a Jesuit; and Andrew Schoppius a
notorious railer, Julius Caesar Bullinger, and Andrew Eudemono Joannes. He
thought it his duty to assert his Father's memory, and to give a brief account
of his life and conversation.

Upon the remove of Richard Milborn to Carlisle, Doctor William La^d, President
of St. John's College in Oxford, was made Bishop of St. David's. He founded in
Oxford a Professor in the Arabic Tongue.

This year died John King, Bishop of London. He was sworn first Chaplain to
King James, who commonly called him, The King of Preachers. And Sir Edward
Coke, said of him, He was the best speaker, in Star-cha^ber, in his time. When
Bishop of London, unless hindered by sickness, he omitted no Lord's day, wherein
he did not visit some Pulpit in London, or near it. The Papists raised a false
aspersion upon him, That at his death he was reconciled to the Church of Rome:
but this was sufficiently confuted by those eye and ear-witnesses, present, at
his pious departure. George Mountain, Bishop of Lincoln succeeded him in his
See.

The same year died William Cotton Bishop of Exeter, whom Valentine Carew, Dean
of St. Paul's, succeeds. Robert Townson Bishop of Sarisbury dies, whom John
Davenant succeeds. Therein also expired Dr. Andrew Willet, a man of great
judgment and Industry, one that had a large soul in a narrow estate. The same
year died also Richard Parry, Bishop of St. Asaph. We will conclude this year
with the death of Mr. Francis Mason, who wrote that worthy Book, De Ministerio
Anglicano.

Anno 1622. Multitudes of Priests and Popish Recusants then imprisoned, were
released, which the Spaniards professed to be a great demonstration Rushw.
Hist. Collect.
of the King's sincere affection, to confirm the amity between the Crowns. But
a General offense was taken at this Indulgence to Papists.

The next year began with the end of that arrant Apostata in this Land, M.
Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, and his fair riddance Anno 1622.
out of it. He had fourteen years been Archbishop of Spalato in Dalmatia, under
the State of Venice, and had now been five years in England. Conscience in
show, and Covetousness indeed, caused his coming hither. He wrote sharply
against the Pope, out of a particular grudge against Fuller. Church Hist. An.
1622.
Pope Paul, who had ordered him to pay a yearly pension of five hundred Crowns
out of his Bishopric, to one Audrentius, a Suffragan Bishop, which this
Archbishop refused to do. The matter was brought to the Court of Rome, where
the Archbishop, angry that he was cast in his Cause, posts out of Italy,
through Germany into the Low Countries, and thence came over into England.

Here multitudes of people flocked to behold this old Archbishop, now a new
Convert. Prelates and Peers presented him with gifts of high valuation. He was
Feasted wheresoever he came, and both the Universities (when he visited them)
highly honored him. But above all King James was most munificent to him. The
King consigned him to the Archbishop of Canterbury for his present
entertainment, and as an earnest of his bounty sent him to Lambeth, a fair
Basin and Boll of Silver, Misit mihi Rex Magnae Britanniae polubrum argenteum
^d abster gendas sordes Romanae Ecclesiae, and poculum argenteum, ad imbibendam
Evangelii puritatem.
which Spalato received with this complement, The King of Great Britain has
sent me a Silver Basin, to wash from me the filth of the Roman Church; and a
Silver Cup to mind me to drink the purity of the Gospel.

Preferment is quickly conferred upon him, as the Deanery of Windsor, and the
Master-ship of the Hospital of the Savoy, with a good Parsonage at West-Ilsey
in Berk-shire, being a peculiar belonging to the Episcopal jurisdiction of the
Dean of Windsor, which Parsonage he collated on himself.

He improved the profits of his place to the utmost, and had a design to
question all his Predecessors Leases at the Savoy, and began to be vexatious to
his Tenants: for which he was gravely and sharply reproved by Dr. King, then
Bishop of London. Spalato complained to King James, who in some choler said,
Extraneus, extraneus es, relinque res sicut eas invenisti; You are a Stranger,
you are a stranger, leave things as you found them. He would passionately
persuade others unto bounty to the poor, though he would give nothing himself.

He now perfects his Books, the Collections whereof were made by him at
Spalato. His works (being three fair Folio's, De Republica Ecclesiastica) give
ample testimony of his abilities.

He delighted in jeering; one of his Sarcasms he unhappily bestowed on Count
Gondomar, the Spanish Ambassador, telling him, That three turns at Tyburn, was
the only way to cure his Fistula. Gondo^ar hereupon meditates revenge, and
tells King James, That his charity abused his Judgment, in conceiving Spalato a
true Convert, who still in heart remained a Roman Catholic. The Ambassador
writes to the King of Spain, He to Pope Gregory the Fifteenth, that Spalato
might be pardoned, and preferred in the Church of Rome, which was easily
obtained. Letters are sent from Rome to Count Gondomar, written by the Cardinal
Millin, to impart them to Spalato, informing him of his pardon at Rome, and
that upon his return the Pope would prefer him to the Bishopric of Salerno in
Naples, worth twelve thousands pounds by the year; and also that a Cardinal's
Hat should be bestowed upon him. And if Spalato with his hand subscribed to
this Letter would renounce what formerly he had Printed, an Apostolical Breve,
with pardon, should solemnly be sent him to Bruxels. Spalato embraces the
motion, recanteth his Opinions largely, subscribes solemnly, and thanketh the
Pope affectionately for his favor: Gondomar carries his subscription to King
James, who is glad to behold the Hypocrite unmasked.

Now died Toby Matthew, Archbishop of York; presently posts Spalato to
Theobalds, becomes an Earnest Petitioner to the King for the vacant
Archbishopric, and is as flatly denied. Spalato offended at this repulse,
requests his Majesty by his Letter to grant him his good leave to depart the
Kingdom. Five days after the Bishops of London and Durham, with the Dean of
Westminster, by his Majesty's direction, repaired to Spalato, propounding unto
Him sixteen Queries, all arising out of his own Letter, and requiring him to
give the explanation of five of the most material under his hand, for his
Majesty's greater satisfaction, which he did accordingly: yet not so clearly,
but that it occasioned a second meeting, wherein more interrogatories were
propounded unto him, to all which he gave his answers. He pretended many
reasons for his return. In pursuance of which his desire, he wrote a second
Letter to King James.

At length Spalato appears before the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
Lincoln, London, Durham, Winchester, at Lambeth, where the Archbishop of
Canterbury in a long Latin Speech, recapitulated the many misdemeanors of
Spalato, principally insisting on his changing of Religion, as appeared by his
purpose of returning to Rome: and that contrary to the Laws of this Realm, he
had held correspondency with the Pope, without the privity of the King's
Majesty. To which charge when Spalato had made a shuffling excuse, rather than
a just defense, the Ar^hbishop in his Majesty's name commanded him to depart
the Kingdom within twenty days, and never to return again. To this he promised
obedience, protesting, he would ever justify the Church of England for
Orthodox in Fundamentals, even in the presence of the Pope, or whomsoever,
though with the loss of his life.

However, he was loath to depart, and secretly deals with his Friends in the
English Court, that his Majesty would permit him to stay. But in vain, and
therefore within the time appointed, he went over in the same Ship with Count
Swartenzburgh, the Emperor's Ambassador, returning hence into Flanders. Being
come to Bruxels, he recants his Religion, and rails bitterly on the English
Church. Here he stayed six months for the Pope's Breve, which at last was
utterly denied him. Now he desperately adventures to Rome, barely presuming on
promises, and the Friendship of Pope Gregory the Fifteenth, then Pope, formerly
his Colleague, and Chamber-fellow. He lived at Rome not loved, and died
unlamented. He was clapped into prison, his study seized on, wherein many papers
were found speaking Heresy enough, his Adversaries being admitted sole
Interpreters thereof. He died some months after, and after his death his
Excommunicated Corpse were put to public shame, and solemnly proceeded against,
in the Inquisition, for relapsing Fuller. Church Hist. Ad. A^. 1622.
into Heresy since his return to Rome. Several Articles of Heresy are charged
upon him, and he found convict thereof, is condemned to have his body burnt by
the public Executioner in the Field of Flora, which was performed accordingly.

The Spanish Match was now the Discourse general, but at last it brake off:
Heaven forbidding the Banes (says Mr. Fuller) even at the third and last
asking thereof. King James falls off, and for a condition of the Marriage,
demands the Restitution of the Palatinate. The Prince returns from Spain.

Then was there a conference entertained between Dr. White, and Dr. Featly,
Protestants; Father Fisher, and Father White, Jesuits: Now happened the fatal
Vespers at Blackfriars in London, Father Drury a Jesuit, of excellent Morals,
Preached there in a great upper-room, next to the House of the French
Ambassador, where three hundred persons were assembled. His Text Matthew. 18. 32.
O thou ungratious servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou desiredst
me, should not Thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants? In
application whereof he bitterly inveighed against the Protestants. About the
middle of his Sermon, and the day declining, on a sudden the Floor fell down
where they were assembled; many were killed, more bruised, all frightted.
Ninety five persons were slain, among whom Mr. Drury, Mr. Rodiat, Priests, with
the Lady Webb, were of the chiefest note. Twenty of the poorer sort were buried
hard by in one Grave, and the rest bestowed by their friends in several places
of Sepulture.

Yet notwithstanding this sad Accident, the Papists were very insolent The
Letter may be read at large in Rushworth's Collect. and Fuller. Church History.
toward all true English men, the rather, because it was generally reported,
That his Majesty intended a Toleration of Religion: which made the Archbishop
of Canterbury, in a serious Letter, to present the King with his apprehensions;
beseeching the King to consider, Lest by this Toleration, and discountenancing
of the true profession of the Gospel, wherewith God has blessed us, and this
Kingdom has so long f^ourished under it, God's heavy wr^th be not drawn upon
this Kingdom, etc. What effect this Letter took is unknown, sure it is, all
men's mouths were filled with a discourse of a Toleration, for, or against it:
yea the Pulpits are loud against Toleration.

Now because the peoples mouths were open, and some Preachers were two busy,
the King gave directions for the regulation of the Ministry, in his Letters
directed to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: for many shallow Preachers
handled the profound points of Predestination, etc. Sermons were turned into
Satyrs against Papists, and Non-conformists. The King revived the primitive and
profitable order of Catechizing in the afternoon. Various censures were passed
on the King's Letters. But these Instructions from his Majesty were not pressed
with equal rigor in all places.

Both the Palatinates were now lost, the Upper seized on by the Emperor; the
Nether by the King of Spain; the City of Heidelberg taken and plundered, and
the inestimable Library of Books therein carried over the Alps on Mules backs
to Rome. Now those Books are placed in the Pope's Vatican. The Duke of Bavaria
was invested in the upper Palatinate.

Anno 1624. The match with France was concluded, and in November the Articles
were sworn unto by King James, Prince Charles, and the French King. The
Articles for Religion were not much short of those for Spanish match.

Count Mansfield was at this time in England, and the Forces raised in the
several parts of the Kingdom for the recovery of the Palatinate, were put under
his command. Dover was the place assigned for their Rendezvous, where the
Colonels and Captains were to receive their several Regiments and Companies,
from the Conductors employed by those several Counties where the men were
raised. These being long pent up in their Ships, suffered the want of all
necessaries, by which means a Pestilence devoured many of them, so that scarce
a Third part of the men were l^nded; the which also afterward mouldred away,
and the design came to nothing.

At this time upon the death of William, Titular Bishop of Calcedon, most of
the English Secular Priests did petition the Pope, that another Bishop might be
sent over into England, there to ordain Priests, give Confirmation, and
exercise Episcopal jurisdiction Among others Matthew Kellison, and Richard
Smith, were presented. Not long after Pope Urban the Eighth, created Richard
Smith, Bishop of Calcedon, and sent him into England with Episcopal Authority
over the Priests within the English Dominions.

King James, after he had been troubled with a Tertian Fever four weeks at
Theobalds, called unto him his only Son, Prince Charles, to whom he
recommended the protection of the Church of England, etc. and died on the seven
and twentieth day of March. He Reigned twenty two years and three days.

The sad news of King James his death was brought to White Hall, when Dr. Laud,
Bishop of St. David's, was Preaching therein. This caused him to break off his
Sermon in the midst thereof, out of civil compliance with the sadness of the
Congregation. And the same day was King Charles Proclaimed at Whitehall.

Shortly after, King James his death, Bishop Laud delivered to the hands of the
Duke of Buckingham, brief memorables of the Life and Death of King James. On
May fourteenth following, King James his Funerals were performed very solemnly
in the Collegiate-church at Westminster. King Charles in his own person
mournfully attended the Funerals of his Father. Dr. Williams, Lord Keeper, and
Bishop of Lincoln, Preached the Sermon, taking for his Text, 2 Chronicles 9. 29, 30,
and part of verse. 31. containing the happy Reign, quiet Death, and stately
Burial of King Solomon. In this Sermon he made a parallel between two peaceable
Princes, King Solomon and King James, adding, that Solomon's vices could be no
blemish to King James, who resembled him only in his choycest virtues.

Doctor Preston still continued, and increased in the favor of the King, and
the Duke of Buckingham.

Then a Book came forth, called Apello Caesarem, made by Mr. Mountague, then
Fellow of Eaton, upon this occasion. He had lately written Satyrically enough
against the Papists, in confu^ation of The Gagger of the Protestants. Now two
Divines of Norwich Diocese, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Ward; inform against him for
deserting our Cause, instead of defending it. Mr. Mountague in his own
Vindication writes a second Book licensed by Francis White, D^an of Carlisle,
finished, and partly Printed in the Reign of King James. Many bitter passages
in this his Book gave great exception.

At that time a Schedule was delivered to the Duke wherein the names Rushw.
Collect. An. 162^. ^
of Ecclesiastical persons were written, under the letters of O, and P, O
standing for Orthodox, and P. for Puritans: for the Duke commanded that the
names of eminent persons to be presented unto the King should be thus digested
under that partition.

On Sunday June 12. Queen Mary landed at Dover: Next day the King coming from
Canterbury, met her at Dover, Thence his Majesty conducted the Queen to
Canterbury, and the same Evening the Marriage was there consummated. On June
16. the King and Queen came both to London. A Chapel at Sommerset-house was
built for the Queen and her Family, with conveniences thereto adjoining for
Capuchin Friars, who were therein placed; and had permission to walk abroad in
their Religious habits.

Then began a Parliament at London, wherein the first Statute agreed upon was
for the more strict observation of the Lord's day. Sir Edward Coke went to the
House of Peers with a message from the Commons, desiring their concurrence in a
petition concerning Religion, and against Recusants, which being agreed to, and
presented to the King, his Majesty answered, That he was glad, that the
Parliament was so forward in matters of Religion, and assured them, they should
find him as forward.

Mr. Richard Mountague was brought to the Bar of the Commons House, for his
Book forementioned, which was Printed, and dedicated to King Charles. But the
King res^ued him from the House of Commons, by taking Mr. Mountague's business
into his own hand. The Plague increasing in London, the Parliament removed to
Oxford, where Doctor Chalenor died of that infection. The Parliament to prevent
the growth of Popery, presented a petition to his Majesty, containing sixteen
particulars, to which they received a satisfactory answer from the King.

Mr. Mountagues cause was recommended to the Duke of Buckingham, by the Bishops
of Rochester, Oxford, and St. David's, as the cause of the Church of England.
They affirm boldly, that they cannot conceive, what use there can be of Civil
Government in the Commonwealth, or of external Ministry in the Church, if such
fatal Opinions as some are, which are opposite to those of Mr. Mountague, be
publicly taught and maintained. But other Learned men were of a different
judgment.

At Oxford in a late Divinity disputation held upon this Question, Whether a
Regenerate man may fall away totally and finally from Grace? The Opponent
u^ging the Appeal to Caesar, the Doctor of the Chair handled the Appellator
very roughly, saying, That he was a man that studied phrases more than matter;
That he understood neither Articles nor Homilies, or at least perverted both;
That he attributed, he knew not what virtue to the sign of the Cross; and
concluded with an Admonition to the Juniors, That they should be wary of
reading that and the like Books.

The King according to his late answer to the Parliament at Oxford, issued out
a Commission to the Judges, to see the Law against Recusants put in Execution.
This was read in all the Courts of Judicature at Reading (where Michaelmas Term
was kept) and a letter directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to take
special care for the discovery of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, etc. within his
Province.

In this and the next year many Books from persons of several abilities and
professions, were written against Mr. Mountague, by Dr. Sutcliff Dean of
Exeter; Mr. Henry Burton; Mr. Yates, a Minister of Norfolk, his Book he
entitled, Ad Caesarem ibis. Dr. Carleton, Bishop of Chichester; Anthony Wotton,
Divinity-professor in Gresham College, and Mr. Francis Rowse, a Layman. His
Majesty sensible of his Subjects great distaste at Mr. Mountague's Book,
resolved to leave him to stand or fall according to the justness of his Cause.
The Duke imparted as much to the Bishop of St. David's, who conceived it of
such ominous concernment, that he entered the same in his Diary, viz. I seem to
see a cloud arising, and threatening the Church of England, God for his mercy
dissipate it.

The King issued forth a Proclamation, Whereby he commanded the return, within
limited time, of all such Children of Noblemen, and other his natural
Subjects, who were now breeding up in Schools and Seminaries, and other Houses
of the Popish Religion beyond the Seas. That their Parents, Tutors, and
Governors, take present order to recall them home, and to provide, that they
return by the day prefixed, at the utmost severity of his Majesty's Justice. He
commanded further, That no Bishop, Priest, or any other person, having taken
Orders under any Authority, derived from the Sea of Rome, do presume to confer
Ecclesiastical Orders, or exercise Ecclesiastical Function, or Jurisdiction
toward any of his Natural Subjects, in any of his Dominions, etc.

On Candlemas-day King Charles was Crowned, Bishop Laud had the chief hand in
compiling the form of the Coronation, and had the honor to perform this
Solemnity, instead of the late Lord Keeper Williams, who (through the King's
di^favour) was sequestered from this service, which belonged to his place, as he
was Dean of Westminster. Dr. Senhouse, Bishop of Carlisle, Preached at the
Coronation. The Coronation Oath was tendered to the King by the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Ceremonies of the Coronation being ended, the Regalia were
offered at the Altar by Bishop Laud, in the King's Name, and then reposited.

Bishop Williams fallen into disgrace, by the displeasure of the Duke of
Buckingham, besought his Majesty, That he would mitigate the Duke's causeless
anger toward him; and that in his absence in the Parliament, no use might be
made of his Majesty's sacred Name to wound the Reputation of a poor Bishop,
etc.

On Monday, February the sixth, began the second Parliament of the King's
Reign. The House of Commons began where they left at Oxford, with matters of
Religion and public grievances. They made strict enquiry into what abuses had
been of the King's grace, since that time, and who were the Authors and
Abbettors thereof; for they had been informed of many Pardons and Reprieves to
Priests and Jesuits. An Act ^a^ tendered against scandalous Ministers. It was
moved, that some p^^^^sion might be made against scandalous Livings, as well as
against scandalous Ministers.

A Committee was named concerning Religion, and the Growth of Popery, and Mr.
Mountague's [Appeal to Caesar] was again brought in question, This Book the
Commons referred to the Committee for Religion, the contents whereof were
reported from Mr. Pym to the House, and the House passed their Votes thereupon;
That Mr. Mountague endeavored to reconcile England to Rome, and to alienate
the King's affections from his well affected Subjects. Diverse Articles were
exhibited by the Commons against Mr. Mountague. They prayed, That the said Mr.
Mountague might be punished according to his Demerits, and that the Book
aforesaid might be suppressed and burnt.

Many resorting to hear Mass at Durham house, in the Lodgings of a Foreign
Ambassador, the Bishop of Durham was required to apprehend such of the King's
Subjects as should be present at the Mass, and to commit them to prison. There
was also a Letter sent from the Attorney General, to the Judges of the
circuits, to direct their proceedings against Recusants.

During the sitting of this Parliament, at the procurement of Robert Fuller.
Church Hist. An. 1626.
Rich, Earl of Warwich, a conference was kept in York house, before the Duke of
Buckingham and other Lords, betwixt Dr. Buckeridge Bishop of Rochester, and Dr.
White Dean of Carlisle, on the one side; and Dr. Morton Bishop of Coventry, and
Dr. Preston on the other, chiefly, About the possibility of one elected to fall
from grace. The passages of which conference are variously reported. Soon after
a second conference was in the same place, on the same points, before the same
persons, betwixt Dr. White Dean of Carlisle, and Mr. Mountague on the one side,
and Dr. Morton Bishop of Litchfield, and Dr. Preston on the other. But these
conferences rather increased the differences, than abated them.

An old Hall in Oxford, formerly called Broad-gates-Hall, was this year turned
into a new College, and called Pembrook College, partly in respect to William
Earl of Pembrook, then Chancellor of the University. This College consists
of a Master, ten Fellows, and ten Scholars, with other Students and Officers to
the number of one hundred sixty nine.

Now Dr. Preston decline's in the Duke's favor, and the Duke betakes himself
to the opposite Interest. This year died Arthur Lake, Bishop of Bath and Wells;
and Lancelot Andrews, who had been Dean of Westminster, Bishop of Chichester,
Ely, and at last, of Winchester. Doctor Nicholas Felton, Bishop of Ely, died
some days after Bishop Andrews.

About this time the Marshal of Middlesex petitioned to the Committee of the
House of Commons touching his resistance in seizing of Priests goods. A Warrant
was made by Mr Atto^ney-General to John Tendering Marshal of Middlesex, and all
other therein named, to search the prison of the Clink, and to seize all Popish
and superstitious matters there found. A Letter also was directed to Sir George
Paul, a Justice of Peace in Surrey, to pray him to take care in expediting that
service. Upon search four several Priests were found in the Clink, viz.
Preston, Candon, Warrington, Prator. Preston was committed to the Clink about
sixteen years since, and discharged of his imprisonment about seven years ago,
yet remained there in the Prison still, attended with two Women servants, and
one Man servant, who as it was suspected, had continued with him ever since the
Gunpowder-Treason. Anno Rushw. Collec. Anno 1626.
1605. He kept there by himself apart from the Keeper of the prison, and had
for his lodging part of the Bishop of Winchester's house, into which there was
a passage made through the prison-yard. There were found in his Chamber five or
six Cart-loads of Books set up with shelves, as in a Library, or Book-seller's
shop, supposed to be worth two thousand pounds at least: besides which it was
affirmed by the Keeper of the prison, that he had a greater Library abroad.
There were also found two Altars ready furnished for Mass; one more public in
an upper Chamber, the other more private, in a Study, many rich Copes,
Surplices, Wax-candles, Crosses, Crucifixes very rich, Beads, Jewels, Chains,
Chalices of Silver and of Gold; five or six bags of money which were not
opened, and loose money to the quantity of an hundred pound thrown up and down
in his Desk; abundance of Manuscripts, and a packet of Letters bound up
together with a thread.

In Candon's Chamber was found an Altar ready furnished with many Plates,
Jewels, rich Pictures and Manuscripts, Wax-candles, etc. with many Books in a
Study. In another Study of his many curious Tools and Engines, three Rapiers,
one Pistol, and a Fowling piece, the pictures of Queen Elizabeth, King James,
Queen Anne, and King Charles. He had also in his custody all the Keeper's
Warrants for committing of his prisoners, which were found in his Chamber,
together with some store of Plate, which he said he kept for the Keeper's wife.

In Warrington's Chamber were found Books, Beads, Boxes of Oil for extreme
Unction, etc. But the wall thereof was broken down into another house adjoining
to the Prison, through which it is conceived the rest of Warrington's stuff
was convaied away in the Interim of the search made in the two former Chambers.

Prator was first committed to Gloucester Gaol, but a Warrant was procured by
the Papists for his remove to the Clink, where he was found a prisoner. But a
countermand was brought from the Archbishop, and Mr. Attorney, whereby the
proceeding of that business was staid, and the Marshal prohibited to remove, or
take any thing, so much as a paper. The Keeper and his Wife, and the Priests
did grievously threaten the Marshall and all his Assistants, with very high
terms, especially with Arrests and Imprisonments for this action.

The Marshall also informed the Committee, that upon the twenty second of March
last, by a like Warrant from the Lord Conway, he searched the Bishop's prison,
called the New prison in (...) in London, where he found six several Priests in
several Chambers, an Altar with all furniture thereto belonging, etc. as much
as three Porters could carry away, it being in the hands of the Lord Conway.

The House of Commons agreed upon a petition to his Majesty concerning
Recusants, That he would give order to remove from all places of Authority and
Government, all such persons, as are either Popish Recusants, or justly to be
suspected. Here they named many Lords, Knights, and Esquires, in diverse
Counties of England. But this Parliament was soon after dissolved.

A general Fast was observed, July 5. in the Cities of London and Westminster,
and places adjacent, and on the second of August, throughout the Kingdom, to
implore a blessing upon the endeavors of the State, and the diverting of those
judgments which the sins of the Land deserved and threatened.

Diverse Lords of the Council were appointed to repair into their several
Countries, for the advancement of a Loan to the King. This business occasioned
a complaint to the Lords of the Council against the Bishop of Lincoln, for
publicly speaking words concerning it, which was conceived to be against the
King and Government. Whereupon Sir John Lamb, and Dr. Sibthorp, informed the
Council to this purpose, That many were grieved to see the Bishop of Lincoln
give place to unconformable Ministers, when he turned his back to those that
were conformable, and how the Puritans ruled all with him, etc. The
Informations given against the Bishop of Lincoln being transmitted to the
Council Table, were ordered to be sealed up, and committed to the custody of
Mr. Trumbal, one of the Clerks of the Council: nevertheless the Bishop of
Lincoln got a copy of them.

Dr. Sibthorp published a Sermon in Print, Preached by him at Northampton,
February 22. 1626. at Lent Assizes, entitled, Apostolic Obedience. This Book
was Licensed by the Bishop of London, who approved thereof. It was dedicated to
the King; it was brought forth upon his Majesty's Commission for raising of
moneys by way of Loan.

Dr. Roger Manwaring promoted the same business in two Sermons Preached before
the King and Court at Whitehall. The Papists at this time were very liberal on
this occasion, that it was then said, That in the point of Allegiance then in
hand, the Papists were exceeding Orthodox, and the Puritans were the only
Recusants.

1627. Archbishop Abbot having been long slighted at Court, now fell under the
King's high displeasure, for refusing to License Dr. Sibthorp's Sermon
forementioned, and not long after was suspended from his Office and confined to
his House at Ford in Kent, and a Commission was granted to the Bishops of
London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, and Doctor Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, to
execute Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction. The occasion of this Commission was not
discovered otherwise than by what was expressed in the Commission it self, viz.
That the said Archbishop could not at that present in his own person attend
those services, which were otherwise proper for his cognizance and
jurisdiction; and which as Archbishop of Canterbury he might and ought in his
own Person have performed and Executed.

The Archbishop for a memorial of these proceedings left to posterity a
Narrative penned with his own hand. The City of London was filled with the
report of his Confining, and diverse men spoke diversely of it.

The Papists in Ireland proffer to pay five thousand men, if they might but
enjoy a toleration. But that motion was crushed by Bishop Downham's Sermon in
Dublin, on Luke 1. 74.

After this, the King being resolved upon the calling of a Parliament,
Archbishop Abbot, the Earl of Bristol, and the Bishop of Lincoln,
notwithstanding the cloud they are under, are had in consideration by the King
and Council, and Writs are Ordered to be sent unto them to sit in the House as
Peers in the ensuing Parliament.

A little before the Parliament assembled, a Society of Recusants was taken in
Clarkenwel. Diverse of them were found to be Jesuits, and the house wherein
they were taken was designed to be a College of that Vid. Rushw. Collects. Ad
Anno 1627.
Order. Among their Papers was found a Copy of a Letter written to their Father
Rector at Bruxels discovering their designs upon this State, and their
judgment of the temper thereof, with a conjecture of the success of the
ensuing Parliament.

A Parliament assembleth March 17. which proves full of troubles. Money came
from them heavily to the supply of the King's necessities: the rather, because
they complained of Doctrines destructive to their Propriety Preached at Court.
For toward the end of the Session of this Parliament Mr. Rouse brought in a
charge against Dr. Manwaring, which some days after was seconded with a
Declaration. He was severely censured for two Sermons he had Preached and
Printed about the power of the King's Prerogative.

Four days after, it was ordered by the House of Lords against him.

I. To be imprisoned during the pleasure of the House. II. To be fined a
thousand pounds. III. To make his submission at the Bar in this House. IV. To
be suspended from his Ministerial function three years. V. To be disabled for
ever hereafter from Preaching at Court. VI. To be incapable of any Secular
Office. VII That his Books are worthy to be burnt, and His Majesty to be moved
that it may be so in London.
But much of this Censure was remitted, in Consideration of the performance of
his humble submission at both the Bars in Parliament, Where he appeared on June
the three and twentieth following, and on his knees before both Houses
submitted himself with much outward expression of sorrow.

On Thursday May 26. 1628. ended this Session of Parliament, 1628.
wherein diverse abuses of the Lord's day restrained. All Carriers, Carters,
Waggoners, Wainmen, Drovers of Cattle, forbidden to travel therein, on the
forfeit of twenty shillings for every offense, etc. A Law was also made, that
whosoever goes himself or sends others beyond the seas, to be trained up in
Popery, etc. shall be disabled to sue, etc. and shall lose all his goods, and
forfeit all his lands for life.

On July 20. died D. Preston of a Consumption, and was buried at Fawsley in
Northa^pton-shire, Mr. Dod Preaching his Funeral-sermon: an Excellent Pr^acher;
a subtle Disputant, and good Politician. About this time Georgo Carleton, that
grave and godly Bishop of Chichester, ended his Pious life. He was bred and
brought up under that holy man M. Bernard Gilpin (whose life he wrote in
gratitude to his memory) and retained his youthful and Poetical studies, fresh
in his old age. Mr. Richard Mountague, one of a differing judgment succeeded
in his See. At the same time the Rich Parsonage of Stanford-rivers in Essex was
conferred on Dr. Manwaring, as void by Bishop Mountague's preferment.

A Proclamation came forth declaring the King's pleasure for proceedings with
Popish Recusants, and directions to his Commissioners for making Compositions
for two parts of three of their estates, which by Law were due to His Majesty.
Nevertheless. (for the most part) they got off upon easy terms by reason of
compositions at undervalues. Dr. Barnaby Potter is now made Bishop of Carlisle.

This was seconded with another Proclamation, commanding, that diligent search
be made for all Priests and Jesuits (particularly the Bishop of Calc^don) and
others that have taken Orders by Authority from the Sea of Rome, that they be
apprehended, and committed to the Gaol of that County where they shall be
found. Smith the titular Bishop of Calc^don hereupon conveyed himself over into
France, where he became a confident of Cardinal Richlieu's.

This year died Toby Matthew Archbishop of York. George Mountain succeeded him,
but died a few months after. During the sitting of the Parliament, one Dr
Leighton a Scottish man presented a Book unto them, exciting the Parliament and
people to kill all the Bishops, and to smite them under the fifth Rib. He
bitterly inveighed against the Queen, calling her a Daughter of Heth, a
Canaanite and Idolatress: and Zions plea was the specious title of his
Pamphlet, for which he was sentenced in the Star Chamber to be whipped and
stigmatized, to have his ears cropped, and nose slit; which censure was inflicted
on him.

On August 23. 1628. The Duke of Buckingham was Murdered at Portsmouth by one
Lieutenant Felton. After the death of the Duke, the King highly favored Dr.
Laud Bishop of London, to whom he sent many gracious messages.

Some three years since, certain Feoffees were legally settled in trust to
purchase in Impropriations with their own and other well-disposed persons
money, and with their profit to set up and maintain a constant Preaching
Ministry in places of greatest need, where the word was most wanting. The
Feoffes were twelve in number diversely qualified,

Doctors in Divinity. William Gouge Richard Sibbs
Charles Offspring. John Davenport. of Lincolns Inn. Ralph Air Sa. Brown
C. Sherland of Grays Inn. John White of the Middle Temple. Citizens. John
Gearing Richard Davis Geo. Harwood Francis Bridges

It is incredible, what large sums were advanced in a short time toward so
laudable a work.

In March Bishop Davenant preaching his course on a Sunday in Lent at
White Hall before the King and Court; In his Sermon he was conceived to fall on
some forbidden points, insomuch that his Majesty manifested much displeasure
thereat: for which he is convented before the Council, where Dr. Harsenet,
Archbishop of York, aggravated his offense. His answer was, that he had
delivered nothing but the received Doctrine of our Church established in the
seventeenth Article, and that he was ready to justify the truth of what he had
then taught. Their answer was the Doctrine was not gainsaid, but his Highness
had given Command these questions should not be debated; and therefore he took
it more offensively that any should be so bold, as in his own hearing to break
his Royal Commands. Here the Archbishop of York aggravated the offense from
many other Circumstances. His Reply was only this, That he never underst^od
that his Majesty had forbid a handling of any Doctrine comprised in the
Articles of ou^ Church, but only raising of new questions, or adding of new
sense thereunto, which he had not done, nor ever should do.

An^o 1630. died Thomas Dove, Bishop of Peterborough. The Nonconformists
complained of his severity in asserting Ecclesiastical discipline. He was an
aged man being the only Queen Elizabeth's Bishop that died in the Reign of
King Charles.

Anno 1631. began great discontents to grow in the University of Oxford. (...).
Church (...). (...). 1^31.
Many conceived that Innovations (defended by others for Renovations, and now
only reduced as used in the primitive times) were multiplied in Divine
Service. Whereat offended, they, in their Sermons, brake forth into (what was
interpreted) bitter invectives. Dr. Smith Wa^den of Wadham-colled^e convented
Mr Thorn of Baliol-colledge, and Mr. Fo^d of Magdalen hall, as offenders
against the King's Instructions, and ordered them to bring in the Copies of
their Sermons. Bishop Laud procured the cause to be heard before the King at
Woodstock; and 1. The Preachers complained of were expelled the University. 2.
The Proctors were deprived of their place for accepting their Appeal. 3. Dr.
Pride^ux and Dr Wilkinson were sh^ewdly checked for engaging in their behalf.
The expulsion of these Preachers increased the Differences in Oxford.

This year died that eminent Preacher Mr. Arthur Hildersam. After he had entered
into his Ministry, he met with many troubles. He was silenced by the High
Commission in June Anno 1590. and restored by the High Commission in January
1591. He was silenced by Bishop Ch^derton. April 24 1605. restored by Bishop
Barlow in January 1608. Silenced by Bishop Neile in November 1611. restored by
Dr. Ridley June 20. 1625. Silenced by the Court at Leicester Mar. 4. 1630.
restored by the same Court 1631. He was Minister of Ashby de la Zou^h forty and
three years. The same year died Robert Bolton M^nister of Broughton in
Northamptonshire, an Authoritative Preacher.

Now a Bill was exhibited in the Exchequer-chamber by Mr. Noy the
Attourney-general against the Feoffees for Impropriations. It was charged
against them, that they diverted the Charity wherewith they were entrusted, to
other uses. That they generally preferred Nonconformists to the Lectures of
their erection. The Court condemned their proceedings as Dangerous to the
Church and State, pronouncing the Gifts, Feoffments, and contrivances made to
the use aforesaid, to be illegal, and so dissolved the same, confiscating their
money to the King's use.

About this time died Samuel Harsenet Archbishop of York. He lies buried at
Chigwel Church in Essex, where he built a School.

Now the Sabbatarian controversy began to be revived. Theophilus Bradburn, a
Minister of Suffolk, had five years before set forth a book, Entitled. A
defense of the most ancient and Sacred Ordinance of God, the Sabbath Day.
Francis White now Bishop of Ely was employed by his Majesty to confute Mr.
Bradburn's erroneous opinion. In the writing whereof many strict people were
offended at some expressions dropping from his pen. Hereupon many Books were
wrote, and controversies on this subject were multiplied. These were
distinguished into three several opinions.

Sabbatarians. Moderate men. Anti-sabbatarians.
In Sommerset-shire some of the Justices were offended at the keeping of Wakes,
Church-ales, etc. on the Lord's day, which occasioned many disorders to be
committed. They moved the Lord Chief Justice Richardson, and Baron Denham then
in their circuit in the Lent-vacation to make some order therein. These in
compliance with their desire, make an Order to suppress such Revels, in regard
of the manifold inconveniences daily arising thereby, enjoining the Constables
to deliver Sir Rich. Baker's Chro.
a Copy thereof to the Minister of every Parish, who on the first Sunday in
Feburary, and likewise the two first Sundays before Easter, was to pub^ish the
same every year. This was looked upon by the Bishops as an Usurpation of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and they therefore procured a Commission directed
to the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and other Divines, and to enquire into the
manner of publishing this Order, and the carriage of the Judges in the
Business. Notwithstanding which, the Chief Justice at the next Assizes gave
strict charge against the Revels, requiring an account of the pub^ication and
execution of the former order, punishing some persons for the breach thereof.
This Order was af^erward revoked, And hereupon, the Justices of that County
made an humble supplication to the King for suppressing the foresaid Assemblies.

In this juncture of time a Declaration for sports on the Lord's day, published
in the Reign of King James, was revived, and enlarged. This gave great distaste
to many, and some Ministers were suspended, and some deprived ab officio and
beneficio; and more vexed in the Highcommission. All Bishops urged not the
reading of the Book with rigor alike, nor punished the refusal with equal
severity. The thickest complaints came from the Diocese of Norwich, and of Bath
and Wells. Much was the Archbishop's moderation in his own Diocese, silencing
but three (in whom also a concurrence of other Non-conformities) through the
whole extent thereof.

Here it is much to be lamented, that such who at the time of the Sabbatarian
controversy were the strictect observers of the Lord's day, are now become (in
another extreme) the greatest neglecters, yea contemners thereof.

Now such Irish Impropriations as were in the Crown, were by the King restored
to the Church, to the great Diminishing of the Royal Revenue. And Archbishop
Laud was a worthy Instrument in moving the King to so pious a work.

A Convocation (concurrent with a Parliament) was called, and held at Dublin in
Ireland, wherein the Nine and thirty Articles of the Church of England were
received in Ireland for all to subscribe to.

Dr. William Juxon Bishop of London, was made Lord Treasurer of England, whose
carriage was so discreet in that place, that it procured a general love to him.

Anno 1635. Archbishop Laud kept his Metropolitical Visitation, and
hence-forward Conformity was more vigorously pressed than before; Now many
differences about Divine Worship began to arise, and many Books were written
pro and con. One controversy was about the Holiness of our Churches. Another
about Adoration toward the Altar. A Controversy was also started about the
posture of the Lord's Board, Communion Table, or Altar. This last controversy
was prosecuted with much needless animosity. Indeed if moderate men had had the
managing of these matters, the accommodation had been easy.

In June Anno 1636. Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, were sentenced in
the High-commission-court. Some three years since Mr. Pyrnne set forth a Book,
called Histrio-mastrix, for which he was censured to lose his ears on the
Pillory, and for a long-time (after two removals to the fleet) Imprisoned in
the Tower: whence he dispersed New Pamphlets, against the established
Discipline of the Church of England, for which he was indicted in the
Star Chamber.

Dr. John Bastwick set forth a Book, Entitled Flagellum Pontificis, and
Episcoporum latialium, in a fluent Latin Style. He was accused in the
High Commission, committed to the Gate House, where he wrote a second Book,
taxing the injustice of the proceedings of the High Commission, for which he
was indicted in the Star Chamber.

Mr. Burton Preached a Sermon on the last fifth of November. On Prove. 24. 21.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
subject to change. This Sermon was afterward Printed, charging the Prelates for
Introducing several Innovations in Divine Worship, for which as a Libel, he was
indicted in the Starchamber. Mr. P^ynne's Plea is rejected, and his answer
refused; so is Dr. Bastwick's: and Mr. Burton's is cast out for imperfect. The
Censure of the Court was, that they should lose their ears in the Palaceyard at
Westminster, fining them also five thousand pounds a man to his Majesty, and
perpetual Imprisonment in three remote places. The Lord Finch added to Mr.
Prynne's Censure, that he should be branded in each Cheek with S. L. for a
slanderous Libeller, to which the whole Court agreed. Two days after, three
Pillories were set up in Palace-yard; or one double one, and a single one at
some distance, for Mr. Prynne, as the chief offender. Mr. Burton first
suffered, making a long speech in the Pillory, not entire; but interrupted with
occasional expressions; His ears were cut so close, that the Head-artery being
cut, the blood abundantly streamed down upon the Scaffold, at which he did not
shrink at all

Dr. Bastwick succeeded him. His friends highly* commended the erection of his
mind over pain and shame. Others conceived, that anger in him acted the part of
patience, as to the stout undergoing of his sufferings.

The Censure was with all rigor executed on Mr. Prynne, commended more for his
kindly patience than either of his Predecessors in that place. Not long after
they were removed, Mr. Prynne to Carnarvancastle in Wales; Dr. Bastwick and Mr.
Burton, the one to Lancastercastle; the other to Lanceston in Cornwall. The two
latter again were removed, one to the Isle of Scilly; the other to the Isle of
Gernezey, and Mr. Prynne to Mount-orguile-castle in Jersey.

Next came the Bishop of Lincoln to be Censured in the Star Chamber. The Bishop
of Lincoln censured.
After the great Seal some ten years since taken from him, he retired himself
to Bugden in Huntington-shire, where he lived very hospitably, and had great
concourse. Among others, Sir John Lamb, Dean of the Arches, formerly a
favorite of the Bishop of Lincoln (fetched off from being prosecuted in
Parliament, and Knighted by his means) with Dr. Sibthorp, Allen and Burden, two
Proctors, came to visit him: and being at dinner with him there was much
discourse about Nonconformists. The Bishop knowing these to be busy men in the
prosecution of such, advised them to take off their heavy hand from them,
informing them, that the King intended to use them hereafter with more mildness
etc. adding that He had communicated this unto him by his own mouth.

A few years after Sir John Lamb upon some difference with the Bishop, informed
against him for revealing the King's secrets; whereupon an Information was put
in against him in the Star Chamber, unto which Bishop Williams by good advice
of Counsel did plead and demurre, as containing no matter fit for the
Cognizance of that Court, as concerning word; spoken of matters done in
Parliament, and secrets pretended to be revealed by him, a Privy-counsellour,
and Peer of Parliament, and therefore not to be heard but in that high Court.
The Demurrer being rendered useless in the Bishop's Defense, he put in a strong
plea, which likewise being argued and debated in open Court, came at last to
the same fate with the demurrer, as referred to Judge Richardson, and smothered
by him in a Chamber.

This plea thus overruled, the Bishop put in a special answer to the
Information, declaring, how all was grounded by a Combination of the persons
named in the Bill, out of an intent to advance themselves, etc. To this special
answer, Attorney Noy rejoyned in issue, admitting the Bishop to prove his
special matters by his Witnesses. After a while, the Attorney being somewhat
remiss in the prosecution, one Richard Kilvert, became the Bishop's Prosecutor,
who had found out, that one John Prigion, a Register of Lincoln and Leicester,
was a most material Witness in the Bishop's defense, the credit of whose
testimony he desired to invalidate, by charging him with getting a Bastard on
one Elizabeth Hodson. This Bastard was by the Sessions at Lincoln, ordered to
be kept by Prigion, as the reputed Father thereof, but at a Sessions following,
the order was reversed, and the Child fathered on one Bourn, and Prigion
acquitted; and at a third Sessions it is returned upon Prigion again. This last
Order of Sessions was again dissolved as illegal, by the Judges of the King's
Bench, and Prigion cleared from the Child charged on him: in the doing whereof
it was said, that Powel and Owen, two Agents of the Bishops, did menace, and
tamper, with the Witnesses.

Hence-forward Kilvert let fall his first information in the Star Chamber, and
employed all his power on the proof of Subornation, and therein he succeeded.
The Bishop was fined eight thousand pounds, and a thousand marks to Sir John
Munson, with Suspension ab Officio, and Beneficio, and to be imprisoned during
ihe King's pleasure. All his Preferments in the Church were sequestered to the
use of the King; and the Archbishop of Canterbury, as Archbishop of the
Province, exercised all kind of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction throughout the
Diocese of Lincoln, not only as an Ordinary of that Diocese, but as Visitor of
all those Colleges, which had any dependence on that See. At the same time
were fined, with the Bishop, George Walker, his Secretary, Cadwallader Powel,
his Steward, at three hundred pounds a piece, and Thomas Lund, the Bishop's
Servant, at a thousand marks, all as Defendants in the same Cause; yet none of
them was imprisoned, save Lund for a few weeks, and their fine never called
upon to this day.

About four years after, viz. 1640. when this Bishop was fetched out of the
Tower, and restored a Peer in Parliament he therein presented several
grievances, concerning the prosecution of this Cause against him. And the
Parliament ordered all the Records of that Suit in the Star Chamber to be
obliterated.

In the year 1616. King James had obtained an Act of the General Sir Rich.
Baker^s Chron.
Assembly at Aberdeen, for the compiling a Liturgy, which was to be first
presented to the King, and, after his approbation, universally received
throughout the Kingdom. This Book was framed, and sent up to the King, who
himself perused, revised it, referring it also to the consideration of others,
in whom he much confided. And after his own and their Observation, Additions,
Expunctions, Mutations, etc. he returned it to Scotland, to be commended to
that Church: but before a period was put to that business, the King died.

King Charles understanding his Father's intention, in composing a Liturgy 1637.
for the Church of Scotland, orders the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop
of Ely, together with diverse other Bishops of both Nations, to revise and
correct (as they should think meet) the Liturgy compiled in his Father's
lifetime (which very little differs from that of England) orders it to be
sent to the Council in Scotland, to be made use of there.

On July twenty three, 1637. as the Dean of Edenborough began to read the Book
in St. Giles his Church, a sudden uproar began by the Lambert Wood of the Life
and Reign of King Charles.
women, and baser sort of people. The Bishop appointed to preach, goes into the
Pulpit, hoping to convince them of their irreverent carriage which nothing
prevailed; for they were the more insolent, flinging stools, stones, and
whatever else came next to hand, at him, so that he hardly escaped with life.
Diverse other Churches were infested with the like fury: but by the Industry of
the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Lord Chancellor, and other Magistrates, the
tumult was appeased, some were afterward apprehended, and endeavors made to
find out the first beginner.

But not long after, a great concourse of people, from all parts of that
Kingdom, came to Edinborough, which occasioned the Lords of the Council to put
forth several Proclamations to prevent the like disorders, but they nothing
prevailed. For, the next day, the Bishop of Galloway, going to the Council, was
followed by a great multitude reviling him until he came to the Council-door,
where he was no sooner entered, but they beset the House with very great
numbers, threatening destruction to all that were within. The Council require
aid of the Provost, and other Magistrates of the City, who return answer, that
they were in the like danger. The tumult still increasing, they of the City
were forced, for the safeguard of their own lives, to subscribe as follows.

1. To join in opposition to the Service Book, and to petition against it. 2.
To restore Ramsey and Rollock, two silenced Ministers. 3. To receive in Mr.
Henderson, formerly silenced.
Which being signed, the Council thought was a good step to suppress the
tumult. But entering into the High Street, the Lord Treasurer, and other Lords,
were fresh assaulted, trodden under foot, and brought back by violence to the
Council-house; where being in great danger, they require aid of diverse
Noblemen, disaffected to the Common Prayer Book, who promised what aid they
possibly could, and in the end returned home safe.

In the afternoon Pro^lamation was made at the Cross at Ebenborough, to prevent
the like disorders, but to small effect: some Citizens demanding the
Restitution of the Ministers, and the performance of what was subscribed.

Suddenly two Petitions were presented against the Common-prayerbook, and the
Composers and Abettors of it; which Petitions were sent to the King (with the
narrative of the whole) who immediately (...). Wood. History King Charles.
sent Instructions for adjourning the Term to Sterling, a strong place, and to
make Proclamation of severe penalties to be inflicted on the breakers of the
peace, which was no sooner proclaimed, but the Lord Hume, Lindsey, and diverse
others, protest against it, and in contempt of Authority compelled the Heralds
to hear the Protest, or Covenant read.

These troublesome beginnings, did afterward occasion the solemn League and
Covenant, whereby the greatest part of the Nation united themselves to defend
their Privileges, as was pretended, and which laid the foundation of a long
and woeful War in both Kingdoms.

They erected a new Government among themselves, which consisted of four Tables
for the four Orders of the State, viz. the Noblemen, Heylin on the life of
Archbishop Laud, part. 2.
Barons, Burgesses, and Ministers, These fixed themselves in Edenborough,
leaving the Lords of Council and Session to make merry at Sterling, where they
had little else to do than to follow their pleasures.

The Tables being formed, they resolved upon renewing the ancient Confession of
that Kirk, with a Band thereunto subjoyned, but accommodated to the present
occasion, which had been signed by King James on January 28. Anno 1580. And by
this Band they entered Covenant for maintenance of their Religion then
professed, and his Majesty's person; but aiming at the contrary. And to this
Covenant they required an Oath of all the Subjects, which was as great an
Usurpation of the Regal power, as they could take upon themselves, for
confirming their own authority, and the peoples obedience, in any project
whatsoever, which should afterward issue from those Tables.

Return we now to England, where we shall find things in a better condition, at
least to outward appearance. And now the Metropolitical visitation having been
carried into all parts of the Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, the
Archbishop of Canterbury began to cast his eye upon the Islands of Gu^rnsey and
Jersey, two Islands lying on the Coast of Normandy, to the Dukedom whereof they
once belonged, and in the Right of that Dukedom to the Crown of England. As
parts of Normandy they were subject in Ecclesiastical matters to the Bishops of
Constance in that Dukedom, and so continued till the Reformation of Religion
Heylin's Hist. of Arcbishop Laud. Ad An. 1637.
here in England, and were then added to the Diocese and Jurisdiction of the
Bishops of Winchester.

But the Genevian Discipline being more agreeable to such Preachers as came to
them from France, they obtained the exercise thereof in the eighth year of
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1565. The whole Government distinguished into two Classes,
both meeting in a Synod every second or third year, according to the order of
their Book of Discipline (digested by Snape and Cartwright) in a Synod held at
Guer^sey, June 28. 1576.

In this manner they continued till King James his time, when the Churches in
the Isle of Jersey, falling into some disorder, and being under an immediate
Governor, who was no great friend to Calvin's Platform, they were necessitated,
for avoiding a great mischief, to cast themselves into the Arms of the Church
of England.

The principal Ecclesiastical Officer, whilst they were under the Bishops of
Constance, had the Title of Dean, for each Island one; the several powers, both
of the Chanceslor and Archdeacon, being united in his Person.

This Office is restored again, his Jurisdiction marked out, his Fees
appointed, his Revenue settled; but made accountable for his Administration to
the Bishop's of Winchester.

The English Liturgy is translated also into French, to be read in their
Churches: Instructions first, and afterward a Body of Canons framed, for
regulating both Ministers and people in their several duties.

Now it was resolved, that the Metropolitical visitation should be held in each
of them at the next opening of the Spring. And the Archbishop had designed a
Person for his principal Visitor, who had spent some time in either Island, and
was well acquainted with the Bailiffs, Ministers, and Men of special note among
them. But the Affairs of Scotland growing worse, this Council was laid by.

But these Islands were not out of his mind. The Islanders used to breed such
of their Sons, as they designed for the Ministry, either at Saumur, or Geneva,
from whence they returned well-seasoned with Calvinism. Therefore to al^ure the
people to send their Children to Oxon, or Cambridge, he thought of providing
some preferment for them in our Universities.

It now happened, that one Hubbard the Heir of Sir Miles Hubbard, Citizen and
Alderman of London, died, to whom, upon an Inquis^tion taken after his death in
due form of Law, no Heir was found, which could lay claim to his Estate. Which
so unexpectedly fallen to the Crown, and being a fair Estate withal, the
Archbishop persuaded his Majesty to bestow some small part thereof upon pious
uses. And so much was allotted out of it, as, for the present, served
sufficiently to endow three Fellowships, for the perpetual education of so many
of the N^tives of Guernsey and Jersey. These Fellowships to be founded in
Exeter, Jesus, and Pembrook Colleges, that being dispersed into several Houses,
there might be an increase both of Fellows, and Revenues of the said
Foundations. By means whereof he did (as Doctor Heylin observes) both piously
and prudently provide for those Islands, and the advancement of Conformity
among them for the future.

It is not to be thought, that the Papists were all this while asleep. Pancani
arriving in England, brought with him many pretended Relics An. 1636.
of Saints, Medals* and pieces of Gold, with the Pope's Picture stamped upon on
them, to be distributed among those of the Party, but chiefly to the Ladies of
the Court, and Country, to whom he made the greatest part of his Applications.
Then he practiced upon some of the principal Lords, and used his best
endeavors to be brought into the acquaintance of the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. But his Grace neither liked the Man, nor the Message he came about,
and admitted him neither to complement, nor communication. However! the Popish
faction multiplying in some numbers about the Court, resorted more openly to
the Masses at Sommerset-house, where the Capuchins had obtained both a Chapel
and Convent. Of this none bears the blame but the Archbishop, who is traduced
in Libels, and common ^alk, for the principal Architect in the plot, and the
contriver of the mischief.

Awakened by so many Alarms, he had good cause to look about him, but more at
the great noise not long after raised about the seduceing of the Countess of
Newport, to the Church of Rome, effected by the practices of Walter Mountague,
a younger Son of the Earl of Manchester, and the importunities of Toby Mathews
(an undeserving Son of a worthy Father.) Con interposing in it as he found
occasion. Wherefore he passionately besought the King, that they might be
barred, either from coming into the Court at all, or to give no offense and
scandal to their misbehaviours. Hereupon Mountague, and Mathews, were
discharged the Court, the one betaking himself to his Countrey-practice, the
other for a time to his former Travels in France and Italy.

The next year he moved for a Proclamation, for the calling in of a Popish
Book, written in French by Francis Sales, Bishop of Geneva, translated into
English, entitled an Introduction to a holy life. The Printer was thereupon
apprehended, and the Translator diligently sought for to be brought to Justice.
His Majesty caused the said Book to be called in, and as many as could be
seized on, to be publicly burned.

But that which did most generally vindicate the Archbishop's reputation, was
the enlarging and re-printing of his Conference with Fisher the Jesuit, even
then when the Libellers were most fierce against him, to which he had been
moved by some private friends, and afterward advised to it by the King himself
at the Council. Table.

Now as he labored by these means to preserve the Church of England from the
growth of Popery, so he took care for preventing the subversion of it by the
spreading of Socinian Heresies. He also procured a Decree to pass in
Star Chamber, to regulate the Trade of Printing, and prevent all abuses of that
Excellent Art to the disturbance of the Church.

Many Lecturers, who had been super-inducted into other Men's Cures, Heylin's
Hist. of Archbish. Laud.
had deserted their Stations, because they would not read the Commonprayer in
their Hoods and Surplices. And as for the position of the Communion Table, it
was no longer left to private Instructions, as it was at the first. It now
began to be more openly avowed in the Visitation Articles of several Bishops
and Archdeacons.

The people in many trading Towns, which were near the Sea, having been long
discharged of the bond of Ceremonies, no sooner came to hear of the least noise
of a Conformity, but they spurn at it. And finding that they had lost the
comfort of their Lecturers, and that their Ministers began to shrink at the
name of a Visitation, it was no hard matter for those Ministers, and Lecturers,
to persuade them to remove their dwellings, and transport their Trades.

Among the first which separated upon this account, were Goodwyn, Nigh,
Buroughs, Bridge, and Symson, who taking some of their followers with them,
betook themselves unto Holland. Goodwyn and Nigh retired to Arnheim, a Town of
Gelderland; Symson and Bridge fixed at Rotterdam: where Buroughs placed
himself I am yet to seek. These men embraced Robinson's moddel of
Church Government in their Congregations, consisting of a co-ordination of
several Churches for their mutual comfort, not a subordination of one to the
other in the way of direction or command. Hence came that name of Independents,
continued unto those among us, who neither associate themselves with the
Prebyterians, nor embrace the frenzies of the Anabaptists But Rotterdam grew
too narrow a place for Bridge and Symson, and Symson was forced to leave it,
and Ward, who succeeded him, tarried not long. More unity there was at Arnheim.

But the Brethren of the Separation in England, desiring elbow-room, cast their
eye chiefly on New England, a Country first discovered, to any purpose, by
Captain Gosnold, Anno 1602. and in the next year surveyed more perfectly by
some of Bristol; afterward granted by King James, Anno 1606. unto a
Corporation of Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants, to be planted and disposed of
for the Public, under the direction of Chief Justice Popham, by whom a Colony
was sent thither in the year next following, at what time they built St.
George's Fort to secure their Haven. It never settled into form till the
building of New-Plinmouth, Anno 1620. New-Bristol, New-Boston, and
New-Barnstable, being quickly added to the other.

De Laet, a good Chorographer, informs us, in his Description of De Laet lib.
3. ca. 8.
America, that the first Planters, and those which followed after them, were
altogether of that Sect, which in England were called Brownists, many of which
had formerly betaken themselves to Holland but afterward departed thence to
join with their Brethren in New England. In this estate they stood, Anno 1633.
when John de Laet gave that character of them.

Whatsoever were the causes of their separation, Doctor Heylin says, the crime
was laid on the Archbishop of Canterbury: and among the Articles of his
Impeachment by the House of Commons, we find this for one, viz. That in his own
person, and his Suffragans, Visitors, Chancellors, etc. he had caused diverse
learned, pious, and orthodox Preachers of God's Word to be silenced,
susppended, deprived, excommunicated, or otherwise grieved, and vexed without
any just cause, etc. and caused diverse of his Majesty's Subjects to forsake the
Kingdom. Hereupon (says Doctor Heylin) so is the Judge to be accused for all
those mischiefs, which the condemned Malefactors, when they once break prison,
may design, and execute. And (says my Author further) the principal
Bell-weathers of these Flocks were Cotton, Chauncy, Wells, Hooker, and perhaps
Hugh Peter's.

It was once under consultation to send a Bishop over to them, for their better
government, and back him with some Forces to compel, if he he were not
otherwise able to persuade, obedience.

But this design was strangled in the first conception, by the violent
breakings out of the Troubles in Scotland, where the Covenanters now began to
raise Arms, levy Soldiers, invite home their Commanders abroad, impose Taxes
upon the people, seize some of the King's Castles, raise Fortifications,
prepare for a War, and chose old David Lesley for their General.

To pacify these distempers, Hamilton is designed for the King's
High-Commissioner Saunderson of the Reign of King Charles.
into Scotland. The Bishops, and others, advised the King to have delegated the
Marquess of Huntley for his High-Commissioner, to manage the Affairs of
Scotland. Hamilton trifleth away the time from July 32. 1637. until June 6.
1638. with Declarations, Proclamations, Messages, Letters, while the Scots
raised Officers, Arms, Ammunition from abroad: four months more in vain
Disputes, and three Journeys to the King, and back again, with the expense of
so much money as might have reduced them by reward, or power. On May 26. he
sets forward for Scotland, and coming to Edenborough, puts himself into
Holy-Rood-house, where the first thing he did was, the waving of his attendance
at the reading of the English Liturgy. Then he published the King's gracious
Proclamation for the nulling of Service Book and High Commission, promising an
Assembly to be held at Glascow, November 21. 1638. and a Parliament at
Edenborough, May 15. 1639. But nothing satisfied.

But before the Assembly at Glascow was indicted, the Covenanters had so laid
the plot, that none but those of their own party should have suffrage in it,
not suffering the Archbishops and Bishops to sit as Moderators in their
Presbyteries. where the Elections were to pass; and citing them to appear as
Criminal persons at the said Assembly. The Archbishops, and Bishops, in the
name of themselves and of all their Adherents, prepared their declinator, or
protestation against the said General Assembly, and all the Acts and
Conclusions of it, as being void and null in Law to all intents and purposes
whatsoever: The day being come, Hamilton marches to the place appointed for
the Session, in the equipage of an High-Commissioner, the Sword and Seal being
carried before him, etc. The reading of his Commission, the putting in and
rejecting of the declinator, the choosing of Henderson to be Moderator of the
Assembly, the constituting of the Members of it, and some debates touching
Votes and Suffrages, challenged by Hamilton for such as were Assessors to him,
took up all their time, betwixt their first meeting and their dissolution,
which was by proclamation solemnly declared on the twenty ninth of the same
month.

But notwithstanding the said dissolution, the Members of the said Assembly
continued their Session, and therein passed many Acts for the utter overthrow
of the Polity and Government of the Church. They not only excommunicated the
Bishops and their Adherents, but condemned the very Function it self to be
Antichristian, and utterly to be abolished out of the Church. The like censure
also they passed on the Service Book and the Canons, with the five Articles of
Perth, and all the Arminian Tenets in case of Predestination, and declared all
men subject to excommunication, and all other censures of the Church, who
should refuse to yield obedience to all their determinations. And albeit his
Majesty, by the same Proclamation, had commanded all his Subjects not to yield
obedience to any of their Acts and Ordinances, yet those of the Assembly were
resolved to maintain their Authority: and not only the Bishops and Clergy, but
also as many of the Laity as had refused to subscribe to the Acts thereof, were
deprived of their Offices and Preferments, banished their Country, and forced
to fly into England, or other places, the King being unable to protect them
from the power and malice of their Adversaries.

The King now thinks of raising an Army against the Scots: and a Sir Rich.
Baker^s Chron.
Loan, for the King's assistance against the Scots, is subscribed by many Lords
of the Council, and Bishops, etc. Cardinal Richlieu was no small Incendiary in
this business betwixt the King and Scots, who sent his Chaplain, and Almoner,
Mr. Thomas Chamberlain, a Scotch-man, to assist the Confederates in advancing
the business, and to attempt all ways of exasperation, and not to depart from
them till he might return with good news in this project.

About the latter end of this year died John Spottiswood, Archbishop of St.
Andrews, at London, and was buried near unto King James in the Abbey-church of
Westminster.

The King began his journey toward the North on March twenty seven, his Army
being advanced before, the chief command whereof was committed to the Earl of
Arundel.

The Scots presented a Petition to the King at his Camp near Berwick. And
Commissioners being on both sides appointed, they came at last to this
conclusion, on June 17. viz. first, That his Majesty should confirm whatsoever
his Commissioner has already granted in his Majesty's name, and that from
thenceforth all matters Ecclesiastical should be determined by the Assemblies
of the Kirk, and all matters civil by the Parliament: and to that end a General
Assembly to be indicted on the sixth of August, and a Parliament on the
twentieth of the same month, in which Parliament an Act of Oblivion was to pass
for the common peace and satisfaction of all parties: that the Scots, upon the
publication of the accord, should within forty eight hours disband all their
Forces, discharge all pretended Tables and Conventicles, restore unto the King
all his Custles, Forts, and Ammunition of all sorts: the like restitution to be
made to all his good Subjects of their liberties, lands, goods, etc. taken and
detained from them, since the late pretended General Assembly at Glascow: that
thereupon the King should presently recall his Fleet, and retire his
Landforces, and cause restitution to be made to all persons of their goods
detained, and arrested, since the first of February.

But as for the proceedings of the Assembly at Glascow, they seem to have been
left in the same condition in which they stood before his Majesty's taking
Arms. And the King doing nothing to the abrogating of them, when he was in the
Head of a powerful Army, he could not expect, that the Scots could yield to any
such abrogation, when he had no such Army to compel obedience.

And this immediately appeared on his Majesty's signing the Agreement, and
discharging his Army thereupon.

For the Covenanters, upon the declaration of this accord, produced a
Protestation.

First, Of adhering to their late General Assembly at Glascow, and to all the
proceedings there, especially the sentences of Deprivation, and
Excommunication, of the sometimes pretended Bishops of that Kingdom, as they
were termed.

Secondly, Of adhering to their solemn Covenant, and declaration of the
Assembly, whereby the Office of Bishops is abjured.

Thirdly, That the Bishops have been malicious Incendiaries of his Majesty
against this Kingdom by their wicked calumnies; and that if they return to this
Kingdom, they be esteemed, and used, as accursed, etc.

Fourthly, That all the entertainers of the excommunicated Bishops should be
orderly proceeded against with Excommunication, conform to the Acts and
Constitutions of this Kirk.

They continued their Meetings, and Consultations, as before they did,
maintained their Fortifications at Leith, the Port-town to Edenborough, and
kept their Officers and Commanders in continual pay. His Majesty hereupon sent
for some of the Chiefs of them to come unto him to Berwick, but was refused in
his Commands. The Earls of Kinnoul, and Traquair, Chief Justice Elphinston, and
Sir James Hamilton, all Privy Counselors, were pulled violently out of their
Coach, on a suspicion that some Bishops were disguised among them; that the
King might have some cause to suspect, that there could be no safety for him in
such a place, and among people so enraged, notwithstanding his great clemency
toward them in the pacification.

In this condition of Affairs his Majesty returned toward London in the
Heylin's Hist. of Archbish. Laud. part. 2.
end of July 1639. leaving the Scots to play their own game as they listed;
having first nominated Traquair, as his High-Commissioner, for managing both
the Assembly and the following Parliament.

In the first meeting of the two, they acted over all the parts they had played
at Glascow, to the utter abolition of Episcopacy, and the ruin of all that
adhered to it, their actings in it being confirmed in his name by the
High Commission.

The news whereof caused the King to send for the Lord Wentworth out of
Ireland, who was presently made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and not long after,
with great solemnity, created Earl of Strafford in the County of York. As Lord
Lieutenant he had power to appoint a Deputy, that he might the better attend
the service here without any prejudice to that Kingdom: which Office he
committed to Wansford, a Yorkshire Gentleman, whom he had took along with him
into Ireland at his first going thither.

His Majesty was pleased to commit the conduct of the Scottish Affairs to a
Juncto of three, namely, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford,
and the Marquess of Hammilton.

These three move his Majesty to call a Parliament: and it was concluded, that
a Parliament should be called on April 13. 1640. In the mean time the Lord
Lieutenant held a Parliament in Ireland, and so governed the affair, that an
Army of eight thousand Horse and Foot was speedily raised, and money granted by
the Parliament to keep them in pay, to furnish them with Ammunition, Arms, and
all other necessaries.

And the Lords of the Council here subscribed largely for the carrying on of
the War, until such time as the Parliament should convene.

The Scots being informed of the King's preparation for a War, sent the Earl of
Dumferling, the Lord Loudon, Sir William Douglas, and Mr Barkham, to represent
the Affairs of their transactions, which were received by the King in a
friendly manner.

Some days being unprofitably spent in these debates, the Archbishop, and the
rest of the Committee delegated for this business, made a report of the whole
business to the rest of the Council, who came to this result, That since the
Scots could not be reclaimed to their obedience by other means, they were to be
reduced by force.

Therefore the Scots as much bestirred themselves on the other side. Part of
the walls of Edenborough-castle, with all the Ordnance upon it, had fallen down
on the nineteenth of November last, being the Anniversary day of his Majesty's
birth, for the repair whereof they would neither suffer Timber, nor other
Materials, to be carried to it: but on the contrary, they began to raise
Fortifications against it, with an intent to block it up, and render it
unuseful to his Majesty's service. Neither would they suffer the Soldiers to
come into the Market to recruit their victuals. They made provisions of great
quantity of Artillery, Munition, and Arms, from foreign parts; laid Taxes of
ten Marks in the hundred upon all the Subjects; scattered abroad many seditious
Pamphlets, for justifying themselves, and seducing others; some of which were
burnt, in England, by the hand of the Hangman; fortified Inchgarvy, and other
places; imprisoned the Earl of Southesk* and other Persons of Quality, for
their fidelity to the King: took to themselves the government of Edenborough;
and employed their Emissaries in England, to solicit them to aid them in
maintaining the War against their Sovereign.

But their chief corespondence was with France, and Ireland. In France they had
made sure of Cardinal Richlieu, who governed all Affairs in that Kingdom. In
Ireland they had a strong party of natural Scots, planted in Vlster by King
James, upon the forfeited Estates of Tir-Owen, Tir-Connel, Odighirty, etc. But
Wentworth crushed them in the beginning of the combination, seizing upon such
Ships and Men as came thither from Scotland, imprisoning some, fining others,
and putting an Oath upon the rest. By which Oath they were bound to abjure the
Covenant, not to aid the Covenanters against the King, nor to protest against
any of his royal Edicts, as their Brethren in Scotland use to do: for the
refusing of which Oath, he fined one Sir Henry Steward, and his Wise, at no
less than five thousand pound a piece, two of their Daughters, and one James
Gray of the same confederacy, at the sum of three thousand pound a piece,
committing them to prison for not paying the fines imposed on them.

Some Scots having endeavored to betray the Town and Castle of Carick-fergus
to a Nobleman of that Country, the principal Conspirator was executed.

Finally, The Lord Lieutenant gave a power to the Bishop of Down and Connor,
and other Bishops of that Kingdom, and their several Chancellors, to attach the
bodies of all such of the meaner sort, who either should refuse to appear
before them upon citation, or to perform all lawful Decrees, and Orders, made
by the said Bishops, etc. and to commit them to the next Gaol, till they should
conform, or answer the contempt at the Council Table. By means whereof the
poorer sort became very obedient to their several Bishops.

In the mean time the Archbishop of Canterbury is intent on the preservation of
the Hierarchy, and the Church of England, against the practices of the Scots,
and Scotizing English: and no less busied in digesting an Apology for
vindicating the Liturgy commended to the Kirk of Scotland. He took order for
translating the Scottish Liturgy into the Latin Tongue, that being published
with the Apology which he had designed, it might give satisfaction to the world
of his Majesty's Piety, and his own great care, the orthodoxy and simplicity of
the Book it self, and the perverseness of the Scots in refusing all of it.
Which Work was finished, and left with him: the present distemper of the times,
and the troubles which fell heavily on him, putting an end to it in the first
beginning.

He recommended to Doctor Hall, then Bishop of Exon, the writing of a Book in
defense of the Divine right of Episcopacy, in opposition to the Scots and their
Adherents.

Exeter having undertaken it, sent the first delineations of the Pourtracture
to Lambeth in the end of October, which were generally well approved of by the
Metropolitan: who having made some alterations, sent them back with many kind
expressions of a fair acceptance. And such was the freedom he used in declaring
his judgment in the case; and such the Authority which his Reasons carried
along with them, that the Bishop of Exon found good cause to correct his Opinon
according to the Rules of these Animadversions; agreeable unto which the Book
was writ, and published not long after, under the name of Episcopacy by Divine
right, etc.

Whilst the Archbishop labored to support Episcopacy on the one side, some of
the adverse party labored as much to suppress it, by lopping off the branches
first, and afterward by laying the Axe to the root of the Tree. Bagshaw, a
Lawyer of some standing, of the Middle Temple, began to question the Bishop's
place and vote in Parliament, their Temporal power, and the authority of the
Commission. For being chosen Reader, by that House for the Lent-vacation, he
first selected for the Argument of his discoursings, the Statute of 25 Edw. 3.
cap. 7. His main design was intended chiefly for the defense of such
Prohibitions, as formerly had been granted by the Courts in Westminster Hall,
to stop the proceedings of the Court-Christian, and specially of the
High Commission, and in the next place to deny the Authority of the Commission
it self, as before was noted. Hereupon the Archbishop informs his Majesty both
of the Man and of his design, how far he had gone in justifying the proceedings
of the Scottish Covenanters, in decrying the temporal power of Churchmen, and
the undoubted right of Bishops to their place in Parliament: his Majesty
hereupon gives order to Finch, the new Lord Keeper, to interdict all further
Reading on those points. Hereupon it was soon found, that nothing could be done
therein without leave from the King, and no such leave to be obtained without
the consent of the Archbishop. To Lambeth therefore goes the Reader, where he
found no admittance till the third Address, and was then told, That he was
fallen upon a Subject neither safe nor seasonable, which should stick closer to
him then he was aware of. Whereupon Bagshaw hasteneth out of Town.

The Parliament came together on April 13. 1640. instead of acting Short view
of the life and Reign of King Charles, p. 77.
any thing for his Majesty's service, they were at the point of passing a Vote
for blasting his War against the Scots. To prevent which, his Majesty was
forced to dissolve them on May 5. the Convocation still continuing, who granted
him a Benevolence of four shillings in the pound for all their Ecclesiastical
promotions, to be paid six years together then next ensuing.

The Convocation sat after the breaking up of the Parliament. A new Commission
was brought from his Majesty, by virtue whereof they were warranted to sit
still, not in the capacity of a Convocation, but of a Synod, to prepare their
Canons for the Royal assent thereunto. But Doctor Br^wnrigg, Doctor Hacket,
Doctor Holdsworth, Mr. Warmstrey, with others, to the number of thirty six (the
whole House consisting of about sixscore) protested against the continuance of
the Convocation. To satisfy these, an Instrument was brought into the Synod,
signed with the hands of the Lord Privy Seal, the two chief Justices, and other
Judges, justifying their so sitting in the nature of a Synod, to be legal
according to the Laws of the Realm. Now their disjoynted meeting being set
together again, they consulted about new Canons.

I shall set down the number, and titles, of the several Canons. 1. Concerning
the Regal power. 2. For the better keeping of the day of his Majesty's
Inauguration. 3. For suppressing of the growth of Popery. 4. Against
Socinianism. 5. Against Sectaries. 6. An Oath enjoined for the preventing of
all Innovations in Doctrine and Government, 7. A Declaration concerning some
Rites and Ceremonies, 8. Of preaching for Conformity. 9. One Book of Articles
of enquiry to be used at all Parochial visitations. 10. Concerning the
Conversation of the Clergy. 11. Chancellors Patents. 12. Chancellors alone not
not to censure any of the Clergy in sundry cases. 13. Excommunication, and
Absolution, not to be pronounced but by a Priest. 14. Concerning the
Commutations, and the disposing of them. 15. Concerning some Concurrent
Jurisdictions. 16. Concerning Licenses to marry. 17. Against vexatious
Citations.


The Oath it self I shall set down, as I find it in the Life of Archbishop
Laud, written by Doctor Heylin, in this form following, viz. I A. B. do swear,
That I do approve the Doctrine, and Discipline, or Government established in
the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to salvation; And
that I will not endeavor by my self, or any other, directly, or indirectly, to
bring in any Popish doctrine, contrary to that which is so established. Nor
will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this Church by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, etc. As it stands now
established, and as by right it ought to stand; nor yet ever subject it to the
usurpations and superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do
plainly and seriously acknowledge and swear, according to the plain and common
sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental
evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly
and truly, upon the faith of a Christian. So help me God in Jesus Christ.



Toward the close of the Convocation, Doctor Griffith made a motion, that there
might be a new Edition of the Welsh Church-bible, some sixty years first
translated into Welsh by the endeavors of Bishop Morgan, but not without many
mistakes and omissions of the Printer. The matter was committed to the care of
the Welsh Bishops, but nothing was effected therein.

Near the ending of the Synod Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, privately
acquainted the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he could not in his Conscience
subscribe the new Canons. The Archbishop being present with the Synod in King
Henry the Seventh his Chapel, said unto him, My Lord of Gloucester, I admonish
you to subscribe: and presently after, My Lord of Gloucester, I admonish you the
second time to subscribe: and immediately after, I admonish you to subscribe.
To all which the Bishop pleaded Conscience, and returned a denial. Some days
after he was committed to the Ga^e-house. Soon after the same Canons were
subscribed at York, and on the last of June following the said Canons were
publicly printed, with the Royal assent affixed thereunto.

Various were men's censures upon these Canons. But most took exception Fuller.
Church History. ad An. 1640.
against that clause in the Oath, We will never give any consent to alter this
Church-governmet, as if the same were intended to abridge the liberty of King
and State in future Parliaments, and Convocations, if hereafter they saw cause
to change any thing therein. Yet others with a favorable sense endeavored to
qualify this suspicious clause, whereby the taker of this Oath was tied up
from consenting to any alteration, saying, that these words, [We will never
give any consent to alter] are intended here to be meant only of a voluntary
and pragmatical alteration, when men conspire and endeavor to change the
present Government of the Church, in such particulars as they do dislike,
without the consent of their Superiors.

Bishop Goodman, on July the tenth, made acknowledgment of his fault before the
Lords of the Council, and took the Oath enjoined in the sixth Canon, for
preserving the Doctrines and Discipline of the Church of England, against all
Popish doctrines which were thereunto repugnant. Upon the doing whereof he was
restored, by his Majesty, to his former liberty. Yet in the time of his last
sickness, it is said, that he declared himself to be a Member of the Church of
Rome, and caused it so to be expressed in his last Will and Testament.

On December 27. 1639. at night, and the night following, there was such a
violent Tempest, that many of the Boats, which were drawn to Land at Lambeth,
were dashed one against the other, and were broke to pieces: and that the
shafts of two Chimneys were blown down upon H^ylin's Hist. of Archbishop Laud.
ad ^n. 1640.
the roof of the Archbishop's Chamber, and beat down both the Lead and Rafters
upon his Bed, in which ruin he must needs have perished, if the roughness of
the Water had not forced him to keep his Chamber at White Hall.

A like mischance happened the same night at Croydon (a retiring place
belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury) where one of the Pinacles fell from
the Steeple, beat down the Lead and Roof of the Church above twenty foot square.

But that which was more remarkable than either of these, was that which
happened the same night at Canterbury, in the Metropolitical Church, where one
of the Pinacles upon the top of the Belfrey-Tower, which carried a Vane with
this Archbishop's Arms upon it, was violently struck down, but born a good
distance from the Steeple, to fall upon the Roof of the Cloister, where the
Arms of the Archiepiscopal See it self were engraven in Stone: which Arms
being broke to pieces by the fall of the other: on Friday night, January 24.
1639. he dreamed, that his Father (who died 46. years before) came to him,
being to his thinking seemingly well and cheerful, that his Father asked him,
what he did there: that after some speech, he demanded of his Father how long
he would stay there; and that his Father made this answer, he would stay till
he had him along with him. Which made such an impression on him, that he
thought fit to remember this in his Breviate.

A brute being spread abroad, That the late Parliament had been dissolved by
his procurement; a paper was pasted up at the Exchange, by John Lilburn,
animating the Apprentices to sack his House at Lambeth, on the Monday
following, and that night we was assaulted by five hundred of the Rabble, who
strove to force an entrance, but were repulsed. And having fortified his House
with some pieces of Canon, he withdrew to his Chamber at Whitehall till the
Rage of the people was blown over. Some of the principal Actors in this
Sedition being apprehended and committed to the Goal in Southwark, were
forcibly delivered by others of their Accomplices, who brake open that and all
other Prisons in that precinct, for which one Benstead, one of the Ring,
leaders was retaken, arraigned, condemned, hanged, drawn and quartered, on May
21. Yet for all this, Libels were scattered against the Archbishop in most
parts of the City. And his Majesty being then newly gone in person with an Army
against the Sco^s, about the end of August a paper was dropped in Covent Garden,
encouraging the Soldiers and Apprentices to fall upon him, yet was there no
tumult raised upon it.

Then he gave order, that the High Commission should be kept at St. Paul's: and
the Commissioners sitting there, on October 22. were violently assaulted by a
mixed multitude of Sectaries, to the number of two thousand, crying out, They
would have no Bishops, nor High Commission. In which tumult having frighted
away the Judges, Advocates, and Officers of the Court, they brake down all the
seats and benches which they found in the Consistory; so that a guard was set
upon that Church, as before at Westminster, not only at the next sitting of
the said Commissioners, but at the first meeting of the Convocation, which soon
after followed.

The Scots were now entered the Realm in hostile manner: and having put by his
Majesty's Forces at a place called Newbourn, they passed over the Tine, and
presently made themselves Masters of the strong Town of New Castle, his
Majesty's Forces not very far distant. Many of the King's own Soldiers in
their marchings through the Country, brake into Churches, pulled up the
Rayles, threw down the Communion Tables, defaced the Common Prayer Books, tore
the Surplices, etc.

The Scots set forth a Remonstance, wherein it was declared, That their
Propositions and desires could find no access unto the ears of the Gracious
King, by reason of the powerful Diversion of the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the Deputy of Ireland, etc. who did only side in all matters of Temporal and
Spiritual Affairs, etc. This Remonstrance was seconded with another Pamphlet,
called, The Intention of the Army. They signified therein, that they had no
design to wast the goods of the People of England, or spoil their Country; but
only to become petitioners to his Majesty to call a Parliament, and to bring
the said Archbishop and Lord Lieutenant to their condign punishments. And that
the English might the better see whom they chiefly aimed at, a Book was
published by the name of Laudensium Autocatacrisis, or the Canterburians
self-conviction.

Upon this his Majesty was assaulted by a Petition from some Lords in H^ylin.
Hist. of Archbi^h. ^aud.
the South, wherein complaint was made of the many inconveniences which had
been drawn on this Kingdom, by the King's ingagings against the Scots, as also
of the growth of Popery; of the pressing of the present payment of Ship Money;
the dissolving of former Parliaments, Monopolies, Innovations, and some other
grievances, among which the Canons which were made in the late Convocation,
could not be omitted. For remedy whereof, His Majesty is desired to call a
Parliament, etc. Subscribed by diverse of the Nobility, presented to the King at
York on September 3. and seconded by another from the City of London to the
same effect.

The King therefore resolves to hold a Parliament, and on November 3. 1640.
that long lasting Parliament began. A Letter was writ to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, advertising, That the Parliament of the twentieth year of King
Henry the Eighth, which began in the fall of Cardinal Wolsey, continued in the
Diminution of the Power and Privileges of the Clergy, and ended in the
dissolution of the Abbeys and Religious Houses, was begun on the third day of
November: and therefore that, for good-luck-sake, he would move the King to
respite the first sitting of it for a day or two longer. But the Archbishop
hearkened not to this advertisement, and the Parliament began at the time
appointed.

On the morrow after began the Convocation at St. Paul's Church, handselled at
their first meeting by the news of the Decease of Dr. Neile, Archbishop of
York. But little was done in this Convocation, but that a motion was made by Mr.
Warmstrey (a Clerk for Worcester) That they should endeavor (according to the
Levitical Law) to cover the pit which they had opened, and to prevent their
Adversaries intention, by condemning such offensive Canons as were made the
last Convocation. But they were loath to confess themselves guilty before they
were accused.

Soon after Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton were discharged out of
prison, and brought with great Triumph into London. Bishop Williams and Mr.
Osbaston, being remitted their fines, were restored to their Livings and
Liberty. Doctor Pocklington, and Doctor Bray were censured; the former for
Preaching and Printing, the latter for Licensing two Books, one called Sunday
no Sabbath: the other The Christian Alter.

Not many days after the Earl of Strafford was impeached of High Treason, by
Mr. Pym, in fourteen Articles. The Earl was forthwith Sequestered the House, and
committed to the Black Rod, and sent not long after to the Tower.

December 18. Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Wren, were voted by the Commons,
Guilty of High Treason, and a charge was immediately brought in against Bishop
Laud, upon the Reading of which on March 1. he was sent to the Tower.

The same month Alderman Pennington, with a great multitude out of London,
petitioned the House against Episcopal Government, and the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church. A Committee was appointed to consider of matters of Religion,
settled in the Upper House of Parliament. Ten Earls, ten Bishops, ten Barons. At
the same time the Lords appointed a Sub-committee, to prepare matters fit for
their cognizance (the Bishop of Lincoln having the Chair in both) authorized to
call together diverse Bishops and Divines, to consult together for correcting
what was amiss, and to settle peace, viz.

The Archbishop of Armagh. The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of Exeter. Dr.
Samuel Ward. Dr. William Twisse. Dr. Robert Sanderson. Dr. Daniel Featley. Dr.
Ralph Brownrigg. Dr. Richard Holdsworth. Dr. John Hacket. Dr. Cornelius
Burgess. Mr. John White. Mr. Stephen Marshall. Mr. Edmond Calamy. Mr. Thomas
Hill.
The place of their meeting was Jerusalem-chamber in the Dean of Westminster's
house, where they had solemn debates six several days.

First they consult on innovations in Doctrine. Then they enquire into
Preter-canonical conformity, and innovations in Discipline; and concerning the
Common Prayer. Lastly, they entered on the Regulating of Ecclesiastical
Government, which was not brought in, because the Bishop of Lincoln had
undertaken the draught thereof, but not finished it, as employed at the same
time in many weighty matters of State. This consultation continued till the
middle of May. But the Bill against Deans and Chapters, put such a distance
between the foresaid Divines, that never their Judgments (and scarce their
persons) met after together.

The Canons made in the late Convocation were condemned in the House of
Commons, as being against the King's Prerogative, the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and containing diverse other
things tending to Sedition, and of dangerous consequence.

Many things were charged against the Archbishop by the Scots Commissioners,
viz.

That he had pressed upon that Kirk, many Innovations in Religion, contained in
the Liturgy and Book of Canons, contrary to the Liberties and Laws thereof.

That he had required Ballentine, Bishop of Dumblane, and the rest of the
Bishops to be present at the Divine Service in their Whites, and blamed the
said Bishop for his negligence in it, etc.

That he gave order for the taking down Stone-walls and Galleries in the
Churches of Edenborough, to no other end but for the setting up of Altars, and
Adoration toward the East.

That for their Supplicating against these Novations, they were declared Rebels
in all the Parish-Churches of England, and a War kindled against them by his
Arts and Practices.

That their Covenant by him was called ungodly, and that diverse Oaths were
imposed upon their Contrymen to abjure the same.

That he in the presence of the King spared not to rail against the General
Assembly held at Glascow, and put his hand to a Warrant for imprisoning some of
those Commissioners sent from the Parliament of Scotland, for the Peace of both
Nations.

That when the late Parliament could not be moved to assist in the War against
them, he had caused the same to be dissolved, and continued the Convocation, to
make Canons against them and their Doctrines, etc.

Such was the charge exhibited by the Scots Commissioners, in which many
thought there was nothing criminal enough to deserve Imprisonment, much less to
menace him with death.

The Bishop of Ely was impeached for many reputed misdemeanors in the Sea of
Norwich. That he deprived or banished, within the space of two years, fifty
Godly, Learned, Painful Ministers. His placing the Communion Table Altar-wise,
and causing a Rayl to be set before it. The practicing of Superstition in his
own person, his bowing toward it; Consecrating the Bread and Wine at the
West Side of the Table, with his back toward the people, and elevating the same
above his Head, that the people might see it, causing the seats in all places
to be so contrived, that the people must of necessity kneel toward the East.
Appointing no Prayers to be used by Preachers before their Sermons, but that
prescribed by the Canon, etc.

In the midst of these troublesome times died Dr. John Davenant, Bishop 1641.
of Salisbury. A little before his death he prayed emphatically for half a
quarter of an hour. Among many heavenly passages therein, He thanked God for
this his fatherly correction, because in all his lifetime he never had any one
heavy affliction, which made him often much suspect with himself, whether he
was a true child of God or no.

Deans and Chapters being now opposed by Parliament, the Cathedral-men
endeavor to preserve their Foundations; and by their friends obtain leave to
be admitted into the House of Commons, and to be heard what they could allege
in their own behalf. They made choice of Doctor John Hacket, Prebendary of St.
Paul's to be the mouth for all the rest.

He showed, that to supply the defects of Prayer committed by private Fuller.
Church Hist. Cen^. 17. lib. 11.
men, the public duty thereof should be constantly performed in some principal
place (in imitation of the Primitive practice) and this is done in Cathedrals.
He spoke much also in praise of Church-musick, when moderated to Edification.
He took occasion to refell that slander, which some cast on Lecture-preachers,
as an upstart Corporation, alleging, that the local Statutes of most, or all
Cathedral Churches, do require Lectures on the weekdays. And in the name of
his Brethren, he requested that Honorable House, that godly and profitable
Preaching might be the more exacted. Then he insisted on the advancement of
Learning, as the proper use and convenience of Cathedrals, each of them being a
small Academy for the Champions of Christ's cause, against the Adversaries, by
their Learned pens. Here he proffered to prove by a Catalogue of their Names
and Works, which he could produce, that most excellent labors in this kind
(excepting some few) have preceeded from persons preferred in Cathedrals: Now
what a disheartning would it be to young Students, if such promotions were
taken away. He alleged also, that the ancient and genume use of Deans and
Chapters; was as Senatus Episcopi, to assist the Bishop in his jurisdiction. He
said, that Cathedral-Churches were the first Monuments of Christianity in
England.

From things he passed to persons, and began with the multitude of such
members, as had maintenance from Cathedrals, the total amounting to many
thousands; All which by the dissolution of Deans and Chapters must be exposed
to poverty. Next, he instanced in their Tenants, who holding Leases from Deans
and Chapters, are sensible of their own happiness (as enjoying six parts of
seven in pure gain) and therefore have petitioned the House to continue their
Ancient Landlords. Moreover, such Cities wherein Cathedrals stand (if Maritime)
being very poor in Trade, are enriched by the hospitality of the Clergy, and
the frequent resort of Strangers unto them. Then he showed, that diverse of low
degree, but generous Spirits, would labor by qualifying themselves by Industry
and Virtue, to attain a share of Cathedral endowments, as the common possession
of the Realm, etc. He trusted their Honors would account it reasonable, that
the Clergy had in some sort a better maintenance than in neighboring reformed
Churches, and not with J^roboam's Priests to be the basest of the people.

Then he instanced in some famous foreign Protestants, who had found relief by
being installed Prebendaries in our Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, as Dr.
Saravia preferred by Queen Elizabeth, Dr. Casaubon (Father and Son) by King
James, Dr. Primrose, Mr. Vossius, in the reign of King Charles, and Dr. Peter
Du-Moulin. And to destroy Deans and Chapters would highly gratify Rome; for
Sanders himself seems to complain, that Queen Elizabeth had left Provosts,
Deans, Canons, and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, because
he foresaw such Foundations would conduce to the stability of Religion.

He went forward to show how such Lands paid greater sums to the Exchequer for
First Fruits, tenths and subsidies, according to the proportion, than any other
Estates and Corporations in the Kingdom. He implored to find the ancient and
honorable Justice of the House unto his Brethren, who were not charged, much
less convicted of any Scandalous faults justly for the same to forfeit their
estates. At last he set before them the Honor of God, to whose worship and
service such Fabrics and Lands were dedicated, and barred all alienations with
(which he said, is termenda vox) curses and imprecations. He minded them of the
censures of Korah and his Accomplices, pronounced hallowed, because pretended to
do God service therewith. He added that of Solomon, Prove. 20. 25. It is a snare
to a man that devoureth that which is holy. He added also that smart question
of St. Paul, Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? and
concluded, that on the ruins of the rewards of Learning, no structure can be
raised but ignorance, and upon the Chaos of ignorance, nothing can be built but
Profaneness and Confusion. This speech was generally well-resented, and wrought
much on the House for the present.

In the afternoon Dr. Cornelius Burgess made a vehement Invective against
Deans and Chapters, etc. He aggravated the debauchedness of Singing men, not
only useless, but hurtful by their Vicious conversation: Yet he concluded with
the utter unlawfulness to convert such endowments to any private person's
profit.

Then was a Bill brought up from the Commons to the Lords against Bishops and
Clergymen: and it was Voted.

I. That they should have no Votes in Parliament. II. That they should not be
in the Commission of the Peace, nor be Judges in Temporal Courts. III. Nor sit
in the Star Chamber, nor be Privy Counselors.
The last branches of this Bill passed by general consent, not above two
dissenting. But the first branch was Voted by the Lords in the negative. But at
last it was wholly cast out.

The Archbishop advised the drawing of a Petition to both Houses of Parliament
in the name of the University of Oxford, not only for the preservation of
Episcopal Government, but of those Foundations, as being both the
encouragements and rewards of Learning. In which petition having spoken, in few
words, of the Antiquity and Succession of Bishops, from the Apostles
themselves, they insist more at large upon such suggestions as might best
justify and endear the cause of Cathedral Churches. The like petition came
from Cambridge, as much concerned in this common cause as Oxon.

At a solemn Fast, not long after, the Temporal Lords took precedence of the
Bishops, contrary to the custom of their Predecessors in all times foregoing:
which being observed by the Lord Spencer, Is this, said he, a day of
humiliation, wherein we show so great a pride, in taking place of those to whom
it was allowed by all our Ancestors?

The Bill against the High Commission Court, was the third time read in the
House of Lords, and passed, which some days after was confirmed by his Majesty.
The Bishop of Lincoln brought up a Bill to regulate Bishops and their
jurisdiction. This Bill was but once read in the House, and no great matter
made thereof. The Bishops that were impeached for making Canons, craved time
till Michaelmas Term. This was vehemently opposed by some Lords, and two
questions were put.

I. Whether the Bishops should fit still in the House, though without voting
(to which themselves consented) whilst the circumstance of time for their
answer was in debate. II. What time they should have for their answer.
The first of these was carried for them by one present voice, and four
Proxies; and for the second, time was allowed them till the tenth of November,
and Council was permitted unto them. Bishop Warner of Rochester is chosen by
joint consent to solicit the cause, sparing neither care nor cost therein. Mr.
Chute drew up a Demurrer in their behalf, that their offense in making Canons
could not amount to a Praemunire: and now the cause sunck in silence.

But the main matter was, that the Bishops were denied all meddling even in the
Commission of preparatory examinations concerning the Earl of Strafford, Causa
sanguinis; and they as men of mercy not to deal in the condemning of any
person. The Bishops against the persuasions of the Lord Kimbolton, and the Earl
of Essex, resolved to keep possession of their Votes, till a prevalent power
outed them thereof.

No day passed, wherein some petition was not presented to the Parliament
against the Bishops, who durst not come to the Parliament by Land for fear of
the Apprentices, who were gathered together in great numbers to Westminster.
The Bishops therefore intended to come to Parliament by water in Barges: but as
they thought to come to Land, they were so pel^ed with Stones, and frighted at
the sight of such a company of them, that they were rowed back, and went away
to their places.

The next day twelve of the Bishops repaired to Jerusalem Chamber, in the
Dean's lodgings, ^^d drew up a Protestation, directed thus, To the King's most
excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament. This
Instrument they delivered to Bishop Williams, now Archbishop of York, who at
the next opportunity presented it to his Majesty; who wholly remitted the
matter to the Parliament. The next morning a Privy Counselor brought this
Protestation into the House: and the twelve subscribers are impeached of High
Treason, and Voted to be committed to the Tower, save that Bishop Morton of
Durham, and Bishop Hall of Norwich, found some favor, so that they alone were
sent to the custody of the Black Rod.

Now was the Bill against the Bishops sitting in Parliament brought up into the
House of the Lords, and the matter agitated so eagerly on both sides. The Lord
Viscount Newark (afterward Earl of Kingston) made two notable speeches in the
House, in defense of Episcopacy, which confirmed those of the Episcopal party,
making the Lords very zealous in Bishops behalf. There were in the House many
other defenders of Episcopacy, as William Lord Marquis of Hartford; the Earl of
South-hampton; the Earl of Bristol, and the Lord Digby his Son; and that
learned Lord, William Earl of Bath, and many other Lords voted for them.

About this time died Richard Mountague Bishop of Norwich, and Doctor Joseph
Hall succeeded him in his See. Doctor John Prideaux, Regius Professor in
Oxford, was made Bishop of Worcester. Doctor Thomas Winniff, Dean of St. Paul's,
was made Bishop of Lincoln. Doctor Ralph Brownrigg, made Bishop of Exeter.
Doctor Henry King, made Bishop of Chichester. Doctor John Westfield, made
Bishop of Bristol; he died not long after. These were as likely persons to have
kept up Episcopacy, if God's providence had soappointed, as any could have been
culled out of England.

The Bill was again brought in against Bishops Votes in Parliament, 1642.
and it was clearly carried in the Negative, that Bishops never more should
Vote as Peers in Parliament. The King was very unwilling to consent to it, but
at last, with much importunity, he signed the Bill, as he was, in St.
Augustines in Canterbury, passing with the Queen toward Dover, then
undertaking her voyage into the Low Countries.

Ten of the eleven Bishops formerly subscribing their Protestation to the
Parliament, were after some months durance (upon good bale given) released.
These now at liberty severally disposed themselves. Some went home to their own
Diocese, as the Bishops of Norwich, Oxford, etc. The Bishop of Durham continued
in London. Some withdrew themselves into the King's quarters, as Archbishop
Williams, etc. Bishop Wren within few months after he was discharged from the
Tower, was seized on by a party of Soldiers at his house at Downham, and
brought back again to the Tower, where he continued till the end of the year
1659. As for the Archbishop of Canterbury, as he first took possession of that
fatal lodging before any of the rest came to him, so he continued there after
their dismission, without hope of finding his passage out of it by any other
door than the door of death: which as he did not look for before it came; so
when it came he did not fear it, says Doctor Heylin.

On October 23. in the year foregoing, the House of Peers sequestered his
Jurisdiction from him, conferring it on Sir Nathanael Brent, and others of his
underofficers, and ordered, That He should bestow none of the Benefices within
his Gift, without acquainting them with the name and quality of the party whom
he intended to prefer, leaving to them the approbation if they saw cause for
it. And on October 15. 1642. (for so long he remained without further
disturbance) it was resolved upon the Question, That the Fines, Rents, and
Profits of Archbishops, and Bishops, should be Sequestered for the use and
service of the Commonwealth. On the ninth of November following, the
Archbishop's house at Lambeth was forcibly possessed by a party of Soldiers,
to keep it for the Public service; and seventy eight pounds of his Rents as
forcibly taken from some of his Officers, by an order under the hands of some
of the Lords. But upon his petition shortly after, he had an order for securing
of his Heylin. Hist. of Archbish. Laud.
Books and Goods. Another order came to bar him from any conference with any of
the other prisoners; or speaking with any other, but in the presence of the
Warder, who was appointed to attend him; and from having the liberty of the
Tower; or from sending any of his servants into the City, but on occasion of
providing victuals, and other necessaries. The Soldiers brake open the doors
of his Chapel in Lambeth house, and began to spoil the Organs there: but their
Captain put a stop to their fury. On December 21. his saddle-horse was seized
on by order from some members in the House of Common: and o^ the 23. Dr.
Leighton, who had before been sentenced in the Star Chamber for his libellous
Pamphlets, came with an order from that House to dispossess the Soldiers of
their quarters there, and turn his House into a Prison: his Wood and Coals
seized on, without any permission to make any use of them for himself. In the
beginning of May the windows in his Chapel were defaced, and the steps torn
up; his Books and Goods seized on by Leighton, and some others. And on the
sixteenth of the same month he was served with a^ order of both Houses,
debarring him from bestowing any of his Benefices, which either were or should
be vacant for the time to come. And on the thirty first, an order was directed
unto Prynne and others, to seize on all his Letters and Papers, to be perused
by such as should be Authorized to that end and purpose.

The entertaining of many petitions by the Houses of Parliament visibly tending
to the abolition of Episcopal government, made it appear most necessary in the
eyes of those who wished well to it, to hasten the publishing of such petitions,
as had been presented to the King in behalf thereof, and by his Majesty had
been ordered to be published accordingly. Among which none did plead the cause
with greater fervency, than that which was tendered in the name of the Gentry
and Clergy of the Diocese of Canterbury. To which petition there subscribed no
fewer than twenty four Knights and Baronets; Esquires and Gentlemen of note;
above three hundred; Divines one hundred and eight; Freeholders and Subsidy men
eight hundred: Many petitions of like nature came from other Counties, where
the people were at any liberty to speak their own sense. All which, with some
of those which had led the way unto the rest, were published by order from his
Majesty, bearing date May 20. 1^42. under the Title of A collection of the
petitions of diverse Countries, etc. Which petitions being drawn together,
besides many which were presented after this Collection, amounted to nineteen
in all, that is to say, two from the County of Chester, two from Cornwall, one
from the University of Oxford, and another from the University of Cambridge;
one from the Heads of Colleges and Halls. This from the Diocese of Canterbury;
another from the Diocese of Exeter; one from the six Counties of North Wales;
and one a piece from the Counties of Nottingham, Hereford, Huntington,
Somerset, Rutland, Stafford, Kent, Oxford, and Lancaster. These petitions came
from thousands of the most eminent subjects of the Realm. But nothwithstanding
the importuni^y of the Petitioners on* the one side, and the moderation of the
King's answer on the other, the prevailing party in both Houses had long since
resolved upon the Question, which afterward they declared by their public
Votes: for on the eleventh of September the Vote passed in the House of
Commons, for abolishing Bishops, Deans and Chapters; celebrated by the Citizens
with Bells and Bonfires, the Lords not coming in till the end of January, when
it past there also.

The War now begins to open. The Parliament had their Guards already, and the
affront which Hotham had put upon the King at Hull, prompted the York shire
Gentlemen to become a guard to his Person. Both Houses presently Vote this to
be a levying War against the Parliament, for whose defense not only the
Trained bands of London must be in a readiness, and the Good people of the
Country required to put themselves into a posture of Arms; but Regiments of
Horse and Foot are listed, a General appointed, great sums of money raised.
Hereupon the King hastens from York to Nottingham, where he sets up his
Standard, inviting all his good Subjects to repair unto him, for defense of
their King, the Laws and Religion of their Country. And marching with great
Forces he was encountered at Edgehill by the Parliaments Forces, where five
thousand men on both sides were slain on the place, among which was the King's
General. Yet the King kept the field, and made his way open, forced Banbury
Castle, and entered triumphantly into Oxford with an hundred and twenty Colors
taken in the Fight.

The King resolves on his advance toward London, and goes forward as far as
Brainford, out of which he beats two of their best Regiments, takes five
hundred prisoners and sinks their Ordnance. But understanding that the Earl of
Essex joining with the London-Auxiliaries lay in way before him at
Turnham-Green near Chiswick, he retreated toward Oxford, where he receives
Propositions of Peace from the Houses of Parliament. Among which I find this
for one. That his Majesty would be pleased to give his Royal Assent, for taking
away superstitious Innovations; and to the Bill for the utter abolishing and
taking away all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans,
Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Deacons, Canons and Prebandaries;
and all Chantors, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-treasurers, Succentors* and
Sacrists, and all Vicars Choral and Choristers, old Vicars, or new Vicars of
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their underofficers out of
the Church of England. To the Bill against scandalous Ministers: To the Bill
against pluralities: And to the Bill for consultation to be had with Godly,
Religious, and Learned Divines: That his Majesty would be pleased to pass such
other Bills for settling of Church Government, as upon consul^^tion with the
Assembly of the said Divines shall be resolved on by both Houses of Parliament,
and by them to be presented to his Majesty.



Which Proposition with the rest, being presented to him on Candlemas-day, he
referred to the following Treaty to be held at Oxford, but the Commissioners
were so tied to their Instructions, that nothing could be yielded by them.

But the Parliament had now entered on the Rents and profits of all the Heylin.
Hist. of Archbishop Land.
Episcopal Sees and Capitular Bodies, which were within the power of their
Armies, and sequestered the Benefices of many under the common notion of
scandalous Ministers: who if they had transgressed the Laws of the Realm, by
the same Laws were to have been proceeded against; that so being legally
deprived, the vacant Churches might be left to be filled by the Patrons with
more deserving Incumbents. But this consisted not with the present design.

Most of the silenced Lecturers and Ministers, which within ten years past had
left the Kingdom for Inconformity, were put into these sequestered Benefices:
with which his Majesty being made acquainted, he presently signified his
dislike of it by his Royal Proclamation, bearing date May 15. 1643. In which he
complains; That diverse of the Pious and Learned Clergy were forced from their
Cures and Habitations, or otherwise silenced, etc. for no other reason, but
because (contrary to the Laws of the Land, and their own Consciences) they
would not pray against Him, and his Assistants, or refused to publish any
Illegal orders for fomenting the War raised against him, but conformed
themselves according to the Book of Comon-Prayers, and preached God's Word
according to the purity thereof, without any mixture of Sedition. Next, That
many Factious and Schismatical persons were intruded into them, to sow
Sedition, and seduce his good Subjects from their Obedience, contrary to the
Word of God, and the Laws of the Land, etc. And thereupon he straightly
commands all his good Subjects to pay their Tithes to the several and
respective Incumbents, or their Assigns without guile or fraud,
notwithstanding any Sequestration, pretended Orders, or Ordinances whatsoever,
from one or both Houses of Parliament, etc. Requiring all Churchwardens and
Sides-men to be assistant in gathering and receiving their Tithes, Rents, and
Profits; and to resist all such persons (as much as in them lay) which were
intruded into any of the Benefices or Cures aforesaid.



But this rather served to declare his Majesty's piety, than to stop the course
of those proceedings.

Then an infamous Pamphlet is dispersed, Licensed by John White, Chairman of
the Committee for Religion, called, The Committee for plundered Ministers, under
the Title of, The first Century of Scandalous and Malignant Priests, etc.

Their Commissioners were no sooner returned from Oxford, but they 1643.
called an Assembly of Divines by their own Authority, who met at Westminster
in King Henry the Seventh his Chapel. These were of four several natures.

First, Men of Episcopal persuasion, as the most Reverend James Usher,
Archbishop of Armagh: Doctor Ralph Brownrigg, Bishop of Exeter: Doctor
Westfield, Bishop of Bristol: Doctor Daniel Featly, Doctor Richard Holdsworth,
etc.

Secondly, Such who in their judgments favored the Presbyterian Discipline,
etc. among whom we take special notice of these.

Doctor Hoyle Divinity Professor in Ireland. Cambridge. Dr. William Gouge in
Blackfriers. Dr. Peter Smith. Mr. Oliver Bowls. Mr. Thomas Gataker. Mr. Henry
Scudder. Mr. Anthony Tuckney. Mr. Stephen Marshall. Mr. John Arrow-Smith. Mr.
Herbert Palmer. Mr. Thomas Thorowgood. Mr. Thomas Hill. Mr. Nathanael Hodges.
Mr. John Gibbon. Mr. Timothy Young. Mr. Richard Vines. Mr. Thomas Coleman. Mr.
Matthew Newcomen. Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker. Mr. John Lightfoot. etc.
Oxford. Dr. William Twisse. Dr. Cornelius Burgess. Dr. Edmond Stanton. Mr.
John White of Dorchester. Mr. Harris of Hanwel. Mr. Edward Reynolds. Mr. John
Maynard. Mr. Charles Herle. Mr. Corbert of Merton College. Mr. Conant. Mr.
Francis Cheynel. Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick. Mr. Cartar Senior. Mr. Cartar Junior.
Mr. Joseph Caryl. Mr. Strickland. Mr. Thomas Baily. etc.



Thirdly, Some who formerly disliking Conformity, removed themselves beyond the
Seas, now returned home at the beginning of this Parliament. These afterward
proved dissenting Brethren to some transactions in the Assembly, as Thomas
Goodwin, Philip Nigh, Sidrach Symson, Jeremiah Burroughes, William Bridge.

Fourthly, Some Members of the Lords and Commons were mingled among them, and
Voted jointly in their Consultations; as the Earl of Pembrook, the Lord Say:
The most Learned Antiquary Mr. Seldom, Mr. Francis Rouse, Mr. Bulstr^de
Whitlock, etc.

Commissioners from Scotland were also joined with them, as the Earl of
Lothian, the Lord Lauderdale, the Lord Warriston, of the Nobility; others of
the Clergy, as Mr. Alexander Henderson, Mr. Gelaspy, etc.

Doctor Twisse Preached the first Sermon, at the meeting of the Assembly,
Fuller. Church Hist. Ad An. 1643.
though the Schools, not the Pulpit, was his proper Element (witness his
Controversal writings) and in his Sermon he exhorted them Faithfully to
discharge their high calling to the glory of God, and honor of his Church. He
much bemoaned, That the Royal Assent was wanting to give encouragement to them:
yet he hoped, That by the efficacy of their fervent Prayers it might in due
time be obtained, and that a happy union might be procured betwixt him and the
Parliament. Sermon ended, the Ordinance was read, by which was declared the
Cause, Ground, and Intent of their Convention; namely to consult with the
Parliament for the settling of Religion and Church Government.

Of an hundred twenty elected, but sixty nine appeared.

And of the first of Royalists, Episcopal in their judgments, very few
appeared, and scarce any continued any time in the House, save Doctor Daniel
Feately, alleging privately several reasons for their departure.

Dr. Twisse, is now chosen Prolocutor, and Mr. Henry Robrough, and Mr. Adoniram
Bifield, their Scribes and Notaries: And now their good success (next to the
Parliament's) is publicly prayed for by the Preachers in the City, and Books
dedicated unto them, under the Title of the most Sacred Assembly; and four
shillings a day sallary was allowed them: and the Chamber of Jerusalem, the
fairest in the Deans lodgings (where King Henry the Fourth died) was the place
where these Divines did daily meet together.

His Majesty looks on this as a strange and unparalleled encr^atchment on his
Royal Prerogative, to which alone the calling of such Assemblies did belong by
the Laws of the Realm. And thereupon by his Proclamation of June 22 1643. being
just ten days after the date of the Ordinance by which the Assembly was
indicted. He inhibits all and Bibl. Regia. p. 331.
every person named in that Ordinance (under several pains) from assembling
together for the end and purpose therein set down, declaring the Assembly to be
illegal, and that the Acts thereof ought not to be received by any of his good
Subjects, as binding them, or of any Authority with them. Which Prohibition
notwithstanding, most of the Members authorized by that Ordinance assembled, as
was before declared.

One of the first public Acts which they performed, was the humble presenting
of a petition to both Houses, for the appointing of a solemn Fast to be
generally observed. And presently a Fast is appointed, and accordingly kept on
the following Friday, Master Bowls, and Master Newcomen, (whose Sermons were
after Printed) Preaching on the same.

The King summons the Lords and Commons to Oxford, to attend there on January
22. then next following. Being come, scarce were they settled in their several
Houses, when they were entertained with an hot Alarm, made by the coming in of
the Scots with a puissant Army. The Scots had thrived so well by the former
service, as made them not unwilling to come under the pay of such bountiful
Masters. And knowing well in what necessity their dear Brethren in England
stood of their assistance, they were resolved to husband that necessity to
their best advantage. The English must first enter into Covenant with them, for
conforming of this Church with that, etc.

In the first branch of it, it was to be Covenanted between the Nations, That
all endeavors should be used for the preservation of the Reformed Religion in
the Church of Scotland, both in Doctrine, Discipline, and Government; Directory
for worship and Catechizing.

And in the second, That in like manner they endeavor without any respect of
persons, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, that is, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy, etc.

But by whomsoever it was framed, his Majesty saw that it aimed at the
subversion of the present Government. Therefore looking on it as a dangerous
combination against himself, the established Religion, and the Laws of this
Kingdom, for the bringing in of Foreign Forces to subvert them all (says
Doctor Heylin) interdicted all his Subjects from imposing, or taking the same,
as they would answer the contrary at their pe^ils. Which Proclamation bearing
date on October 9. came out too late to hinder the taking and enjoying of this
Covenant, where the restraint thereof had been most necessary: for it had been
solemnly taken by all the Members of the House of Commons, and the Assembly of
Divines at St. Margarets in Westminster, on September 25. and within two days
after it was Administered with no less solemnity to diverse Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen, Colonels, Officers, Soldiers, and others, residing in and about the
City of London; a Sermon being Preached by Mr. Coleman, to justify the piety
and legality of it: and finally enjoined to be taken on the Sanday following,
in all Churches and Chapels of London, within the lines of Communication; as
afterward by all the Kingdom in convenient time. No sooner was this Covenant
taken, but to let the Scots see that they were in earnest, a further
impeachment, consisting of ten Articles, were prepared against the Archbishop
of Canterbury.

In the Assembly of Divines some concurred not with the major part, and were
therefore styled, Dissenting Brethren, These men crave a Toleration to be
indulged them (who since their return out of the Lowcountries had fallen upon
gathering of Congregations in or about the City of London) and they excused for
being concluded by the votes of the Assembly. But the Presbyterians highly
opposed their Toleration; they tax the dissenting Brethren for Singularity; and
some moved their ejection out of the Assembly, except in some convenient time
they would comply therewith.

The Dissenters seasonably presented an Apologetical Narrative to the
Parliament, styled by them The most sacred refuge or Asylum for mistaken and
misjudged innocence. Herein they petitioned pathetically for some favor, whose
conscience could not join with the Assembly in all particulars, concluding with
that pityful close, That they pursued no other Interest or design, but a
subsistence (be it the poorest and meanest) in their own land, as not knowing
where else with safety, health, and livelihood to set their feet on earth, and
subscribed their names,

Thomas Goodwin. Philip Nigh. Sidrach Symson. Jeremiah Buroughs. William
Bridge.
These Petitioners found such favor with some potent persons in Parliament,
that they were secured from farther Trouble, and afterward grew able, not
only to encounter, but invade all opposers; yea to open and shut the door of
preferment to others.

Dr. William Twisse their Prolocutor died, and Mr. Charles Herle, Fellow of
Exeter-colledge succeeded him in his place.

The Assembly met with many difficulties; some complained that Mr. Seldom that
Great Antiquary, advantaged by his skill in Antiquity, and the Oriental
Tongues, studied rather to perplex than inform the Members thereof, as appeared
by the fourteen Queries he propounded; whose intent was, to give a check to the
design of those who held Presbytery to be Jure Divino. More trouble was caused
to the Assembly by the opinions of the Erastians. And diverse Parliament men
hearing their own power enlarged thereby, made use of the Erastians for a check
to such who pressed Conformity to the Scotch Kirk in all particulars.

Indeed the Major part of the Assembly endeavored the settling the Scotch
Government in all particulars: and this was labored by the Scotch
Commissioners with all Industry and probable means to obtein the same. But it
could not be effected, nor was it ever settled by Act of Parliament, who kept
the coercive power in their own hands, so that the power of Excommunication was
not entrusted with them, but ultimately resolved into a Committee of eminent
persons of Parliament.

On January 10. 1644. William Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, was beheaded
on Tower Hill, after he had been kept four years a prisoner in the Tower. His
charge was a constructive treason under several Heads, reducible into two
particulars.

I. For endeavoring of the subversion of the Laws of the Land. II. And a like
endeavor to overthrow the Protestant Religion.
His trial was at the Lords bar, and Mr. William Prynne, was his Prosecutor,
but notwithstanding all that could be said, nothing that did amount to Treason
could be proved against him. But the Scots who were at that time very prevalent
would not be satisfied, unless he were put to death, to manifest thereby their
zeal against the Episcopal Hierarchy, Heylin's Hist. of the life of K. Charles,
1. page 113.
to usher in the Presbyterian Government at the approaching Treaty: so that by
an Ordinance of Lords and Commons he was adjudged guilty of High Treason,
though at the passing thereof in the House of Peers, there were but seven
present.

In pursuance of several messages from the King for a Treaty, it was assented
to by the Parliament, and at Vxbridge Commissioners met for the King on one
part, and for the Parliament of England, and the Parliament of Scotland on the
other. Master Christopher Love (waiting on the Parliaments Commissioners in a
general Relation) gave great offense to the Royalists in his Sermon, showing
the impossibility of an agreement. With the Commissioners on both sides certain
Clergymen were sent, in their presence to debate the point of
Church Government.

For the King. Doctor Sheldon. Steward. Benjamin Laney. Henry Hammond. Henry
Fern.



For the Parliament. Master Stephen Marshal. Richard Vines.



These, when the Commissioners were at leisure from Civil affairs, were called
to a conference before them. But this Treaty proved ineffectual. The King
complained of what came to pass, the fruitless end of this Treaty, that his
Commissioners offered full-measured reasons, and the other Commissioners have
stuck rigidly to their demands, etc. (...). Chap. 18.
The Treaty at Vxbridge (says he) gave the fairest hopes of an happy
composure, had others applied themselves to it with the same moderation as he
did, he was confident the war had been ended.

To return to the Assembly, the Monuments which they have left to posterity of
their meeting, are a new form of worship by the name of a Directory, Articles
of Religion drawn up by them, and a double Cat^chism, one the lesser, the other
the greater.

This Assembly dwindled away by d^grees, though never legally dissolved. Many
of them after the taking of Oxford returning to their own Cures, and others
living in London absented themselves, as disliking the managing of matters.

Anno 1645. died Mr. John Dod, a passive Nonconformist, as Mr. Fuller calls
him, a man much esteemed among men of his own persuasion, one that loved not
any one the worse for difference in judgment about Ceremonies, but all the
better for their unity of affections in grace and goodness. He used to retrench
some hot spirits when inveighing against Bishops, telling them how God under
that Government had given a mavelous increase to the Gospel, and that Godly
men might comfortably comport therewith, under which Learning and Religion had
so manifest an Improvement. He was an excellent Scholar, and an exquisite
Hebrician, who with his Society and directions in one Vacation taught that
Tongue unto Mr. John Gregory, that rare Li^guist, and Chaplain of
Christ-Church, who survived him but one year, Mr. Dod was bur^^d at Fausly in
North^^pton-shire.

Now comes strange news, Dr. Williams; Archbishop of York* is no ^.
less suddenly than strangely Metamorph^sed from a zealous Royalist into an
active Parliamentarian: and desirous to make his peace with the Parliament, he
betakes himself to his house at Purin near Aberconway in Wales, put a garrison
therein, and fortified the same, protesting against the King's party, and
dissuading the County from paying Contribution to the King. And wrote to
Colonel Mitton^ (of the Parliament's party) to assist him against the Lord
Byron, who understanding of his Revolt, had sent a party from Aber-conway to
besiege him. At length he lays siege to the Town and Castle of Aber-conway,
reduces them to the Service of the Parliament, and much of the Town to his own
possession. Hereby he saved his estate from Sequestration. But by his last
compliance he lost his old friends at Oxford, and in Lieu of them finding few
new ones at London.

He expended much on the repair of Westminster Abby-church. And when pressed by
Archbishop Laud to a larger contribution to S. Paul's, he answered he would not
rob Peter to pay Paul. The Library of Westminster was the effect of his bounty,
and so was a Chapel in Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford. At S. John's in Cambridge
he founded two fellowships, built a fair Library, and furnished it with Books.
To a grave Minister coming to him for Institution in a living, he thus
expressed himself. I have (says he) passed through many places of honor and
trust, both in Church and State more than any of my Order in England these
seventy years before, But were I but assured, that by my preaching I had but
converted one soul to God, I should take therein more spiritual joy and
comfort, than in all the Honors and Offices which have been bestowed upon me.
He died on March. 25. 1649.

Now I will present the Reader with a list of the Principal Ordinances of the
Lords and Commons which respected Church Matters, and to make this History the
more entire, must go a little backward in time.

November 8. 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the
payment of Tithes by every person within the Realm of England and Wales.

December 13. 1644. An Ordinance for the Ordination of Ministers pro tempore
within the County of Lancaster, according to the Ordinance of the second of
October for the Ordination of Ministers.

April 12. 1645. An Ordinance for the Regul^ting the University of Cambridge,
and for the removing of scandalous Ministers in the seven Associated Counties.

April 23. 1645. An Ordinance appointing Ministers for certain Churches and
Lectures, Hughe's Abridgement of ordinances of Parliament. Part 2.
viz. Philip Goodwin to be Vicar of the Church of Wa^ford in Hartfordshire: and
to receive to himself all Tithes, Oblations, etc. thereunto belonging, during
his tife* And Dr. Cornelius Burgess to have yearly allowance of four-hundred
pounds paid unto him by the Lord Mayer of the City of ^ondon, and the Court of
Aldermen, to be paid quarterly out of the Houses, (...), Rever^^^ of the Dean,
Dean and Chapter of the Church of S. Paul's for and d^ring the term of his
life, he performing the Lectures in the said Church, as by the Lords and
Commons he was Ordered to do.

April 26. 1645. An Ordinance, that no person be permitted to Preach, who is
not Ordained a Minister, either in this or some other Reformed Church; except
such as intending the Ministry, shall be allowed for the trial of their gifts
by those who shall be appointed thereunto.

August 19. 1645. Directions of the Lords and Commons (after advice had with
the Assembly of Divines) for the electing and choosing of Ruling Elders, in all
the Congregations, And in the Classical Assemblies for the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom; for the speedy settling of
the Presbyterial government.

August 21. 1645. Ordained, that the Knights and Burgesses of Parliament of the
several Counties of England and Wales, shall send Printed books of the
Directory of God's Worship fairly bound up in Leather to the Committees of
Parliament residing in the several Counties, who shall send or cause the same
to be delivered to the several Ministers of every Parish, etc.

October 20. 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, together with Rules
and Directions concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
in cases of Ignorance and Scandal. Also the names of such Ministers and others,
that are appointed Tryers and Judges of the Ability of Elders in the twelve
Classes within the Pr^vince of London.

January 7. 1645. An Ordinance for making Covent Garden Par^chical: and that
the new erected Church within the Precinct of the said new intended Parish
shall be a Parish Church for the said Precinct, and that William Earl of
Bedford, his Heirs and Assigns for ever shall have the Patronage of the said
Church, etc.

March 14. 1645. An Ordinance for keeping of scandalous Persons from the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the enabling of the Congregation for the choice
of Elders, and supplying of defects in former Ordinances, and Directions of
Parliament concerning Church Government.

June 5. 1646. An Ordinance for the present settling (without further delay) of
the Presbyterial government in the Church of England.

August 28. 1646. An Ordinance for the Ordination of Ministers by the Classical
Presbyters within their respective bounds for the several Congregations in the
Kingdom of England.

January 29. 1647. An Ordinance for the speedy dividing and settling of the
several Counties of this Kingdom into distinct Classical Presbyteries, and
Congregational Elderships.

February 9. 1647. An Ordinance for Reparation of Churches, and paying of
Churchduties.

April 3. 1648. An Ordinance for union of Churches in the City of Gloucester,
and maintenance for Preaching Ministers there.

May 2. 1648. An Ordinance for punishing Blasphemies and Heresies.

The King on April 17. 1646. In disguise went out of Oxford, attended by Mr.
John Ashburnham, and one more. On May 6. His Majesty came to the Scots Army
which occasioned the Scotch Commissioners to write to the Parliament about it.
May 19. the Scots came with the King to New Castle.

A great dispute was between the King and Mr. Alexander Henderson about
Church Matters, where after several Discourses and meetings, (...) Hist. (...).
many writings passed between them till July 16. concerning these matters by
Authority of the Fathers, and Practice of the Primitive Church. His Majesty
concludes, that to him it is incredible, that any custom of the Catholic
Church be erroneous, which was not Contradicted by Orthodox Learned men in the
times of their first practice, as is easily perceived that these defections
were which Henderson mentions. And finally, that albeit He never esteemed any
Authority equal to the Scriptures, yet he thinks the unanimous consent of the
Fathers, and the Universal practice of the Primitive Church, to be the best and
Authentical Interpreters of God's word, and consequently the fi^test Judges
between him and Henderson, until better may be found. These disputes were
afterward published in Print; to the everlasting Honor of His Majesty and his
Cause.

On February 6. 1646. the Scots, according to agreement, quitted New Castle,
and the English possessed it. The Parliament voted the King's remove to
Holdenby-house, with respect to the safety of His Person. And the Commissioners
appointed for receiving the King's Person came to Newcastle on June 22. The
King desires two of his Chaplains to be with him, which was denied him, at
which he is much troubled. His Majesty resolves to keep every Friday a day of
Solemn Fasting and Humiliation.

After His Majesty had been near five months at Holdenby, near a Thousand
Soldiers commanded by Cornet Joyce came to Holdenby to the King, and told him,
that they were come by command from the Army to remove him from that place. His
Majesty demanded, whether they would offer any violence to his Person. They all
cried, None. He also desired, that his Trunks and Papers might not be Riffled
and tumbled. They promised to set a guard on them. Thirdly, he required such
servants to attend him, against whom there was no just exceptions. They
answered, he should. Lastly he desired, that nothing be imposed on him contrary
to his Conscience. They answered, it was not their judgment to force any thing
against Conscience upon any one, much less on His Majesty. So at one of the
Clock His Majesty went along with them.

On June 28. 1647. His Majesty was brought to Hatfield, the Duke of Richmond
attending him, and others: and from thence came to Casam.

At this time the Parliament was jealous of the King and the Army, lest they
should treat without the consent of the Parliament. And the Army likewise
devised as many jealousies and fears of a private engagement, and Subscribing
in the City of London, and against the Army.

Then the Parliament Order their Votes of the Militia in the hands of the City
to be Null, etc. The Apprentices clamor at the Houses, and gather together in
Westminster Hall in such multitudes, that the Commons were forced to unvote and
null their last Orders.

Then the Army marches nearer London. Both Speakers and some Members fly the
Army. On August 7. the General and the Army march in Triumph through the City.
Sir Thomas Fairfax is made Constable of the Tower: and Titchburn is made
Lieutenant of the Tower. The King is brought first to Oatelands, and afterward
to Hampton Court, and his Children Ordered to be with him.

September 28. 1647. The Commons considered of several Propositions to send to
His Majesty, That about Religion being the main thing. They also Vote, that His
Majesty be desired to give His consent to such Act or Acts of Parliament, as
shall be presented for settling of Presbyterian Government, according to the
matter of several Ordinances of Parliament, for the Directory, or
Church Government to continue for the space of three years from the time that
the King shall give his consent to such Acts. They likewise voted the
Common Prayer book shall not be used in Private.

November 11. 1647. the King escaped from Hampton Court, and le^t on the Table
three Papers, one to the Parliament, one to the Commissioners, a third to
Colonel Whaley.

On October 15. Information was brought to the House, that His Majesty was safe
at the Isle of Wight, and had put himself into the Protection of Colone*
Hammond, then Governor of the Island.

Come we now to the Church* part of the Treaty in the Isle of Wight. Here
appeared of the Divines chosen by the King, James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh,
Brian Duppa Bishop of Sarum, Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Fern. On the other
side Mr. Stephen Marshall, M. Richard Vines, Mr. Lazarus Seaman, and Mr. Joseph
Caryl, were there present by appointment of the Pa^liament.

All things were transacted in scriptis. His Majesty consulted with his
Chaplains when he pleased. The King's writings were publicly read before all
by Mr. Philip Warwick: and Mr Vines read the Papers of his Fellow-divines.

As for the difference between Primitive Episcopacy and present Hierarchy,
urged by the Parliament Divines, his Majesty did not conceive, that the
Additions granted by the favor of His Royal Progenitors for the enlarging the
power and privileges of Bishops, did make the Government substantially to
differ from what it was, no more than Arms and Ornaments make a Body really
different from it self, when it was naked and divested of the same. Whereas
they besought His Majesty to look rather to the Original than to the succession
of Bishops, he thought it needful to look at both, the latter being the best
Clue in such intrinsic cases to find out the former. Lastly, he professed
h^mself unsatisfied in their answer, concerning the perpetual and unalterable
substantials of Church Government, as expecting from them a more particular
Resolution therein, than what he had received. Eleven days after the Parliament
Divines put in their answer to his Majesty's last paper. Herein they affirmed,
they saw not by what warrant the Writ of Partition of the Apostles Office was
taken forth, that the Governing part should be in the hands of the Bishops, the
Teaching and Sacramentizing in the Presbyters. They also said that some Fathers
acknowledged, that Bishops were different from Presbyters only in matter of
Ordination. They also returned, that His Majesty's Definition of Episcopal
Government, is extracted out of the Bishops of later date than Scriptu^e-times.

The darkness of the History of the Church in the times succeeding the Apostles
(said they) had an influence on the Catalogue makers, Fuller's Chur. ^^st.
who derived the Series of succession of Bishops, taken much from Tradition and
Reports. And it is a great blemish of their evidence, that the nearer they come
to the Apostles times (wherein this should be most clear to establish the
succession at the first) they are most doubtful and contradictory one to the
other.

They granted, that a succession of men to feed and govern those Churches, by
Ecclesiastical Writers in compliance with the Language of their own times, were
called Bishops, but not distinct from Presby^ers. So that if such a succession
from the Primitive times, Seriatim were proved, they would either be found more
than Bishops, as Apostles and extraordinary persons; or less, as merely first
Presbyters, not having the three Essentials of Episcopal government insisted on
by His Majesty. They humbly moved His Majesty, that the Regiments of Humane
testimonies on both sides might be discharged the field, and the point of
dispute tried alone by dint of holy Scripture.

They affirmed also, that the power of Episcopacy under Christian and Pagan
Princes is one and the same, though the exercise be not but acknowledging the
subordination thereof to the Sovereign Power, with their accountableness to the
Laws of the Land. They conclude with thanks to His Majesty's Condescension in
vouchsafing them the Liberty and Honor in examining his Learned Reply, praying
God, that a Pen in the Hand of such Abilities might ever be employed in a
subject worthy thereof. Some days after His Majesty returned His last paper,
wherein he not only acknowledges the great pains of these Divines to inform
his judgment, according to their persuasions, but also took special notice of
their Civilities of the Application, both in the Beginning and Body of their
supply. However he told them, they mistook his meaning about a Writ of
Partition, as if His Majesty had Cantoned out the Episcopal Government, one
part to the Bishops, another to the Presbyterians alone: whereas his meaning
was, that the Office of Teaching is common to both alike; but the other of
Governing peculiar to Bishops alone.

The Lords and Commons vote their Commissioners return from the Treaty. The
Commons debate of his Majesty's Propositions, and agree.

I. That he be in Honor, Safety, and Freedom, according to the Laws.

II. That he have his Revenue as before, excepting the Dedications of such
Forts and Garrisons, as were of old accustomed to be allowed maintenance.

III. That he have compensation for the Court of Wards.

IV. That an Act of Oblivion be past.

The King having granted the Parliament to dispose of all great Offices for ten
years, they vote it satisfactory.

On November 26. was presented a Declaration of the Army to the House of
Commons, which was the day before subscribed by the General; it contained
twenty six sheets of paper, showing (as they termed it) the misgoings of King
and Parliament severally, also in all Treaties betwixt them, especially, that
they are now in. They desire, that the Parliament would reject those demands of
the King, especially concerning his Restitution, and coming to London, with
Freedom, Honor and Safety, and that they proceed against the King in way of
Justice, etc. The Army on December 2. enter the lines of Communication, and at
Whitehall quartereth the General, and the rest of the Army at the Mews, St.
James's, York-house, and diverse other places about the City. The King is taken
from Newport, convay'd to Hurst-castle: on December 6. the Trained bands are
discharged the Guard to the Parliament, and and Pride's and Riche's Regiments
take it upon them. Many of the Members coming to the House are seized and kept
in custody by the General's command in the Queen's Court, and Court of Wards.
These were removed to the King's-Head Inn near Charing Cross, and to the Swan
Inn in the Strand under Guards of Soldiers.

The Army put forth a new Representative, called, The Agreement of the People.
The King is brought up to London, arraigned before a select Committee for that
purpose, called An High Court of Justice, indicted; and upon his refusal to own
their Authority, finally condemned.

Having received the sentence of death, Dr. Juxon, Bishop of London, Preached
privately before him at St. James's on the Sunday following: his Text Romans 2.
16. Nex^ Tu^sday being the (...) of ^i^ dissolution, in the morning alone he
received the Commu(...) ^^om the hands of the said Bishop. At which ^ime he
read for the (...) the 27th chapter of St. Matthew, containing the History of
the death and passion of our Savior. Sermon ended, the King heartily thanked
the Bishop for selecting so seasonable and comfortable a portion of Scripture,
seeing all Humane hope and happiness is founded on the sufferings of our
Savior: The Bishop answered, He had done it merely following the direction of
the Church of England, whose Rubric appoints that Chapter the second
Morning-lesson for the thirtieth of January. At ten of the Clock, in the
forenoon, he is brought on Foot from St. James's Palace over the Park to
Whitehall, guarded with a Regiment of Footsouldiers, part before, and the rest
behind him, with Colors flying, and D^ums beating, his private Guard of
Partisans about him, and Doctor Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one
side, and Colonel Tomlinson on the other. He bid them go faster, saying, That
he^ now went before them, to strive for an Heavenly Crown, with less
solicitude, than he had oftentimes bid his Soldiers to fight for an earthly
Diadem. Then passes he to the Scaffold, where he defends his Innocence:
howbeit he acknowledges God's justice, pardons his enemies, takes pity on the
Kingdom. He shows the Soldiers how much they are out of the way, and tells
them, They would never go right, till they give God his due, the King his due,
and the people their due.

You must (said he) give God his due, by restoring his worship and Church
rightly regulated (which is now out of order) according to h^s Word. And a
National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle
this, when every Opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King, said he, (that is my Successor) Indeed I will not, the Laws of
the Land will clearly instruct you for that: For the People, I must tell you,
That their liberty and freedom consists in having Government under those Laws
by which their Lives and Goods may be most their own. It is not in having a
share in the Government, that pertains not to them. A Sovereign and a Subject
are two different things. He prayed God, they might take those courses that are
best for the good of the Kingdom, and their own Salvation.

Then having declared, That he died a Christian according to the profession of
the Church of England, as the same was left him by his Father; He said, I have
a good Cause, and a gracious God; and gave his George to the Bishop, bidding
him, Remember to give it to the Prince. Then, said He, I go from a Corruptible
to an Incorruptible Crown, where no disturba^ce can be, but peace and joy for
evermore. Then lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, having prayed secretly,
stooping down to the block, he re^^iv^d the fatal stroke. On the Wednesday
sennight af^^r, his Corpse ^mbalmed, and Coffined in Lead, was delivered to the
care of some of his Servants to be buried at Windsor. That night they brought
the Corpse to Windsor. The Vault being prepared, a scarff of Lead was provided,
some two foot long, and five inches broad, therein to make an Inscription,
which was

KING CHARLES 1648. The Plummer souldred it to the Coffin, about the Breast of
the Corpse. Then was the Corpse brought to the Vault, being born by the
Soldiers of the Garrison: Over it a black Velvet Herse-cloth, the four Labels
whereof the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, the Earls of
South-hampton, and Lindsey, did support. The Bishop of London stood weeping by.
Then was it deposited in silence and sorrow in the vacant place in the Vault,
near to the Coffin (as it was thought) which contained the Corpse of King Henry
the Eighth (the Herse-cloth being cast in after it) about three of the Clock in
the afternoon: and the Lords that night (though late) returned to London.

Prince Charles eldest Son to King Charles the first, by unquestionable right
succeeded to the Crowns of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in the eighteenth
year of his age. Proclamation and Coronation could not now have their due
course. The Ruling part of the House of Commons, who usurped the Government
with violence on the person of the late King, immediately published an Act even
against Kingly Government. Yet this Inhibition did not deter many Loyal
Subjects from doing their duty: and on February 2. a Proclamation in the name
of the Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Merchants,
Citizens, Yeomen, Seamen, and other Freemen of England, did Proclaim Prince
Charles King of England. The Proclamation was Printed, and scattered about the
Streets of London.

The House of Peers continued yet sitting, and in regard the Commissions of the
Judges were determined by the death of the King, they send to the Commons for a
Conference about it, and other matters relating to the settling of the
Government.

But Monarchy and the House of Lords are declared useless by the Commons.

The Peers in general resent these indignities put upon them by a small part of
the House of Commons; they assert their own Privileges, and the Fundamental
Laws of the Nation; and disclaim and protest against all Acts, Votes, Orders,
or Ordinances of the said Members of the Commons House, for erecting of new
Courts of Justice, to try or execute the King, or any Peer or Subject of the
Realm; for altering the Government, Laws, Great Seal, etc.

Hereupon the Army set a Guard upon the door of the House of Lords, and in
further prosecution of the late Votes of Commons against Monarchy. An Act was
passed by that House for the Exhaeredation of the Royal Line, the Abolishment
of Monarchy in this Kingdom, and the setting up of a Commonwealth, which they
ordered to be published and Proclaimed in all part^ of the Kingdom. But
Alderman Reinoldson, then Lord Mayor of London, refused to publish this Act in
London, and He with three of the Aldermen of his Judgment were sent prisoners
to the Tower.

But on February 3. the King was Proclaimed at the Cross at Edinburgh. In the
beginning of March, the Duke of Hamilton, the Earls of Holland and Norwich, the
Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen, were tried and condemned by an High Court of
Justice erected for that purpose: of which the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of
Holland, and the Lord Capel, were executed March 9. but the Earl of Norwich,
and Sir John Owen were pardoned.

The Commons set forth a Declaration to justify their proceedings. They
promise the establishment of a firm and sase Peace, the advancement of the true
Protestant Religion, the liberal maintenance of a godly Ministry, etc.

They pass an Act for propagating the Gospel in Ireland, March 8.

April 10. 1649. An Act was passed by the Commons for the sale of Deans and
Chapters Lands, and for the abolishing of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Canons,
Prebends, etc. and Tithes of or belonging to any Cathedral or Collegiate Church
in England and Wales: but it was provided, That this should not extend to the
College of St. Mary in Winchester, nor to the College of Eaton; nor to any of
the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments to them belonging.

June 2. 1649 An Act was passed for the better maintenance of Preaching
Ministers, and Schoolmasters (out of the Lands of Deans and Chapters)
throughout England and Wales, in such places where maintenance is wanting, and
for other good uses to the advancement of true Religion, Piety, and Learning.
And the Commissioners of the Great Seal of England issued forth Commissions
under the Great Seal, into all the Counties of England and Wales, to such
persons as by the Parliament were nominated, giving them power by the Oaths of
good and lawful men, etc. to find out the true value of all Parsonages and
Vicarages presentative, and all other Ecclesiastical Livings, with care of
Souls within such Cities and Counties, and to certify into the Chancery what
each of them were really worth per Annum; the names of the Incumbents,
Proprietors, and Possessors thereof, and of such as receive the profi^s; who
supplies the Cure, what he has for his Sallary; how many Chapels are
belonging to one Parish, and how situate, and fit to be united: and how the
Churches and Chapels are supplied by Preaching Ministers, that so a course be
taken for the providing both for Preaching and maintenance, where the same
should be found to be needful.

About this time some Dissenters in the Army called Levellers, drew together
five thousand Horse and Foot at Burford. Colonel Reinolds fell in upon them
with a greater Body than they had, and routed them, taking nine hundred Horse,
and four hundred Foot prisoners: whereof one Thomson and two more principal
Leaders, were immediately shot to death, who died resolutely. Cornet Den, an
Army-preacher, expressing Flag^llum, or the life and death of O. C. p. 83.
his grief and sorrow, was reprieved at the Instant of execution, which their
Fellows beheld from the leads of the Church. The Rest by Cromwells mediation
were all pardoned, and sent home to their own houses. This proved the utter
suppression of that faction, and rendered the Army entirely at his Command: so
that they presently submitted to the lot which Regiments should be sent to
Ireland, then almost reduced to the King's obedience by the Marquess of Ormond.
Cro^well was ordained Commander in chief of the Forces appointed for Ireland,
and tituladoed with the style of Lord Governor of Ireland, while the Lord
Fairfax was left here to attend the Parliament. He with a potent Army landed at
Dublin.

The Marquess of Ormond had besieged Dublin, but the siege was raised by
Colonel Michael Jones, Governor of Dublin, with the utter defeat of the
Marquesses Army. And the siege of Londonderry was raised by Sir Charles Coot
sallying out of the Town. Cromwell takes Drogheda by Storm, and puts all in it
to the Sword. After this, in less than a year most of the Cities and Towns in
Ireland were taken, and that whole Kingdom in a manner subdued to the power of
the Commonwealth of England; and the Marquess of Ormond, and all that oppose
their Authority, withdrew themselves. But a little before, Colonel Rich
received a Brush from my Lord Broghil in the County of Cork, where the Bishop
of Rosse being taken was hanged.

July 19. 1649. An Act was passed by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, for the promoting and propagating the Gospel of Christ in New England.
And a general Collection was made in and through all the Counties, Cities,
Towns, and Parishes of England and Wales, as the foundation for so pious an
undertaking, etc.

King Charles the Second being now at Jersey, part of the English Fleet was
sent to attacque that Island, which put the King upon a speedy remove from
thence into France, where he resided till the time appointed for the Treaty at
Breda, which drew near, and then he repaired thither.

The Committee of the Estates of Scotland having concluded with the King at
Breda, all correspondence with the English was by Proclamation forbidden, and
all manner of provision stopped from being carried into England, though the
Juncto at Westminster had used all Artifices to keep the Scots from closing
with the King. During the Treaty at Breda, 1650.
the Marquess of Momrosse landed in the Isles of Orkney with fifteen hundred
Arms, and five hundred German Soldiers: and after he had gathered more
strength, he was defeated by Colonal Straughan, taken, and brought to
Edinburgh, where he is brought to his Trial, condemned and executed.

The rigorous prosecution of the Marquess of Montrosse in that violent manner,
was chiefly from the instigation of the Kirk, by which long before he had been
Excommunicated. Concerning which he spoke to the people in this manner upon the
Scaffold. What I did in this Kingdom, was in obedience to the most just
Commands of my Sovereign, for his defense in the day of his distress, against
those that rose up against him. I fear God, and honor the King, according to
the Commandments of God, and the Law of Nature and Nations, etc. It is objected
against me by many, even good people, that I am under the censure of the
Church: this is not my fault, si^ce it is only for doing my duty, by obeying
my Prince's most just Commands, for Religion, his Person, and Authority: yet am
I sorry they did Excommunicate me; and in that which is according to God's
Laws, without wronging my Conscience or Allegiance, I desire to be relaxed. If
they will not, I appeal to God, who is the Righteous Judge of the World: and
who must and will, I hope, be my Judge and Savior.



The King was much troubled at the Scots severity against this Noble Marquess.

After this the King lands in Scotland, and is Proclaimed King at Edinburgh
Cross. But his Majesty had not been long among the Scots, but they began
(according to their usual manner of Kirk Authority and Discipline) to obtrude
upon the King such curbing conditions, as but ill-suited with Regal dignity.

Then the Commonwealth of England sent an Army against Scotland, and Cromwell
is made General of the Parliament's Forces instead of Lord Fairfax: and about
the end of June he marched toward Berwick in order to his advance into
Scotland. The Scots raise an Army, and in the mean-time send many Expostulatory
Letters to Sir Arthur Haslerigg then at Newcastle, urging the breach of
Covenant, and the union between the two Nations, which availed nothing.

The Scots having been routed at Muscleburgh, they came to a Battle at Dunbar,
where the whole Army was defeated by Cromwell: of the Scots there were slain in
the Battle four thousand, and nine thousand were taken prisoners, with all
their Ammunition, bag and baggage, and ten thousand Arms. The Scots after this
loss quitted Leith and Edinburgh, whereof the next day Cromwell took possession,
and the King retired to St. Johnstons, where the Committee of Estates were
assembled. The Scots ascribed this overthrow of the Army to their admitting the
King into Scotland, before he had given full satisfaction to the Kirk in what
they required of him; and began very much to impose upon him, and remove from
his Person the most Faithful and Loyal of his Servants. The King departs
secretly from St. Johnstons in discontent to the Lord Dedup's house near
Dundee. The Estates at St. Johnstons send Major General Montgomery to fetch the
King back: the King returns with him to St. Johnstons, where a grand Convention
is held, and diverse of the Royal Nobility are received into the favor of this
Assembly.

Cromwell fortifieth Lies, and lays close siege to Edinburgh Castle. Mr. John
Guthry, Mr. Patrick Gelespy, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, with many other Ministers,
withdrew from the Assembly at St. Johnstons, and in print remonstrated, in the
name of themselves and the Western Churches, against the present proceedings;
and with these Colonel Ker, Straughan the Lord of Warreston, Sir John Chiesly,
and Sir James Stuart, and others, Confederated. By this division Cromwell's
Conquest was made very easy: and his fomenting that Rent in their Church, made
their subjection to his Authority more lasting than otherwise it would have
been.

The King was desirous to compose this disorder, or (at least) to prevent the
dividing so great a Force, as was under Ker and Straughan from his Service: and
to that end the Earl of Cassels, the Lord Broody, and Mr. Robert Douglas the
Minister, were sent to treat with them; but they were somewhat averse to a
composure; yet they declared against any conjunction with Cromwell, professing
equally against Malignants (as they called the King's Loyal Subjects) and
Sectaries. Soon after Colonel Ker, being defeated, was taken prisoner by Major
General Lambert. Mr. Rutherford wrote diverse consolatory Letters to him during
his imprisonment both in Scotland and in England.

Edinburgh Castle was surrendered, by Dundasse the Governor, Son in Law to old
Leven, upon conditions, unto Cromwell, on December 24. 1650. Shortly after all
the Forts on this side of Sterling were taken by the English. The King was
solemnly Crowned at Scoone, near unto St. Johnstons (the accustomed place of
the Coronation of the Kings of Scotland) his Coronation being celebrated with
loud Acclamations, Bonfires, shooting off of Guns, and with as much pomp and
Ceremony as the present State of things would permit.

About the beginning of June the Parliament of Scotland ended, having Addition
to Sir (...) Chron.
before their dissolution given large Commissions and Instructions for the
pressing of men in all parts of the Kingdom beyond Fife, and in the Western
parts for a new Army, which was to consist of 15000 Foot, and 3000 Horse and
Dragoons.

Then was the intended rising in Lancashire unfortunately disapointed, A^no:
651 by the taking of a Ship at Ayx in Scotland, which had been bound to the
Earl of Darby in the Isle of Man, and the seizing of Mr. Berkinhead an Agent in
the business, by whose Letters all was detected; and thereupon were apprehended
Mr. Thomas Cook of Gray's Inn, Mr. Gibbons a Tailor, and Mr. Potter an
Apothecary, together with Mr. Christopher Love, Mr. William Jenkin, Mr. Thonas
Case, Dr. Roger Drake, and some other Presbyterial Ministers, who were brought
before a High Court of Justice, and tried for their lives, and about the latter
end of July, Potter, Gibbons, and Mr. Love, were sentenced to death; and a
while after, Gibbons and Love were executed.

After the defeat of Sir John Brown by Lambert, and the taking of Brunt-Isla^d
and Inchgarvy-Castle by the English; Cromwell resolved to set upon St.
J^hnstons, which after one days siege he gained. Hereupon the King leaves
Scotland, and enters England with his Army by the way of Carlisle, on August 6.
1651. At his first entrance upon English ground he was Proclaimed King of Great
Britain, at the Head of the A^my, with great Acclamations, and shooting off the
Canons, on August 22. he came to Worcester. The Earl of Darby coming with
Forces to the King, was routed by Colonel Lilburn. Cromwell having with the
conjunction of the Militia of diverse Counties, drawn together an Army of fifty
thousand men, surroundeth the City of Worcester. Duke Hamilton (who behaved
himself with undaunted courage) received a shot on his thigh, whereof presently
after he died. The King's Army being over-powred, they were forced to retreat
into the City, and many of Cromwell's Army got in with them. About seven at
night the Cromwellians gained the Fort Royal, at which time his Majesty left
the City, passing out at St. Martin's gate, accompanied with about Sixty Horse
of the chiefest of his Retinue. The Town was taken, and miserably plundered.

There were slain in the Field, in the Town, and in Pursuit some two thousand;
and about eight thousand were taken prisoners in several places; most of the
English common men escaping by their Shibboleth. But at Newport there were
taken in the pursuit, the Earls of Lauderdale, Rothes, Carnworth, Darby,
Cleveland, Shrewsbury; the Lord Spyne, Sir John Pakington, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir
Charles Cunningham, Colonel Graves, Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Secretary to the King,
and many others: Six Colonels of Horse, eight Lieutennant Colonels of Foot, six
Majors of Horse, thirteen Majors of Foot, thirty seven Captains of Horse,
seventy two Captains of Foot, fifty five Quarter Masters, eighty nine
Lieutenants. There were taken also some general Officers with seventy six
Cornets of Horse, ninety nine Ensigns of Foot, ninety Quartermasters, eighty
of the King's Servants, with the King's Standard, which he had set up when he
summoned the Country, the King's Coach and Horses, and Collar of S. S. but the
King's person God wonderfully preserved, delivering him from the Hand of all
his Enemies, and after many difficulties he is safely transported, from
Bright-helmston in Sussex, into France, by Tattersall.

Cromwell comes with his prisoners to London, and having left Lieutennant
General Monk in Scotland, Sterling with the Castle was surrendered unto him, and
Dundee was taken by Storm; and soon after St. Andrews, Aberdeen, with other
Towns, Castles, and Strong places, either voluntarily submitted, or rendered
upon summons.

The Earl of Darby was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire. The Isles of Man and
Jersey, etc. are surrendered to the Parliament. The Isle of Barbados is yielded
up to Sir George Ascough. Now the Parliament of England resolves upon an union
of England and Scotland, and an incorporating of both Nations into one
Commonwealth. This was much opposed and remonstrated against by the Scotch
Kirk, but in vain.

Anno 1652. began the War with Holland: An Act was passed, entitled, An Act
against unlicensed and scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for the better
regulating of Printing.

Anno 1653. The Officers of the Army consult about change of Government: on
April 20. Cromwell, Lambert, Harison, and eight Officers more of the Army,
entered the House of Commons, and after a short speech made by Cromwell, showing
some reasons for the necessity of their dissolution, he declared them
dissolved, and required them to depart: but the Speaker would not leave the
Chair till Harison pulled him out by the Arm. Then Cromwell commanded the Mace
to be taken away, and no more to be carried before him. Then they caused the
doors of the Parliament House to be locked up, and placed a Guard thereon to
prevent the reassembling of the Members.

The first thing done after this change, was to constitute a Council of State
of the chief Officers of the Army. These agreed upon the several persons all
over England to form a new Representative, and a summons was sent to every one
of them in the name of Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of all the Forces, etc.
to take upon them the trust to which they were summoned, and to meet at
Whitehall, on July 5. These assembled at the time appointed, and went to the
Parliament House, and chose Mr. Rouse (made by the late Parliament Provost of
Eaton) to be their speaker.

This mock-Parliament, called by some the little Parliament, aimed at the new
modelling both of Magistracy and Ministry: but the Ministry and the maintenance
thereof by Tithes, they arraigned as an Antichristian Constitution. Having
passed an Act about Marriages, Bi^ths, and Burials, on December 12. Rouse the
Speaker told the House, That their sitting was no longer necessary; and
presemly went out of the House with the Mace before him and (many others
following him) he came to White Hall, and there resigned to Cromwell the
Instrument by him formerly delivered to them at their first sitting.

About four days after the Officers of the Army had prepared an Instrument, or
Systeme of Government, on which the foundation of a new Dominion was to be
erected, and they entreated Oliver Cromwell to accept of the Government under
the Title of Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
He accepted it, and was that day, at one of the clock in the afternoon,
Installed at Westminster. The Protector's Council being chosen and established,
he makes a peace with the Dutch, and with the Queen of Sweden; Spain, Portugal,
and France, seek Cromwell's friendship.

As to the state of Religion at this time in England, one thus describes it.

The Orthodox Protestants were wholly suppressed, and yet some Reverend (...),
or the life and death of O. C. p. 144.
persons, as Doctor Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Doctor Brownrigg, the
Bishop of Exeter, received some shows of respect and reverence from the
Protector, which he more manifestly declared afterward in the Funeralexpence of
the Learned Archbishop Usher, and this to captate a reputation of his love to
Scholars, and the meek, modest, and virtuous Clergy.

The Presbyterian was rather tolerated than countenanced, and yet such of them
as would comply with his Court-greatness became his Favorites, for others of
them he cared not, pleasingly expressing himself, how he had brought under the
pride and arrogance of that Sect, making those that would allow no liberty to
others, to sue for it themselves.

The Independents, and Anabaptists, he loved, and preferred by turns, and was
most constant to them, as the men that would support his Usurpation. Only he
could by no means endure the Fifth Monarchy-men, though by their dotages he had
raised himself to this height. Therefore Feak and Rogers, Preachers, were by
him committed to prison, Feak to Windsor, and Rogers to Carisbrook in the Isle
of Wight. But it is said, he set Mr. Kiffin, the Anabaptist (whom he had taken
out of design into his favor with the party) at variance with Feak, to the
raising of a fewd between them; the balance of his security in the Government.
The like he did between the Presbyterian and the Independent, a subdivided
Schism from the Church of England, as the other were from Independency. And it
was observed, that in most great Towns and Cities in England, he placed an
Independent Minister, and a Pre^byterian together, that the one might balance
the other.

The Kirk of Scotland at this time had the wings of her Authority very much
clipped, if not quite taken away by the dissolution of the General Assembly,
which was done by Colonel Morgan at Aberdeen, where they were assembled; Mr.
Andrew Cant, and the rest of them in vain protesting against the Action. The
like disturbance they had afterward at Edinburgh from Lieutenant Colonel
Cotterel.

The Marquess of Argyle, to keep up his Reputation with the Church of Scotland,
seemed much troubled at this proceeding against the Assemblies, and interceded
with the Protector for the liberty of the Church, wherein he had good success:
and the Church of Scotland was indulged with the exercise of Religion, and a
great part of their Jurisdiction and Discipline. They were restrained in little
more than the power of keeping General Assemblies (their Presbyteries being
permitted to convene) and the rigor of Excommunication; for whereas before
persons excommunicated were not only excluded from the communion of the Kirk,
but had all their Estates confiscated till their reconciliation This latter
part was not now to be executed; but to please the Ministers for the restraint
of their power, the maintenance of Scholars in Universities of Scotland was
increased, and many privileges were granted to them.

The Government and security of the Kingdom of Ireland was the next care of the
Protector, and his Son-in-law, Lieutenant General Fleetwood, is made Deputy of
Ireland.

About this time an Ordinance was published for the Trial and Approbation
Hughes A^bridgem^nt of all Acts and public Ordinances. part. 2.
of Ministers, wherein Doctor Thomas Goodwyn, Philip Nigh, Hugh Peter's, Mr.
Manton and diverse others were named Commissioners. It was ordained, That every
person who should after March 25. 1654. be presented, nominated, chosen, or
appointed to any Benefice (called a Benefice with cure of Souls) or to preach
any public Lecture in England or Wales, should before he be admitted to such
Benefice or Lecture, be adjudged and approved of by the Persons forenamed, to
be a Person for the Grace of God in him, his holy and unblameable Conversation,
and also for his knowledge and utterance, able and fit to preach the Gospel.
And that after the said twenty five of March, no person, but such as should
upon such approbation be admitted by the said persons, should take any public
Lecture, having a stipend legally annexed thereunto, or take or receive any
such Benefice as aforesaid, or the profits thereof.

On June the twenty third following, by the Protector, with the advice of his
Council, it was further ordained, That in case any person, who since April the
first, 1653. has been proved in any public Benefice or public Lecture,
should not before the twenty fourth of June, 1654. obtain approbation and
admittance in manner as in the said Ordinance is expressed, that then the
person, or persons, who have right thereunto, should and might present and
nominate some other fit person to that place.

It was ordained also, That tho said Commissioners in that Ordinance be
authorized to give approbation and admittance to any person concerned in that
clause of the said Ordinance, at any time before the twenty third day of July,
1654. and that in the mean time no person should present, or nominate, any
person to any Benefice, or public Lecture, in the place of any such person,
for the want of such approbation by the time aforesaid. But if such approbation
and admittance should not be by the said twenty third of July obtained by the
said persons therein concerned, then such person, or persons, as have right
thereunto, might present or nominate some other fit person to such place,
according to the said Ordinance.

August the sixteenth, 1654. an Ordinance was passed against ignorant and
scandalous Ministers, in all the respective Counties within England and Wales:
in which it was declared.

1. That such Ministers, and Scholars, should be accounted scandalous in their
lives, as should be proved guilty for holding such blaspemous and Atheistical
Opinions, as are punishable by an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act against
several Atheistical, Blasphemous, and Execrable Opinions, derogatory to the
Honor of God, and destructive to Humane society: orguilty of cursing,
swearing, or subornation of perjury.

2. Such as hold, or teach any of those Popish opinions, required in the Oath
of ab^uration, to be ab^ured: or be guilty of adultery, fornication,
drunkenness, etc. carding, dicing, profaning of the Lord's day, or allow the
same in their Families.

3. Such as have publicly, and frequently received and used the
Common Prayer Book, since the first of January last, or shall at any time
hereafter do the same.

4. Such as do encourage, or countenance, by word, or practice, any
Whitsun-ales, Wakes, Morris-dances, May-poles.

5. Such as have declared, or shall declare, by writing, preaching, or
otherwise, their disaffection to the Government.

6. Such Ministers were to be accounted negligent, as omit the public
Exercises of Preaching, and Praying, on the Lord's Day (not being hindered by
necessary absence, or infirmity of sickness) or that are or shall be
non-resident.

7. Such Schoolmasters should be accounted negligent, as absent themselves
from their Schools, and do wilfully neglect their duties in teaching their
Scholars.

8. Such Ministers, and Schoolmasters, should be accounted ignorant, and
insufficient, as should be so declared, and adjudged, by the said
Commissioners, five or more of them, together with five, or more, of the
Ministers particularly named in the Ordinance for the several and respective
Counties of England and Wales, Assistants to the said Commissioners.

August the thirtieth, 1654. It was ordained, That Sir Hugh Owen Baronet, and
diverse other persons, particularly named in the Ordinance for all the several
Counties in the Dominion of Wales, be Commissioners in their several limits,
and that the said Commissioners, or any three of them, therein are authorized
by their Warrants under their hands and seals to call before them all such
persons, who by authority and color of an Act of Parliament, made February the
twenty second, 1649. entitled [An Act for the better Propagation, and Preaching
of the Gospel in Wales, etc.] have intermedled in the receiving, keeping, and
disposing the said rents, issues, and profits of all or any of the Rectories,
Vicarages, portion of Tenths, and other Ecclesiastical livings, Impropriations,
and Glebe-lands within the said Counties: and to give a true and perfect
account upon Oath (which Oath the Commissioners are empowered to administer) of
all such rents, issues, and profits, which they, or any of them, have received.
And if any of them shall refuse to give a true account, to commit him, or them,
so refusing to the Gaol of the County, there to remain, till they conform
themselves. The moneys found in their hands to be paid into the hands of such
Treasurer as the respective Commissioners should nominate and appoint for that
purpose: which Treasurer should within three months pay in the same into the
Exchequer.

Se^tember the second, 1654. It was ordained, That the Ordinance, entitled, An
Ordinance for bringing in the public Revenue of this Commonwealth into one
Treasury, to be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer; nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend to any the Rents, Profits,
or Revenues, by Acts of Parliament, of Rectories impropriate, appropriate
Tithes, etc. or any of them settled in the Trustees in the said Acts named.

That all and every the Rectories, Impropriations, Tithes appropriate,
Donatives, Oblations, Obventions, First Fruits, Tenths, Pensions, Portions of
Tiths by the said recited Acts vested in the Trustees, and not ex^osed to sale
by an Act, entitled, [An Act for the sale of Manors, of Rectories, and
Glebe-lands, belonging to Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters]
shall from benceforth be settled in the possession and seizin of W. Steel,
Sergeant at Law, and other persons particularly named in the Ordinan^e,
Survivor and Survivors of them, and their Heirs, to the uses, and upon the
Trusts in the said Acts expressed, etc.

That they shall sue for, recover, collect, and gather the Rents, Issues, and
Profits thereof, as Owners in Trust, and manage the Revenue in such way and
manner as shall be most advantageous for the carrying on of this service.

That the said Trustees shall have power to make unions of two Parishes, or
more, into one, and the whole Ecclesiastical Revenues, Tithes, and Profits
belonging to the said Parishes so united, to be supplied for a provisio^ for
one godly and painful Minister, to preach in such of the said Parish charge,
where such union shall be made, as the said Trustees shall judge convenient.

The said Trustees also shall appoint, where the meeting of both the said
Parishes, for the worship of God, shall be, etc.

The said Trustees also shall have power to sever and divide Parishes, where
they shall conceive it needful, and fix such maintenance out of the profits of
the said Church, so to be divided, as they shall think fit, to be approved of
by the Parliament, and in the Intervals of Parliament by the Protector and his
Council, etc.

This year died that famous and learned Antiquary, Mr. John Seldom, and was
buried in the Inner Temple Church in London.

Anno 1655. the Duke of Savoy's Soldiers having committed many Addition to Sir
Rich. Bak^r^s Chron.
cruel outrages upon the Protestants in Piedmo^t, Cromwell took this occasion to
ingratiate himself with the Protestants abroad, and appointing a solemn day of
Humiliation to be kept, he caused a large contribution to be gathered for them
throughout the Nation, and sent his Agents abroad to mediate for them. Alderman
Viner and Pack were made Treasurers for this Money, which amounted to a very
large fum: but how much came to the hands of those for whom it was pretended to
be collected, I know not. The French King accommodated the business, the Duke
of Savoy refusing to admit Cromwell's mediation.

Upon the tendering of certain Proposals, to the Protector, by Manasseh
Ben-Israel, a Jewish Merchant, in the behalf of his Hebrew Nation, for their
free admission to Trade, and exercise of their Religion in England, a
Conference was held about it, several days at White Hall, by the Members of
the Council, and certain Divines of the greatest note among them: and many
Arguments being urged pro and con, those against their admission so far
prevailed, that the Proposals took no effect. Mr. Prynne wrote a Book, at the
same time, against their admission.

Then was an Ordinance made by the Protector, with the advice of his Council,
for the Relief of Ministers put into sequestered Livings, against Molestations,
and Suits, by Parsons sequestered and ejected.

On September the seventeeth, 1656. a Parliament assembled at Westminster, and
chose for their Speaker Sir Thomas Widdrington. Now The Humble Petition and
Advice was framed, which was a Module of Government, with which they several
times waited on the Protector at White Hall, to desire him to take the chief
Government of the Nations upon him, with the Title of King; of which the power
he already had; the name only he wanted. He finding his Officers averse to it,
at last returned answer, That he could not take the Government upon him with
that Title.

Now was James Nailor, the great Ringleader of the Sect called Quakers,
brought to his Trial, who having spread his Doctrine, and gained many
Proselites to it in diverse parts of the Nation, was more especially taken
notice of at Exeter, Wells, and Bristol, and from Bristol was brought up to
London, attended by several Men and Women of his Opinion, who all the way they
came strewed Gloves and Handkerchiefs in his way, and sang Hosannah's to him,
and (blasphemously) are said to have used the same kind of expressions toward
him, as anciently the people of the Jews did to our Savior, when he rode in
triumph to Jerusalem. Nailor being convented before the Parliament, was charged
of Blasphemy, for assuming to himself Divine honors, and such Attributes as
were due to Christ only. He was sentenced by the House to be (first at London)
publicly whipped, pillored, and stigmatized, and bored through the Tongue with a
red hot Iron, as a Blasphemer: then to be conveyed to Bristol, there to be also
whipped; lastly, to be brought back to London, to remain in Bridewel during
pleasure; which Sentence was inflicted upon him.

At this time the viperous brood of Sects, and Heresies, swarmed through all
parts of the Nation. Then the Ranters began to multiply, and the Socinians, who
denied the Divinity of Christ; and one Biddle was infamous for these Opinions;
and Erbury, formerly a Minister in Cardiff in Wales, degenerated unto Ranting.

The Compiler of this Treatise once heard this Erbury speak in a public
Congregation, near Bath in Sommerset-shire, of a threefold Dispensation of God
to his Church and People. There has been (said he) a twofold discovery of God
to his People, or a twofold Dispensation, namely, the Dispensation of the Law
and the Gospel, and God discovered himself to his People in both Dispensations
diversely. Under the Law God discovered himself to his people in a way of fear:
therefore God was called the great and fearful God, and the delivery of the Law
to Moses was in a fearful manner. Now when the Apostle speaks of the Ministry
of the Gospel, he says, You have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, ando. that is (said he) now when the Gospel
came, men knew God to be a Father, and they in the Spirit of Adoption cried,
Abba, Father.

He added, That under the Law God was known as a Lord, and Master, to keep his
People in work; and as they had their work, so they had their wages; and if
they did not work, they had terrors upon their spirits to affright them. But
under the Gospel, God was discovered to be a Father full of Light and Love, so
that now we converse with God in a loving manner, and serve him as a Son
serves his Father. --

He proceeded to tell us, That there is a third Dispens^tion yet to come in the
last days, wherein God will discover himself in a more fearful way, and yet in
a way more full of light and love than in former times.

He added, That then there will be a fuller discovery of God, than has been
both under the Law and Gospel: and the ignorance of this (he said) has been
the cause of all the confusions, and contentions, among the People of God.

He said, That the Apostles waited for this Dispensation, another state more
glorious than any they had yet attained unto. This glorious Dispensation (he
told us) St. Paul calls, The Glory to be revealed in us, the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God; and that St. Peter calls it, The new Heaven, and new Earth,
and St. John, The new Jerusalem.

He said, That the Mystery of the Gospel, which was preached by the Apostles,
was hid from men; they knew not the mystery of it: but the time will come, that
this mystery of the Gospel will come forth in a fuller discovery than has been
heretofore made known. But I shall trouble the Reader no further with him.

On April the nineteenth, 1657. at a certain House in Shoreditch, were
apprehended a discontented party, formerly in the Army, that went under the
name of Fifth Monarchy-men, such as taking upon them to be the Champions of
Christ's Monarchy on Earth, renounced all Monarchy besides: the chief of whom
were Thomas Venner, a Wine-Cooper, Predicant, Ashton, Hopkins, Gowler, and Gray
their Scribes. They had appointed to have rendezvous that night at
Mile-end-Green, and thence to have marched into some other Counties, to join
with others of their party, that were ready to show themselves upon the first
opportunity. There was taken with them a great quantity of Arms, and certain
printed Papers that were to be dispersed, and a Standard with a Lion couchant,
Gules, in a Field Argent, having this Motto, Who shall rouse him up?

There was also taken Major General Harison, Captain Lawson, late Vice Admiral,
Colonel Rich, Carew and Courtney, and Major Danvers; whereof the first was
committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and the rest were sent to remote Castles
and Prisons. General Monk had order to seize Major General Overton, and the
Majors Bramston and Holmes, and cashier them after Fines and good Security for
their behavior. Overton was sent up to the Tower, and his Regiment conferred
on Colonel Morgan: Colonel Okey's Regiment was also taken from him, and given
to a sure Confider: and one Major Wildman, a great Leveller, was taken at
Marleborough, enditing and drawing Declarations against the Protector; so the
danger from the Army was soon suppressed.

About the same time a Book was published, called Killing no Murder, wherein
it was urged, That it was most lawful, just, necessary, and honorable to kill
the Protector; and this printed with the name of one Allen, a disbanded
Leveller, but so politely written, that it intimated a more exact and curious
hand that framed it. Whosoever was the Author, it s^ared Cromwell almost out of
his Wits. This made him most suspitiously fearful, so that he began to dread
every person, or strange face he saw, (which he would anxiously, and intently,
view) for an Assassinate, that Book perpetually running in his mind. It is
said, it was his constant custom to shift and change his Lodging, to which he
passed through twenty several Locks, and out of which he had four or five ways
to avoid pursuit.

June iwenty six, 1657. Then followed the Protector's Instalment, in a more
solemn manner, in Westminster Hall, than before: and the Speaker of the
Parliament, Sir Thomas Widdrington, in the name of the Parliament, presented to
him a Robe of Purple-velvet, a Bible, Sword, and a Scepter, and having made a
Speech thereupon, the Speaker took the Bible, and gave the Protector his Oath.
Mr. Manton, Minister then of Covent Garden, made a Prayer, wherein he
recommended the Protector, Parliament, Council, the Forces by Sea and Land,
Government, and People of the three Nations, to the protection of God. Which
being ended, the Heralds by Trumpets proclaimed Cromwell Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, requiring all
persons to yield him due obedience.

Then were the attempts of the Royal Party, in behalf of his Majesty, betrayed,
and discovered to the Protector, and Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor Huet, Minister
of St. Gregory's by Paul's in London, Mr. Mordant, and others are imprisoned,
and brought to trial before an High Court of Justice, set up under the
Presidentship of Commissioner Lisle. Sir Henry, and the Doctor, were the two
first that were brought to trial, and both of them sentenced to die as
Traitors: the first upon the bare testimony of those three men, who had so
treacherously circumvented him, which in vain he pleaded: the other, as a Mute,
disowning the Authority of the Court, and thereupon denying to plead. On the
eighth of June, 1658. they were beheaded on Tower Hill. Afterward, on July the
seventh, Colonel Edward Ashton, and John Bettley, were hanged and quartered,
the first in Tower-street, the other in Cheapside.

Cromwell was now again adorned with another success, and triumph, by the
defeat of the Spanish Army, and surrender of Du^kirk into his hands, Lockart
his Kinsman, and General of the English Forces, being made Governor thereof.

In August. 1658. the Protector was taken sick at Hampton Court, having not
been well in mind some time before (troubled with the last distracted words of
his beloved Daughter Cleypole, who died on the sixth day of August) which went
near to his heart. After a weeks time his Disease began to show very desperate
symptoms: wherefore he was removed to White Hall, where his Chaplains kept
Fasts for his recovery: but having declared his Son Richard his Successor, he
died on Friday, September the third, at three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The deceased Protector's Will, concerning his Successor, being imparted to the
Council, and chief Officers of the Army, they all consent to the election of
his Son Richard, and the President, and whole Council, went at once to
congratulate him, and to condole his Fathers death, Then was he proclaimed by
the City of London, and chief Officers of the Army. After the Proclamation, the
Lord Mayor presented his Sword to him, which he presently returned: and after
some Ceremonies passed, (the Council, and many Officers of the State, and of
the Army being present) Nathanael Fiennes, one of the Commissioners of the
Great Seal, administered an Oath unto him.

A Gentleman was sent into Ireland, who was chief Governor of that Kingdom, to
acquaint Henry Cromwell with the present posture of Affairs in England: and Mr.
Thomas Clarges was sent into Scotland, to General Monk, to see how he stood
affected to Richard's advancement. Then Addresses were made to the Protector
from all parts of the Nation: and the Army of Scotland submit to what was was
done in England. Addresses were also made to the young Protector from all the
Regiments of the Army in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other parts.

After the pompous solemnity of the Funerals of the late Protector, the new
Protector summoned a Parliament, to meet at Westminster, on January twenty
seven, he endeavors to new model his Council; but the Army grows jealous of
him, and censure him, and the factious part of the Army had many seditious
meetings, and he is persuaded to resign the command of the Army to Fleetwood,
which he refuses. The General Council of Officers (as they called themselves)
met in Fleetwood's House, where they acted with as much formality, as if they
had been the supreme Legislators of the three Kingdoms. At length things came
to this issue, the young Protector was forced to sign a Commission to
Commissioner Fiennes, for the dissolving of the Parliament, and a Proclamation
came forth, in the Protector's name, to publish the dissolution of the
Parliament.

Soon after, whilst many of the Superior Officers of the Army met at Walling
ford-house, in further consideration of a Module of Government, Sapplem. to Sir
Ri^h. Baker's Hist.
the inferior Officers being the most numerous, assembled in the Chapel at
St. James', having Doctor Owen, and other Independent Ministers, to assist at
their Devotion, and at last declared their forwardness to restore the latter
part of the long Parliament, and to restore Lambert, and the rest of the
Officers to their Commands, who had been displaced by Oliver Cromwell for
disaffection to him.

Several Colonels were removed from their Regiments, and others put in their
rooms; as likewise Governors of Towns and other Officers. Lambert being thus
brought again into the Army, recovereth much of hi^ former power.

Then a Declaration of the Officers of the Army was drawn up, which invited the
Members of the long Parliament, who had sat till April the twentieth, 1653. to
return to the exercise and discharge of their trust. They accept of the
Invitation, and take their places in the House.

General Monk seems to consent to what was done in England.

They publish their Intentions by Declaration, viz. That they are resolved, by
God's assistance, to endeavor to secure and establish the property and
Liberties of the people, without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Peers:
and shall vigorously endeavor the carrying on of Reformation, so much desired:
to the end there may be a godly and faithful Magistracy, and Ministry upheld
and maintained in the Nations, etc.



The Officers of the Army presented an humble Address to the Remnant
Parliament, on May 12. 1659. by Lambert and others. Richard, the late
Protector, sends his submission to the Parliament. All Commissions to the
Officers of the Army are ordered to be signed by the Speaker: and Henry
Cromwell is called from the Government of Ireland. Fleetwood, Lambert, and
others, receive their Commissions in the House from the Speaker. The Governor
of Dunkirk submits also to the change of our Government. General Monk likes not
the Juncto's designs of modelling his Army, and uses his utmost industry to
obstruct it. Commissioners are appointed for the Government of Ireland.

In the mean time Captain Titus, and others, sent as Commissioners from the
King, are active for his Majesty's service in London, and in the Country. Sir
George Booth, with several others, appear in a considerable Body; they take
possession of Chester City, but the Castle holds out against them. Chirk-Castle
is delivered to them by Sir Thomas Middleton. Colonel Ireland, and several
others, at the same time declare for them at Leverpool, and Mr. Brooks, one of
the Members of the House of Commons.

Lambert is sent against Sir George Booth. Mr. Nicholas Monk, a Minister, and
the only Brother to General Monk, is sent into Scotland from Sir Hugh Pollard,
Sir Thomas Stukeley, and other of his Majesty's Friends in the West of England;
He sollicits his Brother to embrace his Majesty's Interest.

The King wrote a Letter to General Monk, and another to Sir John Greenvill,
concerning the owning his Cause, Major General Massey was active in
Gloucestershire, and the Lord Herbert, Son to the Marquess of Worcester, and
others. The Lord Herbert was taken: so was Major General Massey, with others:
but all the rest of the Prisoners, except the Lord Herbert, and Massey's
Servant, make an escape.

Lambert marches against Sir George Booth, and Sir George is defeated by
Lambert, and soon after was seized at Newport-pannel, in a disguise, as he was
riding to London.

After this defeat General Monk sends a Letter to the House, signifying his
willingness to be dismissed from his Command. The Army begin to contrive the
recovery and advancement of their power. The Officers of the Army, promoted by
Lambert, dislike some proceedings of the Juncto. They conclude to draw up their
desires in a Petition. Sir Arthur Haslerig vehemently opposes the Armies
proceedings: and incenseth the House against them and Lambert. Fleetwood
endeavors to justify the Officers of the Army, but in vain. Ashfield, Cobbet,
and Duckenfield, presented the Petition of the Army to the House, thus
dirrected. To the Supreme Authority of these Nations, the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, etc.

The humble Petition, and Proposals, of the Officers under the Command of the
Right Honorable the Lord Lambert, in the late Northern Expedition.



The House signify their displeasure, and vote against the effect of the
Petition. Then the Officers resolve upon more moderate Proposals. Another
Petition is brought into the Council of Officers more high than the former.
General Monk writes his sense of it in a Letter to Fleetwood; and offers
himself to march into England, to the assistance of the Parliaments Party.

October the fifth, Colonel Desborow, with many other Officers of the Army,
present a Representation, and Petition of the Officers of the Army to the
Parliament; who at first dissemble their distaste of these proceedings of the
Army. The Council of Officers perceiving, that the Parliament labor to alter
the Constitution of the Army, labor to get Subscriptions to their
Representation, and Petition. They send a Letter to General Monk concerning
their Representation. He resolves to admit of no Subscriptions in Scotland.
General Monk is courted by the Parliament, and complemented by Letters, with
gratulatory Expressions for his good service.

The House takes the Armies debates into consideration, and answers them one by
one Mr. Nicholas Monk arrives from Scotland with private Orders from the
General to Mr. Clarges. The house orders, That the Commissions of Lambert,
and others be made void. They appoint Commissioners for governing the Army, and
remove Fleetwood from the chief command thereof. Colonel Morloy, and Moss, are
ordered with their Regiments to guard the House.

But Lambert, with the Regiments that adhere to him, stop the passages to the
Parliament House, and having enforced the Speaker to return, they dissolve the
Remnant Parliament, by hindering the Members from coming into the House.

The next day diverse of the chief Officers of the Army met at Whitehall, and
chose ten Army Officers to be managers of the State Affairs pro tempore. They
agree, that Fleetwood should be Commander in chief of all the Armies, and that
Limbert should be the next chief Officer under him, and Colonel Desborow
Commissary General of the Horse; and that all the Officers to be constituted in
the Army, should be nominated by Sir Henry Vane, Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborow,
Ludlow, and Berry. They dispatch Colonel Cobbet to General Monk with a large
Narrative of the Reasons of their proceedings.

Now was Mr. Armorer sent by the Lord Mordant to the King, to inform him how
matters went in England. The Council of Officers consult about a frame of
Government. They nominate twenty three persons to take upon them the
Government, under the Title of The Committee of Safety; and they invite them to
sit, giving them Powers and Instructions.

General Monk writes to Fleetwood, and Lambert, complaining of their violation
of Faith to the Parliament, declaring his resolution to endeavuor to restore
them to their power, against all opposition whatsoever.

Mr. Clarges is dispatched away into Scotland by the Grandees of the Army,
together with Colonel Talbot, to solicit General Monk to a Treaty. Monk keeps
in all the displaced Officers in their respective Commands, which causes them
to adhere unto him, and removes those whom himself distrusteth. He signifies
his resolution to several of his Officers to march into England, to
re-establish the Parliament, and has their consent and encouragement.

He marches to Edinborough, and there orders all things to his best advantage.

Captain Johnston secures Berwick; Captain Witter takes possession, for the
General, of the Citadel of St. Johnstons, and is made Major of the Regiment.
Robson gets possession of the Citadel at Air, and is made Colonel of the
Regiment. Smith's Regiment at Innerness is given to Colonel Man. The General
marches to Leith to settle the Citadel and Regiment there. Captain Hatt and
Dennis bring off Cobbet's Regiment to the General; and Cobbet was detained
prisoner at Be^wick; as he was coming into Scotland with his Regiment, he was
brought with a Guard to Edenborough Castle, and kept there.

At Linlithgow, at a Council of Officers, it was advised, that some way should
be used to draw off the Independent Churches in England from favoring the
English Army, which would have much weakened that party, if it had succeeded;
for most of the Inferior Officers were of that persuasion. For the effecting
of this, a Declaration was framed, agreed to, published and dispersed all over
England: and at the same time another Declaration was also made to satisfy the
Kingdom in general with his proceedings.

General Monk invite's Ludlow in Ireland to a Conjunction with him. Colonel
Lilburn at York with what forces he could draw together, makes all possible
opposition against General Monk, and intercepts the General's Letters to Major
General Morgan. Talbot and Clarges come to Edinburgh Novem. 2. and are
well-received by the General.

General Monk take's hold, for his advantage, of Lambert's overture for a
Treaty. Colonel Clobery, Colonel Wilks, and Major Knight, are chosen to be the
General's Commissioners in this Treaty. They meet Lambert at York, who opposes
the proposal touching the restitution of the Parliament. The Army of Horse and
Foot with Lambert amounted to near twelve thousand, and Monk had not above half
the number: but General Monk paid all his men, which the other did not.

Major General Morgan take's his journey into Scotland to General Monk, and his
joining with the General was a matter of great importance. He privately
delivers a Letter to the General from Mr. Bowls a Minister of York a very
eminent man of those parts, and of great credit with the Lord Fairfax. Mr.
Clarges is sent to the Lord Fairfax, Colonel Rossiter, and others, to engage
them to General Monk. Colonel Talbot is prevailed upon by Lambert to take part
with him.

Colonel Whaley, Colonel Gosse, Captain Dean, and Mr. Caryl the Minister, are
sent by Fleetwood to General Monk. Fleetwood by Letters Court's Monk to side
with him.

The ruling Faction in Ireland declare their resolution not to join with
General Monk. But Sir Charles Coot, Sir Theophilus Jones, and a considerable
part of the Army resolve to assist him. Mr. Clarges returns from Scotland, and
secretly confers with Mr. Bowels at York, to whom he brought a letter of
Credit. Bowels negotiates with the Lord Fairfax, Colonel Bethel, and others in
General Monk's behalf, who promise to assist him.

In the mean-time the Commissioners for the Independent Churches, which were
sent into Scotland, were sollicitious to divert Monk from the prosecution of
the War: there was a conference appointed with them at Holy-rood-house, where
were present to treat with them General Monk, Colonel Fairfax, Colonel Syler,
Dr. Barrow, the Judge Advocate of the Army, and Mr. Gumble one of the General's
Chaplains, and Mr. Collins (who had been one of the Preachers to the late
Council in Scotland) was admitted to be present there as a Newter.

Mr. Caryl was the first that spoke, and said, That they all came, not The
effect of Mr. Caryl's speech in the name of the Independent Churches.
to declare their own sense of the General's proceedings, but the sense of the
Churches (for so upon every occasion he called the Independent Congregations.)
That the Churches had not given them Commission to enter into the merits of the
cause, nor to debate whether Lambert's Action of turning out the Parliament
were justifiable or not, but only to present it to his Lordship, as their
opinion, That though that Action could not be justified, yet his Lordship had
not a call to appear against it in that manner that he then did, That his
Lordship had only in charge to keep Scotland in quiet, and was not bound to
take notice of any differences in England. He proceeded to show reasons why the
General should proceed no further, telling him, that it would put a strife
among those that hitherto had been Brethren engaged all along in the same
cause, partakers in the same dangers, and the same successes, among those that
still in their Papers and all their Addresses, called and owned one another for
Brethren; and that at a very unseasonable time, whilst the Canaanites and
Perizzites were in the Land. He insisted on all the advantages the King and his
Party would reap by this quarrel, and all the dangers the people of God (for so
he called his own party) might run into. At last he told the General, that what
Inconveniences soever should happen would be laid at his door, in regard he
would appear to have been the beginner of the War.

At this the General interrupted him, showing that the war was already begun by
Lambert and his party, who had offered violence to those from whom they had all
received their Commissions: not sparing largely to lay open their restless
Instability, which would not suffer the three nations to enjoy any settled
Government at all, but kept them in a perpetual circumvolution, till they were
in danger to be brought to utter ruin; and Declaring, That if they continued
in that course, he was resolved to oppose them to the uttermost, and would (to
repeat his own words) lay them on their backs.

The Treaty ended between the Commissioners of the two Armies, who came to ^n
agreement, which consisted of nine Articles, on Novem. ^5. 1659. But General
Monk consults how he might, with the most handsome pretense, refuse his Assent
to these Articles. And it was proposed by Dr. Barrow, and agreed to by the
General and the rest, That they should not declare a positive dissent to what
their Commissioners had done, but urge, that there was something untreated of,
further to be agreed upon, etc. and that therefore it should be desired, that
two more might be allowed to be added to their Commissioners, to meet a like
number of theirs to be thereunto authorized, to put a more absolute period to
their differences.

Mr. Atkins and Colonel Markham are sent by the General with a Letter to the
City of London, which so much incensed the Committee of Safety, that the
Gentlemen who delivered it are Imprisoned.

On November 19. Nine of the Old Counselors of State privately meet in London,
and sent one Captain Elmes, with Horton, a servant of Sir Arthur Hazlerig's
with a letter into Scotland to General Monk. This was a great encouragement to
the Officers in Scotland.

Colonel Whetham at Portsmouth generously declared for General Monk with that
Garrison, after the Council of State had framed a Commission, wherein they
Constituted General Monk Commander in Chief of all the Armies in England and
Scotland, which was dated November 24. sealed with their seal, and left in the
hands of Mr. Clarges, till a safe messenger might be sent with it unto him.
Hurst-castle, and the Isle of Wight are kept for the Parliament.

Commissioners from the several Shires and Buroughs of Scotland wait upon the
General at Berwick, and the General and they part with a mutual respect. The
General prepares to make defense against Lambert, if occasion were. There were
many great differences between the City of London, and Lambert's party there.
The Soldiers are affronted by the Apprentices not without some bloodshed.
Oppositions from all parts increase against Lambert's faction. Lambert was
daily alarmed with the success of the Commissioners at Portsmouth, and his
party daily decrease. Fleetwood submits, and desires the Members of Parliament
to sit again. They take their Seats again in the Parliament House; and Order
seven Commissioners for the management of the Army. Colonel Morley upon this
change had his Regiment restored, and with it the Government of the Tower
conferred on him. The Irish Brigade was brought off to General Monk by Redman
and Bret. Dublin-castle is surprised: and Sir Charles Coot reduces all
Connaught to a compliance with the present Design. The Lord Fairfax, and
several of Monk's party joining with him, rise in Yorkshire.

Now General Monk begins his march into England. By that time he came to
Morpeth, he was informed that Lambert's whole party was of themselves dispersed
into several quarters in submission to the Parliament's Orders. There he
receive's an Address from the City of London by Mr. William Man, their
Sword Bearer, as likewise from ^^e Gentry of the Country in all parts as he
marched along.

The new restored Members on January 2. name 31. Counselors of State, passing
an Act for their Constitution, and several Instructions for them to Act by:
among which it was provided, that none should sit, but such as should take an
Oath of Abjuration of the King, His family, and Government. The Oath was
opposed by diverse of the House. Scot and Robinson are sent from the House to
complement and attend General Monk upon his journey. Mr. Clarges gives him an
account how affairs stand at London: he sends a letter by Mr. Clarges to the
House from St. Albans. Several addresses are made to him in his March, pleading
for a free Parliament. He marches with his forces into the City of London.
Being come to the Council of State, the Oath of Abjuration was tendered to him,
which he refuses to take. He is conducted with much Ceremony into the House,
where he receives the gratulations of the House. The City continued
malecontent, whereupon the General is Ordered by the Council of State to march
into the City, and pull down the Gates and Percullices of the City, which he
unwillingly caused to be done. The same day a Factious party of Citizens
presented a Petition to the House by one Praise-God Barebone to countenance the
Action.

The General sends a letter to the House signed by Himself and several
Officers, complaining against the admission of Ludlow and others into the
House, that had been by Sir Charles Coot accused of high Treason: and that they
had countenanced too much a late Petition, to exclude the most sober and
conscientious both Ministers and others by Oaths, from all employment and
maintenance: he requested them, that by Friday next they should Issue out Writs
to fill up their House, and when filled, should rise in some short time, to
give place to a full and free Paliament. Scot and Robinson are sent from the
House to the General with their answer to his letter.

The General excuses his late proceedings in the City before the Lord Mayor
and Common Council of the City. He tells them what he had written to the House
touching a free Parliament: The City joyfully receives the news of a free
Parliament.

The Council of State write to him to desire his presence with them: but he
excuses his stay in the City for some longer time, till the minds of the
Citizens were more composed. The City, and Chief Officers of his Army dissuade
him from going to White Hall. The General is solicited from all parts to admit
the secluded Members. He admits of a conference before him, of the sitting with
some of the secluded Members. The Officers of the Army consent to the admission
of the secluded Members upon certain conditions: The General and the Officers
at length agree upon their admission: and on the Tuesday morning following they
were guarded to the House, and took their places in the Parliament.

Then was a letter signed by the General and his Chief Officers drawn up, and
Copies of it sent to all the Regiments and Garrisons in England, and to the
Commanders in Chief of the Armies in England, Scotland, and Ireland to acquaint
them with what he had done.

The Parliament repealed the Act for the Council of State and the Oath of
Abjuration, and passed an Act for another Council, consisting of one and thirty
persons, most of them men of integrity, and well-affected to Kingly government.

Then the General sends Colonel Fairfax to take possession of Hull, and Colonel
Overton submits to his Orders. The Army in Scotland. were well-satisfied with
the General's Actions. About the thirteenth of March the Parliament abrogated
the Engagement appointed formerly to be taken by each Member of Parliament, in
these words, viz. [I do declare and promise, That I will be true and faithful
to the Common Wealth of England, as the same is now established without King,
or House of Lords,] and appointed it should be taken off the file, and made
Null.

The Common Wealth Faction desire the General rather to take the Government
upon himself, than to bring in the King; and treat with him about it. The
General refuses their offer. Then the Republicans attempt to make a mu^iny in
the Army. The long Parliament was now dissolved. The King removes to Breda.

The Council of State appointed by the late Parliament set forth a Proclamation
for the preventing of tumults.

Lambert escape's out of the Tower. Colonel Ingoldsby and Colonel Streater
march against Lambert, defeat his party, and take him prisoner. Colonel
Lambert, Colonel Cobbet, and Major Creed, are sent prisoners to the Tower.
Hereupon several seditious Pamphlets were published in Print, and dispersed to
deprave the minds of the people; and Tickets were thrown into the Courts of
Guard in the night to divide the Soldiers. But none of them was penned with
more virulency and malice, than that suppositious paper, carrying in it is
Frontispiece, A letter from Bruxels, etc. Several letters were also sent to the
General from unknown hands. Then came forth a Declaration of the Nobility and
Gentry that adhered to the late King, residing in and about the City of London.

A new Parliament met at Westminster, April 25. 1660. The Lords chose the Earl
of Manchester to be their Speaker; and the House of Commons Sir Harbottle
Grimston. On April 27. Sir John Greenvil presents the General with a Commission
from His Majesty, to Constitute him Captain General of all the Armies of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; and a letter for the Council of State. The
Letter had a Declaration in it, which were both read in the House. After the
reading thereof the House of Lords voted, That according to the Ancient and
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Government is, and ought to be, by King,
Lords, and Commons.

The Officers of the Army present an Address to the General in compliance with
His Majesty's Letter and Declaration: it is read by the Commons, and approved.
Commissary Clarges is appointed by the General to wait upon the King with this
Address. Six of the Lords and of the Commons, and diverse Aldermen, and diverse
Episcopal and Presbyterial Divines, and some other eminent Citizens are sent to
attend on his Majesty at Breda. His Majesty's Letter and Declaration to the
Fleet, by the diligence of General Mountague, had the same success there, as
that in the Army, being gratefully received by all the Commanders in the Fleet.

Three days after, the Lords and Commons having agreed upon a Proclamation to
that purpose, His Majesty was Proclaimed with great solemnity in the Cities of
London and Westminster, the Lords and Commous, and the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of London being present. Mr. Clarges carries the happy tidings hereof with a
Letter from the General to His Majesty at Breda. Thereupon M. Clarges is
Knighted by His Majesty. The Parliament's and Cities Commissioners have their
audience from His Majesty at the Hague. The King afterward landed at Dover
with the Dukes of York and of Gloucester, and many Noblemen and Gentlemen. There
the General met him, upon whose motion for His going to Canterbury, the King
hastened to His Coach, in His passage to which he was met by the Mayor and
Aldermen of the Town, with Mr. Reading the Minister, who presented His Majesty
with a large Bible with Golden Clasps. At His entrance into Canterbury, he was
met by the Mayor and Aldermen, and Mr. Lovelace the Recorder, who made an
eloquent speech to Him: the Mayor also presented Him with a Tankard of Massy
Gold, and then conducted Him to the Palace, where He remained till Monday. From
Canterbury He marches magnificently attended to London. When he came to S.
George's fields, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen on their Knees Reverenced His
Majesty, and the Lord Mayor presented His Sword unto Him, which His Majesty
gave back to him: from thence He was in a Triumphant and Glorious manner
attended and conducted through the City of London to White Hall, On May 29.
1660. being His birthday.

The Lord Mayor having taken leave of Him, He went to the Lords, where He was
entertained with a grave and eloquent speech of the Earl of Manchester; and
from thence to the Banqueting House, where the whole House of Commons
attending Him, the Speaker in their names expressed the joyful sense they all
had to behold His Majesty returned in safety, and thereby an end was put to
that Tyranny and Slavery His good people had endured. His Majesty in brief
expresses his gracious intentions to them. Then His Majesty gave thanks to God
in His Presence Chamber, for all His deliverances and mercies toward him. May
31. He sets forth a Proclamation against debauchery and profaneness. The Chief
Officers of State, and of the King's Household, and the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, are constituted. The Commons set upon the Act of General Pardon.
On June 4. the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance were taken by both Houses of
Parliament, the King's Servants, and Officers of His Household. His Majesty's
arrival is congratulated by the People from all parts of the Nation, and by
several of the Nobility and Gentry both of Scotland and Ireland. The King on
July 5. is magnificently entertained with the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the
Lords of the Privy Council, the two Houses of Parliament, and the
Chief-officers of State, by the Lord Mayor and the Grandees of the City.

General Monk was created Duke of Albemarle, General Mount ague made Earl of
Sandwich, and the Marquess of Ormond made Duke of Ormond. The Chief Ministers
of State are constituted in Scotland. Notwithstanding the late unanimous
concurrence of the people at Edinborough (as well as other places) in the
public Proclaiming of His Majesty; yet soon after there began to discover it
self a spirit of discontent among many Scotch Ministers, some of the principal
sticklers of the Kirk-party, as appeared by their meeting together at a place
appointed for the drawing up a Remonstrance concerning things wherein they
thought themselves aggrieved: which the Committee of Estates having notice of,
sent forthwith to apprehend them, and clapped them up in Prison; and for the
prevention of the like disturbances for the future, set forth a Proclamation
against all unlawful meetings, and seditious Papers.

The Marquess of Argyle, notwithstanding he came to Court with others of the
Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, under pretense of tendering his service to His
Majesty, yet was he charged with high Treason, and sent prisoner to the Tower:
and together with him were committed the Marquess of Antrim, Sir Henry Vane,
and Sir Arthur Hazlerig, with several others that followed. Sir Arthur died
soon after of a Fever in the Tower. Argyle was sent back into Scotland, and
their tried, condemned, and beh^aded.

On August 19. among other Acts, an Act was passed by the King and Parliament
for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on May 29. the day of His Majesty's
Nativity and Restoration. An Act also was passed for a general Pardon,
Indemnity, and Oblivion, in which among other things that were excepted, all
accounts of the Revenues of Churches in Wales and Monmouth-shire, and all
Judgments of discharge, or Quietus est thereupon had.

This Exception as to the Churches in Wales, was inserted by the Parliament in
this Act, upon information, that some factious people had, in the time of the
late usurpation, procured to themselves an Authority to Sequester all those
Revenues, upon pretense to employ them more equally to illiterate Preachers,
for the better propagation of the Gospel in those parts, but kept the greatest
part to their own use, leaving most of the Churches unsupplied.

All offenses also done by any Popish Priest, Seminary, or Jesuit, contrary to
the Statute of the 27 Eliz. were excepted.

Many of the late King's judges were excepted from pardon. All Trustees in a
pretended Act made Anno 1649. concerning Tithes appropriate Fee-farm rents, and
First Fruits, etc. and their heirs, were to be accomptable for such of the same
as had not been employed according to the said Act: nevertheless, no Minister
or Schoolmaster, or other person, for whose benefit the said Act was made,
were to be accomptable.

The King on September 13. 1660. came to the House of Lords, and signed
fourteen private, and eight public Acts, among which one was an Act for the
Confirming and Restoring of Ministers. This Act stopped the clamours of many
Ecclesiastical Persons that had defective titles to their Cures: and the
goodness of His Majesty was very much celebrated by His consent to it. It
enacts, That every Ecclesiastical Person, or Minister, ordained by any
Ecclesiastical Persons before the twenty fifth of December last past, and was
then in possession, and received the profits, being in the King's gift, or of
His Father, or of any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean and Chapter, Prebend,
Archdeacon, Body Politic or Corporate, or other Person, other than such hereby
restored, is declared lawful Incumbent.

Every Voluntary Resignation of a Benefice to the Patron, or any Pretended
Power since the said first day of January, to be good, as if made to the
Competent Ordinary.

No presentation is to be construed to be an usurpation in Law, to the
prejudice of any that shall have right to present.

Every Ecclesiastical Person formerly Sequestered or ejected after Lawful
presentation and reception (...) the profits, that has not subscribed any
petition to bring the late King to Trial; or by any Act endeavored or
justified the murder of the said King, or declared his judgment against
Infant Baptism, by Preaching, Writing, Printing, or constant refusal to
Baptize, shall be restored to the possession thereof, at or before the twenty
fifth day of December next ensuing; and every Ecclesiastical person to be
removed, may enjoy the profits to that day.

On December 29. following, on which day the Parliament was dissolved, 32 Acts
more were passed by the King. Among which one was an Act for Confirmation of
Marriages during the time of the late Usurpations. Another was for making the
Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial. And an Act for the disappropriating of the
Rectory appropriate of Preston, and uniting and consolidating of the said
Rectory, and of the Vicarage of the Church of Preston, and for the assuring of
the Advouson and right of Patronage of the same unto the Master, Fellows, and
Scholars of Immanuel-colledge in Cambridge. And an Act for Confirmation of
Grants and Leases from Colleges and Hospitals.

Now some sixty Fifth-monarchy men under the conduct of one Thomas Venner, a
Cooper, broke forth into Rebellion. This Venner was a Preacher to a Conventicle
of that opinion in Coleman-street in London. Such was the madness of these men,
that they believed, that They and the rest of their judgment were called by
God to reform the world, and make all the earthly powers (which they called
Babylon) subservient to the Kingdom of Jesus: and in Order thereunto never to
sheath their swords, till the carnal powers of the world were subdued. They
were taught and believed, that one of them should subdue a Thousand, making
account when they had done their work in England, to go into France, Spain,
Germany, and other parts of the world, there to prosecute their pretended holy
design. The place where they plotted and continued their conspiracy was the
meeting place for their devotion, and thither they had at several times
convayed arms. On Sunday January 6. which was the day before their excursion,
they were very late at their Assembly, which made one Martin, the Landlord of
the House, inquisitive after their doings. He peeping through a chink in their
door, saw them arming themselves with Back, breast, and headpiece, and
thereupon immediately gave notice to the next Officers. Half an hour after they
came down, and first marched to S. Thomas the Apostle, to call some of their
party, from thence to Bishops-gate, and after to White-cross-street. They
escaped to S. John's Wood, and from thence to Canc-wood, betwixt High-gate and
Hampsted. On Wednesday morning the Rebels came again into London, and divided
themselves into two parties, one whereof about five or six in the morning
appeared about Leaden Hall, and from thence marched to little Eastcheap, where
they fought desperately, but were dispersed by the trained bands. Venner, and
another ^^rty came to my Lord Mayor's house, thinking to have taken him
Prisoner, but missing him they marched into Woodstreet, where Colonel Corbet
and nine of his party charged through the Rebels, and broke them. They fought
with admirable courage, and if they had not been hindered from increasing their
numbers, a Thousand men so resolved might have done much mischief. Venner
himself was much wounded before he was taken, and about five or six were killed
that refused quarter. About eight or ten days after Venner with about sixteen
or seventeen of the most notorious, were arraigned at Justice-hall in the old
Baily, found guilty and executed in several parts of London.

About this time there was a conference at the Savoy between diverse Episcopal
and Presbyterian Divines about the Church discipline, but to little effect.

A new Parliament was called, which assembled at Westminster, May 8. 1661. In
the first Session whereof an Act was passed, Entitled, An Act for disenabling
all Persons in Holy Orders to exercise any temporal jurisdiction or Authority,
Repealed. The Bishops were brought to sit again as Peers in the House of Lords,
and their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction restored to them.

The Parliament explained a clause contained in an Act of Parliament, made in
the seventeenth year of King Charles the first, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of
a branch of a Statute Primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical.

At the second Session of this Parliament, an Act was made against Quakers, and
others, denying to take a Lawful Oath, with several penalties to be inflicted
on them for several offenses.

An Act was also passed for Uniformity of public Prayers, and Administration
of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies; and of ordering, and
consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of England.

The King's Majesty according to his Declaration of the 25th of October 1660.
had granted his Commission under the Great Seal of England, to several Bishops
and other Divines, to review the Book of Common Prayer, and to prepare such
additions and alterations, as they thought fit to offer. And afterward the
Convocations of both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, being by His Majesty
called and assembled; His Majesty was pleased to Authorize and require the
Presidents of the said Congregation, and other the Bishops and Clergy of the
same, to review the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of the Form and
manner of making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, etc. Since
which time upon full and mature deliberation, they the said Presidents,
Bishops, and Clergy of both Provinces having accordingly reviewed the same
Books, and made some alterations which they thought fit to be inserted to the
same; and some additional Prayers to be used upon proper and emergent
occasions: and having presented the same unto His Majesty in Writing, in one
Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the
Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches;
and the form and manner of making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons. All which His Majesty having duly considered, fully
approved and allowed the same, and recommended to this present Parliament (then
sitting and yet continuing to sit) that the said Book of Common Prayer, etc. be
the Book which shall be appointed to be used by all that officiate in all
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and in all Chapels, or
Colleges and Halls in both the Universities, and the Colleges of Eaton and
Winchester, and in all Parish-Churches and Chapels within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and by all that
make, or consecrate Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, in any of the said places
under such sanctions and penalties as the Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

And accordingly it was Enacted by the King's Majesty and both Houses of
Parliament, That Morning and Evening Prayers in the said Book contained, should
upon every Lord's day, and upon all other days and occasions, and at the times
therein appointed, be openly and solemnly read by all and every Minister and
Curate, in every Church, Chapel, or other place of public worship within this
Realm of England, and places aforesaid.

It was also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Parson, Vicar, or
other Minister whatsoever, who then had and enjoyed any Ecclesiastical Benefice
or Promottion, within this Realm of England, etc. should in the Church,
Chapel, or place of public worship belonging to his said Benefice or
Promotion, upon some Lord's day before the Feast of St. Bartholomew, which
should be in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred sixty two,
openly, publicly, and solemnly read the Morning and Evening Prayer, appointed
to be read by and according to the said Book of Common Prayer, at the times
thereby appointed, and after such reading thereof, openly and publicly before
the Congregation there assembled, declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to
the use of all things in the said Book contained and prescribed, in these words
and no other. I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all
and every thing contained, and prescribed in, and by the Book entitled, The
Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung
or said in Churches; and the form or manner of making, Ordaining and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.



And that all and every such Person, who should (without some lawful impediment
to be allowed and approved of by the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse
to do the same within the time aforesaid, etc. should within one month be
deprived, ipso facto, of his spiritual promotions: and that thenceforth it
should be lawful to and for all Patrons, and Donors of all and singular the
said spiritual Promotions, or of any of them, according to their respective
Rights and Titles, to present, or collate to the same, as though the person or
persons so offending were dead.

And it was further Enacted, That every Person henceforth to be promoted to any
Ecclesiastical Benefice, should read the Common Prayer, and declare his Assent
and Consent thereto within two months next after that he shall be in actual
possession of the said Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion: and upon neglect
or refusal to be deprived as aforesaid. And that Incumbents of Livings, keeping
Curates, shall read the same once every month, upon pain to forfeit the sum of
five pounds to the use of the poor of the Parish for every offense.

It was also Enacted, That every Dean, Canon, and Prebendary of every
Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, and all Masters and other Heads, Fellows,
Chaplains and Tutors of, or in any College, Hall, Hospital: and every public
Professor and Reader in either of the Universities, and in every College
elsewhere; and every Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, etc. and every
Schoolmaster keeping any public or private School; and every person
instructing or teaching any youth in any House or private family, as a Tutor or
Schoolmaster, etc. should before the Feast of St. Bartholomew in the year
aforesaid, subscribe the Declaration following, scilicet. I A. B. do declare,
that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against the
King: and that I do abhor that traitorous position of taking Arms by his
Authority against his person, or against those that are Commissioned by him:
and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now
by Law established: and I do declare, that there lies no obligation upon me, or
on any other person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and
Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government either in Church
or State: and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon
the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and liberties of this Kingdom.



The penalty for failing in subscribing, was for Deans, Vicars, Schoolmasters
to be deprived of their Ecclesiastical promotions, Schools and Lectures to be
void, as if such person so failing were naturally dead.

Provided always, That from and after the 25th day of March, which shall be in
the year of our Lord God, 1682. there shall be omitted in the said declaration
so to be subscribed, and read (it being enjoined to be openly and publicly
read by every Minister, etc. upon some Lords day within three months after his
subscription in the presence of the Congregation there assembled) these words
following, scil. And I do declare, that I do hold, there lies no obligation
upon me, or on any other person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn
League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government either
in Church or State, and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and
imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and liberties
thereof.



So as none of the persons aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be at all obliged
to subscribe, or read any part of the said declaration or acknowledgement.

It was further Enacted, That persons not ordained Priests or Deacons,
according to Episcopal ordination, shall not hold any Ecclesiastical promotion:
nor shall consecrate and administer the holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
upon pain to forfeit for every offense the sum of one hundred pounds; one
moiety thereof to the King, the other moiety thereof to be equally divided
between the poor of the Parish where the offense shall be committed.

It was also Enacted, That no other Form, or Order of Common Prayers,
Administration of Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies should be used openly in any
Church, Chapel, or public place: And it was further Enacted, That if any
person who is by this Act disabled to Preach any Lecture or Sermon, shall,
during the time that he shall continue and remain so disabled, Preach any
Sermon or Lecture, that then for every such offense, the Person and Persons so
offending shall fuffer three months imprisonment in the common Goal, without
Bayl or Mainprize.

It was also Provided, That at all and every time and times when any Sermon or
Lecture is to be Preached, the Common Prayers and Service, in and by the said
Book appointed to be read for that time of the day, shall be openly, publicly,
and solemnly read by some Priest or Deacon, in the Church, Chapel, or place of
public worship, where the said Sermon or Lecture is to be Preached: and that
the Lecturer then to Preach shall be present at the reading thereof.

It was further Enacted, That the Laws and Statutes formerly made for
Uniformity of Common Prayer should continue to be in force, and to be executed
for punishing offenders against this Law. Hereupon many hundred Ministers, with
diverse Lecturers and Schoolmasters, left their places, refusing to conform.

Another Act was also passed for restoring of all such Advousons, Rectories,
Impropriate Glebe-lands and Tithes to his Majesty's loyal Subjects as were
taken from them, and making void certain charges imposed on them, upon their
compositions for delinquency by the late usurped Power.

Another Act was passed for preventing Abuses, in printing Seditious,
Treasonable, and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and for regulating of
Printing, and Priming-presses. Pamphlets and Books prohibited to be Printed,
Published, or Sold, were Heretical, Seditious or Shismatical Books or
Pamphlets; wherein any Christian Doctrine or Opinion shall be asserted or
maintained which is contrary to Christian Faith, or to the Doctrine or
Discipline of the Church of England; or which shall or may tend, or be to the
scandal of Religion, or the Government or Governors of the Church, State, or
Commonwealth, or of any Corporation, or particular person, or persons
whatsoever: none shall import, publish, sell, or dispose any such Book or
Books, or Pamphlets; nor shall cause or procure any such to be published or put
to sale, or to be bound, stitched or sewed together.

In the fifteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, an Act was passed for relief of
such persons, as by Sickness, or other Impediment, were disabled from
subscribing the Declaration in the Act of Uniformity, and explanation of part
of the said Act.

In the sixteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, an Act was passed for
suppression of Seditious Conventicles, under pretense of exercise of Religion.
Wherein it was Enacted, That if any person being of the age of fixteen years
and upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the first day of
July 1664. shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under
color or pretense of any exercise of Religion, in any other manner than is
allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, in any place
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, etc. at which Conventicle,
Meeting, or Assembly, there shall be five persons or more assembled together,
over and above those of the same Household: then it shall and may be lawful to,
and for any two Justices of the Peace of the County, limit, division, or
liberty wherein the said offense aforesaid shall be committed, etc. and they
are hereby required and enjoined upon proof to him or them respectively made of
such offense, either by confession of the party, or Oath of witness, or
notorious evidence of the fact, to make a Record of every such offense under
their hands and seals respectively. And that thereupon the said Justices, etc.
shall commit every such offender so convicted, as aforesaid, to the Gaol, or
house of Correction, there to remain for three months without Bayl or
Mainprize, unless the said offender shall pay down to the said Justices or
chief Magistrate such sum of money not exceeding five pounds, as the said
Justices or Chief-magistrate (who are hereby thereunto authorized and required)
shall fine the said offender at, for his or her said offense: which money shall
be paid to the Churchwardens, for the relief of the poor of the Parish, where
such offender did last inhabit. Upon every second offense the offender to be
imprisoned six months, and to be fined ten pounds. And upon the third offense,
the offender to be transplanted beyond the Seas to any of his Majesty's
Foreign Plantations (Virginia and New England only excepted) there to remain
seven years.

It was further Enacted, That the Lieutennants, or Deputy-lieutennants, or any
Commissioned Officers of the Militia, or any other of his Majesty's Forces,
with such Troops, or Companies of Horse and Foot: and also the Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of
them jointly or severally, within any of the Counties or places within this
Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales, etc. shall repair unto the place where
such Con^enticles are held, and by the best means they can, shall dissol^e, and
dissipate, or prevent all such unlawful meetings, and take into their custody
such of those persons so unlawfully assembled, as they shall judge to be the
leaders and seducers of the rest, and such others as they shall think fit to be
proceeded against according to Law for such offenses.

Every person who shall willingly suffer any such Conventicle, to be held in
his or her house, out-house, barn, yard, etc. shall incur the same penalties
and forfeitures, as any other offender against this Act ought to be proceeded
against.

In the seventeenth year of His Majesty's Reign, an Act was passed for
restraining Non-conformists from inhabiting in Corporations. Herein it was
Enacted, That all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other persons in
holy Orders, or pretended holy Orders, etc. who have not declared their
unfeigned assent and consent as aforesaid, and subscribed the Declaration
aforesaid, and shall not take and subscribe the Oath following. I A. B. do
swear, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms
against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous position of taking Arms
by his Authority against his person, or against those that are Commissioned by
him, in pursuance of such Commissions: And that I will not endeavor at any
time any alteration of Government, either in Church or State.



And all such persons, as shall take upon them to Preach in any unlawful
Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under color or pretense of any exercise of
Religion, contrary to the the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, shall not at
any time from and after the 24th of March 1665. unless only in passing upon
the Road, come or be within five miles of any City, or Town Corporate, or
Borough, that sends Burgesses to the Parliament, within His Majesty's Kingdom
of England, Principality of Wales, etc. or within five miles of any Parish,
Town, or Place, wherein He or They have been, since the Act of Oblivion,
Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, etc. or taken upon them to Preach in any
unlawful Assembly, etc. under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion,
etc. before He or They have subscribed or taken the Oath aforesaid before the
Justices of the Peace at their quarter Sessions to be holden for the County or
division next unto the said Corporation, City or Borough, place or Town, in
open Court (which said Oath the said Justices are thereby empowered there to
administer) upon forfeiture for every such offense the sum of forty pounds of
lawful English money: the one third part to his Majesty and his Successors; the
other third part to the use of the poor of the Parish, where the offense shall
be committed; and the other third part thereof to such person or persons as
shall or will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Plaint, Bill, or Information,
in any Court of Record at Westminster, or before any Justices of Assize, Oyer
and Terminer, or Jail-deliver, etc.

Provided also, That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons
restrained from coming to any City, Town Corporate, Borough, etc. or for any
other person or persons as shall not first take and subscribe the said Oath,
and as shall not frequent Divine Service established by the Laws of this
Kingdom, and carry him or her self reverently, decently and orderly there, to
teach any public or private School, or take any Boarders or Tablers that are
taught or instructed by him or her self, or any other, upon pain for every such
offense to forfeit the sum of forty pounds, to be recovered and distributed as
aforefaid.

The offender also to be committed for six months to prison, by two Justices
of the Peace of the respective County, without Bayl or Mainprize, unless upon
or before such commitment, he shall, before the said Justices of the Peace,
swear and subscribe the aforesaid Oath and Declaration.

An Act was also passed for uniting Churches in Cities and Towns Corporate;
which was judged necessary by reason of the great ruin of many Churches and
Parishes in the late ill times, and otherwise. The Parishes to remain distinct
as to all Rates, Taxes, Parochial rights, charges and duties, and all other
Privileges, Liberties, and respects whatsoever, notwithstanding any such union
to be made by virtue hereof.

It was Enacted, That the Patrons of such Churches and Chapels so united,
shall present by turns only to that Church which shall remain and be
presentative from time to time, etc. Provided, That Parishes having an hundred
pounds maintenance per Annum, may not be united. Incumbents of such united
Parishes must be Graduates in some University. Owners of Impropriations may
bestow and annex maintenance to the Churches where they lie, and settle it in
trust for the benefit of the said Parsonage or Vicarage, without any license of
Mortmain.

It was further Enacted, That if the settled maintenance of such Parsonage,
Vicarage, Churches and Chapels so united, etc. shall not amount to the full
sum of one hundred pounds per Annum, clear and above all charges and reprizes,
that then it shall be lawful for the Parson, Vicar and Incumbent of the same,
and his Successors, to take, receive, and purchase to him and his Successors,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, or other Hereditaments, without any license of
Mortmain; any Law on Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

This year 1665. was a great Plague in London and in the Suburbs thereof; of
which there died above an hundred thousand persons.

Anno 1666. On September 2d. a Great Fire arose in London, which consumed a
great part of the City, whereby her beauty was defaced, and her glory stained:
yea the Houses of God themselves became a heap of ruins, and a sad spectacle
of desolation. The Citizens had not been long returned to their Houses which
the late devouring Plague had driven them from, but now the fire swalloweth up
all their habitations: and they that had so lately escaped the grave, do now
see the City it self (as it were) buried in it is own ruins.

In October 1667. a Judicature was erected for determination of differences,
touching Houses burned or demolished, by reason of the late fire which happened
in London.

An Act was passed for Re-building the City of London. And that the said
Citizens and their Successors for all the time to come, may retain the memorial
of so sad a desolation, and reflect seriously upon their manifold iniquities,
which are the unhappy causes of such Judgments.

It was Enacted, That the second of September (unless the same happen to be the
Lord's day, and if so, then the next day following) be yearly for ever
hereafter observed, as a day of public Pasting and Humiliation within the said
City and Liberties thereof, to implore the mercies of Almighty God upon the
said City, to make devout Prayer and Supplication unto him, to divert the like
calamity for the time to come.

And the better to preserve the memory of this dreadful visitation; It was
further Enacted, That a Column, or Pillar of Brass, or Stone, be erected on, or
as near unto the place where the said Fire so unhappily began, as conveniently
may be, in perpetual remembrance thereof, with such Inscription thereon, as
hereafter by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen be directed.

It was also further Enacted, That the Parish-churches to be Re-builded within
the said City of London, in lien of those which were demolished by the late
fire, should not exceed the number of thirty nine, to be set out and appointed
by and with the advice and consent of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Bishop of London for the time being.

It was also Provided, That the Sites and Materials of such Churches as by this
Bill are not to be rebuilt, together with the Churchyards belonging to such
Churches, shall be, and are hereby vested in the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of London, for the time being, to the end so much of the said ground, as
shall not, upon the re-building of the said City, be laid into the Streets, be
sold and disposed of by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, or the Major part of them,
with the consent of the said Archbishop and Bishop of London for the time
being: and the money raised by such sale, shall be, by the said Mayor and
Aldermen, or the major part of them, with the consent of the said Archbishop
and Bishop, disposed of, and employed for and toward the rebuilding of such
Parish-Churches as by this Act are intended to be rebuilt, and for no other use
or purpose whatsoever.

Provided always, That any thing in this Act contained, shall not extend, or be
taken to vest, or settle the Church of St. Paul's, and St. Faiths, or any part
thereof, or the Church of St. Gregory by St. Paul's, or any of them, or the
Churchyards to any of them belonging or appertaining, in the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, or any of them, any thing in this Act
notwithstanding.

An additional Act was also made for the rebuilding the City of London, uniting
of Parishes, and rebuilding of the Cathedral and Parochial Churches within the
said City. An Imposition was charged upon every Tun or Chaldron of Coals; and
it was provided, That three fourth parts of all the moneys, which from and
after the first day of May 1670. and before the 24th day of June 1677. shall be
raised or payable upon the receipt of the said imposition of two shillings for
every Chaldron or Tun of Coals; or in case of concealment thereof, shall be
employed, and disposed for, and toward the rebuilding, erecting or repairing
of the said Parish-Churches respectively, according to such order and
direction, as by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Bishop, and Lord
Mayor of London for the time being, or any two of them, shall be given in that
behalf: and the same shall from time to time be issued out, and paid
accordingly unto such person and persons, as they or any two of them shall, by
Warrant under their hands and seals for that purpose, direct and appoint. And
that one moiety of all the moneys which from and after the said 24th day of
June 1677. shall be raised, or payable upon the Imposition of three shillings
the Chaldron or Tun of Coals, or in case of concealment thereof as aforesaid,
shall be employed for and by such order and direction etc.

It was also Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Lord Bishop of London, and the Lord Mayor for time being,
etc. to employ or dispose, for and toward the building, repairing the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, one fourth part of the money by this Act given
and appointed for the building, erecting or repairing the Parish-Churches. The
profits of the impositions may be engaged to raise a present stock of money, to
any persons that will advance any sums of money upon that security. All which
moneys so to be borrowed shall be employed for and toward the rebuilding, and
erecting or repairing of the said Cathedral and Parish-Churches respectively
according to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

It was also further Enacted, That the number of Parishes to be settled, and of
Parish-Churches to b^ rebuilded within the said City of London, shall be fifty
one. The foresaid Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary,
notwithstanding. The same Parish-Churches shall be rebuilt according to the
modules appointed by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Bishop and Lord
Mayor of London, with the King's ^^probation. The Parishes of Alhallows
Lumbard-street, St. Bartholomew-Exchange, St. B^id^s, Bennet-Fink, St. Michaels
Crooked-lane, St. Christophers, St. Dionis Back-Church, St. Dunstans in the
East, St. James Garlic hithe St. Michael Cornhil, St. Bassishaw, St. Margaret
Loathbury, St. Mary Aldermanbury, St. Martin Ludgate, St. Peter's Cornhil, St.
Stephens Coleman-street, and St. Sepulchers, shall remain and continue, as
heretofore they were. And the respective Parish-Churches to each of the said
Parishes belonging shall be rebuilded, and continued for the use of the said
Parishes, and the other Parishes shall be respectively united, two Parishes
into one; that is to say, the Parishes of Alhallows Bred-street, and St. John
Evangelist, shall be united into one Parish, and the Church heretofore
belonging to the Parish of Alhallows Bred-street, shall be rebuilded, and shall
be the Parish Church of the Parishes so united. The Parishes of St. Albans
Wood-street, and St. Olaves Silver-street, shall be united into one Parish; and
the Church heretofore belonging to St. Albans Wood-street, shall be the
Parish Church of the said Parishes so united. The Parishes of St. Austin's and
St. Faiths, shall be united into one Parish, and the Church of St. Austins
shall be the Parish Church of the said Parishes so united. The like order is to
be observed in all the rest of the Parish-Churches that are to be united.

It was further Enacted, That any Plate and Goods heretofore belonging to any
of the Churchwardens of any of the Parishes burnt down, which are not to be
rebuilt, shall be enjoyed by the Churchwardens of those and their successors
of the respective Parishes of such Churches to be rebuilded, whereunto the said
other Churches burnt down, are united by this Act. Provided, That the Sites of
the Churches to be demolished, and the Churchyards belonging to the same,
shall be enclosed with Brick or Stone-walls for burial, for the Parishes
formerly belonging to the same, and the Parishes to which they are united as
aforesaid, and not used or employed to any other purpose whatsoever; excepting
such of the Sites and Churchyards, or parts of Sites and Churchyards of the
said Parish-Churches so demolished as aforesaid, as are already laid into the
Streets and Marketplaces set out for that purpose, etc. Notwithstanding the
union, yet the Parishes to all Rates, Charges, and Privileges, are to remain
distinct The present Incumbents of Churches not to be rebuilded, shall not be
deprived of the Tithes, or other profits heretofore belonging to their
respective Churches, so long as they shall assist in serving the Cure; and
other offices belonging to their duty in the Parish Church, whereunto their
respective Parishes shall be united, and annexed by this Act according
direction of the Ordinary, etc. saving to the King's Majesty, his heirs to the
and successors, the Tenths and First Fruits of all such Parish-Churishes as by
force of this present Act shall be united and consolidated, etc.

Yet the said Parsons and Vicars are hereby indemnified from the payment of all
First Fruits, Tenths, and Pensions due, and which shall be due to his Majesty:
and from all dues to the Ordinary and Archdeacon, and all other dues whatsoever
chargeable upon them respectively, until such time as they shall receive the
profits arising from the same, as formerly. And no Process shall be issued out
of any Court whatsoever, against the persons aforesaid, for their non-payment
of First Fruits, Tenths, Pensions, or any other the dues aforesaid, etc. They
are indemnified for not reading the 39. Articles, or not doing other things
enjoined by Law, until such time as the said Churches be re-edified, or made
fit for public worship. The said Parsons and Vicars are empowered to let
Leases of their Glebe-lands, with the consent of the Patron and Ordinary, for
any Term not exceeding forty years, and at such yearly rents, without fine, as
can be obtained for the same: and that no lapses incurred upon any
non-presentation in due time of any of the Patrons of the said livings since
the said fire, shall any ways prejudice, or make void the Presentations that
the said Patrons have since made, whereupon any Incumbent is since instituted
and inducted, any Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of ENGLAND and WALES.
The Archbishops of Canterbury.
1. AUgustine. 2. Laurence. 3. Mellitus. 4. Justus. 5. Honorius. 6. Deus Dedit.
7. Theodorus. 8. Brethwald. 9. Tatwyn. 10. Nothelmus. 11. Cuthbert. 12.
Bregwyn. 13. Lambert, alias Jainbert. 14. Athelard. 15. Wifred. 16. Theologild,
17. Celnoth. 18. Athelred. 19. Plegmond. 20. Athelmus. 21. Wilfelm. 22. Odo
Severus. 23. Dunstan. 24. Ethelgar. 25. Si^icius. 26. Alf^i^us. 27. Elphege.
28. Liu^ig. 29. Agelnoth. 30. Eadsin. 31. Robert Gemeticensis. 32. Stigand. 33.
Lanfrank. 34. Anfelm. 35. Rodolphus. 36. William Corbel. 37. Theobald. 38.
Thomas Becket. 39. Richard. 40. Baldwyn. 41. Reginald Fitz-Joceline. 42 Hubert
Walter. 43. Stephen Langton. 44. Richard Wethershed. 45. Saint Edmond. 46.
Boniface. 47. Robert Kilwarby. 48. John Peckham. 49. Robert Winchelsey. 50.
Walter Reinolds. 51. Simon Mepham. 52. John Stratford. 53. Thomas Bradwardine.
54. Simon Islip. 55. Simon I^ngham. 56. W. Wittlesey. 57. Simon Sudbury. 58.
William Courtney. 59. Thomas Arundel. 60. Henry Chichley. 61. John Stafford.
62. John Kemp. 63. Thomas Bourchier. 64. John Morton. 65. Henry Deane. 66.
William Warham. 67. Thomas Cranmer. 68. Reginald Pool. 69. Matthew Parker. 70.
Edmond Grindal. 71. John Whitgift. 72. Richard Bancroft. 73. George Abbot. 74.
William Laud. 75. William Juxon. 76. Gilbert Sheldon.
Archbishops of York.
1. Paulinus. 2. Cedda. 3. Wilfrid. 4. Bosa. 5. John of Beverley. 6. Wilfrid.
7. Egbert. 8. Albertus. 9. Eanbaldus the First. 10. Eanbaldus the Second. 11.
Wulfius. 12. Wimundus. 13. Wilferus. 14. Ethelbald. 15. Redward. 16. Wulstan.
17. Oskitel. 18. Athelwold. 19. Oswald. 20. Aldulf. 21. Wulstan. 22. Alfricus
Puttoc. 23. Kinsius. 24. Eldredus. 25. Thomas the First. 26. Gerard. 27. Thomas
the Second. 28. Thurstan. 29. Henry Murdac. 30. Saint William. 31. Roger 32.
Geoffry Plantagene^. 33. Walter Gray. 34. Sewal. 35. Godfry de Kinton. 36.
Walter Gifford, 37. William Wickwane. 38. John Roman. 39. Henry Newark. 40.
Thomas de Corbridge. 41. William de Greenfield. 42. William de Melton. 43. Le
Zouch. 44. John Thursby. 45. Alexander Nevil. 46. Thomas Arundel. 47. Robert
Waldby. 48. Richard Scroop. 49. Henry Bowet. 50. John Kemp. 51. William Booth.
52. George Nevil. 53. Laurence Booth. 54. Thomas Rotheram. 55. Thomas Savage.
56. Christopher Baimbridge. 57. Thomas Wolsey. 58. Edward Lee. 59. Robert
Holgate. 60. Nicholas Heath. 61. Thomas Young. 62. Edmond Grindal. 63. Edwyn
Sandys. 64. John Piers. 65. Matthew Hutton. 66. Tobia, Matthew. 67. George
Mounteign 68. Samuel Harsnet. 69. Richard Neile. 70. John Williams. 71.
Accepted Frewin. 72. Richard Stern.
Archbishops of London.
1. Thean: He is said to have built St. Peter's Church in Cornhil. 2. Elvanus.
3. Cadar. 4. Obinus. 5. Conan. 6. Palladius. 7. Stephen. 8. Iltut. 9. Dedwyn.
10. Thedred. 11. Hilary. 12. Restitutus. 13. Guitelnius. 14. Fastidius. 15.
Vodinus. 16. Theodorus.
Bishops of London after the coming of Augustine, when the Archbishopric was
translated to Canterbury.
1. Mellitus. 2. C^adda. 3. Wina. 4. Erkenwald. 5. Waldher. 6. Ingwald. 7.
Egwulf. 8. Wighed. 9. Eadbright. 10. Eadgar. 11. Kenwalch. 12. Eadbald. 13.
Hecbert. 14. Oswyn. 15. Ethelnoth. 16. Ceolbert. 17: Ceorulf. 18. Swithulf. 19.
Eadstan. 20. Wulffius. 21. Etnelward. 22. Elstan. 23. Theodred. 24. Wolstan.
25. Brithelm. 26. Dunstan. 27. Alfstan. 28. Wulfstan. 29. Alhun. 30. Alwy. 31.
Elfward. 32. Robertus. 33. William. 34. Hugh de Orival. 35. Mauritius. 36.
Richard Beavoys the First. 37. Gilbertus Universalis. 38. Robertus de Sigillo.
39. Richard Beavoys the Second. 40. Gilbert Foliot. 41. Richard Fitz-Neal. 42.
William de Sancta Maria. 43. Eustachius de Fauconbridge. 44. Rogerus Niger. 45.
Fulco Basset. 46 Henry de Wingham. 47. Richard Talbot. 48. Henry de Sandwich.
49. Henry Chishul. 50. Richard de Gravesend. 51. Ralph Baldock. 52. Gilbert
Seagrave. 53. Richard Newport. 54. Stephen Gravesend. 55. Nicholas Byntworth.
56. Ralph Stratford. 57. Michael Northbrook. 58. Simon Sudbury. 59. William
Courtney. 60. Robert Braibrook. 61. Roger Walden. 62. Nicholas Bubwith. 63.
Richard Clifford. 64. John Kemp. 65. William Gray. 66. Robert Fitzhugh. 67.
Robert Gilbert. 68. Thomas Kemp 69. John Marshal. 70. Richard Hill. 71. Thomas
Savage. 72. William Warham. 73. William Barnes. 74. Richard Fitz-James. 75.
Cuthbert Tonstal. 76. John Stokesley. 77. Edmond Bonner. 78. Nicholas Ridley.
79. Edmond Grindal. 80. Edwyn Sandys. 81. John Elmer. 82. Richard Fletcher. 83.
Richard Bancroft. 84. Richard Vaughan. 85. Thomas Ravis. 86. George Abbot. 87.
John King. 88. George Mounteign. 89. William Laud. 90. William Juxon. 91.
Gilbert Sheldon. 92. Humphrey Hinchman.
Bishops of Winchester.
1, Birinus 2, Agilbertus 3, Wina 4, Eleutherius 5, Headda 6, Daniel 7,
Humfridus 8, Kimhardus 9, Athelardus 10, Egbaldus 11, Dudda 12, Kineberthus.
13, Alhmundus 14, Wigtheinus 15, Herefrid 16, Edmond 17, Helmstan 18, Swithunus
19, Adferthus 20, Dumbert 21, Denewulsus 22, Athelmus 23, Frithstan 24,
Brinstan 25, Elphegus Calvus^ 26, Elssinus 27, Brithelinus 28, Ethelwald 29,
Elphegus 30, Renulphus 31, Brithwold 32, Elsinus 33, Alwynus 34, Stigandus 35,
Walklyn 36, William Gifford 37, Henry de Bloys 38, Richard More 39, Godfrey de
Lucy 40, Peter de la Roche 41, William de Raley 42, Ethelmarus 43, John Ger^sey
44, Nicholas de Ely 45, John de Pontissara 41, Henry Woodloke 47, John Sandal
48, Reginald A serius 49, John Stratford 50, Adam Tarleton 51, William Eddendon
52, William Wickham 53. Henry Beaufort 54, William Wainfleet 55, Peter Courtney
56, Thomas Langton. 57, Richard Fox 58, Thomas Wolsey 59, Stephen Gardener 60,
John Poynet 61, John White 62, Robert Horn 63, John Watson 64, Thomas Cooper
65, William Wickham 66, William Day 67, Thomas Bilson. 68, James Mountague 69,
Lancelot Andrews 70, Richard Neile 71, Walter Curle 72, Brian Duppa 73, George
Morley
Bishops of Ely.
1, Hervaeus 2, Nigellus 3, Galfridus Rydal 4, William Longchamp 5, Eustachius
6, John de Fontibus 7, Geoffry de Burgo 8, Hugh Norwold 9, William de Kilkenny
10, Hugh Balsam 11, John de Kirkby 12, William de Ludo 13, Ralph Walpool 14,
Robert Oxford 15, John de Keeton 16, John Hotham 17, Simon Montacute 18, Thomas
Lyld 19, Simon Langham 20, John Bamet 21, Thomas Arundel 22, John Fordnam 23,
Philip Morgan 24, Lewis Lushborough 25, Thomas Bourchier 26, William Gray 27,
John Morton 28, John Alcock 29, Richard Redman 30, James Stanley 31, Nicholas
West 32, Thomas Goodrich 33. Thomas Thirlby 34, Richard Cox 35, Martin Heton
36, Lancelot Andrews 37, Nicholas Felton 38, Thomas Buckeridge 39, Francis
White 40, Matthew Wren 41, Benjamin Laney
The Bishops of Dorchester.
The Bishop of that Diocese, whereof Lincoln is now the Sea, sat first at
Dorchester in Oxfordshire. His Diocese, and Jurisdiction, was all that
Country, which now belongs unto the Bishops of Winchester, Lincoln, Sarum,
Oxford, Bristol, wells, Litchfield, Chester, Exeter. He was called the Bishop
of the West Saxons.

These were Bishops. 1. Birinus. 2. Agilbert, a Frenchman. In his time
Kenwalchus, King of the West Saxons, caused this huge Diocese to be divided
into two parts, one of which he left to Agilbert, the other unto 3. Wina,
appointing Winchester to be his See, and all the Westcountrey his Jurisd^ction.
After Agilbert there was no other Bishop of Dorchester a long time. He
departing into France, Wina, and his Successors governed that See also. Not
long after Oswy, King of Mercia, erected an Episcopal See at Litchfield, and
placed one Diuma in the same. He had all mid-England for his Diocese. So had
six or seven of his Successors, until the year 678. at what time a Bishop was
placed at Sidnacester, named Eadhed. He died within one year, then Ethelwin
succeeded.


Then these. Embert, who assisted Beda in writing his Ecclesiastical History.
Alwigh Eadulf Ceolulf. After him the Sea continued vo^d many years. Anno 872.
Brightred became Bishop. In the mean time, sc. Anno 737. another See was
erected at Legecester, now called Leicester: but soon after removed to
Dorchester, and one Tota made Bishop there.


Then these. Edbert. Werenbert. Unwona. Rethun. Ceolred. Halard. Ceolulfus.
Leoswyn. Unto him the Diocese of Sidnacester was also committed (which had now
continued ^oid almost eighty years) and his See for both again was established
at Dorchester. He was a great Benefactor to the Abbey of Ramsey. Alnoth: Anno
960. As^win. Alfhelin. Eadnoth, Provost of Ramsey, slain by the Danes in
battle, Anno 1016. Eadheric. Eadnoth. Ulf, a Norman. Wulfsin.


Bishops of Lincoln.
The last Bishop of Dorchester, and first Bishop of Lincoln, was 1. Remigius 2.
Robert Bloet 3. Alexander 4. Robert de Chisvey 5. Walter de Constantiis 6.
Saint Hugh 7. William de Bloys 8. Hugh VVallys 9. Robert Grosthed 10. Henry
Lexinton 11. Benedict Gravesend 12. Oliver Sutton 13. John de Aldarby 14.
Thomas Beak 15. Henry Burwash 16. Thomas le Beck 17. John Synwel 18. John
Bokingham 19. Henry Beaufort 20. Philip Repingdon 21. Richard Fleming 22
William Gray 23. William Alnwike 24. Marmaduke Lumley 25. John Chadworth 26.
Thomas Rotheram 27. John Russel 28. William Smith 29. Thomas Wolsey 30. William
Atwater 31. John Longland 32. Henry Holbech 33. John Tailer. 34. John White 35.
Thomas Watson 36. Nicholas Bullingham 37. Thomas Cooper 38. William Wickham 39.
William Chaderton 40. William Barlow 41. Richard Neile 42. George Mounteign 43.
John Williams 44. Thomas Winniff 45. Robert Saunderson 46. Benjamin Laney 47.
William Fuller.


Bishops of Coventry and Litchfield.
1. Diuma 2. Cellach 3. Trumhere 4. Jaruman 5. Cedda 6. Winfrid 7. Saxulf 8.
Headda After Saxulf the Diocese was once more divided, and a Bishop placed at
Leicester, whose name was Wilfrid. Headda, that before was Bishop of
Litchfield, recovered the jurisdiction again. 9. Aldwyn 10. Witta The Country
of Mercia was then again divided, and made three Bishoprics. One was continued
at Litchfield, another was appointed at Leicester, the third at Dorchester.
Litchfield was given to Witta: Leicester to Tota: Dorchester to Eadhead
After succeeded these. 11. Hemel 12, Cuthfri 13. Berthun 14. Aldulf. Offa King
of Mercia procured the Pope to make this Aldulf an Archbishop, and gave him
authority over the Sees of Winchester, Hereford, Leicester, Sidnacester,
Helmham and Dunwich. 15. Humbert 16. Herewin 17. Hegbert 18. Ethelwold 19.
Humbertus 20. Kinebert 21. Cumbert 22. Bumfrith 23. Ella 24. Alfgar 25. Kinsy
26. Winsy 27. Elseth 28. Godwin 29. Leosgar 30. Brithmar 31. Wilsius 32.
Leofwyn 33. Peter This man removed his Episcopal See to Chester. 34. Robert de
Limesey: He translated his See from Chester to Coventry, where he was buried.
35. Robert Peche, buried at Coventry. 36. Roger de Clinton. 37. Walter Durdent
38. Richard Peche 39. Girardus Puella 40. Hugh Novant 41. Geoffry de Muschamp
42. Walter de Gray. 43. William de Cornhul 44. Alexander de Savensby 45. Hugh
de Pateshul 46. Roger de We^eham 47. Roger Longspee 48. Walter de Langton 49.
Roger Northborough 50. Robert Stretton 51. Walter Skerlaw 52. Richard Scroop
53. John Burghil 54. John Keterich 55. James Carry 56. William Helworth 57.
William Booth. 58. Nicholas Close 59. Reginald Butler 60. John Hales 61.
William Smith 62. John Arundel 63. Geoffry Blithe 64. Rowland Lee 65. Richard
Sampson 66. Ralph Bayn 67. Thomas Bentham 68. William Overton 69. George Abbot
70. Richard Neile. 71. John Overal. 72. Thomas Morton 73. Robert Wright 74.
John Hacket 75. Doctor VVood.


Bishops of Sherborn.
After the death of Headda; the fifth Bishop of Winchester, Iva, King of the
West Saxons di^ided his Diocese, which before contained all the Country of
the West S^^ons, into two parts. The one of them he committed unto Daniel,
all^tting unto him Winchester for his See, and that Diocese, which now does,
and ever since has belonged unto the same. The other part containing the
Counties of Dorset, Sommerset, Wilts, Devon, an^ Cornwall, be ordained to be
governed by a Bishop, whose See he established at Sherborn.

These Bishops were. 1. Adelm 2. Fordhere 3. Herewald 4. Ethelnold 5. Denefrith
6. VVilbert 7. Ealstan, a famous Warrior: he subdued unto King Egbright, the
Kingdom of Kent, and the East Saxons: he overcame the Danes in many battles: he
much augmented the Revenues of the Bishopric. 8. Edmond 9. Etheleage 10. Alfry
11. Asserius, the first public Reader in the University of Oxford. 12. Sigelm
13. Ethelward, younger Son to King Alfred. After Ethelward the Sea of Sherborn
stood void seven years by reason of the Danish wars. Anno 905. three Sees,
newly erected, were taken out of the Diocese of Sherborn. One had jurisdiction
over Cornwall; another over Devonshire; and a third over Sommerset-shire. Soon
after that, a fourth was placed in VVilt-shire; having his See (some say) at
Ramsbury in VVilt-shire (others) at Sunning in Berk-shire. But to return to
Sherborn. 14. VVerstan 15. Ethelbald 16. Sigelm 17. Alfred 18. VVilfrin 19.
Alfwold 20. Ethelrick 21. Ethelsius 22. Brithwin 23. Elmer 24. Brinwin 25.
Elfwold


Bishops of Wilt-shire.
1: Ethelstan; he had his See at Ramsbury. 2: Odo, that became the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Anno 934. was Bishop of Wilton. 3: Osulf, buried at Wilton. 4:
Alfstan 5: VVolfgar 6: Siricius, translated to Canterbury. 7: Alfricus; he
succeeded his Predecessor in Canterbury. 8: Brithwold, a Monk of Glastonbury, a
great Benefactor of that Abbey, as also of the Abbey of Malmesbury; he was
buried at Glastonbury. 9: Herman, Chaplain to King Edward the Confessor, was
the last Bishop to this petty See.
Bishops of Salisbury.
1: Herman When William the Conqueror commanded that all Bishops should remove
their Sees from obscure Towns to the fairest Cities of their Diocese, Herman
made choice of Salisbury, and there laid the foundation of a Church, which he
lived not to finish. 2: Osmond, a Knight, and a Norman, came into England with
the Conqueror, and was made by him Chancellor of England, and after Herman's
death, Bishop of Salisbury. He finished the building begun by his Predecessor,
and added a Library, which he furnished with many choice Books. He was the
first Author of the Ordinale secundum usum Sarum. 3: Roger, the rich Bishop of
S^^lisbury. 4: Joceline 5: Hubert 6: Robert 7: Richard P^or; he forsook old
Sarum, and began the foundation of a new Church in a place called Merifield, it
was scarce finished thirty years after his departure. 8: Robert Bingham 9:
William of York 10: Giles de Bridport 11: Walter de la VVyle 12: Robert de
VVikehampton 13: Walter Scammel 14: Henry Braunston 15: Laurence de Hawkborn
16: William de Comer 17: Nicholas Longspee 18: Simon de Gaunt 19: Roger de
Mortival 20: Robert VVyvil 21: Ralph Erghum 22: John Waltham 23: Richard
Me^ford 24: Nicholas Bubwith 25: Robert Halam 26: John Chandler 27: Robert
Nevil 28: William Ais^oth 29: Richard Beauchamp 3: Lionel VVodvill 31: Thomas
Langton 32: John Blythe 33: Henry Dean 34: Edmond Audley 35: Laurence Campegius
36: Nicholas Shaxton 37: John Salcot 38: John Iuel 39: Edmond Gheast 40: John
Piers 41: John Coldwel 42: Henry Cotton 43: Robert Abbot 44: Martin Fotherby
45: Robert Townson 46: John Davenant 47: Brian Duppa 48: Humfrey Hinchman 4^:
John Earl 50: Alexander Hide 51: Seth Ward
Bishops of Bath and Wells.
1: Adelm, Abbot of Glastonbury, was ordained Bishop of Bath and Wells, and
had Sommerset-shire allotted him for his Di^cess. 2: VVifelinus 3: Elfeth 4:
VVilfhelm 5: Brithelm 6: Kinewaldus 7: Sigar 8: Alwyn 9: Burwold 10: Leoningus
11: Ethelwyn 12: Brithwyn 13: Merewith 14: Dudoco 15: Giso 16: John de Villula.
This man procured his Episcopal See; which hiterto had been seated at Wells,
to be removed to Bath, whereas all his Predecessors had been called Bishops of
Wells, he renouncing Wells entitled himself Bish. of Bath; where he was buried.
17: Godfrey, a Dutchman, for a time Chancellor of England, he was buried at
Bath. 18: Reginald Fitz-Ioceline: He built the Hospital of St. Iohn' s in Bath,
and gave certain Prebends unto the Church of Wells. Moreover, he gave unto the
City of Wells, a Corporation, and Privileges, which by his gift they enjoy to
this day. 19: Savaricus 20: Ioceline de Wells 21: Roger, who died within six
years after he came to that Bishopric: he is the last of those Bishops that
were buried at Bath. 22: William Button 23: Walter Giffard 24: William Button,
Nephew to the former of that name. 25: Robert Burnel 26: William de Marchia 27:
Walter Haselshaw 28: John Drokensford 29: Ralph of Salop 30: John Barnet 31:
John Harewel. 32: Walter Skirlaw 33: Ralph Erghum 34: Henry Bowet. 35: Nicholas
Bubwith 36: John Stafford 37: Thomas Beckinton 38: Robert Stillington 39:
Richard Fox 40: Oliver King. He pulling down the old Church of the Abbey of
Bath, began the foundation of a fair and sumptuous building, but at the time of
his death left it unperfected. 41: Hadrian de Castello 42: Thomas Wolsey 43:
John Clerk 44: William Knight 45: William Barlow 46: Gilbert Bourn 47: Gilbert
Berkley 48: Thomas Goodwyn 49: John Style 50: James Mountague. He gave a
thousand pounds toward the reparation of the Abbey-church of Bath, and lies
there interred. 51: Arthur Lake 52: William Laud. 53: Leonard Maw 54: Walter
Curle 55: William Piers 56: Creeton 57: Mews.
Bishops of Devonshire-, Cornwall, and Crediton, etc.
Two hundred years the West Country was subject unto the Bishop of Sherborn,
viz. from the year 705. to the year 905. at which time one Bishopric was
erected at Wells in Sommerset-shire, another in Cornwall, a third in Devonshire.

1: The Sea of Athelstan, Bishop of Cornwall, was for a while at St. Petrocks in
Bodmyn, and afterward St. Germans. The Successors of Athelstan in Cornwall were
these. 2: Conanus 3. Ruyodocus 4: Aldredus 5: Brytwyn 6: Athelstan; Anno 966.
7: VVolfi 8: VVoronus 9: VVolocus 10: Stidio 11: Aldredus 12. Burwoldus.
Bishops of Devonshire.
1: VVerstan; He placed himself first at Tawton, but soon after removed to
Crediton, now called Kyrton. 2: Putta 3: Eadulphus 4: Ethelgarus 5: Algarus 6:
Alfwold 7: Sydemanus 8: Alfredus 9: Alwolfus. All these sat, and were buried,
at Crediton. 10: Luyngus. This man upon the death of Burwoldus, Bishop of
Cornwall, his Uncle, procured the County of Cornwall to be added unto his
Diocese, and afterward became Bishop of Worcester.
Bishops of Excester.
King Edward the Confessor coming to Excester, together with his Queen, took
order that the Monks of St. Peter' s, in that City, should be placed at
Westminster, and removed the Episcopal See from Crediton to Excester.

1. Leofricus was the first Bishop. The King taking the Bishop by his right
hand, and the Queen by the left, led him up unto the Altar of his new Church,
and there placed him in a Seat appointed for him. He obtained of the same King
much good Land, and many Privileges for this Church. 2. Osbert, a Norman 3:
William VVarewest; a Chaplain both to the Conqueror, and his two Sons, William
and Henry. 4: Robert Chichester 5: Robert VVarewest 6: Bartholomew Iscanus, so
called of Isca, which is one of the ancient names of this City. 7: John, the
Chaunter of this Church, and Subdean of Sarum. 8: Henry Marshal 9: Simon de
Apulia 10: William Brewer 11: Richard Blondy 12: Walter Bromscomb 13: Peter
Quivil 14: Thomas Bitton 15: Walter Stapleton 16: James Berkley; of the Noble
house of the Lord Berkley. 17: John Godly 18: Thomas Brentingham 19: Edmond
Stafford, Brother to Ralph, Earl of S^afford. 20: John Keterich 21: James Carry
22: Edmond Lacy 23: George Nevil, Brother to Richard the Great Earl of
Warwick, by whose help especially Edward the Fourth obtained the Crown. 24:
John Booth 25: Peter Courtney 26: Richard Fox 27: Oliver King 28: Richard
Redman 29: John Arundel 30: Hugh Oldham 31: John Vosei; Of 22. Lordships, and
Manors, which his Predecessors had left unto him, of a goodly Revenue, he left
but seven, or eight, and them also leased out. And whereas he found fourteen
Houses well-furnished, he left only one House bare, and without furniture; and
yet charged with sundry Fees and Annuities. 32: Miles Coverdale 33: James
Turber^ill 34: William Alley 35: William Bradbridge 36: John Wolton 37:
Gervase Babington 38. William Cotton 39. Valentine Carry 40. Joseph Hall 41.
Ralph Brownrigg 42. John Gauden 43. Seth Ward 44. (...) Sparrow.
Bishops of the East Angles.
Sigebert, King of the East Angles, returning out of France (where he lived in
banishment) and obtaining his Kingdom, brought with him one Felix, a
Burgundian, with whom he h^d lived familiarly, during the time of his Exile,
and made him Bishop of the East Angles, who converting the people to the Faith
of Christ, had his See at Dunwich.

Bishops of Dunwich were these. 1* Felix 2. Thomas, his Successor. 3. Bregilsus
4. Bisus. He waxing old and crazy, divided his See into two parts; one part he
appointed to be the Jurisdiction of a Bishop that should have his See at
Elmham; in the other he continued, as also did diverse of his Successors; which
were these following. 5. Acca 6. Astwolphus 7. Eadfarthus 8. Cuthwenus 9.
Aldberthus 10. Eglasius 11. Herdredus 12. Aelphunus 13. Tydferthus 14.
Weremundis 15. Wyredus.


Bishops of Elmham were these. 1. Bedwyn 2. Northbert 3. Headulacus 4.
Edelfridus 5. Lanferthus 6. Athelwolph 7. Humferthus 8. Sybba 9. Alherdus 10.
Humbiretus.


By reason of the great troubles of those times in the Danish wars, these Sees
stood void almost an hundred years. Anno 955. in the time of King Edwy. 1. One
Athulfus was ordained Bishop of the East Angles at Canterbury, and had his Seat
at Elmham. After him succeeded these. 2. Alf^idus 3. Theodredus the First 4.
Theodredus the Second 5. Athelstan 6. Algarus 7. Alwynus 8. Alfricus 9.
Alyf^eius 10. Stigandus 11. Grinketellus 12. Egelmare. All these, until the
time of King William the Conqueror, had their Sees at Elmham.


Bishops of Thetford.
1. Arfastus was the first Bishop, who was Chaplain to the Conqueror. 2.
William Herbert was the second and last Bishop of Thetford.
Bishop^ of Norwich.
1. William Herbert translated that See from Thetford to Norwich, and was the
first Bishop of Norwich. He built there the Cathedral Church at his own charge,
which he dedicated to the holy Trinity, endowing it with great Lands and
Possessions, Books, and all other necessaries; and on the Northside of the
Church he founded a stately Palace for himself. 2. Everard 3. William Turbus.
In his time the Cathedral Church at Norwich was burnt with fire. 4. John of
Oxford. This man finished the Church which Herbert left unperfected, and
repaired that which by fire was lately defaced. The same year he died the
Church was again defaced with fire. 5. John de Gray. After the death of John de
Gray the Sea was void for seven years. 6. Pandulfus, the Pope's Legate. After
his death the Sea was void three years. 7. Thomas de Blundevil 8. Radulphus 9.
William de Raleigh. The Bishopric was then void by the space almost of three
years. 10. Walter de Suffield. He founded the Hospital of St. Giles in Norwich,
endowing it with Lands and great Possessions. He built also the Chapel of our
Lady in the Cathedral Church, and in the same Chapel was also buried. 11.
Simon de Wanton 12. Roger de Skyrwing. In his time was a dangerous Sedition
between the Citizens of Norwich, and the Monks of the Cathedral Church. 13.
William Middleton 14. Ralph de Walpool 15. John Salmon 16. William Armyn 17.
Anthony de Beck. He used his Monks too rigorously, and was poisoned by his own
Servants. 18. William Bateman. He forced the Lord Morley to carry a burning
Taper in his hand, through the streets of Norwich, unto the High Altar, for
killing certain Deer in one of his Parks, and beating his Keepers. In his time
happened a great Plague in England. In Norwich then there died (besides
Religious men) to the number of 57104. persons between the first of January,
and the first of July, 1348. 19. Thomas Piercy 20. Henry Spencer 21. Alexander
22. Richard Courtney 23. John Wakering 24. William Alnwick 25. Thomas Brown 26.
Gualter Heart 27. James Goldwel 28. Thomas Jan 29. Richard Nyx 30. William Reps
31. Thomas Thirlby 32. John Hopton 33. John Parkhurst 34. Edmond Freak 35.
Edmond Scambler 36. William Redman 37. John Jegon 38. John Overal 39. Samuel
Harsnet 40. Francis White 41. Richard Corbet 42. Matthew Wren 43. Richard
Mountague 44. Joseph Hall 45. Edward Reinolds.
Bishops of Worcester.
Ethelred divided Mercia into five Diocesses, whereof one was Worcester. For
the first Bishop of Worcester. choice was made of one Tarfrith, a learned man,
who died before he could be consecrated. After his decease,

1. Boselus succeeded. 2. Ostforus 3. S. Egwyn. This man went to Rome with
Offa, King of Mercia. He built the Abbey of Evesham. 4. Wilfridus 5. Milredus
6. Weremundus 7. Tilherus 8. Eathoredus 9. Devebertus 10. Hubert 11. Alwin 12.
Werebertus 13. Wilfreth 14. Ethelhune, Abbot of Berkley. 15. Wilserth 16.
Kinewold 17. S. Dunstan. 18. S. Oswald 19. Aldulf 20. Wulstan 21. Leofsius 22.
Briteagus Abbot of Parshor. 23. Living. 24. Aldred 25. S. Wulstan 26. Sampson
27. Theulphus 28. Simon 29. Alured 30. John Pagham 31. Roger, Son to the Earl
of Gloucester. 32. Baldwyn, Abbot of Ford. 33. William de Northale 34. Robert, a
Canon of Lincoln* Son unto William Fitz Ralph, S^neschal of Normandy. 35.
Henry, Abbot of Glastonbury. 36. John de Constantiis 37. Mauger. He was one of
them that excommunicated King John, and interdicted the Realm, and thereupon
fled the Realm. 38. Walter Gray 39. Sylvester 40. William de Bleyes 41. Walter
Cantilupe, Son of William Lord Cantilupe 42. Nicholas, Archdeacon of Ely, and
Chancellor of England 43. Godfry Giffard, Archdeacon of Wells, and Chancellor
of England. 44. William de Gainsborough 45. Walter Reynolds, sometime
Schoolmaster to King Edward the Second; first Treasurer, then Chancellor of
England; became Bishop of Worcester. 46. Walter Maidstone 47. Thomas Cobham 48.
Adam Tarlton 49. Simon Montacute 50. Thomas Henibal 51. William de Bransford
52. John Th^rsby 53. Reginald Brian 54. John Barnet 55. William Wittlesey 56.
William de Lynne 57. Henry Wakefield 58. Tideman de Winchcomb 59. Richard
Clifford 60. Thomas Peverel 61. Philip Morgan 62. Thomas Poulton 63. Thomas
Bourchier 64. John Carpenter 65. John Alcock 66. Robert Morton 67. John Gyglis
68. Sylvester Gyglis 69. Julius Medices 70. Hieronymus de Nugutiis 71. Hugh
Latimer 72. John Bell 73. Nicholas Heath 74. John Hooper 75. Richard Pates 76.
Edwyn Sandys 77. Nicholas Bullingham. 78. John Whitgift 79. Edmond Freak 80.
Richard Fletcher 81. Thomas Bilson 82. Gervase Babington 83. Henry Parry 84.
John Thornborow 85. John Prideaux 86. George Morley 87. John Gauden 88. Robert
Skinner 89. Walter Blandford
Bishops of Hereford.
An Episcopal Seat being established at Hereford,

1. Putta was made the first Bishop thereof. 2. Tirhtellus 3. Torteras 4.
Walstodus 5. Cuthbert 6. Podda 7. Ecca 8. Ceadda 9. Albertus 10. Esna 11.
Ceolmundus 12. Utellus 13. Wulfhardus 14. Benna 15. Edulf 16. Cuthwulf 17.
Mucel 18. Deorlaf 19. Cunemund 20. Edgar 21. Tidhelm 22 Wulfhelm 23 Afrike 24.
Athulf 25. Ethelstan He builded the Cathedral Church from the ground. He was a
holy man, and blind thirteen years before his death. 26. Leovegar, Chaplain to
Duke Harold. Matthew Westminster gives this testimony of him, that he was
undoubtedly Dei famulus in omni Religione perfectus; Ecclesiarum amator,
viduarum and orphanorum defensor; oppressorum subversor, virginitatis
possessor. Griffin, King of Wales, assaulted the City, took it, slew the
Bishop, and seven of the Canons of the Church, spoiled it of all the portable
Relics, and Ornaments, and then fired both Church and City. 27. Walter 28.
Robert Lozing; An excellent Mathematician. 29. Gerard 30. Roger, the Queens
Chancellor. 31. Geoffry de Glyve, Chaplain to King Henry the First. 32. Robert
Bertune, Prior of Lanthony, a man much employed by the Pope in all his
businesses within the Realm. 33. Gilbert Foliot, Abbot of Gloucester. 34. Robert
de Melun 35. Robert Foliot 36. William le Vere, a great Builder. 37. Giles de
Bruise, Son of William Bruise, Lord of Brecknock. 38. Hugh de Mapenor 39. Hugh
Foliot 40. Ralph de Maidstone. He resigned his Bishopric, and became a
Franciscan Friar, Anno 1239. 41. Peter Equeblank. He caused King Henry the
Third to lay such Taxes on the Clergy, as almost beggared them, An. 1255. The
Barons arrested him in his own Cathedral, seized on his goods, divided his
Treasure unto their Soldiers before his face, and long kept him in prison in
the Castle of Ordeley. 42. John Breton, a great Lawyer. 43. Thomas Cantilupe;
Of an ancient House. He was by the Pope Sainted after his death. All the
Bishops of Hereford, since his time, do bear his Coat of Arms, as the Goat of
their Sea. G. three Leopards heads jeasant, three Flower de luces O. 44.
Richard de Swinfield 45. Adam Tarlton 46. Thomas Charlton: He was Lord
Chancellor, and chief Justice of Ireland. 47. John Trilleck 48. Lewis Charlton
49. William Courtney 50. John Gilbert 51. John Tresnant. He was sent to Rome,
to inform the Po^e of the Title of King Henry the Fourth to the Crown. 52.
Robert Mascal. He was Confessor to Henry the Fourth. He built the Quire,
Presbytery, and Steeple of the White-Friers in London; gave many rich Ornaments
to that House; died, and was buried there. He was often Ambassador to many
Foreign Princes. He, with two other Bishops, was sent to the Council of
Constance. 53. Edmond Lacy 54. Thomas Polton 55. Thomas Spofford 56. Richard
Beauchamp 57. Reynold Butler 58. John Stanbery 59. Thoma^ Milling 60. Edmond
Awdley 61. Hadrian de Castello 62. Richard Mayo: President of Magdalen College
for the sp^ce of twenty seven years, and Almoner to King Henry the Seventh.
Anno 1501. he was sent into Spain, to fetch the Lady Katherine, to be married
to Prince Arthur. 63. Charles Booth, Chancellor of the Marches of Wales. 64.
Edward Fox, a learned man, and secretly a favourer of the true Religion. Mr.
Bucer dedicated his Comment upon the Evangelists to him. Himself also wrote
diverse Books yet extant. He was Provost also of Kings College as long as he
lived. 65. Edmond Bonner. 66. John Skyp 67. John Harley 68. Robert Warton 69.
John Scory 70. Herbert Westphaling 71. Robert Benet, Dean of Windsor. He
repaired the Bishops Houses of Hereford and Whi^burn. 72. Francis Godwin,
Bishop of Landaff. 73. George 74. Nicholas Monk. 75. Herbert Crofts.
Bishops of Selfey.
^. Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, being banished by Egfrid, King of
Northumberland, preached the Gospel to the South Saxons. Ediwalch the King of
that Country, had a little before received the Faith of Christ, by the
persuasion of Wulphur K. of Mercia. He made much of Wilfrid, and a^^^gned him
an habitation in Selsey, a place all compassed about with the Sea, except one
way, all that Land, containing eighty seven households, this King gave unto
Wilfrid for his maintenance: He built a Monastery, and established his
Cathedral See in the same. He converted, and baptized, great numbers of people,
and was first Bishop thereof. 2. Eadbert 3. Eolla. 4. Sigga, or Sigfrid 5.
Alubrith 6. Bosa 7. Gilelher 8. Tota 9. Wigthun 10. Ethelulph 11. Beornege 12.
Cenred 13. Guthard 14. Alfred 15. Eadelm 16. Ethelgar 17. Ordbright 18. Elmar
19. Agelred 20. Grinketel 21. Heka, Chaplain to King Edward the Confessor. 22.
Agelrike, a man skilful in the Laws, and Customs of the Land. He was appointed
by King William the Conqueror to assist Gosfrid, Bishop of Constantia, in
judging a great controversy between Lanfrank the Archbishop, and Odo, Earl of
Kent, the King's Brother, in a Convocation holden at Windsor.
Bishops of Chichester.
1. Stigand, Chaplain to the Conqueror, translated his Sea from Selsey (an
obscure place, and now eaten up by the Sea, so that every high water covers
it) unto Chichester, of old called Cissan-cester. So he was the first Bishop of
Chichester. 2. William 3. Ralph, a man of a very high stature, and no less of a
very high mind. He built the Cathedral Church at Chichester from the ground. It
was scarcely finished, when as May 5. 1114. it was defaced, and a great part of
the City consumed with casual fire. He repaired it by the liberality of the
King, and some others. He was a great Housekeeper, and Almsgiv^r, and a
painful Preacher, yearly visiting his whole Diocese, preaching in every place
thrice, reprehending, and punishing sin severely. 4. Seffridus, Abbot of
Glaston. 5. Hilary 6. John de Greenford 7. Seffridus the Second. In his time,
scil. October 19. 1187. the Cathedral Church, together with the whole City, was
casually consumed with fire: the Church, and his own Palace, he both reedified
in good sort. 8. Simon de Wells 9. Richard Poor 10. Ralph de Warham He gave to
the Church a Windmill in Bishopston. 11. Ralph Nevil^, Chancellor of England.
He built Lincoln's Inn from the ground, to be an House of Receipt for himself
and his Successors, when they should come to London. After his time it came to
the possession of Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, who somewhat enlarged it, and
les^ it the name which now it has. 12. Richard de la Wyche: He was born at
Wych in Worcestershire: he was a holy and learned man, diligent in preaching:
and canonized seven years after his death. 13. John Clypping: He built the
Mannor-house of Drungwick, and gave it unto his Church. 14. Stephen de Barksted
15. Gilbert de Stoleo fardo 16. John de Langton, sometime Chancellor of
England. He built a costly Window in the South part of that Church. 17. Robert
Stratford, Brother to John Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury: He found means
to drive away Scholars from Stamford, that began to settle themselves there.
18. William Lulimer 19. William Read. He built the Castle of Amberley, and the
Library of Merton-colledge, where he left his Picture, and many Tables, and
Astronomical Instruments. 20. Thomas Rushock 21. Richard Mitford 22. Robert
Waldby 23. Robert Read 24. Stephen Patington 25. Henry Ware 26. John Kemp 27.
Thomas Polton 28. John Rikinpale 29. Simon Sidenham 30. Richard Praty 31. Adam
Molines 32. Reginal Peacock; He was deprived of his Bishopric. 33. John
Arundel 34. Edward Story 35. Richard Fitz-James 36. Robert Sherborn 37. Richard
Sampson 38. George Day; Deprived Anno 1551. restored by Queen Mary, after he
had long lain prisoner in the Fleet. He was Brother unto William Day, long
after Bishop of Winchester. 39. John Scory: By Queen Mary he was displaced, and
by Queen Elizabeth preferred to Hereford. 40. John Christopherson. He was
deprived by Act of Parliament, in Queen Elizabeth's reign. He gave unto
Trinity-colledge many Books, Greek, Hebrew, and Latin. 41. William Barlow 42.
Richard Curteise 43. Thomas Bickley. He bequeathed unto Merton-colledge, in
Oxford, an hundred pounds, to Magdalen-colledge forty pounds, and gave diverse
other sums of money to other good uses. 44. Anthony Watson 45. Lancelot Andrews
46. Samuel Harsenet 47. George Carleton 48. Richard Mountague 49. Henry King
50. Peter Gunning.
Bishops of Rochester.
Augustine having laid some good foundation of Christian Religion at
Canterbury, for the further propagation of the same, thought good to ordain
Bishops unto other Cities near adjoining, and therefore in one day consecrated
two, viz. Mellitus unto London, and Justus, a Roman, unto Rochester, Anno 604.

The Bishops of Rochester were. 1. Justus 2. Romanus; Traveling to Rome he was
drowned. 3. Paulinus. Being driven from York, he was content to take charge of
Rochester. 4. Ithamar 5. Damianus After his death the Sea long continued void.
6. Putta 7. William 8. Godwyndus 9. Tobias 10. Aldulfus 11. Duina. He was
present at a Provincial Council held by Rochester. 12. Eardulf. Offa King of
Mercia, Ecbert King of Kent, and Ethelbert, another King of Kent, were
benefactors to him and his Successors. 13: Diora 14. Weremund 15. Beornredus
16. Tadnoth 17. Bedenoth 18. Godwyn the First. 19. Cutherwulf 20. Swithulf 21.
Buiricus 22. Cheolmund 23. Chineferth 24. Burrhicus Unto him Edmond, the
Brother of King Athelstan, gave the Townof Malling, Anno 945. 25. Alfstane 26.
Godwyn the Second 27. Godwyn the Third 28. Siward 29. Arnostus Lanfrank 30.
Gundulph 31. Ralph, Abbot of Say 32. Earnulph He wrote an History of the Church
of Rochester. 33. John, Archdeacon of Canterbury. 34. Ascelinus 35. Walter,
Archdeacon of Canterbuty. The Archbishop was wont, till this time, to nominate
to this Bishopric whom pleased him. April 10. 1177. the whole City, and Church
of Rochester were consumed with fire. 36. Gualeran 37. Gilbert Glanvyl He
deprived the Monks of Rochester of all their moveable Goods, all the Ornaments
of their Church, Writings, Evidences, yea, and of great part of their Lands,
Possessions, and Privileges. He built the Hospital at Stroud near Rochester,
and endowed it with fifty two pounds yearly revenue. 38. Benedictus 39. Henry
de Sandford. This man preaching at Sittingburn, before a great Audience,
declared openly, That God had revealed unto him now three several times, how
that on such a day the Souls of King Richard the First, Stephen Langton, late
Archbishop, and another Priest, were delivered out of Purgatory. 40. Richard de
wendover 41. Laurence of St. Martin 42. Walter de Merton, Lord Chancellor of
England. Before he was a Bishop he built Merton-colledge in Oxford. 43. John de
Bradfield 44. Thomas Inglethorp 45. Thomas de Woldham 46. Haymo, Confessor to
King Edward the Second. 47. John de Sheppey 48. William Wittlesey 49. Thomas
Trillick 50. Thomas Brenton 51. William Boltsham 52. John Boltsham 53. Richard
Young 54. John Kemp 55 John Langdon 56. Thomas Brown 57. John Wells. 58. John
White 59. Thomas Rotheram 60. John Alcock 61. John Russel 62. Edmond Awdley 63.
Thomas Savage 64. Richard Fitz-Iames 65. John Fisher 66. John Hilsey 67.
Nicholas Heath 68. Nicholas Ridley 69. John Poynet 70. John Scory 71. Maurice
Griffin 72. Edmond Guest 73. Edmond Freak 74. John Piers 75. John Young 76.
William Barlow 77. Richard Neile 78. John Buckeridge 79. Walter Curle 80. John
Bowls 81. John Warner 82. John Dolben.


Bishops of Oxford.
About the year 730. Didan, Duke of Oxford, by the request of his Daughter,
built a Monastery there for Nuns, and appointed her the Abbess. Anno 847. in
the time of King Ethelred, certain Danes flying into this Monastery, to save
their lives from the cruelty of the English pursuing them, the Monastery was
burnt, and they all burnt in the same; but it was shortly after re-edified by
the said King, and further enriched with diverse Possessions.

This Monastery was neglected, but Anno 1110. Guimundus, Chaplain to King Henry
the First, became Prior of this renewed Monastery, repaired its ruins, and, by
the favor of the King, recovered unto it what Lands soever had been given
heretofore unto the Nuns.

In this state it continued, until Cardinal Wolsey got license to convert it
into a College, Anno 1524. calling it Cardinals-colledge.

He leaving it unperfect, King Henry the Eighth gave it a foundation, the style
whereof he first appointed to be, Collegium Regis Henrici Octavi: but
afterward he entitled the Church, Ecclesia B. Mariae de Osney. He translated
that See to the foresaid College, placing in it a Bishop, a Dean, eight
Prebendaries, a Quire, and other Officers, and finally styled it, Ecclesia
Christi Cathedralis Oxon, ex fundatione Regis Henrici Octavi.

The Bishops were, 1. Robert King 2. Hugh Curwyn 3. John Underhill 4. John
Bridges 5. John Howson 6. Richard Corbet 7. John Bancroft 8. Robert Skinner 9.
William Paul 10. Walter Blandford 11. Nathanael Crew, Son to the Lord Crew.


Bishops of Gloucester.
Osrike, King of Northumberland, founded a Nunnery in the City of Gloucester, in
the year 700.

Kineburg, Eadburg, and Eva, Queens of Mercia, were Abbesses of this Monastery
one after another: it was destroyed by the Danes, and lay waste until Aldred,
Archbishop of York, re-edified the same, Anno 1060. and replenished it with
Monks, and erected from the very foundation that goodly Church, which is now
the Cathedral See of that Diocese.

Being given into the hands of King Henry the Eighth by Parliament, he allotted
the Revenues of it unto the maintenance of a Bishop, a Dean, six Prebendaries,
and other Ministers.

The Bishops were. 1. John Wakeman, Abbot of Tewksbury; he was consecrated the
first Bishop of this new erection, September 7. 1541. 2. John Hooper. He was
burnt at Gloucester, for the profession of the Gospel, in Queen Mary's days. 3.
James Brooks. 4: Richard Chemey 5. John Bullingham 6. Goddfry Gouldsborough 7.
Thomas Ravis 8: Henry Parry 9. Giles Thomson 10. Miles Smith 11. Godfry Goodman
12. William Nicholson 13. Prichard.


Bishops of Peterborough.
Penda, the Son of Penda, the first King of Mercia that was a Christian, began
the f^undation of a Monastery there, Anno 656. but was taken away, by
Treachery, before he could finish the work. But this Monastery was afterward
built up in stately-manner by his Brother Wolpher. This Monastery he dedicated
to St. Peter, and appointed one Saxulf to be the first Abbot thereof.

Two hundred years after it was destroyed by the Danes, and having lain
desolate one hundred and nine years, Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, (a great
Patron of Monkery) re-edefied it. King Edgar assisted the Bishop much in this
foundation, and Adulf, Chancellor to the said King, who became Abbot there.

After him Kenulph, another Abbot, compassed this Monastery with a strong wall,
about the year of our Lord 1000. through the liberality of diverse Benefactors
it grew to that greatness of wealth, as that all the Country round about
belonged to it.

King Henry the Eighth converted it into a Cathedral Church, and the Revenues
upon the maintenance of a Bishop, a Dean, six Prebendaries, and other Ministers.

The Bishops were, 1. John Chambers, Doctor of Physic, he was last Abbot of
Peterborough, and first Bishop thereof, Anno 1541. 2. David Pool, Doctor of
Law. 3. Edmond Scambler 4. Richard Howland 5. Thomas Dove 6. William Peirs 7.
Augustine Lindsel 8. John 9. Benjamin Laney 10. Joseph Henshaw.


Bishops of Bristol.
Robert, Surnamed Fitz-Harding, because his Father (that was Son unto the King
of Denmark) was called Harding; this Robert (I say) being a Citizen of Bristol,
founded the Monastery of St. Augustines, and placed Canons in the same, Anno
1148.

This Foundation was afterward confirmed, and augmented, by King Henry the
Second, who preferred the Author of the same to the marriage of the sole Heir
of the Lord Berkley. Of them are descended all the Lords Berkley.

In that place King Henry the Eighth erected an Episcopal See, and converted
the Revenues of the same unto the maintenance of a Bishop, a Dean, six
Prebendaries, and other Officers.

1. Paul Bush was the first Bishop of Bristol. 2. John Holyman 3. Richard
Cheiney. 4. John Bullingham 5. Richard Fletcher 6. John Thornborough 7.
Nicholas Felton 8. Rowland Searchfield 9. Robert Wright 10. George Cook 11.
Robert Skinner 12. John Westfield 13. Gilbert Ironside 14. Carlton
Bishops of Chester.
King Henry the Eighth converted the Monastery (the Church whereof there first
built by that famous Earl Leofricus, and dedicated unto St. Wergburg) into a
Cathedral Church, erected a new Bishopric there.

The Bishops were, 1. John Bird: He was deprived in Queen Mary's days. 2. John
Coats 3. Cuthbert Scot 4. William Downham 5. William Chadderton 6. Hugh
Bellot 7. Richard Vaughan 8. George Lloyd 9. Thomas Morton 10. John Bridgeman
11. John Walton 12. Henry Fern 13. George Hall. 14. John VVilkins 15. John
Pearson.


Bishops of S. David's.
1. David, Uncle to King Arthur, removed his See from Caerleon to Menevia,
which ever since, from him, is called St. David's. He sat sixty five years, and
died, Anno 642. having first built twelve Monasteries in the Country
thereabout, being now one hundred forty six years of age. 2. Cenauc, who was
first Bishop of Pattern. 3. Teilaw 4. Cenew 5. Morwal 6. Haerunen 7. Elwaed 8.
Gurnuen. 9. Lendivord: Anno 810. the Church of St. David was burnt by the
West Saxons. 10. Gorwyst 11. Gorgan 12. Elvoed 13. Anian 14. Elvoed 15.
Ethelmen 16. Elanc 17. Molscoed 18. Sadermen 19. Catellus 20. Sulhaithnay 21.
Nonis 22. Etwal 23. Asserius, called in the Chronicle of Wales, Archbishop of
all Wales. He died, Anno 906. he was Uncle to Asserius, Bishop of Sherborn.
24. Arthvael 25. Sampson. Henceforth the Bishops of St. David's never subjected
themselves unto Canterbury, until the time of King Henry the First, King of
England. 26. Kueline 27. Rodheric 28. Elquin 29. Lywarch 30. Nergu 31. Hubert
32. Everus 33. Morgenu This man of all the Bishops of St. David's, first refused
to eat flesh, says Giraldus. 34. Nathan 35. Ievan: He continued only one
night. 36. Argustel. 37. Morgenveth 38. Hernun, a godly and learned man. 39.
Carmerin 40. Joseph 41. Bleithud 42. Sulghein 43. Abraham 44. Rythmarch 45.
Wilfrid 46. Bernard 47. David Fitzgerald. 48. Peter. His Church had been
often destroyed, in former Ages, by Danes, and other Pirates; and in his time
was almost ruined. He bestowed much in re-edefying the same; and may in some
sort be said to have built the Church which now stands. 49. Sylvester
Giraldus: He was commonly called Giraldus Cambrensis. He was Son unto Giraldus
de Windsor, that built the Castle of Pembrock, and Nesta, the Sister of
Griffith ap-Rice, ap-Theodore, Prince of Wales. He wrote a description of
England, Ireland and Wales. Of many Books that he wrote you may find the
Catalogue in John Bale. 50. Edward, an Abbot. 51. Alselmus 52. Thomas,
Archdeacon of Lincoln. 53. Richard Carren 54. Thomas Beck 55. David Martin 56.
Henry Gower 57. John Thorsby 58. Reginald Brian 59. Thomas Falstaf 60. Adam
Houghton 61. John Gilbert 62. Gray Mohun, Keeper of the Privy Seal: he was for
a while Lord Treasurer of England. 63. Henry Chichley 64. John Keterich 65.
Stephen Patrington 66. Benet Nichols 67. Thomas Rodburn, a great Mathematician,
and Historiographer. 68. William Lynwood, Doctor of Law. 69. John Langton 70.
John Delabere 71. Robert Tully 72. Thomas Langton 73. Hugh Pavy 74. John Morgan
75. Robert Sherborn 76. Edward Vaughan 77. Richard Rawlins 78. William Barlow
79. Robert Ferrars. He was burnt at Carmarthen for the Truth, March 30. 1555.
in Queen Mary's days. 80: Henry Morgan. He pronounced the sentence of death
against his Predecessor, and invaded his Bishopric: he was displaced in the
beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. 81: Thomas Young 82: Richard Davies
83: Marmaduke Middleton 84: Anthony Rudd 85: Richard Milborn 86: William Laud
87: Theophilus Field 88: Roger Manwaring 89: William Lucy.
Bishops of Dandaff.
1: Dubritius 2: Telian 3: Odoceus 4: Ubylwynus 5: Aidan 6: Elgistil 7:
Litnapeius 8: Comergen 9: Argistwil 10: Gurvan 11: Guodoloin 12: Edilbiu 13:
Grecielus 14: Bertygwyn 15: Trychan 16: Elgovus 17: Cargwaret 18: Cer^ennir 19:
Nobis 20: Galfridus 21: Nudd 22: Cimeliauc 23: Libian 24: Marchhuth 25: Pater
26: Gogwan, consecrated by Dunstan. 27: Bledri 28: Joseph, consecrated by
Agolnoth. I^ his time Kilthereh, King of Wales gave many privileges to his
Church. 29: Herewald: he sat fifty eight years. 30: Urbanus. ^. Hoveden says,
He was consecrated Bishop of this Church, Anno 1108. His See being spoiled, and
the Church ruined, he obtained Letters of the Pope from the Council of Rhemes,
to the King and Archbishop for a supply to repair it: which he obtained, and
began to build the Church of Landaff, as now it is. He seeks to recover
diverse Lands, taken from his See by the Bishop of St. David's, and dies in his
way to Rome. 31: Uhtrid 32: Geoffry 33: Nicholas ap Gurgant 34. William de
falso Marisco. 35. Henry, Prior of Burgavenny. Until this man's time the
Bishopric and Chapter was one body, and their possessions not severed. 36.
William, Prior of Goldeliff. 37. Elias de Radnor 38. William de Burgo 39. John
de la Ware 40. William de Radnor 41. William de Brews 42. John de Monmouth 43.
John de Egglescliff 44. John Pascal 45. Roger Cradock 46. Thomas Rushock 47.
William de Bottlesham 48. Edmond de Bromfield 49. Tideman, Abbot of Beaulieu
50. Andrew Barret 51. John Burghil 52. Thomas Peverel 53. John de la Zouch 54.
John Wellys 55. Nicholas Ashby 56. John Hunden 57. John Smith 58. John Marshal
59. John Ingleby 60. Miles Saley 61. George de Arthegua, a Spaniard, and
Dominican 62. Robert Holgate 63. Anthony Dunstan, or Kitchen 64. Hugh Jones 65.
William Blethin 66. Gervase Babington 67. William Morgan 68. Francis Godwyn 69.
George Carleton 70. William Murrey 71. Morice 72. Hugh Lloyd 73. Davies.
Bishops of Bangor.
1: Hervaeus 2: David 3: Maurice 4: William, Prior of St. Augustines 5: Guianus
6: Albanus 7: Robert of Shrewsbury 8: Caducanus 9: Howel 10: Richard 11:
Anianus 12: Caducanus 13: Gruffin 14: Jews 15: Matthew 16: Thomas de Ringsted
17: Gervase de Castro 18: Howel 19: John Gilbert 26: John, called Episcopus
Clovensis 21: John Swaffham 22: Richard Young 23: Jews 24: Benet Nichols 25:
William Barrow 26: Nicholas 27: Thomas Cheroton 28: John Stanberry 29: James,
called Episcopus Achadensis 30: Thomas Ednan 31: Henry Dean 32: Thomas Pigot
33: John Penny 34: Thomas Skevington. He built all the Cathedral Church from
the Quire downward, excepting that the two sides were partly standing. He was
consecrated June 17. 1509. 35: John Salcot 36: John Bird 37: Arthur Bulkley 38:
William Glyn 39: Rowland Merrick 40: Nicholas Robinson 41: Hugh Bellot 42:
Richard Vaughan 43: Henry Rowland He gave four Bells to the Church of Bangor:
he gave also two fellowships to Iesus-colledge in Oxford 44: Jews Baily 45:
David Dolben 46: William Roberts 47: Robert Morgan 48: Humphrey Lloyd.
Bishops of St. Asaph.
About the year 560. Kentigern, Bishop of Glascow in Scotland, being driven out
of his own Country, erected a Monastery for himself, and his company, between
the Rivers of Elwyd and Elwy; where, in process of time, having builded a
Church, and some other Edifices fit for his entertainment, there flocked unto
him such multitudes of people, as the number of his Monks amounted to no less
than six hundred and sixty* His Church was first built of timber, and
afterward of stone.

Malgocunus, a British King, allowed the same Church to be an Episcopal See,
and endowed it with diverse Lordships, Manors, and Privileges. The Bishop of
that See was then called Elvensis, of the River near which it stands, and
this Kentigern became the first Bishop of the same.

After many years he was called home into Scotland, whereupon he gave over this
Bishopric unto a Disciple of his, called Asaph. In the time of King Edward the
Second there were five Mansion-houses belonging to it, in which the Bishops
used to reside, scil. Lanelwy, Altmaliden, Landeglia, Nauverg, and St. Martins:
of all which there now remains to them Lanelwy only. Great havoc was made of
this Church in the reign of King Henry the Fourth by Owen Glendover, since
which time the Canons Houses were never repaired.

2. St. Asaph. Of him the Cathedral Church was ever after, even unto this day,
called Ecclesia Asaphensis. He was a man of great learning and virtue. Who
succeeded him for some hundreds of years after we find not. 3. The next that is
mentioned, is Geoffry of Monmouth, the Historian. Of a Benedictine Monk he
became Bishop of St. Asaph, Anno 1151. 4. Adam, a Welch-man 5: Reynerus 6:
Abraham He gave half the Tithes of Wrexham to this Church. 7: Howel Ednevit 8.
Anianus the First 9: Anianus the Second: a Dominican, Confessor to Edward the
First. John, Earl of Arundel, gave much Land to him and his Success^rs, and
(after him) John, his Son, added more. 10: Lewellin de Bromfield 11: David ap
Blethin 12: Ephraim 13: Henry 14: John Trevor 15: Llewelin ap Madoc, ap Elis
16: William de Spridlington 17: Laurence Child, a Monk of the Abbey of Battle.
18: Alexander Bach 19: John Trevor 20. Robert 21. John Low 22. Reginald Peacock
23. Thomas 24. Richard Redman 25. David ap Owen 26. Edmond Birkhead 27. Henry
Standish 28. William Barlow 29. Robert Warton 30. Thomas Goldwel 31. Richard
Davies 32. Thomas Davies 33. William Hughes 34. William Morgan 35. Richard
Parry 36. John Hanmer 37. John Owen 38. George Griffith 39. Henry Glemham 40.
Isaac Barrow
Bishops of Lindisfarn.
1. Aidan, who chose for his See a little Island, called Lindisfarn, now called
Holy Island, where he, and diverse of his Successors led their lives. He
traveled up and down the Country on foot to preach the Gospel, giving
whatsoever he could get unto the poor. He died August 31. Anno 651. for grief
of the death of King Oswald, who was traitorously slain twelve days before. 2.
Finan. He first built a Church for his See in the Island all of timber, and
covered it with reed. 3. Colman. He gave over his Bishopric, and returned into
Scotland. 4. Tuda 5. Eata 6. St. Cuthbert, Bishop of Lindisfarn; he is famed
for his Sanctity. 7. Wilfrid 8. Eadbert. He covers the Church with Lead. 9.
Egfrid 10. Ethelwold 11. Kenulfus 12. Higbald. In his time the Danes spoiled
the Church, and Monastery, and the Monks forced to leave it. 13. Egbert 14.
Eanbert 15. Eardulph.
In the mean time the Bishops of Hagustald were. 1. Aca 2. Fritherbert 3.
Athmund 4. Titherus 5. Ethelbert 6. Heanred 7. Eanberthus 8. Tidferthus.


Bishops of Chester on the Street.
1. Eardulph Upon the burning of Lindisfarn removed his See to Chester on the
Street, anciently called Cunecestre. And by Elfred, and Guthred, Kings of
Northumberland, all the Country between Tine and Tisean were given to the same
See. 2. Cuthardus 3. Milred 4. Withred 5. Ughtred 6. Sexhelm. He being
covetous, was so terrified with a Vision of St. Cuthbert, that he was forced to
lea^e the Sea. 7. Alfsius, or Elssig. He was the last Bishop of Lindisfern, or
Chester on the Street.
Bishops of Durham.
1. Aldhunus, or Aldvinus, was consecrated Bishop, Anno 995. He with his Monks
came to Durham, or rather Dunholm; which is compounded of two Saxonwords, Dun
signifying an Hill, and Holm an Island in a River; a place full of Woods. He
with the help of Uthred, Earl of Northumberland, caused the Woods to be cut
down, cleansed the place, and in short time made it habitable. A Church was
finished there in the time of this Bishop. He was Schoolmaster unto the
Children of King Ethelred, Elfred, and Edward, that afteward reigned, and is
called Edward the Confessor. 2. Edmond. The Monks and Priests comending about a
Succ^ssor to Aldhunus, this Edmond came among them, and (^eastingly) offered
himself to be their Bishop; and they chose him against his will, he having a
better mind to a Tennis-court than a Monks Hood, Malmsb. lib. 3. de Pont. He
much adorned his Church, and the City with buildings. 3. Eadred 4. Egelrick. He
builded a Church at Cuneagecestre: in digging the foundation of this Church, he
found so much money, that he cared not for the Bishopric, but resigned it unto
Egelwyn his Brother, and returned to the Monastery of Peterborough, whence he
came. He made the Cawsey from Deeping to Spalding. He was afterward accused to
the Conqueror of Treason, and taken out of his Monastery, and imprisoned at
Westminster, where he died. 5. Egelwyn. He was Bishop at the coming in of the
Conqueror, he forfook Durham, and carried his Clergy with him unto the Church
of Landisfarn, but he was not long before they returned again. 6. Walcher, or
Walter. He was so rich, that he b^ught the Earldom of Northumberland of the
King. He and many of his Retinue were slain in the Church of Durham, May 14.
1080. and the Church burnt with fire, because two of his Servants had murdered
Leulfus, one of the Ancestors to the now Lord Lumley. R. Hoved. 7. William
Kairlipho, Abbot of St. Vincent. He was consecrate at Gloucester in the presence
of the King, and diverse of his Nobles. He procured license of Pope Gregory, to
translate the Monks of Yarrow to Durham. He expelled diverse married Priests out
of his Church and suffered only Monks to dwell there. He pulled down the Church
of Durham, that Aldhunus had built there, and began to erect another far more
magnificent, but lived not to finish it. 8. Ranulph Flambard 9. Geoffry Rufus,
Chancellor of England. He built the Castle of Alnerton. 10. William de Sta.
Barbara. 11. Hugh Pudsey He buil^ a fair House at Derlington, as also the
Church there. He found^d the ^^riory of Finchal. He boug^^ Sadbury of King
Richard the First, and ^ave it unto his See: H^ built the ^^^^ge of Elvet, and
the Gall. (...) Westend of his Cathedral Church, in which he placed the bones
of Venerable Bede. He built two Hospitals, one at Allerton, another called
Sherborn. Unto Sherborn he gave liberal maintenance for sixty five poor Lazers,
and a certain number of Priests. For a great sum of money King Richard made him
Earl of Northumberland. 12. Philip de Poictiers. This Bishop, by the license of
King Richard the First, set up a Mint at Durham, and began to coin money there,
Anno 1196. 13. William de Marisco. 14. Richard Poor 15. Nicholas de Fernham.
16. Walter de Kirkham. 17. Robert Stitchel 18. Robert de Insula. 19. Anthony
Beak 20. Richard de Bury. He was soon after Lord Chancellor, and within two
years after that Lord Treasurer of England. He was often employed in Ambassages
of great importance. What time of leisure he had, he spent either in Prayer, or
conference, with his Chaplains (whereof he had many about him, and those very
learned men) or else in study. His Study was so well furnished with Books, that
it is thought he had more Books than all the Bishops in England. Many Letters
passed between him and Francis Petrarch, and other learned men in those days.
Thomas Bradwardine was then one of his Cha^lains, afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury: Richard Fitz-Ralph afterward Archbishop of Armagh, W Burley, J.
Mandut, R. Holcot, R. Killington, Doctors of Divinity, Richard Bintworth, and
W. Seagrove; the one afterward Bishop of London, the other of Chichester. He
was very liberal to the poor. 21. Thomas Halfield. He built Durham college in
Oxford, now called Trinity-colledge. 22. John Fordham 23. Robert Nevil 24.
Laurence Booth 25. William Dudley 26. John Sherwood 27. Richard Fox 28. William
Severus 29. Christopher Bambridge 30. Thomas Ruthal 31. Thomas Wolsey,
Cardinal. 32. Cuthbert Tonstal 33. James Pilkinton 34. Richard Barnes 35.
Matthew Hutton 36. Tobias Matthew 37. William James 38. Richard Neile 39. John
Howson 40. Thomas Morton 41. John Cozens.
Bishops of Carlisle.
Carlisle being destroyed by the Danes in the year 900. it happened King William
Rufus passing that way, Anno 1090. re-edified it, and built a strong Castle in
the same City.

The Government of this new erected City was committed to a certain Norman
Priest, named Walter, that came into England with the Conqueror. This man being
very rich, began to build there a Church to the honor of the blessed Virgin,
but he died before he could perfect the work.

Adelwald, the first Prior of St. Oswald, and Confessor to King Henry the
First, persuaded the said King to employ the Revenues that Walter left behind
him, in the foundation of a College of Regular Canons, to be annexed unto the
Church forementioned. He did so, and moreover bestowed upon the said College
six Churches, with their Chapels, to be impropriated to the same use.

The Bishops of Carlisle were. 1. Adelwald, the Prior forementioned. 2. Barnard
3. Hugh, Abbot of Battle. 4. Walter Malcleck 5. Sylvester de Everdon 6. Thomas
Vipont 7. Robert de Chause 8. Ralph de Ireton 9. John de Halton 10. John de
Rosse 11. John de Kirkby 12. Gilbert de Welton 13. Thomas de Appleby 14. Robert
Read 15. Thomas Merkes 16. William Strickland 17. Roger Whelpdale 18. William
Barrow 19. Marmaduke Lumley 20. Nicholas Close 21. William Piercy 22. John
Kingscot 23. Richard Scroop 24. Edward Story 25. Richard, Prior of Durham. 26.
William Sever 27. Roger Laburn 28. John Penny 29. John Kite. 30. Robert Aldrich
31. Owen Oglethorp, that crowned Queen Elizabeth. 32. John Best 33. Richard
Barnes 34. John May 35. Henry Robinson 36. Robert Snowdon 37. Richard Milborn
38. Richard Senhouse 39. Francis White 40. Barnaby Potter. 41. Richard Stern
42. Edward Rainbow.


Of the manner of Installation of Bishops here in England in former times.
THe Installation of Bishops was a Ceremony of great solemnity in former Ages,
the particularity whereof we find in Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Excester, in
the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Second, who was Consecrated March
18. 1307.

When he came to Excester to be Installed, at the Eastgate he alighted from
his Horse, and went on foot to St. Peter's Church. All the way, where he should
pass, being laid and covered with black Cloth, on each hand he was conducted
by a Gentleman of great worship, Sir Hugh Courtney (who claimed to be Steward
of his Feast) going next before him. At Broad-gate he was received by his
Chapter and Quire in their Ornaments, with Te Deum, and so carried into the
Church.

The usual Ceremonies being performed there, at his Palace a great Feast was
prepared for the entertainment of such Noblemen, and other Persons of account,
as repaired thither at that time. It is incredible, how many Oxen, Tuns of Ale
and Wine are said to have been usually spent at this kind of Solemnity, even so
much as the whole yearly Revenue, at this time, would not suffice to pay for.

Of those Englishmen that have been Cardinals of the Church of Rome.
1. THE first Leader of this Band is Pope Joan, called by Sabellicus, Bish.
God^^y^.
and some others, John the Seventh, but by Platina and other Writers, John the
Eighth; who being but a Woman, became not only Cardinal, but Pope of Rome: She
was born at Mentz in Germany, the Daughter of an English Priest, who having a
Wife whose Parents dwelt at Mentz, bringing his said Wife to see her friends,
stayed there so long, till she was delivered of this Feminine Prelate, named in
her Baptism Joan, as most say; Gilberta as others; or as Fulgosus delivers,
Agnes. In her youth she fell acquainted with an English Monk of the Abbey of
Fulda, with whom traveling in Man's apparel to diverse Universities and
Monasteries, as well Greek as Latin, she settled in the end at Athens, where she
became Famous for Learning, and continued there with him until the death of
her said Paramour. Then coming to Rome, and, by Reading, Disputing, and other
Exercises, having purchased to her self the reputation of a great Clerk, upon
the death of Leo the Fourth, she was chosen Pope, Anno 855. and held that place
two years five months and three days; in which mean time she was gotten with
child by a certain Cardinal: and going in Procession happened to be delivered of
her burden in the open Street, in which place she instantly died, viz. between
the Colisco and St. Clement's Church: the shame and turpitude of which disgrace
unto that holy See, h^^h moved all the Bishops of Rome since that time to
lengthen a little the walk of their Procession, and to go a way much farther
about, rather than they will endure to pass by that place. And to prevent the
like inconvenience in time to come, they have ordained every Pope after his
election to be searched by the Junior Deacon in a Marble-chair, made hollow for
the same purpose. Spectatur adhuc (says Sabellic^s) in Pontifi^ia domo
m^r^orea sella ^irca medium inanis, qua nobis Pontifex continuo ab e^us
cre^tione residat, ut sedentalis Genetalia ab ultimo Diacono attrectentur. This
History (howsoever imp^gned of late by the Papists) is delivered by M^rianus
Scotus, and Martin of Poland, who lived Anno 1320. Sabellicus, Fasciculus
Temporum, Petrarch, and diverse others. And Platina recounting this Story,
says, Quod onnes fere affirmant, that it is observed almost by all Writers.

2. The nex^ in time is one Vlricus, an Englishman, who being Cardinal, came
into England as the Pope's Legate, Anno 1109. and brought the Archiepiscopal
Pall unto Thomas the younger Archbishop of York, and caused him to consecrate
Turgod Prior of Durham unto the Bishopric of St. Andrews in Scotland.

3. Robert Bullen of Puley, a very Learned Man in his time; unto him the
University of Oxford is much beholden: for whereas in the Reign of King Harold
it had been so wasted, as that for many years it lay desolate and forsaken of
Scholars, he was a means to draw them thither again: and leaving the University
of Paris, took great pains in Reading, Disputing, and Writing diverse Learned
Books; whereby he became so famous even in Foreign Nations, as by Pope
Innocent the Second he was sent for to Rome; by Celestine the Second, made
Cardinal Sancti Eusebii, Anno 1144. and by Lucius the Second, appointed the
Pope's Chancellor; he died Anno 1150.

4. Two years after the preferment of Bullen, Nicholas Breakspear was made
Bishop, Cardinal of Alba, and a while after Pope: he was born in Hartford-shire
at Abbots-Langley, near unto St. Albans; a younger brother of the house of
Breakspear, and the Son of one Robert a married Priest, the which Robert waxing
old, and having lost his Wife, became a Monk in St. Albans, at which time his
Son Nicholas was but a tender youth, resorting to his Father for relief and
maintenance; the old man out of a supersti^ious conceit that the next way to
Heaven was to renounce all care of Friends, Children, and all things else, save
what by the rule of their Order was enjoined, in a rude and churlish manner
cast him off, willing him to try his fortune abroad, without expecting from him
any manner of succor. He being thus turned off to the wide World without all
means of livelihood, went over into France, and traveling through the Country
found no entertainment till he came to Valentia in Provence, where the Monks of
the Abbey of St. Rufus seeing him a beautiful and towardly child, witty, and
for his age very industrious, took him in, and in process of time not only
admitted him into their fraternity, but also chose him first Prior, and
afterward Abbot, having in the mean time by painful study attained to much
learning.

But many differences grew between him and his Monks, who accused him of many
things unto the Pope, that then was Eugenius the third. He after examination of
the cause acquitted the Abbot, and sharply reprehended the Monks as froward
fellows, charging them hereafter to yield unto him as their Governor all
dutiful obedience, notwithstanding which after a little while they renewed
their complaints. And as before, so now, the Abbot answered all their
accusations, and that with such eloquence, discretion and modesty, as the Pope
taking a great liking of the man, he told his Accusers they were unworthy of
him; and therefore willing them to seek for some other for his place, with whom
they might better agree; he created him Bishop, Cardinal, of Alba, Anno 1146.
Soon after which time, upon experience of his great Wisdom and Learning, he
sent him as his Legate into the Countries of Denmark and Norway, the
Inhabitants whereof being then Pagans, he converted unto Christian Religion. At
his return out of those parts Anastatius the Pope, who (Eugenius being dead in
the mean time) had succeeded him, together with his Cardinals, received him
with great honor, much approving his doings. It happened that within a few
months after his return, the said Pope died also: and this man also taking
upon him the name of Hadrian the Fourth, was chosen Pope in hi^ room. This was
He that brought under his entire obedience the Citizens of Rome; that compelled
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa to hold his Stirrup, and appointed the Abbot
of St. Albans to be the first Abbot of England, as St. Alban to whom the Abbey
was dedicated, was the first Martyr of England. Having sat four years nine
months, he died at Anagnia, being choked by a fly in his d^ink.

5. Some report, that Geoffry of Monmouth, the Author of the British History,
was a Cardinal at Rome. This can hardly be made good, but this is evident, he
was consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph, Anno 1151.

6. Busa an Englishman, says John Bale, Nephew unto Pope Hadrian, was made a
Cardinal and the Pope's Chamberlain, Anno 1155. his Titles were first S S.
Cosmae and Damiani, then S. Crucis in Jerusalem, afterward S. Pudentianae.
Through his endeavor chiefly Alexander the Third was chosen Pope, by the
voices of nineteen Cardinals: yet another Antipope was set up against him,
having four voices only: Under him, the said Alexander, he lived in great
authority and favor, and died Anno 1180.

7. The book entitled, Antiquitates Britannicae, ascribed to the late most
Reverend Archbishop Matthew Parker, reports, how that William Corbet,
Archbishop of Canterbury, being deceased, Henry de Bloys Bishop of Winchester,
and Brother unto King Stephen, procured himself to be made a Cardinal, and
appointed Legate a latere from the Pope.

8. Herebert, born at Bosham in Sussex, brought up in Oxford (where he
proceeded Doctor in Divinity) was Secretary unto Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the time of the said Becket's slaughter; the History whereof he
wrote (besides diverse other works) mentioned by John Bale. Pope Lucius the
Third made him Cardinal, Anno 1178. and bestowed upon him the Archbishopric of
Beneventum.

9. John Cummin, an English man, and Archbishop of Dublin, was created a
Priest-cardinal by Pope Lucius the Third, at Velitum, Anno 1183. as testifies
that virtuous, learned, and eloquent man Giraldus Cambrensis.

10. Stephen Langton, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, was created Cardinal
S. Chrysogoni, 1212.

11. Robert Curson, a Gentleman well descended, and an Oxford-man, was made
Cardinal of S. Stephen in Coelio monte: he was a good Divine, and eminent
Preacher. From Oxford he went to Paris, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity:
Anno 1219. he was with King Lewis, the ^rench King, at the taking of Damiata in
Egypt; after that, in the time of Hono^ius the Third, he was here as Legate in
England: he left behind him a sum of Divinity, and a Dis^ou^se touching the
salvation of Origin, ^ertain solemn Lectures, and some other Works much
esteemed.

12. Robert Somerscot made Cardinal of S. Eustachius, Anno 1234. he was a man
(says Matthew Paris) discretus and circumspectu omnibus amabilis merito and
gratiosus. He was to have been elected Pope, after Pope Gregory the Ninth, but
that some of the Cardinals caused him to be poisoned in the Conclave, where the
Cardinals were assembled to make the election.

13. Matthew Paris makes mention of an English Cardinal, called John, that
when the Pope was very angry, because King Henry the Third withstood a certain
exaction of His, and threatened to do great matters against him, sought by many
effectual reasons to divert him from his public course, but to no purpose,
till at length the King for fear of his thunderbolts, was fain to yield. This
man died at the Council at Lions, Anno 1274.

14. Atcherius, Archdeacon of London (where John Bale says he was born) was
created Cardinal of S. Praxedis, Anno 1261. He died at Rome, November 1. 1286.
and was buried in the Church to which he was entitled.

15. William Bray Doctor of Divinity, an Englishman, between whom and the said
Archerus had been a long continued Band of friendship even from their
childhood. Being Archdeacon of Rhemes he was created by the same Pope, Cardinal
of S. Mark, Anno 1262. He died at Civita Vecchia, Anno 1282. in the time of the
vacancy.

16. Robert Kilwarby, being Archbishop of Canterbury, resigned his said
Archbishopric, to be Bishop, Cardinal of Portus, whereunto he was appointed by
Pope Nicholas the Third.

17. Hugh de Evesham, being a Physician of the greatest renown of any then
living in the Christian World, as also well seen in the Mathematics
(especially in Astrology) was sent for to Rome, by Pope Martin the Fourth, to
give his opi^ion in certain doubts, and questions of Physic, which he
performed so learnedly and readily, as gave great satisfaction. He was created
Cardinal of St. Laurence in Lucina, Anno 1280. and was poisoned.

18. John Bale reports of one Theobaldus an English man, that (as he says)
was created Cardinal S. Sabinae in Aventino, by Pope Martin the Fourth, Anno
1289.

19. A Catalogue of English Cardinals, in the History of Archbishop Pa^ker,
mentions one Bernard de Auguiscello, that being Archbishop of Arl^s, was made
Bishop, Cardinal, of Portua, Anno 1281. and died 1290.

20. In the said Catalogue we find also one Berardus made Bishop, Cardinal, of
Praeneste: Anno 1268. he was sometime Canon of York: he died in June 1291.

21. The Register of Ralph Baldock, containing a Catalogue of the Deans of St.
Paul's, reports, that one Arnoldus de Cantilupo, Dean of Paul's, was a Priest
Cardinal, Anno 1306.

22. One Leonardus Guercinus, is likewise mentioned in the same Catalogue, he
was made a Priest Cardinal by Pope Clement the Fifth, Anno 1310.

23. Pope Benedict the Eleventh, who himself had been a Friar-preacher, and
General of that order, made William Macklesfield a Friar-preacher (a Batchelour
of Divinity at Paris, and Doctor at Oxford) a Cardinal S. Sabinae, Anno 1303.
whereas he had been dead then four months before. His Cardinals hat
notwithstanding was carried to London where he was buried, and with great
solemnity set upon his hearse. He was born near Coventry.

24. Upon the news of Macklesfield's death, the Pope ordained in his place, and
to the same title one Walter Winterburn, born in Sarum, a Friarpreacher (as was
the other) a Doctor of Divinity, Confessor to King Edward the Third, and
Provincial of his Order. He enjoyed his honor not past fifteen months, died
in the eightieth year of his Age, Anno 1305. and was buried at London. A man of
great learning, whereof he left some Monuments in writing not yet perished.

25. Thomas Joyce the next Provincial, of the Friars-preachers in England,
succeeded Winterburn not only in the place, but in his Cardinalship too; being
likewise Doctor of Divinity, and Confessor to the King: being employed in an
Embassage to the Emperor, he died on the way, Anno 1307. and was buried in the
Church of the Friars-preachers in Oxford, where he had been brought up. He had
six brethren Preachers, by the same Mother, whereof one named Walter, became
Archbishop of Armagh: Diverse of his works are remembered by John Bale.

26. Sextorius a Britan, that in his youth became a Franciscan Friar, of which
Order he was chofen the nineteenth General, Anno 1339. Then by Pope Innocent he
was appointed first Bishop of Marsilia, after that Archbishop of Ravenna; then
Patriarch of Grado, and lastly Cardinal: September 17. 1361. but he died the
same month. He wrote a Commentary upon S. Augustine de Civitate Dei,
Expositions upon diverse parts of the Bible, Sermons, Lectures, and diverse other
discourses.

27. Pope Urban the Fifth, named William Grisant, was (as Thomas Walsingham
affirms) an Englishman: he was the Son of a famous English Physician, named
also William Grisant, brought up in Mertoncolledge. He died December 19. Anno
1370.

28. The first Cardinal created by the said Vrb^n* was one A^glicus Grimaldi de
Grisacco, who was supposed to have been an English man: but all acknowledge
that he was the Pope's brother's son, and so English by descent. He was
Cardinal S. Petri ad Vincula at first and afterward Bishop Cardinal of Alba:
he died at Avignon, Anno 1387. having held in Commendam many years the Deanary
of York.

29. Bale supposes John Thoresby, Archbishop of York, to have been created a
Priest-cardinal S. Sabinae.

30. Simon Langham, Archbishop of Canterbury, was created a Priestcardinal by
the aforesaid Urban in September 1368. and afterward presented to be Bishop
Cardinal of Praeneste by Gregory the Eleventh.

31. Adam Easton, a Benedictine Monk of Norwich; born in Hereford-shire,
proceeded Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, wrote much; a man of great wisdom and
learning: he was created Cardinal S. Caeciliae. Pope Urban apprehended at one
time no less than seven Cardinals (this Cardinal being one) and after long
imprisonment, caused five of them to be sowed up into sacks, and with barbarous
cruelty to be thrown into the Sea. But this man (whose good fortune it was to
escape) he committed to close prison, till, by the earnest entreaty of King
Richard the Second, he was allowed some more liberty, all his Livings being
taken from him. In that poor estate he continued five years even until the
death of Urban. His next successor Boniface the Ninth, set him quite at
liberty, and restored him to all his preferments again; which thing was
solemnly declared to the Estates assembled in Parliament at Westminister, Anno
1390. after which time he lived seven years in great prosperity, and died
September 19. 1397. and was buried in his own title, where he has a Monument
of Marble with his Arms and Picture, and this rude Epitaph.

Artibus iste pater famosus in omnibus Adam,
Theologus summus, cardique nalis erat.
Anglia cui patriam, Titulum dedit ista Beatae.
Coeciliaeque -- morsque suprema polum.
Anno 1397. men's. September.
He left in writing above twenty several Volumes, whereof the greatest part
were either written in Hebrew, or Translations out of Hebrew; or at least some
discourse, concerning the Hebrew Tongue. Among the rest it is said, that he
Translated all the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Latin.

32. William Courtney, then Bishop of London, was also made Cardinal by the
same Urban.

33. Philip Repingdon, sometime Abbot of Leicester, consecrated Bishop of
Lincoln, March 29. 1405. having been heretofore a great defender of the
Doctrine of John Wickliff, was created Cardinal, S S. Ne^^^ and Achill^i,
September 18. 1408. by Pope Gregory the Twelfth, who before had taken a solemn
Oath to make no more Cardinals, till the controversy concerning the Papacy was
ended: but being forsaken by all his Cardinals except only five, the better to
strengthen himself, he created ten in one day, whereof this man was one.

34. Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham, was created a Priest-cardinal, June 6.
1411. by Pope John the Twenty second. He died Anno 1437.

35. Robert Halam, Bishop of Sarum, was also created a Priest-cardinal, the
same day he died, in the Castle of Gotlieb near Constance, being at the General
Council there, September 4. 1417. having sat Bishop of that Church nine years.

36. Henry Beaufort, brother to King Edward the Fourth, and Bishop of
Winchester, was created Cardinal of S. Eusebius by Pope Martin the Eighth. June
23. 1426. He died April 11. 1447. and was buried in his own Church.

37. Henry Chichely was created Cardinal, Anno 1428. says the Author of
Antiquit. Britan.

38. John Kemp, Archbishop of York, was ordained Cardinal of S. Eusebius,
August 9. 1439. long after being Archbishop of Canterbury, he was removed to
the Title of S. Ruffinus.

39. Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, was created by Pope Paul the
Second, Cardinal S. Syriaci in Thermis, Anno 1464. He died March 30. 1486.

40. John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, was, by Pope Alexander the Fifth,
created Cardinal S. Anastasii, Anno 1493. He died Anno 1500.

41. Christopher Bainbrigg, Archbishop of York, was made a Cardinal S.
Praxedis, Anno 1511.

42. Thomas Wolsey, Archbishop of York, was created Cardinal S. Coeciliae,
September 7. He died November 29. 1530.

43. John Fisher, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Rochester, was made
Cardinal S. Vitalis: for refusing the King's supremacy, and dissallowing his
marriage with the Lady Anne Bolen, he was beheaded on the Tower Hill, 1535.

44. Reginald Pool, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, was created Cardinal by
Pope Paul the Third, May 22. 1536. and had three several Titles: the first S.
Nerei and Achillei; then S. Mariae in Cosmedin; and lastly S. Priscae. He died
November 7. 1558.

45. Peter Petow, a Friar, was made Cardinal by Pope Paul the Fourth, June 13.
1557. and also nominated by him unto the Bishopric of Sarum; and all to cross
and disgrace Cardinal Pool. He died in France within the compass of the same
year, and might never set Foot in England, to make show of his red Hat, as
(doubtless) he greatly desired to have done.

46. William Allen, born in England: He raised a great combustion in our
Church. This sugitive was born in Lancashire, and brought up in Orial College;
he ran away beyond the Seas, for his treasonable practices against his
Country: he was by the Pope and other Enemies of the same, promoted to diverse
Ecclesiastical preferments; and lastly had a Cardinal's hat bestowed upon him
in August 1587. He died a Priestcardinal S. Martini in Montibus 1594. and was
buried in the Church of the English College at Rome.

Of the several Orders and Monks that have been in England.
Matthew Paris tells us, that in his time, Tot jam apparuerunt ordines ^.
in Anglia, ut ordinum confusio videretur inordinata; there then appeared so
many Orders in England, that there seemed to be an inordinate confusion of
Orders.

1. The Benedictines, or black Monks, the primitive Monks in England, so called
from St. Benedict or Bennet, an Italian, first Father and founder of that
Order. Augustine, the Monk, first brought them over into England; and these
black Monks first nested in Canterbury, whence they have flown out into all the
parts of the Kingdom. For (as Clement Reyner observes rightly) all the Abbeys
of England before King William the Conqueror (and some while after) were filled
with this Order: and though the Augustimans were their Seniors in Europe, yet
they were their Juniors in England. The same Order was afterward set forth in
a new edition, corrected and amended under the names of.

First, Cluniacks, These were Benedictines refined, with some additionals
invented and imposed upon them, by Odo the Fourth of Clugny in Normandy, who
lived Anno 913. But these Cluniacks came not into England, till after the
Norman Conquest, and had their richest Covents at Barnstable in Devon-shire,
Pontefract and Meaux in Yorkshire, etc.

Secondly, Sistercians, so called, from one Robert living in Cistercium in
Burgundy. He the second time refined the drossie Benedictines; and Walter
Espick first established their Order, in England, at Rival in Yorkshire;
besides which they have had many other pleasant and plentiful habitations at
Warden and Woburn in Bedford-shire, Buckland and Ford in Devon-shire, Bindon in
Dorset-shire, etc. The Bernardine Monks were of a younger house, or
under-branch of the Cistercians. King John built an Abbey of the Cistercian
Order at Beaulieu in Hant-shire.

Thirdly, Of Grandmont, which observed St. Bennet's rule. These were brought
into England, Anno 1233. and were principally fixed at Abberbury in Shrop-shire.

These Benedictines with their several branches were so numerous, and so richly
endowed, that in their revenues they did match all the Orders in England,
especially if the foundations of Benedictine Nuns be joined in the same
reckoning.

2. The Augustinian Monks succeed; it is conceived that Eudo the Dapifer, or
Sewer to King Henry the First, first brought them into England, Anno 1105. and
that St. John's at Colchester was the prime place of their residence. Doctor
Fuller says, that Waltham. Abbey (for Benedictines at the first) had it is Copy
altered, and bestowed on Augustinians. These Augustinians were also called
Canons Regular. This Order in England brought forth seventy eminent Writers,
and one in Germany worth them all in effect: I mean Martin Luther, who gave a
mortal wound to all these Orders, yea to the root of the Romish Religion.

3. Gilbertine Monks, a mongrel Order, observing some select rules, Camd^^ in
Lincolnshire.
partly of St. Bennet, partly of St. Augustine, so named from Gilbert (son to
Joceline a Knight) Lord of Sempringham in Lincolnshire. Being backed with the
Authority of Pope Eugenius the Third, he ordained a Sect consisting of men and
women, which so grew and increased; that himself laid the foundations of
thirteen Religious houses of this Order.

4. Carthusian Monks, much famed for their mortified lives, and abstinence from
all flesh. Bruno first founded them in the Dolphinate in France, Anno 1080. and
some sixty years after they were first brought over into England. William de
long a Spata, Earl of Salisbury, founded the first house of Carthusian Monks at
Heltrop; whose wife Ela after his death founded the house of Nuns at Lacock in
Wilt-shire, and there continued her self Abbess of the place. The Books of the
English Carthusians were many, there being no less than eleven hundred Authors
of them, their writings tend much to mortification; and out of them Parsons the
Jesuit has collected a good part of his resolutions.

Of the Benedictine Monks, there is reported to have been of that Order, twenty
four Popes of Rome, one hundred eighty two Cardinals, one thousand four hundred
sixty four Archbishops and Bishops, fifteen thousand and seventy Abbots of
renown. Pope John the Twenty second says, there have been of this Order five
thousand six hundred fifty six Monks Canonized, and made Saints.

The clothing and rule of the Cluniacks was according to the appointment of
St. Benedicts rule.

The Cestercians wear red shoes, and white rochets on a black coat^ they are
all shorn save a little circle.

The Order of those of Grandmont, is to lead a strait life (as Monks use to do)
to give themselves to Watching, Fasting and Prayer; to wear a coat of Males
upon their bodies, and a black cloak thereupon.

The Augustinians, or Regular Canons, their clothing, by their first
foundation, was a white coat, and a linen rotchet under a black cope, with a
scapular to cover their head and shoulders.

The Gilbertines may boast, that whereas Benedictines are by original Italians,
Augustinians African, Carthusians French, Dominicans Spanish, etc. they are
pure English by the extraction of their Order.

The life of the Carthusians was outwardly full of painted holiness, in
forbearing flesh, in fasting from bread and water every Friday, in wearing
hair-clothes next their body; they were addicted to much silence and
solitariness, never going abroad, refusing all women's company, with other like
ceremonies.

Of the several sorts of Friars that have been in England.
HEre it will be necessary to premise, what was the distinction between the
Monks and Friars. The most essential difference is this: Monks had nothing in
propriety, nor in common, but, being Mendicants, begged all their subsistence
from the charity of others. Indeed they had houses or cells to dwell in, or
rather to hide themselves in, but they had no means thereunto belonging.

But it may be Objected, That many Convents of Friars had large and ample
Revenues, amounting to some hundreds (though never thousands) by the year. I
Answer, That from the beginning (of the Institution of Friars) it was not so.
These additions of Lands unto them was of latter date: not of their seeking,
but of their Benefactors casting upon them.

We begin with their four elemental Orders. Wickliff commonly inveigheth
against Friars under the name of C. A. J. M.

C. Carmelites, A. Augustinians, J. Jacobines, M. Minorites,
or

Dominicans, Franciscans.
An uncharitable Rythmer thus lets fly at them.

Per decies binos Sathanas capiat Jacoboinas,
Propter and errores Jesu confunde Minores,
Augustienses, p^ter inclyte stern per enses,
Et Carmelitas tanquam falsos Heremitas,
Sunt Confessores Dominorum, se^ Dominarum,
Et seductores ipsraum sunt animarum.
1. Of these, the Dominicans were the first Friars which came over Anno 1221
into England, being but twelve in number, with Gilbert de Fraxineto their
Prior; first landed at Canterbury, fixed at Oxford, but richly endowed at
London. They were commonly called Black Friars, Preaching Friars, and Jacobine
Friars. They took their name from St. Dominick, born at Calogora in Spain: and
Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, was their chief Patron, bestowing his Palace in
the Suburbs of London upon them, which afterward they sold to the Archbishops
of York residing therein; till by some transactions between King Henry the
Eighth, and Cardinal Wolsey, it became the Royal Court, now known by the name
of Whitehall. Afterward by the bounty of Gregory Rocksley Lord Mayor of
London, and Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, they were more
conveniently lodged in two Lanes on the bank of Thames, and still retaining the
name of Black Friars; no fewer than eighty English writers are accounted of
this Order at this day. As beyond the Seas they are much condemned for being
the sole active managers of the cruel Spanish Inquisition; so they deserve due
commendation for their Orthodox Judgments, in maintaining some controversies
in Divinity of importance against the Jesuits.

2. Franciscans follow, commonly called Gray Friars, or Minorites: either in
allusion to Jacob's words, sum minor omnibus beneficiis tuis; or from some
other humble expressions in the New Testament. They received their name from
St. Francis, born in the Duchy of Spoletum in Italy; Canonized by Pope Gregory
the Ninth; about two years after whose death the Franciscans came over into
England, and one Diggs (Ancestor to Sir Dudley Diggs) bought for them their
first seat in Canterbury, who afteward were diffused all over England. They
were well-skilled in School Divinity, and had a curious Library in London
(built by Richard Whittington) in that age costing five hundred and fifty
pounds.

One Bernard of Siena, about the year 1400. refined the Franciscans into
Observants. King Edward the Fourth, first brought them into England, where they
had six famous Cloisters; since which time there have been a new Order of
Minims begun beyond the Seas, Recollects, Penitentaries, Capuchins, etc. seeing
they had their rise since the fall of Abbeys in England, they belong not to our
present enquiry, etc. This Order afforded in England a hundred and ten Learned
Writers.

3. Carmelites, or White Friars, come next; so named from Mount Carmel; brought
over into England, in the Reign of King Richard the First, by Ralph Freeborn;
and placed at Alnwick in Northumberland, in a wilderness most like unto Carmel
in Syria, whose Convent at their dissolution, in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, was at low rates in that cheap County, valued at one hundred ninety and
four pound and seven shillings per Annum; by which we may see, that even
Mendicant Sp^^ds Catal. p. 795. R^yner. de Apostolatu Benedi^inoru^. p. 164
Vide the Catalog. in Fullers Church Hist. l. 6. p. 272
^riars had houses endowed even with Revenues. Hi cum primis Monachis Britonum
and Scotorum ex Aegypto and Palestina in Britanicas Insulas Monach^^um
intulerunt. It is said in the praise of our Carmelites, that they were most
careful in keeping the Records of their Order. Let them thank John Bale herein
once of them, who in his youth made the Catalogue out of love to his Order, and
in his old age preserved it out of his affection to Antiquity. This Order was
vertical, and in the highest exaltation thereof in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth, under Nicholas K^^ton their twenty fifth Provincial. They reckoned no
fewer than one thousand five hundred of their Order. But when John Milverton,
his successor began, in favor of Friary, furiously to engage against Bishops,
and the Secular Clergy, the Carmelites good Masters and Dames began to forsake
them, and they never recovered their credit till they were utterly dissolved.
John Bird, the one and thirtieth Provincial of this Order, zealously impugned
the Pope's Supremacy in his Sermons, for which he was made the first Bishop of
Chester, and was ejected that See in the Reign of Queen Mary, because he was
married. The Carmelites S^^w's Survay of London, ^. ^21.
boast very much of one Simon Stock of their Order, a Kentish boy which being
but twelve years old, went out into the Woods, and there fed on roots and wild
fruit, living in the trunk of an hollow Tree, whence he got the Surname of
Stock. Having a revelation that soon after Some should come out of Syria, and
confirm his Order, which came to pass when the Carmelites came hither, he
afterward became Master General of their Order (to whom the respective
Provincials are accountable) and is said to be famous for his miracles.

4. Augustinian Eremites, they entered England, Anno 1252. and had their first
habitation at St. Peter's in the Poor in London; These probably taking the
denomination of poverty (otherwise at this day a very rich Parish in the City)
because the said Augustinian Eremites went under the notion of begging Friars.
Mean time what a mockery was this (as Doctor Fuller observes) that these
should pretend to be Eremites, who instead of a wide Wilderness, lived in
Broad-street London, where their Church now belongs to the Dutch
Congregation. These Augustine Friars were good Disputants.

The Order of the Dominicans is without all shame to beg, and forsake ^^^on's
Ro^^^ks of Rome.
little by wilful poverty, that they may obtain much, and to wax rich of other
men's labors, they themselves being idle, lazy and unprofitable drones of the
Earth. Their coat is white, their cope and coule is black. The new guise of
their vesture made Pope Innocent to wonder. But Pope Honorius the Third by his
Bull honorably admitted the black Order of the Black Friars.

The Gray Friars, or Franciscans, go barefooted, as Francis their founder did,
and gird themselves with a cord, wearing a little coule, whence some think they
are called Minorites. Some of them be called Friars Observants, and are counted
of more holiness than the common sort of Gray Friars are, which are called
Minorites. At first the color of their cope was russet, but afterward was
turned into white by Pope Honorius the Third. This Order (says the Dutch
Chronicle) is to beg, to take of every man, and to do nothing again for it.
They lie, dissemble, and beguile the people with flattering words under the
pretense of long prayer.

William Duke of Aquitain, and Count of Lectavia, invented or rather renewed the
Order of the Augustine Friars, which had been before long decayed. This William
first dwelt in the Wilderness with his Brethren, chastised his flesh, and
subdued it with a coat of male on his bare Body, Praying, Watching, and
Fasting night and day, so that he was called a Father and Restorer of that
Order. Thus much for the four principal sorts of F^iers.

The following Orders were but additional Descants upon the former, with some
variations of their Founders, among whom were.
1. THE Trinitarians, for whom Robert Rooksley built first an house at
Mottingden in Kent: they were called also de Redemptione Captivorum; whose work
was to beg money of well-disposed people for the ransoming of Christians in
captivity with the Pagans.

2. The Crouched Friars, who came over into England 1244. with the Pope's
Authentic and this unusual privilege, that none should reprove their Order,
or upbraid them, or command them under pain of excommunication. Some say, they
carried a cross on their staves, others on their backs, called, in French, a
Crouch, the place of Crouched Friars in London still retains the Name.

3. The Bonhomes, or good men, being also Eremites brought over into England,
by Richard Earl of Cornwall, in the Reign of his Brother King Henry the Third,
so styled because of their signal goodness. These Bonhomes, though begging
Friars (the poorest of Orders) and Eremites the most sequestered of begging
Friars, had two, and it is believed, no more Covents in all England (Monks
only excepted) the one at Asheridge in Buckingham-shire, now the mansion of
the Right Honorable the Earl of Bridgewater: it was valued, at the
dissolution, yearly at four hundred forty seven pound eight shillings
halfpenny. The other at Eddingdon in Wilt-shire, the late habitation of the
Lady Beauchamp, valued, when dissolved, at five hundred twenty one pound twelve
shillings halfpenny.

In the year 1257. arose two new Orders, both of them were fixed in Cambridge:
the first, the brethren, De paenitentia Jesu (otherwise Fratres Saccati,
brethren of the Sack) whose Cell is since turned into Peter-house. Matthew
Paris gives this account of them, at their first coming into England; Eodem
tempore quidam novus ordo fratrum Londini apparuit, and incognitus. Papale
tanen autenticum palam ostendens, ita ut tot ordinum confusio videretur, qui,
quia saccis incedebant induti, Fratres Saccati vocabantur. It is most likely,
that this avaritious Pope Alexander, instituted this new Order to help fill his
bag and Sachel by these Fratres Saccati, employed to promote his rapines and
revenues, as the Friars Minorites, and Predicants were.

The other were the Bethlemites, dwelling somewhere in Trompington-street, and
wearing a Star with five rays on their backs.

I will conclude with the Robertines, who owe their original to one Robert
Flower, who had been twice Mayor of York, who forsaking the fair Lands left him
by his Father, betook himself to a solitary life about the rocks in Nidsdale in
Yorkshire, and it seems) at Knaresborough the first and last house was
erected for his Order.

Of the Templars, and Hospitallers.
THE Inner Temple and Middle Temple, in London, do now stand in the very place,
where, in times past, in the Reign of King Henry the Second, Heraclius
Patriarch of Jerusalem Consecrated a Church for Knights Templars, which they
had newly built according to the form of the Temple near unto the Sepulcher of
our Lord at Jerusalem. For, at their first institution, about the year of our
Lord 1113. they dwelt in part of the Temple hard by the Sepulcher, whereof they
were so named; they vowed Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, to defend Christian
Religion, the holy Land, and Pilgrims going to visit the Lord's Sepulcher
against all Mah^metans and Infidels: whereupon all men most willingly and most
cordially embraced them: so that through the boun^eous liberality of Princes
and devout people, having gotten in all places very fair possessions, and
exceeding great wealth; they flourished in great reputation for Piety and
Devotion; yea and in the opinion; both of the holiness of the men and of the
place, King Henry (...).
the Third, and many Noble men, desired much to be buried in their Church among
them: some of whose Images are there to be seen with their legs across; for so
they were buried in that age, That had taken upon them the Cross (as they then
termed it) to serve in the holy Land, or had vowed the same.

But in process of time, when with unsatiable greediness they had hoorded up
great wealth, by withdrawing Tithes from Churches, appropriating spiritual
livings to themselves, and other hard means, from Almes-men they turned Lords:
and though very Valiant at the first (for they were sworn rather to die than to
fly) afterward, they grew lazy, they laughed at the Rules of their first
Institution, as at the swadlingclothes of their Infancy, neglecting the
Patriarch: at length, partly their vitiousness, and partly their wealth, caused
their final ex^irpation. Pope Clement having long so journed in France, had
received many Fullers Supplement of the Hist. of the Holy War, l. 5. c. 1.
real Courtesies from King Philip the Fair; At last Philip requested of the
Pope all the Lands of the Knights Templars through France, forfeited (as was
pretended) by reason of their horrible Heresies, and licentious living. The
Pope was willing to gratify him in some good proportion for his favors
received: and therefore being thus long the King's Guest, he gave him the
Templars Lands and Goods to pay for his entertainment. On a sudden all the
Templars in France are clapped in prison, damnable sins are laid to their charge,
and they most cruelly burned to death at a stake, with James the Grand Master
of their Order. All Europe followed the Copy that France had set them. Here in
England King Edward the Second, of that name, suppressed the Order, and put
them to death. So by virtue of a Writ sent from him to Sir John Wogan, Lord
Chief Justice in Ireland, were they served there: and such was the secrecy of
the cont^i^ance of the business, that the storm fell upon them ere they were
aware of it.

In England their possessions were by Authority of Parliament assigned to the
Hospitaller-Knights of St. John of Jerusalem; least that such Lands given to
good and pious uses, against the Donour's will should be given to other uses.
At the North-side of the City of London, John Briset, a rich and devout man,
built an House for the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, which in
time grew so great, that it resembled a Palace, and had in it a very fair
Church, and a Towersteeple raised to so great height, with so fine workmanship,
that while it stood, it was a singular beauty and ornament to the City. These
Knights Hospitallers, at their first Institution, about the year 1124. and long
after, were so lowly all the while they continued poor, that their Governor was
styled servant to the poor s^rvitors of the Hospital of Jerusalem, like as the
Master of the Templars, who shortly after arose, was termed, The Humble
Minister of the poor Knights of the Temple.

The Hospitallers ware a white Cross upon their upper black Garment, and by
solemn profession were bound to serve Pilgrims and poor people in the Hospital
of St. John at Jerusalem, and to secure the passages thither; they charitably
buried the dead, they were assiduous in prayer, mortified themselves with
watchings and fastings; they were courteous and kind to the poor, whom they
called their Masters, and Camd. descrip. of London.
fed with white bred, while themselves lived with brown, and carried themselves
with great austerity: whereby they purchased to themselves the love and liking
of all sorts, and through the bounty of good Princes, and private persons,
admiring their piety and prowess, they rose from this low degree to so high an
Estate, and great riches, that they did after a sort wallow in wealth and
riches. For about the year of our Lord 1240. they had within Christendom
nineteen thousand Lordships, or Manors, like as the Templars nine thousand.
And this estate of theirs grown to so great an height made way for them to as
great Honors, so as their Prior in England was reputed the prime Baron of the
Land (called the Lord of St. John's) and able with fullness and abundance of all
things to maintain an honorable Port, until that King Henry the Eighth gat
their Lands and livings into his own hands, like as he did of the Monasteries
also.

They outlived all other Orders, yet at last they fell into a Praemunire: for
they still continued their obedience to the Pope (contrary to their Allegiance)
whose Usurped authority was banished out of the Land.

They were forced to resign all into the King's hands: He allowed to Sir
William Weston, Lord Prior of the Order, an annual pension weave^s Monu^. p.
114.
of One thousand pounds. But he never received a penny thereof, but died
instantly, struck to the heart when he first heard of the dissolution of his
Priory, and lies buried in the Chauncel of Clarkenwell, with the pourtraiture
of a dead man lying on his shroud, most artificially cut in Stone: others had
rent assigned them of two hundred pound, one hundred pound, sixty pound, fifty
pound, twenty pound, ten pound; according to their several qualities and
deserts.

Queen Mary sets up the Hospitallers again, and Sir Thomas Tresham, of Rushton
in Northamptonshire, was the first and last Lord Prior after their
Restitution: for their nests were plucked down, before they were warm in them,
by the coming in of Queen Elizabeth.

Of the English Nuns.
I Come now to Nuns, almost as numerous in England, as Monks and Friars, as
having (though not so many Orders) yet more of the same Order. The weaker sex
has ever equalled men in their Devotion, often exceeded them in their
Superstition.

At Liming in Kent the Daughter of King Ethelbert took the veil, and became
the first English Nun.

There was an Hermophrodite Order (as is aforesaid) admitting both Men and
Women under the same roof, and during the life of Gilbert their first founder,
for seven hundred Brethren there were one thousand one hundred Sisters entered
into that Order. Doctor Fuller divides the Nuns into three sorts.

First, The Antientest. Secondly, The Poorest. Thirdly, The latest Nuns in
England.
1. Of the first sort, he accounts the She Benedictines, commonly called
black Nuns. Bennet the Monk, after he had placed himself and his Monkish
Brethren in a certain Noble and Famous Cloister upon the Mount Cassinus, raised
up also an Order of Nuns, and made his Sister Scholastica Abbess over them. The
apparel of these black Nuns is a black coat, cloak, coule, and veyl: and least
the Scripture should deceive her and hers, it was commanded, that none of that
Order should read the Holy Scripture, without consent or permission of their
Superior.

2. The poorest follow, being the strict Order of St. Clare, a Lady living at
the same time, and in the same Town with St. Francis; she assembled and
gathered together a Congregation of poor Women, and gave them an Order of life,
like unto the rule that Friar Francis gave his Covent. Their garment is gray,
their Order admits none but women-kind, except it be to say Mass.

3. The Nuns of St. Bridget were the latest in England, first settled here in
the second year of King Henry the Fifth, Anno' Domini 1415. dissolved with the
rest, Anno 1538. so that they continued here only one hundred twenty three
years. Bridget, Queen of Sweden gave them their name and Institution, Men and
Women living under the same roof; the Women above, the Men beneath. They were
seated at Sion in Middlesex, which King Henry the Fifth (having expelled from
thence the Monks Aliens) built for Religious Virgins, to the Honor of our
Savior, the Virgin Mary, and St. Bridget of Sion. In this Sion he appointed so
many Nuns, Priests, and Lay-brethren divided apart within their several VValls,
as were in number (forsooth) equal to Christ's Apostles and Disciples, viz.
eighty five.

I. Sisters, Sixty. II. P^^ests, Thirteen. III. Deacons, Four. IV.
Lay-brethren, Eight.
Having bestowed sufficient maintenance upon them, King Henry provided by a
Law, that contenting themselves therewith, they should take no more of any man:
but what overplus soever remained of their yearly Revenue, they should bestow
it upon the poor. Thomas Walsingham says: if afterward the whole World
should proffer walsi^gh. in (...).
them Farms and possessions, it was utterly unlawful for them to accept any
thing thereof. This Order had but this one Covent in England: and so wealthy it
was, that at the dissolution it was valued yearly worth one thousand nine
hundred forty four pounds eleven shillings eight pence farthing. This Order
constantly kept their Audit on All Saints Eve, October 31. and the day after
All Souls, being the third of November.

No Covents of England more carefully kept their Records than the Priory of
Clark^nwel, to whose credit it is registered. There is a perfect (...) Catal. of
Religious Houses, p. 793.
Catalogue, from their first foundation to their dissolution, of all their
Prioresses, defective in all other houses.

Sir Thomas Chaloner not long ago built a spacious house within the close of
that Priory, upon the frontispiece whereof these Verses were inscribed.

Casta fides superest, velatae tuta soro^es
Ista relegatae deseruere licet.
Nam venerandus Hymen hic vota jugalia servat,
Vestalemque focum monte fovere studet.
Chaste Faith still stay's behind, though hence be flown
Those veiled Nuns who here before did nest:
For reverend Marriage wedlock-vowes does own;
And sacred flames keep's here in Loyal breast.
Here I shall say little of the Houses for Leprous people; though indeed they
deserved more charity than all the rest. Burton-lazars of Leichestershire was
the best endowed house for that purpose: for so they used to term people
infected with the Leprosy. Here was a Camden in Leichestershire.
rich Spittle-house, or Hospital; under the Master whereof, were, in some sort,
all other Spittle-houses, or Lazar-houses in England, like as himself also was
under the Master of the Lazars in Jerusalem.

It was founded in the first age of the Normans, by a common contribution over
all England; and the Mowbraies especially did set to their helping hands. But
as that Disease came into England by the holy War, so it ended with the end
thereof.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABbey of Battle founded by K. William the Conqueror Page 37 Abbey of
Cnobsherburg by whom founded 17 Abbey of Crowland founded 21 Abbey of
Peterborough burnt by the Danes, with an excellent Library therein 25 Abbey at
Glastonbury founded by King Ina 21 Abbey of St. Edmond founded and endowed by
King Canutus 34 Abbeys and Religious Houses dissolved 149 Adelme, the first
Englishman who wrote in Latin 20 Pope Adrian the fourth an Englishman 44
Pope Agatho composeth the differences betwixt the two Archbishops 17 Alcuinus,
Scholar to Venerable Bede, and Tutor to Charles the Great 23 S. Alban the
Proto-martyr of Britain, page 5. he is Canonized 23 Altars taken down by
public Authority 171 King Alfred, England's deliverer from the Danish Tyranny:
his Story from page 26. ad page 30 Abbey of Val-royal in Cheshire founded by
King Edward the first 105 All Souls College in Oxford, by whom founded 130
King Athelstan a great Benefactour to the Church of S. John of Beverley, page
31. he commands the payment of Tithes, Ib. Anne Ascough, her Martyrdom 157 An
Act passed for restoring the Tenths and First Fruits to the Crown 209 An Act
for the Dissolution of all such Monasteries, Covents, etc. as had been founded
by Queen Mary 209 Articles passed in the Convocation in the first year of Queen
Elizabeth 210 Abbey of Westminster converted to a Collegiate Church 221 The
thirty nine Articles composed 227 Arthur King of Britain 10 St. Asaph 11
Aurelius Ambrosius King of Britain 10 Duke of An^ou comes into England 242
Alanus Copus 243 Annates, or First Fruits when brought into England 103 Richard
Armachanus Primate of Ireland 112 A^^baptists Convicted and Censured 171, 172
Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, his lamentable end 125 Augustine the
Monk sent into England. Thousands Baptized by him in one day. 12 He is the
first Archbishop of Ca^^^^bury, his death 14 Archbishop Abbot Confined 299
Abbey of Evesham founded and endowed by King Offa 21 The Assembly at Glascbow
pass Acts for the overthrow of Episcopacy, the Service book and the Canons,
etc. 313 A^hunus Bishop of Holy-Island, removes his See and Covent to Durham
33 A new Representative, called the Agreement of the people 345 Alexander
Alesius, a Learned (...). 169
B
BAbington's Conspiracy, page 248 Bacon a good School-man and Mathemati^ian 107
Bertha wife to King Eth^lbert 12 John Baconthorp, a Learned Englishman 111
Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, his story 45, 46, 47 His translation
and enshrining 70 John of Beverley, who gave Education to Bid 21 Bid,
Surnamed Venerable, his Birth, Learning, Writings, and Death 22 Birth of our
Savior 1 Birinus converteth the West Saxons 16 Bodies when first brought to be
buried in Churches 23 Bernard Bishop of S. David's denies subjection to the
Archbishop of Canterbury 42 Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, his story 75
Brazen-nose College in Oxford, when and by whom founded 138 Biddle a Socinian
359 Thomas Bradwardine Archbishop of Canterbury, his story, and writings 33
Christian Britan's Celebrated the Passover contrary to the Constitutions of the
Roman Church 4 How long the Britans remained under the Roman yoke 4 Britans
driven into Britain in France, Wales and Cornwall 9 Britans escaped all the
persecutions of the Heathen Roman Emperors, except the last under Dioclesian 5
British Bishops in the Councils of Arbes, Nice, Sardis and Ariminum 6 When
Bishops Seats were altered from Villages to great Cities 38 Bishops Imprisoned
by King Stephen 43 Robert Brus King of Scotland 105 The Battle at
Bannocks-borough 106 Beginning of the Broyls between the two Houses of
Lancaster and York 131 Bainham a Martyr 147 Bilney burnt 146 Henry Beauford and
Cardinal, the Founder of S. Crosses Hospital 131 The Popes Bulls of Provision
for Ecclesiastical promotions 103 A^chbishop Boniface, his making way for Popes
Appropriating First Fruits unto themselves 80 The Bishoprics of Westminster,
Oxford, Peterborough, Bristol and Chester, erected by Henry the eight 154
Bishopric of Westminster dissolved 221 Protestant Bishops placed in the Sees
of the Popish Prelates 212 Bernard Gilpin refuses the Bishoprike of Carlisle
215 Bishops with other Divines met at Lambeth, resolved on diverse Articles 258
Earl Bothwel married to the Queen of Scots, flees out of Scotland 232 Twelve
Bishops Impeached, and sent to the Tower 238 The Counterfeit Boy of Bilson 282
Dr. Bastwick, Prynne, and Burton Censured 305 Brown and Harrison inveigh
against Bishops, etc. 245 Bishops of S. Andrews, and Glasscow, and Abbot of
Scone, put in Iron-chains, and Imprifoned in Port-chester Castle 104, 105. The
King's Palace of Bridewel given to the City of London for a workhouse 177 The
Bible Translated in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth,
and Queen Elizabeth 161 Bible Translated in King James his Reign 273 ad 276 D.
Bound's Book about the Sabbath 257 The first Bailiffs of London 348 Every
Parish when bound to provide a Bible in English, and a Register-book to be kept
there 150 Bishop Bonner, a cruel Persecutor, doomed to perpetual Imprisonment
212 M. Bucer, his coming into England; he takes the Chair at Cambridge, his
death 169. Buckingham-shire Martyrs many before Luther's time 139. Benedictus
Biscopius; the first Glass in England was his Gift 17. The Fatal Vespers at
Blackfriers 291 A Bill Signed against Bishops Voting as Peers in Parliament 229
Walter Burley a Great Philosopher 113.
C.
CAursines, what they were, when they first came into England page 74 The Book
of Canons made 269 Cadwallader, the last King of the stock of Britans 19
Cacrleon in Wales, the Court of King Arthur: the Sea of an Archbishop: a
College of two hundred Philosophers 11 Cadocus, Abbot of Llancanvan in
Gla^organ-shire, his charity and liberality 11 Caransius made a League with the
Britains, and expelled the Romans, and made himself King 5 Co^gel, Abbot of
Bangor 11 Colmkil, a famous Seminary of learning 16 Mr. Thomas Cartwright.
Articles tendered to him: his imprisonment 253 Col. Edward Ashton, and John
Betley executed 361 Colleges erected beyond the Seas for English youth to be
educated therein 234, 235 Cridda first King of Mercia 9 Cerdicus first King of
the West Saxons 10 Constantius Chlorus, Emperor of France, Spain, and Britain:
he died, and was buried at York 5 Constantine the Great, born, made King, and
Emperor, first in Britan. 6 A Council called at Hartford 18 A Council called at
Cliffe in Kent by King Ethelbald, and Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury 22 A
Council at Hatfield 19 A Council at Becanceld. Another held at Berghamsteed, by
Withred King of Kent 20 A Council held by Wolphred Archbishop of Canterbury at
Celichyth 24 A Council assembled at Alncester to promote the building of
Evesham-abbey 21 A Council of Saxon and British Bishops assembled under an Oak
in the borders of Worcester and Hereford shires 12 A Council at Intingford 30
Diverse Councils kept in the Reign of King Athelston, viz. at Exceter,
Feversham, Thunderfield, and London; and at Great Lea 31 Three Councils held in
the time of Dunstan, viz. at Winchester, Cartlage in Cambridge-shire, and Caln
in Wilt-shire 32 Chelsey-colledge founded 277 A National Council held by Hoel.
Dha, for all Wales, at Tyquin 32 A Council of Bishops called by King William
the First, at Winton 37 A Council against Appeals to Rome 117 A Conference held
at St. Albans 7 The University of Cambridge founded by King Sigebert 15
Cambridge wasted by the Danes 25 Conference between Dr. White, and Dr. Featly,
Protestants; and Fisher, and White, Jesuits 291 Isaac Causabon, his
Exercitations and death 280, 281 Constellation of Cassiopeia 238 Conference at
Hampton Court 261, ad 269 A Convocation wherein the Lord Thomas Cromwell sat in
State above all the Bishops 149 King Charles the First, his story from 292, ad
347 A Council summoned by Archbishop Anselm, at Westminster, where all married
Priests were excommunicated 41 A Council called at Westminster, by Albericus
Bishop of Hostia 43 A Council at Westminster in the Reign of King Henry the
Second 48 A Council held at Oxford 71 A Council held at Lambeth, by John
Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury 90 He summoneth another Council at Reading 96
A Council called by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, at St. Paul's
London 119 A Convocation in London 126 A Council called by Archbishop Morton,
to redress the luxury of the London-Clergy in Clothes, and frequenting Taverns
137 King Charles the Second, his story from 347, ad 385 Sir John Old-castle,
Lord Cobham, his story from 123, ad 127 The persecution of the Lady Eleanor
Cob^am 129 Christ-church College in Oxford, founded by Cardinal Wolsey 143
Miles Coverdale Bishop of Exet^r. 172 John Colet, a learned Englishman; the
founder of the Free School of St. Paul's London 142 Canons and Converts of the
Order of Sempingham, turn Apostates 91 Contention between the two Archbishops
of Canterbury and York 48 Alexander Cementarius his story 58, 59 Sir Geoffry
Chaucer, when he flourished 113 Archbishop Cranmer his subscription to Popery
for fear of death: he retracteth his retractation: he is burnt to ashes 202
Lord Thomas Cromwell; his story from 149, ad 155 The Canons made by the
Convocation, Anno 1640 318
D.
DAvid, Uncle to King Arthur, kept a Synod against the Pelagian error: he
removed his Archiepiscopal seat from Caerleon to Meneva, now called St. David's
page 11 Danes, when they first invaded England 23 Earl of Darby beheaded at
Bolton 353 John Duns Scotus, or Dunensis 107 Dubitrius, his Academy near the
River Wye in Monmouth-shire 9 Diuma first Bishop of Mercia 17 Dioclesian and
Maximian resign their Ensigns of Command 59 David's Psalms, when and by whom
first translated into English meter 172 Lord Darby married to the Queen of
Scots: his death 230, 232 Disputation between the Protestants and Papists 211
The Synod of Dort 283, 284 University at Dublin founded 254 Dorchester in
Oxfordshire, the seat of Birinus his Bishopric 16 Dunstan, Archbishop of
Canterbury, his story 31, 32 Doomsday Book, when made 37 Battle of Dunbar 350
E.
ELvanus built a library near St. Peter's Church in Cornhil page 3 Ele^therius
Bishop of Rome, his letter to King Lucius ib. Ella first King of the
South Saxons 9 Kingdom of the East Saxons what it contained, and when it began.
Exchenwin first King thereof 9 Kingdom of the East Angles, what it contained,
when it began their conversion advanced by King Sigebert 15 Edmond King of the
East Angles murdered by the Danes 26 Ethelbert King of Kent embraces
Christianity 12 Ethelfred King of Northumberland kills one thousand two
hundred Monks of Bangor: he is slain by the Britains 13 Egbert King of the
West Saxons, made himself sole Monarch of England 23 Frkenwald a Bishop,
founder of the Monasteries of Che^tsey in Surrey, and Barking in Essex 19
Edilwalch King of the South Saxons is baptized 19 Edwyn the son of Ethelfred
becomes a Christian 14 Ethelwolph King of the West Saxons grants the Tenth
of all his Lands to God and his Ministers, etc. his story 24 Kind Edward the
Elder restores the University of Cambridge, expells the Danes, etc. 30 Elphege
Bishop of Canterbury stoned by the Danes 33 Eaton College founded by King
Henry the Sixth 131 Edward the Confessor, his Ecclesiastical Laws: his
hereditary virtue left to his successors to cure the Kings Evil 35 England
freed from the Danes 35 England interdicteded for six years in the Reign of
King John 57 Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury Canonized 80 King Edward the
First, his story from 86. ad 105 Edward the Second, his story from 105. ad 109
Edward the Third, his story from 109. ad 114 Edward the Sixth, his story from
154. ad 179 Queen Elizabeth, her troubles during her Sister's Reign 190 The
story of her Reign from 206. ad 261 Edinburgh Castle surrendered to O. Cromwell,
by Colonel Dundasse 351
F.
PAulus Fagius and M. Bucer, their bodies taken out of their Graves, and burnt
203 The Sect of the Family of Love 239 Flamines and Archflamines, their places
turned into Bishoprics and Archbishopriks by King Lucius 3 Finan converted the
East Saxons 16 Focariae, Concubines to the Canons: they are imprisoned in the
Tower John Frith, a learned man, burnt in Smith-field 148 First Fruits Office,
when set up in London 150 John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, beheaded 148 Mr.
John Fox with some others settle themselves at Basil in Queen Mary's days 200
His death 250 Fifth Monarchy-men apprehended 360 John Ficknam made Abbot of
Westminster 196 The troubles of Franckford 197, 198 Robert Farrars, Bishop of
St. David's, imprisoned in King Edward's days, and burnt in Queen Mary's days
175 Florentius, first Bishop of Argentine, or Strausburg 17
G.
GAsper Haywood, the first Jesuit, that ever set foot in England 246 Gospel
first planted in Britain 1 Britain first received the Gospel by public
Authority 2 Germanus Bishop of Auxerre is sent for into Britain to suppress
Pelagianism 7 Gospel first planted by Augustine among the Saxons 12 Five
Grammar Schools erected in London 129 Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester he
fell sick the same day that Bishop Ridley and Latimer were burnt: his sad end
194 A Gun shot at Dr. Pendleton preaching at Paul's cross 193 Lady Jane Gray
proclaimed Queen of England 179 She and her husband, the Lord Guilford Dudley,
and her Father the Duke of Suffolk are beheaded 188 Gutblake the first Saxon
Eremite in England 21 Robert Grosthed Bishop of Lincoln 80. 81 The Gunpowder
plot 270. 271 Archbishop Grindal, a patron of prophecyings, and how they were
modelled 241 Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, committed to the Gate House
for refusing to subscribe the Canons made, Anno 1640. 320 He dies a Papist
ibid.
H.
HArold, the Son of Earl Godwyn, King of England: he is slain at Battle in
Sussex 36 Hardiknout, the last of the Danish Kings in England 35 Alexander
Hales an Englishman, Master to Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure 107 Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury divided England into Parishes 16 Helvetia converted by
Gallus ib. Hengist Captain of the Saxons, invadeth Britain 8 He is King of Kent
9 An Heptarchy established in Britain 9 Swallowed up in the West Saxons
Monarchy 10 Robert Holcot a learned English man 112 Duke Hamilton, Earl of
Holland, and Lord Capel beheaded 348 Hubba the Dane kills Hedda the Abbot of
Peterborough, and eighty four Monks with his own hand 25 King Henry the Third,
his story from 68. ad 86 Henry the Fourth, his story from 118. ad 123 Henry the
Fifth, his story from 123. ad 127 Henry the Seventh, his story from 135. ad 140
Henry the Eighth, his story from 141. ad 157 Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Huet
beheaded 361 Hospital at Greenwich, founded by William Lambert 250 Hospitals of
Christ-church in London, and St. Thomas in Southwark founded 176. 177 The
Statute made Pro Haeretico comburendo 119 Death of Prince Henry 280 John Hooper
and John Rogers, founders of Nonconformity 169 Bishop Hall's Book in defense
of the divine right of Episcopacy 317 Dr. John Hacket defends Deans and
Chapters 325 A sad contest between Mr. Rich. Hooker, and Mr. Walter Travers 255
King Charles the First, his Dispute with Mr. Alexander Henderson 342
I.
KIng James, his birth page 230 His story from 261. ad 293 Impropriations
bought in to maintain a preaching Ministry 301 The Impostures of Hacket,
Arthington, and Coppinger 253 Ilfutus, a profound Scholar 11 Ina King of the
West Saxon, sets forth his Saxon Laws 20 He first granted Peter Pence to the
Pope out of this Kingdom 22 Johannes Scotus Erigena, murdered in the Abbey of
Malmesbury 30 John King of England, his story from 51. ad 68 Jews crucify a
Child at Oxford; their punishment 85 Their banishment out of England ibid.
Ioachim Abbot of Calabria 49 Ida King of Northumberland 10 Images taken away in
most places of England 160 Inquisitors appointed to search out for Heretics,
with all Wickliffs Books 123 Many Italians held the best Livings in England: a
Statute made against it. Four Italians followed each other in the Sea of
Worcester 137 John Jewel chosen to pen the first gratulatory letter to Queen
Mary by his enemies page 184 He subscribeth the Popish Tenets 187 He bewails
his fall in the Congregation at Franckford: he is made Bishop of Sarum 187 His
challenge 218 His Apology 226 Such Irish Impropriations as were in the Crown,
restored to the Church 304 Dr. William Juxon Lord Treasurer ib.
K.
COlonel Ker taken prisoner by Lambert 351 Kingdom of the South Saxons,
comprehending Sussex and Surrey, when it began 9 The beginning of the Kingdom
of Kent 9 Kentigern, Bishop of Elwy in North Wales 11 John Kemp Archbishop of
Canterbury built the Divinity School in Oxford, and Paul's Cross 132 Kenulphus,
King of the West Saxons conferreth large privileges on the Monastery of
Abingdon 169 Kings of England of old sent their Crowns to St. Edmond's shrine
34 Kimbeline King of Britain at the birth of our Savior 1 Kyngils King of the
West Saxons is baptized by Birinus 16 Order of the Knights Templars abolished
throughout Christendom 106 Their Lands in England conferred on the Knights of
St. John of Jerusalem ibid. John Knox at Franckford preaches against the
English Liturgy as imperfect and superstitious. He is rebuked by Dr. R. Cox. He
is accused to the State for High Treason against the Emperor. Knox departs
the City 199 And setleth himself at Geneva 200 Kets Rebellion 166 Kilian, the
first Bish. of Wortsbu^g first instructed the people of East France in the
Christian Faith 17 The Bishop of Wortsburg carried a Sword and a Priest's Gown
in his Badge ibid.
L.
HVgh Latimer resigneth his Bishopric of Worcester, rather than he would yield
to the passing of the six Articles 169 John Lambert, his Martyrdom 153 Diverse
Liturgies in use in England till King William the Conqueror's time 39 Lollards,
after Abjuration, forced to wear the fashion of a Faggot wrought in thread on
their sleeves 141 The Scottish Liturgy translated into the Latin Tongue 317 An
Apology for vindicating the Liturgy commended to the Kirk of Scotland 317 A
public Liturgy framed in King Edward his days 164 John a Lasco, with his
Congregation of Germans settled at London: the West part of the Church of
Austin-friars allotted them p. 170 His Congregation dissolved 184 John Lewis an
Arrian burnt at Norwich 246 Levellers rou^ed by Colonel Reinolds at Bur^ord 349
Latimer and Ridley burnt at Oxford 194 Adam Loftus, Archbishop of Dublin, and
Chancellor of Ireland 255 Matthew Lenox made Regent of Scotland 236 Earl of
Leicester goes over into the Low Countries with a great Army 248 Mr. Love and
Gibbons beheaded 352 Bartholomew Legatt an Arrian burn^ 279 London burnt 381
The Commissioners of the High Commission at St. Paul's violently assaulted by
Lilburn and the London Apprentices 321 Archbishop Laud impeached and sent to
the Tower 323 And beheaded on Tower Hill ib. Lucius, the first Christian King
of Britain 2 His story 3. and 4 L^^pus Bishop of Troys, comes into Britain,
and refuteth the Heresy of Pelagius 7 English Liturgy translated into Fren^h,
for the Isles of Iersey and Gu^rnsey 309 The Liturgy translated into Welsh 175
Luther, when he arose 142
M.
GEneral Monk his story, from page 363. ad 371 Marquess of Montr^sse defeated,
condemned and executed 350 Queen Mary, her Reign, from 180. ad 206 Maximus a
Christian Prince, Governor of Britain 9 Marianus Scotus 35 Walter Mapez his
verses setting forth the Church of Rome in her colors 67 Thomas Merks Bishop
of Carlisle faithful to King Richard the Second 108 Medvinus sent to Rome 2
Kingdom of Mercia, why so called, and what Counties it contained 9 Mercia
divided into five Bishoprics 19 The Goods of three Orders of Monks seized into
the hands of King Edward the Third 110 The number of Monasteries suppressed in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth 153 The number of those that suffered
Martyrdom for the Gospel in Queen Mary's days 194 Peter Martyr sent for into
England; made Canon of Christchurch in Oxford 169 Quits the Realm in Queen
Mary's days 184 His Letters to Queen Elizabeth 220 His Wives body taken out of
her grave, and burnt after his departure 184 Bishop Morton contrives the Union
of the two Houses of York and Lancaster 135 Nine hundred Monks slain in S.
Augustines Abbey in Canterbury 33 Murrey Regent of Scotland 233 His Death 236
The French Massacre 238 The Millenary Petition 269 Richard Middleton, entitled,
Doctor Fundatissimus 107 Sir Thomas Moor a Great enemy to the Protestants: he
was beheaded the next month after Bishop Fisher 149 Moratus, an old British
writer 3
N
THe Names of those that were Archbishops of London 3 Numbers of the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, etc. that were deprived in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign 213 George Nevil, Archbishop of York, his Prodigious Feast: his Estate
seized, and his person Imprisoned 1^3 The Numbers of Colleges and Chaunteries
Demolished in the Reign of King Henry the eighth 154 Kingdom of Northumberland,
subdivided into two Kingdoms, viz. of Bernicia and Deira 10 Nuns of the Abbey
of Ambresbury Convicted for Incontinency 51 Non-conformists in Queen
Eliz^beth's time of two sorts 229, 231 James Nailor, the Ringleader of the
Quakers publicly whipped, pillored, and Stigmatized 359
O
OFfa, King of Mercia founder of the Monastery of S. Albans bestows great
lands upon it: he was buried at Bedford 23 Osmond, Bishop of Sarum deviser of
that Service, which after was observed in the whole Realm: all Service Ordered
to be secundum usum Sarum 39 Oswald, second son of King Ethelfred, converted by
Aidan: he disdained not to Preach to his Subjects and Nobles in the English
Tongue 15 Oswald, Bishop of Worcester: Oswald^s Law 31 William Occham, the
Author of the Sect called Nominales 112 The first use of Oaths in
Ecclesiastical Courts in England 78 Oath of the King's Supremacy established
145 Writers for and against the Oath of Allegiance 272 The form of the Oa^h
framed in the Convocation Anno 1640 319 The form of the Oath taken by every
Student admitted into the Popish Seminaries 235 Oak of Reformation 167 Oliver
Cromwell, his Sorry from 350 ad 361 The form of the Oath taken unto the Pope by
every Popish Bishop at the taking of his Pall 139 Ordal for the trial of guilty
persons 35
P
Pattern Preacher at Lanpatern in (...)-shire 11 P^l^gius born in B^itain
broacheth his Heresies publicly 7 Pelagi^^^sm condemned in Britain in two
Synods 8 S. Petrock Captain of the Cornish Saints 11 Pau^^us baptizeth King
Edwyn, with all ^is Nobles and much people at York 15 P^^d^ King of Mercia
embraces Christianity 16 Ple^g^^und Consecrateth seven Bishops in one day
Matthew Parker Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. Diverse Bishop^ Consecrated
him 212 Kellison's and Parson's slandering him to be Consecrated at the Nag's
Head-tavern in Cheap Side 214 His Story 223 S. Paul's Church and Steeple in
London burnt 222 Pope Pius Excommunicates Q. Elizabeth 235 The first settled
Presbytery in England, at Wandsworth in Surrey 237 Popish Priests and Jesuits
executed 242 The Little Parliament 353 The Humble Petition and Advice Framed
358 Statute of Praemunire, when enacted 117 Players forbidden by Proclamation
in King Edward the sixth his time 161 Piers Gavesion surprised by Guy Earl of
Wa^wick, who caused him to be beheaded 106 The first Patent of a Commenda
Retinere granted by the King to any Bishop Elect 84 Geoffry Plantaginet
Archbishop of York, his Story 52, 53 Per^wigs and long hair forbidden in the
Clergy 77 Priests forced to forgo their wives 42 When the Pope made his first
encroachment on the Liberties of the English Crown 38 Cardinal Pooles reception
into England 191 He absolveth the Parliament, and whole Kingdom for withdrawing
their obedience to the Church of Rome 192 Consecrated to the Sea of Canterbury
next Sunday after Cranmer's death 202 English Ambassadors sent to Rome arrived
there on the first day of the Papacy of Pope Paul the fourth. Pembrock-colledge
in Oxford founded 296 Pinckney the Provincial of the Augustine-friars, and Dr.
Shaa only of all the Clergy, engage for King Richard the third 134, 135
Parsonages not exceeding ten Marks, and Vicaridges ten pounds, freed from
First Fruits 152 King Philip Married to Queen Mary 190 A Great Plague in London
381 Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham, made Earl of Northumberland by King Richard
the first 48 Penry, Barrow, and Greenwood, condemned and executed 256 John
Piers, Archbishop of York derided by Martin Mar-prelate 256
Q
QVeen's-colledge in Oxford, when and by whom founded 111 Queen of Scots
assumeth to her self the Style and Title of Queen of England 213 She flies into
England, and ends her doleful life at Fatheringhay Castle. She is buried in
the Quire at Peterborough: and twenty years after removed to Westminster 249
Queen Eleanor: a solemn Anniversary instituted to be kept for her, by King
Edward the first her Husband 97
R
ROmans forsake the Isle of of Britain 7 Rumold, called M^chlinensis Apostolus
16 King Richard the first, his Story 48, 49, 50 George Ripley a great
Mathematitian 140 John Rouse a great Antiquary 140 King Richard the second, his
Story, from 114 ad 118 Philip Rippinton, of a Professor became a cruel
persecutor of the Gospel. He is made Bishop of Lincoln 121 Master John Rogers
burnt in Smithfield: the first Martyr in Queen Marie's 194 Cardinal Richlieu an
Incendiary between King Charles the first and the Scots 313 When the word
Recusant, first came up 236 Reformed Religion advanced in Ireland 217 The Rites
of the Church of England for a time remained the only form of Worship for the
Kirk of Scotland 216 Thomas Rudbourn a Monk of Winchester, an old Writer 3 The
R^mish Translation comes forth 247 Rogers, his exposition on the thirty nine
Articles of the Church of England 247 Roger a Monk of Chester, and an
Historiographer 113 Doctor Fulk and M. Cartwright, their answer to the Rhemish
Translation 247 Richard Cromwell, his Story 361, 362
S
THat cruel Statute pro Haeretico comburendo, first hanselled on William
Sautre, Priest 119, 120 See of Sarum had five Bishops in five years space 94
Scotland, when freed from the Sea of York 133 Secular Priests ejected 31 A
Survay taken of all the Glebeland of the Clergy 110 Severus comes into Britain
and assisteth in condemning Pelagianism 8 Sampson, Scholar to Iltutus: being
made Archbishop of Dole, he carries away the Monuments of British Antiquity 11
S^bert, King of Essex embraces Christianity by the Ministry of Mellitus 14
Sigebert King of East Angles enters into a Monastery 21 Saxons invade Britain 8
South Saxons converted to Christianity the last of the seven Kingdoms 19 A
Survay taken of all the Revenues and Dignities Ecclesiastical in England,
returned in a Book to be kept in the Exchequer 152 John Spottiswood, Archbishop
of S. Andrews, his death 314 John Story a great persecutor, executed 234 A
Statute made that all Convocations should be called by the King's Writ 146 The
bloody Statute for the six Popish Articles enacted 155 A Statute made for the
recovery of Tithes 156 Edward Seymour Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector of the
Realm in the Reign of King Edward the sixth: his story from 159 ad 174
Sommerset-house how, and when erected 165 The Sweating-sickness 174 Richard
Sutton the Founder of Charter House Hospital 280 M. Antonius de Dominis,
Archbishop of Spalato, his Story 281, 288, 289, 290 Stubs and Page, their right
hands cut off with a Cleaver 242 The Scots erect a New Government for
themselves, consisting of four Tables for the four Orders of the State, viz.
the Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, and Ministers, they enter into Covenant 308
They enter England in an Hostile manner 321 The first settlement of the Church
under Queen Elizabeth 215 Seminaries beyond the Seas erected for English youth
234 Stone's discovery of the Presbyterian meetings 254 Lord Wentworth made Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and Earl of Strafford 315 He is impeached of High
Treason 223 Many under the notion of scandalous Ministers Sequestered 332 Many
Silenced Ministers and Lecturers put into Sequestered Benefices 332 Sherwin,
Kirby, and Briant, Priests, and Campian the Jesuit, Executed for Treason 242
T
MErchant-Tailors School in London when founded 224 S. Teliau, a Scholar to
Dubritus 11 Thetford burnt by the Danes 25 Adam Tarlton, Bishop of Hereford,
the Grand contriver of all mischief against King Edward the second, his Story
108, 109, 110 Tindals Translation of the New Testament burnt in Paul's
Churchyard 147 John de Trevisa, a learned Englishman 117 Mr. Walter Travers,
his story 255, 256 Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury erected a well-furnished
Library 18 Theodore Abbot of Crowland murdered by the Danes 25 John Thrask, his
errors and censure 283 The Treaty at Vxbridge 337 The Treaty and Dispute in
the Isle of VVight 343, 344 William Tindal strangled, and burnt at Filford in
Flaunders 150 Nicholas Trivet, a Black Friar, wrote two Histories, and a Book
of Annals 113 William Tailor, Priest, burnt 127
V.
KIng Vortigern sends for Germanus and Lupus into Britain, to refute the
Heresy of Pelagius. He afterward marries with a Pagan woman, and is deserted
of his Nobles page 8 Vortimer the son of Vortigern, chosen King of Britain; he
is poisoned ibid. Vodinus Archbishop of London put to death by the command of
Vortigern ib. Vffa, first King of the East Angles 9 Polyder Virgil the Popes
collector General of the Peter Pence in England. He wrote a Latin History of
Britain 148 Vter-Pendragon King of Britain 10 Aubery de Vere, a learned Lawyer,
Advocate for King Stephen 44 An Act for Uniformity of public prayers, etc. 375
An Act for uniting Churches in Cities and Towns corporate 381
W.
WIllibrod Reformer of Frisia 17 Bishop Williams censured and imprisoned 305
Wilfrid Archbishop of York converteth the men of Freezland in Belgia to
Christianity 19 After his expulsion from York, he is for a time made Bishop of
Leicester; at last he is restored to York, and was buried in his Monastery at
Rippon 20 King William the First, gave unto the Bishops an entire jurisdiction
to judge all causes relating to Religion, before that time the Bishop and the
Sheriff kept their Court together 38 This King laid wast thirty Parish Churches
in the New Forest, to make a Paradise for his Deer 40 William Witlesee,
Archbishop of Canterbury, freed the University of Oxford from the jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Lincoln, formerly the Diocesan thereof 113 John Wickliff, his
story 113, 114, 115 His bones burnt, and the ashes cast into the River 128
William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester founder of Mary Magdalen College in
Oxford 131 The miserable death of Dr. Whittington a great Persecutor at Sadbury
140 William Wickham founded New College in Oxford, and the College at
Winchester 117 Thomas Wallis, a Dominican Friar, a writer of many choice Books
113 Cardinal Wolsey, his story 143, 144, 145 Dr. William VVhitacre, his Answer
to Campian's Challenge 241 His death 259 William White Priest, burnt, who was
a Scholar of John VVickliff: with him were burnt John VVaddon Priest, and
Father Abraham of Colchester 128
Y.
WHen, and by whom the Yeomen of the King's guard were Instituted 136
Z.
BAltazar Zanchez, a Spaniard, founded an Almes-house at Totnam-high-cross in
Middlesex 259
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 33. read names: p. 7. l. 7. r. Franks: l. 13. r. Virtutem: p. 8.
l. 5. r. Britain: p. 9. in marg. r. Tinmuthens. p. 9. l. 15. f. at r. and: l.
23. r. remain: p. 15. l. 4. r. Cern. l. 20. r. died: p. 16. l. 32. r.
propagated: p. 26. l. 3. r. Halesdon. l. 29. r. Danish. p. 46. l. 21. r. the
Pope: l. 35. r. the Cathedral: p. 47. l. 30. r. history: p. 49. l. 28. r. whom:
p. 55. l. 7. r. reddituum: p. 81. l. 22. r. monachorum: l. 30. r. Papae and
papalibus: p. 84. l. 35. r. the King issued: p 86. l. penult. r. the first: p.
103. l. 24. r. Ecclesiae: p. 104. l. 7. r. or Benefice: l. 8. r. Expectancy: p.
131. l 4. r. Regalis: l. 16. r. fellows: l. 32. dele out: p. 137. l. penult. r.
thrifty: p. 138. l. 5. r. the Pope: p. 140. l. 14. they to cover: p. 143. l.
18. r. the Gatehouse: p. 165. l. 28. r. all Fridays: p. 168. l. 39. r. was
signified: p. 172. l. 41. r. who would not: p. 173. l. 21. r. she bare: p. 176.
l. 16. dele in their companies: p. 180. l. 11. r. eight thousand: p. 181. l. 9.
r. Framingham: p. 182. l. 32. dele but: p. 186. l. 16. r. convocation: l. 40 r.
days: p. 188. l. 7. r. to be examined: p. 200. l. 15. r. the reformation: p.
204. l. 20. r. turned: p. 207. l. 24. r. her age: p. 215. l. 9. r. gowns: p.
229. l. 20. r. was required: l. 38. r. Wyatt: p. 232. l. 20. dele was: p. 237.
l 6. r. which made many: p. 239. l. 39. r. Bentham: p. 241. l. 35. r. the old
continued: p. 242. l. 20. r. Gulphs: p. 248. l. 40. r. discoverer: p. 253. l.
41. r. Scory: p. 256. l. 16. r. privately: l. 30. r. Greenwood: p. 257. in
marg. r. Pitzeus: l. 31. 1596. p. 260. r. first Protestant Bishop: p. 261. l.
25. r. Brother to the Lord Cobham: p. 263. l. 25. r. Lordships: p. 270. l. 1.
r. 1604. p. 300. l. 9. r. were restrained: p. 321. l. 14. r. it was: p. 322. l.
2. r. of their: p. 326. l. 26. r. tremenda: p. 333. l. 21. r. Corbet: p. 335.
l. 33. r. enjoining: p. 370. l. 22. r. suppositious.


