Gemitus de Carcere Nantes. OR, Prison-Sighs, AND ^UPPORTS, BEING (...) Few
BROKEN SCRAPS AND Crumbs of Comfort.

^ly fallen from the great Kings Table, the Holy ^iptures; into the Prisoners
Basket; who being satisfied, (...) fall (through the Grate) a few Leavings, for
the Hungry ^s abroad, till God send more Plenty.

Meliora Speranda.

Psalm. 69. 33. The Lord Despises not his Prisoners. Usque quo domine?

Rev. 6. 10. How long Lord? etc. London, Printed in the Year. 1684.

TO THE READER
Reader,
THou have herein Prison Visits Repaid; with a Groan, from them immured
within, Ecchoing to them at Liberty without: It Is Pity their just Defense that
suffer, should be an Offense to any; or that the Hope of Righteousness to come,
in them that Feed in Stone Walls at present, should obtain no Softer Usage,
then Words harder then the Walls of a Prison: but Patience is both our Duty,
and Dignity, till he comes that will take Account for Idle and Hard Speeches;
(panton ton skleroon) Jud. 15. hard to prove, and harder to bear.

Now, two things make these Stony Restraints Tolerable if not Comfortable, the
one store of Water, (that is) Tears and Sighs to Soften hard things, and wash
away Filth: The other Sweet Herbs to Adorn and Refresh: Of both sorts, the two
Sheets following give a Taste to the Hungry.

If any ask us what we do in Prison? We Answer, we Sigh and Cry to him, whose
Ears are open, Psalm. 34. 15. to the Cry of the just (or as the Gr. is) in their
Cry, but our doing now is by way of Suffering, our Witness more silent and
still, but as true and effectual. If any grudge this Freedom, It Is but our Duty
to send the Hungry a few of our Scraps, to stay their Appetites (till more
comes) that Spiritual Crumbs of Manna may Feed those that Suffer loss of Goods,
by Temporal Spoils, and Rapine.

If the Prisoners Basket goes about, not to Crave but carry broken Meat in time
of Famine, it is Pity any should envy, either the Bread, or the Eater; To the
Hungry even bitter things are Sweet: Prove. 27. 7. If any love to Quaff (as that
Profane Belshazzar, Dan. 5. did) in our Tears; much good do it them: So we say
to the Lords Lambs, till God send Plenty: and Christ be your Food, Dear Souls.

These things had crept through the Grate sooner, had not the Press without,
been oppressed by sad Obstructions, and some of the Prisoners within, by
Multiplied Trials, and growing bonds: so that some expect no Manumission (in an
ordinary way) till Death Arrests us, (or our keepers) by an Habeas Corpus, cum
Causa to Answer at the King's Bench, and Ultimate Tribunal: and then (if not
before) comes our Audit, and good Deliverance. Nor are some of us Anxious or
Avidous of Liberation, till our Word comes, and God (and the King) by a Golden
Key cause Pulpit, and Prison Doors to fly open at once; and then our Liberty
may be of Use for God, and the good of Souls: (the best End of Life) In the
Interim, our Patience must possess our Souls, being well Satisfied that our
Prison Sighs, and Cries, (if our Cause be good) are Preferable to Dumb Pulpits,
and Dear-bought Liberties by Insnaring Bonds, or Sinful Complyances mixed with
the Terrors that most Worshippers are now Exposed too: The Lord send us all a
Good Deliverance.

VALE.
Prisoners Sighs, and Supports.
COnsidering it has been the lot of the best and noblest Souls, that have bore
mortal Flesh (even Christ Himself) to be in Prison for a good cause, yea, in a
Native Land; And that God has an open ear to the Groans of such; And finding
the kindness of Auditors and Visitors, not otherwise to the compensated, it is
meet (till debts can be paid, in full) to pay in part, by Lines^ And seeing
Stone Walls are but Dumb Preachers, it is very Lawful to make the just cries on
the inside, to Echo to all without: That some that envied our Liberty, may (by
seeing their own) pity our Captivity, and others join their Supplications to
our Sighs, for the Gospel, and Christ's sake.

To that End let Christians at Liberty; Echo to us in bonds, sensing both our
Prison Sorrows, and Supports, the one in this sheet, the other in the next.

For the first, though no Christian, who deserves that Royal Style, and knows
what Sin and Sorrow means, can want his Sighs; Yet Pris'ners^ for Religion,
yea thinking Persons at Liberty, with whom any seri^ Piety, or thoughts of
Eternity do obtain; cannot well abandon such secret efforts of mind, (now when
the whole Creation Groans,) as these following Sighs and Tears, utter: And
sounds reverberate, and Echo best on the Waters.

Now first, To begin at the root, all sorrow is the Fruit of Sin: He Is a Sot
that Snarles at the Stone, (as Dogs do) not eying the hand that sent it: No Man
how good soever his cause is, but may find Sin enough Personally demerriting
the Rod though not from Men: And as God may at the same time inflict a scourge
justly for Sin, and yet permit a Trial to befall us by Men unjustly, and in both
lay on a Sanctified Cross: So we may in the same breath both condole our Sin
and Captivity, the yoke of our Transgression, being wreathed by Gods hand, and
also enter our just appeal to God, the just Judge for our Defense and
Vindication.

And as each is called individually in secret to Mourn for his own; so for
others Sins; and the Oppressions of the Day, under which our Liberties groan;
God in Wisdom, laying Sufferings on some, in a Body Politic, though Innocent;
for the sake of the nocent: And this is one of our Groans.

Secondly, Some Prisons are as Joseph's strait Dungeons, that allow us not the
Jura humanae Naturae; and like the House of Jonathan. Jer. 37. 20. Dirty holes
to the Prophets of God: Chap. 38. And some of the Keepers ^gged severe
Potiphars, like Paul's Jailer, Acts 16. 22. (though some have no cause to
complain so,) such as some of the Marian Martyrs Suffered and Sighed under;
turgid Alexanders that for gain can torment the Pious, and Favor profane
Capital Criminals: S. R. Complained that to the Pious; Law and Justice was
denied, which Rogues and M^^therers have gratis, for Gods sake.

Thirdly, To be clapped up and so forgot is a deep Sigh: This was the Chief
Butlers fault, and Joseph's Case, recognized (occasionally) by P^^raoh's Dream;
Genesis 49. 17. Though Reason might have taught more g^titude to Joseph, that
foretold his happy Restoration: Men in restra^ may gladly hear good Tidings,
that in Honor forget their (...) Fellows, and Friends: And being advanced too
high, daign not a look, or recognition, to Equals now below them: And to be
forgot is in a sort to be as one Dead, or Buried alive, Psalm. 88. 8. 18. Few
grieve for Joseph's affliction (or strait) Amos. 6. 6.

Fourthly, The envy of Brethren is yet a Deep Sigh, be they by Nature, Nation,
or Profession so: It cut Joseph's Soul worse then the Irons did, that Brethren
owning the same God, should consult confinement in a Pit, and Captivity to base
Isma'lites and Egyptians; against him that came to seek, and feed them, and to
scorn him as a Fanatic Dreamer, Genesis 37. 19, 20. Though after twenty Years,
Conscience gave them for that Guilt, a just reprimand: And envy was that which
gave them so wicked a motion. Acts 7. 9.

No Persecution of Pagans, or Papagans, so bitter and harsh as the Fraternal;
for with it Cain began the World, and the cause was (...) dissent in better
Worship then his: And Ishmael, Edom, Doeg, nay, the Men of Anathoth, etc. have
derived it down, to all the purest Prophets and Professors since: Yea, the very
devout vexed Paul most: And the last named Perils, was by false Brethren; Acts
13. 50. 2 Cor. 11. 26. So now some may Sigh [Proh dolor! heu gemitus! Fratris
ab ense cado.] It Is sad, to Sell and Kill for Gods sake, and yet think we do
God good Service. Joh. 16. 7.

Fifthly, To be slandered in our good name vyes with that of envy: It being as
heavy to be blasted in our just Credit for Evil doers, (As Joseph was) as to be
hated for well doing: For this, Joseph had his mi^timus to Prison, with Irons:
So had Jeremy; and Men shut up under such Odious are half murdered, aforehand;
and rendered incapable to make their (...) defense take away the crime, of the
ill Name of Sedition, Faction, Schism, Heresy, Rebellion, given to Paul, (as
Acts 6. 13. 24. 5, 14. Chap. 28. 22.) and so the Offense ceases: 'I was a
complaint Jeremy made to Baruch. Chap. 26. 5. I am shut up and cannot) go to
the House of the Lord: An heavy privation, to be stripped of, and con^in'd from
the Place, and Privilege of Divine approaches, it is grievous to any, far more
to a Prophet: And thus Daniel was accused, as (...) -- and cast into the Den of
Lions, that yet was able (in's just de^) to tell the King (when he better
adverted on's Innocence) that (...) him, he had done no hurt. Dan. 6. 22. But
for such, so to suffer, (...) Sighs. Were it not for the Slander of that
Mistress of Whore^ (in our Day) the Pious Chastity of our Joseph's, might escape
(...) Prison: But God rescued him from the Hungry Lions, of both sorts: (...)
brought him forth, and cleared his Innocence to the King too: (...) virtue
Slandr'd, and the Innocent punished unconvicted to gratify ra^, may cause a deep
Groan. It Is a sad Word that in Zach. 11. 6. And (...) fulfilled on the Jews, in
Christ's time.

Sixthly, Some Circumstances adjunct to confinement, add wegh of woe, to it: As
when it is by the rigor of Laws stretched on the rack; (...) makes it sharp; or
by Laws Surreptitiously got, as that Decree against Daniel was: Or by such men
as ought to be a Terror to the ill; (...) a Praise to the good; when it is
otherwise, what Groans ensue? So (...) Religious Conscience, or the Law of our
God is concerned in the (...): as in Dan. 6. 5. There being no greater Cruelty,
then to impe^ (...) Worship, or impose a false, 1 Samuel 26. 19. This is to pull
(...) from the Breasts, and cause Souls to pine away, for want of (...) Broad
of Life: Oh the Deep Sighs that this sends up every Sabbath, (...) the Ears of
the Lord of Zabboth, a late! And if denying Corn, (...) a Curse, what Curse
follows the restraint of those that would di^ it, and cannot? O how does it
Gratify the Papists, to see A^ rules for restoring Popery, so Observed, in
Suppression of (...) most noted Dissenters Lectures!

Nor is a Prison a sweet Place, to be amongst Malefactors, as Joseph (...),
stripped of the Company of Relations, locked up by others, and kept (...) doing
good to the Souls of Criminals: Put to the Charges of Fees, (...), and such
Contingencies; in six Months, that would keep our (...) twelve Months: And all
out of a Precarious income, that lasts (...) ad libi^um: And it is no easy thing
to hear the ^anting Swashbucklers Oaths, Healths, Taunts, and Blasphemies, that
daring Fellons Belch (...) against God, and Innocents, as if Religion were a
Crime: Nor is is a small Circumstance, for Men whose Education, and Parts,
Birth, and Breeding, (beside Divine habiliments) have rendered Pregnant for
(...) in their Generations, to be coop't up in a Hole, or Den, for a (...), or
Trifle; having nothing to do, save to write their own Life, (...) rather Death
Politicially) Nor can we (as Paul,) Preach to the (...) or to Friends, which
might sweeten a Prison, and beget Souls (...) God, in our bonds, as Onesimus
was: and Vergerius did to a Man.

But especially to be Deprived of public use to our Native Land, (...) made
Home-born Slaves Suspended from our Duty, Cited, and Spited for it, Ejected
from places of use, and Dear paid for, not allowed a hired house, Acts 28. 30.
nor to Exhort four in our Chambers: (that the Law allows us) and this without
Jury, Oath, or Conviction, and in a Protestant Nation, etc. This is Lugendum
and Luendum Nefas, and calls (...) great Wrath on the Land: To which, Oh how
many add? and th^^e that would stand in the Gap to turn it away, fail, and are
misused, mocked, as 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17. till no Healing, no Remedy can Obtain
Oh, how fatal is this Work to Court, City, and Country, Let Zedekiah with his
Successors, the State of the Jews, the City of Jerusalem, twice Witness: being
the first time by the Caldees, the second time by the Rom^^^ Demolished; (both
City and Temple) for Temple Rights, and Civil Franchises, stand, or fall
together; if Gods Ark (his glory) be delivered up, our strength will soon go
Captive; Gods Priesthood, and man's Properties, being forfeit at once, by
Maladministration; next the Ark Truckles to Dagon: That so few see this,
though so many will feel it is (...) Groan.

To all the Adjuncts may one Circumstance more of the time be added, that it is
for so long time: it is said of the King of Babylon, he opened not the House of
his Prisoners, when he destroyed Cities, and made the World as a Wilderness,
Isaiah 14. 17. (i. e.) not for a long time; 37 years J^^^achin (Josia's
Brother) lay in Prison, till another Successor) Evil^^^dach Enlarged him, as 2
Kings 24. 15, 17. chap. 25. 27. 29. This was (...) Nebuchadnezzars time, from
the first Captivity: This was long enough, to dwell in the Pit: some are put to
long Durance, and Patience, So was Joseph also, his Youthful time spent in
this, and such like Sufferings and Paul puts it among the Adjuncts of his
Cross; Aged, and now Prison^ too; Phil. 9. and to be at last Dedicated to a
block, and lictor, was a palt of Nero's Rage; and he Suffered Prisons often,
(by one Six Months (...) out, another Commences,) in Prisons more frequent, so
2 Cor. 11. 23. and Deaths often, and though the Lot of all goes not that
length, yet either the Duration, or Iteration of this Cross, or some Adjunct
annexed, (...) Exile, and Captive too, (so Isaiah 51. 14.) or want, or
closeness, or else Sickness (joined Mat. 25. 43.) or as Vagrant, as in Isaiah
49. 21. (...) any of them, (far more if all be conjoined) add weight: So
Temptation, Desertion, Dejection, Conjoint, do make a Prison as a dark Dungeon,
to be shut up so; that bitter Complaint Suits it of He^^^n (though a wise Soul)
I Am shut up that I cannot come forth, Psalm. 88. 6, 8. this twists the bands
double and treble, the wreathed Irons are sharpest, the wrath of man alone is
hot enough, of God hotter, both United intolerable: no getting forth, till he
that binds loosen, and say to the Prisoners, come (...) again. One at Liberty
is sad Fettered thus, but one so in Prison, is now (...) Pit, like Jeremys full
of mire; or Joseph in which is no Water, 37. 24. as theirs in Babylon was; no
Water of Comfort, though (...) of Gall and Affliction. Oh how pining and dismal
like, looks (...) Prisoner now? If the Light of Gods face, makes a Prison a
Palace (...): to want it now is to be in a Hell, on this side Hell: and it is
the (...) Misery, (therein) once to have been happy.

(...) one Groan more as to this, (and a sad one) The Devil he casts (...)
Substitutes) the Saints some of them (and would do all) into Prison, (...) 2.
10. so does he Laborers, to set up Loyte^ers, hinder the Gospel (...) ruin
Souls: says he, Oh these Ringleaders of Faction disturb the (...) of my
Kingdom; rob me of my Vassals, cast me out of my Possessi(...) (long held by
Prescription) I hate the Micaiahs, they never speak good (...) me, or my Laws,
but Evil: So he raised envy (often in the devout) against both the first and best
of Preachers, in all ages. It Is well to be ^oted, that Apoc. 2 10. is Ushered
in with a behold! to note, when Saints are shut up, all should mind well the
Instruments of some's Commitment: For though the intermediate cause was Man,
(Dioclesian) yet 'twas (...) Devil sat on the bench; or (as the Greek is, Apoc.
2. 13.) on the Throne ^^^ce he Emits Vassals, dissolves Assemblies, sends out
Judas like In^mers, or Sycophants; convicts without Oath, confines without Law,
^shes without Fault, and condemns without Justice; for where he dwells there
can be no worse Neighbor: And the purer they be, the ^^rse is his Enmity to
them. To say the Devil dwells in Russia, Rome, or China is sad enough; but that
he dwells at Britain or London, where Christ and the Gospel have Obtained, is
far sadder. That Satan should put his Mantle on Samuels shoulders, was
Serpentine Craft, because it decely'd a King; but to lay his Cloven Foot on the
Throne of God, and abuse the Scepter of Kings, invading the place of the Holy,
to pervert Judgment, and punish the Pious; Causes far deeper Sighs. Let none
Judge our Sighs mixed with bitterness, or undue Reflections; for as good as
Peter was, Satan was too hard for him, and if he insinuated into the Prince of
the Apostles (as some call 'im) who is Exempt from his Pythonology, How many
Countries (Christian by Profession,) does he pervert to a Scarlet Inquisition?

^^ (And last) Sigh turns to a Supplication: Not to Man for a Release, (...) to
God for Relief: Sighs Issue well that drop so in Gods Ear, were it possible to
read without the Walls, what Petitions drop on the inside, they would be found
to be these, or the like.

lord, that thy Kingdom might come in Power, over the Nations, and (...), that
the Prisoners in the Pit might be Visited, as Isaiah 24. 3 last, (...) That the
Lord will appear in's Glory to build up Zion, to hear the Prayer of the low
Shrubs, and the Groaning of the Prisoners, and deliver the Sons of Death; that
the Prophesies may be Fulfilled that Relate to the latter day Glory; and the
Captive Exile may ^asten out of the pit; and in the mean time, their bread
may not fail, Isaiah 52. 14. That Judgment and Righteousness might be in the
Earth for the poor and oppressed. Psalm. 72. 6. 13. that wrong doers may be
brought to account, that just Law^ may be Impartially Executed, and unjust
Nulled, and the Gospel may be furthered, by Satan's hindering of its Preachers:
that the Sabbath may not be forgot, nor Assemblies of Saints for ever
scattered, but the Days of our Dispersion may be Finished, that the Reproach of
the solemn Meetings, may be wiped off, and the Rebuke of his Folk took out of
the Earth: that the Lambs now scattered may be gathered in a Cloudy and Dark
day, and the great Shepherds presence amongst them; that the Children cries may
be heard in the streets, seeking meat with tears in the Eyes, and hungry
Hearts; Saying, Oh, who will give us Bread to Relieve our Souls? Look what Sighs
the Famine of Bread Forces from the Hungry, in a time of Natural Drought such
(nay far more dolorous) are extort from Souls plucked off the Breasts of
Scripture Consolation; and Tempted to eat poluted or poisoned bread, and sit at
the Table of Devils, these the least of them (often Itterated and Enlarged) may
be found writ on our Prison walls, and with them much Incense added to our
how-longs, and are gone up in the Ears of the Lord God of Zabbaoth, and will
surely Obtain both Vengeance on some, and Recompense on others.

Now by these hints may be guest what work is on Foot in the house of our
Prison, and for our Hopes and Supports, they may deserve a second part. We
Conclude the first part thus

Clamitat in Caelum, vox sanguinis, and Sodomorum;
Vox oppressorum, and merces detenta Laborum.
Bloodshed, with Sodomy '^d oppression (...),
And Laborers hire detained to God on high.
The Second Part.
AS this World allows us no comfort, without Crosses mixed, so God never
inflicts Crosses on his, but Crowns them with Consolations not a few; so
Preponderating one by the other, that it is better to enjoy them both, then to
be exempted of the Cross wholly.

Nor is Liberty (though in it self very sweet) when a snare, and Terror attends
it, so desirable, or Bonds so heavy, but God can, and frequently does, make the
latter Evil more Eligible, then the former good, by the adjunct of his own
comforting Presence.

Now that which makes Bonds easy, and Prisons sweet, is this, when a Man can
appeal to God, and the World, perhaps to some of his Enemies Consciences, that
he Suffers not as an Evil doer, or Criminal; So Daniel was faultless before
(both) the King, and all his Accusers; (...) in the Law, and matters of his
God: Dan, 6. 5, 14, 22. And so the (...) freely Confessed, Christ had done
nothing amiss; Gr. (...) Luke 23. 41. nil inconveniens, nothing awry, absurd,
or out of place: and Jeremy was vindicated by the Princes, against those
Malicious Priests, that sought his Blood, since he had done nothing worthy of
Death, and what he said, was in the name of the Lord: And the Elders (his Jury)
with Ahikam) seconded them, and cleared him; so his confinement was not Death;
nor very long, (though itterated) for at last he was relieved, and (that is a
wonder) at the sacking of the City, by Nebuzaradan, and releast, to go at
Liberty: When his Malicious Natives went Captives. Let good Prophets be
Faithful to their Master, and Message, and though Country Men vex them for their
fidelity, God will make even Babilonians Favor them for their Misery, or set
them at Liberty.

Such Urbanity showed the Romans to Paul, Acts 23. 30. Chap. 23 29. Innocence,
and a good Conscience^ are still a good Plea (though not ever Successful) and at
last obtain with God, and Men, and often do more for the Honor, or discharge
of a good Man, then all the Shifts that complying Politicians, use for
themselves.

But negative Comforts are not all: Though it is sweet not to Suffer as an Evil
doer; There are some possitive Supports, that Strangers intermeddle not with,
known only to them that taste them, valuable above all Riches; and adapted to
the Nature of our Testimony.

First, This has been the lot of the best in all Ages, and for a good cause,
though by the worst of Men; Joseph's chastity could not excuse him; nor M^caiahs
plain dealing, nor Jeremy's, nor Peter's: Nay, Paul's Gospel, (though an Embassy
of Peace) even that exposed the Apostle; Preaching often does in se derivare
furorem mundi. One met with that Angel of God, John Bradford then in Prison;
some rusled in their Prison-straw, in the Marian Days, with more true Content,
then others did in Satin, and Velvet: And good cause for it, God is our
Sovereign Disposer, and may need or call for our Liberty, or Life, at pleasure;
and we are to resign it, in the service of his Name, and Truth; as of more use
then all our Preaching.

Beside there comes a Worldly rust often on our Graces, (Silver has it is dross
and rust;) and a Prison serves (like the Scullions Office) to rub us bright,
for the Lords Fable; or the Summer Parlour: The Zeal of a Poor Maid (say Alice
Driver, or such a one) shines more on Gods shelf, then all the learning of X
Bishops of Cant: or York; Spices smell best, and Graces shine most, when hard
Rubbed. This School of Adversity has accomplished some (in Experience) for God,
better then the University has, and to better Use.

Now to share in Society with the choicest Saints is great Support --
(...) miseris, socios habuisse doloris. --
To bear (as Simon did) with Christ, who (ever) takes the heavier part of our
Cross, yea and helps us to bear the lighter too, is no small alay to its
weight: And all Saints have so often since shared, that the Cross is (by
handling often) planed smooth, and worn light. Bad associates may make Liberty
uncomfortable, and good, makes bonds easy. For

Secondly, God is also present, and so was he with Joseph. Acts 7. 9. And so
with Jeremy: Chap. 20. 11. This is no little Honor and Succor; what it
imports is not to tell in a few words.

Sometimes it means, a Glorious presence in Duties and Ordinances. This is
promised to that Temple-State, by the Name Jehovah Shammah. So Ezekiel Vlt.
Sometimes the Incarnation of Christ is noted by it, as in the Title Immanuel:
Sometimes the Success of all affairs, as in Joseph's trust, and David's War: And
often it denotes good success in our Prophesying, Acts 18. 10. But most usually
it notes Support in our Sufferings for Christ, and the Gospels sake* Such as
Jeremy, Steven, Paul, (of old) and the Martyrs a late had in all Ages past: Nor
needs a Man more to be happy: now whatever it may intend in itself; as Glorious
it shows in its effects; this has a Spirit of Glory resting on them that have
it, whatever shame, or reproach comes for Christ's name and sake: As in 1 Pet.
4. 14. This in bonds, is True Liberty, and gives light in darkness: It Is that
Precious Stone, that was the light to Noah in the Ark; whilst God shut him up
above twelve Months, which H. A. Notes; and let our confinement be what, and
how long it will, he that shut Noah in, Genesis 7. 16. called him out again, Chap.
8. 16.

This makes darkness light, a Den of Thieves, an House of Prayer, the
detestable Dungeon Leonine, a Garden, or Palace of Christ: And by this presence
a Gridiron, or a fiery Furnace converts to a Bed of Roses, or pleasant Gallery
in which Christ walks and talks with us: And often do Persecutors, both
stumble, and fall at this rock, as Jer. 20. 11. He believed, and Macaiah of old
found, whom Ahab committed, and see why, and what came often? 1 King. 22. 8. --
v. 27, 28, and 34. compared.

The like found Herod. Acts 12. Vlt. and if not this, yet none can express the
love of God, the Joy of Christ's smiles, the Spiritual Liberty, the
Inlargements in Prayer, the Content of mind that is here, save those that find
them.

3 dly, Since Gods presence Seals not to a blank, our cause is good, it is
Christ's cause of which none ought to be (nor are we) ashamed: The well
strating of which, is a key to let in Comfort to a Prisoner for Christ's sake,
it is no small relief to be married to a Cross of Christ's choosing for us, he
ever intailing on it what cost the Patient Bearers need, to Bear all the Charges
of it.

If any ask Prisoners what our cause is? We shame not to say, this is the cause
we Suffer for, and dare venture further then to Prison, in its Defense, viz.
The Royal dignity, and primacy of Christ over all (...) Col. 1. 18.) the
Glorious Liberty of the Gospel, in both the Profession of its Faith, purity of
its Worship, and its Liberty of Prophecy: We Suffer for not swearing, to what
we do not understand: And because we dare not say (far less Swear) there needs
no alteration in Rule, Civil, or Sacred, when all things need it so much; so it
be for the better. We Suffer for Preaching Christ, and seeking to win Souls to
him by the word; for living in a City corporate when its Franchizes are
discorporate, and forfieted to the King: And for Praying for its Peace,
reducted to Babel: And for the Controversy of Zion, and her stones in the
dust: Nay for dwelling Praying in our Famillies, from which had we departed, we
should suddenly have been seized, and suspected for Pl^ters: And they that
commit us, do now force us to live in Lo -- who now is in the fault?

These (in part) are our Pious Offenses. And in all, we dare with our dying
Breath, Sigh out our appeal, to the last Judge, that will one day (perhaps in
the Body) call us and our Persecutors to a second fair hearing: And at present
we may only say (as once David -- 1 Samuel 26. 19.) if the Lord have incensed --
but if etc. -- or as Micaiah, if such return in Peace -- God has not spoken by
us: Hear o People, etc. 1 Kings 22. 28. Not doubting God is on's way, to Judge
and Plead.

Fourthly, Our use is not destroyed by a close Prison, our Walls may be others
wells, as Israel's rock gave out both Water and Honey too: Our confinement
corporally, may prove others Liberty Spiritually: For the word is not bound.
Thus Jeremy had a word from God in the (press yard or) Court of the Prison.
Chap. 32. 2. As a promise of Liberty; and as a sign, bought Land there; for
nothing is too hard for God, verse 17. 27. and what got not vent by a Pulpit, he
propogated by his Pen: as Chap 36. 2, 5, 8, 19. 28 32. And in a second Edition,
and with some Additions too. So did Paul; A Prison for Christ is an high (though
hard) Pulpit, and a good Pen may be a cloven Tongue, loud, and ^orid; Paul is
converted Young, and Preached long, but a Prisoner aged: as Phil. 9. Ephe'. 4.
1. And then wrote, (when he could not Preach) several of's Epistles, how be it
in's Body, he bare the Stigmatas of the Lord Jesus: (...) -- be it a literal
brand, or some Odium of reproach (as Factious, Seditious,) I say not: Yet still
the Gospel got ground; Christ wins more Souls to the Truth by Paul's chain,
and his True Successors in Prison; then by Episcopal palls, and Lawn sleeves:
When Bishops began to rusle in Satin, a Voice was heard [Hodie venerum in
Ecolesiam funditur.] As Flint and Steel; the Collision of two hard things (man's
enmity, with Gods Truth) brings out a more Sparkling Glory to Christ: Grace
and Truth shine brightest (as Diamonds) in the dungeon. It matters little where
the Pulpit stands, so many hear, learn, and edify. Some Sermons are Preached to
few, in one place, or Age: But those are well Preached indeed, and loudly
Canorous, that make thousands abroad, nay after Ages to hear, as Ephesians 2. 7. And
see the exceeding Riches of his Grace: Some of us were pained in our silence,
and gravid of our Sermons till safely laid in, and brought to bed in N G. and
other Prisons; and now our Mr. (nay our Enemies) have took our Testimony (for
Christ) off our hands, got us visits, and forced us to live (safely log'd) in a
corporation: Yea eased us of our Duty to Souls; and besides took the guilt of
our silent Sabbaths, on themselves: And now our cry is on them, be the Blood of
Souls, Lo! we are clear and free.

Fifthly, Cries are hence ascending not only our own, but others for us: And
that of diverse kinds For how can the oppressed hold? Prayers have a cry, like
that of the poor Widows for vengeance and at last obtains, the Lambs that are
spoiled of the green pastures, and expelled to common, cry; and say as Ezekiel. 4.
14. or Peter, Acts 10 14. Lord, we never eat what was (...), common, or
Polluted. And the bleating Sheep, in the Wood and Pits, cry, as Mica. 7. 14.
Feed thy flock that dwell solitary: So do the Darlings that like Joseph, are in
the Pit, cry; and though men hear not the anguish of their Souls, (like his,
Genesis 42. 21.) God surely hears. The very wrongs (themselves) suffered, have a
Cry; often in the Consciences of Oppressors; and is not stilled, till Exonerate.

David cried to the Most High out of the Low Deepes, and never rested till God
pulled him out; and set his Feet on a Rock, and performed all for him; Psalm.
40. 2. 130. 1. 140. 5, 6, 12. 142. 1, 5, 7. and brought him out of Prison; If
one can Pray, and make the Walls, or Mountains Echo again; no Distress, or
Bonds will rest long: The Holy Unction of Prayer will supply the hard knots,
resolve the Fetters of Brass; Psalm. 107. 10. 13, 14. and serve as a Golden Key,
to open all Doors of Iron, of themselves: Acts 12. 10. This was an Effort of
Prayer EKTENES -- drawn out for Peter, v. 5. So was Paul freed of old, and
Larmouth a late, when at Prayer, a piece of the Prison-wall fell down, and a
Voice called him out. If the Mountains, Timber, Stones, may speak, and cry (as
once, Ezekiel. 7. 7. Habac. 2. 11 Luke 19. 40.) why not our Prison-walls? They
that think to destroy Religious Assemblies for Prayer and Prophesy, by shutting
our Doors Seizures and Confinements, may consider whether they do not by
violent practices rather propagate them: and though they should scatter us, they
do but truly multiply us; and for one Meeting of many together, cause ten and
twenty perhaps an hundred) to grow out of the ruins of that one; so impossible
is the purpose a foot, of suppressing us totally. If the Tears of a Widow, one
Orphant, or Oppressed, cry so loud to God, what will the Cry of Blood, and Souls
under the Altar obtain, that are slain for the Word of God, and Testimony they
held to the very last?

6thly, As Cries hence are many, so mighty, God heard and was with Joseph, and
Daniel in the Den; and so heard every Groan, Psalm. 102. 20. Nexorum ut gemitus
audiat -- As Bucha? -- Christ was pleased to declare both his care of, and
concern'dness in his; by the procedure of the Final Judgment, Mat. 25. 36, 43.
both in rewarding the Sheeps and the (...) the one for visiting him, the other
for the neglect of it; and takes what is done, or omitted to his little ones,
as unto himself. So the Reproaches in Egypt, are called Reproaches of Christ,
Heb. 11. 26. (or for him) which as it carries a Rebuke (on the first view) for
the omission that some excuse too easily; So it shows both what a good Master
and Advocate Christ the Judge will be, on whom we may draw all our Bills of
Exchange, and (on sight) our Benefactors will receive payment in full, for
every good work: and also what revenges he will take for lawless confinement of
his Saints and Witnesses, that Labored in his Word and Name: If he is angry at
omitting to visit his, far more at commit^ing them to Goals. Nor will it
excuse, to have been civil to them, (as Pilate scourging Christ, to release
him) or to say, 'twas but according to Law, etc. for if Humane Laws, may be
once allowed to thwart with the Divine, Daniel and the three Children were far
out, and the Apostles too, Acts 4. 19, 20. 5. 28, 29. in exposing themselves to
needless Sufferings, (as one lately avers) for a Moat, or Rite: But Fides
Venales, and a Cheveral Conscience, we still detest, and demur on our Cause,
and appeal to the ulmitate Judgment.

In the Interim, expecting that a word will come, like Joseph's, from God, or
Men; (Preceptive, or providential,) to free us: For the Lord will not cast off
forever, nor will he approve to crush underfoot (Lam. 3. 34.) all the Prisoners
of the Earth: And if it be not True of the Lion, to spare what is prostrate,
nor proper to Kings to open Dens, and call Prophets out: Yet God himself will
do it: And if our hopes fail here, and we dye in the Pit as one alate did, that
may not fail, there is a General Jaol delivery at hand.

And so 7ly, and Lastly, it is an allay to Confinement to be assured the time is
confined, and set, by him that bounds rage of Man, and turns it to his praise.
It Is a Title given to God (with other attributes,) the Lord foreseeth
Prisoners. Psalm. 146. 7. So he did of old by Joseph, and so to Peter, Paul,
Silas, and so to many in the Marian Days; and some condemned to Death: I mean
not only at Death, which is the final deliverance, when the Prisoners rest
together, they bear not the Voice of the Oppressors, and the weary be at rest:
Job. 3. 17, 18. But in life (often) God owns that Title. For, It Is a part of
Christ's Office (by Prophecy) to open the Prisons to them that are bound: And
to say to them come forth and feed -- Isai. 42. 7. 49. 9. He also paid the
Ransom, after which, it is unjust with Men, to hold them fast; the Blood of the
covenant, is so valuable a price to God, that it builds a strong hold of Hope
to us; our fleeing to it, is both safety, and discharge. Job. 33. 24. I have
found a Ransom, my Son paid it, (says the Father) and now go open the Doors,
and bring them out, with gladness.

Besides, Experience verifies the facts Joseph lay but until his word came.
Psalm. 105. 19. Gods Word in the promise, becomes ours in performance; and that
which tried his Faith, freed him, at last.

Nor are Examples wanting how this is done in all Ages, both Ordinary, and
wonderful; whereof all storys are well fraught: Sometimes the Rulers themselves
that detained them unjustly, release them (on better advice) more justly; as
Pharaoh did Joseph; Darius did Daniel: Breaking an unrepealable Persian Law, to
do it Dan. 6. 23, 24. Because he trusted in's God: So they that (erst) had
shut Paul up, are glad precariously, to persuade him out; Acts 16. 37 39. as
not able to justify that illegal confinement.

So was that Earthquake, a wonderful mean of his discharge, though under a double
restraint: ver. 24-26. God will shake the foundations of the Prisons, rather
then suffer his Ambassadors of Peace to be long shut up, as Prisoners of War:
Sometimes Prayers are drawn out at length, to draw them out; and so Peter was
rescued by an Angel, Acts 12. 5, 10. And (now and then) the Angel knocks a
Herod etc. on the Head (as with the Key) ver. 23. and so the word grows, and
multiplies; being watered both with the Blood of Martyrs, and at last of
Malicious Persecutors. Some condemned to dye in flames, were by Queen Marys
Death freed.

And if the time be ask't for, one Psalm indigitates it, when God appears in's
Glory to build Zion, to hear the Prayer of the lowly, and destitute, and to
look from's Sanctuary on the Earth, and hear the Groaning of the Prisoners, and
lose the Sons of Death, as it is in Psalm. 102. 13, 15, 27. 19, etc. to 22 ver.
(A Glorious Prophetic Psalm.) And though the time be prolonged, and some may
drop (as ripe Figs) ere it is accomplished: Yet by the increase, of the guilt of
some, and the Cries of oppressed Souls at and under the Altar, it cannot be
long; it is seldom seen but violence to Sacred matters, is avenged in the same
Age, it is committed: As the Eagles theft, of flesh from the Altar, carried
alive coal thence, that fired her nest, young and all; tho some Sinners are
bore long with, yet after Patience has suffered sufficient abuse, Divine
Wisdom, Justice (and goodness it self) consult a time, swiftly and speedily, to
repay recompenses. Joel. 3. 4. Hab. 2. 7. Zac. 5. 1-4. etc. And the delay makes
a good (expected long, more Glorious.

Now if it be so, if those be our just Groans, and if they ascend on high; and
these our present allays, for a fore taste of better hopes, at the day of our
full Redemption, and Kingdom of our Lord; let none grudge, if we impart of our
Prison scraps, to many abroad that Hunger: And say to any that own Humanity, or
Christianity; For the Lord's sake, remember the Prisoners: If not, we cheer our
selves in the dark (as singing Nightingales) hoping day, in this Gallicinium

Corpus, men's, Oculus; Conclusum, Libera, Laetus;
Est, Fruitur, Spectat; Carcere, Pace, Palum.
The Body's shut up, the mind in Peace does lie;
The joyful Eye, the Heavenly Pole does Spy.
FINIS.
An Hymn on Canticles 4. 8.
Jesus from all Worldly Delights,
And Sufferings too, his Spouse Invites.
1
COme, O my Spouse, with me come home;
From Leb'non have away
With me, from Lebanon now come,
From top of Amona;
From Shenirs Top, and Hermon Hill,
From Dens of Lions have;
And from the Leopards fierce, that still
Thee on those Hills do wast.
2
O come! that word Attracts my heart,
Who will not hearken to it?
For some must hear that word, Depart;
Lord bring us to thy Foot:
To come with thee, Lord, I Am content;
Will thou accept of me?
Though in the Lions Dens I Am pent,
Grant there thy Company.
3
But cannot my Lord be well content,
Without my Fellowship;
In pieces me though Lions rent,
I Will over them Mountains skip.
Lord stay, for these Ascents are hard,
From Leb'nons Sweet Delight:
Lead me along, and be my guard,
When Lions me affright.
And when these Mountains I have past,
In thy Sweet Company;
To the Hill of Spices me at last,
Conduct to be with thee.
The Phoenix, a Prison-Hymn.
LOrd, here I sit alone,
My Liberty is gone:
My Ministry's resigned to thee;
Grant Sweet Communion.
I once did others Water,
Whom thou now let'st men scatter.
O Fountain free, now water me,
By what shall flow from thee.
My Testimony turn,
(Though this the fire do burn)
Unto thy praise, and after raise,
A Phoenix from its Urn.
As Birds that lonesome sit,
Or Joseph in the Pit,
Or even as when the Pelican,
To Wilderness takes flight;
So Lord I to thee sly,
To have good company.
Be thou my one companion,
For I Am content with thee.
And when my days are spent,
That here thou have me lent,
Now take me up with thee to Sup,
Where my Forerunner went.
An Hymn on Canticles 2. 14.
In The Clefts of the Rock (apart from Noise,
Christ longs to hear his Doves sweet Voice.
1
OH, thou my Dove (for secrecy)
In Clefts of Rock Retires;
In Secret Stairs that hid do lie,
Lo this thy Spouse desires:
Come forth, let me thy Countenance see,
Fain hear thy Voice would I;
For sweet thy Voice is still to me,
And Countenance comely.
2.
No Secret Stairs, no Clefts (at all)
Wherein Christ's Spouse does dwell;
From Christ can hide; No Den, nor Wall,
Nor yet the Belly of Hell.
But even there our Cries he hears,
And counts our face most sweet:
Though most bedewed with Briny Tears,
And prostrate at his Feet.
3.
But, Lord, whence flows this Love and Grace?
How much to be admired?
That thou so long'st to see our face!
Why is our Voice Desired?
A place there in our Rock now is,
Where Christ his Flock does hide;
The cause of his desire is this,
And here we safe Abide.
But, Lord, have thou so great Delight,
In our Imperfect grace?
What Joys shall we have in thy sight,
When we shall see thy face!
FINIS.

