PHILADELPHIA, OR, A TREATISE OF Brotherly-Love SHOWING, That we must love all
Men: Love the Wicked in general: Love our Enemies: That the Godly must
especially love another: And the Reasons of each particular Love. The manner of
our Mutual Love; the Dignity, Necessity, Excellency, and Usefulness of
Brotherly-Love. That the want of Love, where Love is due, is Hatred, showed in
diverse particulars. The greatness of the sin of Malice and Hatred; With the
Reasons why wicked Men hate the Saints: Together with Cautions against the Sins
that break the Bond of Love. Many weighty Questions discussed, and diverse Cases
cleared.

By William Gearing, Minister of the Word.

Tanta vel in nobis utinam^is esset (...),
Quantus in hoc lacero tempore (...),
Owen Epigr. L. 3. Ignis, Amor, Tussis, certo sese indice (...) LONDON, Printed
for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible on London Bridge, next the Gate*

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Banks of Ailesford in the County of Kent,
Baronet, and to Richard Hampden of Hampden in the County of Buckingham,
Esquire; and to the virtuous Ladies, their Wives.
OUR Church is not now like Christ's Coat, without Seam; but like Jeroboam's,
that was rent into twelve pieces: and the Northern and Southern Poles may as
soon meet together, as the wide differencies and diversities of Opinions that
are among us, be reconciled. Many men are never at quiet themselves, unless
they are at strife with others. Tumultuous Spirits have framed a Church like
Pliny's Araphali, all Body and no Head: The seducing Romanists have built
another like the Toad-stool, all Head, and no Body. The Brains of many men are
Forges for framing new fancies: Schism is the Ship wherein many turbulent
Spirits go; the winds that drive it are violent passions; wilfulness the
Rudder, obstinacy the Anchor. Heretical opininions are like Monsters; they
begin with the figure of a man, but end with the form and shape of a Beast, of
a Fish, etc. So these begin with God, the true God, but end with monstrous
shapes of vain Imaginations. Broiling Spirits do nothing, but fling firebrands,
and heap on wood to set Kingdoms in a Combustion. Catelina (...) desire to fish
b^ troubled waters, being as much afraid of peace as of the Plague; like
C^tiline, when they cannot quench the fire (begun in their own houses) with
water, they will therefore pull them down, and so quench it, ipsa ruina
incendium extingere.

I ^ind the Pedigree of Contention thus decyphered. There was a bastard
begotten by Anger, Quel. Sermon. 1. in 1 or. 11. 16.
nursed by Pride, and maintained by wilful Contradiction, and when they came to
give him a name, they bestowed upon him the name of Contention: and as was the
Name of the Child, so was his Nature, for as soon as he began to go, he always
went backward, like the Sea-Crab. Great pity it is, that such a cross Companion
should find harbor in any civil Society, much less in the Church of God, which
ought to be compact together as a City at unity. As the seed of the woman
should be at enmity with the Serpent, so should it be at unity with it self. Oh
how happy were it if the Schisms and Discords that make music only for Hell,
might never be heard in the Church of God more: but I fear as long as the
Church of God consists of men, and men are subject to diverse pass^^ns, there
will be rents and divisions among us.

Have not we cause to think, that the Lord has a great controversy with our
Nation, which is so full of malicious controversies and contentions, to the
dishonor of God, who is Love; of his Gospel, which is a Doctrine of Love and
Peace; and of that ancient Law and Message of Love, which he sent unto us from
heaven in the beginning, and has so often renewed since the beginning. If we
look upon the rents and breaches, discords, divisions, quarrels, contentions
that are between men, and that many tim s about triffles; if we consider with
what eagerness, bitterness, obstinacy, these are followed; might it not seem,
that there had never been a Doctrine of Love and Gospel of peace preached among
us? They that are full of carnal mirth, care for none of these things, as it
was said of Gallio. It is one special part of our obedience to the Law of Love,
that we should with much compassion m^urn for these things, that if it be
possible, the wrath that is like to fall upon the Land, may be prevented; and
withal let us mourn for the danger of many particular Souls, who live without
any spark of Christian Love to their Neighbors and Brethren, without which
they shall certainly perish: and let us pray for them that their sins may be
forgiven them, and that their hearts may be purified in obeying the truth
through Faith, unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren.

Satan is an enemy to Union and Love, and especially to the nearest and fastest
union: he is a most malicious Spirit and Murderer, and loves to break the
union of the Spirit, and the bond of peace betwixt man and man. Therefore the
nearer any are united and joined together in any bond of Love, the more does he
labor to make a rent and division between them. So he delights to rent the
Church of Christ, and to separate one member of it from another by Heresy and
Schism, to breed difference in judgment, and the^eupon division of hearts
between those that are the pr^fessed members of one mystical body of Christ.

How were Paul and Barnabas knit together in Love, and how did they join
together as one Soul in the work of the Lord, whereunto they were separated by
the Spirit from the rest of the faithful, as appears in the holy Story? yet
upon a slight occasion, Satan bred a sharp contention between them, and a
separation between these two holy men for a time. So it is his delight to break
the nearest and strongest bonds, even the matrimonal tie betwixt man and wife,
which are one flesh: between Brethren and Sisters that are of one blood:
between the Inhabitants of one Kingdom, one City, one House.

That which cannot endure heat, can least of all endure the greatest heat. Ice
that is apt to dissolve at a little warmth, can less endure heat in the highest
degree: bring it to the fire, and it soon dissolveth. So the Devil, that hates
Love and Union in general, does most of all hate, and work against the
greatest, nearest, and strongest union.

So long as the Saints are not yet fully fitted and framed together, no wonder
though there be differences between them. As stones, so far as they are fitted
together, they join and close in one; but if they be but yet in fitting and
framing, and the work be but done in part, not in perfection; they will not
close in every point. So when Christians are but in part fitly framed together
in Christ, they do but in part close and unite, and there may be differences,
until that which is perfect is come, and that which is but in part be done
away; for so far as they are not fitly joined together in Christ, so far they
are yet carnal, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 3.1.3. And thus he accounts
them, while envying, strife, and divisions are among them. We must consider
that they agree in the main, as they meet in one Foundation and Cornerstone,
and are fitly framed together in Christ. So in the main they agree in one mind,
and are of one heart. They hold the foundation; they meet in one common Center
which is Christ, though they differ somewhat in drawing their Lines. The true
members of Christ, though there may be some disproportion between some of them
and others, yet they all meet in their Head, and receive one life and spirit
from Him.

And whereas (I say) they agree in the main, you must know.

1. That in respect of the Doctrine of Faith, they agee in all those Truths,
which are simply and absolutely necessary to Salvation, though they differ
sometimes about some of the consequents of these, or about something of less
moment; as St. Paul shows in 1 Cor. 3. that these which hold the foundation
of Faith, may build diversely: some Gold, Silver, precious Stones: Some Hay,
Straw, Stubble.

2. They all partake of the same main necessary fundamental Graces, Faith
unfeigned, Hope, Love, Repentance, etc. though some in a greater, some in a
lesser measure. Some have more Dross mixed with their Graces than others. The
Corruptions of men are therefore so much the more to be lamented herein, that
those who agree in substance, should not only differ, but also quarrel and fall
out about Circumstances, join in the foundation, and rent in the frame.

It was a worthy speech of Grynaeus, an Orthodox Divine, who having some
intercourse of Letters with Chytraeus, though seeming to differ from him about
the Sacrament; he told him in one of his Epistles to this effect, That though
they should not see each others faces here in this world, yet he hoped they
should meet in heaven, Ubi Luthero cum Zuinglio optime convenit, where Luther
and Zuinglius agree exceeding well. They that are so fitly framed together in
Christ, as that they are set in a way and state, which shall lead them to a
full and perfect agreement in heaven, which is one common Home and Country
appointed for them all, should bear in mind Joseph's admonition to his
Brethren, when he sent them home to their Fathers house, Fall not out by the
way, Genesis 45.24. When we come to our Fathers house in Heaven, there shall be no
jarrs, not one cross word pass between us, not an angry look or thought to all
eternity. Therefore in our passage thither we should be careful to walk
peaceably, and if in all things we cannot be of one mind (which yet we should
endeavor by all means) yet should we bear with others in a patient and
peaceable manner.

Much honored in the Lord.

The design of this Treatise (which I humbly dedicate to you) is, to provoke
men (and especially the Saints) to that Love of one another, which corrupt
Nature most strives against, turning all charity aside (as it were) into a
private Channel of self-love, which like the Sea, should disperse it self
throughout the whole World.

It was a famous Proverb in the primitives times, which now reflecteth infamy
upon our times, Ecce, ut se invicem diligunt Christiani, See how the Christians
love one another! Then fierce contentions, and hatred among Christians,
declared men to be no Christians at all; and can it now consist with any new
stamp of Christianity?

Religion is the surest Cement of all Societies, it endeareth them one to
another in special sort, it has it is Name of binding men to God, Religio a
religando.
and man to man. But alas! many there are that think Religion to be no such eye
as we pretend; nay they begin to question whether there be any such thing as
Religion, or no. We have even lost Religion in questions about Religion, been
disputing so long which is the true, that almost we are come to have none at
all. The world turns Atheist, as ^^e it turned Arrian. It were not possible
that sin should grow to that height as it does, if this were not the cause of
it. The Orator said of friendship, that whosoever went to take that from men,
went about to take away the Sun out of Heaven; of Religion we may say so
indeed, They that would rob us of that, would rob us of our Sun; this were a
way to dissolve the Brotherhood between Judah and Israel. God grant that we may
be all as the Angels of the Mercy-seat, that turned face to face, and not back
to back, like Sampson's Foxes, that made nothing but spoil and wast where they
went.

I dare not press too far on your patience, but humbly beseech, that you will
be pleased to command him, who studieth how he may show himself,

Your most affectionate Servant in the Gospel, William Gearing.
Crausden in Sussex. October. 10. 1669
Index Rerum.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. The Text, 1 John 3.11. opened. The Substance and Circumstances of it:
where also is showed, that by one another is meant our Brother, our Neighbor,
and who they are. Sect. 2. Two questions resolved. Qu. 1. Why we are no where
commanded to love our selves? Qu. 2. Why is it not said that we should be
beloved one of another, as well as that we should love each other.
CHAP. II.
Shows that the Commandment of Love is a message sent from Heaven to Earth.
Where we are to consider. 1. The Person from whom it is sent. 2. The Messengers
by whom it is sent. 3. The Message it self. it is sent. 4. The Persons to whom
it is sent.
CHAP. III.
An Exhortation to yield obedience to this message of God.
CHAP. IV.
Shows that they are contrary to God, that carry m ssages between men, that
tend to the overthrow of Love: and likewise how hardly men are brought to
unfeigned Love to each other.
CHAP. V.
Shows, That the Commandment of Love was from the beginning; and how it was
from the beginning.
CHAP. VI.
The Antiquity of this Law of Love shows the excellency of it, as being a
fundamental Law.
CHAP. VII.
Shows, That no injuries that men do unto us, should make us think our selves
discharged from the duty of love toward them ^t ^ik^wise shows what mighty
numbers of offenders shall be arraigned, and endited at the last day for the
breach of this ancient Law.
CHAP. VIII.
Sect. Shows, That it is the m^ssage and solemn charge of God, that
Christians should love one an^the^. The Description of Love. Sect. 2. Why
Christ calls the Commandment of Love, a new Commandm^^t, showed in five
things: Why he calls it his Commandment, showed in two things.
CHAP. IX.
Shows, That we must love all men; where we are to observe the differences of
Love. That there is due unto all, 1. A Dove of Pity and Compassi^n. 2. A Love
of Mercy and Help. 3. The Love of Courtesy and Gentleness. 4. The Love of
Familiarity and Friendship.

CHAP. X.
Sets down five reasons why we are to love all men: and four reasons why
Publicans and Sinners do return all offices of Love t those that love them.
CHAP. XI.
Shows, how we must manifest our Love in general to the wicked: of what we
must beware, and what we must do: two reasons of it.
CHAP. XII.
Sect. 1. Of our Love to our enemies: What this Love is, and wherein it
consists, showed in five things. That this Love exceeds that of Publicans
showed three things. Sect. 2. Shows how far wicked men may love their
enemies, laid down in two things: yet that no wicked man does truly love his
enemy, showed in three in things. Sect. 3. How our Love must be extended to the
enemies of God, of his Church and People, showed in two things. 3. Reasons why
imprecations were sometimes uttered against Gods enemies. A Question how Godly
men are, or may be said to hate wicked men, answered in three things.
CHAP. XIII.
Shows, That Godly men must especially love one another.
CHAP. XIV.
Sets down Nine reasons why Godly men must show special Love one to another.
CHAP. XV.
Sect. 1. Discovers the manner how we are to love one another. 1. As our
selves. Sect. 2. -- As Christ loved us: The greatness of Christ's Love in laying
down his Life for us, showed in four things. Sect. 3. Shows, That Christians
being called to it, ought so to love their Brethren, as to lay down their Lives
for them: wherein is handled the thing required. Sect. 4. Shows, The
Condition supposed. Sect. 5. That we must have a special Call before we lay
down our lives, showed in four things. Sect. 6. Shows, What this Call is: a
Christian may be called to it in two cases that more immediately concern God.
Sect. 7. Shows two cases that concern our Brethren. Sect. 8. Sets down two
reasons thereof.
CHAP. XVI.
Sect. 1. Of Christians bearing one another burdens. Of bearing outward
burdens. A Question whether forwardness in relieving others, he always a sign
of one that loves God, answered negatively in three Particulars. Sect. 2. Of
Christians bearing one another inward burdens wherein it consists, showed in
five things. Sect. 3. Shows that in so doing we fulfill the Law of Christ,
which is the Law of Love. 2. Questions about this resolved. How men do love in
obedience to the Law of Nature is showed.
CHAP. XVII.
Sect. 1. Of the Order of our Love one to another, showed in seven things.
Sect. 2. Question first, Whether I am bound to love godly Strangers above my
wicked Kindred, or Relations. Question 2. What if some of our Kindred are Godly
and poor; others are wicked and rich? Resolved.
CHAP. XVIII.
What true Christian Love to the Saints is, showed in five things.
CHAP. XIX.
Sect. 1. Sets forth the woeful condition of those that hate the Saints. Sect.
2. Shows five reasons of theeir hating of them. Sect. 3. A Question, Why men
within the visible Church should hate the Saints, answered. An Object. But I do
not hate the Saints, answered. That the want of Love, where Love is due, is
Hatred, showed in particulars.
CHAP. XX.
Sect. 1. The greatness of this sin of hating the Saints, showed. It is an
argument such love not God himself. Sect. 2. He that loves not his Brother,
abides in death. A Question, How the Saints can be Brethren to those that
abide in death, answered in two particulars. Sect. 3. Shows, That Haters of
the Godly are murderers, manifested in three things. Sect. 4. The aggravations
and occasions hereof considered. Sect. 5. Shows, How malice makes men most
contrary to God, and most like the Devil.
CHAP. XXI.
An Exhortation to Christians to love one another, especially Ministers.
CHAP. XXII.
Shows, The dignity, necessity, excelleney, us^fulness of this Grace and duty
of Love.
CHAP. XXIII.
Of loving not in word, and in tongue, but in deed and in truth.
CHAP. XXIV.
Advice to take heed of those sins that break the bond of Love.
CHAP. XXV.
Shows, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of mutual and
Brotherly Love.
CHAP. XXVI.
Lays down arguments to encourage the Godly to suffer the Hatred of the
world.
CHAP. XXVII.
Sets down some rules for a Christians carriage in the time of the worlds
Hatred.
CHAP. XXVIII.
The Conclusion with an Exhortation to the continuance of Brotherly Love
PHILADELPHIA: OR, A Treatise of BROTHERLY-LOVE.
1 John 3.11. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
SAint John had this Eminence of Happiness above the rest of Christ's
Disciples, That he was the beloved Disciple. And, as it is said of Lazarus in
Heaven, That he lies in Abraham's Bosom, so our Apostle had this Heaven on
Earth, To lean on Christ's Bosom: Who drew such love from Christ, that he became
the Apostle of Love. The main Argument of this Epistle, is, This Grace of Love:
First, He largely sets forth God s Love to us: God is Love, and Christ is Love;
he found it so, when he lay in the Bosom of Christ. Then mainly, he exhorts us
to mutual-love; Showing, How Saints should live together like Brethren, and
love another. It is no new command that he lays upon them, but that which they
had heard before, that they should love one another. The words of the Text, are
the first Reason or Argument to confirm the Truth of the former Proposition;
showing, that one main Property of the Children of God, is laid down here in
this verse, where we may note 1. The Substance of this Argument. 2. The
Circumstances of this Argument.


The Substance lies in this, That God has commanded this duty of Mutual-love
toward each other. Now those that are of God, have his law written upon their
hearts, which are framed to obey him.

The Circumstances are these.

1. That this Commandment is sent as a message from heaven to earth, from God
to man.

2. That it is an ancient message, it is from the beginning.

How it is said, to be from the beginning, seems somewhat doubtful. There are
diverse interpretations of this word [beginning.]

1. Some understand it from the beginning of the publishing of the Law in Mount
Sinai, delivered to the Ancients by Moses, in an open and solemn manner, which
is a Law of Love, and commands us, to love our Neighbors as our selves.

2. Others understand it from the beginning of Christ's preaching of the
Gospel, and the Apostles immediately after him, This being the great
commandment that Christ laid upon his Disciples, A new Commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another, Joh. 13.34. And again, that which the Apostles
laid upon all the Saints: Some understand it, from the delivery of the Gospel
unto these Christians, to whom the Apostle here writes. But

3. By the Beginning may be understood from the creation of Man. The law of
nature stamped upon men's hearts in the first creation, dictateth to us, that we
ought to love one another. There may be some reason given, to prove this sense
to be very probable; for in the next words, this reason is amplified, by an
example of the contrary sin, Not as Cain, who was of the wicked one, and slew
his brother, etc. So that it may seem, that as he alleges a contrary
Example, whereby this commandment of Love was fearfully broken, so he may have
this meaning, That the commandment of Love, which was transgressed by Cain near
the beginning of the world (he being the first man that ever was born of a
woman) was delivered in the beginning of the world, before this transgression
of Cain.

Object. But it may be objected, that St. John says to these Christians to
whom he writes, ye have heard it from the beginning: How could those that then
lived hear this in the beginning of the world?

Sol. It may be understood thus, That the Apostle may (as it were) comprehend
the whole body of Mankind together, that lived in several ages, and so that
which those that lived in the beginning, heard for their, own use, and the use
of all Mankind, may be said to be spoken to all from the beginning. Or thus --
Ye have heard it from the beginning, that is, Ye have heard it as an ancient
message delivered in the beginning, and not as a new message or commandment.
Howsoever, it is true every way. This Law of Love was delivered in the
beginning of the world: It was delivered also in the beginning of that open and
solemn publication of the Law in Mount Sinai; it was delivered in the beginning
of the preaching of the Gospel after our Savior's coming in the flesh, That we
should love one another.

Of Love I shall speak all along this Treatise: We are here to enquire what is
meant, by one another.

1. Some by [one another] include the Angels; but the Scripture usually sets
forth the Object of our Love by two terms

Our Brother. Neighbor.


By Brother is usually meant the Saints, who are all born of God, therefore
Brethren. Godly men are said to be Brethren

1. In respect of Adoption, God has adopted them all to be his children, they
have one Father who has begotten them, they have all the spirit of Adoption
given to them, whereby they cry Abba, Father: that is, Father, Father. It is
doubled, to show, that God is our Father, both by Creation, and by Adoption.
Therefore the Saints are brethren to Christ; He is not ashamed to call them
brethren, Heb. 2.12. Go tell my brethren, and say unto them, etc. The reason is
given in the message, I ascend unto my father, and your father, and to my God,
and your God. Words as full of comfort, as the sea of Water, or the Sun of
Light. [My brethren] What a loving compellation is this, to hear Christ call a
poor creature, my brother? O blessed Union in a most happy Correlation!

2. In regard of their participation of one and the same divine nature: all
saints have the same image of God upon them, as the same image of the King is
stamped upon all his coin: every one of them are alike in holiness and
righteousness; hence they mutually love one another.

3. In respect of their Communion of the same privileges: They are all elected
of God the Father, redeemed by Christ; they are all Temples of the Holy Ghost:
they are all people of the Covenant: they are all reconciled: they all have
grace: they are all Vessels of Mercy: Every one (as Solomon) is a Jedidiah, the
beloved of the Lord himself: God loves them all alike in Christ. What
privilege has David above a converted Gentile; John the beloved Disciple,
above a converted Publican, in point of spiritual Sonship?

4. In respect of Participation of one and the same Inheritance: Heaven is
every particular saints eternal Inheritance; Magna benevolentia, cum unicus
sit, tamen noluit esse unicus.
and God is every particular saint's eternal reward. Though Christ be the sole
Heir of Heaven and Earth, yet he would not be the sole Heir, but will have all
his brethren to be partakers of the same Inheritance, Romans 8.17. They are
joynt-heirs with Christ: He makes them all Kings to reign with him in glory.

5. They are called Brethren, to show, how saints ought to carry themselves
each to other, even as brothers do, and ought to do, viz. to love as brethren.
1 Pet. 3.8, 9. to converse together, to accompany each other, to counsel one
another for their mutual good, and to perform all offices of love and kindness
to each other. It is an excellent saying of Clemens of Alexandria, If the
spiritual man be in us, our Humanity is Fraternity; what then is our
Fraternity? It is raised to that which has no name to express it: The union of
the saints in Heaven, is beyond the union of Fraternity. This which is of Grace
is of the same nature.

By Neighbor, we are to understand one whom St. Paul calls (...), proximum,
Romans 13.9. one that is near unto thee, and verse. 8. (...), another, any other
besides thy self, whether near to thee, or afar off, whether friend or
adversary, whether familiar or stranger, August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 1. cap.
3. lomb. lib. 3. sent. distinct. 28.
whether of thy kindred or alliance, or neither; whether believer or unbeliever.
I^ a word, any one whosoever, that in any respect whatsoever stands in need
of thy prayers or charitable deeds, or that shows any kind of charity unto
thee, he is thy Neighbor. So our Savior plainly informs us, by the Parable of
the wounded traveller, Luke 10. relieved by the Samaritan that passed by.
Brother, is a word more narrow than Neighbor: Brother implies only the
Saints: Neighbor implies Mankind: Strangers and enemies will come under this
term of Neighbor, as I shall show.

Sect. II.
Quest. 1. BUt why is it no where expressly commanded to love our selves? we are
commanded to love one another: Thou art commanded to love thy Neighbor, but
not expressly, to love thy self.

Resp. 1. Because it is superfluous to exhort men to love themselves? men are
naturally too prone to self-love: their self-love, like Pharaoh's lean kine
swalloweth up love to the Saints, and love to others: every man is apt to look
to his own things; the most part, and the Strength of men's affections cleave to
themselves: how many churlish Nabals be there in the world, that in their
hearts answer Christ in his Saints, as he did David, when he came to him for
relief; Shall I take my bread, and my wine, and my flesh, which I have provided
for my shearers, and give to men that I know not? Self-love makes us haters of
one another, envious to one another; self-love shuts up our Bowels of
Compassion from others.

Because we have a command to love our selves, in that the Lord commands us,
to love our Neighbor as our selves: love to our selves, is included in this
love to others. Our love to our selves, must be the rule and measure of our
love to others. In loving others, we love our selves; he that loves the Saints
most, loves himself best.

Quest. 2. Why is it not said here, That we should be beloved of one another,
as well as that we should love one another?

Resp. 1. To love another is thine own grace; that another loves thee, it is
not thine, but his grace.

2. Thou may the better assure thy self that thou art godly, by thy love to
the Saints, and not by their love to thee. That I love a child of God, I may be
certain of it; but that I am beloved of others is uncertain. Judas was a
Disciple in show, but a Devil in heart. Again, others may love thee, and may
think well, and hope well of thee; yet if thou do not love them; if thou
love not the Saints that love thee; thou may perish for all their love to
thee.

3. Because thou shall be beloved of others, if thou love them: Nothing will
draw out love sooner than love it self.

CHAP. II.
FRom the former Circumstance in this text, note this point of Doctrine.

Observe. That the Commandment of love, is a message sent from heaven to earth,
from God to man: Which is to be understood of the whole word of God, and
especially of the Doctrine of mutual and brotherly-love, between men and men.
Sin set man against God, and God against man. God sent a message of Love and
Reconciliation unto man, between himself and man in his Gospel, offering peace
and love to man by his Son: on the other side sin made a breach between man:
God sent a message of Love from heaven also unto men, that those breaches
should be made up, and that they should join together in an holy and
brotherly-love.

God's Ministers are Messengers, sent of God with a message of love, with a
message, offering love from God to man, and requiring Love from man to God; and
on the other hand, requiring Love between man and man: so the name of the
Apostles signifies men sent on a message. Christ being ascended up into
heaven, sent them about the world with a message of Love, offering Love, and
commanding Love: These Messengers of Christ found the world fighting agrinst
God, and to be hateful, and hating one another, and so delivered a message of
Love unto them from God.

Now as in other messages, so in this, ye may see 1. The Person from whom it is
sent. 2. The Messengers by whom it is sent. 3. The Message it self it is sent.
4. The Persons to whom it is sent.


1. The Person who sent this message, is the great God, who being full of glory
and blessedness, accompanied with so many thousands of glorious Angels, who
were knit together in Love to him, and to each other; among whom was not the
least jarr, nor any thing that was offensive to any of them: He (I say) pitied
the misery of Mankind, whom he saw full of rents and divisions, tormented with
malice and rage against each other, vexing themselves and others; and so out of
his love and compassion sent this message unto them.

2. The Messengers by whom it was sent, they have been diverse in several ages:
first the Patriarchs before the Flood: Ye read of Enoch's prophecy mentioned by
St. Jude, who was the seventh from Adam, and was before the Flood. Ye find Noah
a preacher of righteousness before the Flood, as St. Peter notes: and Lamech
the Father of Noah (not he that was of Cains posterity) seems to have had the
spirit of Prophecy, and to have revealed the Lords Counsel communicated to him
unto the Church; and therefore he gave a significant name to his Son, calling
him Noah, which signifies Rest, because he should give them rest from the toil
of their hands, concerning the earth which the Lord has cursed. He should be
left to propagate the Church in that general deluge and desolation. So I am
persuaded, that the Lord did by Adam and other holy men, reveal his counsel,
and send messages to the world, according to his will.

After the Flood, there were Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. then Moses, and
the Prophets in several ages: and in special, John Baptist, who was sent as a
peculiar Messenger before the face of Christ. Then came Christ Jesus, who was
the principal Messenger, and Angel of the Covenant. But he differs from all
others, in that he did both send this message, and was sent of this message. A^
he was God, and one of the Persons of the blessed Trinity, so he did send this
message: as he took upon him, the the office of a Mediator and Messenger
between God and man, so he was sent of this message, and came preaching Love
among men. Then were his Apostles sent out by him unto all the world, to
deliver a message of Love from him unto them; after them, Pastors and Teachers
to the end of the world. Of these Messengers, some had this message from God,
immediately revealed to them by his Spirit, as the Patriachs, Prophets, and
Apostles, who were immediately inspired: some (as it were) at the second hand,
as the Priests and Levites before our Savior's coming; and Pastors and
Teachers since: who understanding the mind of the Lord by his word, do deliver
his message to the world: yet so, that even these also (as many of them as are
faithful) have the assistance of the Spirit more or less, opening the Mysteries
and Counsels of God unto them, and enabling them to deliver his message unto
his people.

3. The Persons to whom this message is sent, are those to whom his word is
p^^^ched; and among these, even we, who at this day are made partakers of this
precious word of God. And as St. Paul spoke, Act. 13.26. Men and brethren,
children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you
is the word of this salvation sent: so say I to you that are baptized, and hear
the Gospel, to you is this message of Love sent from Heaven.

4. Consider the Message: It is a Message of Love; it requires all that will
enjoy the sweetness, comfort, and fruit of his saving-love, to embrace others
in love, and out of a feeling of his Love, to do the duties of Love, which his
word requires at their hands, both to Him and others.

CHAP. III.
Use. 1. THen be exhorted to yield obedience to this message of God; remember
that this Commandment of brotherly-love is to be obeyed as a message sent from
God; therefore think not in thine heart, such a one never deserved any love at
my hands, why should I love him? but rather consider with thy self, God has
sent me a message, wherein he bids me love him. When Haman heard it was the
Kings pleasure, that he should honor Mordecai whom he meant to have hanged, he
durst not b^^ do it. Has the King of heaven sent to us, to love our Brethren;
yea, to love our enemies, surely we must bring our hearts to it, else we shall
have no evidence to our Souls that we are the children of God, Who is Love.

Thou will say perhaps, that he has given thee cause to hate him: oh then
remember that God has sent thee a message, that thou ought to love him: Can
the wrongs that he has done thee, discharge thee of that obedience which thou
owe to the Lord's message and commandment? Can any enemy give thee sufficient
cause to disobey the Lord's commandment? None can free a man from owing obeence
to the lawful commands of lawful Authority: but some higher Authority, the
Supreme and highest Authority, commands thee to love thy Brethren,
Neighbors, and enemies, all whomsoever, though not all in the same degree. Now
the wrongs of any of these can by no means discharge thee from that bond of
Love, which the Authority of God lays upon thee.

It is not enough to rule the tongue or hands, and to abstain from open wrongs
in word or deed, and in the mean time, to carry a bitter Spirit in our breasts
against others: Nay it is not enough to carry our affections upon terms of
indifferency and neutrality, so as neither to love nor hate, as some men may
flatter themselves, and think they do well enough, if they do not hate them,
though they do not love them. As Balak said to Balaam concerning the
Israelites, neither bless them at all, nor curse them at all; since he could not
persuade him to curse them, he would fain have had him not to bless them, but
to carry himself indifferently betwixt him and them; so many men, because they
are forbidden malice and revenge, do think they do well, if they abstain from
these, albeit they bear no love to their Neighbor in their hearts, especially
if he be one that has wronged them. But this is not enough, the Lord has sent
thee a message that thou should love thy Neighbor. Oh then, labor to get
the Spirit of Love and Power, and of a sound mind, to frame thy heart to love
others, because thou find, that God has loved thee, and commanded thee to
love thy Brethren, and thine enemies; then thou will not think how ill such and
such persons have deserved thy love.

CHAP. IV.
II. INasmuch as the Lord has sent a message of love unto men, this shows,
That they are contrary unto God, who carry messages between men, that tend to
the overthrow of love, and breeding of ill will and malice between men and men.
These cross the message of God, which is a commandment of love betwixt man and
man: they think to get some carnal love from others toward themselves, by
seeking to alienate their hearts from others. But let all take heed, how they
go about to separate those whom God would have to be joined together in love.

III. This point shows, how hardly men are brought to unseigned love toward
each other: Men are so alienated from this duty of Christian-love, that the God
of Love sends a message of Love from Heaven to bring them to it, and to
incline their hearts to love. It is a sign that men are much bent upon Enmity
and Variance, when a King is fain to send an Emba^^ge of Love and Peace unto
them, from a far country to set them agreed: So it is a sign, that men are
much alienated from Christian-Love, and inclined to the contrary, when the King
of kings sees cause to send a message from heaven to earth, to unite them to
each other in Love.

All that live under the Gospel, profess one Faith, partake of one Baptism, eat
and drink all at one Table of the Lord, etc. Yet all this will not bring them
truly, to embrace each other in Christian-Love: But God sees there is need to
send a message of Love from heaven to earth, to unite them together.

CHAP. V.
HAving considered the first Circumstance, I come to the second, which shows
the Antiquity of this Doctrine of Love: it was from the beginning: whence I
observe.

Observe. That the Commandment of Love is from the beginning. It is true, we do
not find, that it was in express words given in command at the beginning of the
world: I mean, we do not find any Record in the Word mentioning any such
express Command of Love delivered in the beginning; but it is certain, that
such a command was giv^n; for otherwise, Cain had not been guilty, when he did
so notoriously transgress the Law of Love, in hating and murdering his
Brother; for where no Law is, there is no Transgression. But it is manifest,
that Cain did grievously transgress, as appears, by the wrath of God against
him, by his arraignment and punishment of him; therefore there was a Law of
Love given in the beginning; against which this man, that was the first man
born of a woman, offened grievously; and for which he was severely punished.

Now it is out of Question, That it was written in Adam's heart before his
Fall; for it was a special part of that holy Image of God in him. -- But then
it may be said, that this Image of God was lost by the Fall, and so the Law of
Love, as well as other parts of holiness, was blotted out of his heart. -- I
answer, that though it were blotted out of his heart, yet I do not believe it
was blotted out of his head and understanding, but that still he retained a
knowledge of this duty, although his heart was now so corrupted, and his
affections so perverted and disordered, that he could not frame his heart to
obey this Law of Love: He had lost that inclination to entire and perfect Love,
which he had by Creation, and by which he resembled God, who is Love. But
howsoever, the writing the Law in the heart of Adam at his Creation, or the
remaining of this Law in the mind and understanding of Adam, I conceive not to
be meant here by this message of God sent to men, and requiring them to love
each other; for that was not lex tradita, sed insculpta, not a Law delivered by
way of message, but a Law engraven, and a Character of Love imprinted in the
mind of Adam: But this spoken of here, is the delivery of a Law, as a message
sent from God to man.

Therefore I conceive, That this Law of Love was by the Spirit of God revealed
to Adam, and to other holy men, who were stirred up of God to teach and deliver
it unto men, and to propagate this Doctrine of Brotherly-love, as men
multiplied and increased upon the earth. So it appears, in that soon after
the the Fall; the Doctrine of the Gospel and Salvation by Jesus Christ, was
delivered to Adam, as a gracious message of Life. Now this was the Doctrine of
Faith, and the Doctrine of Faith and Love are inseparable, and always go
together, as the Graces of Faith and Love are always joined. For in Christ, who
is promised in the Gospel, not only God is reconciled to man, but also man is
knit to man in Love. So ye may see how these two are joined together as it were
in one commandment, 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we believe in
his son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment. So that
the Doctrine of the Gospel commanding Faith, is but an imperfect Law, if it be
not joined with the commandment of Love.

The commandment of Faith and Love together, make up a complete Law: Therefore
I doubt not, but as the one, so the other also was delivered in the Beginning.
Abraham knew this well, who lived long before the Law was published on mount
Sinai, and therefore he walked in Love, and labored to cherish Love, and to
p^^ (...) the breach of Love, and thereupon says to Lo, I pray thee let there
be no strife between me and thee, for we are brethren: So it appears likewise
by his carriages mother cases. And it (...) ^^^^eds be so, for the same way of
Salvation for the Substance is, and has ever been oper^^^^ and showed unto
men: The same good wor^share ordained for the people of God to walk (...)
throughout all ages, therefore they must have the same rule to walk by in all
sages. Now Love and the Fruits of Love is the Substance of the Law, therefore
this was from the Beginning.

CHAP. VI.
Use. 1. THis shows the Excellency of the Law of Love, and of the Duty of
Love commanded in this Law; It is ancient, it is from the beginning. Ancient
Laws are fundamental Laws, and ought especially to be regarded and observed.
That Law of Ceremonies delivered to Moses, and by him to the people of Israel,
was a new Law in comparison of this, and therefore it was no fundamental Law of
the Church of God, and so it was abrogated in the fullness of time; but this Law
of Love is both an ancient Law from the beginning, and so a fundamental Law of
the Church of God, without which the Church cannot stand; for if Love be taken
away, there can be no Church. Therefore men do little consider what they do,
when they allow themselves in the neglect of Christian-Love, and in the duties
thereof. They sin against a most ancient and fundamental Law, without which the
Church of God cannot stand. Malice, Hatred, want of Love, is a sin against the
foundation of Obedience and Holiness.

As there be fundamental Errors, viz. Errors against the foundation of Faith,
so there be (as it were) fundamental sins, sins against the fundamental Law of
Love. Every failing in the duties of Love is a sin against this Law; but the
want of Christian-Love, and the nourishing of Malice and Enmity in the heart,
are more directly against this ancient and fundamental Law. This Law of Love,
then being an ancient and fundamental Law, delivered from the beginning, does
commend unto us the excellency of Christian and Brotherly-Love, and show the
odiousness of the contrary sin. None can rest upon Christ, the Foundation and
Cornerstone of the Church, which has not this fundamental Law of Love written
in his heart, which has not his heart inclined to Love. Therefore St. Paul
says, That the Tongues of men and Angels, faith to remove mountains, abundance
of knoledg; all these, if a man had them without Love, cannot profit: no,
though a man should give all his goods also to the poor, and his body to the
fire; and why? Because he wants a fundamental and principal Grace, required
in this fundamental and ancient Law; the want whereof proves him not to be
grounded nor built upon Christ, the Foundation and Cornerstone of the Church,
because he has not the Spirit of Love which is in Christ. How should this move
every one of us then, to search our hearts diligently, lest any Lees or Dregs
of Malice should settle there, lest (as the Apostle says) any root of
bitterness should remain there, and spring up in us. How should it move us, to
purge out all affections contrary unto Love.

CHAP. VII.
II SEeing this Commandment of Love was from the beginning, it should teach us,
That no injuries which men have done, or can do against us, should make us
think our selves discharged from the duty of Love toward them. This Law of
Love, pleads prescription against all such wrongs and injuries whatsoever. It
was before them, and it is to take take place before them, and against them
all. The Law of Love which is so ancient, even from the beginning, should cause
us to walk in Love, and to do the offices of Love, above all those new injuries
which men have done us, or may do us. These should not prevail so to draw us to
Malice and Hatred, or to extinguish Love in us, as that should to beget and
increase Love.

The Apostle disputing about the Law and the Gospel in the Epistle to the
Galathians, says, That the Law, as it was published by Moses, being four
hundred years after the Promise of the Gospel given to Abraham, could not
disanul that Promise, and make it of none effect: much less can any injuries
disanul this law of Love, which is many thousand years more ancient than any
injury which we have received: therefore still this ancient Law stands in
force, and binds us to love even those who do most of all wrong and provoke
us. Is it not then a most unchristian thing, when men cannot lay down old
enmities, nor purge out old grudges, nor forgive old injuries? Are any so old
as this most ancient law of Love, which is from the beginning? There is a
wicked hereditary enmity between some Families and Kinreds, which descends
from father to son, etc. and they will not give it over, because it is so
ancient: What if it were Five hundred years old? yet this law of Love, which is
above Five thousand years old, since the delivery of it to Mankind, should
prevail so far with us, as to make us forget them, and to walk in Love.

III. The Antiquity of this law of Love, should cause us to consider of that
great Day of the Lord, which shall be in the end of Time, even at the end of
the world; when all the breaches of this law (not being blotted out by
repentance) that have been from the beginning, are now, and shall be to the end
of the world, shall be punished with everlasting vengeance. Oh the innumerable
Transgressions against this law in all ages, which then shall be called to
account, and brought to the Bar of the highest Tribunal, even before the
judgment Seat of Christ! Oh the horrible murders, massacres, cruelties,
oppressions, extortions, thefts, rapes, persecutions, tyrannies of Princes and
States, malicious plots and practices, contentious courses, wrongs, injuries;
and (among the rest) those bloody Wars, and destroying of Nations with fire and
sword; which, if they be not lawfully undertaken, and lawfully managed, are to
be accounted among the most notorious breaches of this royal and most ancient
Law: and beside these, all fraudulent and unjust dealings; together with other
things of like nature.

What mighty numbers of notorious Offenders, shall then be arraigned and
endited for the breach of this ancient Law, which was from the beginning? What
numberless Catalogues, and huge Bills of Offenses against this Law, shall then
be brought to Trial? The thought of this, might make men's hearts to shake, and
their knees to smite together, as Belshazzar's did: If we consider, That as he
saw an hand miraculously writing his Doom upon the wall; so the hand of God
has written, and does write all these Offenses in the Tables of men's
Consciences, where they shall stand recorded until the last day; unless in
those, who have washed out this Handwriting, by the Blood of Christ sprinkled
by Faith, joined with unfeigned Repentance, and Reformation of Heart and Life.

How should we bewail the fearful Transgressions against this most ancient and
sacred Law, committed now among our selves, to whom the Gospel of Love and
Peace is preached; in which Gospel, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace,
has especially, as in his last Testament bequeathed Peace, and commended Love
unto us; I say in this Testament sealed with his own most precious blood, which
he shed in Love toward us, to make Peace between God and us, That so we might
be at peace among our selves.

CHAP. VIII. I come now to the main thing in my Text, and that is
Christian-Love: And thence shall observe,
Sect. I.
Observe. THat it is the message and solemn charge of God and Christ, That
Christians should love one another. It is not an Arbitrary thing, That we
should love one another, but the Command of God; a great Command, and that
which is joined to believing in his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. The one is
as truly necessary to Salvation as the other. Let men talk of Believing (while
they will) on the Son of God; yet if they have no Love one to another, Their
Faith is a dead Faith; because God stands much upon this, To have his people
live together in Love: At the beginning of the verse he says, it is his
Commandment, and at the end of the verse he says, he gave us Commandment. It
is also observable, that he says of the Commandment of Love, he gave us that
Commandment: It is a gift; we should not only submit to it, as being bound by
the Authority of it; but we should open our hearts to it, and cheerfully
embrace it, as a Gift from God.

Love is an affection of the Heart, arising out of an Apprehension of God's
Love to us, and embracing others in the Lord, 1 John 4.11. If God so loved us,
we ought also to love another. He shows, whence this spiritual love
springs, even from an Apprehension of God's Love to us. Now from this Love to
God, arises our Love to others. Ver. 20. If a man say, he loves God, and
hates his brother, he is a Liar; and ver. 21. This Commandment have we from
him, that he who loves God, love his brother also. So that, as our Love to God
arises from God's Love to us; so this spiritual Love to men arises, both from
God's Love to us, and our Love to God. And it is in the Lord: True spiritual
Love, carries a respect to God, and not so much to outward things. It loves
others, either with respect to God's Graces in them, or with respect to God's
Command; either, because God has put his likeness upon them; or because God
has commanded them to love them. In the former respect, this Love embraces
the Godly: in the second, All men; because God has commanded us to love all,
under the name of our Neighbor: For that answer of Savior to the question,
(Who is my Neighbor?) is appliable to any. And Christ, who speaks
peremptorily, [I say unto you, Love your enemies] excludes none.

Now that this Love is sound, only in the sanctified Soul, is easily proved by
the Description it self; for it arises from an apprehension of God's Love to
us. Now wheresoever this is rightly apprehended, there is some degree of
Sanctification, and the heart is in some measure purified. For God's Love is
apprehended by a sound Faith, and a sound Faith purifieth the heart: Yea the
Love of God prevails so far, as to brin^ the heart, out of Love with Sin, and
so to purge and cleanse out those sinful dispositions and affections of the
heart, which are contrary to the Love of God; and so purifieth the heart.

A new commandment I give unto you, says our Savior to his Disciples, That ye
love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another, Joh.
13.34. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you,
Joh. 15.12.

SECT. II.
THere are two remarkable things, about this: Christ calls it a new
Commandment, and he calls it his Commandment.

He calls it a new Commandment for these reasons.

1. Because it is given after a new manner. The Law commands us to love our
Neighbor as our selves. Wh^^e our Love to our selves, is the Rule of our Love
to our Neighbor. But Christ in his Gospel commands us to love one another,
sicut ego dilexi vos, as I have loved you, says he: We must Love each other
even as he has loved us. Where Christ's Love to us must be the Rule and
Measure of our Love to the Saints, and to all men.

The Law says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor: Christ extends it further, and
says, Thou shall love thy very Enemies.

Our Love must be, like the Sun in the Firmament, that shines upon the Good
and the Bad. Our Love (like the Clouds) must drop on the barren Heath, as well
as upon the rich and fruitful Soil. We must do good to them that do us evil,
bless them that curse us.

2. It is called new in respect of the excellency of this Grace, and so it is
an Hebraism: It was the Hebrew custom to call excellent things, new: quia nova,
aut sunt, aut videntur meliora quam vetera; because new things, either are, or
seem to be better than old. As if our Savior had said, Many a Commandment have
I delivered unto you, but this is instead of all; Love one another. Love will
make you to keep all the other. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

3. It is called new, as Maldonat thinks, not because it is a new command, or
delivered in a new manner, but because our Savior commends this above all,
and commands and presses it to his Disciples, as if it were a new command
brought from heaven; as if they never heard of such Truth before, Love one
another. Novitas respicit studium diligendi, non mandatum.

4. It is called a new Commandment, as the Gospel is called a new Testament.

5. Because it must be renewed every day; We must love, and yet moreover we must
pay this this debt of Love continually, and yet still stand in debt.

Christ calls it his Command for two reasons.

1. Because among all the Commands of the Moral Law, he presses this most of
all; As if he had said, Moses from God commands you many things, I command
this, Love ye one another: This is the Royal Law, which ye must obey.

2. Because he is most delighted in it: It is the joy of Christ, when he sees
Brethren to dwell together in Love and Unity. Psalm. 133.1. It is like the
precious Ointment of Aaron; How sweet was that? It is like the Dew of Hermon;
How fruitful is that? For there the Lord commands his Blessing, even Life for
evermore. Eternal Life is the Crown; the Reward, the blessing of Brotherly
Love: How pleasant, how comely is that?

This is one of those weightier things of the Law, which our Savior speaks of
Mat. 23. Yea, the weight of the Law lies upon it, as it were: For the Law is
fulfilled by Love; not excluding Faith, but presupposing it. This is the order,
first Faith, secondly Love to God, thirdly Love to man. Faith apprehends
God's Love to us in Christ, God's Love apprehended by Faith, makes us love God:
Our Love to God makes us to love our Neighbor. And where this Order is not
framed in the Heart and Soul, there is no right orderly frame of Holiness; but
mere disorder and confusion. There may be some confused motions now and then,
toward heavenly things, and some disordered purposes to lead a new life; but
there is not Christ formed in the heart, nor holiness framed there, nor Kingdom
of Christ set up there; nor Image of God imprinted there; nor the Law of God
written there.

CHAP. IX.
IN the prosecution of this point, I will handle these four Conclusions: 1. I
shall show, That we must love all men. 2. That Godly men must love even the
wicked. 3. That Godly men must love even their very Enemies. 4. That the Godly
must especially love one another.

1. That we must love all men.

Here first, Let us observe these Differences of Love.

1. There is a Love of Pity and Compassion. This Love is due to all men, good
and bad who are in misery. This will make thee weep with them that weep, not
shedding the tears of a Crocodile, as Ishmael the Son of Nethaniah did, Jer.
41.6. But rather of our Savior, who not only raised Lazarus, but also wept
over him, to make it appear how he loved him. Joh. 11.35. The Jews said, Oh how
be loved him! He that is a man of much natural affection, will be kindly
affectioned with Brotherly-Love, for where there is no Bowels of Compassion,
there can be no true love either of Man or of God.

True Love to any is manifested, chiefly to their Souls. Do thou see men to
go on in sin, and in a desperate neglect, not to regard the Salvation of their
own Souls; then mourn for them, being moved with the consideration, into what
misery these wretched Creatures are like to plunge themselves in. See thou a
vain Sensualist spend his days in the eager pursuit of carnal delights, never
considering his latter end, mourn for his Sorrows hereafter. See thou a
Neighbor drunk, or hear thy Friend swear and curse, let thy heart pity him.
Alas poor Soul! What will he do when Christ comes to judgment? Poor wretch!
methinks I see him weeping and wailing, and wringing his hands, although now he
spend his days in mirth and jollity. This Love was in Christ toward the wicked
Jews, Luke 19.41. For even in his Triumph, when the people was making great
joy, he then wept over Jerusalem. This was the burden of his Lamentation; O
Jerusalem, that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong unto
thy peace; but now they are hidden from thine eyes. O Jerusalem, thou that now
triumphest, I cannot but weep, when I consider how the things of thy peace are
going, and thy fearful destruction is hanging over thee; the sword of God's
vengeance is drawn out against; thee. So when thou see any wicked man, merry
and jovial, pity him, O poor wretch! Thou that art so merry now, O that thou
knew the things that belong unto thy peace, before they be hid from thee: I
do even see how the sword of Divine Wrath hangs over thine head, and thy
Damnation slumbereth not.

This Love of Compassion was in David, Rivers of tears (says he) run down mine
eyes, because men keep not thy Law. I mourn when I see wicked men to be jolly
in their sins. So St. Paul says, There are some of whom I tell you weeping,
that are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction.

II. There is a Love of mercy and help, due to all in their Afflictions. This
is plainly showed by the parable of the good Samaritan. The wounded man was not
his Companion; he found him in misery by chance as he was passing by the
way-side, whether he were Jew, or Gentile, or Stranger, this Samaritan did
comfort him, relieve him, and took great care to recover him. See what use our
Savior made of this, Go, do thou likewise the same. Do thou see a man in
misery, be not like the Priest, and the merciless Levite, but be a good
Samaritan to him, speak comfortably to him; and let thy heart join with thy
tongue, and thy hand with thy heart; be as ready to do good, as to wish well to
him, that he may bless God in thee, and for thee. If thou can not do all thou
would, yet be willing to do all thou can, and where thou can do no more,
turn thy wishes into prayers; and from prayer conclude for those that are
Godly, My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in Glory by
Jesus Christ.

Suppose a wicked man is in misery, and it is in thy power to help him; yet
give something humanitati, if not homini. The Sun shines upon the good and the
bad; the Clouds water both, the Creatures tell thee what thou should do. A
good man (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast; then much more, will a good
man be merciful to a man in misery. In the Law God ordained, that if a man did
see his Enen^mies Ox or Ass in a ditch or pit, he should help him out. Does
God take care for Oxen and for Asses, and not much more for men? Remember,
Dives is tormented in Hell for his hard-heartedness toward distressed Lazarus.

III. The Love of Courtesy and Gentleness. We owe Kindness and Gentleness to
all men; This is a Fruit of the Spirit. A surly, dogged, harsh temper is
unbeseeming a Christian: such persons are more fit to be Monks and Anchorets
than Christians. God himself is said to be a God of a great Kindness; so must
his children be. A gentle Spirit puts forth it self to all gentle and courteous
behavior; drawing affection and delight from others. See how sweetly our
Savior carried himself toward all. When the man came in, not having the
Wedding Garment, Friend, (says he) how came thou in hither? It is
Parabolical indeed, but yet our Savior shows, with what gentleness,
courtesy and kindness, he carried himself.

Some there are indeed that turn Love into Complements, and affected Phrases
and Gesticulations; that will make great Protestations of Love and Kindness,
when their heart is not with you, Prove. 23.7. Such a one will say, he is your
servant, at your command, he will kiss your hand, or the hemm of your Garment,
but it is with the kiss of a Joab or a Judas; he carries two Faces under one
Hood: but the true Christian is little in Circumstances, but striveth to abound
in the Substance of Love. David and Jonathan contended together in weeping, not
in crying [Your Servant Sir] in real friendship, not in empty words. It cannot
be denied, but some Ceremonies, that is, outward Expression in the very
Gestures and Countenaunces of Friends will thrust in with true Love; not so
much for Love-sake, as for respect, the witness and acknowledgment of desert,
which is the Ground, Nurse and Guardian of Love: Therefore Love makes no
difference between affected Complements, and downright rudeness, but shunneth
both alike, that it may neither wast Complements, nor neglect that respect
which Civility, Modesty and Religion require, as a part of the debt of Love.
But to be a Master of the Art of Ceremonies (as one says) and to assert such a
necessity of them, as to exceed in their use; as it favors not of a simple
sincere ingenuous Spirit, so it sets the Teeth of true Love on edg: The
Christian's main care should be to love, not in word or tongue, but in deed and
in truth.

IV. There is the Love of Familiarity and Friendship. This we owe not to all,
but to the Saints. As the Schoolmen say of God, There is Amor in Deo, erga
omnes, non amicitia, God loves all, but God says not to every one, You are my
Friends, but only to the Godly. In this respect he says, Esau have I hated,
Jacob have I loved; Jacob is my Friend, whom I love with my special Love. So
there may be in the Godly, Love to the wicked, but not Friendship and
Familiarity. The wise man says, Walk not with the frowa d, for thou thy
self-shalt learn frowardness; Wicked men will defile the Godly, by intimate and
constant Communion. Israel must not marry with Ashdod; no Canaanite or
Gibeonite must be of the Communion of Saints. What Fellowship has a Member of
Christ with the Children of Belial? Yet I shall show you how we are to love the
wicked, hereafter.

CHAP. X.
NOw I come to give you the Proofs and Reasons, why we are to love all. For
Proofs, take these places of Scripture. Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good to all men, but especially to them that are of the
household of faith. [While we have time] so some read; that is, While we live,
let us do good to all men; as opportunity serves, let us do good to every man,
but especially to the Saints. Our Savior bids us, to love our enemies, Mat.
5.44. and there speaks in opposition to that Pharisaical Tradition, That a man
was bound only to love his Friends: He therefore requires our Love to be
extended to enemies, even to such as curse and hate us.

The Reasons hereof are

1. Because where ever we see any part of Gods goodness, we are to love it. It
is said that our Savior beholding the rich young man that came unto him, loved
him, Mar. 10.21. There is some Print of Gods goodness in many that are not
Godly, which ought to draw our affection to it; Goodness being the Object of
Love. This is the reason why God himself loves all his Creatures, because
there is a participation of his Goodness in them. There are some Relics of
Gods Image in profane men, that God bears a general Love unto, that we also
may do the like.

2 Love is a due debt to every man. Romans 13.8. Owe nothing to any man but to
love one another; this debt is owing from every man, it must be continually
paying, and yet ever owing. The Book of Love must never be crossed; although ye
do never so many kindnesses one to another; yet still you owe more. He pays
not his d^bts, that rendereth not Love. This is a debt that grows due faster
than it can be can be paid, and must be always paying.

3. Because all are partakers of the same humane Nature: That they are men, and
reasonable Cr^atures, and made as thou wast, after the Image of God; natura
communis and societas rationis, the common nature and participation of Reason
with us should draw our Love to them. The most brutish Creatures that are, and
the most cruel, yet are loving to one another of the same kind; though one
beast of another kind has Antipathy against another. Shall man be more brutish
and savage than Bears, Lions, and Tigers? As Solomon bids the the Sluggard to
go learn of the Pismire, Diligence; so we may bid the hard-hearted man, to
learn of Wolves and Tigers, to be loving one to another.

4. Because we know not who among men belong not to Gods Election of Grace,
therefore we are to love them, and to wish them all Grace and Glory. And the
reason of the Schoolmen is, because every man being a reasonable Creature, is
capable of Grace and Glory. The prophanest man in the world, is not altogether
an hopeless man, unless it be such a one as has sinned the sin against the
Holy Ghost.

5. Because a good man must be perfect in his Love, even as God is perfect: He
loves the good and the bad; he causes his Sun to shine upon the just and the
unjust. Be ye perfect therefore (says our Savior) as our heavenly Father is
perfect. To love them that love you, what reward have you? Do not even the
Publicans the same? If you salute your brethren only, what do ye more than
others? do not even the Publicans the same? The first Argument is ab utili and
inutili. If ye love them which love you only, what reward have you? That is, ye
lose your reward, ye shall have no reward from God, who does neither for the
present, nor for the future, reward such. Now because our Savior mentions
reward, we must not therefore think any merit in our Love. The Reward which God
gives, is of Grace, not of Debt. Good works are rewarded, because God has
promised a Reward: They are not meritorious, because they have no proportion to
the Reward. The second Argument is drawn a comparatis. Do not even the
Publicans the same? but yet there is a vast difference implied, If you love
them only that love you, then there is no difference between my Disciples and
Publicans; my Disciples do no more than they do: but your Love must be far more
extensive than their Love; ye must love such whom they do not Love; ye must do
more good than they can or will do: ye must exceed Publicans, Sinners,
Heathens, Pharisees, in Love and the Offices thereof.

The Publicans among the Jews, were such as received and gathered up the Roman
Emperor's Customs, Taxes, and Tribute, who were a very abomination to the
Jews, they were a people generally hated: they were an unjust, defrauding
oppressing sort of men. No Jew would be a Publican, but abhorred the Office;
because they disdained to oppress their own Nation, therefore they were (for
the most part) Heathens; and to show what vile people they were, they are
usually joined with Harlots, Sinners, Heathens, yea the worst of men. Now says
our Savior, These wicked Publicans do love those who love them; even Publicans
will return kindness for kindness. The vilest of men do love, and because they
love, do much good to them they love. There is a mutual exchange of kindnesses,
of beneficences between wicked men. Luke 6.32. Our Savior says, what thank
have ye, if ye love them who love you? for sinners also love, those who love
them: It is no great matter, for a man to love those who love him. The Greek
word there for Sinners, is (...). The Word signifies notorious, vile,
abominable sinners, such as sell themselves to Sin and Satan to work iniquity,
even such as these will do good to those who do good to them. How does this
appear? read v. 33. If ye do good to them who do good to you, what thank have
you? for sinners also do even the same. Look what external Office of Love any
do to Sinners, they will return all Offices of Love which lie in their power
back upon them. If you visit them, Sinners will visit you: If you feed and
cloth them in their necessities, they will feed and cloth you in your
necessities. This appears, ver. 34. where our Savior mentions a particular
act of Love. If ye lend to them, of whom you hope to receive, what thank have
you, for sinners also lend to sinners. Now whence is it that such good Offices
come out of Nazareth? I answer.

1. Because it is the nature of Love, not only of the Grace of Love, planted by
the Spirit of Grace; but also natural Love, planted by God in the Souls of all
men, to return Love for love, kindness for kindness, good for good. Magnes
amoris amor; Love is the Loadstone of Love. As the Loadstone by his virtue
draws Iron to it; so Love shown and manifested, draws the Heart and
Affections of others to it. Natural Love is not sordid and ignoble, but is free
and ingenuous, and is ambitious to requite.

2. Because the worst of men think themselves obliged to love those who love
them. They know they cannot satisfy their obligation to them, but by a
proportionable return of Love to those who love them. Wicked men who make no
Conscience of loving of God, though they are under the strictest and highest
Obligations that can be to love him, yet they make some Conscience of loving
such as love them.

3. Because of the benefit and profit accrewing to wicked men by reciprocal
returns of mutual-love; there is a mutual giving and receiving benefits: They
love for civil and profitable respects, though it be not lasting; and when the
fuel cease, the flame goes out.

4. There is pride in the heart of wicked men, which makes them disdain to be
beholden to others for their kindnesses: Therefore they do return Love for
Love, kindness for kindness.

Here then ye may see, that there is a Love in men which is not Charity:
Natural Love and Charity differ as much as Gold from Dross and Dung. Publicans,
though eminently loving, yet were very wicked. Sin and Natural Love can agree,
but not Sin and Charity. This Love and Hatred of Godliness can dwell together
in one Soul; but Hatred and Charity cannot lie together in one heart. It is
then but a sandy foundation for any man to build his hopes of Salvation, upon
his living lovingly among his loving Neighbors, and doing good to such; even
such hopes Publicans and Sinners may have. Therefore he that expects Heaven
for his reward, must do more than others. What do you more than others, says
our Savior? Mat. 5.47. The Argument runs thus. If your Love do no more than
the Love of others, than your Love is no better than the Love of others. But
the Love of Saints must do more than the Love of Sinners: My Disciples must
love more than Publicans; so that the Question is preceptive, commanding every
one, who claims propriety and Interest in Christ to outdo others in offices
of Love and Charity.

CHAP. XI. I come in the second place, to show, How we must manifest our Love
in general to the wicked. Here consider, of what we must beware, and what we
must do.
1. Of what we must beware.
1. WE must not approve of, or delight in their Sins. God loves the wicked,
but in no wise approves of them in their sins: We must hate the Vice, but not
the Person: God hates not the Persons of Devils, but their Sins: We must follow
God in this: hence are those Phrases in Scripture of God's loathing, hating,
abhorring the Sins of the wicked, they are an abomination to him; and we must
by no means approve of their Sins, and delight in them. Their Sin must not be
our joy: that which is God's dishonor, must be our grief, yea it must be our
hatred, as it is Gods. Can a Child see his Father disgraced by men, and his
Bowels not yearn? If God be as dear unto us as a Father, we cannot but rise
against them that dishonor him. Gods Glory must be dearer to us than all
things.

2. We must not any way encourage them walking in their Sins. God loves the
unjust, yet he threatens them with all woes and curses, and with damnation. He
tells the unclean person, that he will judg^ him: He tells the drunkard, that
there is a woe unto him: He tells the proud, that they are an abomination to
him: He tells all the wicked, that he will not hold them guiltless, that he
will turn them all into Hell. The Lord gives them not the least hint of mercy,
to cause them to walk presumptuously in their sins. We must say to our Friends
and Neighbors that walk in sinful ways, how do ye hope to be saved? what
grounds of confidence have ye, while ye live in such sins? Certainly, ye will
undo your Souls for ever, if you go on in such and such sins.

2. What we must do.
We must admonish and reprove them; in which duty we are too faulty. Christ did
reprove wicked men to their faces. How tartly did he deal with the Scribes and
Pharisees for their Hypocrisy, and with the Jews also? How boldly did the
Prophets reprove the great Ones; they would spare none, if they were wicked.
But ye will say, that Christ and the Prophets did reprove them as Ministers;
and they were immediately sent from God to reprove those particular persons. It
is true; yet Ministers in public may reprove the same sins in other persons as
ever the Prophets did. But we rather speak of private reproof and admonition,
which duty concerns every man.

Therefore observe these things. Art thou a member of a Family and see thou
sin to grow there in any Person? thou art faithfully to reprove and admonish.
Have thou kindred or friends whom thou dearly love walking in evil ways? then
reprove and admonish. Do any of thy Familiars sin in thy company, then reprove
and admonish them. Art thou in the Company of Strangers, that swear and curse,
and profane the holy Name of God, give a loving check to them, Why do ye curse
and swear?

Perhaps ye will say, they regard it not. It is no matter, Thou do thy duty.
Ye will reply; We have done so and they do not reform. Yet still reprove them;
God may make thy reproofs effectual one time or other: God is patient and
long-suffering; so must we be also. -- You will say, they scoff and scorn at
reproof. -- I answer, Then avoid their fellowship as much as thou can. We do
express more Love to one another, by reproving one another, than by any thing;
it is a sign we desire the good of one another Souls. True Love is mixed of
sweetness and sharpness: It is a kind of (...), a bitter-sweet: it has not
only sweet meats, but pills, corrosives, as well as healing plasters: it can
wound as well as heal; yea it must wound that it may heal. If a Christian see
seculent matter that nourishes vice, cleave to any one, true love will cause
him to strain a point of kindness to purge it out, albeit with more rough than
pleasing Physic; faithful are the wounds of such a friend. Prove. 27.6. Melius
est cum severitate diligere, quam cum lenitate decipere. Better is a severe
kind of Love, than a deceitful Lenity.

There are two reasons, why we must in Love to the wicked, thus behave our
selves.

1. Because our Love to them must principally aim at their conversion,
reformation and salvation. As God labors by his goodness to draw men to
repentance, so must we by our Love; and what better course can we take than by
reproving them, by telling them of the fearful danger they are in, and that
such courses will undoubtedly bring them to Hell. When wicked men shall see we
dislike their courses, and grieve at them, God may set it home upon them, to
make them the more sensible of their own sins. Should we not show our dislike
of such courses, we should harden and confirm them in their sins, and so to be
an occasion of their desperate impenitency.

2. Because otherwise we show neither Love to them, nor to our selves: we make
our selves partakers of their sins: neglect of reproof is a tacit consent to
them in their sins: should we any way encourage them, we should be abettors of
them: Should we any way delight in their sins, God would lay them to our score.

CHAP. XII.
Sect. 1.
THE third thing I am to treat of, is, Love to our Enemies. Here in the first
place, Let us consider, what this Love is, and wherein it consists.

1. It is not a Love in word and in tongue, but an affectionate Love, a Loving
in heart and in deed. Romans 12.10. be kindly affectioned one to another: (...),
be naturally affectionate, as the Dams among Creatures, are naturally
affectionate to their young ones. Gods command [Love thine enemies] reaches
the heart, and enjoins thee to affect them, as well as the tongue, to speak
loving words unto them.

2 It is a Love, that sets us upon the exercise of all duties of Love toward
them.

1. To love them with a Love of benevolence, to bless them that curse you, to
wish them good when they wish you evil, to speak well of them, when they speak
all manner of evil of you, this is to love our enemies.

2. To be willing to pardon their private injuries done unto us.

So the Parable of the two debtors teaches us, Mat. 18.25. The King pardoned
one which owed him ten thousand talents: and he was to pardon his fellow that
owed him an hundred pence; which thing because he would not do, his Lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due
unto him. Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man defers his anger, and it is his
glory to pass over a transgression. Men think it but baseness and cowardliness
to put up wrongs; but God says, it is his wisdom, his glory, his discretion.
Suppose thine enemies have done thee great wrongs, and many injuries; the more
is thy love manifested.

3. Heartily to rejoice in the gifts and parts of our enemies, and in
whatsoever is is excellent in them, and to be glad of their prosperity, and to
lament when it is otherwise with them. Thus David made Lamentation for Saul, 2 Samuel 1. v. 19. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places. v. 24 25. Ye
daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet with other
delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. How are the mighty
fallen in the midst of the battle!

4. To love them with a Love of beneficence: To do them all the good we can; to
do all the good we can to their bodies, to do them good speedily and without
delay, and constantly without any willing neglect, when it lies in our power.
Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you. Mat. 5.44. If thine enemy
hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him drink; for in so doing, thou shall heap
coals of fire upon his head. Romans 12.20. either coals of conversion, or co^ls
of confusion.

5 To love them with a religious Love, Love your enemies, pray for them which
despitefully use you, Luke 6.28. Pray for their health when they are sick; pray
for their lives when they are in the gates of death; pray for their
deliverance, when they are compassed about with dangers, or oppressed with
troubles: pray for their Conversion, Pardon and Salvation. Suppose wicked men
vex thy Soul as the Sodomites did Lot for righteousness sake, and hate thee for
thy Love, yet pray for them. So David did, Psalm 109.4.5. For my Love they are
my adversaries, but I give my self unto prayer. Suppose they persecute thee
even to the death, yet thou art to pity them, and pray for them. Thus our
Savior prayed for his enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do. St. Stephen also prayed heartily for all his Persecutors. Lord, lay not
this Sin to their charge. He prayed heartily for them, when they were stoning
him to death. When David's enemies were plotting his death, he prayed for their
good, he humbled his Soul with fasting, and clothed himself with Sackcloth
Psalm. 35.13. So St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.12. Being reviled, we bless, etc. being
defamed we entreat. The hellish rage of enemies must move you to show your
heavenly love to them. This is the Love we must show to our enemies, and this
Love exceeds that of Publicans, and that for these reasons.

1. Because their Love is extended no farther than to their brethren their
benefactors; where they find Love, there they return Love; they return good to
none but to such from whom they receive good; where no Love is shown, there
they will show no Love; they will return evil for evil; What others measure to
them, they will measure the same to them again.

2. Because their Love at best, is but verbal and complemental, consisting
rather in wishing than in supplying. They have words at will, Oil and Butter
enough in their mouth to supply all, but they keep all to themselves, they have
little to spare to their Neighbor, whatever his need be. They give as good
words as need to be, Depart in peace, be warmed, and filled. but give him not
those things that are needful. Jam. 2.16.

3. Because the Love of Publicans lasts no longer than their friends Love
lasts; they often change in their affections. How often is the Love of carnal
men turned into Hatred, and their friend-ship into enmity? the Love of
Publicans is but Love of retaliation; but this Love is a constant Love. Let
their enemies smile or frown, they love them. Let their enemies do good to them
or do evil, still they love them, and do good unto them; let their enemies
bless or curse them, yet they love them; yea when their enemies are in their
height of malice, they love them and pray for them. Many waters of their
enemies unkindness, and the raging floods of their enemies malice, shall
neither quench it nor drown it. They may cool it, but cannot quench it: they
may for a while keep down the Flames, but cannot put out the coal of Love
within them.

SECT. II. Now I will show, bow no Publicans or wicked men can love their
enemies.
1. THey may speak fair to their enemies, but this is not Love: their words are
smoother than oil, yet then their hearts are full of gall and bitterness, and
of mischievous devices. Joab spoke friendly to Abner, while his heart was full
of murderous intents.

2. They may salute their enemies, yet then, as Judas, they may seek an
occasion to betray them, as he did, by a kiss and an embrace: and while they
flatter them, they spread a net for their feet, making them a sure prey: and if
their feet be entangled, they are fast enough for running away.

Yet no wicked man can, or does Love his enemies, so as to wish well to them as
often as they have opportunity: they cannot, they will not pray for them, but
when occasion is given, they will curse such as bless them, and will deal
despitefully with them. The reasons are these.

1. Because this Love is a fruit of the Spirit, and proceeds from grace. And
it is as possible for Thorns to bring forth grapes, as for a wicked man to
bring forth such fruits of the Spirit. This Love that I speak of, grows no
where out of Paradise, but in a gracious heart: there is no such flower to be
found in Natures Garden. Though men naturally love their kindred, and their
friends, yet they cannot love their enemies. Naturally men hate their enemies;
Nature judges it seemly and ju^^ to to be revenged on enemies; to give the
same measure that their enemies measure to them. Every natural man is of the
Pharisee's judgment, That we are bound to love them that love us, and hate our
enemies. Hence it is, that men bring Arguments to justify themselves in their
malicious actings against their enemies, and satisfy themselves with their own
fallacious argumentations.

That wicked men cannot love their enemies, will appear, if we consider what
their hearts are filled with. Romans 1.29. The Apostle says, they are filled
with all unrighteousness, wickedness, malitiousness, full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity. Did not God set a dam, and keep within the banks,
those seas of malice in men's hearts, the whole world would soon be drowned in
the flood of maliciousness. Now before it is possible for a wicked man to love
his enemies, his heart must be emptied of that envy, hatred and malice: the
Spirit of regeneration must in a wonderful manner dry up this Sea of
wickedness, and they must be brought to cast out Envy, Hatred and Malice out of
their Hearts, as they would Toads out of their Bosoms.

3. Because they must first deny themselves, and become patient and meek in
Spirit, and be content to suffer injuries, affronts, (...) much evil-dealings,
before they can bring their hear^ to love them that acted all enm^^^ agai^^^
them. Oh What Grace is required to bri^^ the hearts of men to be meek, when
provoked and to be content to suffer much evil.

SECT. III.
Quest. HOw must our Love be extended to the enemies of God, of his Church,
his, Truth, his Saints? For even to these we must manifest some Love, in
praying for them.

Resp. In answer hereunto, I desire you to consider these things:

1. Pray that God would put hooks into the Nostrils of these Leviathans, that
they might not always make havoc of the Church of God; that God would
frustrate the malicious designs of mighty Nim^ods, and bring their enterprises
to naught. Thus David prayed, that God would turn the Wisdom of Achitophel into
foolishness.

2. Pray that God would open their eyes, that they may see their own madness in
kicking against the pricks, and that all their plots, counsels, malice against
the Church will undoubtedly turn to their own destruction without re^^^^ance.
How did St. Stephen's prayer ^^ke (...) St. Paul, who was one of his
per^^^utors from a Blasphemer and a Persecutor, ^od made him a great Instrument
of his Glory, and a choice vessel of his mercy. But yet when wicked men openly
and wilfully manifest their hatred and malice against God, we must be friends
to none that are enemies to God. Thus David says unto God, Do not I hate them
that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I
hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. Psalm. 139 27.22. I
hate none but Gods enemies, those I count mine enemies. I am not troubled at
him that wrongeth my person or good name, but at him that blasphemeth my God,
and persecuteth his Truth, and his Saints for the name of Christ; these do I
count my enemies. I have have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will
not sit with wicked, Psalm. 26.5. He would not so much as sit with them, because
he hated them. As friendship with the world is enmity with God, so to contract
friendship with the wicked, is to join with Gods enemies, and to cause him to
turn enemy to him that so does. See what a sharp check was given to Jehoshaphar
for joining in friendship with two wicked Kings, as Ahab and Jehoram, 2 Chronicles.
12.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord. David did set light by the hatred
of the world, but yet strived stoutly for the maintenance of Gods Glory,
insomuch that he would undertake open war against all the Enemies of God. Hence
sprang all those fearful curses and imprecations that David in many Psalms does
wish against the wicked for their enmity against God, and hatred of him. Read
Psalm. 109. and see how David there does curse Judas, and all the enemies of the
Gospel.

These imprecations against Gods enemies are uttered sometimes.

1. Per modum pronuntiationis, non per modum optionis, by way of prediction,
what will befall them. As for instance; Let them O Lord be confounded, and put
to shame. This is not so much to wish their confusion, as a prediction that
they shall be confounded, and put to shame.

Sometimes when the destruction of the enemies of God is wished or desired,
desiderium optantis ad justitiam punientis, non ad poenam refertur: the wish is
directed to Gods Glory, not so much desiring the misery and punishment of the
wicked enemies. So Psalm. 58.10.11. The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees
the vengeance, be shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked; so that a man
shall say, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous; verily there is a God
that judges in the earth. Gods Glory manifested in the destruction of the
wicked, is matter of rejoicing to the Saints, not simply their destruction.

3. It is ad remotionem culpae, non ad destructionem peccantis, that Sin might
be removed, not that the Sinner should be destroyed.

Quest. But how are godly men said to hate, and how may they hate wicked men?

Resp. 1. We must hate their sins, not their persons, all their sins as well as
one sin, and in all wicked men as well as in one wicked man.

2. We must hate them as they are Gods enemies; not as they are our own
particular enemies. David did humble himself for his own enemies; but as for
the enemies of God and his Church, them he hated with a perfect hatred.

3. Our hatred must be with hope and desire of their conversion, and not with
despair. And in this there is more Love shown than hatred; we must hate them as
Gods enemies, yet not plot their evil in any thing, but pray for their good,
and do them all the good we can, as occasion serves; Grace only can do this.
Here see the excellency of Grace, it makes a man truly to hate sin in all, and
yet to love all likewise.

CHAP. XIII.
IN the fourth place I am to show, That Godly men must especially love one
another. True Love, says St. Augustine, is, motus animi ad fruendum Deo
propter ipsum; se, and proximum, propter Deum; A motion of the Soul to the
enjoying of God for himself, and himself and his Neighbor for Gods sake:
Wherefore as God is the Savior of all men, but especially of them that
believe; So a Christian is to be a lover of all men, but especially those of
the household of Faith. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also
that is begotten of him, 1 Job. 5.1. And this he does, as being a better
argument of true goodness, than his believing. For if the Question be, whether
a man be good, it is not demanded (says the same Father) what he believes,
but what he loves.

This love is strictly required of all Christians. 1 Pet. 1.22. See that ye
love one another with a pure heart, fervently; our Love to the Saints must be
fervent Love, and then pure and unfeigned Love.

As the Angels are called Seraphims from burning (as some think) because they
burn in Love to God and to his Saints, so there must be this Seraphical burning
Love in the Godly, to the Godly. David says, Psalm. 16.3. All my delight is in
the Saints. In the foregoing verse, he acknowledges he can bestow nothing upon
God: My goodness extends not to thee; therefore he manifests his Love to
God in loving his Saints that are in the earth; them he esteemed the excellent
of the earth: Godly men are the truly excellent; Grace is the truest dignity of
a man. [In whom is all my delight] I take no delight in any Company, more than
in the sweet and Godly fellowship and communion of Saints. Therefore Philemon
is commended by St. Paul for his Love to all the Saints. Col. 3.14. Above all
things put on Charity. The Apostle verse 12, presses them to get and exercise
sundry Graces: put on bowels of mercy, kindness, and humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another; and above all
things put on charity. The Apostle alludeth to Garments; the other Graces are
the inward Graces of a Christian; Love is the glorious Raiment of Needle Work.
Charity must be the vestis exterior, the outward Garment, the clothing of
Gold. But Calvin expounds the preposition (...) by propter, and not by super;
for all these things put on Charity. This is the Queen commands all other
Graces. Love produces the actions of all other Graces, non elicitive sed
imperative, it is Love that makes men merciful, and full of pity and compassion
to their distressed Brethren: Where no Love is, there is nothing but Fury,
Wrath and Madness, Envy and Contentions. It is Love that makes men humble,
preferring one another Gifts and Graces, rejoicing in one another Prosperity.
Where this Godly Love is not, there is nothing but repining at one another
Prosperity, rejoicing in the Evils of each other.

It is Charity that makes men meek and long-suffering, it will make a man put
up many reproaches, wrongs and injuries.

It is the want of this Love, that makes men account it cowardice to put up
wrongs; Oh say they, it is not the true mark of a Gentleman to put up wrongs;
but sure I am, it is the true mark of a Godly Christian. Will men prefer
Gentility before Christianity; and carnal wisdom which is Devilish, and comes
from Hell, above that wisdom which comes down from Heaven, and is Gentle and
Peaceable?

Love will make us to forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake
forgiveth us, as heartily, as freely, as fully as Christ does pardon our sins.
It is the want of this Love that makes men so revengful; Hence Love is said to
be the bond of perfectness, (in regard of the Church) Love uniteth all the
Members of Christ together; and makes them to perform their several duties to
each other. 2. In regard of all the Graces of Gods Spirit; Love stirs them
up, and sets every Grace to do their several offices. Hence Love is styled, the
fulfilling of the Law: it keeps men from doing evil, it sets men upon doing all
good.

CHAP. XIV.
THe Reasons why Christians must show special Love one to another, are these.

1. Because God himself bestows his most special Love, the riches of his
Love, upon the Godly; his everlasting Love is toward Jacob. As a man loves
his whole Family, but his special Love is to his Wife and Children. So God,
although he loves all the world, all his Creatures, yet his special Love is to
his Saints. God's common and ordinary Love to all mankind, to the wicked, is
but like the crumbs that fall from the rich man's Table; but his special Love and
Favor are the Dainties upon that Table, which none but his Church does feed
upon. God causes the Sun in the Firmament to shine upon the just and the
unjust. The light of the Sun is a great, yet common mercy; but God has
promised, that he will be a Sun and Shield to his Saints, and give both Grace
and Glory. God will give the Light of the Sun to the wicked, but the Godly only
shall enjoy the Light of his Countenance. He will give to the wicked Rain, the
Dew of the Clouds; but the Godly only shall have the Dew of Heaven poured on
them. If the Lord does bestow the chief of his Love upon his people, then must
we Love them as God does, and bestow the chief of our Love upon them.

2. Because Jesus Christ himself loves the Godly above all; he thinks
nothing too dear, too good for his Saints, his Blood, his Life, his
Righteousness, his Spirit, his Grace, his Glory, his Kingdom. He thought no
evil too great to suffer for his Saints, What Reproaches, what Blasphemies,
what contradictions of Sinners? What Pangs, what Sorrows, what Tortures, what
Agonies did his spotless Soul endure? if here be no Love to the Saints, where
is it? Ye then that profess your selves to be Christ's Disciples, imitate your
Master in this, in bestowing your best Love upon those that are truly Godly. By
this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, Joh.
13.35. In this sense to be a Disciple of Christ, is to be a Child of God; for
it is meant of a practical Disciple, one that learneth of Christ not only by
his Word to know his Will, but also by his Word and Spirit to follow him. It is
as if our Savior had said, your gifts of working Miracles, and casting out
Devils in my Name, your preaching my Word, your Praying, are not such signs
that ye are my Disciples, as your Mutual-Love. I your Master do love you, and
what is your Love one to another, but a reflected beam of my Love?

3. The Holy Ghost loves the Saints chiefly; he is pleased to make their
Hearts his Temple to live and dwell in. The Spirit has his residence in them,
he has desired them for his Habitation; he ever keeps home in a Godly man's
heart; he dwells in him, and shall be in him. And as himself, so his Graces
shall still abide in him. The anointing which ye have received from him,
abides in you. 1 John 2.27. The comforter shall abide with you for ever, Joh.
14.16. So shall his Comforts too, though not always alike perceived. The Spirit
dwelling in a Christian, storeth him plentifully. His Divine Power gives him
all things pertaining to Life and Godliness. This unfeigned Love to the
Children of God, is a special and principal fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. The
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith. Love is in the forefront. Now it is by this Spirit of God, that Men and
Women are regenerate and born of God. By this Spirit they are born again, and
made the Children of God, and the same Spirit which gives them this new birth,
does bring forth in them this fruit of Love. Now seeing the All-glorious
Trinity love the Saints so dearly; so peculiarly, is there not reason we should
do so? If we love not as God loves, in setting our special Love, where he sets
his special Love, we cannot be followers of God as dear Children.

4. The Holy Angels are ready to do Godly men all the offices of Love, and take
special care of them: now the Saints shall be in Heaven as the Angels of God
are; let us then be like them here upon Earth. The Angels of God are willing to
do any office of Love for the meanest Saints: they are their ministering Spirits
for their good. Shall not we then love those whom the glorified Angels do so
dearly and tenderly Love?

5. Because of that near union which the Saints have with God and Christ,
therefore we must bestow our special Love upon them. Christ and his Saints are
so nearly united to each other, that they are said to be one: they are one in
Spirit. So that if God and Christ have our special Love, the Saints that are
one with God and Christ must have our special Love also. And he that does not
love a Saint, does not love God with special Love; he that does not love the
Saints above others, does not love God above all things. God, Christ, and all
the Saints are but one entire object of our Charity: only here is the
difference; God and Christ is to be loved for himself, and the Saints are to be
loved for God, and in God: In God, not without him; for God, by virtue of his
Command. So that our Love to the Saints is per redundantiam, it does redound
from God to the Saints. Christ and the Saints are as a Man and Wife; he that
does not heartily love the Wife, does not truly love the Husband, because they
are but one Flesh: So it is in our Love to Christ and his Saints, who make but
one mystical Body. He that loves not the Members of the Body, loves not the
Head.

Let us suppose the glorified Body of Christ in the Heavens were upon the Earth
with us, no doubt but we would be very officious and respective of it, and in
an holy Emulation we would strive who could manifest greatest Love to his
glorified Body. How would ye cry out Oh yonder is the Body that was whipped and
scourged, buffeted, peirced, nailed, and broken for us; that glorified Body,
was the Body that was crucified for me: Let me be Anathema Maranatha, if I
should not love him that loved me in so wonderful a manner. But as our Savior
said to Judas repining at the cost bestowed upon him, Me you shall not have
always, but the poor ye shall have always among you; so may he say to us, Me
you have not among you; but I leave among you a most fit Object for your Love.
I leave my poor Saints to be with you always, which I do as much respect, as I
do this glorified Mass united to my Godhead. What Love ye bestow on my Saints,
I will set it on my score, as if ye had done it to my glorified Body. Therefore
such do but prate of Love to Christ, as do not love his Members. And were the
Lord Jesus upon Earth, conversant among men; they that grieve, mock, and hate
the Saints, and shun their company, would do the same to Christ himself. Tell
me, can that sore eye that cannot endure to look upon a Candle, but it smarteth
and aketh, can it endure to look upon the Sun? He that can not endure to see a
spark of Grace and Holiness shining in a Saint, but he hates and scoffs at it,
would that man endure to see the Sun of righteousness himself? Doubtless, such
men would hate Christ, if he were living among them, as they do the Saints.

6. Because where the special Good is, upon that must our special Love be
bestowed. It is the rule of the Schoolmen, ut simpliciter ad simpliciter, sic
magis ad magis, et maxim ad maximee; that is, If that which is simply good be
to be loved, then that which is better is to have more Love; and that which is
the best good is to have the best Love. What is the best thing in man, if Grace
be not? will ye say Riches is better than Grace? then a rich Man (because rich)
is to be preferred and loved above a Godly Man Will ye say Beauty is better
than Grace? then a fair Face is to be esteemed above the Beauty of Holiness.
Will ye say the endowments of Natural Parts is better than Grace? then an
Heathen Philosopher may be loved better than a Child of God. Is moral Honesty
better than Grace? then a dunghill covered with Snow, is better than an House of
Marble full of Gold. What are the things men love most? take a survey of them
all; and ye shall find Gods Image in the Saints is best. What does God regard
in men? do you think he regards a rich Nabal for his Riches, an exalted Haman
for his Honors; a voluptuous Esau for his Pleasures; or an indiscreet Woman
for her Beauty? Do ye think he looks upon Greatness in any respect? These
things are not the good he loves, but Grace only. Grace is Gods own Nature,
and shall he turn his eyes from himself? Grace is Spiritual Riches, Spiritual
Beauty, Spiritual Honor; it is all excellency in a Spiritual way, therefore
chiefly to be beloved. Did ye see an Angel in his Glory, you would say, indeed
he is a very lovely Creature; it is Gods Image that makes him so, and it is the
same for Substance in a Saint on Earth: Want of Love to the Saints, is our own
blindness, because we do not conceive the worth and excellency of Grace in the
Saints. Swine trample upon Pearl, because they know not the worth of it: So
wicked men slight the Godly, not perceiving the worth of Grace in them.

7. Because our Love to the Saints manifests, that we are of the Communion of
Saints. Love is the Soul and Life of the Communion of Saints; it is the bond of
perfection; it binds the Saints up in one Body; it is the Cornerstone which
holds the sides of the Wall together; it is that which makes Christ's Church
like his Coat without Rent. It was the opinion of some Philosophers, That the
whole world was but one Body, and that there is one Soul of the World, that
holds the parts of the World: so much more, there is a Spirit of Communion
which uniteth the Members of it with the Spirit of Love. And, as the members of
a Man's Body will fall asunder, were there not uniting parts in them, as Sinews
and Muscles joining them together; so the Communion of Saints, is held and
maintained by the bond of Love.

See how diversely the Scripture sets forth the Communion of Saints by such
terms, as do call for special Love. They are said to be Brethren; must not one
Brother love another above a stranger? they are said to be Members of one Body;
must not one Member help another Member of the same Body, before others of
another Body? They are all said to be one Spouse of Christ; all the Saints
together make up the Church, which is the Wife of Christ: So the Saints should
love one another, as if there were no Saints but themselves. They are all said
to be made partakers of one Divine Nature. Who will not love his own, Flesh,
his own Nature better than another? In loving the Saints thou do but love
thy self. They are said to be one Household; the Church is called, The Household
of the Faithful. As in a Family, there is one Board, one Bread, one Cup among
near Relatives: So Christians should have one Heart, one Mind, one Affection,
and should hold and cleave together. Such Love there was among Christians in
the Primitive times, that the Heathens observing it, said, Oh how do the
Christians love one another!

8. Because we are to live with them to Eternity, therefore Saints should have
our chiefest Love. When all the wicked of the world shall be turned into Hell,
be they never so great, or never so dear unto us; ye that are Saints, ye shall
lie together in Abraham's Bosom, dwell together in those Mansions, which Christ
your Head and your Savior has prepared for you in the highest Heavens,
enjoying God together, following Jesus Christ the Lamb, the Bridegroom
together, praising God together; ye shall reign with Christ together, be
glorified together. Are your Friends rich and mighty on Earth; and are the
Saints poor, despicable, and miserable in the World? yet these poor Saints
shall live in Heaven with you, when the cruel Nimrods of the Earth, shall be
turned into Hell.

Is there not Reason that we should love them most, that are Fellow-Heirs of
one and the same Kingdom, our Eternal Neighbors in Heaven, fellow-Citizens of
the Heavenly Jerusalem? It is a true Axiom of the Schools; Societas fruitionis
divinae est fundamentum charitatis; ergo inter proximorum praecipua charitatis
objecta, sunt sancti homines, (i. e.) The common participation of one and the
same eternal Glory and Happiness, is the main Foundation of Charity. Therefore
they infer truly, that among our Neighbors, the Saints are the chiefest
Objects of our Love.

9. Because indeed the Godly are the best men on the Earth, whatsoever the
World does think of them. David calls them the excellent of the earth, the
Pillars of the Earth; they are called Gods Jewels, the Apple of Gods Eye, Gods
beloved. Persons, the more excellent they are, the more to be beloved; they are
called the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Look over the Book of the Canticles, and
see by what Names and Titles God calls his Saints; and then ye must needs
confess, they are Persons highly to be loved.

CHAP. XV.
Sect. 1.
I Come now to show, How we are to love one another. The manner of our
mutual-Love, the Scripture sets down by two expressions: 1. As thy self. 2. As
Christ loved us.


1. In the first place, Thou must love thy Neighbor, as thy self.

1. Who is there, that wishes not all the good that may be to himself? Does
any sober man wish any harm to himself? So must thou heartily desire the good
of others. Thus Moses wished, That all the Lords people were Prophets; he
wished every man like unto himself. So St. Paul desires from his heart, That
all Israel might be saved. Romans 10.1.

2. Who is not affected with his own Miseries and Afflictions? So must thou;
when thou see others in Misery, Thou must weep with them that weep, and make
their Losses and Miseries to become thine own.

3. Who does not pray heartily for himself, for Gods Blessing on all things he
sets his hand unto? So must thou pray for others, with the same fervency which
thou usest in praying for thy self; pray for that which will do them most good,
that they may every way be the better for thee; that thou may find by
experience as Laban did, That the Lord has blessed them for thy sake.

4. Who does not endeavor his own good with all his might? The like care must
thou have of thy Neighbors good, especially of the Saints. Love is a diligent
Affection, and the Fountain of Diligence. Diligentia may well be derived a
diligendo, Diligence from Dilection, or Loving, the things (as one says) are
conjugate no less than the names. Thy Love must be a laboring Love; a Love,
that is full of mercy and good fruits. The Apostle ascribes Work and Labor
unto Love, because Love refuses no pains, it will spend and be spent, even
there, where is least Love returned for most expended.

5. Who does not rejoice in his own good? Thou do never envy thy self thine
own Happiness; So must thou rejoice in the Gifts, Parts, Graces, and Prosperity
of others. To envy at one another good, is some of the Poison of the old
Serpent, which he spitteth: It is the principal quality of Devils to envy the
Saints Happiness.

6. Who is there, that is weary in doing good to himself? When does a man cease
to do good to himself? So must thou do to others. Thou must never be weary in
well-doing to them; A Friend (a true Christian Friend) loves at all times,
Prove. 17.17. Let thy Love to thy Brother be without envy in Prosperity; and
without weariness in Adversity When the feigned Lover is to his Friend as the
Cuckoo, that affords you his company, till you be weary of him in Summer, but
before Winter comes takes his leave; Be thou to thy Brother, as the
Blackbird, that keeps constantly with us; and is of use (if need be) to feed
us in Winter.

Every man knows what is good for himself; thence does a good man conclude,
if Justice, Mercy, Knowledge, Grace, Credit be good for me, then are they good
for my Brother also; and he will labor to procure them, that he may serve his
Brother through love, Gal. 5.13. intending his good more than his own, in
loving of him.

True it is, a man in loving another, may have some respect to himself; if he
be Wise, Judicious, Learned, to learn of him: If Humble, Loving, Holy, to
imitate him: If any way beneficial, to be a Gainer by him, in a way of God, not
of Lust, or of the World. But this is not the first and principal thing for
which the Christian loves another, but as the result; not as the moving Cause,
but as the Reward of Love; as Man and Wife, by showing more Love to each other
for Love's sake, do reap more Love from each other.

SECT. II.
II. WE must love one another as Christ loved us. Christ loved us when we were
enemies to him, Herein is the Love of God commended to us, that when we were
enemies, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. Yea, when we were enemies to Christ, and
he might have wrought our destruction, yet then he sought to us for our Love,
entreating us to be reconciled unto him; he came to seek the lost Sheep of the
house of Israel. What surpassing Love is this, That the great God should come,
and seek to his own Creatures for their Love; that the Cedar should make suit
to, the Thistle? What had Christ lost by it, if every Son of Adam had been
turned into Hell? Could he not have made another World of Men to have glorified
him, and to reign with him in Glory? yet that he should seek to us to be
reconciled to him, here is surpassing Love. So must we love one another. Are we
injurious to one another, and at variance one with another, then let us seek to
one another for reconciliation.

Christ so loved us, that he was willing to lay down his Life for us. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, 1 John 3.16.
Christ's could not show greater Love to us than in dying for us. Christ's Love to
us is the ultimum resolubile, the last thing into which all his actions in the
work of our Redemption is resolved. Do ye ask, Why God was incarnate, why he
suffered death, why he endured such contradiction of Sinners, such Mockings,
such a bloody Agony in the Garden, this answers all, Because he loved us. I
live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself to death
for me, Gal. 2.20. The Apostle speaks here in the Person of all Believers.
These following Reasons may demonstrate to us, that Christ's Love was the Cause
that made him to lay down his Life for us.

R. 1. Because there was no desert in us. It is not our Love to him first, that
made him to love us; no, we love him, because he loved us first: Our Love to
him, is the effect and consequent of his Love to us, not the cause of his Love.
What is there in any man considered as fallen from God, that can deserve such
incomprehensible Love, as that God should dye for us? Can Sin deserve the Love
of Christ? What is a natural Man, but a very Body of Sin? We do not, nor can we
Love God, because we are enmity to him. Amor descendit, non ascendit. There is
more Love in a Father to a Child, than in a Child to a Father: His Love did
first descend to us, before our Love could ascend to him. The Prophet Ezekiel
sets forth the odious and most undeserving condition of Man under a Parable of
a polluted Infant, when we were most forlorn, polluted, and most helpless, then
was the time of Love, Ezekiel. 16. When thou wast wallowing in thine own
filthiness, then was the time of Love.

2. Because Christ reaps no good by us. What if Adam and all his Posterity had
been damned, he had lost no whit of his Blessedness; he was infinitely happy
from everlasting, and so is to everlasting, and would be; had not a man been
partaker of his Glory, therefore it must needs be his mere Love to us; and such
a Love as does earnestly desire and tender our everlasting good and Salvation.
It was for our Reconciliation and Justification that he endured Wrath, he died
for our Redemptoin; he shed his Blood for us miserable Creatures, to make us
eternally happy, Sons of God, and Heirs of Salvation. What Motive or Ground had
Christ to dye and suffer, if it were not his mere Love to us; so that we may
well cry out with St. Augustine, O Lord, thou have loved me more than thy self,
because thou would dye for me, and not for thy self.

3. Because Christ laid down his Life being never desired of us, therefore mere
Love to us did incline him to dye for us. Had Men taken Counsel together, to
devise a means to pacify Gods Wrath; had men been let alone to themselves,
they would never have regarded Salvation at all. All our care would have been
how to sin, how to fulfill our Lusts; we should never have prayed, Lord send thy
Son into the world to dye for us, to save us, to redeem us from Sin and
Damnation; therefore it was his Mercy occasioned by our Misery, merely his Love
that made him to dye for us. When Gods Justice was pleading hard for the
damnation of sinful men, What do such Rebels here on earth? Why do thou not O
Lord, make these wretched Sinners to smart for their Rebellion? as Thou have
turned them out of Paradise, so turn them out of the World into Hell; Let them
know what it is to taste of the Forbidden Fruit; Then did Christ without suing
to him, plead as hard for us, Father spare them, and punish me; bless them, let
me be made a Curse; be at peace with them, let me endure thy Wrath: I will go,
and keep thy Law, because they have broken it; let the Sorrows of Hell compass
me about, that they may enter into thine unspeakable Joys; Love therefore must
be the mere Motive. Had we desired Christ to have laid down his Life for us,
there were some extrinsical Motive, yet Love still; but in that Christ was
found of them that sought him not, and in that he is made known to them, and
given to them, and for them that never sought after him, it is mere and
wonderful Love.

4. Because he was very willing to dye for us: Greater Love has no man, then
for a man to lay down his Life for his Friend. It is maximus fluxus, maximum
opus, maximum beneficium, argumentum irrefragabile dilectionis; The greatest
Flux of Love, the greatest work, the greatest benefit, an irrefragable argument
of Love, says Parisiensis. And to show his willingness, Christ says of his
Passion, desiderio desideravi, with a desire have I desired it. Christ did
earnestly desire to drink of the Cup of his Fathers Wrath, that we might not
taste it; would he have drunk of such a bitter Cup, if he did not love us? His
willingness to dye for us, is the commendation of his Love. He laid down his
Life for us; it was not in the power of Pilate, and all the Jews, his enemies,
to take away his Life from him: Christ did willingly dye. Indeed Pilate
condemned him; the Jews cried out, Crucify him, crucify him; they carried him
to Calvary as a Malefactor with Spears, yet if he had pleased, they could not
have put him to death. Had not his own free Love opened his heart, no Soldier
could ever have opened his side; no though Pontius Pilate should have had all
the Roman Legions, and the whole Power of the Empire under his charge. They
might as soon have plucked the Sun out of his Orb, as have sundered Christ's
Soul from his Body: As soon have brought a Sea of Waters out of a Rock, as have
spilt one drop of his Blood; unless he had yielded himself to death. Walk in
love, (says the Apostle) as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for
us an offering, and a sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.2.

Would ye but walk a few turns with Christ in the Garden, where he felt the
Agony in his Soul: Would ye go up to Calvary, and see what our blessed Savior
did there endure, then would ye say, Herein we perceive the Love of Christ, in
that he laid down his Life for us. When the Jews saw Christ weeping over
Lazarus, they cried out, Behold how he loved him: but go ye up to Mount
Calvary, look through his Stripes and Wounds, into his heavy and tormented
heart; look upon his striped back, upon his buffeted Face, upon his pierced
side, his bloody head, hands and feet, see what he did and suffered for us,
then ye cannot but say, behold how he loved us! Oh what manner of Love is this!

SECT. III.
NOw we must love one another, even as Christ has loved us. Now if Christ of
his mere Love, has laid down his Life for us, then we ought also to lay down
our lives for the Brethren. 1 John 3.16. This would have seemed an hard saying
to us, if it had been nakedly proposed in such terms as these, we ought to lay
down our lives for the Brethren; but the Apostle having before laid down such a
strong Argument aforehand, does in a most convincing manner infer this upon it,
as an undeniable conclusion, which cannot with any show of reason be gainsayed,
or contradicted. Christ the eternal Son of God, has manifested his singular
Love, in laying down his Life for us; we must therefore follow the Captain of
our Salvation in this incomparable act of Love. We were dearer to him than his
blood, than his Life; so the Saints good must be dearer to us than our hearts
blood, than our precious Life. Here I will lay down this Proposition.

That Christians being called unto it, ought to show so much Love to their
Brethren, as to lay down their Lives for them. In this Proposition, two things
are to be considered.

1. The Thing required. 2. The Condition supposed.
The Thing required is this, That Christians should lay down their Lives for
the Brethren. The Condition supposed is this, If they be called unto it. For
the former we must know, that although Christians must not think their Lives
too dear for the Brethren, yet it is in this as it is in other duties of Love
and Mercy toward men; the first and greatest Commandment must give Life unto
the second, which is like unto it. The first Table must have the chiefest
respect in our obedience to the second. That is, the Love of God, and our
regard of his Glory, commanded in the first Table (which is called, The first
and great Commandment) must have the chief sway in our hearts, to incline us to
the duties of Love toward man, enjoined in the second Table; for we must love
our Neighbor in the Lord, and for the Lord, and so the Love of God must have a
constraining and overruling power over us; the Love of God must first move us
to lay down our Lives for the Brethren, and then the Love of our Brethren,
being (as it were) comprehended in our Love of God, must move us thereunto. --
The Glory of God must be the principal end, that we must aim at, in doing good
to others. So especially in this great fruit of Love, when we lay down our
lives for them, then the good of our Brethren must be respected in the second
place, in as much as God is glorified in that good which they receive by that
means. So then, when any do in Christian Love lay down their Lives for their
Brethren, they do not dye for them only, but for the Lord chiefly and
principally. This the Apostle strongly proves to be required of Christians,
because Christ has showed such wonderful Love in laying down his Life tor us.
This indeed is an Argument unanswerable, but holds strongly a majori, from
the greater to the less. If Christ did lay down his Life for us, then ought we
much more to lay down our lives for the Brethren.

1. Christ was infinitely above us in Glory and Majesty, yet laid he down his
Life for us; much more ought we to lay down our Lives for the Brethren, who are
of the same Mould with our selves by nature, and also partakers of the same
precious Faith by Grace.

2. Christ being greatly offended by our sins, laid down his Life for us being
his enemies: much more ought we to lay down our Lives for those who are not
enemies, but Brethren, and that by the best bond, viz. the bond of Regeneration.

3. Christ's Death for us, was a matter of Humiliation and abasement to him who
was the Prince of Life, and Lord of Glory: But our death for our Brethren is an
advancement unto us. Some office and employment, which would be an abasement,
and dishonor to a Prince, may be a great Honor and Preferment to a mean
Subject. So in this case; Christ, though he were the Lord of Glory, the Prince
of Life, yet was content to dye for us, though his Death were a great abasement
to him in regard of his infinite excellency and divine Majesty. But for us, who
are sinful, and so mortal, and must return to dust, it is an advancement and
improvement of our death, when we are called to give our Lives for the Brethren.

SECT. IV.
I Come now to the Condition supposed, that is, If we be called unto it: For
this we must know, that many things are absolutely commanded, and all
Christians are to perform them in general without exception, such as the duties
of Believing and Repenting, and of bringing forth fruits meet for repentance,
which all Christians ought to perform by virtue of their general Calling. --
Some other are enjoined too as well as the former, but not without a more
special Calling. The duty of relieving the wants of others, is one of those
duties that is very much pressed in the Scripture; scarce any, more; yet this
is to be understood of those that have a special calling to it, namely those
whom God has enabled with outward means for this purpose, more or less. So the
duty of preaching the Gospel is straightly enjoined, but not to be exercised
without a lawful Calling to the work of the Ministry. Of this latter sort, is
the duty of laying down our Lives for the Brethren, which is not to be
exercised without a special calling. As for the madness of some fond Sectaries,
whereof we read in the ancient Stories of the Church, who would force men to
kill them that they might become Martyrs, it could not but proceed from the
suggestion of that wicked Spirit, who is a Murderer from the beginning.
Therefore this work of laying down our Lives for the Brethren, is not imposed
upon us, by virtue of our general calling, but must be done upon supposal of a
special Call.

Yet thus much we know, that there is a difference and distinction to be made
between the will and the deed in such cases. The will must be present with us,
by virtue of our general calling, as we are Christians; the deed and
performance it self must not be undertaken without special calling: that is, As
we are Christians, and have given up our names to Christ, we must have our
hearts so possessed with the Spirit of Brotherly and Christian Love, in
conformity to Christ and his Love, as that we must have a ready and willing
mind to undergo it, if the Lord shall call us to it. So the poorest Christian
that is so far from being able to give to another, that he needs to receiv^
himself, yet must be so possessed with Christian Love and Compassion, that he
would give if he had ability. He must have a pitiful heart; such an heart as
would open his hand, if he had what to give. -- So in this case, a Christian
must labor to bring his heart to be willing in Love to dye for his Brethren.
But for the actual performance of this work in laying down our lives for the
Brethren, it requires a more special call. As the Apostle says to the
Philippians, Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe,
but to suffer for his Name, Phil. 1.29. Where he shows, that suffering is a
thing given, a privilege bestowed upon some Believers, whereunto all Believers
are not called; that is, not in an eminent manner. Scarce any Believer can live
any long time in the world after his effectual calling and conversion, but that
he shall suffer for the name of Christ in some kind or other: but to suffer in
a more special and eminent degree, is given but to some, who are in a special
manner called unto it.

SECT. V.
THat we must have a special Call, before we lay down our Lives, will thus
appear.

1. We have a general^ Command to preserve Life: We must labor to preserve the
Life of an Ox, or an Ass when it is in danger, much more of a man: and if the
Life of others, then our own also; inasmuch as the Love we owe to our selves,
is the rule of our love toward others. Therefore so far is it from being a
duty imposed upon us, to thrust our selves rashly and of our own heads into the
mouth of death without a Calling, that we are bound not to desire it, lest we
be found guilty of our own Blood.

2. To lay down our Life for the Brethren without a special Call and Warrant,
may be a wrong to the Brethren, rather than a benefit; because thereby we
bereave our selves of doing them any further good in that way of Christian
Love, wherein we are to walk toward them here in the world by suffering death
without a warrant: Yet when we have a Call, we must not give back under
pretense, that we desire to to do them good by our Lives, but rather believe,
that the wisdom of God, who calls us to suffer, sees, that thus dying for
them, we shall more benefit them, and glorify God, than we could by escaping
death, and continuing in the world among them.

3. We cannot suffer death by the hands of Persecutors for the Brethren,
without the Sin of others, viz. of those that shed our Blood. Now a Christian
without a Call from God, has no warrant to give occasion to others, wilfully
to commit such a bloody Sin: but when we are called to it, we must take heed,
we do not sin our selves, in giving back under an hypocritical pretense of
being loath to give others an occasion of offending.

4. Our blessed Savviour himself, although he came into the world, purposely to
lay down his Life for the Brethren, yet did not willingly run upon his death,
but did diverse times shun the rage of his enemies, and even in his Infancy fled
from Herod's cruelty. And, when his hour was come, though he showed himself many
ways to be willing to lay down his Life, yet he did not thrust himself into the
hands of his enemies, but left them to contrive his death among themselves, and
so to take the guilt of his blood upon them. He could have saved the Priests
that cost they bestowed upon Judas, to hire him to commit that most horrible
treason. He could have prevented Judas, that he should not have taken that
booty, which cost him so dear; but he let them take their course, and exercise
their malice. He suffered Judas to make his bargain, the Highpriests servants
to apprehend him, and carry him to their Master: he would not of himself come
among them, till they fetched, and carried him in the nature of a Prisoner.

SECT. VI.
Quest. NOw then the question is, What that Call is, which is supposed as a
condition in this case, without which a Christian is not bound to lay down his
Life for the Brethren?

Resp. I answer, A Christian may be called to this in such Cases, as do more
immediately concern God; and in such as do more immediately concern the
Brethren.

As for those cases as do more immediately concern God, in which we may be
called to die for our Brethren, they may be diverse, as

1. When we are persecuted for the Name and Gospel of Christ, and are called to
confess the truth, with apparent danger of death, in such a case we are to lay
down our lives for Christ: and in such a case (in an inferior respect) we are
also to lay down our lives for the Brethren: inasmuch as we should rather choose
to die, than to give any just occasion of offense, or stumbling unto them, by
denying the truth. And on the other side, we should be content to dye for their
encouragement in the profession of the truth. Now, though this be a case that
does more directly and immediately concern God than our Brethren, yet it does
concern our Brethren also in an inferior respect. So in this regard, I think
there were few of those many thousand martyrs which have suffered for Christ,
but also they have suffered for their Brethren: and in such sufferings they are
to have regard to their Brethren, though principally to the Lord. Now we are
called thus to suffer, when we are brought before those in authority, and put
to it, either to deny the truth, or to suffer death,

2. When the Preachers of the Gospel cannot without danger of death declare the
whole counsel of God in things needful to Salvation, they must be content to
hazard their lives, rather than not to be faithful in that commission, which
the Lord has put them in. This does immediately concern the Glory of God, and
the discharge of their Consciences toward him: But it does also concern the
Glory of God in an inferior degree; and they must refuse both to deliver any
unsound Doctrine to them, to the endangering of their Souls, and abhor to keep
back any necessary truth from them, although their own lives should be in
apparent danger by that means.

SECT. VII.
ON the other side there are cases, that do more immediately concern the
Brethren, wherein we may be called to lay down our lives for them; yet in these
our principal aim must be at the Glory of God. As for Example.

1. If we be put to it to confess some things by others of the Godly, which may
bring them into danger through the malice of wicked men. In this case we should
rather dye than hurt them by such confessions, lest we be accessory to the
mischief, which by that means the Adversaries are like to bring upon them. I
have read of one Firmus, an holy Bishop of Tagesta, St. Augustine's Country,
in Africa, who when the Emperor (not then a Christian) required delivery, or
(at least) the discovery of a Christian, which he had with great care hidden
from the Tyrant, resolutely answered, Nee prodam, nee mentiar, I will neither
lie, nor betray my Brother: from which resolution, no torments then inflicted
(which were many and sharp) could draw or enforce him. Mr. Fox in his acts and
monuments tells us of Cuthbert Simpson, who being Deacon of the Protestant
Congregation in London, in Queen Mary's days, was apprehended and charged to
discover the names of those that were Members of the Congregation, which he
utterly refused to do, and would not yield to do it by any torture, but
constantly suffered death, and cruel wrackings also before his death; insomuch
that bloody Bonner did openly in the hearing of diverse persons, extol him, for
his wonderful patience. So, if Christians living under Popish Persecutors,
should be driven to meet together in Ships or Woods, or other private places to
perform the Worship of God together, if any Christian should be privy
thereunto, although himself might escape untoucht in Body, Goods, Liberty, upon
condition only, that he would detect and discover them, he ought rather to
endure the spoiling of all his Goods, or the loss of Liberty, or of Life,
rather than serve the malice of the Adversaries, in laying open the Brethren
unto the cruelty of malicious Enemies.

2. When any necessary duty is required at our hands for the good of the
Brethren, and of the people of God, which we are bound to perform, although
with hazard of our lives, we must be content to put our lives in our hands, and
not withdraw our hand from helping them in such a case. So those that are in
any Country called to the wars in defense of the Church against the Pope and
his adherents, or against the Turk, against Gog and Magog, and to stand up in
defense of the Gospel. In like manner those that are called by any special
relation to others, or any special office to supply others in time of the
Pestilence, or other infectious diseases, ought in Love to hazard their Lives
for their good, and not be wanting to them; unless in some Cases, when by
helping some they are like to hinder many more.

Therefore it is generally held, That the Ministers of the Gospel are not tied
to visit those that are sick of contagious diseases, because it would make
their people to shun them in the public Congregation, and so be an occasion of
depriving the people of the Ordinances of God, although themselves should
escape the infection. But yet, where there are diverse Ministers in the same
place, I should conceive it fitting, that one or more according to the number
of the infected, should be employed in this work, and that the public service
of the Congregation should be discharged by others. As when the Plague was at
Geneva in Calvin's time, there being diverse Ministers in in the City, three of
them (whereof Calvin was one) offered themselves to this service; and so it was
to be decided, by Lot, which of the three should be the man. Such cases
likewise may happen concerning the necessary relief of the Godly, who are
imprisoned or banished by Popish Persecutors; as many were in Queen Mary's
days. In a word; When any necessary duty, which we owe to the people of God,
may be likely to endanger our Lives, we must not shrink back to save our Lives.

SECT. VIII.
THe Reasons hereof are these.

R. 1. Because the Salvation of the Brethren must b^ preferred above all our
outward things whatsoever: their Souls must be preferred above our own Bodies;
therefore if our suffering loss of Liberty and Life be any way advantageous for
their Salvation, we are to endure the worst in this Life, that they might gain
Life eternal. Our Savior laid down his Life for their Salvation, we must do so
also. St. Paul gladly endured any thing for the Elects sake; he could wish
himself to be an Anathema, a Curse for the Jews his Brethren: and Moses would
be blotted out of the Book of Life, that the Israelites might live in the
presence of God. A miserable wretch St. Paul was for Christ's sake, and for the
Salvatioh of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.10. We are fools, weak despised, naked,
hungry, buffeted, persecuted, made the offscouring of the world. God makes the
like Covenant with us, as Moses did with the two Tribes and half, which dwelt
on the other side Jordan, that they should go in before their Brethren, and
fight for them, to expel the Canaanites; and when they had placed their
Brethren in Canaan, then they were to return and enjoy their Inheritances. Thus
must we hazard our Lives to bring others to Heaven, if called unto it, and
neglect our own Lives, that others might enjoy the heavenly Canaan together
with us.

2. Because this will wonderfully confirm the Brethren in the truth delivered
to them, and protessed by them: otherwise our Cowardice and Apostasy may cause
them to waver, and draw them off from the ways of G^d, and be a means to
destroy them for whom Christ died. It is an old and a true saying Sanguis
Martyrum semen Eccl^siae, That the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the
Church; the Martyrs Blood made the Church fruitful: the Christians did wax more
bold through Paul's Bonds: Curtius feared not to die for Rome: Mencotheus for
Thebes: And shall not we suffer that for Christ and his Saints which Pagans
suffered for their Country.
Christ was the more boldly professed by the new Converts, by how much St. Paul
was more constant and cheerful in his sufferings for Christ and his Gospel. St.
Basil tells us, how forty Martyrs did encourage one another to dye for Christ
and his Gospel. We see how prodigal Soldiers are of their Lives, to show their
fidelity to their King and Country, and shall not Christians much more be
prodigal of theirs for God and his Church?

Let all then that would be acknowledged for Gods Children, labor for so much
power of Christian Love, as may dispose their hearts, to be content to resign
up their Lives for the Glory of God, and the good of others. It is the want of
Faith and Love, that makes this seem hard and grievous to us; for if these
Graces were in us, and did abound, they would sw^eten the bitterness of death
it self, and of the most grievous sufferings, and enable us to overcome death
and the world, and to break all those cords and ties which fasten us to this
present world, and the things of this life, and make us so unwilling to lay
down our Lives for Christ and his Church. If the arms of the inner man were
strengthened in the power of these two Graces, all those Cords which I spoke
of, would break asunder, like those that Sampson was bound with, when the
Philistines came upon him. Are we not Members of the same Body with the people
of God? and does not one Member adventure it self to save another? so should it
be among the Members of the mystical Body of Christ.

CHAP. XVI.
Sect. I.
THere is one great Office of Love which we must perform one to another, even
those that are not called to lay down their Lives for the Brethren, must do
this, that is, to bear one another Burdens. Bear ye one another burdens, and
so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6.2.

This duty is mutually to be performed to one another. Thou must bear thy
Brothers Burdens, and he must bear thine. He that expects others should ease
and help him, let him be willing to ease others: Christians in their journey to
Heaven, must do like loving Travelers, who have a Burden to carry, sometimes
one carries it, sometimes the other; in so doing both will go on with the
greater cheerfulness, and with ease perform their journey. To this course of
Travelers (as Estius conceives) the Apostle alludeth, Estius in Galat. 6.2.
when he says, Bear ye one another burdens. Calvin says, That Christians
must show their Humanity one to another, which teaches men to afford mutual
help in their necessities by bearing one another burdens. This duty concerns
every Christian; it is not only the duty of strong Christians to bear the
burdens of the weak, but also the weak may, and must bear the Burdens of the
stronger: Both have their Burdens; the strong has his, the weak has his; both
need help and ease, both are subject to faint under their Burdens; therefore we
must bear one another burdens, even that which lies heavy, and presses down
our Souls and Bodies. There are outward Burdens, and inward Burdens.

As to outward Burdens; those that have ability must be merciful to their
Brethren who are in want. St. Paul bids Timothy to charge them that are rich
in this world, that they be not high-minded etc. that they do good, that they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy
6.17.18. Do then the rich bear the Burdens of the poor, when they are rich and
plentiful in giving to those that are in need? To do good, and to communicate,
forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased, Heb. 13.16. It is
given in charge, as a thing especially to be remembered, and by no means to be
forgotten. And St. John shows, that those who are able, and relieve not their
poor Brethren, are void of the Love of God. 1 John 4.20.21. If a man say, I
love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And this
Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his brother also.
Where ye see, that the profession of Love to God, without Love and Compassion
toward others, cannot stand with truth. And the same Law of Love that
commands us to love, requires us to love our Brethren and Neighbors also.
But with what kind of Love? that the Apostle shows in 1 John 3.18. not a Love
made up of words, or rooted in the tongue, but a Love that is Love indeed, and
Love in truth: a Love seated in the heart, and bringing sorth the fruits of
Love.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, if the want of a compassionate heart and
hand toward the needy in those that are able, be an Argument of the want of
Love to God, whether on the other side, forwardness in relieving others, be
always a sure sign of one that truly loves God.

Resp. I answer, No: for a man may bear the Burdens of the needy, and be
helpful to them in many other respects, although he has not the Love of God
dwelling in him.

1. Out of a hope to merit at the hands of God, and to make amends for his sins
by this means; which makes these things abominable in the sight of God, and
exceedingly wrongeth the free Grace of God, and the perfect merits of Christ.
Such are the alms of the Papists many times, and those works whereof they so
much boast.

2. He may be moved unto it out of Vainglory, that he may have the praise of
men, and be counted a liberal and free-hearted man: so the Pharisees gave alms
with sound of Trumpet.

3. He may do it out of a natural pity, and a kind of freeness of spirit, as
many of the Heathens have done. Therefore this alone, unless it be joined with
other Graces, and fruits of Grace in an holy Conversation, is no sufficient
argument, that a man's heart is possessed with a true and sincere Love of God:
so that the want of this Christian Compassion and its fruits, is enough to
prove him that has this worlds goods, not to have the Love of God dwelling in
him: but the practice of this duty alone, is not sufficient to prove a man to
have the Love of God in him. He that wants the use of his hands, cannot b^ a
good workman, in the exercise of a trade or handy-craft; but yet eve y one that
has the use of his hands is not a good workman, but there is more required,
as skill and exercise in such a trade: so it is in this case. Therefore St.
Paul says, Alth^ugh I give all my goods to the poor, and have not love, it
profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. supposing that a man may not only give
plentifully, but give away all, and yet want the truth of Love to God, and to
his Brethren.

SECT. II.
NOw as to inward burdens, I will show, wherein Christians bearing of one
another burdens consists. In general, it is to ease and refresh the drooping
Spirits, groaning, sighing, and mourning under the burden of Sin; this is (as
the Prophet speaks in another case) To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free and to break every yoke. I
shall lay open this duty in sundry particulars.

1, When we pray for them, in their calamity, as earnestly, as importunately,
as affectionately, as for our own souls burdened with the same Load. Thus Job
prayed for his 3 Friends, and the Lord was reconciled with them: Job's prayers
eased them of the burden of Gods Wrath, which might have layen long upon them.
Cry to heaven for pardon, and you give present ease to one another: pray for
the Favor of God, and ye make each others sins lighter than a Feather, which
before were as heavy as a mountain of Lead.

2. When we can mourn with them, and for them, lament their iniquities, and be
humbled for their sins, as for our own; when we can bow down heavily as though
they were our Brethren, and behave our selves as one that mourns for his
mother. Moses by his prayers and tears did bear the burden of the whole Camp of
Israel. Mutual Humiliation for one another, brings mutual ease.

3. When we labor the Conversion and Reformation of one another. Jam. 5.19.20.
He that converteth a sinner, shall save a soul from death, and shall bide a
multitude of sins; here is Salvation from death and sin, from multitudes of
sins, a deliverance from two insupportable burdens, which have broke the backs
of all the damned cast-aways.

2. When we direct them to a right course of obtaining and regaining the Favor
of God, from our own experiences. As men who have been troubled with any pain,
will tell those who have been laboring with the same, by what means they had
present ease: What Medicines, what Ointments, what Salves they used? make trial
of the same, and ye will find present ease. Thus when Christians, who
experimentally know the burden of sin, the horror of guilt, shall communicated
their counsel and directions; This I did, and I obtained pardon, I humbled my
soul, I tasted, I prayed, I reformed, I departed from evil, and the Lord gave
me present ease.

5. When we apply the comfortable promises of the Gospel to them: See thou a
fellow-Christian Christian bitterly bewailing his sin, full of shame and sorrow
for his sin, going hither and thither like a desolate forlorn man, fearing his
estate and condition, questioning his Salvation, trembling at the thoughts of
Hell, then must thou apply Gospel-promises: to such a one. The truth is, the
promises do belong to none but to burdened sinners; Come unto me all ye that
are heavy laden, and I will ease you, This is to pour Oil into their wounds,
this is to bind up the broken in heart, when we aptly apply the promises to
them. Do thou hear them complain of the greatness of sin, apply that place
Psalm. 25.11. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. Christ came to save the
chief of sinners. Do thou hear them complain of the multitudes of their sins;
apply that of Exodus 34.7. The Lord etc. forgiving iniquities, trangressions,
and sins. Do they complain of their misery? apply thou the promises of mercy.
Do they complain of their unworthiness? apply the promises of free Grace; tell
them, that God will freely heal all their backslidings.

SECT. III.
THe reason why we are to bear one another burdens is, because in so doing we
shall fulfill the Law of Christ: it is the Law of Christ, it is the command of
Christ, that we should bear one another burdens, that Law which compels you to
other duties, constrains you to this duty also.

Quest. But where do we find that Christ gave this Law? or what is that Law of
Christ?

Resp. I answer, that Law which commands us to love one another, which our
Savior frequently calls his Commandment, here he calls his Law and Command.

Quest. But what is that Law of loving one another, to bearing one another
burdens?

Resp. 1. Yes, because in commanding us to love one another, he commands us
to do any office of Love and Humanity one to another, whereof this of bearing
one another burdens, is none of the least duties of Christian mutual Love.

2. Because our Love of one to another must conform to Christ's Love, which he
showed unto us. Now herein Christ did commend his Love unto us, in that he was
pleased to bear ^ur burdens: the burden of our sins, and of his Fathers Wrath
was laid upon his Shoulders. Had not the Lord Jesus bore our burdens for us, we
had been for ever crushed, and sunk down under them. Shall Christ bear our
Burdens, and shall not we bear one another burdens, and show our selves
therein to be followers of Christ?

3. Because this duty is one of the highest degrees of our obedience unto
Christ: observe the words so fulfill the law of Christ: it is not a perfect, but
solidum complementum, a solid, or substantial fulfilling of the Law of Christ.
It is not said of other sincere performances, that we fulfill the Law of Christ;
it is not said of thy praying, thy hearing, etc. that thou do fulfill the Law
of Christ, but of this duty of Love: Love is the fulfilling of the Law: Bearing
of one another burdens (which is an eminent act of Love) is the fulfilling the
Law of Christ. Without this, all other offices of Love, are but slight,
superficial acts of obedience: he that does not do this, nihil habet, (says
Calvin) he has nothing of a man, nothing of a Christian, nothing of a disciple
of Christ, nothing of Christian Love in him.

There is a Sect, not long since risen among us, calling themselves
High-attainers, boasting that they have attained to perfection of Holiness, and
therefore need not the help of ordinances. But these deluded wretches do come
as short of perfection, as the Earth does of Heaven: but now those who do
Christianly bear one anoth^rs burdens, are High-attainers indeed, for they
fulfill the Law of Christ.

I know there may be strong Love in men's hearts toward some persons, without
any partaking of the Love of God, and the spirit of Regeneration; and this Love
may have something commendable in it; but it is nothing in respect of Gods
gracious acceptance: such men do rather Love in obedience to the Law of
nature; than in obedience to the Law, or Gospel of Christ; therefore their Love
loses acceptance with the Lord. I say, they love in obedience to the Law of
Nature; for men have some parts of the Law of Nature remain written in their
hearts, How men love in obedience to the Law of nature.
since the Fall of Adam, as the Apostle shows even concerning the Gentiles,
or Heathens themselves. Romans 2.14.15 which Law I take to be more than the light
of Nature, for otherwise (methinketh) it should rather be called the Doctrine,
or the instructions of Nature than a Law; for a Law carries Authority with it,
and a binding power; but a light, or a doctrine does but only show and teach.
But that which was written by Nature in the hearts of the Gentiles, the Apostle
says, was written as a Law, and so it carried a kind of Authority over their
Hearts and Consciences; not only showing them what should be done, but also
enclining and bowing their spirits unto ^t. So at this day, this law of Nature
may incline the hearts of many (as a law) to love their Neighbors; and they do
it in obedience to this law of Nature, that is, they yield to this natural
enclination of their hearts, and according to it do love some persons, whom
their natures do incline them to love, until this Law be countermanded by a
stronger law, the law of Sin and Corruption, enclining the heart to cast off
love, and to entertain bitterness of spirit, or the like, and until it be
overborn by outward occasions, which tend to quench Love. For this law of
Nature is weak, and soon loses its authority and command; I mean, so far as it
has any thing good in it, so far as it is a broken piece (as it were) of the
Image of God. But if we take the law of Nature for Nature corrupted, which is
the law of Sin: that is very strong, and has a great command over the heart,
and is hardly resisted. Now then they that have any commendable love in them
toward others in their natural estate, they do but herein follow the
inclination of their hearts, which is the same that I said before, that they do
it in obedience to the law of Nature, not in obedience to the law of Christ.
B^t a Christian, that will approve his heart to God must love others in the
name of Christ, and in obedience to his Gospel, which cannot be, unless we
partake of the love of God in Christ, and have embraced Christ in the Gospel.
Now I co^ceive there may be more heat sometimes in that natural love than in
this Spiritual and Christian love, and especially in that sinful love which is
between diverse persons, which deceives many, and makes them apt to bless
themselves, as if they were truly possessed of the spirit of Love, because they
find some strength of natural affection in themselves. But a little of that
heat which comes from the Sunbeams, is of more virtue and excellency than a
great deal of Kitchen-fire. A little of the heavenly affection of Love (which
is a proper heat of the spirit of Christ, and flows from the love of God
apprehended by says) is more worth than a great deal of natural affection.

CHAP. XVII.
SECT. I.
IN the next place I shall speak of the order of our love one to another.

1. We must love our own Souls next to Jesus Christ. God is to be loved above
all as the chief and supreme good, and our own Souls next as being more worth
than a whole world: and if the love of any thing should stand between God and
our Souls, we must hate that thing as our deadly enemy, that seeks to rob us of
our chiefest good.

2. We must love our Neighbors soul next to our own soul, above our own bodies.

3. Among our Neighbors we must love those that are most godly, the excellent
of the earth, those that excel in goodness; In them is all my delight, says
David. God's Jewels must be in our account most precious; one pearl is more
worth than a million of pibbles: God loves all men, but the riches of his lov^
he gives to his Saints.

4. Among the godly those of our own Nation are to be especially beloved. O
pray for the peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper that love thee, Psalm.
122.6. Saint Paul could even wish himself accursed for his Countrymen the Jews:
and for their sakes Moses could even be blotted out of the book of life. As
Christ came from the Jews, so he came to seek the lost sheep of the house of
Israel in the first place.

5. Among them I am to love those who are my Kindred above others who are not:
Nature calls for love, but Grace calls for more.

6. We are in a special manner to love those of our Family. A Christian is to
labor to make his ally, his friend, but especially his Wife and Children, such
as may be lovely and acceptable. How did David mourn for his son Absalom? and
Abraham pray for Ishmael?

7. Above all a man is to love his Wife. A man shall leave his father and his
mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be one flesh, Genesis 2.24.
Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it. Ephesians. 5.25. This is the order of our Love.

SECT. II.
Quest. Here it may be demanded; Seeing special love is due to the Saints next
to Christ, because they make one body with him; am I bound to love godly men
that are not my kindred, above my wicked kindred; whether I am to love a godly
stranger before a wicked Wife or Child?

Resp. 1. There is a double Love: Amor approbationis and complacentiae; Amor
optationis vel desiderii: a love of approbation and complacency; a love of
wishing or desire. I may love a Stranger that is godly with the love of delight
and approbation, for his graces shining in him, more than I do those that are
near to me that are wicked. Thus Jonathan did love godly David more than he did
wicked Saul that was his Father: but with the love of desire and wish of the
Salvation of my Wife and Children, and Kindred, wishing them grace and glory;
herein I may show more love to my wicked Wife, Husband, and Children, than to
godly Strangers. It is true, in regard of wishing Salvation, I am to love a
godly Stranger and my Kindred alike, but in regard of the earnest desire of
Salvation, I may more earnestly desire the Salvation of my Wife than theirs.
Thus Abraham did earnestly desire the Salvation of wicked Ishmael. Oh that
Ishmael might live in thy sight!

2. That Christian love is not measured by carnal effects, but being spiritual
love, it is most shown in Spiritual things, as in holy cleaving of hearts
together, in mutual prayers, in mutual comforting, in mutual delighting in one
another gifts and graces; in mutual exhortation of one another to love and
good works. With this love I may love a godly Stranger more than any of my
nearest Kindred that are not godly, when as my natural affection may be
stronger to my wicked Kindred than to godly Strangers, as in providing for them
the things of this Life. I must nourish my Wife and Children, when as I may
suffer Saints to perish with famine, if I have not sufficient means to relieve
both: but if I have sufficient means for both, then must I feed an hungry
Saint, and cloth a naked Lazarus.

Quest. But what if some of my Kindred are godly, but poor; others are wicked,
but rich: some of my Children are godly, but are not so witty and handsome, and
so industrious for the world as others of my Children that are wicked; What
shall I do in this dase?

Resp. I answer, Thy godly Kindred, be they never so poor, and yet in an equal
relation with thy rich Kindred that are wicked, are to have thy special Love.
And if thou do not show more Love to such, thou do not love Grace but
Riches: so likewise for Children, Jacob loved Joseph more than all his other
Sons, because more godly: Woe to that Father that shall dishearten a godly
Child, and give more encouragement unto, and be more fond over a riotous
Prodigal, a scoffing Ishmael. What is this but for a man to love sin in his
Child more than godliness; the Image of the Devil more than the Image of God?
It is true, that where there are more relations of Kindred, Neighborhood,
Co-heirship of Grace, and the like, there Love admits of multiplication and
increase, but this draws not the Lover from God, who is the Author of those
Relations, and the Rule of Love also. Carnal Lovers first please their fancy,
and then their affection must act, let the object be what it will: to them
godly or ungodly are much at one: they make no difference between the household
of Faith, and the fraternity of evil men: although God make a difference
between Jacob and Esau, yet they will make none: they resemble those Sons of
God, that seeing the Daughters of men to be fair, took them Wives of all they
liked best for their Beauty, without respect to their goodness. Many a Parent
considers not, what Child is best deserving, but most pleasing; and usually
those Children please them best, that do least please God.

CHAP. XVIII.
THe next thing I am come to do, is to show, When a man may be said to love the
Children of God. To this end, consider these following particulars.

1. True Christian Love to the people of God is a peculiar kind of Love,
whereby a man loves them as they are the Children of God, and as Brethren, be
they Strangers or Acquaintance, Kindred or not; rich or poor, mean or mighty,
honorable or base, it is all one, if they be righteous persons. In natural
Love, there is a peculiar Love of a Brother toward a Brother, distinct from
the Love of a Neighbor: a man may have a natural Love to a Neighbor, but
another kind of peculiar Love to a Brother. So if a man do love the Children of
God as he ought, he loves them with a peculiar Love, as ^hey are the Children
of God. A man may lo^ another, for some good quality of Art or Nature, though
he be not a Child of God; but there must be a peculiar Love to the Children of
God, though there be not the same qualities of Art or Nature in them: he must
love them as made near unto him by Grace, and joined with him in partaking of
the same precious Faith; he must love them for Holiness sake, because they fear
the Lord, and follow after righteousness. Some men have no peculiar Love to the
people of God, but their peculiar and familiar Love is for some natural
persons, who suit best with their carnal affections: these are their
bosom-Friends. This is a sign of unsound Love, when a man's most intimate
Friends are wicked persons; although he may bestow a good look upon some of the
people of God, and sometimes carry himself somewhat fairly toward them. If
they seem to love some of the people of God, it is for some other respect, and
not because they are the Children of God: it may be there is some special gift
in them, either of Body or Mind, common to them with natural men, and for this
they love them, and sometimes delight in their company; but as for other good
men, not so qualified (yet as sincere as the former, and as rich in Grace) they
do not affect them.

He that loves Religion in a man because he is rich, or comely, or a man of
parts, etc. ^ut slighteth it in a poor Lazarus, in a mean ^n, though he be all
glorious within, he does not love a godly man. And as Alexander said of two men
(one was his Friend, the other was his Flatterer), Hic amat Regem, i will
Alexandrum; This man loves me because I am a King, and can prefer him; but,
that man loves Alexander, he loves my very person. So it may be said of such
as love Religious persons, because rich or noble. Hic amat divitias, honores,
ille amat religionem. These men love riches and honors, not religion; only he
that loves a righteous man in nomine justi, because he is righteous, he loves
the godly with a peculiar love.

So the true love by which the Children of God do love each other, is toward
Strangers whom they never saw, nor are like to see, when they hear of their
Graces, and of their zeal and forwardness in the ways of God, and for his
glory; as St. Paul was affectionate toward those of the godly, who had not
seen his face in the flesh.

2. Then does a man truly love the godly, when he can love all Saints, as well
as some; and this flows from the former. If I love a c^ild of God because a
child of God, I must love all the children of God. A quatenus ad omne valet
consequentia. If I love gold, because gold, I love all gold; so if I love
grace, because grace, I cannot but love grace in all. If I love the Image of
God in one, I must needs carry the same affection to all that have this Image.
There is the same ground, reason, motive and object in all Saints, as well as
in one particular Saint. To love one Saint, and not another, is to make
spiritual love carnal, a divided, a factious love; as the Apostle speaks to the
Corinthians; for while one says, I am of Paul, another says, I am of Apollos,
are ye not carnal. So when men shall say, I love such a man, he is a good man,
but cannot endure the name of another godly man; their love is carnal. He that
loves not all Saints, loves no Saint at all; he that loves not the poor
Saint as well as the rich, the low and mean Saints as well as the noble and
honorable, he does not truly love any. There is great reason why we should
love all Saints as well as one, be their outward conditions never so contrary.
God the father loves all his Saints alike. All the Saints have an equal share
in the love of Jesus Christ, he shed his blood for all alike; he gives his
merits and righteousness to all alike: Yea, Jesus Christ himself calls all
the Saints his brethren, even the meanest of his Saints. The heart of the
meanest Christian is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, as well as the heart of the
most honorable, and shall not we love all whom the Lord thus loves? Godly
love is like the Center in the midst of a Circumference or circle, which has
an equal respect to all parts of the circle; so true Christian love has
respect to all parts of the circle, so true Christian love has respect to all
Saints equally.

3. When they go beyond us in grace, when they excel us in holiness, when we
love them the more we see them excel us in grace and in all spiritual gifts,
whatever relation they have unto us, yea though their gifts and graces should
eclypse ours, yet then if we can as truly rejoice in their gifts, as if we our
selves had them, and do more entirely love them, by how much the more we see
those gifts and graces shining in them, this is true Christian love: like that
of Moses, Number. 11.29. when one came, and told them, that Eldad and Medad
prophesied, Moses was glad to hear it: Would God (says he) that all the Lord's
people were Prophets! Are others as good, or better than I am, would God that
he or they, and all others were better than I. Only he loves the Saints truly,
that can love them for their graces, and the more grace, the more to love them.
Let it satisfy thee, that thou art a doorkeeper in God's house, although thou
art not made high Priest to enter into the holy of holies; it is well that thou
art admitted into Christ's School, although thou art not placed in the highest
form: it is well that thou art a beloved disciple of Christ, although thou have
not the same privilege with St. John to lie always in the bosom of Christ.

4. When we can love the Saints constantly at all times, as well as at one
time, when the Church of God is overwhelmed with troubles, and nothing but
stormy clouds hang over the heads of God's people, then to love them as in the
serenest calm, when the Church enjoys peace and quiet round about, when there
are no fears, troubles, nor persecutions, this is the man that loves the
godly. Does the state of a Christian alter and decay, yet thy charity does not
decay? Is a Christian friend fallen into disgrace with the world, yet thou do
truly make much of him? Is he persecuted every where, yet thy love follows
him? Is he fallen into poverty and necessity, yet thy love fails not for all
this: certainly thy love to the godly is a peculiar love. It is not affliction
that shall divide the Soul of Jonathan from the Soul of David. True Christian
love owneth the people of God in all conditions; it uniteth and knitteth the
heart to the children of God, and makes a man one with them, and so makes
their case ours.

5. When we can heartily love godly men, when they most of all reprove us,
check us, The Rebukes of friend are better than the Flatterings of a foe; and
he that loves with austerity is better than he that kills with delicacy.
admonish us, and as gladly receive an holy reproof as a kindness from them,
Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, let him r^prove me, it
shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head; but yet my prayer
shall be in their calamities, Psalm. 141.5. David had rather be quickened up
with holy reproofs, then tickled with fond and flattering soothings; such men
he would pray for in their calamities, and love them best. This often times
turns the love of wicked men into hatred, who pretend love as long as the
godly are silent at their evil ways, but if they begin to reprove, they will
cease to love. Thus Ahab dealt with Elijah, and H^rod with John Baptist, and
the Galatians with St. Paul, men that did love St. Paul as dearly, that they
could find in their hearts to pluck out their eyes for him, yet was he reputed
as an enemy because he told them the truth. Mutual reproof is a sign of true
Christian love to each other; if thou love a child of God, love him when he
reproves thee, as when he does not.

CHAP. XIX.
SECT. I.
THis then may show unto us the woeful condition of those that are enemies to
the children of God, and of all others almost, that love them least, in whom
there are most signs of true godliness; yea, hate them because of their
religious lives, hate them for those very practices wherein the godly labor to
be like their heavenly father, and to approve themselves his children; hate
them because they hate sin, and fear to offend their Father which is in heaven,
not only in the greatest sins, but also in those which seem very light and
small offenses, or none at all in the eye of the world; they hate them because
they show their dislike of their courses, which tend to God's dishonor, and
because they do not sooth them in an evil estate, and so become false witnesses
of God, because they will not join with them in some of their sinful practices;
they hate them because they go in a way contrary to them, and so they hate them
because they are the children of God, 1 Job. 3.12. as Cain hated Abel, and slew
him, because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous. They are mine
Adversaries, says David, because I follow the thing that is good. Psalm. 38.20.
If ye were of the world (says Christ to his Disciples) the world would love
its own, but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. Ye are enemies to the course of the
wicked world, therefore the world hates you. The hatred of the world against
the godly is no new, nor strange thing; it is a thing not to be wondered or
marvelled at, marvel not my brethren, if the world hate you. It is not new; for
presently after the Fall this enmity began: it is not strange, for God himself,
who is the Lord of Hosts proclaimed War between the godly, the seed of the
Woman; and the world, the seed of the Serpent.

The Lord himself has sounded the Trumpet of War between the world and the
godly, how then can they but take the Alarm, and prepare themselves to Battle?
not, that the Lord has either commanded the world to fight against his people,
or that he has infused any malice into the men of the world, but that he
having put his Spirit into the hearts of the godly, and made them partakers of
his divine Nature, has thereby made them contrary to the world, even as Light
to Darkness; whereupon necessarily follows the hatred and enmity of the world
against them. We see the truth of this in the malice of Cain against Abel;
Ishmael against Isaac; Esau against Jacob; three pair of Brethren in several
ages. We see it in the Egyptians and their King Pharaoh against Israel, for the
sufferings of Israel are called the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11. This has been
the course of the world from age to age. Thus did the Caldeans show their
malice to Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, accusing them to Nebuchadnezzar,
that they might be thrown into the fiery Furnace for shunning of Idolatry. Thus
did the Courtiers of Darius show their bitter and bloody malice against
righteous Daniel, for praying three times a day to his God, craftily
circumventing the King himself (not privy to their drift) to sign an unlawful
Decree, by which Daniel was ensnared, that he might be cast into the Lions Den.
So Haman showed his malice against Mordecai, and the whole Church of the Jews,
seeking their utter ruin. Tobijah and Sanballat were carried with the like
malicious spirit against the Church, and against the restoring the worship of
God at Jerusalem. Antiochus Epiphanes was full of malice and rage against the
Church. So Herod, the chief Priests, and the unbelieving Jews also in the
Apostles times: the Roman Emperors, and after them the Roman Bishops have
continued this enmity, and many other Popish Princes. But, besides these, there
are many Children of the world, mixed with the people of God, who are pricks in
the eyes, and thorns in the sides of the godly; and upon many occasions show
their malice against them.

SECT. II.
R. ONe Reason is, because the world has had, and yet has one and the same
Prince, Captain, and Commander from the beginning, even the Devil, whose hatred
is restless, and perpetual against the people of God. Wars and troubles many
times cease between Nation and Nation, through the change of Kings and
Captains: yea sometimes there are strait Leagues of Amity and Friendship,
sometimes Unions, as between England and Scotland, etc. But the Devil having
usurped a Kingdom over the world by Gods permission, ever since he conquered it
in the Garden, and so eontinuing his Tyranny over it, until Christ at the last
day shall utterly and finally destroy his Kingdom; it is no matter of wonder,
no new and strange thing, that the world which is in subjection under him, does
continue to hate the people of God. He is the Arch-enemy of God, and he will
inspire hatred and malice against the Children of God, into the hearts of those
that are in subjection to him. As it is said of Cain, he was of that wicked
one, and slew his Brother, etc. so it may be said of other persecutors, and
enemies in their several times; Haman was of that wicked one; Pharaoh wrs of
that wicked one; Jezabel was of that wicked one; Herod, Nero, Domitian; the
persecuting Popes, etc. were of that wicked one, and led by the same malicious
spirit. And the like may be said of any enemies which the godly have at this
day, either within or without the Church.

It is said, that Xerxes the Persian wept when he viewed his mighty Army,
because an hundred years should not leave one of all the company alive; but
Xerxes himself also was taken away long ere that time. But the Devil never
wants forces; and though his Instruments and Soldiers dye, yet having the
world under him, a new generation arises; when the old is worn out, and he
that is their Commander lives still to train and stir them up unto the War.

2. To be hated by the world, is incident to all godly men; it is not thy
Condition only, but the Condition of all that do live godly in Christ Jesus;
the^ shall and do suffer persecution in some degree or other: some do sip,
others drink deeper of the Cup, but every one of the Saints have tasted of it.
All the Prophets, Christ himself, and all the Apostles: is it any wonder then,
if they do the like to thee? thou art not the only Saint in the world that is
hated; there be as many in thy Condition as there be Saints in the world.

3. Christ himself has fore warned (...) of this that we shall be hated of all
men for his Name sake, John. 16.4. What reason then have w^ to be troubled when
it comes to pas^? The things have I told you, that when the ^me shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them, Why then should I be troubled at the
world's hating me? my Savior has told me of it aforehand, I could expect no
other from the world. Christ like a Captain, tells his Soldiers of the chance
of War; if ye will be Conquerors, ye must endure the brunt and heat of the
Battle: our Savior tells us of the worst, that we might be fore-armed, that in
the midst of the worlds hatred we might in patience possess our souls.
Therefore let not Christians stand amazed, like men at their wits end, when
they see the world malicious against them? When was it otherwise? When was that
Golden Age, wherein the world was perfectly reconciled with the people of God?
Some times have been more quiet than other, but when did the enmity wholly
cease? when could it have been truly said, The world is no enemy to the Church
and Children of God?

SECT. III.
Object. BUt some will say perhaps, It were not strange for the world without
the Church to hate it, but for men within the visible Church to hate the people
of God, is very Strange!

Sol. I answer not a whit, for the world is but a world still, whether it be
within or without the Church. Coelum non animum, etc. they change the air, not
their hearts by joining with the people of God; they draw breath in the
ordinances of God, but their hearts are still the Devil's Chapels, even while
themselves are in the Temple or Church of God. And why should it be thought new
or strange? was not Cain within the Church, when he slew his brother? and
Ishmael when he persecuted Isaac? and Esau, when he breathed blood and murder?
and the Jews, when they conspired to smite Jeremy with the Tongue, and Pashur,
when he put him in the Stocks? If a man enclose some bad ground, it is apt for
nothing but briers and thorns within his garden-pale, or wast; it will bring
forth such kind of evil plants still, unless some further means be used to
alter and better the nature and manure of it. So let part of the world, and
some children of Satan and the World be enclosed within the Lord's Garden,
within the compass of h^ Church, they will be as bad or worse than before, and
as full of enmity against the people of God, unless the Lord be pleased to
change and renew their hearts. Tares will be tares still, though they grow
among the wheat; thorns will be thorns, although they spring up among the
Lillies. Therefore it is great weakness to be astonished at the malice of the
wicked against the godly within the Church it self. What? Religion, and the
power of godliness opposed and hated in a Land or Kingdom, where Laws and
Statutes maintain the Gospel? yea, why not? unless we think that these have
power to conver^ all the subjects of the same Kingdom, which none can do but
the power of God's grace and spirit. It were a new and strange thing indeed, if
the World should grow so unlike it self in these days, as not to hate the
people of God. This were to be marvelled at, and men might ask, has the old
Serpent lost his sting, his poison? Is the world turned upside down? Therefore
(Readers) if it happen to be any of your cases (as it may be very well) to taste
of the world's malice and bitter enmity, not only in the ordinary way of
scoffs, slanders, etc. but in a more furious and violent manner, marvel not,
it is no news, this was the old course, Antiquum obtinet, the world does but
keep its old wont. Be not dismayed, thus it dealt with your Master, your
Savior, your Head, your King, your Captain; thus with his Servants, Soldiers,
Subjects, Members of former and later times.

Is not this a common thing among us? who have sewer friends than the godly?
who are more distasted and disliked generally? Do not men look upon them
usually as upon Strangers; yea, rather as upon Adversaries? they are counted
signs and wonders. Oh that God would convince men of their dangerous Estate,
who love not the Children of God, who like men the worse for fearing God, and
walking in his ways, who like a Father, or Mother, an Husband or Wi^e, a Child,
or Servant, Neighbor, or Kinsman the worse, because he fears the Lord; such
persons are in a dangerous estate, they are in the gall of bitterness, and bond
of iniquity.

Object. But thou will say perhaps, I do not hate the Children of God, I do not
meddle not make with them.

Sol. Oh but this will not serve thy turn, if thou do love them the less,
delight in them the less because they are godly, it is enough to prove thee to
be an enemy to them. If thou could love another better if he were not
religious, or if he were not so religious, it is an argument thou art not a
child of God. How common is this case? Many see something or other in some of
the godly, for which they could love them if they were not religious, or if
they were (at least) less forward in religion then they are: whatever such
pretend, they love not the generation of the Righteous.

Now the want of love, where love is due, is hatred in the sight of God; and it
appears thus.

1. Love does join and incline the heart to those whom it loves, and ought to
love; now then the want of Love disjoyneth the heart from such; it is an
aversion, and morning the heart from them; and this aversion of the heart
through want of love toward those to whom love is due is an hatred of them; as
the aversion and turning the heart away from God through want of love to him,
to: whom the highest pitch and perfection of love is due, is hatred of him, so
it is in this case I am speaking of touching the want of love to the Children
of God.

2. We may see this by the light of nature in natural things; for as the want
of sight in those Creatures to whom the faculty of sight or seeing belongs,
is blindness, as the want of sight in Men, Beasts, Birds, etc. so the want of
love in those that ought to love, toward those that ought to be beloved, is
hatred.

3. We may also see it by comparing the general sum of the second table of the
law, with the particular Commandments of that Law; and there yo^ shall see,
that all the six Commandments except the first of them ( Honor thy father and
thy mother, etc.) are negative, forbidding such and such sins. Thou shall do no
murder: Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. Now our Savior, and the Apostle
do show, that the sum of this Law is this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. So then the want of true Christian and holy Love, is hatred, which is the
^oot of murder, and whor^dom, and theft, and slanders, and coveting, etc. The
sum of obedience to those Commandments is Love; the sum of disobed^ence is
hatred, or want of Love. Now it is true, that the particular and direct bending
of the heart in bitterness of affection against some certain persons, is a
greater degree of hatred than mere want of love is.

4. Compare affections and outward actions together: not to save life, when a
man may by lawful means, is to murder; not to provide for a man's family, is
to take from them their due; ^onor to love is to hate.

5. Comp^re it with the nature of sin in general; the want of holiness is sin;
the want of righteousness is unrighteousness, the want of purity is impurity;
so the want of love is hatred.

6. The want of love is the deficient cause (as it were) of all the fruits and
effects of malice and hatred. Where the heart is empty of true Christian love,
there that evil and malicious Spirit has a free entrance, and may take
possession, and breed all bitterness of affections and bring forth in the
practice all actions and fruits of malice and ill will; and this want of Love
lays open the heart unto all these. So then, either ye must love out of a
pure heart unfeignedly, or else the Lord will account you as haters of your
Brethren. Our Savior made no middle-way between love and hatred in the
ordering of our hearts and affections toward enemies; but when he corrected
the Pharisees gloss, which was this, [ Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy.] He says, But I say unto you, love your enemies, etc. Some man
might have expected, that he should rather have said, concerning loving or
hating of enemies, as Bal^k speak to Balaam, of blessing or cursing of Israel;
neither bless them at all, nor curse them at all, carry thy self indifferently
between me and them, so some out of carnal reason might have looked, that our
Savior should have pointed out a middle way, and said, Neither love your
enemies, nor hate them, but carry your selves indifferently toward them. But
our Savior says expressly, Love your enemies, and do good unto them, and that
as they will approve themselves to be the children of their heavenly father. So
that not to love those whom we ought to love, is to hate: So then, as we will
avoid the damnable sin of hatred, we must labor to be possessed of the grace
of love, and that principally to the Children of God, and to all the Children
of God, high and low, rich and poor, of better or of meaner gifts and parts;
and on the other side to be possessed with hearty love toward all men in
general, and in particular toward those that have done us injuries and
unkindnesses, otherwise we are haters of them.

CHAP. XX.
Sect. I.
IN the next place I will set forth the greatness of this sin of hating the
people of God, or others.

1. It is an argument that such persons love not God himself. If a King should
say of some certain men about him. These men are very dear unto me; and as I
love them in a special manner, so I will have all that love me to love them; I
will make this as a note by which to know a faithful subject from a traitor
viz. love to these whom I dearly love; he that loves not them, I will not
account them loyal and true hearted to me: Whether these persons deserve the
love of all or not, yet this would be a greater argument of the King's
extraordinary love to such men: so in this case, the Lord says in effect of
every child of his, He that loves not thee, I will take him for none of my
friends, for none of my children; he that looks for love and favor from me,
must bear true love to thee. How great then is the love of God toward his
children, he will not acknowledge that any love him, who hate them. When the
unbelieving Jews told our Savior; we have one father, even God, he answered,
If God were your father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth, and came from
God, neither come I of my self, but he sent me, Joh. 8.41, 42. So in this case
it may be said to many carnal persons, who think th^mselves the children and
people of Cod. If God were your father, ye would love them that do most of all
labor to honor and please God, and are most careful not to sin against him.
Such is God's love to his people, that he takes none for his own, that do not
love them. There be many that say, they love God, and yet love not his
children. Well! the Lord will none of thy love, unless it be such as makes
thee also to love his children. If thou say thou love God, and yet love
Drunkards, Swearers, Worldlings, more than his children, who are zealous for
his glory, thou may keep thy love to thy self, God will not accept of it. To
all that live in the visible Church, and come to the ordinances, and take the
name of God in their mouths, and do hate the godly, the Lord says in effect,
why do thou not love me? in that thou love not my children, thou love not
me; such tender love does the Lord bear to his people; This our Savior
expressed sweetly in that speech to St. Peter after his Resurrection from the
dead, when by a three-^old confession of his love to him, he seemed (as it
were) to put him to penance for his late threefold denial of him. Simon, son
of Jonah, love thou me? Peter answered thrice; Yea Lord, thou know that I
love thee. Yea, but Peter, if thou will have me taste of the fruit of thy Love
to me; if thou do love me indeed, and wilt have me to accept of thy love as
sound and true; love them whom I love; love them and love me, and show it by
thy care of their Souls, and by thy diligence in feeding them with my word; go
feed my Sheep and Lambs.

SECT. II.
II HE that loves not his brother abides in death; 1 John 3.14. All by nature
are in a state of death, and void of Christian love, but all do not abide in
death, some do not continue in the state of death, but those that love the
brethren are passed from death to life: Now those who want this Christian and
brotherly love, these are not only dead in sins by nature, but they abide in
death. They abide in the death of guilt, the guilt of all their sins lies upon
them, they abide under the dominion and power of sin; they abide in a state of
wrath; the wrath of God abides on them, as long as they abide in the hatred of
the brethren, they abide in a death of condemnation. As St. John says, We know
we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: So also we may
know, that those are dead in sin and lie obnoxious every moment to eternal
death, who hate the brethren.

Now I conceive, that the Apostle speaks of a brother in the same sense, as
he did before, viz. a brother by grace, a child of God.

Quest. But how can such be brethren to those who abide in death?

Resp. 1. That all men and women as they (...) men and women, are brethren and
sisters by a natural relation, all coming of one man, and one woman originally,
viz. Adam and Eve. St. Paul taught this learning to the Scholars of Athens, Act
17.26. viz. that God has made of one blood all Nations of men that dwell upon
all the face of the earth. The Athenians (as proud as they were in despising
other nations as barbarous, yea other Cities of Greece in comparison of
themselves, yet) were not of any better stock or blood originally than the
meanest of them. The Athenians were not of one blood, and the Argives of
another, and the B^aetians of another, etc. no, the very Scythians were of as
good a stock originally as they, even of the same blood. So now, the greatest
Potentate, and the poorest beggar; the most civil, and the most savage Nations,
are of one blood originally; the English and the Muscovitae; the Laplanders,
Tartarians, yea the Beasilians and Canibals, are of one blood originally. God
could have made a man, and woman for every province and part of the world, and
so have given a several Original to every Nation; but he in his wisdom did
rather please to make one man out of whose loins, one woman out of whose womb,
all the Nations of the earth should issue; that so all Nations might be made of
one blood, and all might be of kin, and that so there might be a natural bond
of union, brotherhood, and love between them: So then a child of God is a
brother to a natural person; for they that are the children of God are the
children of men too, and of the same blood with others; therefore when natural
persons do not love the children of God, it is a sign they do abide in death.
When the graces of the godly, and the fruits of grace in their conversation and
practice are so distastful unto men, that for this they cast off love and
affection toward them, though they be their brethren by nature and of the same
blood with them originally, whereas this should increase their love toward
them; this shows, that such do abide in death.

2. He that lives in the Church of God, and accounts himself a child of God;
if he be a child of God indeed, all the children of God are his brethren and
sisters, both by Nature and Grace. If God be his father, the children of God
are his brethren and sisters; but if he does not love them as brethren, it
shows that he abides in death, and deceives himself, he is not born of God,
nor passed from death to life.

SECT. III.
III. HAters of others (especially of the godly) they are murderers, 1 Job. 3
15. He that hates his brother is a murderer. Every act of hatred is a mortal
wound given to a godly man. Some think, St. John speaks by way of allusion to
Cain, who was an actual murderer of holy Abel, and that God accounts all
haters of godly men, as heinous sinners, as damned Cain is, and their hatred as
abominable a sin as his actual murder. Do thou see a man hating, scoffing,
opposing, persecuting godliness, for godliness sake, Thou may point at him,
and say, yonder goes a Cain, a murderer of a righteous man!

1. Malice and hatred is murder, affectu and desiderio, in affection and
desire; it makes a man to desire, wish, and rejoice in the death or destruction
of those whom he hates. This the Heathens saw by the light of Nature,
therefore one of them said, Quem oderunt, periisse expetunt, whom men do hate,
his death they do desire. Now what is this but murder? It is true! that in
respect of the person hated, the hurt done to him by hating him is much less
than when he is actually murdered, and his blood spilt. It is true also, that
the actual commission of murder in outward act does add much to the guilt of
his conscience that hates his brother, because there is both the inward hatred
or murder of the heart, and the outward cruel act of murder added to it; there
is the beginning, and the consummation, the accomplishing and finishing of this
bloody sin. But yet the inward malice and hatred of the heart, which makes
those that harbor malice in their hearts, to wish the death and destruction of
those they hate, or to rejoice in it, is murder in the sight of God. Men that
have malice festering in their hearts against others, causing a desire of their
destruction may hold their hands from shedding of blood for want of
opportunity, for fear of the Law, for fear of infamy among men, yea out of a
slavish fear, left their own conscience, as a revenger of blood should pursue
them with restless horror and terror, and never let them enjoy merry hour in
this life, besides the dismal effects of it in the life to come. And on the
other side, they are not restrained from murder by Love in any degree. That
appears by this; that though themselves are loath to shed blood, yet they that
are malicious, generally could be content that those whom they hate, should
perish by the hands of others: they have a secret desire of this, and are well
enough pleased with it in the retired thoughts of their hearts, if such a thing
happen by the hands of others.

2. M^lice is the root of Murder; and therefore it is murder virtualiter et
eminenter: Murder is conceived in the womb of Malice; Malice is the Seed of
which this foul and bloody Monster of Murder and Bloodshed is hatched. As the
Child is in the Fathers Loyus ere it be born or conceived, so murder is in the
Bowels of Malice before it is brought sorth. As poison is in the young Brood of
the Viper before it is able to put forth the sting; so murder lies a breeding
in the womb of Malice and Hatred before it break forth into Blood. Malice
makes a bloody Heart, and Murder makes bloody hands. Murder is oftentimes
the effect of Hatied and Malice: first Cain did hate Abel, he was wroth with
him, then he killed him. Absalom's Hatred made him to kill his Brother Amnon.
Thus Persecutors hating the Professors of Truth, took away their Lives from
them: They set their Wits on work to invent Torments for the painful death of
Gods Saints: Hatred of godliness did kindle the fire of Martyrdom.

3. The Scripture calls it Murder, to show how great a Sin hatred of
Godliness is. Aquinas disputing what was the greatest sin as a man man could
commit against his Neighbor, his resolution was, that Odium proximi est
gravissimum peccatorum, it was Hatred of our Neighbor. Much more grievous it
is, when a man shall hate any one, because he follows the thing that good is,
and hates a man because he labors to be like unto God. To shed man's Blood,
who was made after the Image of God, and to do that murder that ever was
committed with the least degree of malice that any was, is a most fearful and
damnable sin: but I conceive, that there may be a greater sin committed in
harboring abundance of malice and bitterness in the heart, though without
Bloodshed, than in some Cases, when Blood is unlawfully spilt. In the malice of
our powder-Traytors, this is apparent, which though by the Providence of God,
it was restrained from shedding of Blood, was far more grievous than many an
act of murder, which has been committed. But besides this, when men do
neither actually shed Blood, nor purpose and plot bloodshed, I conceive their
malice may be more sinful than some acts of Murder. I doubt not, but that many
a man sins far more in malice against his Neighbor, than David in killing
Vriah, though it was a grievous sin: for, what is sin, but the Transgression of
the Law? (...). Now there may be a more strong bent of the heart against the
Law of Love in deep-setled malice long continued in the heart and soul, full of
implacable rage and bitterness, than in some acts of murder. The hurt done to
a man's Neighbor is incomparably greater in murdering him, than that which is
done by mere malice concealed, and kept close in the heart, be it never so
great. But the greatness of sin, (I suppose) though against the second Table,
is not always to be measured by the hurt done to a Neighbor, but by the
greater or lesser opposition to the Law of Love. And I am persuaded, that some
men going on with restless malice and bitterness of spirit against their
Neighbor, may be more guilty in the sight of God, than some others that have
committed that fearful sin of murder; so great and heinous a sin is the sin of
malice before the Lord, who is Love.

SECT. IV.
1. HEre let us consider, What the occasions have been, which have bred distaste
and di^content, whether they have been wrongs indeed, or wrongs only in
appearance: or whether (being rightly considered) their deeds which we have
distasted, and taken occasion to hate them for, have been good, tending to the
discharge of their consciences, and our reformation. If they have been indeed
wrongs and injuries; yet nevertheless, to harbor malice against them, is to
commit murder. It is true, that Hatred in such a case is not so great a sin,
as in the other cases mentioned; yet in this case it being no less, than a
degree of murder, we are to lament, and to be humbled ^or it, as for a sin
exceeding heinous.

On the other side, If it has been for some actions, which were not real
injuries, but only taken for such by reason of our own weakness, partiality,
self-love, prejudice against their persons, etc. then is our Hatred a sin of an
higher Nature than in the former case, and so we are accordingly to be affected
with it -- Again, if they have been such words or actions, as have tended to
the discharge of their consciences, and for the reformation of us in our
course, or for the righting of others whom we have wronged, etc; if for any of
these we have hated them, and been malicious against them, then is our sin yet
more grievous and abominable. So Jonathan dealt plainly with his Father Saul,
laying open the greatness of his sin in hating David to the death, if the
Father had had Grace to have made use of his Sons faithful dealing with him. 1 Samuel 19.4. Jonathan spoke good of David unto Saul his Father, and said unto
him, let not the King sin against his servant, against David, because he has
not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very
good. For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the
Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel. Thou saw it, and did
rejoice, wher^fore then will thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David
without a cause? Thus when men hate others that admonish and reprove them in
public or in private, and seek their restraint in sin, or reformation; or
those that punish them being Magistrates, or in office, etc. this is a bloody
kind of malice, and for this we are to be deeply humbled. If malice be murder,
when injuries are received; how much more when others have labored to do us
good? if thou have hated any for crossing thee in an evil way in word or deed,
thou have sinned in an high degree, and have cause to be greatly humbled for it.

2. Let us also examine, how our hearts have been stirred less or more in
hatred, or bitter affections against any others; for, there is great difference
of degrees in this as in other sins: how hardly we have been brought to
reconciliation, how implacable? What bitterness has broken forth out of our
hearts in words or actions against them? what offense, or evil example we have
given to others by these means? and accordingly should we charge our
Consciences before the Lord. I fear many do very lightly pass over this sin of
malice, especially it having not much showed it self openly, but having for the
most part part layen in the depths of their malicious hearts. Owe nothing then
to any man, but to love one another: Do not in malice think, that thou owe
ill will, or an ill-turn to any, but that thou owe love to all, malice to
none: for whosoever hates his Brother, is a murderer, and ye know that no
murderer has eternal Life abiding in him.

SECT. V.
IV. MAlice and Hatred makes men most contrary to God, and most like unto the
Devil. It makes a man most contrary to God, for God is Love, 1 John 4.16. It is
the Nature of God to love men; He is (...), he is of a most glorious, lovely,
and loving Nature, and is the Author of all Love in us. This shows what a God
he is to us, and every Creature finds him to be a loving God, a loving
Father. As the Sun is Light, and the Fountain of Light, and gives Light to the
Stars of Heaven, and to all sublunary things; so God is Love it self, and the
Fountain of all Love: he fills the Angels in Heaven with Love, he fills the
Saints on earth with mutual and spiritual Love; and the natural Love and
Affection that are in men one to another, are sparks and rays of Gods Love: all
the Creatures are objects of his Love, every Creature of God is good, therefore
beloved of God. Do ye think God would vouchsafe to call himself by the Name of
Love, if there were not a wonderful excellency in Love? now, he that dwells
in Love, dwells in God, and God in him: he that embraces the Love of God by
Faith, and thereupon unfeignedly loves God and his Brethren, dwelling,
continuing, or abiding in this Love, he continues or abides in God, and God
in him. If in any Love it be true, That the Soul is where it loves, it is most
true in this Love of a Child of God to his heavenly Father, and to all the
Saints: his Soul is with God, with Christ, his Beloved in Heaven, and abides
in him. This our Savior knew full well, when he taught us, Mat. 6. Lay not up
for your selves Treasures on earth, but lay up for your selves Treasures in
Heaven: for where your Treasures are, there will your hearts be also. His
delight also is in the Saints that are on the earth in those that excel in
Grace and Holiness. One that was full of holy Love was wont to answer all
questions therewith. Whence came thou? from Love: Whither go thou? to
Love: Where dwell thou? in Love. God is such a ones dewlling place, his
home, his resting place, and Christ is the Door by which he enters into this
dwelling, by Christ he enters and dwells in God. Now malice makes men most
like unto the Devil, whose continual exercise is malice, and malicious
practices against God and man. Such was his hellish malice, that seeing man in
happiness, and the favor of God, he entised the woman, and by her the man, to
that sin and rebellion, which brought all mankind into a most miserable
Condition: and what is his continual practice, but to sin, and to draw men and
women into sin? Now those that harbor malice in their hearts, they are in a
special sort like to Satan, when it is against the persons, not the sins of
others only. Malice is properly a settled Hatred, a rancour of heart, by which
men are provoked to deal spitefu^ly and mischievously with those whom they love
not, either wishing them ill, or doing them ill. Wickked Shimei railed upon
David, when he was in an heavy strait, and cursed him, Come up thou bloody man,
thou son of Belial: and when a godly man is brought into misery, malicious
persons say, Aha, aha, so would we have it. Godly men walk in the narrow way,
their lives are strict and holy; the wicked are in the broad way, walking in
all excess of riot. Repugnans qua repugnans, est causa odij: When one crosses
another in his Happiness, in his pleasures, he is counted an enemy. Can a
wicked man (as a wicked man) have a greater enemy than such as will not give
them Elbow room in their sins, but cross them in their Profaneness? When the
watercourse are stopped, the waters swell high; so when the godly man labors
to dam up the courses of ungodliness, the wicked swell with hatred against
such. It is true what Lactantius said, Veritas ideo semper invisa est, eo quod
is qui p^ccat, vult habere liberum peccandi locum; Wicked men hate godliness
for no other cause, but that it will not afford them room to sin freely without
control. Now the Devil is ever stirring up the wicked to hate the godly; that
Prince of malice is ever filling the hearts of the wicked with malice. It is
one of the Devils main plots, to raise evil surmises in wicked men's hearts
against the godly, and to disgrace the way of Holiness as a thing, that tends
to nothing else, but to curb men from their pleasures, and to be an hook in
their Nostrils. Now as God is Love, so Satan is full of malice: and as they
that cherish in their hearts true Christian Love, and walk in the Spirit of
Love, are of God, and do bear his Image; so they that do not purge their hearts
of Hatred, Malice, and bitterness, are of the Devil.

CHAP. XXI.
LEt me now exhort all Christians to love one another. 1 John 4.7. Beloved, let
us love one another, for love is of God; and every one that loves is born of
God, and knows God. Every one that loves the Children of God unfeignedly, is
born of God, and is acquainted with him, and knows him, as the Child knows
his Father.

Were I to speak in an assembly of Ministers, I might in a special manner
direct my speech to them, that they should labor to abound in Brotherly Love,
as toward others of the godly; so especially toward each others as
Fellow Laborers, called to the same work, and employed to build up the same
spiritual house of God, that they should be of one mind, and speak the same
things, the same Truth, not envying, nor despising each other, but rejoicing in
each others Gifts and Graces, and in those fruit of each others labors; not
like those who grudg to hear of others labors, while themselves are lazy, and
looking on them with an evil eye, refusing to be their fellow laborers, and
maligning them, because they will not be their fellow-loyterers. What Brotherly
love and amity was there among the Apostles of Christ? St. Peter calls Paul
his beloved Brother. So when Paul and Barnabas returned from the preaching of
the Gospel to diverse Nations, we read with what love they were entertained by
the rest of the Apostles at Jerusalem, Act. 15.4. And when they were come to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders.
And the Apostles and Elders in their Epistle sent to the Churches, speak thus.
Act. 15. v. 25.26. It seemed good unto us being assembled together, to send
chosen men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas and Saul, men that have hazarded
their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: Where they both profess
their entire love unto them, and also in Brotherly love give them special
Commendation. So afterward, when St. Paul returned from another long voyage,
we see what demonstration of Brotherly love there was between him and St.
James, Act. 21.18.19.20. Paul went in with us unto James, and all the Elders
were present: and when he had saluted them, be declared particularly what
things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry. And when they heard
it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou see Brother, h^w many
Thousands of Jews there are which believe, etc. So when Paul and Barnabas had
made known to the other Apostles the Doctrine which they had taught, Paul
says, When Jam^s and Cephas, and John (three eminent Apostles) who seemed to
be pillars, perceived the grace that was given to me, they gave to me, and
Barnabas, the right hand of fellow-ship. Gal. 2.9. The reason is plain; for as
they excelled in admirable gifts, for the service of the Church, so they
abounded in saving-graces, and especially in that grace of Christian and
Brotherly love, which purged their hearts from envy and carnal emulation of the
gifts or success of each other, and so they kept the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. Moreover, they knew well, that they were as a City set on an
Hill, and that the eye of the world was fixed upon them, and therefore they
were careful to walk in Love, as toward all sorts, so especially toward each
other, that they might not give occasion to the enemies to blaspheme, that they
might not offend the Church of God, nor blemish his Glory. They knew well, that
this was needful for the furtherance of the Gospel, of that great work of the
Apostleship, to which the Lord had called them, that they should with one mind,
and one Spirit, join together in the work of the Lord.

This may discover to us the intolerable pride of the Pope, who instead of
embracing the godly Ministers of Christ with Brotherly Love (as St. Peter does
embrace Paul, as his Brother and equal) does first lift up himself above them;
and in a cruel manner tyrannize over them. St. Peter did not lift up over the
head of Paul the scepter of Dominion and Papal Supremacy, nor offer him his
foot to kiss, as the Pope, his pretended Successor; but in all Brotherly Love,
and in the spirit of meekness gives him the right hand of fellowship, as to
his equal in place and dignity. Therefore when the Pope brings not only
Ministers of the Gospel, but also the Kings and Emperors of the world into
subjection, and challenges an uncontroled authority over them, we may justly
say, From the beginning it was not so; no, nor for many ages after: the Church
of God, a long time acknowledging no one supreme Head, but Christ, as is
manifest by many things which were written many hundred years before Luther was
born. Therefore all proud papal Spirits, who are more like the Pope in a proud
contempt of their Brethren, than they are to Peter in Meekness and Brotherly
Love: they cease to derive their Pedigree from the Apostles, until they do more
truly express their Graces, and follow their Example.

CHAP. XXII.
NOw let me press all Christians to mu^^al and Brotherly Love: Let all
Christians who have tasted of the Love of God, show their Love to God in loving
their Brethren out of a pure heart fervently. This to the end of the world is a
badg of Christ's true Disciples, and this shows, that the same mind is in them
that was in Christ Jesus, who loved them, and washed them with his own blood,
to make them Kings and Priests unto his heavenly Father. God is Love, and he
that loves in, and for the Lord, is born of God, and beloved of God. And we
should labor more and more freely to taste of the Love of God, that our hearts
may be more seasoned with Christian Love toward others.

How can it stand together, that Christians should be led by one Spirit, and
yet be so cross and contrary in their affections to each other? Is Christ
divided, says the Apostle? Can the Spirit of Christ which is the Spirit of
Peace and Love be the cause of division in those who are all possessed with one
and the same Spirit? It were strange to see the members of the same body, which
are animated and quickened with one and the same Soul, to fight one against
another, one limb to tear another off the same body; the hand to pluck out the
eye, or one hand to cut off the other: because all the members have one Soul,
which kniteth them all together in Love. So for the faithful, who profess
themselves be ^overned by that one Spirit of Christ, to be ^t variance, is in a
sort monstrous.

Now that I may move you to Brotherly Love, I desire you to consider.

1. That it is an honorable thing for Brethren to love one another. We have a
notable example of this Brotherly Love in two Heathens, viz. Eumenes and
Attalus. This Eumenes was King of Pergamus, and left his Wife and his Kingdom,
and traveled abroad, shortly after whose departure, news was brought to
Pergamus, that Eumenes was cowardly slain by one Persius, whereupon Attalus
takes his Brothers Kingdom and his Wife: not long after Attalus hears news
of his Brothers Life, and speedy return. He does not then (as policy would have
done) prepare to keep the Kingdom he had usurped, and to hold out his Brother
in hostile manner at point of spear; but he meets him with Music, as glad of
his return, and resigneth to him his Wife and Kingdom. His Brother having power
in his hand again, only said thus in his ear, Thou should not have taken my
Wife, unless thou had seen me dead; and never gave him bitter word
afterward; and dying left him his Kingdom in ample sort. And to requite this
favor, his brother dying makes his Son his heir to his Fathers Kingdom,
notwithstanding he had many Sons of his own. This singular example of Brotherly
Love among these Heathens will be laid to our charge, if we come short of them
in this duty.

II. Love is a very necessary thing: Christian Love is as necessary as Life. As
a man cannot live the Life of Nature without breath; so neither can he live the
Life of the Spirit without Love. St. James says, As the body without the
spirit is dead, (or the body without breath is dead) even so faith without
works is dead also: it is breathless and liveless without works. Now what are
works here spoken of by the Apostle, but the Acts and Fruits of Christian Love?
So then the Soul without Love is dead in sins, and has no spiritual Breath nor
Life.

It is in vain to say, We live unless we love; unless we have the truth of
Christian and Brotherly Love, we may think our selves to be alive, but indeed
are dead.

St. Paul notably shows the necessity of this Grace, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
Though I speak with the Tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity (or
Christian Love) I am become as sounding brass, or as a tinckling cymbal. And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge: And though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor; and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profits me nothing. So ye see that Love is so absolutely necessary, that all
is nothing without it. Though a man where an Angel for gifts and abilities;
though he should spare neither body nor goods, yet without Christian Love all
is nothing; for all these without true Love, are but the works of a dead man,
separated from God, the Fountain of Life, and destitute of the spirit of
Christ, who is the spirit of Love and Life. So all gifts and works without
Love, are but the dead works of dead men, and therefore nothing in the sight of
God. If I have not charity, I am nothing, says the Apostle. Whatsoever I have
else, whatsoever I do, I am nothing: I have not the Essence and Being of a
Christian; my Soul is an empty Carcass, Though a man should build Churches,
Colleges, Hospitals, Almshouses: Though he should spend his strength in
preaching; though he should spend his time in praying and reading, yet he is
nothing in the eyes of God; if he have not the Grace of Christian Love, he has
not the Being and Essence of a Christian, and of one born of God.

In 1 Cor. 15.10. the Apostle says, By the grace of God I am that I am. Why?
St. Paul was not all grace, not all spirit, there was something in him that was
of Nature, and something of Education, before ever he tasted of the Grace of
God: but the Apostle counted all this nothing: his legal righteousness nothing;
his learning nothing; his natural abilities; his whole self nothing; only that
was his Being, which was newly breathed in him by the work of Gods saving Grace
and sanctifying Spirit. This was the only something that he made account of,
even this new Being and new Nature, which was of the Grace of God. -- So when a
man has the Spirit of Love, and power, and of a sound mind, then he is
something; then is he something toward God; then is he one of those that God
makes a reckoning of; one of the Lords own number. Ye find Rev. 7.4. etc. that
there were sealed of the twelve Tribes of Israel twelve thousand of each Tribe,
which made up an hundred forty and fourthousand. These (ye see) were numbered
and sealed; and these followed the Lamb, and stood with him upon mount Sion.
Now there were abundance of the people of Israel besides these; but there was
no reckoning made of them; they were not numbered, and so not sealed; they came
not into the Lords account; they were nothing; they wanted the grace of Love,
and the spirit of Life; they wanted the Being and Essence of Saints and
Children of God. So beloved! a man may be something in the visible Church, he
may have a place and a name among the people of God; yea, he may be of special
use in the Church, and do some special service, yet if he have not the Spirit
of Love, which is the Spirit of Life, he is nothing in Gods account: he
stands for a Cyphar; he is none of the Lords number. How necessary then is
this Grace of Christian Love? It is far more necessary to love, than to be
beloved. Though a man should be as friendless as Job and David in their
afflictions, and find as little Love as they did; yet if he himself in the
mean-time be possessed with the Spirit of Love, he is a living man, an happy
man, a child of God, one born of God, who is Love. This grace of Love, whereof
his Heart and Conscience bears him witness, shall yield him more sweet and
sound Comfort, than all the worlds affection toward him.

On the other side, if a man were the worlds Minion, and Darling, and had the
Love of a whole Country in an high degree; yet if he himself have not this
grace of true Christian Love, he were nothing: let the world make as much as
she can of him, God will make nothing of him; he will not number him, nor write
him among the living, his name is not written in Heaven. Thus ye see how
necessary this grace of Love is. In that place of St. James forecited, it is
said, Faith without works is dead. Now how does Faith work, but by Love? An
Handy-crafts-man may as well work at his Trade without a hand, as a man may do
the works of Faith (works that are witnesses of a lively, saving, Faith)
without true Christian Love. A man may do many things, which for the outside
may look like the works and fruits of Faith without Love; but they want the
heart and soul, of works acceptable unto God: they are but the outward cases of
good works. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be
done with Love; if they be done without Love, they be done without Life; and
they cannot be done with Love, unless with hearts possessed with the Spirit of
Love.

How miserable then should we think our selves without Love? Men often complain
for w^nt of necessaries, when as many times those things that they complain of
the want of, may well be spared, and are rather superfluities than necessaries:
But alas! what is so necessary as true Christian Love? many think they have
enough of it, who yet have not one spark of this heavenly fire in their hearts:
they think they have love enough to others, but not love enough from others;
whereas it is a thing much more to be looked after, that we have fervent and
sincere love toward others, than that we may taste plentifully of the fruits of
Love from others.

And in desiring an increase of Love in others, we should rather desire it for
the glory of God, and as a seal of their effectual calling, and a means to
further their account, whose Love we desire; than to enjoy the fruits of their
Love for our own outward benefit, or contentment. As St. Paul speaking of some
Christians bounty, and commending it, says, Not that I desire a gift, but I
desire fruit, that may abound to your account. That is, I desire your benefit
in giving, rather than my own benefit in receiving; and so in others fruit of
Love.

3. Consider the excellency of this grace of Christian Love: It is a most noble
and excellent grace, it shows who are of the seed Royal, who are the Children
of the King of Kings, it discovers who be the Heirs of glory, and belonging
to the Kingdom of God. It is (as it were) the heart of the new Creature. This
new Creature has its several parts and faculties, as well as the natural man;
and Faith is (as it were) the brain of the new man; yet so, that it has an
influence upon the heart and active powers of the new Creature. That, brings
in Light, and apprehends the Lord Jesus Christ shining graciously in the
Gospel, who is the brightness of the Fathers glory. But Love is the heart of
the new Creature, that which warmeth the new man, and is the first mover in the
actions of obedience, whether of Love and Holiness toward God, or of Love and
Righteousness toward man.

Now ye know, that the heart is a principal part in any Creature that has that
part; and the more excellent the Creature is, the more excellent is that part
of it. Now no Creature under Heaven is comparable for excellency with the new
Creature, which is the immediate frame and work of the sanctifying Spirit, an
effect of one of his most divine Operations. I mean, the whole frame of
Regeneration and Sanctification in one born of God; now Love is the heart of
this new Creature: the heart in a man is said to be primum vivens, et ultimum
moriens; the first part that lives, the last that dies: But Love, which is
the heart of the new Creature, never dies: Faith and Hope have their periods;
Love out-liveth them, and is everlasting: for Faith is of things not seen, 1
Cor. 13.8. etc. But when all the glorious things promised and believed, lie
open to the sight of the Saints at a full view; Faith, as it is the evidence of
things not seen, shall cease; Hope, is of things to come; but when all shall be
in present possession, and the Soul can neither expect nor receive any more,
Hope shall cease. But Love is for ever and ever; and this shall be in full
perfection when this Life shall end, when there shall be nothing in them that
love, nor in them that are to be loved, which may hinder Love; when they shall
wholly dwell in God who is Love, and be filled with the fullness of God, and so
with fullness of Love. And if he could say of his earthly kind of wisdom, that
if it were visible, and to be seen with the eyes of men, it would make men
strangely enamoured with it; how much more may it be said of this Christian
Love, which is from above, that if it were in a visible shape, and had an
outward beauty, answerable to the excellency of its Nature, it would inflame
the affections of men and women toward it.

4. Love makes men useful and helpful to others. Plato says of those men that
are malicious and contentious, that they do break the order of nature. For
whereas the Philosophers affirm a man by nature to be animal politicum,
malicious and contentious persons make themselves unfit for society, being no
better than firebrands of sedition, and Satan's Instruments to sow dissension.
Therefore St. Augustine says, that all companies are not to be called a people
but only those who are joined by consent of Laws. And the same Father says
thus; Give me that unum necessarium, that one thing necessary, viz. Love and
Unity, and thou shall have a people well ordered. Take away this, and thou
shall have a rout, a confusion, and all out of order; for where envying and
strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3.16. Love is an
uniting grace, we read, 1 Samuel 18.1. that the soul of Jonathan was knit with
the soul of David; the reason follows, and Jonathan loved him as his own
soul. This made him very helpful to David upon all occasions.

The Apostle sets down many good fruits of this grace of Love, 1 Cor. 13.4.
Charity suffers l^ng, and is kind, envyeth not, vaunteth not her self (or, is
not rash), is not puffed up; 5. Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil; 7. Bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. If another do him
an injury, a man that has this grace of Love, suffers it: if his friend be
froward, he is kind: if fallen, he vaunteth not himself over him, nor is rash
in censuring; if far behind him in parts, he is not puffed up: if provoking him
to passion, he does not behave himself unseemly: if a selfseeker, he seek^th
not his own: if he vex him daily, he is not easily provoked: if he carry
himself so doubtfully that he knows not what to make of him, he thinks no
evil: if he load him with reproaches, he bears all things: if he promise
amendment, he believes all things: if he does not make good his word, he
hops all things: and if in all things he be cross and thwarting, the true
Ch^^stian Lover endures all things. Love is easy to be entreated, it never is
implacable, or inexorable, whatsoever, or how great soever the wrongs or
injuries be. They that cannot be reconciled, that will not be pacifyed or
appeased, are far from Christian Love.

True Christian Love is not barren, it will make men use the gifts of several
kinds which God has given to the supply and benefit of the people of God,
according to their several wants. So those of Macedonia supplied the wants of
the Saints at Jerusalem. Nehemiah improved his favor with the King of Persia
for the good of the Church of God in Judea: So did Daniel improve his favor
with Nebuchadnezzar for the advancement of Shadrach, Mesech, Abednego: and
Mordecai improved his dignity for the benefit of the Church. That Love which is
true, will be fruitful; now these fruits of Love are of diverse kinds, according
to the several parts of the Second Table. As all duties of love toward the
Souls of others, in Ministers, Masters, Parents, Neighbors, Acquaintance, etc.
preaching the Word, catechizing, instructing, admonishing, comforting,
reproving publicly, privately, in praying for them, etc. And toward their
bodies, goods, good names, in relieving their wants, in defending them to our
power, in clearing them according to our knowledge against slanders, false
accusations, etc. and so for all other duties which man owes to man. These
things every Christian must practi e and he must do them out of the truth of
Christian Love. As, that is not true Love, which does not bring forth such
fruits of Love; so those works are not accepted, which are not done in Love,
though they may be such works (for the matter) as are commanded in the Law of
Love.

CHAP. XXIII.
LEt us then labor to put in practice that exhortation of the Apostle, 1 John
3.18. My little Children let us not love in word and tongue; but in deed and in
truth. Where the Apostle does not condemn profession and expression of Love in
words, and with the Tongue, for he himself used it, I think no man more: yea he
uses it in that place, expr^ssing tenderness of heart, and fatherly affection
in this very exhortation; (...), My little children, etc. So he expresses much
Love in words in this Epistle. But he condemns that show of Love; which is
mere words, and a bare profession of Love. A Tree is not to be liked the worse,
because it bears a fair Leaf together with good fruits, but rather the
better; for it is both an ornament to the Tree, and makes the fruit the more
savoury, and of a better relish. But this makes the Tree ready for the Ax and
for the Fire, when it bears Leaves and no Fruit, or little Fruit: so a
Christian is not to be liked the worse for clothing his fruits and works of
Love, with expressions, professions, and words of Love, but the better rather:
for they are both an ornament to him in his Christian course, and (besides)
they give grace and relish to those works and fruits. Yea, Christian speeches
in many cases are themselves very good and wholesome fruits, good arguments of
Sanctification, and very profitable to the hearers, ministering grace unto them,
and winning them so some liking of the ways of God: yea, good words of
admonition, consolation, are as necessary alms, as any other, for many; though
not so acceptable to the most.

But as a Tree that bears store of good fruit, though it have but a ragged
Leaf, is much better than another that is rough, and full of green and fair
Leaves, with none, or little fruit; so a Christian full of good works, though
not fairly-spoken, is far to be preferred above one who has a fair tongue and
a close hand.

The thing then which the Apostle exhorts unto, is, That we should not rest
in a Love that shows it self only in words and tongue, but that which is in
deed and in truth.

CHAP. XXIV.
THis should make us in the next place to take heed of those sins that do
especially stir up the heart to break the bond of Love.

1. Take heed of suffering Anger to settle, and take root in your hearts; cure
it while it is but a green wound, before it turn into a Canker or festered sore
of malice and hatred; quench it when it is but a spark, or when it begins to
kindle; let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath. Anger engendereth malice,
unless it be suppressed. Persons overcome with anger, the Lord thinks them
unworthy of his peoples society, Prove. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angry
man, and with a furious man thou shall not go. God does not brand any created
passion, seated in the Soul of man, as he does anger. Though all the passions
seated in the soul of man (when extreme) are vicious, yet God does no where
forbid us to make friendship with a man of grief, of fears, of hope, of desire,
of love, but only with an angry man: Do not take them ever for Friends and
Companions. In another place he says, Walk not with the froward, for fear of
learning his ways, and getting a snare unto thy soul. Chrysostom calls
furious angry men, Chrysostom. Hom. ad. pop. Antioch.
Daemoniacks, men possessed with the Devil; for as they rage and blaspheme, and
are set upon mischief, so men in their anger are for any mischief the Devil at
that instant suggesteth to them: Oh, how prompt and ready are men in their
wrath to do what mischief they can to their Brethren.

2. Take heed of the sin of Envy, which is a sin that breaks the nearest bond
of Nature, and the strongest bond of Love. Envy did so fret in the heart of
most of Jacob's Sons, that they decreed the death of Joseph their innocent
Brother; and though afterward they spared his life, yet they robbed him of his
liberty, and exposed him to those dangers which were worse than death,
banishing him out of the Church, and giving him occasion to fall from the true
God, had not the Lord been gracious to him Genesis 37.20.28 Therefore labor by
the spirit of Love to purge out this bitter affection, left it alienate your
hearts from your Brethren.

3. Take heed and beware of Covetousness. This sin makes men even to desire the
death of their own Parents, and Brethren, that they may have their lands or
goods, and so to commit a secret murder in their hearts. This sin (I fear) is
too common, and little laid to heart. But, as our Savior says, He that
looks on a woman, and lusts after her, has committed adultery with her
already in his heart. So may we not say? he that looks on the estate, and
goods of a Father, Brother, Kinsman, etc. and longs for their death, has
committed murder already in his heart. This sin of Covetousness also makes
men to break the bonds of natural affection, when it brings them to defraud
or wrong those in their goods which are nearest to them. The prophet Jeremy
shows how corrupt those times were, which were a little before the
destruction of Jerusalem, when he says, Jerem. 9.4. Take ye heed every one of
his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will utterly
supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders.

4. See that Pride root not it self in your hearts: Pride lifts up the heart
in high thoughts of its own worth; it breeds unthankfulness to God and men:
Pride breeds scorn and contempt of others; it breeds revengefulness, and
will not suffer us to stoop so far, as to suffer wrongs, and to overcome evil
with good: Pride cannot endure to be reproved or admonished; it breeds
self-will and stubbornness: it will be served before God himself; it will so
carry away a man's heart, that that cost, which should be bestowed for the glory
of God, and the relief of others, shall be employed to set forth Pride in
superfluitics of apparel, sumptuous feasts, buildings, etc.

This may teach us to beware of men, as our Savior says: Sin breaks the Law
of Friendship, and nearest relations, it dissolveth the bond of Brotherhood. A
Brother seeks the destruction of a Brother: or, if not the shedding of his
blood, yet his utter undoing. So the Father is not safe in respect of his Child
sometimes; the Neighbor in respect of his Neighbor. This is not meant for
this end, that Towns, Families, Kinreds, etc. should be filled with causless
and uncharitable suspicions of one against another, whereby Christian Love is
weakened or extinguished; but that wisdom or watchfulness should be used,
especially when men have to do with such, as either are notoriously wicked, or
give shrewd signs of Hypocrisy, that we should not be too open toward such;
nor by liberty of speech about matters too high for us to meddle in, or by
opening secrets to give them power to hurt us; we know not how far the malice
of Satan, together with the corruptions of their own hearts may carry them. A
wise and watchful carriage in keeping out of their danger, need not hinder us
from performing any office of Christian Love unto them. The Spirit of God in
the Proverbs gives many directions of this Nature, which Christians are to
practice. And albeit we may think our words are such, as cannot justly be
blamed, yet when we use unnecessary liberty of speech, though we seem to keep
within our bounds, how ^asi^y may ignorance, mistake, or malice pervert that
which has been spoken, and so we may be snared in the words of our mouth.

Nay, not only such as I spoke of, are to be taken-heed of, but even many
others, in whom we see not those evidences of notorious sins, or Hypocrisy;
for we know not what alterations there may be in men. It were much to be
wished, that our speeches might be such, whereby our selves or others might be
edified, and not whereby our selves or others should be entrapped, or
endangered: yea the Scripture that highly condemns worldliness,
carking-cares, covetousness, and neglect of that one thing necessary, yet does
commend Christian providence in managing these outward things; and therefore it
is a Christian duty, and not only a point of good husbandry to take heed of
rashness in betraying our outward means to the will and pleasure of other men
without just cause, and therefore rash suretyship is condemned in Scripture:
and many that run into bands they care not how, say afterward (when it is too
late) they had thought such and such would never have dealt with them as they
have done.

CHAP. XXV.
NOw beloved, see that you abound in love to the Brethren; think that you can
never love them enough. To increase in Love is a thousand times better than to
increase in wealth; it is more necessary and more excellent. Therefore St. Paul
says to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4.9.10. As touching Brotherly Love, ye need
not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one
another: and indeed ye do it toward all the brethren that are in all
Macedonia: but we beseech you brethren, that ye increase more and more. As if
he had said, I do not provoke you to increase in Wealth, but to increase in
Love: and he that thriveth most in Love is the richest man. He that abounds
^o^t in the grace of Love is most truly rich, he is rich in God, and possessed
of an excellent treasure, whereas many an one that has full bags, great lands,
or stock, has a beggarly Soul and Spirit, destitute of this most excellent
riches.

And now my Brethren, when you come to the Table of Lord, and see it spread and
furnished before you, I desire you to take special notice, that as this
Sacrament is a Seal of the Lords unspeakable love unto us in Christ, if we come
fitted and prepared for it; so it is a Sacrament of mutual and brotherly love
between those that are the Lords invited guests, and those for whom he has
provided this blessed Supper. This bread of the Lord is the Childrens bread;
and this Cup of the Lord is filled for his Children: therefore thou who do
not love the Children of God, as they are his Children, how can thou take
this Sacrament without great Hypocrisy? The Sacrament is a Seal of our Union
and Communion with Christ and his Saints. So says the Apostle concerning this
Sacrament; 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? Is it not a Seal of our Union and Communion
with Christ? and so proper to those that are truly united unto Christ, and made
one with him. Then he adds ver. 17. For we being many, are one bread, and one
body, for we all partakers of that one bread. It is also a Seal of Communion
between the faithful. Now in eating of this one bread with the Children of God,
and drinking with them of the same Cup, thou professest thy self to keep the
Unity of the Spirit with them, in the bond of peace, and so to embrace them,
and to be joined together with them in love; for they are the people for whom
this Supper is principally provided. Now if thou love them the worse for
religion and godliness sake, it is great Hypocrisy, and so, a great pollution
of the Sacrament for thee to receive it; and it is the ready way to bring a
Curse upon thy self, instead of a Blessing, and to make thee guilty of the
blood of Christ, instead of having thy guilt washed away by his blood.

CHAP. XXVI.
LEt me now give Arguments to encourage the Godly to suffer the Hatred of the
World.

1. Consider what a God ye serve, for whose sake ye are hated; and oppose the
infinite Love of God to the worlds hatred: then you need neither to care for
it, nor to be troubled at it. Perhaps a world of wicked men hate thee, yet an
infinite God does love thee: an hell of Devils are combined against thee, yet
an infinite God stands for thee, and embraces thee. Is the hatred of the
world and of hell, greater than the Love of God is toward thee? The worlds
hatred is but of a short continuance; Gods Love is an everlasting Love. There
are bounds set to the worlds hatred, Gods Love is boundless. Look up to God in
Heaven, when the world is in an uproar about thee, and quiet thy self with this
Meditation. I am causlesly hated of the wicked, Yet be not cast down O my Soul,
the Lord of Heaven loves me; and what is their hatred to His Love? The world
is every where railing upon me, and scoffing of me; but what are all the
reproaches of the world to me as long as the Lord delights in me, and
approves of my ways. As David answered Micohl, mocking at him, dancing before
the Ark, It was before the Lord who delighted in me: he cared not whom he
displeased, so long as he pleased God; so the Saints need not regard the world
hatred.

2. God has a special care over thee in thy greatest dangers and troubles.
Tertullian says, a Saint is, cura Divini ingenij, Gods own charge in the
world; he has none to look after, but the Saints. Thou art the Object of the
hatred of the wicked, and of Gods care, as long as the ey^s of God are upon
thee, what matter is it that the envious eyes of the wicked be against thee?
God is more watchful for thy good, than they can be to do thee hurt. David
could sleep securely in the night, although an H^st of ten thousand men did
encamp against him: Gods care over him was an impregnable Shield.

3. Consider that you have Christ a Co-partner with you in their hatred. When
he lived here, he was hated as much as you can be, and is sensible of all the
wrongs that are done unto you. Those Canaanites that are Thorns in thy side,
are Thorns in his side. Those wretches which are pricks in thine Eye, are
pricks in the Apple of his Eye. See how comfortably Christ speaks to you, Be of
good cheer, I have overcome the world.

The wicked are but so many Serpents that have lost their stings; though you
fight with a malicious world, yet you contend with a vanquished enemy, which
shall shortly be trodden under your feet.

4. God does overruled their hatred: sometimes he lets the wicked lose upon his
Saints, sometimes he binds them up. Esau hated Jacob, and purposed to slay him,
but God chain-him up, and made the face of rough Esau to look like an Angel of
God. Wicked men are compared to Seas; sometimes the Waves arise to such an
height in a storm, as if they would over throw and drown all before them; b^t
God has set ^ounds to them: thus far, and ^o farther; here shall thy proud
waves st^y* So God has bounded the malice of the wicked. Thus (...) shall they
trouble his people, ^ut here shall their hatred and malice stay: fain would the
Devil have taken away the life o^ Job, but touch it not, says the Lord. They
cannot take away an hair from your heads, but what God permits.

5. Consider, how God will manifest his Love to thee in Heaven, who art hated
for him here; how Christ will hug thee in his arms, and kiss thee with the
kisses of his mouth, who art reviled for him here. Cast up thine eyes to
Heaven, when thou art sensible of the world; hatred, and say, Heaven will pay
for all: Call to remembrance thy future glory, and then rejoice that thou art
counted worthy to be hated ^o^ Christ's sake. The more the world loads thee with
malice and hatred, the more will God load thee with honor and glory. The more
marks of Christ thou do carry about thee, the higher will Christ exalt thee.
Our Savior endured the Cross, despising the shame, for his eye was fixed upon
the glory set before him, Heb. 12.2. Set Heaven before thine eyes, and thou will neither regard the best nor the worst in this present world. Oh what is
the hatred of this world to the love of God in Christ, and that infinite mass
of glory that shall be revealed!

CHAP. XXVII.
FInally let me give two or three rules for a Christians carriages in the time
of the worlds hatred.

1. Beware of giving just cause by thy carriage to wicked men, to exasperate
their hatred against thee: if they hate thee, let it be for Christ, for
Righteousness sake, and for well-doing. You are not hated for Christ, if you
give any cause to the Adversaries of Religion to revile you. 1 Pet. 2 11.12.
Abstain from fleshly lusts that war against the soul, having your conversation
honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evildoers,
they may by their good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day
of visitation. And 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are
ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled, but sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear;
having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers,
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.
Christians should labor so to walk, that they may have nothing to cover their
malice withal; but that it may be manifest to their Consciences, and to the
eyes of others, that they hate them, and set themselves against them for
Righteousness-sake, and that their Adversaries may be ashamed. Then are men
brought to shame, when things that are shameful are laid open; but when
Christians by worldliness, or distempers, or by playing the busy body, etc. do
give them something to cover their malice against them withal, they keep them
from being ashamed. But when a Christian walks unblameably and watchfully, he
uncovereth the shame of their malice against him, making it to appear, that it
is for Righteousness-sake; and so causes the shame of it to reflect upon their
own faces, insomuch that many times their own Consciences do condemn them them,
for such as fight against God, which may be a means of their Conversion or
restraint.

2. Carry your selves meekly toward them, when they are most maliciously and
furiously bent against you. Two Angels coming into the streets of Sodom in the
Evening, were entertained by Lot. And in likelihood they appeared in the form
of men, showed themselves in a shape surpassing in Beauty, whereupon these
wicked Sodomites boiling with filthy and unnatural lust, desired to abuse
them, contrary to the Law of Nature, taking them to be mortal men; and
observing into what house they entered between Supper and Bedtime, they
assaulted his house, and called upon him to bring forth his guests, that they
might deal with them according to their filthy Lust. Now mark the carriage of
Righteous Let in this case, Genesis 19.6, 7, 8. And Lot went out at the door unto
them, and shut the door after him, and said, I pray you Brethren do not so
wickedly: Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man^; let me I
pray you bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes,
only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my
roof. Now it must be confessed that here was a great failing in this carriage
of Lot, which must not be imitated by any means, that to save his guests from
being unnaturally abused, he would expose his Daughters to the beastly lusts of
the Sodomites, which was so much the greater, in that (as appears afterward)
they were contracted, and so it was a great injury to their husbands, that had
espoused, though not yet married them. But this was partly out of want of
Knowledge, as it seems; for then many Truths were not so cleared as now they
are: partly it was out of weakness: the unlawfulness of Polygamy, and so the
unlawfulness of doing evil that good might come, or yielding to some sin to
prevent a greater sin (as in this case). These and the like truths were not so
clear^y opened to the godly (it seems as now) they are, partly it was out of
weakness of Faith, that he did not rest upon God, who had ways enough to keep
him out of so great a strait without any such indirect and unlawful means as
appeared afterward: and partly out of a sudden confused haste, being beset
with a mighty number of men, desperately wicked, and enflamed with violent and
raging lust, so that not having time to retire his thoughts, and compose his
Spirit, and to take things better into consideration, he sell upon this
unwarrantable shift. I am persuaded, he had much rather have lost his
heart-blood, if that would have satisfied them; but he thought nothing would
save his guests, unless these wretches filthy lusts had some other Objects to
feed upon.

But passing by his great oversight and infirmity, let us take notice of his
carriage otherwise: and that ye shall find was full of Love unto his guests
according to the Law of Hospitality, full of detestation against such foul
unnnatural wickedness, full of meekness toward these Sodomites, as appears
in his speech forementioned. He gave them never a bitter word, he only sought
to keep them from this sin.

CHAP. XXVIII.
NOw (to conduct) let me exhort every Christian to maintain a watchful eye over
their Love, that it wax not cold in these evil-times. Our Savior long since
prophesied of the latter times, that because iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold, Mat. 24.12. That there should be a flood of iniquity, and
a frost of love. The times wherein we live, tell us, that iniquity does abound,
I had almost said, it cannot abound more; now then let brotherly love
continaee, Heb. 13.1. This Love (like that Fire under the Law) came down from
Heaven, therefore preserve it; we had need be very careful, for sinful times
are cooling times: Sin is as apt to quench Love, as Water to quench the Fire.
These objects of Love are continually the same: When Love goes away, the power,
the zeal, the practice of religion goes away. It is an argument your Love is
truly divine, if you keep it flaming in the worst of times. It you suffer your
Love to God and his people to decay, you will lose all the good that ever you
have done. If your Love decay, all the people of God with whom you have taken
sweet counsel together, prayed together, fasted together, all these shall rise
up in judgment against you. Oh think what manner of damnation yours will be; ye
shall feel the most dreadful effects of Gods eternal hatred, who have suffered
your Love to Gods ways and people to dye within you. Oh if your Love decay, it
is not easily recovered again; and to recover your first Love, you must repent,
and do your first works, it will cost you much labor, much sighing, much
sorrow of heart before you can recover your former degrees of Love. Take heed
of a slavish fear of wicked men; St. Paul opposes the spirit of fear to the
spirit of Love, 2 Timothy 1.17. Be not too familiar with those that are unsettled
in the truth. Many had loved more, had they disputed less. Set your hearts on
the things of the world; Demas forsook the fellowship of the Saints, because he
embraced this present world.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London-Bridg.
MR. Sedgwick's Bowels of Mercy. fol. The Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol.
2. An Exposition of Temptation, on Mat. 4. verse 1. to the end of the eleventh.
3. A Commentary on Titus. 4. David's Learning: A Comment upon Psalm. 32. 5. The
Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed. upon Luke 8. and 4. A Learned Commentary
or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, by
Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol. A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the
first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on
Psalm. 4. ver. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony Burgess, fol. The view of the Holy
Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton. Fol. Christianographia, or a Description of the
multitude, and sundry sorts of Christians in the world, not subject to the
Pope. By Ephesians. Pagitt. Fol. These six Treatises next following, are written by
Mr. George Swinnock. 1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making
Religion ones busineis, in Religious Duti^s, Natural Actions, his Particular
Vocation, his Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families
for their Instruction and Edification. The first Part. 2. Likewise a second
Part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in the conditions of
Prosperity and Adversity. 3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's
Calling, Wherein the Christian is directed how to make Religion his business,
in his dealings with all Men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage
in good Company, in bad Company, in solitarine^s, or when he is alone, on a
Weekday from morning to night, in visiting the sick on a Dying bed; as also
the means how a Christian may do this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of
Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized:
and the True Christian Characterized. The Fading of the Flesh, and the
flourishing of Faith: Or, One cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it
well; all these by George Swinnock M. A. Large Octavoes. A learned Commentary
on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, to
which is added, First, a Conference between Christ and Mary. Second, the
Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles, by Richard Sibbs,
D. D. 4 to. An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful
observations thereupon, by Will Greenhil. 4 to. The Gospel Covenant, or the
Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New- England, by Peter Buckely. 4 to.
Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B.
D. 4 to. A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by John Dod,
4 to. Fiery Jesuit, or and Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase,
Doctrines, and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4
to. Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effec^s, discovered. By Theophilus Bolwheile. A Defense against the fear of
Death. By Zac^ Crofton. The True bounds of Christian freed^m, or a Discourse
showing the extents and restraints of Christian Liberty, wherein the truth is
settled, many errors con^^^ed; out of John 8. ver. 36.
FINIS.

