A COLLECTION Out of the best Approved Authors, CONTAINING HISTORIES OF
Visions, Apparitions, Prophesies, Spirits, Divinations, and other wonderful
Illusions of the Devil wrought by Magic or otherwise.

Also of diverse Astrological Predictions, SHOWING As the wickedness of the
former, so the vanity of the latter, and folly of trusting to them.

LONDON: Printed for Joshua Kirton, at his shop in S. Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Kings-Arms. 1657.

Courteous Reader,
HOw great an influence that bewitching Art of Magical-Astrology has had on
multitudes of both men and women in these our times, too sad experience does
truly make evident; yea so far, that it may well be feared, that some are more
ready to harken to, and place more confidence in, these their pretended
Divinations or Prognostications, then ought well to stand with a true
Christians prosession. Somewhat to undeceive those that either hitherto have
been, or hereafter may be deluded by these deceivers and their deceits, is the
end of this Collection. In which you shall find, that the Author has
faithfully, and from well approved Writers, set forth, as the original of that
Diabolical Art, and the strong delusions of Satan; so likewise by several
examples, showed the wickedness of the Professors, and how exceedingly they
have been deluded, that over credulously have given credit to the same; if
pleasure or profit prevail with thee, I hope this may prove acceptable to thee,
wherein thou have not only variety of story, but the same improved for thy
good; which that it may so prove, as the hearty desire of,

Yours, I. K.

1. Of the fabulous erections and appellations of Stars, and Celestial
Signs; such as the Mag-astro-mancers do make use of, in their erecting of
Theames, or Scheames; for their divining prognostications and predictions.
PHrixus had a Golden sheep, or a Ram with a Golden Fleece, given him by his
father, or else by his mother; this Ram nourished him; and speaking with man's
voice, advised him of sundry perils; and to help him in his flight, flew with
him in the air, carrying him over Hellespout, to Colchos: then was this Ram
sacrificed to Jupiter, to Mars, or to Mercury; and the skin or fleece hanged
upon an Oak or an Elm; in the Wood, Grove, or Temple of Jupiter, or of
Mercury: And in memorial of all this, it was by prayer obtained of Jupiter,
that the Sign Aries, or the Ram, should be placed among the Stars. All that
can here be credible, is; that this Phrixus was an Astrologer; now the
Astrologer gave an occasion to the Fable; and the Fable to the setting up of
the first sign of the Zodiac.

Jupiter infinitely taken with the excellent beauty of Europa, turned himself
into a dainty white Bull, and was seeding by the Sea side, where Europa, with
her fellow Virgins, used to walk, she observing and admiring the unusual
comeliness of this beast, went aside to behold it, fell more freely to stroke
it, gat upon the back of it; and by this wile was carried over Sea into Great,
and there ravished. Then for an everlasting memorial of this fact, Jupiter
placed the image of Taurus among the Stars: and Europa obtained that one part
of the world might be called after her name.

Orion arrogantly boasting of his cunning and power to kill any beast, Tellus,
Latona, Diana, indigning this insolency, raised up a Scorpion that slew him.
Scorpius for this memorable fact, was taken up, and set among the Stars: and
(in pity) Orion was thither referred also, and placed next to Taurus.

Ganymedes a beautiful Boy, inordinately loved by Jupiter, he caused an Eagle
to snatch him up into heaven; and so translated him among the Stars; to make
that Sign which they call Aquarius.

Such stories of Star-making there are in the Poetical Fables of the Pleiades,
the Hyades, the Dolphin, the Eagle, the Swan, the Goat, of Castor and Pollux,
of Cassiope and Andromeda, of Ariadnes crown, of Orpheus his Harp, of the
Argonants ship, of Silenus his Ass, and the Asses Cribbe, etc.

2. Of the Mythologicall significations of Planets; which are not only made to
signify men's morals, or their manners; but their fatals also, or their lives
and fortunes.
Saturn was the son of Coelus and Rhea; which signifies, that Time began
with the agitation and motion of beams and the Stars. Saturn cut off his
fathers genitals: This signifies time consuming her self, or forgetting her
own beginning rather. Jupiter cuts off Saturnes genitals; because he tempers
his malice, or malign influence. Saturn covenants with his brother Titan to
slay all his sons; to note, that it is conspired betweed the Sun and Time,
that all that are born shall haste to an end. Saturn devoures his own sons;
to note, that few live, who when they are born, have Saturn dominant in their
horoscope. But Saturn did only eat up his male-children, not his females: is
he therefore not so malignant in the birth of women, as of men? And Saturn was
couzened by his wives shifts, who kept some of his male children from his
greedy tooth; yea and was made to devour a stone instead of a man: does not
this signify, that a Planet may be prevented by that which is no Planet?
Saturn vomited up again all that he did eat: showing that nature repaires
that by generation, which she impaires by corruption. Saturn turned himself
into a horse, to obtain his love, or indeed his lust: which shows what furious
lust they are prone to, that are borne under this cold and dull Planet. Saturn
is old; because of his slow motion, and want of heat. He has a Sithe in his
hand, and a Serpent by him; because he is a retrograde Planet. Jupiter binds
him, deposes him casts him into hell: and all this is but a figure of a
conjunction depressing, infringing, or tempering his malignant influence. But
Jupiter does no such thing, but rather frees, and restores him: and does that
signify nothing? was not this benign Planet now a means to help and forward
his malignity? But Saturn was foretold by an Oracle that his own son should
depose him from his Kingdom. What? were divining Oracles before the Planets? Or
indeed, are there not over the Stars that can foretell their fates; as well
as they can the fates of others? In short, the Golden age was under Saturnes
reign: why then is he made so maleficall a Planet wheresoever he is
predominant? It would be long to note the like of Jupiter, Mars, Sol, etc. and
after all such observation, the question at last would return to this: whether
Mythology or Astrology (the poetical, or the speculatory Fable) serves most,
to make one another good, or more significant?

3. Of the strange, uncouth, improbable, impossible, ridiculous, and
superstitious causes, grounds, forms, prescripts, ways, means, and
instruments, whereby to acquire the Art, procure the power, and prepare unto
the practice of Divinatory, Magic and Astrology.
MElampus, Tiresias, Thales, and Apollonius Tyanaeus could understand the voice
or language of Birds. The latter of them sitting among his friends, seeing many
Sparrowes upon a tree, and another coming in chirping to the rest, told them,
that it told its fellows, that there was a sack of Wheat spilt in such a place,
near the City; and they going to see, found it so. But how learnt Appollonius
this rare divining art? why peradventure by Democritus his prescript, who named
the Birds, whose blood being mingled together would produce a serpent: of which
whosoever would eat should understand the voices of Birds. Or else, by that of
Hermes, who says, If any one shall go forth to catch Birds on a certain day
of the Kalends of November; and shall boil the first bird that he catches,
with the heart of a Fox: that all that shall eat of this bird, shall
understand the voices of Birds, and of all other animals. Or else that of the
Arabians, who say, that they shall understand the meaning of bruits; who shall
eat the heart and liver of Dragons.

The Sybils, the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Amon, were by
their natural melancholy complexion, Prophets, and Poets. -- Hesiod, Ion,
Tynnichus, Calcinensis, Homer, and Lucretius, were on a sudden taken with a
madness, and became poets, and prophesied wonderful and divine things, which
they themselves scarce understood. -- Cornelius Patarus his Priest, did at that
time, when Caesar and Pompey were to fight in Thessalia, being taken with
madness, foretell the time, order, and issue of the battle.

How great heats love stirs up in the liver and pulse, Physicians know,
discerning by that kind of judgment, the name of her that is beloved. So
Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken with the love of Stratonica.

When a maid at Rome died the same day that she was married, and was presented
to Apollonius, he accurately enquired into her name; which being known, he
pronounced some occult thing, by which she revived. It was an observation among
the Romans, in their holy rites, that when they did besiege any City, they did
diligently enquire into the proper and true name of it, and the name of that
God under whose protection it was: which being known, they did then with some
verse, call forth the Gods, that were the protectors of that City, and did
curse the inhabitants thereof, and so at length, their Gods being absent, did
overcome them.

Vsyche in Apuleius, prays thus to Ceres; I beseech thee by thy fruitful
right hand, I embrace thee by the joyful ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet
silence of thy chests, by the winged Chariot of Dragons thy servants, by the
furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring wagon, the clammy earth, by the
place of going down into cellars at the light nuptials of Proserpina, and
returns of the last inventions of her daughter, and other things which are
concealed in her Temple in the City Eleusis in Attica.

The Egyptians, and Arabians confirm, that the figure of the Cross, has
very great power, and that it is the most sure receptacle of all the celestial
powers, and intelligences, because it is the rightest figure of all, containing
four right angles, and it is the first description of the superficies, having
longitude and latitude; and they said it is inspired with the fortitude of the
Celestials.

Rabbi Israel made certain cakes, writ upon with certain divine and
angelical names, and so consecrated; which they that did eat with faith,
hope, and charity, did presently break forth with a spirit of Prophecy.

Rabbi Iohena the son of Iochabod did after that manner enlighten a certain
rude Countreyman, called Eleazar, being altogether illiterate, that being
compassed about with sudden brightness, did unexpectedly preach such high
mysteries of the law, to an assembly of wise men, that he did even astonish all
that were near him.

A certain man called Heruiscus an Egyptian was endued with such a divine
nature, that at the very sight of Images that had any deity in them, he was
forthwith stirred up with a kind of divine phrenzy.

The Sybil in Delphi was wont to receive God after two ways: either by subtle
spirit, and fire, which did break forth somewhat out of the mouth of the cave,
where she sitting in the entrance, upon a brazen three footed stool, dedicated
to a Diety; was divinely inspired, and did utter prophecyings; or a great fire,
flying out of the cave, did surround this prophetess, stirring her up, being
filled with a Deity, to prophecy; which inspiration also she received, as she
sat upon a consecrated seat, breaking forth presently into predictions.

There was a Prophetess in Branchi which sat upon an Extree, and either held
a wand in her hand given to her by some Deity: or washed her feet, and
sometimes the hem of her garment in the waters: by all these she was filled
with divine splendour, and did unfold many Oracles.

In the Country of Thracia there was a certain passage consecrated to
Bacchus, from whence Predictions and Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors
of whose Temples having drank wine abundantly, did do strange things. Amongst
the Charians also, where the Temple of Clavius Apollo was, to whom it was given
to utter divine things, they having drank much Wine, did strange things.

There was also a prophetical fountain of Father Achaia, constituted before
the Temple of Ceres; where they that did enquire of the event of the sick, did
let down a Glass by degrees tied to a small cord, to the top of the water; and
certain supplications, and fumes being made, the event of the thing did
appear in the glass.

There was also not far from Epidaurus, a City of Licaonia, a deep Fume,
which was called the water of Juno, into which cakes of Corn being cast,
answers were given fortunate, if the waters did quietly retain what was cast
in: but unhappy, if they did as it were scorning of them, cast them back.

We read that Hermes, Socrates, Xenocrates, Plato, Plotine, Heraclitus,
Pythagoras and Zoroastes, were wont to abstract themselves by rapture, and so
to learn the knowledge of many things. Also there was in Proconnesus, a
Philosopher of wonderful knowledge, called Atheus; whose soul sometimes went
out of the body, and after the visitation of places far remote, returned
again into the body, more learned. Also the soul of Harman Clezomenius was
wont to wander abroad, his body being left, and to bring true tidings of things
very far off. And there are even to this day, in Norway and Lapland very many
who can abstract themselves three whole days from their body, and being
returned, declare many things which are afar off.

Amphiarus the Prophet commanded those who would receive Oracles to abstain
one whole day from meat, and three days from wine; that the soul could not
rightly prophecy unless it were free from wine.

It was a custom amongst the Ancients, that they who should receive Answers,
certain sacred expiations, and sacrifices being first celebrated, and divine
worship ended; did religiously lie down even in a consecrated chamber, or at
least in the skins of the sacrifices. The Rulers of the Lacedaemonians were
wont to lie down in the Temple at Pasiphae that they might dream. The same was
done in the Temple of Aesculapius, from whom true dreams were thought to be
sent forth. And the Calabrians consulting Podalyrius, the son of Aesculapius,
did sleep near his Sepulcher in Lamb-skinnes: for so doing they were told in
their dreams whatsoever they desired to know.

There was formerly at Bura a town in Achaia, an Oracle of Hercules,
constituted by a Chest board, where he that went to consult of any thing, after
he had prayed, cast four Dice; the cast of which the Prophet observing, did
find written in the Chest-board what should come to pass.

There was once at Pharis, a City of Achaia, in the middle of the Market, a
statue of Mercury; where he that went to receive omen, did, Frankincense being
fumed, and candles being lighted, which was set before it, and that Country
Coin being offered on the right hand of the statue, whisper into the right
care of the statue, whatsoever he would demand; and presently, his ears being
stopped with both his hands, did make baste away from the Marketplace; which
when he was past, did presently, his ears being opened, observe the first
voice he did hear from any man, for a certain Oracle given unto him.

The Pythagorean Philosophers, being taken with desire of Oracles, divine
praises being celebrated, did wash themselves in a river, as in a bathe; and
did put on white raiment, and linen, etc. -- In like manner, the Brachmanni,
the wise men of the Indians, were wont to wash themselves naked in a fountain,
which is called Dirce in Boeotia, their heads being first anointed with amber
drops, and odors fit for that purpose: then after they were according to
custom sufficiently clean, they were to go forth about noon, clothed in
white linen, with a white attire, having rings on their fingers, and staves in
their hands. In like manner among the Gymnosophists it was a custom to wash
themselves thrice a day, and twice in the night, in cold water; before they
entered into the holy place, etc.

The Brachmani did admit none to their College, but those that were abstinent
from wine, from flesh, and vices: saying that none could understand God, but
they that emulate him by a divine conversation, which also Phraortes (in
Philostratus) taught the lower Indians.

The Priests of the Athenians, who are called in Greek Hierophantae (as Hierome
reports) that they might live the more chastely in their sacred employments, and
might follow their divine affairs without lust, were wont to castrate
themselves, by drinking of Hemlock.

Zoroastes the father and Prince of the Magicians, is said to attain to the
knowledge of all natural and divine things, by the solitude of twenty years;
when he wrote, and did very strange things, concerning all the art of divining
and soothsaying. The like things do the writings of Orpheus to Musaeus,
declare him to have done in the desert of Thracia. So we read that Epimenides
of Crete, because learned by a very long sleep; for they say, that he slept
fifty years, id est, to have lain hid so long. Pythagoras also in like manner
to have lain hid ten years: and Heraclitus and Democritus for the same cause
were delighted with solitariness.

The Brachmanni of the Indians, the Magicians of the Persians, the
Gymnosophists of the Egyptians, the Divines of the Greeks, and Chaldeans
which did excel in divine secrets; did apply themselves to divine vows and
prayers, and thereby did effect many wonderful things.

Abbot Ioachim proceeded no other way in his prophecies, but by formal numbers.

4. Of the diabolical, original, and obscure, and spurious Inventers,
Authors, and Tutors, to praestigious Magic, and divining Astrology.
THe Delphian Oracle was first invented by a Goat; and that's the reason why a
Goat is there immolated by the consulters. For a goat looking into a great
chink or cleft of the earth, began to insult with strange voice, and gesture;
which made the admiring shepherds peep in too, and so were corrupted with
fury to prediction. The fame of this made it to be adjudged an earthly oracle,
and so a Tripode was built over it for divination. It was first ascribed to
Tellus, Tellus gave it to Thenus, and Thenus to Apollo.

Tages the nephew of Jupiter, the son of a Genius, or a Devil, yea an evil
Genius, or a Devil himself, taught the Hetrurians the aruspicinall discipline,
or the art of divining. For, as a certain Plowman was plowing in the
Tarquinian field, there suddenly starts up from under a clod, this Tages, in
the form of a little child, and spoke to the Plowman: at which he astonished,
cried out; whereupon in came all the Hetrurians; and then he taught them this
art or discipline for the space of six hours together, and they wrote it from
his mouth; and so he died, or disappeared. Some say that this Tages was only a
base obscure fellow, and that he grew famous on a sudden, from the art of
divining.

Sosipatra a prophetess, the wife of Aedesius the Sophister, had two Demons
in the form of old men, that taught her the secrets of Magic, for the space of
five years together.

A strange old woman came to Tarquin the proud, and offered him nine books to
sale (which she said were divine Oracles) and asking him a huge price for them,
the King laughed at her, for making so monstrous a demand: whereupon she burnt
three of them before his face, and still asked the same price for the rest; at
which the King laughed so much the more; then burning other three, and yet
bating nothing of her former price, the King conceived there might be some rare
thing contained in them, and bought the last three at the same rate: and so the
woman went out, and was never seen after by any. Now these books they kept as
divinatory Oracles, to be consulted as occasion served.

One has a pretty Apologue to this effect: A light giddy huswife, Dame vanity,
stole into the bed of a wild youth called Sir Curiosity; and betwixt them both
was begotten a manyfaced Elfe, called Magic: and fearing lest the Lady Truth
should cause it to be strangled as soon as it was born, for a monster; the two
sureties of it, or guardians, Grandsire Impudence, and Grandame Superstition,
having wrapped it up in the mantle of an old crone, called Difficulty, and her
waiting puzzle named Jill Hard-trifle attending upon it; they committed it to
nurse to a prodigious Hagge, that hight Praestigie: she carried it up and down
to the blind houses of Gaffer Ignorance and Gammer Folly; in whose families it
has lurkt ever since, entertained only by a fond Gossip, called Credulity;
where it still keeps in (like an Owl) all the day time of Truth and Peace; and
never dares to peep abroad, but in the twilight of Error and Distraction.

From the sect of the Grecians have proceeded all these books of Darkness,
which Vlpianus the Lawyer calls books disallowed to be read, and forthwith
appointed them to be destroyed. Of which sort the first is Zabulus reported to
invent, who was given to unlawful Arts: then Barnabas a certain Cyprian. And
now in these days, there are carried about books with feined titles; under the
names of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon; also Paul, Honorius, Cyprianus,
Albertus, Thomas, Hierome, and of a certain man of York; whose toys Alphonsus
King of Castile, Rohert an Englishman, Bacon, and Apponus, and many other men
of deplored wit, have foolishly followed. Moreover they have not made Men
only, and Saints and Patriarks, and the Angels of God, the Authors of such
execrable opinions, but they boast also that these books were delivered by
Raziel and Raphael the angels of Adam and Tobias, which books openly betray
themselves, to him that looks narrowly into them, etc.

Peter (in Glement) deduces this art from the prevaricating Angels; proving,
how they taught men, that the Devils do obey mortal men, according to
certain arts, and may be compelled thereunto, that is, by magical invocations.

Cham the son of Noah, delivered the ill found out discipline of Magic art,
to a certain son of his, called Misraim (from whom is derived the race of
the Egyptians, Babylonians, and Persians) him the Nations that then were,
called Zoroaster, the first author of the admired magical art. His master in
this vanity, was Ayovax or Azovax etc.

Methodius writes, that in the 340 year of Jared there arose the inventors of
the evil art, men full of all wickedness, of the sons of Cain: as Iabeth, and
Tholuscoll, the sons of Lamech, who was blind; in the time of whose dominion
the devil perverted them to all kind of Magical arts.

Zabulus and Zamolxis addicted to unlawful arts, first invented, or rather
propagated it, so as that without doubt it might be determined for issuing from
their father the Devil. There followed their steps Almadal, Alchiudus, and
Hipochus, from the root of the Arabians; Apuschierus, Zaratus, and Cobares,
among the Medes; Marmaridius, among the Babylonians; Zarmocemdas among the
Assyrians; Abbaris among the Hyperboreant; Thespetion among the Aethiopians;
Arunphis among the Egyptians; Julian among the Chaldaeans, called the
Thaurgists, etc.

Besides the spurious, fictitious, and ascriptitious books of Adam, Abel,
Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Daniel, Solomon, Zacharias, Paul, etc. St.
Augustine (oh horror of blasphemy!) reports certain foolish, wretched Pagans,
(affected themselves to magical art) to have boasted that they had seen and
read books of Magical art written by Christ himself; and by an epistolary
title directed to Peter and Paul: affirming that by the arts therein contained,
he did all those miracles for which he was so famous. But the Father bids show
those books they spoke of; and asks if they by them can learn to do as he
did? and withal proves against them, That Christ himself wrote no book at
all; that he need not write to Peter, because he was always with him; that he
could not write to Paul, because he was not called till after his passion; and
that he would not write of Magic, because it was contrary to his doctrine; and
that even his enemies were thus convinced how venerable and virtuous the name
of Christ was; in that they thought and sought to win the weight of authority
to such their execrable arts, by commentitiously prefixing his most glorious
name.

Cassandra desperately loved by Apollo, and importunately solicited by him,
would not consent, unless he would first bestow upon her the gift of
Divination. Which the credulous lover soon granted; but she having already
obtained her desire, refused to stand to her promise, for the satisfaction of
his. This the divining God could not foresee; yet indigning to find himself
so deluded, because he could not recall such his fatal gift, he laid this
curse upon it, That whatsoever she vaticinated, she should not be believed. Let
it be a curse to the predictors not to be believed: surely it is a blessing to
Christians not to believe them. And believe them who list, whose original
endowment was from a lust.

The first man that themselves confess to have attained to the skill of a
Prophet in Tharsus, was a silly Shepherd; having only so much wit, as taught
him to take advantage of the follies of his Countrymen. Others say, the first
Prophet of this kind was found by chance in an old vault, in Hetruria: without
knowledge either of his name, his dwelling, or the mean that conveyed him
thither.

When began the motions of the Stars, and accordingly the genethliacall way
to be known? was it not after Theatis the Egyptian? or else, as some say,
after Atlas, the prop and supporter of the heavens?

The Original and foundation of Magical and Astrologicall arts, is yet more
dubious and fabulous, from the false opinions and impossible, about the time of
the worlds beginning, and computation of the years thereof. Apuleius was of
opinion, that the world, and men, and arts therein, were from eternity. And
being destroyed by floods and conflagrations, (in some parts, but not all) were
repaired, but not created. The Indians boasted of men living long before Adam;
and that they could name who was Adams father and master. The Egyptians
fained, that they had a story in letters comprehending thirteen thousand
years. The Chaldaeans dotingly gloried, that they had monuments of Astrology,
containing four hundred and seventy thousand years. Plato accounts many
thousands of ages to have been past, since the existence of the world; and
induces an Egyptian Priest talking with Solon, and affirming, that Athens of
the Greeks, and Sais of the Egyptians, were built, one nine, the other eight
thousand years before their time. The Egyptians fained that the Stars, from
their first original, had four times run their courses, (and the Stars do
not once absolve their course but in 36000 years) and that the Sun had twice
set where it now rises: and that their Kings, to Ptolomy, had reigned there
above seventy thousand years: and that for more then an hundred thousand
years, Egypt had been skillful in comprehending the way of the Stars. The
Indians bragd of their historical monuments, that from the time of Liber Pater
to Alexander the great, there were an hundred fifty and three Indian Kings;
through the space of six thousand four hundred and two years, and three
months. The Chaldaeans, from their first observation of the Stars, to
Alexanders time, number four hundred thousand years. Pliny reports from
Eudoxus, that Zoroaster lived six thousand years before Platoes death.
Hernippus says the same man was five thousand years before the Trojane war.
Betwixt Vulcan the son of Nilus the Egyptian and Alexander of Macedon, were
(they say) forty eight thousand, eight hundred sixty three years: in which
time there happened three hundred seventy three Defects or Ecclipses of the
Sun, and eight hundred thirty two of the Moon. The Egyptians record in their
annals above thirteen thousand ages of years, and three hundred and thirty
Kings before Amesis. Betwixt Osiris, and Isis, and Alexander of Macedon, some
reckon ten thousand, others twenty three thousand years. Other fable the Gods,
and Heroes to have reigned there no less then eighteen thousand, and men
little less then fifteen thousand years, unto the hundred and eighty
olimpiad. Alexander in an Epistle to his mother Olympias, wrote the narration
of a certain Egyptian Priest insinuating the Kingdom of the Assyrians to
exceed five thousand years: the Empire of the Persions and Macedonians unto
Alexander, more then eight thousand years. The Assyrians, through the
vastness and plainness of their Region, whence they might on all parts behold
the trajections and motions of the Stars; these being noted they first
committed to memory what was thereby signified to every one; in which Nation
the Chaldaeans (so called not from their art, but their country) by continual
observation of the Stars, are thought to have made the science, whereby it
might be predicted what should befall every one, and with what fate every one
was born.

5. Of Paganish Oracles, founded upon the stars, founding divinatory Magic,
and Astrology, confounded by Divinity, and Christianity.
A Certain big bellied woman enquiring of Apollo, whether it was a male child,
or a female, that she went withal, and should bring forth? he answered a
female; declaring that he had perceived so much from the time of her
conception, saying, thou may not hope for a male-child, seeing the Moon is
darkened by the rays of Venus. To another, enquiring as concerning his health,
it was answered (by the course of the Stars predicting sicknesses) that his
lungs were vexed with ill humors; because Saturn was pressed with unevenness
or roughness, either in leaping, or speaking. In answer to another, Thy fatal
day (quoth he) is at hand: because Saturn and Mars have both agreed together
to determine it.

Apollo himself being interrogated by a certain Soldier, why he labored so
hazzardous a thing as the fatation of a man's free will? answered, because
genethliacall Mars so stirred him up: or else thus, why he labored under such
hazard or peril himself? because fatiduall Mars had stirred up such a thing
against his fatiduall Oracle. For thus tamely they took their own fatations;
and confessed they were not able to defend their own Temples from firing.

Pythius Apollo contended, that fates might be dissolved by malesicall arts.
For when one enquired, why he was judged of Apollo as unapt for any thing? and
what was to be done, whereby he might be received as fit for something? It was
answered by the Oracle, that the force of the Fates did hinder him, and yet he
might avoid that by Magical arts.

Porphyrius confesses, that the gods will lie, saying, that an exquisite
knowledge of things future, is not only incomprehensible to men, but to many
of the gods. Nevertheless did they not always lie of their own accord; but
were wont to predict, that they themselves could not answer truly; and yet men
out of their madness, would obstinately compel them to answer. Therefore
Delphick Apollo, when the affection, or disposition of the Heavens, and the
continent was so, that he could not foresee the truth: forbear (said he by his
diviner) this forcible urging, and utter not those powerful words; for I shall
tell false, if thou thus compellest. And in another answer, the way of the
Stars (says he) afford me to say nothing to day.

Where is the Delphian Oracle, that men did so religiously adore? where is
Apollo Pythius, or Clarius? where is Jupiter Dodonaeus? The Delphicke Oracle
truly is related to have been thrice burnt by the Thracians; yet was not that
calamity once foreseen or foretold by Apollo himself. We have heard the same
of Jupiter Capitoline, in the time of Ptolomy, when the Temple of Vesta was
also burnt. That great Image of Jupiter, which they say was the glory as it
were of all Greece, in the time of Julius Caesar burned, being from above
stricken with thunder and lightning in the Olympic bickerings. And in more
ancient times, they say the Capitoline Temple was burnt: and Pantheus is said
to be cast down and destroyed with thunder and lightning: and we are not
ignorant, how the Sacrary of Serapis in Alexandria was burnt in like manner.

Augustus Caesar consulting the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, about the succession
in the Empire, it gave no answer thereunto: and being importuned to give a
reason of its silence, answered to this effect: That an Hebrew child, a Ruler
of the Gods themselves, had commanded him to depart that place, and get him
down to Hell.

Aemilianus the Rethorician was heard to report, that his Father sailing
toward Italy, about the Isles which they call the Echinades, the wind lying
still, toward night they came near to Paxas; and they that sailed being more
attently vigilant, on a sudden was heard a great voice from the Isle Paxas,
calling on one Thraemnus (now this Thraemnus was an Egyptian, and Governor of
that ship) they all wondered, but he answered not till the third call, and then
it cried louder thus: When thou come near the Fenne, proclaim, that great
Pan is dead. Which being heard, all of them were stricken with great fear, and
doubted whether they should obey that voice or not; at length they approved
this counsel of Thraemnus the Governor, that if the winds blew fair and
prosperous, they would say nothing; but if the Sea were calm, and the winds
ceased when they came in that very place, then there was no concealing of what
they had heard. Now when they were near the fenne, and no wind stirring,
Thraemnus looking into the Sea, pronounced with a loud voice, as he had heard,
Great Pan is dead. Which being proclaimed, there was presently heard many and
great and strange groans. As soon as they came to Rome, the rumor hereof
filled the whole City, so that Tiberius sent for Thraemnus to confirm the
truth thereof. -- Then Demetrius told his story, Beyond Britain there are many
desolate Islands, some of which are dedicated to Demons and Heroes: and I
sailed (said he) toward an Isle near to Britain; where there are few
inhabitants, but all accounted hallowed by the Britains: As I was there, a
great tempest arose in the air, with storms and lightnings that made us all
afraid: which thing the Islanders said, fell out, because some of the Demons,
and Heroes were dead. The grave Author gives this note upon them, that these
things were said, and done in the time of Tiberius; in which time our Savior
was conversant upon earth, and then both silenced and expelled Devils.

6. Of the Magical Oracles, and or aculous Magicians, the causes of all
Idolatry; especially that inhumane abomination of humane Sacrifices, or
immolations.
THe Rhodians did sacrifice a man to Saturn; which they afterward willing to
mitigate, did reserve unto those Saturnials, one condemned to death; whom,
being laden with Wine, they immolated at that feast. In the I Will Salamis, which
of old time they called Coronea, until the time of Diomedes, a man was
slaughtered to Agravala the daughter of Cecrops: afterward in the Temple of
Pallas, Agravala and Diomedes (one of the three) a man was immolated; whom led
by youths about the altar, at length was smitten by the Priest with a spear,
and so laid upon the fire and burnt; which thing Dyphilus the King of Cyprus
(in the time of Seleucus) abhominating, appointed that not a man, but an Ox
should be sacrificed to Diomedes. Amongst the Egyptians in Heliopolis they
sacrificed men. To Juno they sacrificed three in a day. To Dionysius called
Omadius, by those of Chios, a man was sacrificed, being cruelly torn in pieces.
The Lacedaemonians were wont to sacrifice a man to Mars. The Phaenicians, in
the calamities of war, and pestilence, were wont to immolate their dearest
friends to Saturn. The Curetes sacrificed of old their children to Saturn. In
Laodicea of Syria a Virgin was offered to Pallas. The Arabians every year
sacrificed a child, and buried it under the Altar. All the Graecians commonly
immolated a man before they went out to war. In the great City of Latinus, a
man was sacrificed upon the solemnity of Jupiter. Not only in Arcadia, to Pan
Lyceus; nor in Carthage, to Saturn; but all men in common, upon the appointed
day of sacrificing a man did sprinkle the Altar with man's blood. It was the
manner of the Ancients in great calamities, and dangers, that the Prince of the
Nation, or City should give up the best beloved of his children to a vengefull
devil, as a reward of redemption, and mystically to slaughter him so delivered
up. Saturnus the King of that Region which the Phaenicians call Israel, who
after he had put off man, being brought to the star of Saturn, having a
dear and only son of Anobret his new married Spouse, called Jeud (for so
the Phaenicians call an only son) because the City was pressed with a most
great and dangerous war; Him, clad in regal ornaments, he offered upon the
Altar built and prepared to that purpose. Aristomenes Messenius sacrificed
three hundred at once to Jupiter, whom they call Ichometes; among whom
Theopompus the King of the Lacedaemonians was a Noble and Regal Host. The
Tauroscythians whatsoever stranger they took (and they took many, driven
thither by tempest) they were wont forthwith to sacrifice them to Diana. In
Pella a City of Thessalia a man of Achaia was sacrificed every year to Peleus,
and Chiron. The Cretians did immolate a man to Jupiter. The Lesbians to
Dionysius. The Phocensians to Diana. Herechteus the Atticke, and Macharius the
Roman, one sacrificed his daughter to Proserpina, the other to a Demon his
defensor. Jupiter and Apollo is said to have brought great calamity upon Italy,
because the tenth part of men was not sacrificed to them. The Pelasgi, and the
Aborigenes, the earth being fruitless, vowed to sacrifice to Jupiter, and
Apollo, the tenth part of all that should be born. The Celti, and almost all
the more Easterly people did sacrifice by homicide. Saturn was angry with the
Carthaginians, because whereas formerly they had sacrificed to him, the more
excellent of their sons; afterward they immolated to him infants privily
bought, and obscurely educated, instead of their children: whereupon to appease
him, they publicly sacrificed to him two hundred of their most Noble young
men.

The Athenians being afflicted with famine, because of the slaughter of
Androgeus, and flying to the Gods for help, Apollo did not answer, that the
Gods were to be pacified with righteousness, humanity, repentance, or
contrition: but he adding death to death, and plague to plague, and cruelty to
cruelty, commanded that seven males, and as many females, (not infants, but men
grown) should every year be sent into Creet, and there sacrificed.

Cepheus King of the Aethiopians, and Cassiope his wife, had one only
daughter, named Andromeda; in his time a huge sea monster infested the
Country; whereupon they consulting the Oracle for remedy; answer was returned,
that could not be, till Andromeda was exposed to that monster to be devoured.
Thus cruel were the Stars to those, that afterward were made Stars themselves.

Tiresias promised victory to the Thebanes; but upon this condition, that the
son of Creon should be sacrificed as a victime for his Country. Chalcas did
vaticinate or prognosticate the destruction of Troy; but upon the success,
enjoined that Iphigenia the daughter of Agamemnon should be immolated.

The Delphian Oracle being consulted about a great plague grassating among the
Ionians, it was answered, that it could not be remedied, unless Menelippus and
Cometho; and not only so, but unless a young man, and a maid, were yearly
offered up at Diana's altar. The Messenians consulting about some issue of
their long war with the Lacedaemonians, it was predicted that theirs should
be the victory, but upon this condition, that they should sacrifice an
incorrupted virgin of the Aepytidaean family unto their God: whereupon
Aristodemus, to gratify his Country, destinated his only daughter to the
immolation.

After the death of Julian the apostate, there was found in Antioch sundry
heads, and carcases of men, women, and children, hidden in chests, wells, pits,
and other secret holes; all which he had idolatrously, and barbarously caused
to be slain for Necromancy and divinations sake. Especially in Carras, in the
Temple, where he had performed his execrable abomination, immediately before
his going into Persia, and had straightly commanded, that the doors should be
kept locked, and none to enter in till his return. There was found a woman
hanged up by the hair of the head, her hands cut off, and her belly ripped up;
and all to vaticinate and ariolate his Persian Victory.

Such like anthropomanticke Sacrifices were used by Mithridates, Heliogabalus,
etc. by the Druides among the French; by the Goths to their God Odhen; and by
the Sclavonians to their great God Swantmith, and more efficacious in answers;
to whom they were accustomed to sacrifice a Christian every year.

In the Taurican Region, where Thoas was King, it was a law of their
sacrifices, that whatsoever stranger came thither, especially they that were
cast upon their shore, should be slain as a victime to Diana Taurica.

Idomeneus King of the Cretians, returning to his own Country, from the
Trojane war, Neptune sent such a tempest, that he was constrained to vow a
Sacrifice unto him, the first creature that met him, as he came out of his
ship: now his own son first meeting him, to welcome his safe arrival, was
so served.

In Albania, a Region not far distant from the Caspian sea, they used to
immolate a man to the Moon: where many of the servants did divine; and he that
was most transported therein, wandering alone in the wood, was taken and bound
by the Priest with a sacred chain, and nourished delicately for the space of a
year, and then led to be Sacrificed with the rest of the hosts.

That there were such heathenish and inhumane immolations, and they pertaining
to all kinds of divination (either as preparations thereto, or as consequents
thereof) is most evident and undeniable. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 11, 12.

7. Of the fatuity of fatations, or fatidicall divinations.
HOw often is Jupiter, Apollo, and the rest of the starry Gods, complaining of
their own fate? how they themselves are subject thereunto? and that what any
one of them does (especially upon poor mortals) another of them can neither
prevent, nor remedy, but it must of necessity be? So Jupiter wept showers of
blood, because he could not deliver his son Sarpedon from death.

Contrarily, Apollo Pythius contends, that the fates may be dissolved by
maleficall arts, for when one enquired, why Apollo had judged him fit for
nothing, and what was to be done, that he might be thought fit for something?
he answered, the force of the Fates did hinder him; yet he might avoid them by
magical arts.

Almost infinite numbers, both of Graecians and Barbarians, yea women, and
tender children, have fainelesly and willingly left their bodies, and embraced
their deaths: now this cannot be applied to the necessity of Fate.

Oenomaus, in his book of maleficall artifices, uses these words against
Apollo: Go thou to Delphos, and thou can not hold thy peace, though thou
would; for so Apollo the son of Jupiter now wills; not because he will, but
because necessity compels him to will. -- Hear a fatidicall Oracle! Leaving
thy Country, go into Euhoea, for there it is fatally destinated for thee to
build a City. What say thou Apollo? Is it not in a man's power to leave his
own Country when he pleases? and if it be fated for a man to build a City, he
must do it whether thou consellest or no; nay, whether he himself will or no.
-- Hear another fatidicall Oracle, Go tell the Parians, O Thesides, that they
must build for themselves a City in Aeria. Why he must needs have told it,
because it was so fated, although thou had not commanded it. Thou did
answer to Laius, it was fated that he should be slain by his own son. Were
thou ignorant, that his son was to be born Lord of his own will? Was it not
in Laius his own will whether he would do his endeavor to get children, or
no? and was it not in his sons own will whether he would kill his father, or
no? -- Thou answeredst to Loerus, Jupiter has done, and will do thee much
ill: it is not right, O Apollo, for the Gods to handle an innocent man so
hardly; if he was forced to do any thing ill, why did not Jupiter punish
himself also, as the author of that necessity? -- Why did thou praise
Licurgus, O Apollo? for if he were good, this was not to be attributed to him,
but to the Fates.

Chiron the centaure, the son of Saturn, who taught Physic, and Astrology;
was grievously wounded in his foot by a dart of Hercules, dipped in Lernaean
poison, that casually fell upon it: wherewith being sore vexed, he wished to
die, that he might fulfill the vaticination which his daughter Ocyrrhoe had
predicted: but he could not naturally thus yield to Fate, being born immortal
from his parents: at length praying the Gods above that he might be suffered to
die, they granted his request, but withal translated him into Heaven, and
placed him among the Stars in the Zodiac, and there he is called Sagittarius.

Theophilus Emperor of Greece was advised by the Patriarch John a Magician to
break down the fatal Statue with three heads, and so to presage of his
success. Likewise Euphrosine wife to Alexius, was counseled to cause the
snout of the Calydonian bore to be cut off, and battered many other fatal
statues and fabrications, for presagitians sake.

Among the Elaeans was a brazen Ox, which the Corcyreans had there dedicated;
a little child playing under it, hastily dashed his head against it so hard,
that it dashed out his brains. The Elaeans condemned the Ox for the murder,
and being about to draw it away to some execution, they were admonished by the
Delphick Oracle, to expiate the Ox, as they used to do facts of imprudent
homicide; because it was done by Fate, and by chance, and by no ill deceit.

The fatidicall Image of Apollo Cumanus wept four days together, at the
warring against Aristonicus, as not being able to prevent or redress what was
fatally destined. So Juno Sospita (nevertheless unable to save) wept at
Lavinium, because of a great pestilence that was fatally to follow. And so
Diana condoled Camilla: and Hercules, dying Pallas.

A notable fellow minding to try Apollos Oracle at Delphos, asked him, what it
was he held in his hand (holding a Sparrow under his cloak) and whether it was
alive, or dead? (intending to kill, or preserve it, contrary to what the Oracle
should answer. But the answer was that it was in his own choice whether it
should live or die. The old Fable confesses that there is more in the liberty
of a man's will, then in the Fates, which they divine either of, or by.

8. Of the sundry natures, customs, and manners of men, either quite contrary,
or nothing according to the positions, conjunctions, dominations, and
dispositions of the Stars.
AMong the Seranes there is a law not to kill, nor to fornicate, not to worship
Images; whence in that region, there is no temple to be seen, no harlot, no
adultresse, none is a thief, none a manslayer; neither does the siery star
of Mars, constituted in the midst of heaven, compel the will of anyone of them
to the murder of men: neither does Venus, conjoined to Mars, cause any one of
them to solicit another man's wife: and yet every day Mars must needs come
there into the midst of heaven; and that in so great a Region that men are born
there every hour, is not to be denied.

Among the Indians and Bactrians, there are many thousands of men, which they
call Brachmans; they both by traditions, and laws of their Fathers, neither
worship Images, nor eat any thing that is animate, they neither drink wine or
beer, but far from all malignity, are only attending upon God: but yet all
the other Indians in the same Region, are involved in adulteries, murder,
drunkenness, idolatry; yea, there are found some of them, dwelling in the same
climate, which hunting men, and sacrificing, devour them. And yet not any of
the Planets, which they call good and happy, could prohibit these from
slaughter, and mischief; neither could the malefick stars impell the
Brachmans to malefice, or malefacture.

Among the Persians there was a law, of marrying daughters, sisters, and
mothers themselves: neither did they celebrate these nefarious marriages in
Persia only, but also in all other climates of the world wheresoever they
came: whose wickedness other Nations abominating, called them Magufiaeans; and
there are in Egypt, Phrygia, and Galatia, very many of the Magufiaeans, that
by succession from their fathers, are still polluted with the same wickedness.
And yet we cannot say, that in the Nativities of them all, there was Venus in
terms, and in the house of Saturn, and with Saturn, Mars aspecting.

Among the Getulians, this is the law or custom: the women till the fields
build houses, and do all such like works; and moreover they may meet with whom
they please: neither are they accused for it by their husbands, nor called
therefore adulteresses though they mingle indifferently with all, and
especially with strangers. Also their women contemn all persumes, neither
wear they dyed garments; but go bare footed. On the contrary, their men
delight in vestures, and odours, and various colors; yet do they it not out
of effeminacy; for they are valiant and warlike above other Nations.
Nevertheless all the women that are born among them, had not Venus ill
affected in Capricorn or Aquarius: nor were all the men born under Venus,
constituted with Mars in Aries; which the fopperies of the Caldaeans can claim
makes men both valiant and delicate at once.

Among the Bactrians, the women use gallant ornaments, and precious ointments,
and are more reverenced by their handmayds and servants, then their husbands
are, and ride abroad in a singular pomp, their horses adorned with trappings
of gold and precious stones: neither do they live chastely, but mingle with
servants as well as strangers: nor are they accused by their husbands, because
they Lord it over them. Notwithstanding the nativity of every Bactrian woman
had not Venus, with Jupiter and Mars in the midst of heaven, and terms of
Venus.

Amongst the Arabians all adulteresses are put to death, and those punished,
that are only but suspected. In Parthia and Armenia, homicides are executed,
sometimes by the Judges, sometimes by the kindred of him that was murdered: but
he that shall kill a wife, a son, or a daughter, or a brother, or sister
unmarried, is not so much as accused for it; for so is the law. Contrarily we
see among the Grecians and Romans parricide is not expiated, but by the greater
penalty. Among the Atrians or Adroams, he that stole the least thing was
stoned: but among the Bactrians, he that stole but petty things was only spit
upon: yet among the Romans, such an one was beaten and wounded. From the river
Euphrates, to the oriental Ocean, he to whom murder or theft was objected, was
not much aggrieved, or tormented: but if he had abused himself with a
masculine, and that come to light, he was forced, through pain to kill
himself. And yet the wise men of Greece were not ashamed to pursue specious
boys. In the same oriental coast, the parents and kindred, if they had known
their sons and kinsfolks subjecting themselves to turpitude, they both killed
them, and would not vouchsafe so much as to bury them. Amongst the Gauls, the
children marry publikly, and by the law are noted with no reproach for it; and
yet truly it is not possible that all they among the Gauls, who betray the
flower of their youth; should have Venus and Mercury, in the house of Saturn,
and of Mars terms occident.

Among the Britains, many men have but one wife. Among the Parthians, many
women (on the contrary) have but one husband; and yet they all live chastely,
and obedient to laws. The Amazons have no men; but, at spring time they go
into other Countries, and couple with their bordering neighbors: and thus, by
a natural law, they all bring forth about one time, and the males they slay,
the females they cherish, and are all warlike women.

Mercury in his house, with Venus, is said by the Chaldaeans, to make man
covetous, and money mongers, and devisers, and paynters; but in the house of
Venus, to make them unguentaries, or perfumers, and such as exercise their
voices, as Stage players and actors of fables. And yet among the Saracens and
Moors, and in upper Lybia, and in nether Germany, and among the Sarmatians,
and the Scythians, and other Nations that inhabit the Northern parts of the Sea
Pontus; in Alania also, and Albania, and Othene, and Saunia, and Aurea; there
is found no money hoorder, no paynter, no Architect, no Geometrician, no
exerciser of his voice, no actor of fables: but such a conjunction of Mercury
and Venus, is found to be altogether ineffectuall and vain, in so many and
great parts of the world.

All the Medes nourish Dogs with no little cost and care; to which they cast
men dying, and yet gasping: notwithstanding all of them had not, in a diurnall
nativity, the Moon with Mars under the earth, in Cancer.

The Indians burn their dead, with whom their wives are willingly burned
together: yet all those women that thus willingly endured the sire of their
husbands, had not in a nocturnall nativity, the Sun, with Mars, in the term
of Mars in Leo.

Many of the Germans use strangling: yet is it not possible that all they who
so hang themselves, should have the Moon intercepted of Saturn and Mars.

Among all Nations men are born at all hours, and we see laws and manners
prevail every where from the power of a man's free will. Neither does any man's
nativity enforce him to do any thing against it. Neither does it compel the
Serans to homicide; nor the Brachmans to the eating of flesh; nor are the
Persians thereby restrained from unlawful marriages; nor the Indians kept from
the fire; nor the Medes from the dogs; nor the Parthians from marrying many
wives; nor are the Mesopotamian women debarred from chastity; nor the Graecians
from their exercises; nor the Romans from their rule; nor the French from their
muliebriousnesse; nor can all the Nations, which we call Barbarians, be thus
brought to approve the learning of the Muses.

All the Jews, by the Mosaicall law, do circumcise their children on the
eight day; yet are they not compelled to it by the force of any Star; nor are
they impelled thereunto by the time of the region; nor are they induced to do
otherwise by the custom or manners of any other Nation: for wheresoever they
are, whether in Syria, Galatia, Italy, Greece, Parthia, they still keep their
Law; which could not at all be done by any necessity of their Nativity. For it
is not possible that all the Jews should have the same Nativity. Futhermore,
one of the seven days, where ever they are, they cease from all manner of
work, nor go a journey, nor use any fire, yet does not any genethliacall
reason restrain a Jew from building, or pulling down a house, from buying, or
selling, on that day: but many of them are born, many are sick, and healed,
and many die on that day.

The sect of the Christians, which are found in every part of the world, and in
every City; if the Parthians after they once become such, they marry not many
wives; neither do the Medes (after that) cast their dead unto the dogs, nor
the Persians marry their daughters, nor the Pactrians and Gauls corrupt
matrimony; nor the Egyptians worship Apis, or a dog, or a Goat, or a Cat:
but wheresoever they are, they live after others laws and customs: nor can
they be compelled, either by any genethliacall reason, or by their own, or by
the principles of any, to think any thing fit to be done, which their master
has not counted fit to be spoken.

9. Of Magicians and Astrologers, the most perverse and pestilent Heretics:
and their Magic and Astrology, the greatest causes or confirmations of their
blasphemous and nefarious Heresies.
SImon Magus was the Prince of Heretics, and the father of the first Heresies
after Christ: who, besides those so execrable in doctrine, and detestable in
manners, hatched these so abominable, as concerning his own person, giving out
that himself was some great one. Acts 8.9. and taught that himself was he who
should appear to the Jews, as the Son, and in Samaria, should descend, as
the Father; and to the other Nations should come as the Holy Ghost. He set
himself forth for a God, at least for the son of a Virgin. He bewitched the
people, with his sorceries, or magic, to say, This man is the great power of
God, Acts 8.10. And in admiration of his magical operations, they set up a
statue, with this Inscription, To Simon the holy God: His Image was made after
the figure of Jupiter; and the Image of Salena, or Helena, his harlot (whom he
affirmed to be the first conception of his mind, the mother of all, by whom, in
the beginning, he conceived in his mind, to make the Angels, and the
Archangels) was made after the figure of Minerva: and these they worshipped
with Incense, victimes, offerings and sacrifices. Howbeit this magical
sorcerer simulated the Christian faith, and was baptized; supposing that the
Apostles healed by Magic, and not by the power of God; and suspecting the Holy
Ghost to be given, by a greater Magical science, he offered money for the
gift: which being denied him, he studied all manner of Magic so much the more;
so to make himself seem the more glorious in the emulation; and to make himself
famous in his contestation against the Apostles, vented his heresies, and
vaunted his sorceries so much the more. And, in stead of the Holy Ghost, he got
him a devil for his familiar; which he said, was the Soul of a slain child,
(although indeed it was a Devil) that he had adjured for his assistance, in
doing whatsoever he commanded. His Priests and proselytes likewise were taught
to use exorcisms, and incantations, and Amatories and allurements; and had also
their Paredrials, and Oniropompists; Sc. their familiars; and studiously
exercised all manner of curious superstitions, and unlawful Arts. And all was
to this intent, that his, and their praestigious acts, might seem to confirm
their blasphemous heresies.

Elymas the Sorcerer, or the Magician, sought to turn away the Deputy from the
faith; and would not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord, Act. 13.8,
10. And not only his actions, but his appellations also, serve to note his
Heresy, as well as his Sorcery. Jannes and Iambres the Magicians that
withstood Moses; wherefore are those Heretics, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate, or of no judgment, concerning the faith, that resist the truth,
compared to them 2 Timothy 3.8. Doubtless, there was not only some resemblance,
or similitude, but some identity or reality in their actions.

Menander the disciple, and successor of Simon Magus; a Samaritane also, and a
Magician, was possessed with a devil; and being instructed with daemoniacal
power, was not inferior to the former in diabolical operation. And having
attained to the height of magical Science, which (he said) he had from his
Euvoja; and by her taught, and gave it unto others: so that many were deluded
and deceived by this his prodigious art. To which he added, as upon which he
founded these his portentous, Heresies, or opinions, viz. Affirming himself to
be the Savior sent from Olympus to Heaven; or from the invisible world, for
the salvation of men. Teaching, that the Angels, the operators of this world,
cannot be otherwise bound, or compelled, or conquered by any; unless it be by
learning the deceptive, and proving the experience, of the Magical art, which
he taught, and by receiving the Baptism which he himself delivered, which
whosoever had ever been partakers of, they should thereby acquire perpetual
immortality; and die no more; but remain everlastingly with themselves, or with
him, and become thenceforth expert of old age, and be made immortal.

Saturninus or Saturnilus, and Basilides, were notorious impostors in all
Magical arts, using Images, incantations, and invocations and all other
superfluous curiosities. And among their other Heresies, this was one,
inconsistent altogether, not only with nature, and Theology; but with Magic
also, and Astrology. viz. In that they invented 365. Heavens, making one
another by succession, and similitude; and the lowest of them begetting the
creatures here below. And the chiefest or highest of them, which they call
Abrafax, or Abraxas, they make to have in it self, not only the number of the
365; but the virtue of them all. And yet the Mathematicians then agreed with
them in the distribution of the 365 local positions of the Heavens; though
peradventure not in their mutual, and so infinite generation: Howbeit, in this
they, and the Magicians were wholly agreed in contending their mysteries to be
ineffable, and ought to be hidden in silence.

Carpocrates and his ear-mark'd Disciples, practiced all manner of Magical
arts; used Incantations, Philters, Paredrials, or Demoniacal assessours,
oniropompists, or Dream-artists, and all other machinations, malignations,
inductions, illectations, etc. Yea, they set up Schools of Magic, and taught
praestigious operation in public; saying heretically, that by virtue of these
they had gotten the Dominion over the Princes, and Fabricators of this world;
and not only over them, but over all that are made therein. Teaching yet more
heretically, that they who will attain to the perfection of their Mystagogie,
must dare to do any thing; yea, must do any filthy thing: otherwise they cannot
escape the Prince of this world, unless by such secret operation they pay
their debt to all. And what was this operation of absolving the debt in the
body? but a nefarious coition of men and of women; and therewithal, an
abominable operating of incantations, venefices, and Idolatries upon every
member of the body.

Marcus (with his podalitial Marcosites) was most skilful and expert in
almagical impostures; by which he seduced many men, and not a few women; to
turn to, and attend him, as one most sciential, and perfect; and one that had
gotten great virtue from invisible and unnameable powers and places. Whereas he
only mixed the ludicrous fopperies of Anaxilaus, together with the wicked
subtilties of Magicians, and so deluded into admiration or astonishment, such
simple and senseless people, as could not discern his ludibrious incantations.
For faigning himself to give thanks over a cup of white wine, by his long
invocations, and incantations, he turned it to red, or made it so appear, that
it might be thought, by that grace, from them that are above all, he distilled
his own blood into the cup; through the invention thereof, and that they which
were present might desire to taste of that cup, that so there might distill upon
them that grace which the Magician invoked; or which the Magician called Grace.
Understand withal, that he had a Devil his Paredrial, or assessor; by which he
himself did seem to prophecy: and so many women, as he thought worthy to be
partakers of his grace, he made to prophecy, especially he busied himself
about women that were noble, and rich, and gayly clad; and thus blasphemously
he would flatter, and allure them: I will that thou should partake of my
grace; because the Father sees every Angel of thine always before his face;
now the place of thy greatness is in us, and it behooves us to convene in one;
receive first from me, and by me, grace; and be thou prepared as a Spouse, to
entertain her well-beloved; that thou may be as I, and I as thou: place thou
in thy chamber the seed of light; take from me thy well beloved; and receive
thou him, and be received of him; behold grace descends upon thee; open thy
mouth and prophecy. Thus she being enticed, seduced, and puffed up, and her
heart beating and burning within her, out of a hope, or presumption to
prophecy; she dares to speak any doting follies; and that (from the heat of
the spirit) boldly, impudently, confidently vainly, emptily. And from
thenceforth reputes her self a prophetess; and gives thanks to Marcus, who
has communicated his own Grace to her: and now labors to recompense and
reward him, not only with all her wealth and substance, but with her corporal
copulation, that in all things they may be one. A certain Deacon in Asia, who
had received Marcus into his house, fell into this very kind of calamity; he
having a very beautiful wise' this Magician corrupted her both in body, and
mind, or opinion; so that she followed after him a long time: at length, after
the brethren had converted her with great pains; she spent her whole time in
confession, bewayling and lamenting the corruption that she had suffered by
this heretical Magician, or magical Heretic.

Priscillianus was very studious of Zoroaster the Magician, and of a Magician
made a Bishop. He himself subjected Christ his actions, and passions, to the
stars. And the Priscillianists determined all men to be bound to fatal stars;
and that our body is composed according to the twelve signs; as those they
vulgarly call Mathem iticians use to do, constituting Aries in the head, Taurus
in the neck, Gemini in the shoulder, Cancer in the breast, and so running over
the rest by name, till they came to the soles of the feet, which they attribute
to Pisces, called the last sign by the Astrologers. These and the like
fabulous, vain, and sacrilegious things, has this heresy woven together,
which is too long to prosecute. And so is it, to speak particularly of the
Ebonites, Valentinians, Gnostics, Colarbasians, Heracleonites, Heraclites,
Ophites, Cerdonians, Marcionists, Montanists, Euchetanes, Euphratians,
Senophians, etc. which were as infamous for praestigious Magic, as portentous
heresies. I pass by the heresies of the Magical, and Astrological
Philosophers, about the principles, terms, matters, efficacies and ends, of
all things, celestial, and terrestrial; and their Magical opinions mixed with
Idolatry, Superstition, Atheism, and profaneness.

Of all the rest, Ptolomie, and the Ptolomaites would not be left out, and it
were but for names sake: but Ptolomie was a bud or branch of the Gnostics, and
the Valentinians, and then he must needs be a piece of a Magician. But I only
put the Ptolomaites, heathenish or heretical, to the construction and
application of these words; (...)? For hereupon I conclude, that if Ptolomie
the Genethliack, was not an heretic, yet Ptolomie the heretic, was a
Genethliack. And that he, and his followers are as easy to be posed, puzzled,
and confuted in the one, as the other.

10. Of the inveterate malice, and envy of Magical operators, and
Astrologicall diviners, in maligning, defaming, opposing and persecuting the
Church; and more especially the Ministers of Christ.
BEsides the canonical history of Jannes and Iambres resisting Moses; and of
Simon Magus, and Elymas withstanding St. Peter and St. Paul: Ecclesiastical
story makes this relation betwixt St. Peter and Simon Magus. Nero being
captivated with the effascinating allurements of Simon Magus, who had gotten
his heart, by promising him (through his wicked arts) victory, dominion,
health, long life, safety, etc. all which he believed, that knew not how to
prove the truth of things: so that he held the chief place in his friendship;
for he took him to be the overseer, and guardian of his life, and health. But
after that Peter had detected his flagitious vanities; and had demonstrated how
that he only belyed the species and appearances of things; and that he
effected no true solid thing at all: then was he had in scorn, and therefore
consumed himself with grief and envy. And although he had experience of
Peter's power in other parts (for under Claudius Caesar he was stricken with
madness, after that he was found to have dealt so maliciously against the
Apostle Peter in Iudaea, he wandered from East to West) and coming to Rome
first, he boasted that he could raise the dead. It so fell out, that a Noble
young man, a kinsman of Caesar's, died about that time, to the grief of all.
Most of them advised that an experiment should be made, whether he could be
raised again from the dead. Now Peter was accounted very famous for such mighty
works: but as yet the Gentiles had no faith, as touching any such fact of his.
Yet their grief requiring remedy, to Peter they went: and some of them thought
it meet that Simon Magus should be called also. Both of them being present,
Peter bad Simon begin first to raise the dead if he could: and if he could not,
then he himself would not be wanting to the raising of the dead by the help of
Christ. Simon supposing that his art would avayle much in a City of the
Gentiles, proposed this condition: that if he raised the dead, then Peter
should be slain, who injuricusly provoked so great a power (for so he was
called) but if Peter prevailed in the fact, he should in like manner be avenged
of Simon. Peter is content and Simon begins: and drawing to the dead man's bed,
so soon as he began to inchant, and murmurre his charms, the dead corpse seemed
to move the head, thereupon great was the cry of the Gentiles, that he was
alive already, and spoke with Simon: and a greater indignation against Peter,
that he durst offer to compare himself to such a power. The holy Apostle
desiring silence, said, if the dead be raised indeed, and live, let him rise,
walk, speak: all this is but a phantasme, and no reality: call but Simon away
from the bed side, and then shall ye see not so much as the least show of it.
Well, Simon was brought from the bed, and there remained not so much as a sign
of any motion in the dead man. Then Peter intent on prayer a while within
himself, and standing aloof off from the corpse, cried with a loud voice,
Young man arise, the Lord Jesus heals thee: and straight way he arose, and
spoke, and walked, and received meat, and he delivered him to his mother, who
desired him, that he would not depart from him: to whom he said, he shall not
be forsaken of him who has made him to rise again, whose servants we are: and
thou mother, be secure of thy son, and fear not, for he has his keeper.
Then the people arising up to stone Simon, Peter said, let this suffice for his
punishment now, that he understand his arts are nothing available; let him live
yet, and see the Kingdom of Christ increase even against his will. The
Magician was much tormented in himself at this glory of the Apostle; and
collecting himself, and summoning up all the force of his charms, he gathers
the people together, and complains, that he had been greatly offended by the
Galilaeans, and therefore would now leave the City, which he was wont so to
defend. And appoints a day, on which he would go fly, and so would ascend
into those supernall seats; for the heavens was open to him when he pleased:
upon the said day he gets up the Capitoline Mount, and so casting himself from
the top of a Rock, began to fly. Thereat began the people to wonder and
worship; many of them saying, it was the power of God, and not of men, to fly
with a body; and that Christ himself did no such thing. Whereupon, Peter
praying Christ to magnify his own power, by detecting the vanity of such
tempting arts, and so to undeceive the people: Simons wings were forthwith
clipped, and he fell down headlong, and died either in the place, or soon after.
Now Nero indigne in the fall and loss of so necessary a friend and familiar,
took occasion against Peter, and persecuted him to his martyrdom.

Cynops a great Magician, and adversary to St. John, inveighed against his
doctrine, detracted from the miracles which he wrought in the name of Christ,
and defamed his person, through the false criminations of Apollos Priests. And
provoking him to behold and admire his power, in raising the dead out of the
sea (which was no other then devils appearing in forms of men) where he
himself diving (to fetch up more dead men) with a great noise of the Sea, and
acclamation of the superstitious bewitched people: at the prayers of St. John
the sea roared indeed, and swallowed up Cynops among the dead, so that he never
appeared above water any more. Then commanded he those devils to depart that
place, and get them again to their cave. Yea, he made the devils to confess
the mutual compact or covenant that was betwixt them and Cynops. And likewise
expelled devils out of diverse places: for which Domitian commanded that he
should be banished into the Isle of Pathmos.

Wardacheus King of Babylon, being foretold by his Diviners, of the great
danger and loss, which he should suffer in his war against the Indians; at
which he being dejected, the Apostles Simon and Jude (then present) smiling
said, they had brought peace with them into his kingdom, and therefore bad him
not fear, for the Indians should be glad to make peace with him on the morrow.
But the Magicians derided both this and them, and bad him not believe those
vain men, for it should so be as they had said. But they proved the vain men;
for the event fell out contrary to theirs, and according to the Apostles
prediction. Those two Apostles also were mocked and derided by Zaroes and
Arphaxat, two Magicians: but at the very hour of the martyrdom of the two
Apostles, the two Magicians were stricken dead with Thunder and Lightning.

Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia, being sent in embassage to Isdigerdes King of
Persia; he much honored the man for his singular piety, and began to attend
unto his doctrine. Now the Persian Magicians, fearing lest he might persuade
the King to receive the Christian faith; and envying the man, because he had
(by his prayers) cured the King of that pain in his head; whereunto all their
spells and charms were nothing available: they began (whereby to despite this
Religious man) to play this imposture, namely, they caused one to be hidden
under the ground, and to presage, or proclaim in this wise, as the King was at
his devotions; that the King should be cast out of his Kingdom for giving heed
to a Christian Priest. Hearing this voice, though he much reverenced Maruthas,
yet was he minded to remove him, rather then run so great a hazard. But
Maruthas (by his wisdom and diligence) detecting the circulatory and
praestigious fallacy: the King caused every tenth Magician to be beheaded.
Maruthas after this departed Persia: and yet returning thither again after a
while, then began the Magicians to play their imposturous prankes afresh. For
they caused a noisome and poisonous stink in the place still when the King and
Maruthas met together: and this they foysted upon the Christians; and presaged
how perilous it was to the Kings health. But they being formerly suspected;
were the more easily discovered, and punished accordingly. After the death of
Isdigerdes, his son Baratanes was stirred up by the Magicians to bitter
persecution against the Christians; Sapores also bitterly persecuted the
Christians, and especially Simeon the Bishop and the Ministers; because they
refused to worship (the Planetarian god) the Sun, in which persecution, the
Magicians were the only instigators and actors.

The persecution under Decius, was not begun by any imperial edict; but first
set on foot by an imposterous Diviner: who stirred up the multitude of the
Heathens, to promote their own superstition, and oppress the Christian
profession.

Olerian was very clement and favorable to the Christians, till the Magicians
put him upon the persecution; as the greatest enemies to and impediments of
their acts and operations.

All the Philosophers, Sophisters, Magicians, Aruspices, Augurs, Negromancers,
gathered themselves together against Athanasius, alleging nothing could
succeed in their art, or to them by their Art, till Athanasius was first taken
out of the way. Therefore they greatly excited Julian against him. Another time
they most calumniously accused him of the same devilish art, that they
themselves were guilty of.

Julian, Maxentius, and Maximinus, were great divining Magicians, and great
favorers and promoters of divining Magicians; and as such, and by such, great
tyrants, and persecutors; and such as especially labored to destroy not only
the Priests, but the Priesthood.

Henry the third purposing to aid his brother against Lewis the French King,
was dissuaded therefrom by the disastrous predictions of William de Perepond, a
great Astrologer, and his counselor. But the main intent of the divination
was from the Popes Oracle; lest Lewis might so be interrupted in his
persecuting enterprise against the Albigenses.

The Magicians (as the Ecclefiasticall historians relate it) pursued Daniel
with envy, calumny, and treachery, before Cambyses, or Cyaxares, till they
brought him to the Lions den; till the Prince repented that he was led so
far by the Magicians, and delivered Daniel from the den, and cast them into
it.

The Magicians of Persia by false calumny, and barbarous cruelty, raised and
maintained thirty years persecution against the Christians: devising and
inflicting horried tortures upon Abdas or Audas, a Bishop; upon Benjamin a
Deacon; and also upon Hormisda, a Nobleman.

Theoteclinus a Magician of Antioch, under Maximinus, by magical force caused
an Image of Jupiter to pour forth Oracles; and such they were as served to
whet on the Emperors persecution, and to exasperate the hatred of the Citizens
against the Christians.

11. Of the divining envy, dissimulation, calumny, blasphemy, and enmity, not
only against Christian Religion, but even against Christ himself.
MIlesian Apollo being consulted about Christ, whether he was God, or man, gave
this answer: That he was mortal according to flesh, or body; wise in
portentous, or monstrous works; but being apprehended by arms under Chaldean
Judges, with nails and clubs, he made a bitter end. Upon which Lactantius his
comment is, That although the Oracle (as it was forced) began to speak truth;
yet it did it so subtly, and perversely, as with intent to deceive the
consulter, being altogether ignorant of the mystery of God and man: and so
seems to deny him to be God, by confessing him to be man. But in that it
acknowledges him to be mortal, according to the flesh, it is not inconsequent
(although against the mind of the Oracle) but that he was immortal, and God
nevertheless, according to the Spirit. And why must he needs make mention of
the flesh; when as it was enough to say him mortal? but being pressed with
truth, he could not deny the thing to be, as it was: as he also was forced to
confess him to be wise. And what says Apollo to himself? If he be wise, then
is his doctrine wisdom, and no other: and they are therefore wise that follow
it, and no other. Why then do their vulgar account us vain and foolish: since
we follow a master, and Teacher wise, by their Oraculous gods own confession?
In that he says, that he did portentous works (by which he merited the faith
of a Godhead) he seems to assent unto us: because he says him to do those
very things, which (rightly understood and believed) we glory in. Nevertheless
he recollects himself, and returns to his daemonicall frauds of calumny and
blasphemy. For albeit he spoke some truth, as necessitated, yet he seems to be
a betrayer of himself and the gods: in as much as he would have enviously
concealed (through an inimicall and deceiving lie) that which the truth partly
wrung from him. And therefore he says him to have done wonderful works; but
he meant it should be understood not by a divine, but by a magical or divining
power. But whereas he says further, that he was apprehended under Chaldaean
Judges, etc. I demand hereupon whether they were Chaldeans by nature, or by
profession? The first is not to be conceded as concerning Herod and Pilat; nor
yet properly as touching Annas and Caiaphas: and therefore (since he will needs
call them Chaldeans) the latter is rather to be supposed: it is not strange to
be believed, that any one of them might be of the Chaldean profession, or
addicted to it. And why might not the Chaldaeanizing Oracle be drawn to
confess so much against it self? And might it not be one end of the Eclipse
at his passion, to make even all the Chaldaeanizing Astrologers to confess,
with some of their fellows, that it was no other but the God of nature, that
now suffered?

One asking Apollo, what God he might appease, whereby to recall his wife from
Christianity? The Oracle gave this answer (as St. Augustine cites it from
Porphyrius, a great enemy of Christ and Christians) Sooner may thou write in
water, or fly in the air like a bird, then remove the opinion of thy impious
wife; let her go on as she will, and sing a dead God in vain fallacies, and
false lamentations: whom (the Judge rightly determining) an ill death has
ended. This Porphyrius cites, and expounds blasphemously; as if Christ died
deservedly, from the just sentence of his Judges. But St. Augustine conceives
Apollo spoke not thus; but his vaticinating Diviner: and yet not he, but this
magical calumniator; that durst blaspheme above the devil himself. For
Apollo himself durst not but speak well of him, saying, he was such a God, and
King, as made the heavens, the earth, and Sea, and the deep things of Hell to
tremble; of whom both he, and his fellow Demons were afraid. Such also was the
answer of Hecate concerning Christ; and so were all the rest of them. Among
some forced and dissembled truths, abundance of blasphemy, and calumny against
Christ, and Christian religion.

The Pythian Oracle being consulted again and again by the Athenians, what
religion was best to be set up? would still answer, their Fathers or Countries
customs, rites, or ceremonies. Not but that he would false religion in all
variety: but that he feared a change of religion might make way to reformation
of Christianity.

12. Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, Diabolically praedicting, maliciously
envying, malefically imprecating, and venefically murdering, such as inhibited,
opposed, confuted, contradicted them, or their arts. That is, either by
violence, treachery, or sorcery, seeking, and venturing their adversaries
destruction: whether they were Kings or Priests, Christians or Persians.
VItellius having commanded by his Edicts, that the Chaldeans, Mathematicians,
Magicians, judicial Astrologers, and Diviners should depart the City of Rome,
and be banished all Italy, within the Kalends of October. Thereupon the
Chaldaeans set up an imprecatory and devotory libell, threatening that Vitellius
Germanicus, by the day of the same Kalends should be no where, or not in being.
And yet not that by Fate so much as vaticinall malesice.

Domitian having decreed the banishment of the Astologers, (although he much
presumed to be an Astrologer or Diviner himself) they likewise casting his
constellation, told him what time he should die. Ascletarion the Mathematician
especially threatened his death to his own face. At which Domitian angerly
demanded, what death found he by his art that he should die himself? He
answered that he himself should be eaten up of dogs, which (says the story)
fell out as prodigiously, as inevitably. Now those dogs being devils, without
doubt it was easy for the Devil to suggest unto the Astrologer what he meant
to effect himself: so easy is it for Astrologers to predict those things,
whereof they intend to be the instruments, or by their effascinating
predictions to instigate others to commit. And if they understood not these
very things by diabolical instinct, to satisfy their tempting invocations;
how should Apellonius Tyanaeus, disputing in the Schools at Ephesus, stop on a
sudden with defixed eyes, and distracted conntenance, cry out (at the very
instant that Domitian was slain at Rome) well done Stephanus, kill the Tyrant;
that Tyrant Domitian is even now wounded, slain dead? Well might a Magician be
advised of the act, when it was a soothsaying divination, that provoked to do
the deed.

Iustine Martyr was slain by the treachery of one Creseens, a dissolute,
vainglorious, circulatory, sophistical Philosopher: because he disputed
against, and confuted him in that kind of sophistry.

Picus Mirandula, for writing largely, soundly, and sharply against Astrology
was envyously and imprecatingly told by Lucius Bellantius, that (according to
his Astrologicall judgment upon his Nativity) he should die in the thirty
fourth year of his age: yet while he formerly disputed for the Mathematical
sciences at large, the Astrologers made the Stars to signify his stupendous
living above his years.

It is recorded of Simon Magus, that many even of the Heathens observing his
praestigiousnesse, and branding him for it, he soothed them up, and pretended a
sacrifice, and bade all those that had reproached him or his art to a banquet;
of which they had no sooner eaten, but they were all infested and inflicted
with devils and diseases.

A Magician not far from Ihena, being upbraided by a neighbor of his, a
Carpenter, with his unlawful arts and practices: pretended to predict some
infortunity of his at hand, for railing against the profession; but wrought it
venefically, so that the poor man fell suddenly into a strange disease.
Whereupon begging pardon for offending him or his Art, he implored the help of
his skill for his release. The Magician promised it, and to that purpose gave
him a certain root to take in a potion, which he had no sooner done, but he
was taken with most exquisite torments in all parts, of which at length he died.

13. Of oraculous arts, and divinatory artifices, silenced, and confounded, at
the presence, and by the virtue of wise and holy men and things.
I Vlian apostatizing from Christianity, and being now to be initiated in the
Paganish way, by the consecration of a praestigious Magician: the Devil (who
was to be present at the solemnity) disappeared at the sign of the Cross
(which might then be of more virtue, because of less superstition) at which
power Julian was more troubled, then he was at the Devils presence. But the
praestigious pseudomantist excused it; and would not have him to think that the
devil fled or avoided the place for fear of it, but in hatred to it.

Julian again sacrificing to Apollo, and no answer being given of any thing
whereof he enquired, he then demanded of the daemoniacall Priests what might be
the cause of such his silence? They answered, that no answer was given by the
Oracle, because the Sepulcher of the Martyr Babylas stood so nigh. Whereupon he
commanded that the Galilaeans (for so he called the Christians, should come and
remove his Sepulcher from thence, which they did with great exultation, singing
(even in the ears of the profane Prince) Confounded be all they that serve
graven Images, and that boast themselves of Idols.

At the incarnation of Ghrist all the divining Oracles of the Panym gods were
shut up; as the Oracle of Delphos, among others, was constrained to confess;
and so never spoke afterward. Wherewith Augustus being afraid, caused a great
Altar to be erected in the Capitol; signifying that it was the Altar of the
Ged, the firstborn.

A juggling impostor carried about a Dragon, persuading the people it was
Aesculapius, saying it would give answers of all that was demanded, that
whenever he moved him in any of his circles, Oyes was made (after the manner
of Athens) in these terms: if any mocker, flouter or Christian be here, let
him go forth; for no prankes could be played while they were by.

About the time of Constantine, Apollo spoke this Oracle, not out of the mouth
of his Priest, as formerly; but out of a certain dark cave or den, viz.
that the just which were upon the earth (meaning the Christians) hindered him
from his vaticinating, or presaging power.

Valentinian, who was at first somewhat favorable to the Christians, was
afterward greatly incensed against them, by the Magicians, Astrologers, and
Diviners, that urged him to forbid them his house, to banish them far away, and
to put them to the Sword: because indeed they were obstacles to their
incantations, and praestigious practices. For there were some of those holy
professors, that with their very sight, and voice, represt all that their
diabolical art and efficacy.

Thaumaturgus, with his companions, driven (by reason of the night approaching,
and an hasty shower falling) into a Temple where divination was wont to be
exercised: immediately upon their entrance the Devil gave over his answer, and
departed the place. The next morning, after they were gone from thence, the
Priest of the Temple began his sacrifices, to adjure the spirit to his
predicting responsals again, who cried out that he could not now have access
to the place, as formerly, and all because of his entrance that remained there
the last night.

St. Hierome says, that upon our Saviors entrance into Egypt, all the Idols
there fell down, and so their divining arts and offices were undone: wherewith
they had so long deceived the world. And therein he takes the prophecy to be
fulfilled, Isa. 19.1. etc.

Macarius of Egypt, and Macarius of Alexandria, both these holy men were
banished into an Isle that had no Christian inhabitant in it. They were no
sooner entered there, but the Devils that had there their Temple, or grove, and
their divining Priest) began forthwith to quake for fear. Yea the Priests
daughter being suddenly obsessed with a fury, and crying out why came ye
hither, to drive ue hence? They expelled the Devil out of the Damsel. which
occasioned the conversion of the Priest, and the inhabitants of the whole Isle,
to the Christian faith. The like story is of these two together with Isidorus;
and the Devils own confession by the tongue of the obstssed Damsel much more
large. O your power! ye servants of Christ! every where are we expelled by you,
out of Cities and Villages, Mountains and Valleys, and desert places. We had
hopes that this strange place of ours might have escaped your presence and
power, but hither you are driven by your persecutors, that you might be a means
to drive us hence, etc.

Astyrius, by his presence and prayer, plainly detected, and utterly frustrated
the praestigious conveyance of the victimes, that in certain festivals, were
cast into the enchanted fountains.

Apollo himself was forced to confess, that the holy men which resided
thereabouts, were the only obstacles why he could utter no more his presaging
truths; and being asked how those kind of men might be discerned, he answered,
by their profession of Jesus Christ.

14. Of such as apostated from, or were excommunicated out of the Church of
Christ, because of Magic and Astrology.
SImon Magus believed, and was baptized, and continued with Philip, and
wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done, Act. 8.13. yet
after all this, the bond of iniquity, the diabolical compact, or magical
covenant had so entangled and ensnared him, that of sometimes Samaritan,
sometimes Jewish, and for the most part Pagan in his religion, he fell utterly
away from Christian, and had not the least part or lot in that matter.

Julian was trained up in Christianity, and professed it; but stealing to
magical Masters, they so perverted him with their Magical sophistry, as that
they utterly perverted him; and that made him (as soon as he durst appear in
his own colors) apostate, or fall away from it.

Ecebolius the Sophister, who was one of Iulians Tutors while Constantius
reigned, he seemed very ardently to embrace the Christian faith: but after that
Julian had obtained the Empire, he presently conformed to those opinions and
manners of the Emperor, which he, and his light, had infused into him. But
Julian being dead, he pretended again to profess the Christian Religion; and
cast himself prostrate at the door of the Church (out of which he was
excommunicated) crying out to such as past by, tread me under feet, as unsavory
salt: yet after all this, remained light and unconstant in his religion, to an
utter apostasy at the last.

Porphyrius, that notable contemplator in Magic, and practitioner also, who of
Christian, turned Platonist, and Pagan, upon this occasion. Certain Christians
of Caesarea Palestinae having reproved him sharply (some say scourged him) for
the notorious scandal as well of his manners as opinions: he indigning to be
thus dealt withal, quite deserted Christianity, became a capital enemy
thereunto, and wrote diverse cursed books against Christian Religion (besides
those wherein he promoted magical Philosophy, and Paganism) wherein he
blasphemed God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost; depraved and wrested the
Scriptures, calumniated the Prophets and Apostles, and slandered sundry
Fathers, Doctors, and Confessors of the Primitive Church.

Aquila, making some flourishes in the Christian profession, but not forsaking
his former corrupt habit in the vanities of Astrology, but still abhorring the
superstitious positions of Nativities, was therefore reprehended by the
orthodox teachers of those times. But instead of amending those his pernicious
errors, he perversely opposed them even against the truth it self. For which
being expelled the Church, he renounced Christianity, turned Proselyte, and
became a circumcised Iow.

Pope Alexander the third (they say) suspended a Priest from his office, for
the space of a whole year, for but consulting with an Astrologer, about a
thest that was committed in the Church.

Eleusius, a Novatian Bishop, and one who himself had sacrificed to Fortune,
was deprived of his Bishopric, for the baptizing of Heraclius, a presaging
Priest of Hercules, and admitting him to the degree of a Deacon.

At Laodicea one Epiphanius a Sophister, about to recite an Ode in the honor
of Bacchus, began to declame, hence ye profane, and not initiated to the
sacred Bacehanals. Notwithstanding many of the Christians staid still, as being
taken with the fame of the Rhetorician. Amongst the rest were the two
Apollinares, the father, and the son, both Clerks, one a Presbiter, the other
a Lector. Of which Theodorus the Bishop of Laodicea being advertised, he
reasonably chid the lay people, and so pardoned them. But as for the
Apollinares, after long, sharp, and public rebuke, he interdicted them the
Church, and communion of Christians.

Anatolius, very familiar to Gregorius the Bishop, being found to have
sacrificed to Idols at Antioch; and the prefect of the East being but too
negligent and remiss in judging him for it: the people began to rise in
tumult, and to lay hands upon Gregory himself; whom they also impeached of
Idolatry, but unjustly. Hereupon by the command of Tiberius the Emperor (him
that succeeded Justin) Anatolius was called in question, and not having whereof
to accuse Gregory, at the acclamation of the people, who could not endure such
a wickedness unpunished, he was not only excluded the Church, but condemned to
the beasts.

15. Of those that have retracted, recanted, repented of the study, practice,
and consult of Magic and Astrology: and that either fruit fully, or unfruit
fully, desperately, or contritely.
MAnasseh was a Magician, for he observed times, and used inch auntments, and
used witcherast, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizzards, 2 Chronicles.
33.6 yet we believe that he truly and unfainedly repented, and although his
prayer be Apecryphall, for be besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself
greatly before the God of his father; and prayed unto him, and he was entreated
of him, and heard his supplication. -- Then Manasseh knew that the Lord be was
God, Verse. 12, 13. Neither do we make any doubt of the hearty and effectual
repentance of those Exercists, Acts 19.17, 18. because fear fell on them all,
and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified; and many that believed came and
confessed, and showed their deeds; many also of them which used curious arts,
brought their books together, and burned them before all men. -- So mightily
grew the word of God, and prevailed. The like we believe of the Damsel, Act.
16.16, 17, 18. because possessed with a spirit of divination (passive rather
then active, the devil divining by her, rather then she by the Devil.) The same
followed Paul and us, and cried saying, these men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation. A good confession in all
respects, (take it to be the Damsels, and not the Devils speech) giving God and
his Ministers their due, and yet claming their own interest withal. But as for
Simon Magus his repenting ( pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these
things which ye have spoken come upon me, Acts 8. 24.) who can judge it to be
other then false and fruitless? For he was terrified only with an
apprehension of the punishment, not of the sin: and put off that duty to
others, which he should have exercised himself.

Tiberius importunate to know, who should be his successor in the Empire? it
was answered, even he that should first come to him the next morning. Hereupon
he gave order to his Tutor, to bring his Nephew Tiberius to him, very early the
next day: and the day appearing, commanded Euodus (ignorant of his intent and
desire) to go out, and bring in to him the first youth that he met, which fell
out to be Caius: which when Tiberius saw, he was infinitely troubled,
exceedingly beshrewing himself, that he had sought after any Augurie or
presage at all. For whereas he might have lived, and died a great deal more
contentedly, had he been altogether ignorant of things future; their
foreknowledge now served only to add both to the miseries of his life and
death.

After the death of Caesar, which was said to follow the fatidicall prediction
of Spurina the Mathematician; the people lamented, and wished that the cursed
Diviner had rather lost his skill; then that a father of his Country should so
have lost his life.

Nero was himself held to be a great Mag astro-mancer, and wanted neither wit
nor will, nor wealth, nor Tutors, nor instruments, nor study, nor credulity;
yet for all this confessed that he never found any argument of truth, nor
experiment of reality in magical operation; which made him at last abdicate
and renounce it, reject and contemn it; and abhor and condemn himself for
ever having to do with it.

Origin is often cited by Magicians and Astrologers, as if he were their own:
howbeit in his books (and especially as Eusebius cites him) he plainly and
abundantly refutes them. And therefore if he were more addicted to them, it is
certain enough that he converted from them.

St. Gyprian sometimes addicted to the study of magic repented of it at his
conversion. And if that book de duplici Martyrio be his, we have there this
his confession: They that use Magical arts have denied Christ, and made a
compact with the Devil: from which evil the mercy of the Lord has delivered
us; as it has also from all the rest, in which we were held, while we
sometimes walked according to the old man.

St. Augustine confessed that he was very much inclined to the study of Magic
and Astrology; but, after his conversion, he utterly abandoned, and condemned
it. And to this purpose relates this story of himself. A friend of his (one
Firminus) and he, walking together, both of them being addicted to the
constellationall way: Firminus asks his opinion of his constellation, about a
secular business he had then in hand. St. Augustine, somewhat changed in his
general opinion of it, told him, that he conceived that way to be vain and
ridiculous. Firminus insisted, and told him a story from his father, and his
fathers friend, two genethliacall Astrologers, and so precise observatours, as
that they calculated the births of the very bruit beasts in their families. And
it so fell out, that his mother bare him, and the others maid brought forth a
son also in one day, hour, and minute, as near as could be guest. But now
these two (so born alike) proved to be of various and contrary both fortunes
and manners, in every respect. Upon this relation of Firminus, Augustine
abhorred the falsity of natalitiall prognostications more and more; and so
resolved to cast it off without all scruple: and not only so, but was instant
to convince the other of this vanity, from his own narration, and thus to
revoke him from it too.

As St. Augustine was preaching to the people, there was presented before him,
in the Church, a Mathematician. Concerning whom he thus spoke. This man, of
race a Christian, then relapsed, is now returned a penitent: and being
terrified with the power of the Lord, he is now again received to the mercy of
the Lord. Seduced he was by the enemy, and long continued a Mathematician; not
only seduced, but seducing; as well deceiving as deceived. Many lies has he
spoken against God (who gave unto him a power to do good, not to do evil)
saying, It is not a man's will, that makes him commit adultery, but Venus; nor
yet to commit murder, but Mars: neither does God make a man just, but Jupiter.
And many other were his sacrilegious sayings. How many Christians has he
gulled of their money? How many have bought lying predictions of him at a dear
rate? But now (as we believe of him) he abhors this lying trade. For having
enticed others, he now perceives himself to be the most ensnared by the devil.
And now penitent before God and men, he is become a true convert. For we
persuade our selves, it only proceeds from the awful fear of his heart. Did
we not rejoice at that Mathematicians conversion, who converted from a pagan;
although he seemed to do it for some promotion in the Church? But this
penitent seeks for mercy only; and therefore is the rather to be commended
both to your eyes and hearts. Receive him, and love him, lest Satan again may
tempt him. Let your testimony and approbation confirm his conversion. He was
lost, but now is found. Long did he knock at the doors of the Church, ere he
was suffered to enter: but he is now brought in, and has brought with him his
books to be burnt (by which himself might have burned unquenchably) that they
cast into the fire, himself might enter into that everlasting refreshing. We
suffered him the longer to supplicate for the remedy from the school of
Christ, because the art wherein he has been exercised, is to be suspected, not
only of falfity in it self, but of fallacy in good. And therefore we delayed
him, that he might not delude and tempt us. But now we have admitted him, that
he might not be tempted again, and deluded himself. Pray ye therefore to
Christ for him; for the prayer of his Church is available against all
impostures and impieties.

Julian greatly corrupted with magical superstition, began a little (through
present horror of conscience) to look back again to Christianity: and lay a
while at the Church doors, weeping and crying, Tread upon me unsauoury Salt.
But Ecebolius, a Magician, hindered his true repentance, and thorough
conversion; and brought him back again into that damnable superstition, worse
then at the first. The same Ecebolius (after Iulians death) feigned the like
repentance, and is said to use the same words, but to as little fruit. The same
Julian having received his deaths wound, roared and rayled at the Sun, which
the Astrologers had made him believe was the auspicious dominator at his birth;
accusing it for shining so propitiously upon the Persians, but not favoring
him with any fortunate influence: and so died, impiously cursing God, and the
Stars; but the Star-gazers and himself for adhering to them, not undeservedly.

Wenceslaus sent for a wagon full of Conjurers to play tricks, and make sport:
amongst the rest he called Zyto; who coming in with a wide mouth, cloven to
both his ears, swallowed up the chief Conjurer, and voyds him again downward,
etc. but was himself carried away by the devil, which so moved Wenceslaus that
he thence forwards seriously applied himself to the meditation of sacred
things.

Pope Sylvester the second, of a Monk became a Magician, insinuated himself
into the familiarity of a Necromanticall Saracene, and stole from him a
Conjuring-book; and studying or practicing that art, obtained (by the devils
means) the Popedom. Which dignity so soon as he had ascended, he dissembled
his black art, under that holy vestment: but kept a brazen head in a secret
place, from which he sought and received divining answers. And enquiring of the
devil, how long he should live in the Papal dignity? he answered
aequivocatingly; that he should live long, if he came not at Jerusalem Now in
the fourth year of his Pontificate, as he was sacrificing in the Church of the
holy Cross, in Jerusalem, at Rome, he was suddenly stricken with a grievous
fever, and began to be convinced that thus the devil had deluded him, and now
he must die. Whereupon he began to be penitent, and confessing before the
people, deplored the wickedness of his magical error. Exhorting all men,
avoiding ambition, and diabolical deceits, to live well, and holily;
entreating them every one, that after his death, the trunk of his body, torn
and dismembered (as it justly deserved) might be laid upon a Cart, and buried in
that place whither the horses carried it of their own accord. And in the
extremity of his death, besought that his hands and tongue might be cut out, by
which he had blasphemed God and sacrificed to devils.

Trithemius retracted his opinion concerning the seven spirits, in the seven
Planets, governing the world in their course, by 354 years apiece, and four
months: protesting after this manner in the conclusion, that of all these he
believed and admitted nothing, but as the Catholic Church believed; and for
the rest, he refuted and contemned all, as vain, fained, and superstitious.
And as he disclaimed this to Maximilian the Emperor, so he exclaimed against
the Artists to Another. Away with these rash men, vain men, lying Astrologers,
deceivers of minds, and pratlers of frivolous things. For the disposition of
the Stars makes nothing, to the immortal soul, to natural science, to
supercelestiall wisdom. A body has power only over a body. The mind is free,
and not subject to Stars; and neither receives their influences, nor follows
their motions, etc.

Cornelius Agrippa in his youth wrote a Magical book of occult Philosophy; but
in his sager years wrote another of the vanity of Sciences: wherein he
confutes and condemns Magic, Astrology, and all kind of divination: and calls
the latter his recantation of the former: But if toward his death, he said
indeed to his black Dog, Away wicked beast thou have utterly undone me: without
all doubt, and notwithstanding all apology, his recantation was truer then his
repentance. For that was sufficient to convince others: whereas this was not
sufficient to convert himself.

Rodaick of Toledo (hoping to find treasures) caused a Palace to be opened,
that had been kept shut for many years; there he found nothing, but a coffer,
and in it a sheet, and in it written a prophecy, that after the opening
thereof, men like those painted in the sheet should invade Spain, and subdue
it. The King was therefore sorry, and caused the coffer and castle to be shut
again.

Phanias an Hierosolymitane servant, by the advice of certain Magicians, had
emancipated himself to the devil, in his hand writing, for the obtaining of
his masters daughter, by virtue of their art. But at length repenting, he was
converted by the prayer of St. Basil, and the devil casting in the chirograph,
he was publicly received into the bosom of the Church.

Cyprian a Magician, while he sought by Magical arts to inchant and dementate
Iustina the Virgin, was by her means converted to Christ. For whose truth they
both suffered Martyrdom.

Socrates offended at the bold and blind vagations of men in their disputations
about the measures of the Sun, and of the Moon, and other Stars: wherein they
labored more in babbling words, then solid arguments; undertaking to comprehend
the whole circuit of the world with all the events therein, from the beginning
to the end. Hereupon he withdrew his mind from these unlearned errors: and
applied it wholly to consider man's frail condition, and the vitiousnesse and
vertuousnesse of affections; and to teach such manners as most pertained to
honest and happy life.

A Priest of an oraculous Temple, who had perceived that his divining devil
had receded at the presence of Gregory Theametargus: at the first calumniating,
but afterward admiring his power, desired to learn of him that mystery of
commanding devils. He taught him therefore the mystery of godliness, and
confirmed it by a miracle: whereupon he was converted, forsaking his
praestigious Idolatry; yea wife, children, goods, and all, to follow him; and
so became an excellent servant in the Church, and a great opposer of satan
himself.

Marcellus, and Apuleius, two martyrs, who first adhering to Simon Magus: but
seeing the miracles that were wrought by the Apostles, converted from the
Magicians praestigiousnesse; and gave themselves wholly to believe, and follow
the Apostolical doctrine: for which they were martyred afterward.

Hermogenes a magician, disliking his own art, brought a many of his magical
books, and offered them to James the Apostle, to be burnt.

16. Of Magicians and Astrologers idolatrous account; and other vain,
confident, and servile superstitions they wrought in simple and credulous men.
THere was a certain man called Simon, which before time in the same City used
Magic, or sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that
himself was some great one. To whom they all gave heed, from the least, to the
greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. And to him they had
regard, because that of a long time, he had bewitched them with sorceries or
magic, Act. 8 9, 10, 11. To the same Simon, a Statue was set up at Rome, with
this inscription, To Simon the Holy God.

These Magicians and Astrologers in their generations were numbered among the
Gods, and had their Statues, Images, Oracles, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and
Services, viz. Zoroaster, Trismegistus, Mopsus, Amphiaraus, Apollonius
Tyanaeus, Amphilocus, Accius, Nanius, Porphyrius, Diodorus, Thor, Ollerus. All
these Mag-astro-mancers, and many more arrogated a divinity to themselves, from
their divinations; and had it attributed unto them by the superstitious people
of several Nations.

Theagenes was so superstitious, that he had in his house the Image of Hecate:
and durst at no time offer to stir out of doors, till he had first consulted
it. For which his slavish superstition, he grew into a Proverb among the very
heathens themselves.

Archimedes the Geometrician, by his art alone, drawing out a massy ship; which
whole multitudes could not once move, hereupon Hiero the King was so
transported with admiration, that he concluded, Archimedes ought to be believed
in whatsoever he said: yea, though he should say, give him but footing, and he
would remove the whole earth.

Augustus together with Agrippa, coming to the chamber of Theogenes the
Mathematician; and he predicting great and almost incredible things to Agrippa,
who first consulted him: Augustus resolved to conceal his own geniture, and
would by no means have it calculated, lest that less things might be
prognosticated of him, then were of Agrippa: at last he yielded to it by much
importunity, and Theogenes leaping at it, and adoring him, prognosticating his
greatness, because born under Capricorn (for whosoever has his horoscope in
the first part of Capricorn, shall be a King, or an Emperor) Augustus had
forthwith such a confidence in this fatidical praesagitian, that he divulged
his natalitial Theme; and caused the sign of the star Capricorn (under which
he was born) to be impressed on his Coin, and placed in his Arms.

Maximinus a great Tyrant, and persecutor, was so superstitiously fearful, that
he would do nothing without divination: neither would by any means be drawn to
transgress an augurie or an Oracle, no not a nayls breadth.

Frederick the second, the Emperor, having married Isabel sister to the King
of England, forbear her company, till a certain hour, that his Astrologers, or
wizzards had assigned for that purpose; that so he might beget a son famous
from the constellation. But mark the fruits of this constellatory copulation,
poor Isabel dyed in childbed.

Ludovicus Sfortia maintained an Astrologer at an excessive charge, who in
recompense thereof, would insult over his credulity by his prognostications:
and make him often times, leave his dinner, rise out of his bed, and ride away in
storms and tempests, through dirt and mire; making him believe, that this was
the only way to escape or prevent such and such eminent dangers, which he
foresaw were ready to betide him.

The Turks are so superstitiously addicted to observe the placits of the
Astrologers; that they willingly war not, but at the beginning of the new Moon.
Once they sought to assault Vienna, for no other cause, but because they saw a
gilded Moon placed upon the top of St. Stephens Tower.

St. Augustine tells Marcellinus, how ridiculous it was (in the Gentiles
account of their Magicians) to compare Apollonius, and Apuleius and other
skilful men in Magic, to Christ: yea, and to prefer them before him. Yet he
takes the comparison to be more tolerable betwixt him, and them; rather then
their adulterous Gods. Yea, and says that Scipio Nasica their Priest, was more
worthy of divine honors, then their Gods themselves. Because they being
consulted, commanded scenical plays (horrid and shameless spectacles) for the
sedating of the pestilence: but he admonished the contrary; accounting those
cursed and filthy enterludes as the greatest plagues of the mind.

Scipio Affricane was so swayed with divining superstition, that he would
undertake no business, public or private, till he had first stayed and
consulted in the Cell of Jupiter Capitoline.

Lucius Scylla, so often as he determined to wage any war, he would first
embrace the little Image of Apollo (taken from Delphos) and in the sight of his
soldiers, would pray it to hasten the promise, or prediction.

Alexander sacrificing, and a young boy holding the Censer, a coal fell upon
his arm, and so burnt it, that the standers by were troubled with the smell:
yet he (so insensibly charmed he was) not once shrinkt at it, whereby he was
put in mind to presage, what manly invinciblenesse should be found in his
soldiers against all perils: when as he observed such undanted sufferance in a
very child.

As Aelius Praetor was pleading Law, a certain bird came and sat upon his head:
which an Aruspick observed, and thereupon predicted; that it being saved, the
state of his own house would be happy; but the Commonwealth miserable: but the
contrary, if it dyed, which the superstitious man hearing, immediately bit off
the birds neck before them all.

Codrus King of the Athenians upon an oraculous responsal that that side should
get the victory, whose King was slain in the battle: in a superstitious
rashness committed himself disguised to the danger of his enemies darts. Oh
the superstition of predictions, that expose men not only to the toleration,
but election of utmost perils!

Gyges living in all kind of felicity, would needs consult Pythian Apolto, if
any mortal man enjoyed more happiness, then himself? it was answered of a
poor Arcadian, who lived contented in his own strait cottage, that he was
far more happy then he. At this he would needs throw away his enchanted Ring,
and after that fell into extreme misery, the end of all magical felicity.

The earth gaping, and thence an infectious air proceeding, which caused a
great pestilence among the Romans; and they endeavoring to fill it up, but
could not: upon consult, it was answered by the vaticinators that nothing could
fill that gulf, and so remedy the plague, but one that was most eminent
amongst them: whereupon Curtius taking himself to be the man presaged, and to
do his country service, rode headlong into the gulf, and there perished.

Menecrates an Astrologicall Physician, would needs account of himself, as god
Jupiter; and thus wrote to Philip of Macedon: Mencerates Jupiter to Philip
health of body. He, to check his magical arrogance, wrote thus: Philip to
Menecrates, soundness of mind. Yet seeing he would not for all this, out of
that conceit, nor be advertised of his proud and vain presumption, he
commanded, at a banquet, to set nothing before him but Frankincense, and such
like fumes (with the offering whereof the gods were pleased) but not one bit of
meat: till at length, for mere hunger he was forced to confess himself to be
no more but a mortal man.

17. Of the several ways that have been used, whereby to direct, dispose,
determine, moderate, remedy, or prevent superstitious hopes or fears; as
concerning prodigies, and prognostications.
SVlpitius Gallus, being Lieutenant General of Lucius Paulus his army against
King Porses, it happened on a clear night, that the Moon suddenly defected in an
Eclipse; at which dire omen the soldiers stood amazed, and had no heart to
fight: till he made a notable oration, concerning the course of the Heavens,
and the force of the Stars (as that such things have their natural causes, and
ordinarily portend no more but natural effects, and not arbitrary actions, and
contingent events.) And so animated the Soldiers, that they went on fearlesse,
and obtained the victory. Which they ascribed to him, as an effect of his
rationally persuading art, quite contrary to the other, irrationally
prognosticating.

The Athenians being terrified at the sudden obscuration, or eclipse of the
Sun, taking it to be a celestial denunciation of their destruction.
Thereupon stood forth Pericles, and discoursed of the Sun and Moons course;
as he had learned of his master Anaxagoras; and so eased them of their vain
fears.

Agathocles, in his wars against the Penians, when an Eclipse, or any
celestial prodigy did happen, was still wont to discourse to his Soldiers,
of their natural causes and effects: and so both expelled their fears, and
encouraged them to success.

A certain Augur would needs stay the marching of Alexanders army, till he
took auspication from a bird that sat before them. The Soldiers mean while
much troubled about the doubtfulnesse of the presage: one Mesellanius alias
Myssnianus, a Jewish soldier, impatient of the delay, took an arrow, and shot
the bird stone dead. Which the Augur indigning, he replied, should a whole army
be stayed to note the presage of its expedition and success from such a silly
thing, as could not foresee its own fall?

A bold Astrologer presumed to tell Galeacius Prince of Millaine, that the
Stars promised himself long life; but to him a short one. This he said,
thinking to terrify him; but it so provoked him, that he presently caused him
to be hanged, and lived a long time after.

There coming Oracles, or soothsayings of all sorts to the Thebanes, some
promising them victory, some threatening their overthrow, to the peoples
infinite distraction; Thereupon Epaminondis their Captain in chief, commanded
that those that promised victory should be laid on the right hand the oratory
chair, and the other on the left. Having thus disposed them, he got up into
the chair, and made this pithy oration. If you Thebanes will be obedient to
your Captains, and be courageous of heart to encounter your enemies; these
here (showing the presages on the right hand) are yours. But if ye be
disobedient, and faint hearted, then these (poynting to them on the left hand)
are ordained for you.

A Soothsayer bringing in the intrailes of a sacrificed Ox to Philip of
Macedon, son to Antigonus; he asked Demetrius, what his judgment was of
those signs? And whether he should keep the castle to himself, or deliver it
to the Messinians? Demetrius smiling, answered him, If thou be of the
Soothsayers mind, thou may deliver it up: but if thou have the mind of a King
rather, then shall thou hold the Ox by both the horns.

Lucullus with about 10000 going against Tigranes, and his 130000 men; and that
upon the day before the nones of October, on which formerly the Cymbrians had
greatly discomfited Caesar's army: one told him, that day was ominous to the
Romans. Let us fight them (quoth he) the more valiantly; and so we shall make
it accounted for an happy day hereafter, of an unlucky day heretofore.

An Aruspex, after his solemn lustration, brought the intrailes to Crassus,
who let them fall out of his hands. This (as an argument of his age and
weakness) was interpreted for an ill token. Whereat he smiling said, though
they thought him so old and weak in letting those intrails fall out of his
hands: yet he was young, and strong enough to keep his sword in his hands.

Alexander drawing up to Babylon with his army, the Chaldaeans admonished him,
to delay his entrance into the City, for some ill signs, which they foresaw.
But he being resolved answered them according to the common proverb, that he
was the best Diviner, that presaged the best things. Then they requested him,
that seeing he was so resolved, that he would enter the City on such a port, as
might be with his face toward the East, and not toward the West. He was
content to observe them so far; but finding the way exceeding foul and
myrie, he entered the City the clean contrary way to their admonition.

When Apollonius, and his companions were traveling in a bright Moonshine
night, the phantasme of an Hagge met them, and sometimes it changed it self
into this shape, and some times into that, and sometimes vanished out of their
sight. Now as soon as Apollonius knew what it was, grievously reviling it, he
advised his companions to do the like. For he knew that was the best remedy
against such invasions.

A certain Jew having told Peter of Castile, that his horoscope promised him
most eminent fortune and success, in many things: which (for the most part)
falling out contrary, and therefore the King angrily upbraiding the
Genethliacke, with the falsity of his art. Alas (quoth he) though the heavens
freeze never so hard, yet a man may sweat in a bath; Confessing that inferior
and ordinary means working contrary, are sufficient to alter and prevent the
force and power of the heavenly bodies.

The parents of a certain Virgin came to blessed Macarius, entreating him to
pray to God, that her humane shape might be restored to their daughter, which
they imagined to be turned into a Cow. The holy man affirmed, he could see no
other thing in her, but the appearance of a virgin; and praying for them, the
praestigious delusion vanished; and then they perceived her to be so too. The
Egyptian likewise that had his wife made to appear in his bed, as if she had
been a rugged mare, appealed to Macarius: and by his prayers, the praestigious
imposture was expelled.

A young man dwelling in Gareoth, not far from Aberdine, was haunted mightily
with a spectrous apparition of a beautiful woman, enticing him to lewdness:
which he discovered to the Bishop, who advised him to depart the place, and
betake himself to fasting and prayer; and so he was delivered of the
temptation.

A young Gentlewoman of the Country of Mar, suspected by her parents, and
questioned somewhat severely, confessed, that a young man kept her company by
night, and sometimes by day; but how he came in, or went out, she could not
tell. One day having watched, they spied an horrible monstrous thing in their
daughters arms; which a Priest, knowing the Scriputres, and of honest life,
caused to vanish away.

18. Of humane reason, and prudence (much more Christian wisdom) making more
probable, and pertinent conjectures, presages, interpretations; then can all
the art and artifice of Magic and Astrology.
IMmediately upon the destruction of Jerusalem, there was seen a comet hanging
over the Temple in the similitude of a fiery sword; which did denounce fire and
sword to the City. Many nights together there shone a light about the Temple
and Altar, as if it had been day. The vulgar did interpret it, as betokening
the good and liberty of their Nation; but the more prudent thought the
contrary. An Heifer also ready to be sacrificed, brought forth a Lamb, in the
middle of the Temple. Also the Brazen gate diverse nights together, unlockt, or
opened it self, and could very hardly be shut again: and this the most
thought to be a token of some future good; but the more discerning conceived
otherwise of it. In the clouds were suddenly seen a little before Sunset whole
troops of armed men. In the Feast of Pentecost, the Priests entering into the
Temple at night to celebrate the accustomed Sacrifice, the first felt a
mottion, then heard a sound, and after that understood a voice crying out,
Depart we from hence. Four years before, one Jesus the son of Ananias a
plain Countreyman cried out in a prophetical spirit, while the City was yet
in peace and abundance, A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice
from the four winds, a voice upon Jerusalem, and upon the Temple, a voice
upon the bridegroomes, and the brides, a voice upon all the people. At which
the Elders were moved, and caused him to be sharply punished; but he changed
not his voice, neither for fear, nor stripes, nor threats, nor perswafions;
but at every stripe cried out, woe to Jerusalem. At length they weary with
inflicting, gave him over for one mad, and that knew not what he said. But he
still continued in the same sad tune, till the very beginning of the siege, and
then he ceased; as one that needed denounce no more, seeing the thing denounced
was now come to pass. Only after the fire was already begun in the City, and
the Temple, going about the wall, he began to cry again, Woe to the City, the
people, and the Temple; and woe also to me: and so being smitten with something
that was sling'd at him, he died.

Many of the Astrologers conjecturing many things upon the geniture of Nero;
the saying of his father Domitius was held for the aptest presage: that nothing
could come from him and Agrippina, but must be detestable, and born for the
public evil.

Hannibal well nothing the unskilfulnesse, and temerity of Terentius varro, and
Caius Flaminius, divined of the Romans defeat, and the Affricans victory,
against all the Soothsayers, or diviners.

Hippecrates writing of two brothers, sickning alike, and recovering alike;
supposed them therefore to be twins, and so fetched the cause from their like
temper and constitution, in their generation and conception: but Possidonius a
stoicke (and much addicted to Astrology) would needs have it to be from the
constitution of the Stars, at their conception and birth. St. Augustine gives
judgment forth physician, against the Mathematitian, grounded upon the
disposition of the parents, the soil, the nutrition, etc. and not upon the
influence of the Stars.

Three brothers, sons to the Cimmerian King, contending about their fathers
kingdom, were content to refer themselves to Ariopharnes King of Thrace,
whom he judged worthiest of it. Who gave judgment after this manner, better
then all the Ariolaters. He caused their fathers body to be taken out of the
Sepulcher, and to be tied to a tree, to see which of them could shoot nearest
their fathers heart. The eldest shot his father in the throat, the second hit
him in the breast, the youngest would rather lose his hopes then shoot at all.
And to him for his pieties sake, he designed the Kingdom.

Charles the great (or as some say, his son) beholding a stupendous Comet,
one Egmund (alias Egmard) an Astrologer, willing to have him thereby apprehend
some fearful mutations either to his person, or to his dominions: yet because
he would seem not to terrify him too much, made use of those words of
Scripture (both against his own art, and mind) Be not dismayed at the signs of
Heaven. To whom the Emperor answered very devoutly, We fear not Comets, or
prodigious signs, but the maker of them, and us; and magnify his mercy that
would thus admonish us provoking and slothful sinners, by these, or any other
his tokens.

Frederick the third, when a Countreyman came before him, complaining that one
of his horses was stolen out of his Inn, asked where the thief was? that (said
the Countreyman) he could not tell. How chance (said the Emperor) he stole not
both thy horses as well as one? The man answered, the other was a Mare; and not
fit for a soldiers use: whereupon (instead of going to a wise man, to find
out stolen goods) the Emperor advised him to lead his mare up and down the
several streets and lanes, and so by their mutual neighing, the thief came
to be discovered.

In the time of Edward, surnamed the Martyr, there appeared a terrible blazing
Star, which the Wizzards and the vulgar, would have to portend this, and
that: but the more wise and religious said, it was a sign of Gods anger, for
their wickedness against the married Clergy.

The mother of George Castriot, called Scanderbeg, dreamed she was brought to
bed of a Serpent, which covered all Albania, and devoured many Turks. His
father John, Prince of Albania, hearing of this dream, would seek for no
exposition either of Oracles or Soothsayers, but cheared his wife, telling her,
he foresaw she should be delivered of a son, an excellent warrior, a great
scourge of the Turks, and a defender of the Christian faith.

Luctatius Catulus, a notable Roman in the first Punick war, was advised by
the Senate not to consult the fortune of the praenestine lots. Because the
Commonwealth ought to be administered by patriall auspications; that is, by
prudent counsels: and not by foreign divinations. And by this means he
prospered, and put an end to that war.

Apollo foreseeing the ruin of the Athenians, counseled them for their
safety, to betake themselves to wooden walls, sc. their ships: which very thing
Themistocles, out of his prudent observation, had advised before.

Solon gave warning of the tyranny that should infest the state of Athens. For
which (says Cicero) I may call him a prudent man, but not a Diviner. Because
prudence was able to forespeak such a thing, without Divination.

Divitiacus Heduus, led more by Physiology, then Astrology; and by reason, more
then both, as concerning the events of things future: would never be drawn on
alone by the augury of a divining Priest; but would still add thereunto his
own prudent and rational conjecture. And by that always ruled his affairs,
rather then by the other.

Otanes a noble Persian, and most sagacious in conjecture, suspecting the
Magicians usurpation in suborning a false King, a Pseudo Smerdis (for the true
Smerdis being slain by Prazaspes a Magician; and Patizites a Magician setting
up his brother Smerdis a Magician, who was in all parts very like the other)
Otanes advised his daughter (a concubine) to feel about the Pseudo Smerdis his
head (for Cambyses had cut off both the Magicians ears, for distinction sake)
and thus cunningly finding out the truth, they conspired against the usurping
Magicians and slew them.

Agathocles made an oration to his soldiers, whereby they were much
encouraged. But an eclipse of the Sun happened, at which they were not a
little terrified. Wherefore the King (as careful to give a reason of that, as
of the war) told them that if it had happened before they set forth, the
prodigy might have portended something against them that made the expedition:
but seeing it fell out after their setting forth, all the portent must needs be
against them against whom the expedition was made. And thus he encouraged them
again, and proo ved victorious.

William the Conqueror coming out of his ship to enter upon the English
shore, his foot chanced to slip so that he fell to the ground: some doubted of
the omen, but one of the soldiers said wisely, this did but signify his
taking possession of England.

Christophorus Golumbus, after that he saw the Indians turn treacherous, and
grow implacable toward him, told them (having some skill in Astronomy to
foresee an Ecclips) that within few days they should see the Moon his friend,
and portending terrible things to them, because of their breach of hospitality.
Now when the Eclipse happened accordingly, they (ignorant of the cause) took his
prediction to be ratified, and fearing the sequel, used him with all courtesy,
and ladened him with gifts.

19. Of Magical and Astrologicall Artists, and their Arts, wittily derided,
wisely rejected, and worthily contemned.
THe Army of the Romans being deadly smitten by the darts and arrows of the
Parthians; and Cassius laboring to preserve and order such of the dispersed as
repaired to him, for another assault: a certain Chaldaean advised him, to
protract the time a while, til the Moon had run over Scorpio, and attained to
Sagitarius. Oh (quoth he) I rear Sagitarius, or the Archer, more then I do
Scorpio, or the Serpent himself.

Spurina admonished Caesar, to take heed of some peril that was toward him
which could not be deferred beyond the Ides of March. When the day came, Caesar
derided Spurina, saying, the Ides of March were come, and yet he saw no hurt.
Yea (quoth the Augur) they are come indeed, but for all that they are not past.
Thus they jeared one another; but ere the predicted time was complete, the
conspiracy of Caesar's death took effect. And thus the Astrologers jeare, what
got Caesar by jearing their Art? But have they not read that Cicero derided
Spurina, as well as Caesar did? And if they compare Authors, they shall read,
that Caesar himself had noted, that the Ides of March would be ferall to him,
because of Scorpio's declining. So then it is easy to be observed, that the
effect followed, because of his superstition, rather then his derision. It is
well noted of the same Caesar, that for no religion (that is, fatidicall
superstition) he could be deterred, or retarded from any enterprise. When the
host escaped from the Immolator (a direful omen for the sacrifice to avoid
the Altar) he notwithstanding would not defer his expedition against Scipio
and Iuba. In his profection into Africa, as he went out of the ship, he chanced
to fall slat upon the ground (an ill omen) yet he presumed it for the best
sign, and said, I now hold thee fast, O Africa. Yea he carried a Baffoon Jester
along with him, on purpose to elude the invincible name of the Scipio's in that
province: and though he went on against the admonitions of the greatest Augurs,
yet he the rather prospered for his own resolution.

Pyrrhus was wont to say merrily, that he conceived himself to be born under
Hercules his Star: because the more victories he had gotten against the Romans,
the more sharply they still rose up against him.

Cato used to say, he wondered how one Astrologicall diviner could look upon
another, and not laugh, sc. that they had so neatly agreed together to delude
all others. But the world is turned since Catos time; and they must now give it
leave to laugh at them, and their delusions.

A certain Astrologer telling it in or to an Assembly, that he had there drawn
in a Table the erratulae, or wandering Stars. Lie not friend (quoth Diogenes)
for the Stars err not, nor wander at all; but they that sit or stand here to
no purpose. (I add, but they that study and practice an art to as little.) The
same Cynick asked another, talking familiarly of the Stars, when the came from
Heaven?

Thales, as he went on looking up to the Stars, fell into a ditch of water;
whereupon (besides the jest his maid made of him at the present) others said of
him afterward, that if he had looked down into the water he might have seen the
Stars: but looking up to the Stars, he could not see the water. Bion said, the
Astrologers were very ridiculous, who boasted they could see the Fish afar
off in the Heavens; and yet could not see the Fishes hard by swimming in the
River.

Dion, one of Plato's Scholars, and friends; an Eclipse of the Moon chancing
at the same time that he was waighing up his Anchors, to sail from Zacynthe to
make war with the Tyrant Dionysius, disregarded the vaticinall portent, set
to sail notwithstanding, came to Syracuse, and prevailed to drive out the
Tyrant.

One showed Vespasian a strange hayry Comet, thinking to put him in some fear
of the portent; whereat he merrily reply plied, that prodigy betokened
nothing contrary to him, but the King of the Parthians (his enemy) who wore a
bushy head of hair.

After the death of Julian the Autiochenians even in their sports thus derided
Maximus, the greatest Magician, and chief of those that had seduced him by
their predictions and praestigious operations: where are now thy divinations. O
foolish Maximus? God and his Church have now overcome, viz. the Devil, and
Magicians.

St. Augustine confesses his Nebridius would often deride his study of
Judiciary Astrology: and he was ready to deride him again, for ignorant in
that art: till at length convinced of his own ignorance, he prevented the
others smiling, by his own bewayling.

Nearchus admiral to Alexander arriving near the Isle of Nosala, consecrated
to the Sun, was told of a prophecy, that no mortal man might land there, but
at the instant he should vanish away, and be no more seen. This made the
Mariners refuse, butthe Admiral forced them to go ashore, and landed there
himself; to let them see how vain and contemptible were all such predictions.

Cato observing one to have consulted a Soothsayer, upon a Rat gnawing his
hose: what an ominous portent (said he) would the man have suspected, if his
hose had gnawne the Rat? When one wondered at the Snakes winding about his door
bar: what a wonder said another, would it have been, if the bar had twisted
about the snake?

Polydamus conjecturing an ill omen to the Trojanes, from the flight of an
Eagle, holding a Serpent in his talons: Tush, quoth Hercules, the best
augurizing is to fight valiantly for our Country.

Prusias refusing to fight, because the Diviners had signified to him, that the
inspected intrailes forbad it as unlucky. What (said an Athenian Captain) will thou give more credit to a piece of calses flesh, then to an old Commander?

Cicero reciting the Diviners prediction of some dreadful portent, from the
Mice gnawing the Soldiers Targets or Belts; then, quoth he, may I fear the
decay of the Commonwealth, because the Mice gnawed Plato's polity in my study.
And if they should likewise gnaw Epicures book of riot and voluptuousness,
might we not thence dread a presage of dearth and famine?

At Pericles his setting out to the Peloponnesian war, the master of the ship
being somewhat dismayed because of an eclipse of the Sun at that instant:
Pericles cast his cloak over his eyes, and asked him what hurt that did him,
save only hinder his sight for a little space?

Alphonsus King of Arragon, honoring all learned men, and making liberal
provision for the masters of all good arts, only ha past by, or slighted the
Astrologers. The reason of it being asked, it was answered by a pleasant wit,
That the Stars rule fools, but wise men govern the Stars. It was therefore for
foolish princes to respect and entertain such; and not for the wise, such as
Alphonsus was.

Scaliger makes himself merry with a Fly-driving Configurator, who having made
a Talismannicall plate, for this very purpose: he had no sooner set it up, but
a Fly comes presently and (as says my Translator) shites upon it for handsell,
or in contempt of all such figures.

Alarielus having besieged Rome, some heathenish people had sent for certain
Tusoane Magicians, who confidently promised (by their art) to make him raise
his siege, and so free the City. But Innocentius then Bishop there, drove them
out thence, judging it better and safer for the City to be taken, then to be
delivered by such divellish means.

Frederick of Austria, being imprisoned by Lewis of Bavaria; a Magician
promised Leopoldus his brother (if he would reward him well for his pains)
that he would (by his art) set Frederick at liberty, and bring him safe out of
Bavaria, home to Austria, within an hours space. And, upon a liberal promise
his devil hyed to the prison, and appeared to Frederick in the shape of a
stranger, presenting there a horse before him, and bad him get upon him, and he
should presently carry him home into his own Country. But Frederick being very
inquisitive, scrupulous, conscientious, more then the phantasme could well away
with, disappeared; and excused the frustration to the Magician, from the others
refusal; and he likewise to those that had employed him.

The Duke of Anjou consulting with the Count of Savoy, about an offer which a
Magician had made unto him, as touching the betraying of a Castle into their
hands, by the power of his art. The Count replied, he trusted in God, and would
never consent, that it should be said, that such old Soldiers and stout, could
not do an exploit, without the advice, or help of an infamous, and forbidden
art: and so caused the praestigious artists head to be stricken off.

Charles the fifth not only rejected the advice, but caused Cornelius Agrippa
(with two noble men also his confederates) to be banished his Court and
Kingdoms; for projecting a way to him, of finding, or tempering treasure, by
magical, or mago chymicall arts, and artifices.

St. Augustine derides Apollo, for hiring himself out to Laomedon, about the
walling of Troy. And being himself called the diviner, and the father of all
diviners, yet for all that he could not foresee, how Laomedon would perjure his
promise, and defraud him of his reward.

Theoeritus a divining Sophister himself, yet could he not but deride the
vain opinions men had of their divining Gods; saying, O men! be of good minds;
so long as ye may see the divining Gods, and their divinations die, and perish
before you.

Antiphon, when one had presaged ill, because a Sow had eaten up her own pigs:
he observing that the owner kept her extreme lean and bare: Be merry (said he)
at the good sign, in that she did not devour thy children instead of her own.

Publius Claudius in the first Punick war, as he was upon a sea fight, taking
an auspice according to the manner; it was told him, the Pullen would not come
out of their roosts to meat: then commanding to cast them all into the Sea; if
they will not eat (quoth he) let them drink.

Sabinus father to Vespasian (being informed of strange things concerning his
son, by the heruspicall Diviners) told his old mother Tertulla that she had a
Nephew or Grandchilde begotten of him, which should be Caesar. At this the old
woman could not but laugh, and wondering at his credulity, said, That her son
doted, while she her self was got of a sound mind.

A certain vaticinator sat in the Market place, telling to every one their
fortune; to whom one came and told him, that while he sat there, his doors
were broken open, and all his goods carried away. At which hearing he straight
ran home, wards sighing: to whom, another meeting him, said, Could thou
indeed divine what should happen to others, and could not foresee what might
befall thy self?

A certain Sorceresse undertook for money to tell men which way to foresee and
prevent the wrath of the Gods: but being accused, condemned, and led to
execution, one said, Could thou teach others how to avert a divine judgment:
and could not thy self escape humane vengeance?

Diogenes, when he saw the Governors of provinces, the Physicians,
Philosophers, and Orators, was wont say, nothing was more wise: but when he saw
the Vaticinators, Conjectors, aruspects, etc. then he used to say, nothing was
more foolish, then was man.

Cicero, an augur (says St. Austin) derided the Auguries, and reprehended
those kind of men, that would have the counsels of life to be moderated by
Crows and Daws.

St. Bernard, while he was a child, lying sick upon his bed, being grievously
troubled with the headache; there came to him a sorcerous hagge to mitigate his
pains by her charms: at which he crying out with great indignation, caused
her forthwith to be thrust away from him.

Queen Elizabeth, when diverse (upon greater scrupulosity, then cause) went
about to dissuade her Majesty (lying then at Richmond) from looking on a Comet:
with a courage answerable to the greatness of her state, she caused the window
to be set open, and cast out this word jacta est alea, the dice are thrown.
Affirming, that her steadfast hope and confidence was too firmly planted in the
promises of God, to be blasted, or affrighted with those beams, which either
had a ground in nature, whereupon to rise; or at least no warrant out of
Scripture to portend the mishaps of Princes.

20. Of the absurd and ridiculous reasons, which have been rendered by
Mag-astro-mancers, both for the rules of their art, and their practice upon
those rules, and the events upon those practices; yea, and the remedies of
those events.
THey of Lebedia sacrificing before the Oracle of Jupiter Triphonius, the cocks
happened to crow apace all the while; This, said the Soothsaying Sacrificulists,
presaged victory to the Baeotians, over the Thebanes. And they gave this reason
for their divination: because that bird is silent, being vanquished; but crows
always when he is conqueror.

A certain Courser, intending to try his speed at the Olympic games, dreamt
the night before, that he was carried thither in a Chariot: and consulting a
Conjecturer upon it, Thou shall win (said he) I warrant thee; for a Chariot
signifies swiftness and speed.

Another of them dreamt, that he was turned into an Eagle. Thou shall get the
mastery (quoth the interpreter) because this Foul flies the swiftest of all
other. Another of them dreaming the like dream, ah (quoth the diviner) it is to
be feared thou will come last, because this bird pursuing her prey, follows in
the tail of the other.

A certain Matron (longing to be pregnant) dreamt her belly was sealed up: this
presages barrenness, said one divining expounder, because nothing can come
forth of that which is sealed up. Nay, said another, this imports
fruitfulness, because no body uses to seal up that vessel, or bag which is
empty, and has nothing in it.

St. Ambrose thus derides their reasons: Can any thing be more ridiculous then
to say (as the prognosticating Astrologers used) that if a man be born under
the Sign of Aries, he shall be wise in counsel. And why? because the Ram is
eminent in leading the flock. Item, he shall be rich. And why? because the Ram
has every year a rich fleece growing on his back. If he be born under the
sign Taurus, he shall be strong, laborious, potent in service, etc. And why?
because the Bull or the Ox submits his neck to the yoke. He that is born under
Leo, Scorpio, Pisees; shall be fierce, malicious, silent: And why? because
Lions are fierce, Scopions are poisonous, and Fishes are mute, etc.

Upon the Statue of Augustus there was inscribed Caesar: now it being
thunder-striken, it happened that the letter C was thereby blotted out: upon
which it was answered by the divining Oraculists, that Augustus had only a
hundred days to live; because the letter C notes that number: and after that
should be translated among the Gods; because Aesar in the Hetrurian language
signifies a God.

Livia being great with child, and willing to take the Omen, whether she
should bring forth a son, or a daughter; an egg was taken from under a sitting
hen, and (according to the prescripts of divining omination) was kept warm in
her hands, or in the hands of her maids, hatching it by turns; till at last
comes out a Cock gallantly crested or Combed, whereupon Seribonius a
Mathematician promised famous things of the infant; and that he should reign,
but without any kingly ensign. That it should be a male child, he gathered
from the Cock chicken; but (by the same reason) why should he be without any
kingly ensign, seeing the Cock was so bravely crested, or combed.

Proelus gives an example in a spirit, which was wont to appear in the form of
a Lion; but by the setting of a Cock before it, vanished away: because there is
a contrariety betwixt a Cock and a Lion.

Orus Apollo says in his hieroglyphics, Dawes, that are twins signify
marriage: because this animal brings forth two eggs, out of which male and
female must be brought forth. But if (which seldom happens) two males be
generated, the males will not couple with any other females, nor females with
any other males, but will always live without a mate, and solitary. Therefore,
they that meet a single Daw, divine thereby that they shall live a single life.

The Eagle portends victory, but by blood, because she drinks no water, but
blood. An Owl because she goes to her young by night unawares, as death comes
unawares, is therefore said to foretell death. Yet sometimes, because she is not
blind, in the dark of the night, does betoken diligence and watch ulnesse,
which she made good, when she sat upon the spear of Hiero.

Faustina the wife of Antonius, fell in love with a sword-player, and fell sick
for him: her husband how this might be remedyed, made his consult with the
soothsayers: whose advice was to kill the Fencer, and let his wife bathe her in
his blood, and presently accompany with her himself; and so the passion would
be allayed.

Melampus the Augur conjectured at the slaughter of the Greeks, by the flight
of little birds; when he says, thou see that no bird takes his flight in
fair weather.

Swallows, because when they are dying, they provide a place of safety for
their young; do portend a great patrimony, or legacy after the death of
friends. A Bat meeting any one that is running away, signifies an evasion: for
although she have no wings, yet she flies. A Sparrow is a bad omen to one that
runs away: for she flies from the Hawk, and makes haste to the Owl, where she
is in great danger. To meet a Lion, seeing she is amongst animals the
strongest, is good: but for a woman to meet a Lioness, is bad; because she
hinders conception; for a Lioness brings forth but once. A Dog in a journey is
fortunate; because Cyrus being cast into the Woods was nourished by a Dog, till
he came to the Kingdom. Mice signify danger; for the same day that they did
gnaw gold in the Capitol, both the Consuls were intercepted by Hannibal, by way
of ambush near Tarentum. The Pismires, because they know how to provide for
themselves, and to prepare safe nests for themselves, protend security, riches,
and a great Army. Hence, when the Pismires had devoured a tame Dragon of
Tiberius Caesar, it was advised that he should take heed of the tumult of a
multitude.

If a Snake meet thee, take heed of an ill tongued enemy: for this animal has
no power, but in his mouth. A Snake creeping into Tiberius his palace,
portended his fall. Two Snakes were found in the beed of Sempronius Gracchus;
wherefore a soothsayer told him, if he would let the male go, or the female
escape he, or his wife should shortly dye: he preferring the life of his wife,
killed the male, and let the female escape, and within a few days he dyed. But
Tully tells the story otherwise, and reasons better upon it. I marvel (says he)
if the emission of the female Snake should bring death to Tiberius Gracchus;
and the emission of the male Snake were deadly to Cornelia, why he did dismiss
either of them. For the soothsayers answered nothing of any future accident, if
neither were dismissed. And that Gracchus his death followed, the cause (I
believe) was some disease, and not the Serpents dismission.

Meeting of Monks is commonly accounted as an ill omen, and so much the rather
if it be early in the morning: because these kind of men live for the most part
by the sudden death of men; as Vultures do by slauhgters.

Apollonius, and his companions (according to his advice) caused the phantasm
of an Hagge to vanish away by reviling it: for he knew that was the best remedy
against such invasions. For so fearful is this kind of spirits, that they once
moved, tremble, and are compelled by feigned terror, and false and impossible
threats. So the Hagge of Menippus Lycius, who was the cause of the Pestilence,
being stoned by his command, and the pestilence ceased. And was not that,
because they are afraid of impossible beatings, as well as impossible
threatenings?

21. Of Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, envying, opposing, differing,
contradicting, confuting both themselves, and one another.
CAlchas, and Mopsus, two great Augurs, or Astorlogical diviners, meeting
together at an Oracle of Apollo Clarius fell to contest about their skill in
the conjecturing art. The question was, how many Figs there were upon such a
tree; or how many Pigs there were in such a sowes belly? Which Mopsus guest at,
and mist not a hair: but Calchas, because he could not do so much; pining with
grief, or envy, took pet and dyed.

Eudoxus, the chief Astrologer of his time, affirmed, that the Chaldeans are
not to be credited in their natalitial prognostications, or predictions.
Penaetius a Stoical Philosopher, and yet rejected the predictions of the
Astrologers. Anchialus, and Cassander, excelling in all parts of Astrology; yet
used it not, or rather abused it not to predictions. Scylax Halicarnassaeus,
although eminent in Astrology, nevertheless abandoned the whole Chaldaical way
of it.

Servius Tullius sleeping, his head seemed to shine, or burn: some of the
Diviners said, that signified, he should perish by lightning; others, that it
was a token he should obtain Regal dignity.

Darius dreamed that the Camp of the Macedons was on fire, and that he saw
Alexander coming to him, in clothes of the same fashion, as his own were, and
that he was carried on horseback through Babylon, and so vanished out of fight.
At this, the dream spellers were divided in their divinations; some
interpreting it a fortune, some an infortune; some to the one side, some to the
other.

Betwixt the Tyrians and the Macedonians, was a semblable prodigle (blood on
the one part seen in iron; and on the other part in bread.) They of either
party interpret it as a token of good success to themselves. But Aristander
(the most skilful of the Diviners) expounded it thus on the Macedonian behalf;
if the blood had appeared outwardly, it had signified ill fortune to the
Macedons, that were without: but for as much as it was within, it portended the
like to them that were within the City, which they now besieged. Again, a huge
sea monster appeared in the sight of both parties; and they both made
themselves merry, in prognosticating (according to their Magastromantick
teachers) good luck to themselves; but were both of them deceived in the truth,
if not both in the event.

Alexander having left off to consult with his diviners; (because he found them
so various and uncertain) had yet again an itch to the superstition; and called
his Aruspicks, to inspect the entrayls; commanding that the signification
should be be showed to none but himself. Aristander is the man of art, and
credit; but he notwithstanding communicates the matter unto Erigius; who takes
advantage thereby to dissuade Alexanders resolution. Upon which he calls for
the artist, rebukes the betraying of his privy counsels and commands. The
skilful man is now more amazed then at a prodigy: yet gathering his wits
together to make some Apology for himself, he confessed some difficulty and
danger from the inspected entrails; but deeply professed his love to, and care
of his King notwithstanding. The King perceiving the flexiblenesse both of the
man's nature, and of his art; wishes him to have a confidence of fortunate
success, as well in this, as in former things. Whereupon the Aruspick pores
again, and comes in with his second prognostics; and professes to have found
signs quite contrary to the first.

Philip of Macedon dreamed that he did seal up his wives belly, and that the
seal left behind the print of a Lion upon it; Certain wise men, or wizzards
told him, that this gave him warning to look straightly to his wife, and keep
her close. At which the King was troubled; but Aristander (to make all good)
told him his wife was with child, and had in her belly a treasure worth the
sealing up.

The same day that Alexander was born, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was
burnt. This made the distracted Priests and vaticinators prognosticate, that
some great misfortune was that day born to all Asia. But soon after news was
brought to Philip of three great victories, which made him rejoice exceedingly;
now these predictors (to make up the triumph) praesaged that his son, which was
born with three great victories, should be an invincible Emperor.

Dion being about to free his Country from the tyranny of Dionysius; there
happened an eclipse of the Moon, which terrified the soldiers not a little.
Thereupon stood up one Miltas a soothsayer, and bad his fellow soldiers be of
good cheer; for the sign imported the impairing of dignity, meaning the
tyranny of Dionysius. But as touching the swarm of Bees, that lighted on the
Poop of Dions ship; he told him, and his friends secretly, that he was afraid
his acts would flourish only for a while, and soon fade away. Again, Dion
getting upon Dionysius his Clock, or Dial; and thence making an Oration to the
Syracusans, to promote their own liberty; the soothsaying prognosticators liked
it well, and said it was a good sign; for that he did now tread the sumptuous
edifice and artifice (and yet an Astrological artifice) of the Tyrant under
feet. But because the hand of the Dyal shows the course of the Sun, which
never leaves moving, they were afraid that Dions affairs should have a sudden
change of fortune.

A certain Noble man of Silesia was very inquisitive with three several
Astrologers, to know the manner of his own death. The first answered, he should
die of a seaver, the second said, of a fall; the third answered, in the waters.
And to make all good, thus (they say) it fell out. First the Fever (forsooth)
seized on him; then the frenzy thereof made him cast himself out of a window,
and that window was over a Moate; and so he fell into the water, and there
perished. The like tale do the Country people tell of our Merlin; the the King
talking with Merlin about men's fates, caused a Faulconer of his to pass by
disguised, and demanded, what kind of death should that man dye? Merlin
answered, he should be hanged. The same man coming by the second time, in
another disguise, and the like demand made, he answered, he should be stabd;
and the third time it was resolved he should be drowned. And thus (they say) it
happened: The King being on hawking, the Hawke took perch on a tree hard by a
River side: the Faulconer climing up to fetch down his Hawke, a grain of a
branch got hold of his neck, and there he hung; that breaking he fell upon a
splinter, and it stabd him; that not holding, he fell into the River, and so
was drowned. That the Magastromancers may thus contradict themselves, and one
another, is easily to be believed: but that their various praedictions were
thus completed, let the faith thereof be with the Authors.

Iohanues Albertus, Archbishop of Magdeburgh had the Moon in Aries, in the
sixth house; which signified health, but the Moon was environed by Mars, and he
in Aries; and by Saturn, and he in Taurus; and the Sun and Mercury opposite;
and those more manifest signs of daily, and cruel diseases.

Tarestius or Tarchetius, a great Mathematician, who being given to the
calculation of Astronomy, for the delight of speculation only, was entreated
by Marcus Varro to search out what hour and day the nativity of Romulus was,
who having thoroughly considered the adventures, acts, and gests of Romulus, how
long he lived, and how he died: all these being conferred, he did boldly judge,
that Romulus was conceived in his mothers womb, in the first year of the
second Olympiad, the 23 day of the mouneth, which the Egyptians call Cbaeas;
and now is called December, about three of the clock in the morning; in which
hour there was a total eclipse of the Sun: and that he was born into the
world the 21 of the month of Thoth, which is the month of September, about
the rising of the Sun. Now is not this old way of calculating a Nativity,
quite contrary to the new? But of the twain, which is the most certain? that a
priori, or a posteriori? sc. from the acts and accidents of life, to the birth:
or from the birth to the acts and accidents of life? The Historian notes the
one for false and vain; what then is to be thought of the other?

In the time of Kenneth King of Scots, appeared two dreadful Comets; one
before the Sunrising, the other after the setting; also armies were seen in
the air, and noyses of arms, and horses heard. Also a Bishops Crosier staff
was burned, as he held it in his hand, in time of service, and could not be
quenched. But the prodigies were not so various, as were the prognosticators
interpretations; whereof some were delivered for good, some for bad, but none
for true.

When the Image of Apollo Cumanus wept, some of the Aruspects were for the
casting of it into the sea, because of the terrible portent: but other more
skilful heruspicks, were for the intercession, because the Images weeping
portended prosperous things.

Proteus is a proverb of versatile mutability. And of him that part of story
which is least fabulous, is this. Proteus was an Astrologicall magician; and is
said therefore to transform himself into so many shapes, because of his
various and contrarious opinions, vaticinations, predictions, and prestigious
prankes. A fit emblem of all such, that are seldom like themselves.

Colophonius Xenophanes, one who confessed there to be Gods, denied all
divination. All the rest besides Epicurus, babbling about the nature of the
Gods, approved of divination; although not after one way. Dicaearchus the
Peripatetick took away all other kind of divination; and only left those of
Dreams and Fury. And besides those, Cratippus rejected all the rest. Panaetius
indeed durst not deny the power of divining altogether; yet he said, he doubted
of it. Xenophon took all kinds of divination quite away. The chief articles
that were objected against Socrates, were contempt and rejection of Oracles.
Eudoxus Gnidius was wont to say, that the Chaldaeans were by no means to be
credited in their observations or predictions upon the lives and fortunes of
men, from the day and hour of their nativity.

Two men, before their contest at the Olympic games dreamed the like dream,
viz. that they were drawn by four swift coursers in a Chariot: they both
consulted one Prophet, and he prophesied to the one, that he should win; and
to the other, that he should lose the prize.

One told Vitellius, that the circles which appeared in the waters like
crowns, were abodes of Empire; another of them boded thereupon, that either
they signified no such thing, or else but the instability thereof.

The fame is, that Julian on a certain time inspecting the entrayles, there
appeared in them the sign of the Cross environed with a crown. Some that
partooke of the divination, were cast into a fear hereat, that the Christian
Religion should gather strength, and that the doctrine of Christ should be
perpetual; taking it for a sign both of victory, and eternity. But the chief
divining Artist among them, bad the Emperor be of good cheer; for the
victimes portended prosperous things according to his own desire: because the
mark of the Christian religion was circumscribed and coarcted; as a token that
it should have no large spreading in the world.

Julian again meditating war against the Persians sent to the Oracles at
Delphos, Delos, and Dodona; and they all consented to encourage him, promising
him undoubted success. But there was an old prophecy of former diviners, that
utterly thwarted them all: for it foretold, that it should be exitiall to the
Emperor and people of Rome, whenever he passed with his army beyond the
River Euphrates, and the City Ctesiphon. And thereabouts was Julian slain, and
his army overthrown.

22. Of juggling predictions, forged divinations, and ludibrious mock-charms, as
operative as the rest; and all alike effectual, not from themselves; but from
the Agents, or Patients superstition, and credulity.
SErtorius a notable Captain, was wont to feign visions, dreams, and
divinations; and pretended himself to be informed of many future events, by a
white Hind, that a skillful friend had sent him, to be his instructor in those
mysteries: and by these very devices, kept his Soldiers in order and courage;
and so achieved many notable feats and victories.

Two Country fellows came to Vespasian, entreating his help in their cure, as
the Oracle of Serapis had showed unto them. One of them was blind, and he was
told, that if Vespasian did but spit in his eyes, that should restore his
sight. The other was lame of his thighs, and he was told he should be cured, if
Vespasian did but touch the part affected with his heel. The good Emperor was
somewhat scrupulous to make experiment of a thing so vain and improbable; but
at the importunity of his friends, and earnest suite of the parties, he was
drawn to do as the Oracle or vision had directed; and the effect presently
followed thereupon. Namely, upon their superstition, and the devils illusion;
for the Serapidane Devil was a raid, that his divining Oracle would fall to the
ground, now that Christianity began somewhat to appear in Egypt; and
therefore he sent his patients to implore the help of Vespasian, that by the
rarity of the miracle he might hold up the majesty of the Oracle.

Alexanders soldiers being greatly terrified and disheartened, because of a
bloody Eclipse of the Moon; hereupon he (secure of all events) called for the
Egyptian presagers, and commanded them to express their skill. They concealed
the cause of the Eclipse, and their own suspicions from the common sort; but
forged this interpretation, That the Sun was over the Greeks, and the Moon
over the Persians: and as often as she was in an Eclipse, did portend the
slaughter and ruin of that Nation. The credulous soldiers hereupon conceived
hope, went on, and prospered.

Pheron an Egyptian King, had a disease of a strange cause, but of a stranger
cure. He was struck blind for casting a dart into Nilus, and so continued for
the space of eleven years; then consulting the Oracle about his recovery, it
was answered, he must wash his eyes with the urine of a woman, that had never
known other then her own husband. First he made trial of that of his own wife,
but it would not do: and of many others more, and at last he light of one
whereby he recovered his sight. And forthwith called all those other women
together, and burnt them; and married that one himself, whose water was so
sovereign.

The Dictators, Emperors, and people of Rome, were taught by their augurizing
and aruspicall Diviners, certain devotory odes, or forms of direful
execration, full of barbarismes, and profaneness; that so the imprecating of
the one added to the others vaticinating, might make the ominating much more
forcible and effectual.

Erasmus having in familiarity one Bibliopegus, a Dane; they two being
pleasantly disposed together, Erasmus jestingly bad him take a knife, and open
any lease of Homers Iliads, and choose any verse on the right side of the
lease, and he would thence undertake to tell him his fortune. Bibliopegus
having observed all circumstances very strictly, Erasmus began to predict, that
he should marry a wife very rich, but so ill conditioned, that he should be
forced to desert her. And the event of this jest fell out in good earnest.

Hemingius while he was a young Student, in a Logic Lecture, recited these
verses, used in the Schools; Fecane cageti, Daphenes, gebare, Gedaco,
Gebali stant, sed non stant Phoebus, becas and hedas.
Hereupon he added in jeasting manner, that these verses were very effectual
against a Fever; if the several words were inscribed upon a piece of bread,
and given to the sick man in order, so as to eat every day a piece, with the
word inscribed. Now there happened to hear him a good honest simple man, who not
apprehending the jest, believed all to be spoken seriously. And within a few
days after, having a servant of his fallen sick of a Fevrr, gave him a piece
of bread the first day inscribed with the Fecane; and so every day in order to
the last word; and then he was cured. Others likewise seeing the efficacy of
this amulet followed the example, and obtained the like effect. Till at length
the jest of it came out, and so the virtue of it ceased.

Gotschalcus, and Wierus relate this story (one from his own knowledge, the
other from another report; and though they vary in circumstances, yet they
agree in the effect.) A certain woman grievously troubled with sore eyes,
light upon a certain knavish Scholar, to whom she complained of her
infirmity, craved the help of his art, and promised liberally to reward him.
He, either to make sport, or in hope of gain, promised to help her: and to
that end, took a piece of paper, wherein he wrote such kind of Characters as
were never invented or seen before; and underneath them wrote these words in
great Letters, The devil pull out thine eyes, and stop up their boles with
dung. This he folds up, and wraps it in a piece of cloth, and ties it about her
neck, and bids her have an especial care that it be not taken thence, nor yet
opened, or read by any means. All this she observes awfully, and her watery
eyes were cured. About a year or two after, either she let fall off through
carelessness, or else had a desire to see what was there contaned; the charm
then being opened, and read, and the cursed contents thereof understood, and
abhorred, it was cast into the fire; which done, her sore eyes returned in as
grievous manner as before.

I have read it in an Orthodox divine, that he knew a young Gentleman, who by
chance spilling the salt of the Table; some that sat with him said merrily to
him, that it was an ill omen, and wished him take heed to himself that day: of
which the young man was so superstitiously credulous, that it would not go out
of his mind; and going abroad that day, got a wound of which he died not long
after.

Old Ennius fained many answers of the Pythian Apollo, and delivered them in
verse; when as Apollo had long before left off his poetical prophetizing: and
yet even these spoke as true, and was found as effectual, as any of the rest.

Numa Pompilius, Scipio Affricanus, Lucius Scylla, Quintus Sertorius, Minos
King of Crete, Pisistrates the Athenian Tyrant, Lyeurgus, and Zaleucus, are all
noted for assimulating of religion, or a faigning of divination and oraculous
predictions: and nevertheless prevailed by this means, and ruled both by Laws
and arms.

Persia being oppressed with the sordid domination of the Magicians, Darius the
King with some adjutors of like dignity, entered into a pact, that they should
ride to such a place before Sun rising, and whose horse neighed there first,
it should be taken as an omen to make him King. Now Darius his Groom, to effect
it the more prosperously for his master, had rubd his hand in the genitall
parts of a Mare, and when they came to the place, strok't the horse over the
nose, which presently neighed upon the smell. Whereupon all the rest alighted,
and as from a divine suffrage, saluted him King.

Alexander Severus, yet a youth, and dreaming of nothing less then an Empire;
making (as boys used) Virgilian lots; light upon certain verses that seemed to
portend or praesignifie the Roman Empire to him. Yea many such verses both of
Homer and of Virgil, have been often used to that end; and have proved as
significant and effectual, as any presaging Oracle of them all.

23. Of the aenigmaticall, obscure, amphibolicall, ambiguous, and aequivocating
(so. so deluding speeches, studiously and industriously delivered, by
oraculous, magical, sorcerous, and astrologicall predictors, or diviners.
PYrrhus King of Epyre perceiving the power of the Romans, against whom he
went, consulted the Oracle of Apollo, and it gave him this doubtful answer,
Aeacides, I say,
The Romans conquer may.
Which he interpreted to himself in the best part, but found the event as
various as the words were dubious.

Craesus that rich King of Lydia, consulting the Delphian Oracle, which he
himself had so munificently adorned; to show its gratitude, it resolved him
this Riddle, If Craesus fearlesse shall pass Italy's river,
A Kingdom great, wealth greater shall be shiver.
He now thought he should destroy another wealth and power, and not his own:
But instead of bringing Persia within the power of Lydia, Craesus himself fell
into the hands of Cyrus. And the Oracle gloried, that which way soever it
happened, it still spoke true.

While Alexander was in a fight, some that stood by him saw or imagined an
Eagle fearlessely fluttering over his head: then Aristander (the only diviner)
carrying a laurel in his hand, and showed the soldiers a token of victory.
But it is uncertain of which he spoke, the Laurel, or the Eagle.

An Astrologer advised Epaminondas the Thebane, to take heed of the Sea, for
that would be fatal to him. Which he therefore carefully avoided, but found
his death in a wood, which was called by that name.

Another of them bad Philip of Macedon, take heed of a Chara ret, or Cart, as a
thing dismal, or dangerous to his life: whereupon he not only refrayned, but
proscribed the use of all such; yet nevertheless had his deaths wound given
him in a City of such a name: others say, the hilt of the sword that killed him
had a Chariot engraven on it.

Nere heard news from Apollo at Delphos, that he should take heed of the
siventy third year of age: which made him very secure, being then but about
the age of thirty three. But he understood not (till it was too late) that it
was meant not of his own, but of the age of Galba, who shortly after succeeded
him.

Hannibal was foretold, that he should not die, but in the land of Lybia: and
when he thought himself secure, as far enough from that; he took his death
in a little village called Lybissa.

Inlian deluded by an Oracle, in the ambiguous word thera, signifying a beast,
and a river; dreaming of nothing else but victory in his Persian war, was there
slain.

Caligula consulting about his geniture, Sylla the Mathematician affirmed that
his death was approaching. The Antiatine Letts admonished him to take heed of
Cassius. For which cause he caused Cassius Longinus, then proconsul of Asis, to
be slain: unmindfull that Chaerea (the man that did the deed) was so called.

Zene the Emperor was told by his vaticinating prognosticators, that he of
necessity should be shortly in Constantinople; he presumed it of the City, and
that he should go thither in triumph, and state: but his men being beaten, and
fled, he casually retired into a castle, which the inhabitants thereabouts
called by that name, where he had leisure to see and bewail his delusion.

Alexander besieging Tyrus, dreamed he saw a Satyr: The Diviners expound it,
Satyrs, sc. Tyrus is thine.

Commodus being about to give battle to the Saracenes, dreamed he was going to
Thessalonica; the Soothsayers thus interpret it, These all nikin, sc. leave the
victory to another; and so he did.

Appius consulting the Pythian Oracle about the event of the civil war
betwixt Caesar and Pompey; was answered, that war was nothing to him, he
should obtain the cell of Eubea: He now supposing that Apollo admonished him
not to imbroyl himself in that danger, withdrew himself to that place
(presumed a place of quiet and honor) but there he got a disease, and found a
grave.

Daphida, or Daphas a Sophister, would needs make himself merry with Apollo's
Oracle, or some of his vaticinating Priests, and consulted how he might find
his horse, when as he never had one: it was answered him, he should find his
horse, but it should dash out his brains. At length Actalus (against whom he
had rayled) got him, and threw him headlong against a stone or rock so called.
This end he had, for abusing the authority, not deriding the Oracle.

Pope Sylvester the second inquiring at his brazen head, how long he should
live in that Papal dignity: the devil answered out of it, he might live long,
if he came not at Jerusalem; now when he thought himself most safe, he was
suddenly stricken whith a deadly fever, in a Church at Rome called by that
name.

Pope Alexander the sixth, who was himself addicted to Necromancy, was
inquisitive how long he should continue in the Popedom? It was answered
nineteen: which he understood of years; but it was completed in ten years
and nine months, as some say: or as others, in eleven years and eight days.

A certain Bishop was forewarned by an Astrologer, to beware of a fall from a
high place: he hoping to avoid the threatening of the Stars, kept continually
in low rooms. At length news being brought that he was put out of his
Bishopric; wretch that I am! said he, that I could not think on this before;
for I could not have fallen from an higher place.

A great Mathematician was consulted, who should be the successor to Stephen
King of Poland; he wrote Deus. They were glad of so good a Governor; but soon
after came in the Suedian. And the Astrologer being challenged upon his
praediction, replied he meant they should read the word backward, and then it
was Sued.

Peter the Hermit, a Soothsayer, prophesied that King John should be no more
King of England after Ascension day; which he would have made good in his
resignation of his kingdom into the hands of the Pope, and receiving it again
upon other conditions. But all his equivocation would not save him from the
Gallows.

Thomas of Ersilton, a Scottish Soothsayer, being asked by the Earl of March,
what kind of weather they should have on the morrow? answered, that on the
morrow before noon should blow the sorest wind that ever was heard in Scotland.
The morrow proving fair and calm, the Earl told him he was much mistaken in
his mark. To which he answered no more, but that it was not yet past noon.
Then came news of the Kings death; upon which the Wizzard replied, that was the
wind he meant.

The Earl of Athol trusting to a wizzards or witches prediction, that before
his death he should be crowned openly in the sight of the people; traitorously
conspired the death of James the first King of Scotland. For which he was in
the beginning of his execution, brought into an open place, and there crowned
with an hot Iron.

Iunius Brutus going to Delphos with the sons of Tarquin, (whom he had sent
thither to honor Apollo with sacrifices and gifts) was fain (for fear of envy
to offer his Gold to the divining God in an hollow staff. And the young men
consulting which of them should reign: it was answered by the Oracle, he that
before other should kiss his mother. Then Brutus (seeming to slip by casualty)
purposely cast himself grovelling and kissed the earth, as common mother of
them all.

Tully thus bespeaks Apolle, A whole volume has Chrysippus filled with thy
Oracles, some partly false, and some true by chance: (as it often proves in any
kind of speech) some so obscure, as that the interpretation needs an
interpreter; and the lot may very well be referred to a lot again: and some so
ambiguous, as that they may justly be imputed to a subtle sophister, rather
then to a divining answerer.

Hamilcar the Carthaginian Captain, as he besieged the Syraeusans, in his
dream heard a voice that told him, he should the next night sup in the City. At
which he was glad, promised himself the victory, and prepared for the assault.
But the Syracusans (upon advantage of a tumult amongst his men) surprised him,
and so carried him with them into the City, and there he supt, as a captive,
but not as a conqueror, as he was made to suppose.

Cambyses warned by Apollo's Oracle to beware of Smerdis, who set lime-twigs
for his Crown, supposed it to be meant of his brother, and so bereft him of his
life: but after this, another Smerdis, who was nothing of the blood, and whom
the Destinies concealed in the Duke, accomplished the prophecy. The same
Cambyses being advised to beware of a Town called Echatana, would never come at
any of those which were in his own Dominions; but light by chance into another,
where his life ended.

The night before King Henry the fourth meant to set forward to the holy Land,
with an intent to declare his inward repentance for the wrongs which he had
done at home, by warring against Infidels: because it had been told him that he
should die in Jerusalem; it was his fortune to fall sick and die soon after,
in a chamber bearing that name here at Westminster.

Edward the first was made to doubt of Brough upon Stanmire; when as he died at
Brough upon the sands.

An Earl of Pembrook died at Barwick in Wales, whenas he was put in fear of
Barwick upon the border.

Wolsey the Cardinal of York, being given to understand that at Kingston he
should end, would always rather ride about, then pass thorough Kingston upon
Thames: but was committed to the charge of Sir Anthony Kingston, to convey him
to the Tower, if he had not died by the way.

The Welshmen had a prophecy, that the rood of Dernell Gathren should set fire
on a Forest: a thing so far from sense and probability, as no man could
conceive what it should mean: till Cromwell, meaning to make a scorn of
superstition, caused the fire, wherewith no Forest stored with Trees, but a
silly Friar should be burnt, to be kindled with that Image.

24. Of things falling out quite contrary to Magical and Astrologicall
Prognostications or Predictions: and thereupon the Magastromancers themselves
justly rewarded by diverse, for their delusive way.
Caius Cornelius Hispalus by an Edict commanded that the Choldaeans within ten
days should depart the City, and all Italy; because by their light and lying
wits, they made a gain of, and a giune for the people.

The Magicians of Persia devised many praestigious impostunes whereby to delude
and disturb Isdigerdes their King: but their pranks being detected, he caused
every tenth man of them throughout the Kingdom to be beheaded.

Maximinus being overcome by Licinius, returned home in a rage, and put to
death his fatidicall predictors (that had urged him to the war, in confidence
of their oraculous praesagings) as inchanters and seducers, and such as had
betrayed his peace and safety.

Julian that so favored, and practiced all kind of praestigious artifices, in
his war against the Persians, was not only hecouraged, and assured of
victory by his Soothsayers; but and all manner of fortunate success confirmed
unto him by Delphian, Delonian, and Dodonaean Oracles: yet how fatal that war
was to him, the event proved; and not only so, but the heavens themselves
(without, yea and against the Astrologers) foretold.

As Sylla (upon an expedition) was sacrificing, there appeared a serpent about
the Altar; of this the Ariolists made a sad presage, and would have retarded
the exploit: but he proceeded nevertheless, and there followed a glorious
issue that day; not from the counsel of the Diviners, but of the Commanders.

Cicero reports from his own knowledge, that the Chaldaeans had foretold to
Pompey, to Crassus, and to Caesar himself, that none of them should die, but
in their old age, at their own houses, and with honor; in all which
particulars it fell one clean otherwise to them all. So that he wonders any
should believe them, that may observe so many events, so contrary to their
predictions.

To their objection, of Flaminius, and his army perishing, because they
followed not the Diviners direction; Cicero opposes this answer, that Paulus
observed them the year after, and yet both he and his army perished
nevertheless. I add, from Orosius, that Flaminius the consul contemning the
Diviners counsel, inhibiting his course as unfortunate; went on, and obtained
a glorious conquest. Whether it was the same, or another, it is sufficiently
confuting.

It is storied in Livie, that the Augurs ominating disastrous and unfortunate
things to the Roman army, from their immolations and inspections: the
Captains resolved on the contrary, acquainted the army that all things divined
were happy, and promised victory; whereupon they proceeded cheerfully and
prevailed.

Nicias the Athenian, being made to believe (by the Astrologgers
prognosticating upon an Eclipse of the Moon) that is was safest for him, not
to stir out of the haven that night, but to stay still in his ships, was there
that night surprised by the Syracusans.

A great aruspicall Diviner would needs forewarn Caesar, not to send over into
Africa before winter; yet he did it; and if he had not done it, the enemy had
gathered all their forces together, and utterly prevented him.

After that the Serpents had thrice eaten up the liver of the sacrifices, and
the inspecting Augurs had constantly interpreted it for the good of T.
Gracchus: yet his unfortunate end followed upon it for all that.

Maxentius gave himself to magical studies, and incantation, and ripped up
women with child, and inquired into the entrayles of new born infants, and
killed Lions to that purpose, and after a secret manner adjured and invoked
Devils; and endeavored thus to avoid the instant war; and by these arts
wholly promised himself the victory; and consided more in his magical arts,
then in the good will of his subjects: but the Emperor Constantine, by faith,
and prayer, and the power of God, utterly vanquished him, and he was miserably
drowned in Tyber, after all. So was Magnentius also vanquished by Constantius,
and made to cut his own throat, after all the vain hopes his Magical Diviners
had deluded him withal.

In the time of Leo Isaurus, Masalmas a Prince of the Saracens soon entered
Pergamus, although the Citizens thereof (trusting to a certain Magician) had
immolated an horrible sacrifice to the Devil; a pregnant woman being cut up,
and the fruit of her womb taken out alive, and boiled in a Kettle, and all the
Soldiers directed to dip the sleeve of their right hand in the broth.

Albumazar, that great Astrologer, prophesied (by his art) that the Christian
Law should not last above 1460 years; which we now see falsified some hundreds
almost.

Abraham the Jew prognosticated from his astrologicall observations, that the
Messiah which the Jews expected, should come in the year 1464. after Christ.
Which how true it is, the day has declared.

Petrus de Aliaco (one that made no difference betwixt Theology and Astrology)
predicted many things against the peace of the Church, which never fell out,
but rather the contrary.

Pope John 21. alias 19. would often out of his Mathematical skill, promise to
himself long life, and Popedom, and boast it among his familiars: but died
nevertheless of a disastrous casualty within four months after he was made
Pope.

Odo Bishop of Baia, was put in great hopes by his Astrologicall predictors,
that he should happily attain unto the Popedom: but using the means
thereunto, he purchased to himself a perpetual imprisonment, and so died
miserably.

Oleph King of Norway was induced, by sundry prognostics of his prevailing, to
invade Denmark, but his Navy being scattered, he desperately cast himself into
the Sea, and so perished.

Ericus that conquering King of Swedes, when (by the prognostics of his art)
he presumed himself most secure, was taken captive by Ostanes. And Hading,
such another of them, after all his presumption was forced to hang himself.

Guido of Flanders was deceived by a Necromancer (of whom he had learnt the
Art) by which he had promised him, that whenever he would, he should pass
invisible out of any peril. But that immutation little availed to the safety
of his life.

Frederick Stuphius (who maintained his army with magical money) was
notwithstanding taken by Rudolph of Habspurge, and burnt.

Reatius a praestigious operator, being therefore convented, confessed his
circulatory frauds: and afterward was slain by one whom he had deceived by
those his delusory ways.

Methotin an idolatrous Magician, his frauds being detected, was slain by a
concourse of people, and his body nailed to a stake. And Hollerus such another,
was cruelly murdered by his own aemulators.

A great Calculator confesses, that Sebastian Castalio showed an Astrologer (to
his great admiration) the genesis of his little son, who died in his infancy;
and yet that genesis had all the aphaeticall places safe and sound; which might
promise a prolonged life, or direct any judge for to pronounce thereupon.

An Earl of Aspremont would seem to entertain all comers with all kind of
dainties, but they were no sooner out of his house, but that horse and man was
ready to die with hunger and thirst. A curious inquisitor was carried out of
his own house into a very pleasant place, as it seemed, but in the morning
found himself laid upon thorns, and almost starved. One Mendoza would present
his banquets, but they proved nothing but coals and ashes.

Hamilear the Carthaginian Captain, led on by the Ariolists, sacrificed all
the while he was in fight, in hope of better success; but finding it, in the
discomfiture of his party, to fall out on the contrary, he cast himself as a
desperate sacrifice into the fire, to quench it with his blood, that had put
him in so great hopes, and stood him in so little stead.

Rhadagusus a King of the Goths, in warring against the Romans, did nothing
almost but immolate or sacrifice for auspication, or divinations sake: so that
they began boastingly to spread abroad Rhadagusus (who had reconciled to
himself the protection and assistance of such Gods) was sure to overcome. But
nevertheless he was taken and slain, with above 100000. of his army.

Papyrius Cursor oppugning Aquilonia, the Pullarian Auspicator would needs be
presaging clean contrary to his tokens: whose fallacy being found out, the
Consul praesumed a good omen notwithstanding, and beginning the fight, caused
the lying Augur to be placed in the front, and the first dart that was cast by
the enemy struck him stark dead.

Eudemus being foretold by a cunning dream-speller, that although he was now in
exile, yet he should return to his own Land within five years: within which
space he notwithstanding dyed in ^^racusa: but to make his prediction good, he
said, he meant his grave which is every man's own land.

Constantia an honorable dame of Rome, having received assurance from
Astrologers of a long, healthful, and most happy life, fell sick within sive
days after of a burning fever, and finding that there was no way but death,
she strained her husbands hand, and concluded both her speech, and life, with
these complaining words, Behold what truth is in the vain pregnosticates of
fond Astrologers.

Ninus who detested all Astrologers, with their deceipts, suppressed Zoroastes,
who would deal in nothing without their encouragement. Pompey with his guard
of prophets lost his head: and Caesar by contempt of Oracles subdued his
enemies. Justinian exiling all sorts of false Prophets with their bag and
baggage, did flourish as a Conqueror; whereas Julian admitting them, with all
their packs of falsehoods and blasphemous lies, did perish as a castaway.

At such time as Brittanicus waited for the great lot of the Roman Empire, by
the comfort and encouragement of a vain Astrologer: he lost both life and all,
by the rigor of a bloody Tyrant.

Thrasillus the Mathematician, whom Tiberius had taken into familiarity,
presaging good things upon the sight of a ship: but things falling out contrary
to what he predicted, Tiberius was purposed, as they walked together, to cast
him down a praecipice for a falsary, and an intruder into his secrets.

Seneca, by a pretty fancy, brings in Mercury persuading with the Gods, that
they would abridge the life of Claudius; if not for any other cause, yet even
for pity and compassion of the poor Astrologers: who had already been taken
with so many lies (from year to year) about this point: as if the destinies
were not more favorable, then their grounds were sure, the credit of Astrology
would decay for ever.

St. Ambrose tells of one that prognosticated great store of rain to fall,
after an exceeding drought: but none was seen, till it was obtained by the
prayers of the Church.

Galen writes that none of all those Prophets and Astrologers, whose skill was
commended, and their depth admired in his time at Rome, gave any perfect
judgment either as touching the disease, the continuance, or cure thereof.

Manfredus a rare Doctor of Astrology, assured Ordelaphius a Prince in Italy,
that that very year wherein he died, if there were any certain knowledge by
his art, he should not end his life, before extremity of age had made him lame
and unweldy.

Paulus Florentinus lived till 85 years of age, and yet he would assure his
friends in private, that he never found one comfort that might promise long
life in the figure of his birth; but sudden death, with many tragical and most
lamentable accidents.

The great dearth of Cattle which was so certainly expected by the Calculators
Anno 1558. turned to a wonderful increase of all kinds of sustenance.

At the same time that the fond Bohemians were afraid to be consumed with
sudden sire that should come down from Heaven, as some preachers gave warning,
they were almost drowned with a second Flood, by means of excessive showers,
springtides, and store of land-waters, that ran down with immoderate
abundance, as if God had resolved to descry the falsehood of their juggling.

At another time, the people were so scared with an universal fear of waters
scattered abode by prophets of this kind, as a certain Abbot (seeking to
prevent the worst) built him a Tabernacle upon the top of Harrow on the Hill:
but the conclusion is, that before Summer was half spent, all the ditches were
drawn dry, and the castle perished for lack of water.

Paul Flerent noting two constellations, under which the State of Florence was
refreshed, after long and bloody wars: finds them so cross and opposite
one to another, as himself is forced to confess, that small light of
assurance may be taken from the blaze of this Beacon.

Pencer prognosticated upon the last Comet, that our bodies should be parched
and burned up with heat; but how fell it out? Forsooth we had not a more
unkindly Summer for many years in respect of extraordinary cold.

25. Of the Heavens calculating their own purport, without the help of an
Artist: and the suspicion of Magastromancers predicting rather by diabolical
instinct, or the suggestion of their own Familiars, then from any virtue of the
stars.
THe day before Julian died, one (and he an heathen) watching over night, saw a
conjunction or compact of the Stars, expressing thus much in legible
characters, To day is Julian slain in Persia. Also Didymus Alexandrinus had a
vision of white horses running in the air, and they that rode upon them said,
tell Didymus, in this very hour Julian is slain, and bid him tell it to
Athanasius the Bishop.

Constantine in his holy meditations, calling up his eyes Eastward toward
Heaven, saw the similitude of a Cross, wherein were stars (as letters) so
placed, that visibly might be read this sentence in Greek, In this thou shall
overcome.

At what time Caesar was in the battle of Pharsalia, one Caius Cornelius a
notable prognosticator in Padua, beholding the flying of Birds, cried out, Now
they give the onset on both sides; and a little after (as a man possessed with
some spirit) cried out again, O Caesar, the victory is thine. Such was that of
Apollonius concerning Domitian, of which before.

Numa Pompilius, a Magician or Sortiary not inferior to any, had frequent and
familiar company, confabulation, and congression with Aegeria a Nymphish
devil. Simon Magus had a dog, they say, could speak, and do many prodigious
pranks. Quintus Sertorius had an Heart which he consulted withal. Pope
Sylvester the second had a dog, which he held more dear then the Kingdom of
Naples. Laurentius also had such an one at Roan. Iodocus de Rosa had the devil
in a Ring. Petrus Apponensis, a magical Physician, had seven spirits, which he
kept in glasses. Andreas an Italian had a great red dog that would do many
prodigious feats. Faecius Cared^us is said to have an acry spirit very
familiar. Stephen Gardener had his darling cat. John Faustus had a dog called
prestigiar. And Cornelius Agrippa had another called Monsieur. A French Baron
had a cat that vanished into the air because he chid her* And it is reported of
an English one, that had such another, which did in like manner.

The same day that the Torensians overcame the Crotonians in Italy, the victory
was told at Corinth, Athens, and Lacedaemon.

Mercury minding to try the skill of Tyresias in vaticinating, stole his Oxen,
and came to him in the shape of a man, and told him they were lost. Out they
went together to make conjecture of the thief by Augury, and the blind
presager bad Mercury to tell him what bird he saw? he answered an Eagle flying
on the left hand; that (he said) signified nothing to him. Again, he asked him,
what bird? he answered, a Crow, sometimes looking upwards, sometimes downward.
Then understanding all by instinct, that Crow (said he) swears by heaven and
earth, that thou can restore me my Oxen again if thou will.

When Caius Marius had overcome the Sicambrians, at the River Mosa, the news of
the victory was presently carried to Rome by Castor and Pollux the Starry gods;
or as others say, by the Impish devils themselves. Plutarch reports many
examples of demonicall familiars, carrying news of victory to the Romans in a
moment, from the remotest regions.

Gleombrotus sequestring himself from the society of men, and frequenting
solitary woods and caves, to become more inward with Satyrs, was informed that
there were Demons wandering up and down to inspire dreams and Oracles, and
furnish men with prophecies and predictions.

Lactantius is of the mind that the cutting of the Whetstone by Accius Naevius,
and the drawing of the Ship by the Girdle of Claudia the Vestall, and the like
were obtained by their Familiars. To which I may add Thucia's drawing water in
a sive.

Iodocus de Rosa was wont to say, that he would put none other Messenger in
trust with a cause of weight, then him that lodged one night at Constantinople,
and the next under his Signet.

The spirit Orthon brought intelligence out of all corners of the world to
Gaston Earl of Foix.

The Spirit or Familiar which daily called upon Alaricus (as he related to a
certain godly Monk) to begin his voyage toward Rome, came from the devils
court undoubtedly.

26. Of Astromancers turning Pantomancers; or presaging, not only upon
prodigies, but upon every slight occasion, by every vile and vain means: and
so occasioning superstitious people to an omination upon every accident, and
after any fashion.
Darius in the beginning of his reign, but changed the scabbard of his Sword,
from the Persian into the Grecian fashion: and the Chaldaeans (loath to let
slip any occasion of keeping their art in ure) straight way prognosticated
thereupon the translation of his Kingdom to the Greeks.

A Raven let fall a clod upon Alexanders head, and it brake to pieces: and then
flying to the next Tower, was there entangled in pitch: Aristander interprets
it as a sign of the ruin of the City, with some peril to the Kings person.
But what was last and least prognosticated, was first and most found.

Alexander steeping Barley (as the Macedonian custom was at the making of
walls) the birds of the air came and picked it up. Now many took this for an
unlucky token. But the diviners (that would spend their verdict in the most
trivial matters, rather then sit out) told them it betokened, that that Corn
should nourish many countries.

Cicero derided the Baeotian vaticinators, for predicting victory to the
Thebanes, from the crowing of Cocks. So does he the Lanuuian Aruspicks, for
making such a marvelous portent, in that the Mice gnawed the Belts.

The City of Rome being mightily divested by the Gauls, the Senators began to
deliberate, whether they should repair their ruined walls; or flit to Vejos.
Now a certain Centurion of theirs coming by at that instant, commanded the
Ensign to set down his Standard, or Banner in that place, saying, it was best
for them to abide there. The Senators over hearing that voice, interpreted it
as an omen, and so desisted from consulting any longer about their migration,
or removal, but resolved to stay at Rome still.

Lucius Paulus being about to war with King Perses, as he returned from the
Court home to his own house, his little daughter met him, whom he kissed, and
asked her why she looked so sad? she replied, Persa was dead, meaning her whelp
or Puppet. And this he took to be an omen or presage of the vanquishment and
death of Perser.

Caecilia the wise of Metellus, leading a Niece of hers (now marriageable) to
the Temple, to hear some hopes of a good husband; she standing long there, and
hearing no answer to any such purpose, desired her Aunt she might have leave to
sit by her: That thou shall (said she) and I will yield thee my seat. This the
Virgin accepted for an omen, that she should succeed her in being married to
Metellus after her decease.

Caius Marius fleeing to the house of Faunia for safeguard, set up his Ass,
and gave him Provender; which he refused to eat, but got out, and went into
the water: and that made him to ruminate, that there was no safe abiding for
him in any house or country, but he must get him to sea.

Pompey being routed by Caesar, fled for safety to the Isle of Cyprus; and
spying there a stately building, asked the name of it; it was answered, that it
was called (...); this he sighing interpreted, as portending ill to him,
touching the Empire or Kingdom.

They of Perianna imploring the aid of the Samians, against their adversaries
of Cerra: they to deride them, sent them a Sybill in a little Bark; which they
interpreted as a good omination. So they of Apollonia being in distress, and
sending to the Epidamnians for succor, they returned them answer, that they
would send the river Aeas for their relief: which they accepted as a good
omen; and making the river Captain in chief, got the victory, and afterward
sacrificed to it, as a God.

The old Druides gathered a Serpents egg at a certain time of the Moon,
according to certain rites and ceremonies; and so reserved it for omination of
victory and prevalency in wars, strifes, contentions. And such an one a Noble
man of Rome, is said to have hatched in his bosom in a controversy that he
had with the Emperor Claudius.

O Zoroster it is said, that he laughed at his birth; and that his brains beat
so hard, that they beat off the hand that was laid upon his head: and this must
signify his profound science. Plato while an infant, and asleep in his cradle,
there sat honey Bees upon his lips: and this must signify his Eloquence. To
Mydas in like manner there came pismires and carried grains of Wheat into his
mouth: and this was a prediction of his riches. Servius Tullius, a mean child,
while he was sleeping a flame appeared to shine round about his head; and this
was made to presage a crown. Roscius his nurse awaking observed by moonlight a
Serpent as it were embracing the child: and this must prognosticate his eminent
fame and glory; although his height was a Stage player. If these occasions were
not slight, yet could there be slighter divinations, or more worthy to be
slighted?

Alexanders father dreamt that his mothers belly was sealed with the impresse
of a Lion upon it. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, had a vision of a
firebrand, or burning Torch, that should set on fire Troy, and all Asia. There
appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury, pouring forth blood
upon the earth. The mother of Dionysius dreamed that she brought forth a Satyr.
Add to these and the like, the prodigious birth of Zoroaster, their Prince and
master, and then ask the Magastromancers, what need such prodigies at births?
and such presagings upon them? if the natalitiall conjunctions be sufficiently
portending without them.

The Oracles themselves would give answers to any kind of questions, were they
never so trivial; and would presage the erection and restoration of scenicall
enterludes (as parts of divine service) though never so ludicrous: And would
enjoin and accept of divining means, matters, instruments, rites, ceremonies,
though never so ridiculous. As among the Colophonians in Ionia there the Oracle
would afford them the virtue of prophesying from the drinking of water. Among
the Branchides in the same Province, from the sucking in of certain vapors.
In another Oracle a woman sat upon a Trevet at the mouth of a cave, and was
filled with the fury of divination. In another a glass was let down into a
fountain, by a slender thread and after sacrifices and imprecations, the images
of things future were seen in the glass. In another, they descended into a
fountain, and so vaticinated as they desired. In another, they consulting
burnt lamps, offered Incense, gave gifts, and put their ears to the mouth of
the Image; then stopping them, they went out of the Temple, and opening them
again, the first voice they heard from any they met, they took it for an
Oraculous answer. In another they judged of things future by casting of Dice,
etc.

Several Countries had their several ways of divining, and all of them
esteemed alike acceptable to the Gods, and alike effectual among themselves.
Tacitus writes thus of the manners of the Germans, that they sing as they go
to war, and encourage each other by their Bardian odes, acquiring the fortune
of their fight by their singing, and he that makes the harshest noise is
thought to do it best. They take this to be much of providence in children,
(especially females) neither neglect they their counsels and answers. Velleda
the Prophetess (although she was a trouble to them) they held for a Goddess.
Auspicies and Lotteries they observe especially. And for lots the custom is
simple. A bough cut off from a fruitful tree they divide into lesser branches
or slips; and those distinguished by certain marks, they cast carelessly upon a
white garment: and in public consulting use the ministry of the Priest; in
private of the father of the family; who looking up to heaven takes up every
one of them thrice, and interprets them according to the impressed marks. If any
forbid, there is no more consulting for that day: if it be permitted, then to
answer the faith of the auspicies, they go on to interrogate the voices and
flights of birds. It is also the property of that Nation to experience the
presages and monitions of horses. They are nourished publicly in woods and
groves; white they are, and touch no common work; only put into a sacred
chariot they are accompanied by the Priest, and the Prince, and so they observe
their neighing and sweating. Neither is there more faith had in any other
auspicie either by the common people, the Nobles, or the Priests. For they
conceive these to be the Secretaries of the Gods, and themselves their
ministers. There is another way of auspicie, whereby they explore the event of
war: they get a captive by any means of that Nation with which they war,
and commit him and one chosen out of their own common sort, to try together in
their own Country arms: and the victory of the one or the other they make to
be a great presage to either side. They couple not, unless some sudden thing
chance, but on certain days when the Moon begins to be in the full; for that
they believe to be a most auspicious beginning for the doing of business.

The mother of Sapor King of Persia being with child, and it doubted whether it
was a male or a female she went withal, (for if it proveda female, it might
not succeed in such dignity.) For this cause the Princes convented the
Magicians, to try their skill, and pronounce upon the birth. Therefore they
brought a Mare ready to fool, and the Magicians vaticinated upon it; and it
falling out according to their prediction, they thereupon concluded, it was a
male child the Queen went withal: upon this they without delay laid the Crown
upon the Queens belly, and proclaimed the child scarce conceived to be their
King, according to their Countries rites and laws.

Augustus and Mark Anthony were playing together, and what a business of
caution a mathematical Egyptian presager made upon it? advising the one (as
concerning their after earnest) to take heed of the other, as whose genius was
too strong for him, or his demon afraid of his.

As Pope Engenius sung Mass in the Church of Rheimes, some drops of the
consecrated wine chanced to be spilt; and what prognosticating was upon it? And
no less was there upon Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury his singing a Requiem
the same day he was reconciled to the King.

27. Of the treasons, treacheries, conspiracies, seditious ambitions,
usurpations, turbulencies, and busy medlings, of Magical and Astrologicall
diviners, against Princes, Magistrates, Kingdoms and States.
CAmbyses having added Egypt to his fathers Kingdoms, could not endure their
magical religion, but abominating their superstitious ceremonies, caused the
Oraculous Temples of Apis, and others, to be pulled down. At length he was
murdered by means of two Magicians, who concealed his death, and usurping upon
his Kingdom, reigned in his stead, and name. But their boldness being
detected, they were apprehended and suppressed by Darius, who therefore by the
consent of all was chosen King.

Cobares, a man of magic art (if an art it be, and not a vain man's deceit)
yet what ever it be, he was more notable for his profession of it, then for his
knowledge in it. He (at a feast) would needs be counselling Bessus the weaker
to yield to Alexander the stronger: which meddling of his was so ill taken, that
he hardly escaped his throat cutting; and he likewise took so ill the rejection
of his counsel, that he defected and fled to the contrary part. Now what
unhappy politicians are such as these (both to themselves and others) that if
they may not be accepted for busy counselors, turn malecontented fugitives.

Alexander being about to scale the walls of a City, Demophon the diviner would
needs dissuade him from some apparition of unfortunate signs. Of whom the King
demanded, if it would not trouble him to be interrupted in his Science? which
he acknowledging, the King replied upon him again, avouching, that in his
greatest affairs he found always no greater distraction, and disturbance, then
that of a superstitious pragmaticall Soothsayer.

Nicius the Athenian Captain kept a Soothsayer continually in his house;
pretending it was to consult with him about the great affairs of the
Commonwealth: when as it was only to inquire about his own business, or to
promote his own ambition.

Alcibiades to promote his own ambitions, suborned certain predicting
Soothsayers, to presage happy success, and honor to the Athenians, in their
Sicilian war, although his end served, it fell out clean contrary.

Meton the Astronomer very politickly feined himself mad, and fired his own
house, pretending a mislike of the celestial signs, as touching the common
success in that war: but his end was to himself, sc. to release his son,
engaged in that voyage, and so to ease himself (let the Commonwealth sink or
swim) of the charge of maintaining him there.

While Fadus governed the Province of Iudaea, a certain Magician, Theudas by
name, persuaded the people to follow him to the River Iordane, (taking their
substance along with them) and he would divide the waters, as heretofore; and
so work their deliverance. But Fadus pursued them, dispersed the seduced
multitude, took the Magician and cut off his head.

Another time, an Egyptian coming to Jerusalem, feined himself to be a
Prophet, but was a Magician; he persuaded the popular multitude to go along
with him to Mount Olivet, and he would there show them strange things for their
freedom: but Faelix followed upon them, and slew hundreds of them: only the
Egyptian escaped, by vanishing out of sight.

Another Magician seduced the people, leading them out into the Wilderness;
promising them safety, and rest from their evils: but Festus followed straight
after them, and slew both the Seducer, and many of those whom he had seduced.

Many Soothsaying Astrologers (grudging at the least increase, or ease of the
Church) had gathered themselves together, to consult about the praenotion of
Valens his successor: and having tried all kind of divination, at length they
made a wooden Treuet of Laurel, and used such execrable and diabolical
incantation, that they observed a conjunction of these letters THEOD, which
they expounded of one Theodorus a Pagan, and useful to their purpose:
presuming on the power of their constellation, or constellated figure, to
depose or set up whom they thought good. But Valens understanding it, slew both
the diviners, and the party they had divined upon. Yea, his fury was so
implacable, that it extended to all, either of that sect, or name.

Eugenius a Schoolmaster, by the means of Arbogustes, a treacherous officer,
and of Hyparchus, a politic presager, having strangled young Valentinian,
usurped the Empire; presuming he should attain to what he went about; being
thereunto induced by the word of those that took upon them to predict things
future, from the immolation of victimes, inspection of entrails, and
observation of the Stars.

Thrasyllus the Mathematician, having predicted certain joyful things to Nero,
and they falling out quite contrary: he determined to cast him headlong into
the sea, as a falsarie, and rash intruder into his secrets. Yea the same Nero
had an odd way of exploring his Magical predictors; and if there were found
the least suspicion of vanity or fraud in them, he would cast them (as they
walked upon a precipice) headlong into the Sea: and many times would do it,
lest they might be the bewrayers of his secrets; for he, who knew their
treacheries, durst trust none of them.

The ancient Britains deeply drencht in superstition by their magical
Druides, were so enslaved to them, as that they usurped the determining of all
controversies, public or private; concerning all matters or causes criminal,
or real: so that they took upon them to award recompenses, or penalties, as
they pleased; and who ever he or they were that refused to stand to their
judgment; him, or them they presently interdicted, forbidding all commerce
with them.

It is recorded that in France, the Magicians, Astrologers, Sortiaries,
Sorcerers, Wizzards, and Witches, were so numerous, that they began to boast
themselves not only for a society, but for an Army; and to profess that if
they could but get some one in authority to be their Commander or leader, they
durst wage war with any King or State; and doubted not of the victory through
the virtue and power of their art: Like as the Hunnes (by those very means) had
formerly done against Sigebert King of France.

Peter of Pomfreit, that hermeticall Wizzard, by buzzing his prophecies into
the peoples ears, sought to make the commotion against King John. And in Ketts
commotion, one main promotion of it was, upon the false prophecies that Hob,
Dic, and Hic, (meaning the rusticks) with their clubs, should fill up the
valley of Dussindale with the bodies of the dead.

Leoline Prince of Wales rebelled against Edward the first upon a prophecy of
Merlin (that ginne of error) how he should be shortly crowned with the diadem
of Brute. But his head was cut off, and crowned with Ivy, and there was his end.

The Persi in Magi were not only contented to be honored by their Kings, but
usurped the Kingdom to themselves. The Egyptian Priests, or vaticinators
arrogated great honors for their praevision and praediction of suture things,
both by their sacrificings, and by their skill in the stars.

Numa Pompilius, Licurgus, Solon, Minos, Zamolxis, pretended their Laws from
Jupiter, Apollo, Mercury, Minerva, and other predicting Oracles; that so they
might the more easily impose upon, and domineere over the slavish people.

Aristocrates King of the Arcadians, ayding the Messenians against the
Lacedaemonians; they so corrupted him with gifts, and besides he was so blinded
with the unprosperous signification of the intrayles, that upon the joining of
the battle he disheartened his own soldiers, and fled; and so basely betrayed
his old friends the Messenians.

While Servius Tullus reigned, one had a very fair Cow, of which the oraculous
predictors gave out, that whosoever should offer that Cow to Diana, he, his
Country and kindred should attain to great authority and rule over the whole
world. Now the owner of it bringing it to Rome, to offer it in behalf of
himself and his, the presaging Priest of the Temple, commanded him not to
offer it till he had washed himself; and while he went forth so to do, he
sacrificed it for the advantage of himself, and his like.

Libo Drusus, a loose rash young man, was encouraged by Firmius Catus, through
the confidence of Chaldean promises, magical mysteries, and interpretations of
dreams, to make insurrection against Tiberius Caesar: but in the end was driven
desperately (his servants refusing) to lay violent hands upon himself.
Immediately upon this the Senate consulted for the expelling of the
Mathematicians and Magicians out of Italy, and L. Pitnanius, one of their
number, was cast down a Rock.

In Catilines conspiracy, Lentulus was accused both by his letters and speeches
which he used out of the Sybils books; that the Kingdom of Rome was presaged to
three of the Cornelian family, viz. Cinna, and Silla, and himself, the third
to whom it was fated. And moreover, that now was the twentieth year from the
burning of the Capitol, concerning which the haruspicks by their prodigies had
given answer that civil wars there should be rife and bloody.

The haruspicks portended great and wonderful things for the promotion of
Caius Marius his ambition.

In the second Punick war (befides a tumult and distraction in the State)
such a confusion there was in religion (as the cause and continuance of the
other) that men, women, young, old, noble, plebeians, all sacrisiced and
prophesied as they listed: and he or she was no body that could not presage of
one disastrous event or another.

Apollo gave such perplexed answers to the Lacedaemonians (in their troubles)
that a Pagan Philosopher was provoked to tell him plainly, If thou had
answered thus in quiet times, it had seemed frivolous to all; only thy
ignorance lurkes under our fears and distraction; because such things are most
impressing and credited in such kind of times.

Apuleius (says St. Augustine) an Affricane and therefore best known to us
Affricanes, for all his magical arts could not attain to a Kingdom: no nor yet
to any judicial power in a Commonwealth, for all his judiciary Astrology. Did
he modestly contemn these things as a Philosopher? Nay did he not hunt, and
hire, and contend with the Citizens of Choas (where he married a wife) about
the setting up of a Statue to him? So that if he arrived at no greatness, it
was not because he had no will, but no power.

A certain prophecy given out and published at Rome, at the removing of the
Emperor Tiberius, that he should never return any more, occasioned the death
of many well disposed Citizens: who ventring too far upon this little ground,
to discharge their Country from the clog of servitude, were cut off by
cruelty. About the same time Furius Scribonianus was exiled, because he had
enquired after the Princes death by Chaldeans or Astrologers.

Mahomet, and Sergius, both of them by magical and praestigious tricks set up
themselves; the one for a King, the other for a Prophet.

Frederick Barbarossa leading an army against them of Millaine, they sent an
Arabian magician to play the veneficke, and take away his life by poison: which
being discovered, and he apprehended; notwithstanding he threatened that he
could do it with words, and would do it, unless he were dismissed; yet this
moved not the King to fear his malefice: but he therefore inflicted on him the
sharper punishment.

Pope Julius the third gave a Cardinals hat to a youth whom he favored; and
being asked the reason of it, said, That he found by Astrology, that it was the
youths destiny to be a great Prelate; which was impossible except himself were
Pope: and therefore that he did raise him, as the driver on of his own Fortune.

Certain rude uncivil clowns, under a color of a prophecy, that they should
conquer and subdue the holy Land, raked a sort of vagabonds and bankrupts
together; who falling forthwith to spoil and robbery, were hanged upon Gibbets
almost in every Country as they past.

The young Duke of Viseo in Portingale, having once been pardoned by Don Ivan
el Grande, at the suit of the Queen his sister; was encouraged by the
Mathematicians and Astrologers to rebel again; with assurance that he should
obtain the Crown: whereof he not only failed, but besides was deprived of his
life by the course of ordinary justice.

My Lord of Northampton tells the story of two Countrymen of ours, one
sometimes professing Greek in Cambridge, the other of the same calling: one
contriving treason, sedition, or faction, from the stars, but clapped under
hatches when the planets promised most fortunate success: the other
undutifully taking arms against his Sovereign: and often confessing, he had
never dealt in that attempt, but by encouragement of a certain prophecy, that
he should prevail against his Prince by popular devotion.

28. Of impostorous Magic and Astrology, the causes of preposterous villainy:
or the Magastromancers instigating to those execrable acts, which otherwise had
never been invented, or intended: And other cursed consequents.
CAracalla remaining in Mesopotamia, sent to Maternus, whom he had left
Governor of Rome, to assemble all the Astrologers and Mathematicians, and
procure them to give their opinions secretly, whether there were any
conspiracies on foot against him; and to give their judgments how long he
should live, and what death he should die. Maternus did so; and (as the
Astrologers had advised) wrote that Macrinus, his prefect, was the conspirator;
and therefore did warn him to see Macrinus dispatched out of the way. As the
Letter came to Caracalla, he was at that instant upon a sport which he would
not intermit; and so committed the Letters to Macrinus to read over, and make
report of their contents to him afterward. Macrinus in perusal of them
finding himself accused of such treason as he never thought of, and doomed or
necessitated to it by Astrologicall judgment; and considering the Emperors
jealous cruelty, and Maternus his envy, thought there could now be no safety
for him, either in excusing or delaying: and so set Martial, a discontented
Centurion (whose brother he had caused to be put to death) to murder him.

Among the other prodigies that were said to prognosticate Domitians death,
there was seen a crown encircling about the Sun. Now because Stephanus
signifies a Crown, the Astrologers would have the Crown to signify Stephanus;
and he must be the man thus destinied to dispatch Domitian; and this very thing
was it that heartned him to do the deed.

Dioclesian, because a Druid or Sorceresse had foretold him, that he should be
Emperor after he had slain a Boar: he not only killed all the Boares he
could, but slew all the men he knew that had the name of Aper, or Boar.

Valens understanding, by a constellated figure, that one should succeed him,
whose name began with TH. or Th. thereupon caused diverse to be slain, whose
names began after that manner.

Edward the fourth wrought the death of George Duke of Clarence, his brother:
instigated thereunto by a foolish prophecy, that one whose name began with a G.
should succeed him.

It was upon a prophecy or prediction, that Mackbeth slew Duncane King of
Scots: and likewise Banquo, his chiefest friend; because of a prophecy, that
his posterity should succeed in the Kingdom. Again, upon a Wizards prophecy or
prediction, that he should never be slain by any man born of a woman; nor
vanquished, till the wood of Bernane came to the Castle of Dunsinane; this made
him give up himself securely to all kind of wickedness.

Nisaeus tyrant of Syracuse, being foretold of his death by a Soothsayer,
thereupon riotously lavisht away all his wealth beforehand. So did a rich man
of Lions, upon the calculating of his Nativity, but lived and begged along time
after.

Natholocus King of Scots, desirous to understand somewhat of the issue of his
troubles; sent a trusty servant of his to enquire of a Witch: who consulting
with her spirits, told him, the King should be murdered, not by the hands of
his enemies, but by one of his most familiar friends. The messenger demanding
instantly by whose hands? Even by thine, said she. Whereupon he defied her, and
bad her go like an old witch; and trusted he should see her burnt, ere he
should be drawn to do so villainous a deed: intending to signify it sincerely
to the King himself. But by the way, as he returned, many fears and suspicions
arose in his mind; especially that the Kings jealousy would not be satisfied
with his innocence; so that he thought it the surest way for himself to do
the deed; and (thus induced) he did it.

Cambyses dreaming that his brother Smerdis should reign, because he thought
he saw him sitting in a regal Throne, contrived his death by the means of one
Praxaspes a magician, who peradventure had either magically sent that dream, or
else interpreted to that purpose.

From an old oriental prophecy, that about that time such as came out of the
land of Iudaea, should obtain the whole government of affairs; the Jews slew
their governor, and rebelled, but to their own miserable destruction.

Vespasian being admonished by the Mathematicians to take heed of Metius
Pomposianus, because he had an imperial Genesis: whom though he (wiser then to
give credit unto such things) nevertheless preferred; yet Domitian was drawn
to put him to death upon the self same occasion.

29. Of Magastromancers cluding Authority; and deluding themselves in a
presumption of impunity.
CLeomedes for many portentous malefices, being fast shut up in a close
sepulcher or coffin, with a cover that many men could hardly lift, laid upon it
to keep him safe against the day of trial: when the day came he was vanished
thence, and not there to be found, neither alive nor dead. When they consulted
the Oracle about his portentous escape, it commended him for it, as one of the
last of the Heroes.

Apollonius Tyanaeus being convented before Domitian, when he thought to take
punishment of the Magician, he forthwith vanished out of his presence.

Apuleius accused for magical Arts and practices, before Claudius a Christian
Magistrate; instead of confessing his fault, fell to calumniate and traduce the
very Laws; for exhibiting the same under such penalties.

One Diodorus, or Leodorus, a most portentous Conjurer, being therefore
condemned, and led to execution: by his enchantments slipped out of the
executioners hands, and conveyed himself in the air, from Catana in Sicily to
Constantinople. At last the Bishop of Catana caught him at unawares, and caused
him to be burnt in a fiery furnace.

At Cullen a certain Damsel being cited for playing of prestigious tricks; she
did many juggling feats before the Nobles, as rending of towels, breaking of
glasses, and presently making them whole again, etc. which made them vain
sport, and they conclude them to be but joculatory pranks, and so she escaped
the Inquisitour.

David Ebroy a magical Jew made those of his Nation believe that he was the
Messiah, come to free them from the servitude of the uncircumcised. The King of
Persia apprehending him, he by his sleights escaped out of prison, crossed a
broad river, and could never be overtaken.

One Caesarius Maltes, a praestigious Jugler, being taken at Paris, escaped
prison by his circulatory tricks; for which being questioned again in another
place, and condemned; the Governor (by his power, and against Law) reprieved
him; as much taken with his feats of Leigerdemaine. But nothing prospered after
that in his government, and he died not long after.

In the territories of Berne, one Scaphius boasted, that he could escape
invisible, when he pleased: and so had often times avoided the hands of his
capital enemies. At length (when he grew ripe both for divine and humane
vengeance) he was espied (by those that laid wait to apprehend him) through a
window; and was so slain with a spear, when he least dreamt of his death.

Caius Marius, a man ignoble, and a cruel author of civil wars, after the
first fight wherein he was vanquished by Sylla; being taken naked and muddy by
the enemy, he was brought to the Minturnians, and delivered to the Governor of
the City, who sitting in council upon him, gave sentence that he should be put
to death presently; and seeing none of the Citizens would undertake the
execution, they committed it to a Cimbrian horsman, or some say, a Frenchman,
who, about to dispatch the business, heard a great voice out of a dark place;
Thou man! dare thou kill Marius? at which the man afraid, let fall his
weapon and ran away, crying he durst not do the deed, and so he escaped.

At Venice a certain maleficall Sorcerer being condemned, made all the locks
fall off, and doors fly open; only by a confection of certain herbs, and
mussitation of certain charms, and so went his way.

30. Of God, and the Stars, and men, blasphemed, accused, calumniated,
defamed, by, or by the means of Magicians, and Astrologers.
ALexander, in a distempered mood, having slain Clytus his plain, but trusty
friend; afterward ashamed of so foul a fact; and having no other way to
excuse so vile and dishonorable an action, he urged his eligion spellers to
try their fatidicall arts, and to enquire whether it was not the ire of the
Gods, that had necessitated him so to do? and in conclusion (after much
calculating, inspecting, consulting) the Gods are made to bear the blame, in
fatally enforcing so foul an act.

A certain fatidicall Philosopher beating his servant for a fault, the servant
cried out of his masters injustice, for punishing him, for doing a thing that
was not in his own will, or power. Seeing he himself had taught, that men are
fatally necessitated to do either well or ill.

St. Augustine reports of a Mathematician in his time, who was wont to say. It
was not men that lusted, but Venus; not men that killed, but Mars; not men that
stole, but Mercury; It was not God that helped, or favored, but Jupiter, etc.

Justin Martyr, Marullus, Symeon, Athanasius, Eusebius Emissenus, were
calumniated and slandered by Magicians and Astrologers; as if they had been the
worst of them themselves.

Kunegunde (they say was defamed for a whore, by a diabolical wizzard; So was
Turbula.

In the time of Frederick the second, there was a German sorcerer, that did use
to defame men by reproaching them publikly with their most secret sins.

Blanch wife to Peter of Castile, had presented her husband with a rich Girdle,
unwitting that it was enchanted by a certain Jew; so that still when the King
put it on, it appeared like a snake: Maria de Padilla (the Kings Concubine, and
the Jews Proselyte) having herself a chief hand in it, most calumniously
charged the virtuous Queen with her own sorcerous act, instigated thereunto by
the envious Jew, or Magician: because the Queen had justly wrought the whole
sect of them out of power, and favor at Court. But now the King being so
imbittered by the prodigious apparition, and other magical predictions, the
Concubine was so imboldned, that she prosecuted the poor innocent Queen to her
death. And after that, so bewitched the King, that she got into her place.

Elianor wife to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, was impeached of sorcery by one
Bolingbrooke an Astronomer, who being himself apprehended, accused her as
accessory: when as her greatest guilt in that art, was her superstition in
consulting, not practicing of it.

The prefect of Galatia missing his son, certain servants of his were accused
by the false divination of a pseudomantist, as if they had slain him: but no
sooner were they executed, but the young man returned safe home again.

Alexander being admonished by the divining lots, that he should command him to
be killed that first met him as he went out of the gate; by chance an Asse-herd
met him, and he commanded it to be done accordingly. But the poor man
complaining of the injustice, that he should (being innocent) be adjudged to
such capital punishment; answer was made, that must be imputed to the gods,
who had advised the King to slay the first that met him. If it be so (quoth the
Asse-herd) the lot means another, and not me (for my Ass which I drove before
me) met the King before I. The King delighted with this answer, the Ass was
executed; and so the Gods, the King, and the Asse-herd were all excused by wit,
more then by Lot.

Rhea Sylvia, the daughter of Numitor, a vestall, being compressed and found
with child: both she and her parents agreed to excuse it, saying, that she had
suffered force not from a man, but some God, or Genius; he that had done the
deed, had likewise predicted that she should bring forth twins: which, though
it so fell out, yet by the sentence of the Council, the Law in that case was
to be used against her.

A contention arising betwixt Cleomenes and Demaratus, about the Kingdom of
Lacedaemonia; Cleomenes accused Demaratus as not the son of Ariston, and
therefore ought not to succeed. The Lacedaemonians to be resolved in the
business, consulted the Delphian Oracle; which ( Periatis the Priest thereof
being corrupted by Cleomenes) gave answer that the party enquired upon, was not
Aristons son: Whereupon Demaratus conjured his mother from the infernals to
answer for him: who replied, that it was a God, or an Hero that deluded her,
and begat him. And thus they accused one another.

Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras, Arnobius,
Minutius Foelix, Lactantius, Augustine; and so many as have written against the
Idolatrous and magical immolations of the Heathens, have had much to do to
apologize for the Christians, against all those false calumnies wherewith they
impudently burdened them. In simulating the Christians to be given to choose
wickedness, which they themselves were guilty of: and to be the cause of those
judgments which their own impieties had provoked. Julian, and Maximinus were
not only satisfied to have them thus defamed, and slandered, but took occasion
to determine their persecution, and extermination.

During the Popedom of Benedict the third, in the City of Mentz a Daemoniacall
Familiar that lay lurking under a Sacrificulists Pall, as he was sprinkling of
holy water, accused him publicly, that he had that night layn with his
Proctors wife.

A certain Praetor or Judge, having sentenced diverse malefactors to death, at
the accusation of an Ariolist or Pythian vaticinator: at length he took upon
him to tell him of one more, if he would not take it ill: the Judge earnest to
know who it was, he insimulated his own wife, and prefixed an hour wherein he
would show him her in the convent of other Witches. But he (knowing his own
wives integrity, and mistrusting the others calumny) at the time appointed had
invited (unknown to the Ariolist) a many of his kindred and friends to suppe
with his wife and him. And as they sat at supper, he took an occasion to rise,
and go with the Ariolist to the place, where he showed him (in a spectrous
apparition) his own wife in the company of other Lamian hagges. Enough to have
deluded him, had he not returned, and found his wife at the table where he left
her, with the testimony of all those at the table, that she had never stirred
thence. Whereupon he caused the Ariolist himself to be executed.

31. Of praestigious Magicians and Astrologers, prodigiously practicing their
arts, for the promotion of their own and others filthy lusts.
Nectanebus an Egyptian King, and great Magician, coming into Macedonia in
King Philips time; so practiced it, as to make Olympias ( Philips wife) to
dream, that she should be married to Jupiter Hammon, and should conceive a
famous child by him. And thus it was brought about, Olympias sent for
Nectanebus, to learn of him, what should become of her; in as much as it was
rumored abroad, that King Philip was minded to forsake her, and to take
another: he tells her under hand, that he received a charge from the Oracle, as
he came out of Egypt, to go and help a neglected Queen, whom Jupiter Hammon
greatly loved, and intended to embrace. The following night he causes her to
dream of such a thing: yea and by his diabolical charm effects the like
imagination in Philip, now absent in war. Thus is Olympias earnestly longing
after Jupiter; and the next day calls again for Nectanebus, and enquires of
him, when shall be this much expected time? He bids her to adorn her bed, and
make her-self fit to receive so divine a Paramour; but adds, he will come to
her in the shape of a Dragon, with a Goats head, and horns. At the hearing of
which she greatly terrifyed, he replies, if you be afraid of such a
congression, make me a bed hard by, and I will secure you from all
affrightment. At night, to bed goes the credulous Queen, royally prepared, as
became such an entertainment: and as soon as all was silent, the magical
impostor raises a praestigious commotion, and apparition; and goes to bed to
the Queen himself: and so begets Alexander the Great; hereupon reputed the son
of Jupiter Hammon. When Alexander was now grown up, he with his Tutor and
Father, Nectanebus, walking abroad in the evening, and standing hard by the
steep of a Rock; Alexander hastily turning himself round about, thrust the
Magician down the precipice at unawares: where he was so dashed and sore
bruised in the fall, that his death must necessarily follow. Then complaining
of Alexanders rash act; Alexander replied, thou ought rather to complain of
thine own Art, that busies thee in the searching the things of the Heavens: and
lets thee not foresee, what impends thee on earth. Alas (quoth he) what mortal
man can avoid his own fate? I foreknew, while I was in Egypt, that mine own
son should be the occasion of mine own death. What am I thy son said Alexander?
To whom Nectanebus confesses the whole truth, and dies.

A certain Egyptian burning in lust toward another man's wife, consults with a
Magician, or Sorcerer, how he might obtain his desire? He answered, nothing
hindered, but the mutual love that was between the husband, and the wife,
whereupon he hired the impostor to stir up a dislike betwixt them; which he
labored after this praestigious manner, making the woman appear to the man, as
if he had a shagg'd Mare in his bed.

A paganish young man in Gaza, extremely loved a Virgin that was a Christian;
and when all his dalliance availed not to his end, he went to Memphis, thinking
to bring it about by Magical Art. Where after a years attendance, he was
instructed by Aesculapius his vaticinators, to put a certain plate of brass,
with a portentous figure, under the threshold where the maid dwelt; and to
recite certain torments, or charms of words over it. Whereupon the Virgin grew
mad in love with him; and did nothing but call for the young man, nightand day.
But her parents had her to Hillarion, who presently (by his wisdom and piety)
dispossessed her of that magical and constellational fury.

Turbula a Martyr in Persia, being falsely accused and condemned by the
Magicians: one of them fell greatly enamoured with her excellent beauty; would
have corrupted her, with promise of safety to her and her followers, and other
great rewards; but all would not prevail.

Vter Pendragon coming into Gornwall, cast his eyes upon fair Igrene, wife to
the Duke of that Province; whom he very importunately solicits, but all to
little purpose; the constant wife (that so dearly loved her Lord) would by no
means be won to do him that dishonor. Merlin therefore is consulted, who to
bring her to his bow; scorns to use any petty magical Philters; but he new
moulds the shape of the King, and prints upon his face, the very feature of
Gonlois her own Lord: by which means he soon violated this Ladies chastity, in
the bed of praestigious delusion.

A Magical Monk in Spain, or some Friar Praedicant, was familiar with a
Nobleman, that had a fair wife. He tempts her chastity, and is repulsed; upon
his unsatisfied importunity, she acquaints her husband: it is consented to
admit him again, and watched to entrap him. At the time appointed, he comes in
a secular habit and equipage; she is resolute still and refusing: but the night
gave boldness to the attempt, and now what he cannot persuade, he seeks to
enforce. She resists it, and cries out, to give the watchword to her husband,
and those that lay in wait; but all in vain; for he by his effascinating Art,
had charmed them all into a dead sleep. As they strugled together, she spyed a
dagger at his back, and therewithal stabbed him to the death. And running into
the room, where her husband and the rest were, she found them so fast asleep,
that all she could do, could not awake them, now having none in her family
either to hear, or help her; she suspected some malefice, and went stoutly and
cast the dead carcass into the street. Where passers by lighting upon it, the
business is brought before the Corrigidor, and the dead party is discerned.
The next day the Prior of the Covent is desired to summon all his fellows
together; who all came, only this party is absent: they then knock at his
chamber door, but no body makes answer; at last they break open the door, and
there they epsy a Torch in the Chimney burning very dimly. Now neither the
husband nor any of the family could be awaked till that Torch was extinct.

A certain soldier that by Magical Philters had sought to procure the love of
such a woman; one night imagined that he enjoyed her in his dream: but he
awaking, found himself cast into a filthy myry ditch, and there embracing in
his arms a carcass or carrion of a dead beast.

In Misnia a young man using the Art, or means of a Magician, to enjoy her whom
he loved; was brought into a byroom, and by malefical incantations there was
brought in to him the spectrene apparition of her whom he loved: the besotted
youth taking it for real, put forth his hand to embrace her; at which his
brains were violently dashed out against the walls; the carcass so beaten upon
the Magician, that he himself lay half dead a long time after.

The Oracles themselves ordained scenical and Floralian enterludes. The Magical
Philosophers had their notorious Harlots: and professed not only a necessity,
but a lawfulness of having them. The Persians and Chaldeans were burning mad
upon their own sisters, daughters, mothers. Both their Magical Religion, and
Laws, were for wrong and lusts.

Romulus, (whose birth, life and death was praestigious) is thought to be begot
upon a Vestal by Mars, by Amulius her Uncle, by the Genius of the place, by a
divining Priest, by a common soldier. The things to be chiefly noted in him
are the Magical lusts of his birth, wrongs of his life, and judgments of his
death.

Simon Magus had his Helena: and (take Helena's for Harlots) so had Nicolaus of
Antioch; so had Marcus; so had Marcion: so had Apelles; so had Montanus; so had
Priscillian. All Heretics; most or all Mag-astro-mancers. And it is a question
whether they made more use of their women in their Magic, their heresies, or
their lusts.

Gallirrhoe a noble Virgin, and already betrothed to an husband, bathing in the
River: and according to a Magical instance, with odes and incantations,
imploring Scamander to take her maidenhead: Simon the Athenian, praestigiously
faigning himself to be Scamander, did vitiate her by that means.

Echerates the Thessalian, coming to consult Apollo at Delphos, and there
seeing Pythia a Virgin of exceeding beauty, violently ravished her, upon which
it was decreed, that no Virgin, or young woman should after that be set over
the Oracle: but some old Crone of fifty at least, yet in a virgins habit.

Aristocrates King of the Messenians, in as much as he could not allure the
Priestesse of Diana Hymnia to his lusts, and to avoid his importunity, flying
to the Altar, he forceably ravished her there. For which he was stoned by the
Arcadians: and the Priesthood was afterward transferred from a Virgin to a
married wife.

Decius Mundus, a young man of dignity and wealth, falling desperately in love
with Paulina, the fair, and yet chaste wife of Saturninus; offered her twenty
Myriades, or two hundred thousand Attick Drachmes, for one nights lodging:
which she refusing, he resolved to pine himself to death; which Ida (his
fathers hand maid infranchised) perceiving, chears him up, bids him be of good
hope, promising him for five Myriades, to bring it so about, as that he shall
obtain his desire. And knowing the virtuous woman to be much devoted to Isis,
she goes to some of the Priests of the Temple, and giving them two Myriads and
an half, and promising as much more, adjures their silence, and requires their
assistance. The chief of the Priests promises to convert Paulina; and feigns a
Message to her from Anubis out of Egypt, as touching his love to her, and how
he commanded that she should present her self before him. She willingly
embraces the motion, and boasts to her friends the love of Anubis toward her.
Her husband also is acquainted with the solemn invitation, and consents to it,
being confident of his wives chastity. To the Temple she comes, gallantly
adorned, and after supper the Priest shuts her up: and the lights withdrawn,
and Mundus lurking in a corner, comes to her instead of the God, and lies with
her all night, and departs early in the morning. Though she returning home,
glories greatly among her friends of her congresse with the God, to the wonder
of them all. But about three days after, Mundus meeting her by chance, thus
greets her: O well dear Paulina! thou have saved me twenty Myriades, nd
nevertheless have satisfied my desire: neither was it little contentful to me,
that I obtained it under the name of Anubis; and having sosaid, away he went.
At which hearing, the deluded matron tears her garments, and tells the
praestigious and flagitious delusion to her husband, entreating him not to
neglect her dishonor, so as to suffer it to go unpunished. Whereupon he
relates the business to Tiberius; who after due examination, causes Idae and
the sacrificing impostors to be executed, banishes Mundus, pulls down the
Temple, and casts the Statue of Isis into Tyber.

A Priest of Saturn, by name Tyrannus, would by his responsals invite the
noblest men and women to worship; and if the women were pleasing to him for his
lust, he would tell the husband, that Saturn commanded his wife should stay
there with him all that night. Then would he in their sight shut the doors, and
deliver the keys to another, and depart. But at night would secretly creep by
a subterranean passage into Saturns hollow Image: and thence would he talk to
the superstitiously deluded creature of those things that might the more excite
her reverence, and provoke his own concupiscence. After that extinguishing the
lights by his Art, then would he descend to the amazed soul, and mix
sacrilegious adultery with his profane commentations. Thus had he long and
often illuded a many of them. But it so fell out, that a Matron, more wise and
chaste then the rest, abhorring the act, discerned Tyrannus by his voice;
complained hereof to her husband: And the beastly fraud being detected, him
they tormented, and the Temple and Image they demolished.

32 Of the base sordid flattery, and corrupt covetousness of Magical and
Astrological Diviners; as also of Chemical promisers, and presuming deluders.
WHat provoked the mad Prophet Balaam the son of Bosor to seek after
enchantments and divination; but because he loved the wages of
unrighteousness? 2 Pet. 2.15. Why would Simon Magus have given money for the
gift of the Holy Ghost: but because he intended to get more money by it, Act 8.
The vagabond Jews exorcists of war for their advantage that they set up the
trade of calling over them that had evil spirits, Act. 19. And the Damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination, brought her masters (who but the Magical
and Astrological diviners?) much gain by prophesying, Act. 13.16.

Dardanus a most profligated Magician, was so sordidly addicted to
covetousness; tha the Dardanian Arts grew into a proverbial usage
indifferently, either for Magic or covetousness

Thetis, some say Democritus, foreseeing first a plenty, then a dearth of
Olives; monopolized all the oil that his money or credit could reach too: and
so in a year or two made himself very rich.

Apuleius is feigned to be turned into an Ass: into an Ass for the vanity;
and why not into a golden Ass, for the covetousness of his Art?

Demonax noting a certain Diviner to expose his prognostics to sale, said; if
these can help a man to procure his good, or prevent his evil fortune, they may
be worth the money: otherwise they are too dear of naught, if they either feed a
man with vain hopes; or make a man to purchase a sense of his misery before the
time.

Apollonius (so covetous he was) that he often sought for Mines and hidden
treasures, but he never found out any by his conjuring Art; unless he milkt it
out of deluded people spurses.

The fame goes of Faustus, and of Agrippa likewise, that as they made their
journeys from place to place, they would still pay money in their Inns,
seemingly good and current: but by that they were gone from thence, if they
told their money again, they should find nothing else but horns and chips,
and shells, and pieces of iron and brass, and such like rusty rubbish.

Pope Martin the 2. Benedict the 9. John the 21. and the 22. Sylvester the 2.
and Gregory the 7. All these are recorded by sundry Historians, to have
ascended the Papal chair, by Magical and Necromantick Arts. And it is of equal
observation, that their covetousness, as well as their ambition, did induce
them thereunto.

Certain of the Indians, look what wares they had lost by shipwreck, they
sought to recover them from the sea again, by incantations. Stuphius used to
pay his Army with Magical money. Agrippa offered Charles the fifth to gain him
infinite treasures by Magical means.

Macrianus an hungry Greek would needs go conjure for treasure in the Isle
Paros, and the earth swallowed him up. A Prior, with two of his fellows
entering into a den near Puteoli, to find treasure, miserably perished there,
and was never seen more. A poor artificer of Basil, diving into another low
vault, for the same purpose, found nothing but dead men's bones, and was so
poisoned with the stench, that he dyed within two or three days after. At Pisa
some tried in like manner, but were so infested with devils, that they were
forced to give over the work. In the west of Wales a certain rich man dreamed
three nights together, that there was a chain of gold hidden under the head
Stone, which covered St Bernaces well: he believing his repeated dream, and
minding to make trial, put his hand into the hole, and had it most venomously
bitten by a poisonous serpent.

A certain professor of Chemistry (which is a kind of praestigious, covetous,
cheating Magic) would show hands and feet of gold, which he pretended to have
composed by his art; and so had made himself rich, and many others poor. At
length he offered a golden bridle bit to Anastasius the Emperor; who answered
him, thou have deceived many, but thou shall not deceive me; and so cast him
into prison, and there he dyed.

Two Chemists had agreed upon a cheat, that one of them should turn druggist,
and sell strange roots and powders: the other to follow still his gold-finding
trade: and so he offered his service to Ernest Marquess of Baden, who was
wonderful given to that vanity: To work they go and all things proceed well,
only one ingredient was wanting, which is called Resch, pretending it a cheap
commodity, and to be had at every Apothecaries shop. The Prince sends his Page
for some of it, and his other partner was hard by the door exposing it to sale,
and lets him have a great deal of it for a matter of a shilling; and the
impostor puts in this dust among the rest, and at length produces pretty store
of gold. The Marquess wonderful glad of the effect, richly rewards the man,
forbringing the art to that perfection; and so dismisses him, minding to
practice it by himself: which he does with some happy success, as long as the
Resch lasted (which was a counterfeit powder mixed with the filings of gold)
this being spent, he sends to the Apothecaries for more, and none of them could
tell that ever they had seen or heard of such a commodity. And then the Prince
perceived the imposture, when neither it, nor either of the inventers of it,
were any where to be found.

A certain Spanish pretending Alchymist coming to Antwerp, set up his furnace,
and got acquainted with four rich Spanish Merchants. He fell to inveigh
against their slow trading and slender return; advising them to join with him,
and become compartners in his Art (the truth whereof he would soon demonstrate
to their senses) and so they should be rich in a short time, and without any
great adventure. Give him but such a little sum of gold, and they should
quickly see how his Gold-begetting art would multiply it. The Merchants are
content to venture so much for the experiment* As all was working, he hastily
bids send of the Merchants men for two royals worth of the stone Onastros, to
be had at any Apothecaries shop; as he was going, he pretends there must be no
delay, and therefore bids go to the next Apothecary (with whom he had left a
massy piece of gold, crusted over, and colored as if it had been a stone: and
left order that whosoever came to ask for Onastros, they should have that, and
at a very low rate. This being brought he plyes the furnace, according to all
circumstances, and at length draws out a wedge of Gold, in weight and value
triple to that they had put in. The Merchants send it to the Goldsmiths, and it
really abides and answers the touch. At this there is exceeding rejoicing; and
they are sworn not to reveal his secret experiment to any. And now they offer
to trust him and his art with hundreds, nay and thousands. To which he seemed
more modest then at the first. But in an evening calls upon them for the largest
sums they had offered to venture, pretending to begin the like experiment
very early the next morning: which having got into his hands, he took horse
that night, and so rode away into France.

One Constantine a famous Alchymist told this story of some of his fellows;
that they greedy of Gold, blew long without either livelihood or hope of it;
and then consulted with a paredriall of theirs, the devil, to let them
understand, if they were defective in any rite or ceremony requisite to the
Art, that they mist so of their expected end. To this the Devil made no other
answer but Labor, labor. Whereupon they fell to work a fresh, and plied every
thing hard, till all was consumed away: then came the devil thundering and
scattered abroad all that was left, and made all their gear to fly a pieces,
and laughed at it when he had done.

Besides Dardanians, such as by magical and maleficall arts, would transfer
others stocks into their own fields; and others heaps of Corn into their own
barnes and garners: they were also called Saccularians; because by the same
art, they would charm and convey the money out of others purses into their own.

Cicero records that Demosthenes (almost 300 years before him) complained that
the Pythian Oracle did (...), flatter Philip then in power, and prognosticated
altogether on his part; and was to that purpose corrupted by him. And adds
that the like was to be suspected of the Delphian Oracle of his days.

Apollo flattered Lycurgus for giving Laws; and knew not therefore whether he
should style him a God, or a man. And Lycurgus flattered him again; pretending
his Laws to proceed from his divining Oracles: although some of them were such,
that old wives and slaves might easily have both predicted and edicted.

Archilochus, a viperine Satyrist; and not only so, but a petulant obscure
Poet (for which the Lacedaemonians suppressed his books, and banished the Author)
yet was he therefore highly commended by Apollo, who foretold his father that
such his son should be famous among men. And when he was slain, the Delphian
Oracle not only condemned their wickedness, but commended still Archilochus
his wit.

Cypselus and Phalaris, two egregious tyrants, yet both praised by Apollo's
Oracle; and the one pronounced for happy, and the other for long lived.

Vespasian having obtained the Empire, none more flattered by Sostrates,
Seleucus, Basilides, and other Mathematical diviners; but makes him believe he
sees his advancement and victories in the entrayles. Others by vaticinating
instinct cause certain antique vessels to be dug up in sacred places,
wherein they found (they say) the image of Vespasian perfectly engraven.
Another whatsoever he shall enterprise promises him the largest success.

Alexander being ambitious to be thought of divine original, and solicitous to
redeem the imputation of his mothers infamy, sent before, and suborned the
divining Priests with fair promises and large gifts: who thereupon made the
Oracle to give answer even as he would himself; which upon his first entrance
into the Temple, saluted him as the son of Jupiter Hammon.

The Locrians (fewer in number) being to war with the Crotonians, implored
the Gods by sacrifice for success: which the Crotonians hearing, sent
presently to consult Apollo at Delphos, and received this answer; that enemies
must be overcome first by vows, and then by arms. Whereupon they vowed the
tenth part of the spoil to Apollo. The Locrians understanding both the answer,
and their vow; vowed the ninth part, and kept it secret, lest their enemies
should outvie them, and so obtained the victory.

In the Milesian region, one having bought the next draught of the Fishermen;
they drew up (among other things) a golden Table. Great was the controversy
whose this should be. Delphick Apollo was consulted to decide it: who answered,
it ought to be given to him, that was wiser then all the rest. Whereupon they
gave it to Thales their own Country wiseman, or Astrologer, and he to Bias; and
he to Pittacus; and so one to another, till at last it came to Solon; and he
gave it to Apollo himself. And thus was it shuffled up betwixt the Astrologers,
and the Oraculists.

Strepsiades consulted a Thessalian Veneficke about pulling down the Moon from
Heaven by magical ends. For at Athens they were wont to pay use, rent, taxes,
etc. upon the first appearing of the new Moon. Now if there were no Moon at all
to appear, he thought this the only way to prevent and defeat the creditors.

Macarius the Mitylenian a Priest of Bacchus, bearing before him a face of
justice and equity; one committed to his trust a certain sum of money; which in
his presence he hid in a more safe and secret place of the Temple. Afterward
the man calling upon him to restore what was deposited, he called him into the
Temple, and there cut his throat.

Belesis a Babylonian Priest, skillful in Astrology and the art of divining;
had foretold to Arbaces the Mede, that he should eject Sardanapalus out of the
Assyrian Kingdom. Which so falling out, Arbaces made Belesis Governor of
Babylon. Now an Eunuch of Sardanapalus finding great store of treasure in his
house, brought it to Belesis; who under a color of carrying ashes, transported
it away, it being the Kings due. Which fact of his the Judges sentenced for
capital, but that it was the Kings pleasure to pardon him.

The Romans having spent much treasure in the Macedonian war; and their
people greatly exhausted: It was thought necessary that so much should be
exacted of the pontifical Augures, Aruspicks, Diviners, etc. as might help to
supply the present necessity (for though they had praedicted fair for it, yet
had they themselves hitherto paid nothing to the war) This tax made the
predicting Priests so murmur, and exclaim at the breach of their privileges,
for that they could have wished they had not been so forward in predicting and
auspicating as they were.

33. Of the infamy, danger, misery, and ruin of such as have affectedly
favored, or preferred, and superstitiously credited, or consulted Magical and
Astrologicall predictors.
Octavius persuaded by certain Chaldaean sacrifices, or praedicting
Soothsayers, who had promised him that all should go well with him, stayed in
Rome, till he was there slain by Marcus his Soldiers, that had entered the
City. And after he was dead a Chaldean prophecy was found in his bosom. This
man (says the Historian) was as wise and just as any Roman of his time: save
that he had this great imperfection, to frequent Soothsayers, wise men, and
Astronomers, more then men skillful in arms and government.

Midas was so superstitiously troubled and distracted about his own dreams,
that he poisoned himself by drinking of Bulls blood. Aristodemus King of the
Messenians, in his war against the Lacedaemonians, was so disturbed at the
dogs barking like wolves, and that the grass grew in his fathers house, or
about his household Gods (which the diviners feared for ominous) that he
desperately made himself away. Nicias the Athenian Captain was so exceeding
fearful of the portent of an eclipse, that he sat still and suffered himself
to be environed by his enemies: and so betrayed both himself and 40000.
soldiers to destruction.

Pomeralius (by his predictions) was the cause of a great slaughter to
Constantine the son of Irene: and of his own death to boot. Stethatus
(accounted the chief Astrologer of his time) by a foolish vaticination,
brought destruction both to Alexius and himself. Emanuel Connuenus the
Emperor, much addicted to this madness, timely (besides the perpetual
infamy) brought himself, and a great Navy to utter confusion. Peter Leonius, a
Physician, by his vain confidence of the Mathematics, gave occasion to the
death of Laurence de Medices, and his own after that.

Andronicus having made somewhat too severe an edict, not only against
Conjurers, and Necromancers, but against all their relations: to redeem the
hatred of such severity, he began to encourage, and consult them himself. And
enquiring about his Successor, the magical diviner used his feats in water;
and there was seen written backward ( Si for Is.) the two first letters of his
successors name. Noting Isacius, that slew him and reigned in his stead Didius
Iulianus making the like inquisition by a glass, a child looking in it,
observed Iulians slaughter, and the succession of Severus. So was Julian the
Apostate deluded by his diviners to his utter destruction.

Otho Sylvius was led on by his predicting Astrologers, to usurpation, and
riot, and to kill himself desperately at last. Maxentius was so deluded (by
his prognosticators) with assurance of victory, that he went on confidently,
but was vanquished and perished. Licinius called together his Augurs, Egyptian
diviners, Necromancers, Veneficks, praestigious sacrificers, and
pseudopresagers, to enquire what should be the success of the war against
Constantine. They all at once predicted victory without doubt. The inchanters
made odes, and rimes; the Augures presignified happy success, by the flight of
birds: so did the Aruspicall sacrificulists from the intrayles: and thus they
made him confident to his vanquishment, flight, and extreme confusion.

Italicus a Christian Governor, having an accustomed horsrace with an
aemulating neighbor a Pagan; comes to Hilarion entreating his prayers: because
his Aemulator had used sorcerous imprecations, whereby to disable his horses,
and stir up his own. Hilarion judging such an occasion not worthy of his
prayers, counseled him to sell his horses which he kept for that purpose, and
to distribute the money to the poor. He answered it was a public custom,
and the other would not suffer it to be laid down; and that in such their
masteries, they used insolently to domineere over the Christians. He therefore
being much importuned both by him and others, condescended (whether in
merriment, or to be rid of the importunity) to give him a cup in which he used
to drink in, and bad him fill it with water, and sprinkle his horses therewith,
and so dismissed him. This he did accordingly, and wanne the goal, against all
expectation. Whereupon Hilarion, who thus intended to deride rather then to
imitate any Magical artifice) was simulated for a Witch or Wizard, by the
Paganish party, and required to penalty.

Elianor Duchess of Gloucester consulted so long with Astrologers, Wizzards,
and Witches, till she came to be convented for one her self at last: and after
that lived and died miserably.

In a town within the territories of Brunswick, they had hired a pyed Piper to
conjure away all the Rats and Mice that much infested him. This he did by his
piping and charming; but not being satisfied according to his expectation, he
piped or charmed again; and there followed him an 130 children of that place,
all whom he led unto the side of an hill, and conjured them every one into a
gaping cleft thereof; so that he and they were swallowed up, and never seen
after.

A Captain consulting with a Wizard about the next days battle, he answered,
the day should be his, upon condition he would not spare to kill the first man
he met in the morning. Which he performed accordingly, and got the victory.
Then returning home joyfully, found to his grief, that he had killed his own
wife, who out of her great love had come to him disguised in man's apparel,
thereby to take part with him in that days adventure.

Valerian addicted to anthropomancy, or predicting by intrailes of men, women,
children; was unfortunate in his government, taken prisoner by Sapor King of
Persia, who used him for a stirrup to get on horseback on, and afterward
caused him to be flayed alive.

Another that had lost a silver spoon, would needs go to a magical wiseman,
to find out the thief; and it was agreed betwixt them, that (for better
discovery) he who had conveyed it away should lose one of his eyes, and when he
came home, he found that sad mark inflicted on a little child of his own, that
had carelessly cast the spoon aside.

Cecrops having newly builded Athens, two prodigies presently appeared in the
place; an Olive tree sprung up suddenly, and water strangely gushed forth Upon
these Delphick Apollo is consulted: who answered, that the Olive signified
Minerva, and the water Neptune; and that it was in the choice of the Citizens
to give the name of their City to whether of these they would. The Citizens of
both sexes are convented; the men are for Neptune, and the women for Minerva:
and the female sex being more numerous by one, prevailed in the suffrage. But
Neptune indigning the rejection, did so depopulate them with waves and floods,
that they were fain to punish their women for their suffrage against him.

Alcamenes and Theopompus being Kings of the Lacedaemonians, there was an
Oraculous prophecy, that Sparta should be lost through lucre. Lycurgus calling
this to mind, rejected all riches; and the people were brought truly into such
a superstitious fear, that whereas before they thought them the only
benefactors, they now condemned them to death, that first brought money in
amongst them.

In the City of Come in Italy, the Official and Inquistor having a great
number of Witches and Wizzards in prison: taking others with them, would needs
urge them to show them their homages to the devil: but were so beaten by them,
that some of them died within fifteen days: others renounced God hereupon and
vowed themselves to the devils service.

Eucrates beholding Pancrates, an Egyptian magician do many wonderful feats,
insinuated himself into his friendship, and communicated all his secrets to
him. The Magician at length persuaded him to leave all his family at Memphis,
and to follow him alone: and after they came into their Inn, he took a bat, a
bar, or a broom, and wrapped it with clouts, and by his charms made it walk, and
appear like a man, and made it minister unto them in sundry services, as
drawing water, etc. then with another charm would be turn it into a pestel,
bolt, bar, or besome again. Now one day when Pancrates was gone abroad into the
market, Eucrates would needs imitate his familiar, and dressed the bar or pestel,
muttered the syllables, and commanded it to draw water; and after it had done
sufficiently, commanded it to turn into a pestell or bar again. But it would
not obey, but still drew water, till he was afraid of drowning; then he took a
saw and sawed the bar in two; and then both parts began to fetch and pour
water in abundance; till in comes Pancrates, and turned it into what it was at
first, and so left his fellow, and was never seen after of him.

John Faustus light among a sort of his companions, who when they were half
drunk, importuned him to play some of his pranks; and the feat must be a Vine
full of Grapes, as the greater novelty now in the Winter season. Faustus
consented to satisfy their curiosity, upon this condition, that they should
keep silence, and not stir out of their places, nor offer to pluck a Grape
till he bad, otherwise they might pluck their own peril. The praestigious
sight is presented, and every one had his knife drawn and hold of a branch, but
not to cut till he spoke the word. But having held them a while in suspense,
all suddenly vanished, and every man appeared to have hold only of his own
nose, and ready to have cut it off, if the word had been once given.

34. Of an evil Art, worst to the Artists: or the just punishment; and
dreadful judgments befalling praestigious Magicians, and fatidicall
Astrologers.
THraseas the Augur, telling Busyris, the Egyptian Tyrant, that (in a time of
excessive drought) there was no other way to procure rain, but by sacrificing
some stranger to Jupiter: the King thereupon enquiring what countreyman he was,
and finding him to be a stranger, sacrificed him the first. And persisting in
this inhumane way, Hercules (coming into Egypt) slew both the tyrant, his
son, and all the Ariolists, at their own Altars.

Certain Hetrurian Soothsayers gave envious, perfidious, and unprosperous
divinations, and directions to the Romans, about a statue that was stricken
with thunder and lightning: for which they were slain by the people; and that
gave occasion to the boys, to sing this proverb in the streets, Ill counsel
is always worst to the Counselor.

A certain Germane warfaring in Italy, chose to him a soldier that was a
Conjurer to be his mate, to show him his skill, the circle is made, the
imprecation uttered, the spirit hideously appears, is asked about the success
at Gouletta, confesses his ignorance, and takes time to resolve; disappeares
and leaves such a terror and stink behind, that they had like to have been
poisoned with the noisomeness, and died for fear.

Examples of the Magastromancers fatal miseries, and unfortunate ends, are too
many to be instanc't in at large. Zoroaster the first father of them, was
vanquished by Ninus, who burnt his books; some say that he himself was burnt by
the devil, as he was provoking him by his magical experiments. Simon Magus as
he would needs go fly in the air, had his magical wings so clipped, that he
fell down and broke his neck. Cynops, as he went about to raise the dead out of
the sea, was himself swallowed up of the waves, and died. Zarces and Arphaxat,
both burnt by lightning. Chalchas died for envy. Tullus Hostilius provoking to
thunder, was himself stricken to death therewith. Nectanebus killed by his own
son. Ascletarion eaten up of dogs, as he went to execution. Onomacritus
expelled Athens by Hipparchus. Messinius put to the sword by Valentinian.
Sempronius Rufus banished by Severus. Heliogabalus, an thropomantist, slain and
cast into a Jakes. Nigidius Figulus died in exile. Apoleius accused and
condemned before Claudius Maximus proconful of Africa. Amphiaraus swallowed up
of the earth. Romulus rapt up in a black stormy thundering cloud. Aristaeus
snatched away by an evil spirit. Zito fetched away quick by the devil. A Count
of Matscon, as he was making merry with his friends, there came, one to the
door with a horse, and made him come forth and get up, and so carried him up
into the air invisibly, and he audibly crying out as he was carried up and
down. Another was seized on by the devil, while he was presenting the
praestigious pageantry of Hector and Achilles. Another, the devil came into his
closet, and left him there dead sitting in a chair with his heart in his hand.
Pope Benedict the ninth, strangled by the devil in a wood. John Faustus (the
devil entering his chamber with a terrible commotion) was found dragd out of
his bed, and his face wrung quite behind him. Bladad (who not only practiced
magical arts, but taught them to the Britains) in confirmation hereof, would
needs go fly, but fell headlong, and was dashed in pieces against the Temple of
Apollo, in Troynovant. Odo Bishop of Baia perished in prison. Galeaceus caused
a bold peremptory Astrologer to be hanged up. Charles the seventh of France
hanged Aegidius the Marshall, for his magical exploits. Simon the blind
exorcist slain by his own wife possessed with a devil. Stuphius taken by
Radulph of Habspurge and burnt. Methotin slain by the people, and his body
stak't. Reatius killed by one whom he had deluded. Hollerus slain by his own
aemulators. Oddo drowned, for all that he often sailed without a ship. Ericus
driven to hang himself. Oluph desperately drowning himself. Diodorus, after
all his prestigious evasions, at length caught and burnt. Iunctin an Italian,
prognosticating of himself (as Astrologers rarely can be drawn to do) on the
day he feared to be most dismal, was knocked on the head by his books in his
own study. Peter of Pomfret executed for an imposterous traitor. A Priest of
Norimberge would needs go conjure for treasure, and digging found a hollow
cave, and therein spyed a chest, and a black dog lying by it; which he was no
sooner entered, but the cave shut its mouth upon him, and there he perished. At
Saltsburg a charmer undertook to enchant all the Serpents within a miles space;
which while he was effecting, a great old serpent among the rest leapt upon
him, wrapped his tail about him, and so drew him into the ditch, and there he
was drowned.

Gobrias that assisted Darius in freeing Persia from the Magicians cruel
tyranny and execrable treachery: a base massy Magician hard and close pressed
upon him; so that one of his fellows, durst not smite the villain, for fear
of wounding his friend that had buckled with him. But he bad not spare to use
his sword, though it were to the hazard of himself; which he rather chose to
suffer, then that such a miscreant should escape unavenged.

Alexander a pseudomantist as Lucian was preparing an accusation against him,
rotted lothsomely, and so died miserably eaten up of worms.

Manes, that magical heretic, or heretical magician, was in such favor with
the King of Persia, that he wrote all his portents for true miacles, and his
madness for divine fury. His son falling sick, he committed him to Manes his
art for his cure. Who confidently undertook it, but faignedly performed it: and
therefore perceiving him to be worse and worse, he fled into Mesopotamia.
Whence the King caused him to be fetched back, and flead off his skin alive, and
filled it with chafe, and gave his carcass to the dogs.

At the taking of Constantinople, the Greeks superstitiously bewitched with a
prophecy, that a mighty enemy should be possessed of the greatest part of the
City; but should be defeated in the marketplace, called the Brazen Bull; were
both careless and dastardly in suffering the Turks to make breaches upon the
walls, enter the City, and arrive at the very place: where they were cruelly
slain themselves.

Bellantius the great Astrologer, which is said to have given warning to
Savanorola, to beware of burning: was neither able to foretell, nor to prevent
his own great peril, in so plain a manner by the Stars, but that he was most
beastly murdered.

35. Of the reformation of Magic and Astrology, as well in Pagan States, as
Christian Churches: with a Caveat (in conclusion) to Englishmen, for to beware
of Astrologicall Magicians, or Magical Astrologers; as to redeem the old
scandal, and prevent the new calumny, of their superstitious addiction to
Soothsaying Prophecies and predictions.
NInus vanquished Zoroaster, and in a contempt to his Magic and Astrology,
caused his books to be burnt. Numa, Pompilius, and Dardanus would needs have
their Magical books to be buried with them. This might be their diabolical
envy, or rather the devils own policy, to have them thought, and sought as
things prizeable; but it was indeed Gods providence to have them abolished as
things detestable. Hermogenes his books were burned by St. James the Apostle.
The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius ordained that such kind of books should
be burned in the sight of the Bishops. Athanasius speaks of whole volumes that
were burnt, even by the consent of the Arts greatest admirers. Iodocus de Rosa
his conjuring books were burnt by a common Council. Belike such a consumption
has always been thought and found to be the best way of reformation: and most
conformable to that great example, Acts 19.19.

The Chaldaeans indigning the many oraculous and divining gods that were set up
in several countries; and presuming to reform all to their own god Vr, or
Fire: they proposed to diverse Provinces, that that God which prevailed to
confound all the other should be accounted as the only God. To this purpose
they carry their Idol Fire in a Censer up and down with them, and commit it to
conflict with the other Idols of Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, etc. and it
consumes them all. The fame of the Chaldean Fire devouring all where it came,
coming to the ears of the Priest of Canopus (an Egyptian god, in whose Temple
was taught Magic by Egyptian letters; and not unlike Astrology too, or
divining by the Stars, since they have a Star also of that name) this put him
upon a crafty device to save the credit of his god. He took a great earthen
water pot full of holes, and stopped them with Wax, and filled it with water,
and painted it over, and set it up instead of his God (or rather this water pot
was the belly of Canopus himself so fashioned.) In come the Chaldeans, and as
the two gods are put to the bickering, the Wax melts, and the water runs out,
and so the Fire is quenched: and now is Canopus accounted for the victor. After
this comes Theophilus a Christian Priest to contest with him; and he (by the
power and providence of God) makes the very creature Fire to consume all, in
despite of all magical force or fraud: and so works the reformation.

The Alexandrians not well knowing how to prohibit the Astrologers directly,
did it subtly. They exacted a yearly tribute not only of the Astrologers,
but of all those that consulted them. And this exaction they called (...), the
fools tribute; thinking that either the charge or the shame of it would thus
restrain, if not reform it.

Augustus gathered up here and there all the fatidicall books he could; and
those that were spread abroad under none, or no apt authors, he caused them to
be all burnt, to the number of two thousand: and only retained the Sibylline
books, and them too with choice, commanding that even they should not be looked
into by any others but the Quindecemvirs only.

In the too long protraction of the second Punick war, their religion became
so distracted by the turbulencies of the times, that all sexes, ages, and
degrees of people turned sacrificers and vaticinators. Complaint hereof was
brought to the Senate; and they laid the blame on the inferior Magistrates for
not inhibiting them. At length the business was committed by the Senate to M.
Aemilius, the Vrbane Praetor, who made proclamation, that whosoever had any
books of vaticination, or written Orisons or arts of sacrificing, letters, etc.
that they should bring them all to him within such a day. And thus he freed
them from such confusions as were crept into their religion.

As they were plowing in the field of L. Petilius the Scribe, certain books of
Numa were there found in a chest of stone. Which Q. Petilius the Vrbane Praetor
hearing of, sent for them; and reading only the sum or contents of them, and
observing that they tended to the utter dissolving of religion, told L.
Petilius, that he intended to burn them. The Scribe appealed to the Tribunes of
the people; they referred it to the Senate: where it was decreed, that the
Praetor should keep his vow or resolution; and so they were burned by the
victimaries, or sacrificers themselves, in the sight of all the people.

It being related to the Fathers, by Quintilian a Tribune of the people,
concerning a book of the Sybils, which Caninius Gallus a Quindecemvir would
have received among the rest of the prophecies; Tiberius hereupon sent letters
to the Senate, severely checking at Caninius, who being versed in the
ceremonies, would admit of an ode or a charm, whose author was uncertain;
which the masters had not read, nor the College approved: putting the Fathers
in mind of Augustus his edict, to carry all such to the Vrbane Praetor: and
that the Sibylline verses, belonged to the care of the Priests, to discern
which were true, and which false. And that they should especially acquaint the
Quindecemvirs therewith, and not transact any thing rashly in a cause of
religion.

Under Valentinian, one Hilarious a Car-man was brought before Apronius the
prefect of the City; because he had committed his son to a venefick,
necromancer, or sorcerer, to be brought up or traded in such arts as were
interdicted by the laws; and was therefore condemned.

Amantius an aruspick was solicited by Hymetius to sacrifice for depraved and
maleficall intents: which being proved by papers found in his house, the
consulter was banished, and the practitioner condemned.

Lollianus a very young magician, being accused, that he had written a book of
pernicious arts: for fear that Maximinus would banish him, appealed to
Valentinian, who more grievously punished him.

Palladius a veneficke, and Heliodorus a genethliacke, or one that interpreted
fate by genitures, were therefore accused before Modestus the praetorian
prefect. Palladius impeached Fidustius, Praesidatis, Irenaeus, and Pergamius
for their abominable charms. Fidustius confesses his vaticinating malefice,
and joins with him Hilarious and Patricius. Pergamius accuses many thousands as
conscious of the same arts. Hilarious and Patricius confess the sortilegious
fact, with all the circumstances. Wherefore all these, and many other
Philosophers are punished with fire and sword; as Pasiphilus, Diogenes,
Alypius, Simonides, and others. And last of all, that no mention might be found
of these unlawful arts, innumerable books and volumes are all heaped together,
and burnt in the Judges sight.

Under Manuel Commenus, one Araon was accused, in that there was found in his
house the image of a Tortoise, and with in it the picture of a man chained, and
pierced through the breast: and that he carried about him the old conjuring
book that was called Solomon's; which while he read it, legions of devils would
appear, and ask him wherefore he called them, and would quickly execute his
commands. Of which being convicted, he had his eyes put out, the usual
punishment of those times.

Sicidites about the same time was impeached, for casting prestigious mists
before men's eyes; and for sending out his devils to terrify and torment men.
The same man sitting by the water side with some of his companions asked them
what they would give him, and he would make the Boatman (that then passed by
with a load of earthen vessels) to break all his own wares, with his own Oar?
Something they promised him, and he muttered a few words, and it came to pass
accordingly. The man being asked after that, why he was so mad as to break his
wares? answered, he thought he saw before him an ugly great Serpent ready to
devour him, which still crept nearer to him the more he struck at it, and when
all his pots were broken in pieces then it vanished. For this and other
ridiculous pernicious tricks, he was served as Araon was, sc. had his eyes put
out; an apt punishment for all peepers, and Star-gazers.

In vain was all the Pagan reformation of Magic and Astrology. For they put
the Artists or practitioner away with one hand, and pulled them to them with
another: witness the edicts of Augustus, Tiberius, Nero, Vitellius, Domitian,
etc. and their own repealing acts, and especially the Senate that banished
Martha the Syrian prophetess: and yet a little after retained and embraced
Batabacus a predicting diviner. The Historian therefore said well and truly on
both parts. This kind of men, treacherous to Potentates, and delusive to all
consulters and confiders, are always inhibited our City, and yet always
retained in it.

I say no more of Imperial edicts: nor of those after the Emperors became
Christian; nor of provincial Laws, nor of municipall Statutes; nor of
general Councels, nor of Ecclesiastical Canons; nor of Fathers sentences,
etc. All these are sufficiently collected against them. I only conclude with
an animadversion to our own Countrymen.

PLiny (writing of Magic) says, that in his days the Art thereof was highly
honored by the Britains, and the people of that Nation so deeply devoted
thereunto, and the practices of it performed with such complements of all
ceremonies, that a man would think, the Persians had learned all their magic
skill from them. And in truth our own histories report, that the first Rulers
of this Land, were Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, (such as were Samothes,
Magus, Sarron, Druis, Bardus) and that under a color to teach men the
knowledge of the Stars: they brought men to the worship of the Stars. Yea, and
that they thus begat here their sects of Samotheans Magicians, (In so much as
the Persians have been thought to have borrowed their word magi from hence.)
Sarronides, Druides, Barditaes or Bardians: and these kinds of sects were
propagated amongst us, till the preaching of Fugatius, and Damianus, in the
time of King Lucius: and then they began thus to be abolished, and put to
flight. What? two Preachers put down so many sects of Magicians? What a shame
and misery were it now, if one Society of Artists should set up themselves to
pull down so many preachers of the Gospel? Philip de Cominees, speaking of
foolish fantastical prophecies, says, The Englishmen are never unfurnisht of
such, from the cabalisticall disposing, and expounding of certain letters. What
would he have said, if he had seen his own Frenchman translated amongst us?
Again, he says, The English attribute much to prophecies and vaticinations:
and always are weak, when they treat of hard matters, to produce some such
kind of thing. Which, for all his reputed sobriety, we cannot but take for a
calumny. Who do unanimously profess (against all Merlinicall arrogators,
prorogators, derogators) that we are of the mind of William of Newborough; that
sharply inveighed against Geffray ap Arthur, for adventuring to divulge under
the name of authentic prophecies, the deceitful conjectures, and
foredeemings of one Merline a Wizzard; and adding thereunto a great deal of
his own. And do herein approve of the Council of Trent, for inhibiting the
publication of Merlines books. Although we take them to be (as some of their
own said of them) like the Astrologers, who to save their Phenomenon, framed to
their conceit, Eccentretes, and Epicydes, and a wonderful engine of orbs,
though no such things were, etc. We also do commend the many wholesome Laws,
imperial and municipall, among Christians and Heathens, that have been justly
enacted against them. And do advise them not to make slight of the
Ecclesiastical penances; however not to neglect true repentance. Otherwise we
could wish that our own Statute-laws were but duly executed upon the several
kinds of them. And then should we have the Magastromancers posed and puzzel'd
indeed, that is, not only confuted, but confounded.

Faeliciter, Cum Deo, conclusum est contra Mag-astrologos.
Amen.
CHAP. XVIII. 18. From the fatuity of Fate.
1. WHether the very word, term, or name of Fate and Fortune, be not of
Paganish origination; and withal, of superstitious derivation and acception?
As Fate or fatation, from praefation or fore-speaking. And (I pray) whose
speaking? not Gods, but the stars; nay not the stars, but the constellated
Oracles: For these were the first Faticanes, and their hills, or cells, the
first Vaticanes that ere were heard of. Although I rejoice not much in
etimologizing, neither do account an argument from the Notation to be very
strong, especially in names of humane imposition: Yet something may (not
amiss) be affirmed or denied, from the notation of the name (though it be not
so exquisite, but allusive only) keeping the principal letters, and coming
near to the nature of the thing. Let them therefore give me leave a little to
play upon the word: and if they will undertake to do otherwise; let others
judge if they be not more ridiculous. Fatum a fando; vates, quasi fates, a
fando, vel a (...), Fatuus a fando. Fate, and Fatories, and Fatiloquists, and
Fools, all taken from talking they know not what; (...), and (...), why any of
(...); and not all rather of (...)? in as much as fatidicall men, and Fools,
both fore-speak many things, but foresee nothing, (...), vel (...), vel (...),
vel (...); of making furious and fantastical both connexions and Predictions;
vel quasi (...), supposing the hand or power of the Moon, or celestial
bodies, to be therein; vel (...), sive (...), doubting whether the coelestialls
do signify or presage any such thing, yea or no; vel (...); whether months,
or days, or years, do indeed distribute such things as they prognosticate;
vel (...), whether there be any such part or lot indeed; vel (...), whether
there be any such thing as Fate in destiny remaining; vel quasi (...), a thing
not coherent congruous, convenient, necessary. But why not of (...), rather
than of all the rest? save that there is nothing in this their fatal Destiny,
to be loved or desired. Sic (...), quare non a (...), aeque ac a (...)? Take
them one as well as another, and then they note all together, that Fate may as
easily be occurred, and prevented, as that it must necessarily have its fact or
finishing. And that it may as well be passed by, as pass upon. Sic (...), a
(...), happening any way; vel a (...), because of every ones own fabricating or
making; vel quasi (...); as a thing (at best) but in a man's vows, wishes, or
desires, rather than in any reallity. Sic Fortuna quasi vortuna, a vertendo, of
turning every way. Vel quasi forte una; peradventure something, peradventure
nothing. But to cease from descanting upon names, the very nature of both these
has always caused the learned to call them the (...); the most vain and
foolish things of themselves, that a man could either fear or confide in.

2. Whether Fate or Fortune ought once to be named among Christians? And how
many eminent Saints of Gods Church have retracted, and repented that ever they
have so done? And how mamany of them have, and do daily warn men to be wary,
how they rake the heathenish terms out of their ashes, and translate them into
the Church of Christ? Not that they are litigious about terms, or scrupulous
of titles: But because the word of God has not a word, nor a syllable, nor a
sound, nor a signification of either of them; if it be rightly translated or
understood. And because neither of them can be of any edification to the Church
of God: but the use of them is a profanation both of his Word and Church.

3. Whether there be any such thing as Fate in nature, or in the world? And
whether they that determine for it, do aptly distinguish it: or in the
determination abstract and exempt it from the very hethenish original and
acceptance? And whether all their distinctions of Fate be able to discern it,
for a solid and sober truth, in any part or respect? The Theological sat is
abusive; for that is not paganish fate, but divine providence. The Natural fate
is superfluous; for that need be called no more but natures common order. The
Stoicall fate is superstitious, for that binds all things, persons, actors, (in
heaven or earth) to an ineluctible necessity. The Chaldaicall, Mathematical,
or Genathliacall fate is worse than all the rest, as adding to them all a
sydereall or constellationall fancy. But what kind of Fate call they that which
they make to sit in the middle, and as it were hover in the balance, betwixt
the desultory levity of an indifferent casualty; and the presultory temerity of
an urging, and inevitable necessity?

4. Whether Fate or Fortune do not mutually take away one another? For
necessity and contingency have always been held as contraries and
inconsistents. Else to what end were all those disputes betwixt the Stoics and
the Epicures? But why then do so many Authors speak of both these so
promiscuously? And why do our Fataries, and Fortunaries so confound them:
especially in their prognostications, or predictions?

5. Whether the Philosophers have been more serious than the Poets, about the
series of Fate? As for the Poets, what child smiles not to read the pretty
fictious of the three Fates, or fatal Sisters; Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos;
yea, or of Nona, Decima, and Morta; and of their names, derivations, progeny,
order, and offices? As for the Philosophers (Stoics and Epicures,) It were
long to tell, how featly they have tossed both Fate and Fertune, too and fro in
their sundry argumentations, assertions, definitions, descriptions, opinions,
etc. But (better than all their earnest) it is excellent sport which they make
(in their Mythologies, Apologues, Hieroglyphics, etc.) with Fortunes wheel and
horn on the one hand: and Fates Distaff and Spindle on the other.

6. Whether argue the more strongly; the Stoics against Fortune, or the
Epicures against Fate? Me thinks the Stoics (for all their gravity) do but
rayl, when they call her the Goddess of fools, an empty name, a versatile wind,
a short Sunshine, a sudden tempest, a muddy torrent, a fools paradise, a
labyrinth, etc. Reproaching her for blind, deaf, mad, brutish, instable,
treacherous, envious cruel etc. Querulously accusing her for playing with her
own gifts; and sporting her self with humane mortality and misery: turning all
things upside down; corrupting her own nature, or rushing upon her very self;
repenting of her good, rejoicing at her evil; taking the stronger part;
regarding not virtue, but power; answering those more, that dare, than that
implore her; carrying on things against reason, prudence, counsel, virtue;
most deceiving, where she is most trusted; fooling all she fosters; smiling and
killing at once; tempering her honey with poison; immoderate both in good and
evil; strangling at last her own nurselings; exalting and depressing; giviving
and taking; dealing indiscriminatly; satisfying the greedy, more than the
needy; giving unto many too much, to none enough; now a mother, now a stepdame;
when most flourishing or flattering, most feeble; and making but the more
unhappy, for having been acquainted with her happiness. But (in my mind) the
Epicures (for all their levity) reason better. For though they might return the
many invectives against Fortune upon Fate, yet they soberly argue thus; If
there be necessitating and enforcing fatation upon things, must not such a
thing be done by a man, whether he be instructed or exhorted to it or no? nay,
shall he not do it whether he will himself or no? Is not the destinating
decree enough to bring all things about, although there were neither command,
nor care to go about it? Does it not robb all rational creatures of mind,
will, counsel, deliberation, to tie them up to inevitable necessity? How then
are their proper motions reserved, not only to rationalls, but to every moving
creature? What natural series of causes can there be betwixt intellectualls,
rationalls, spiritualls, animals, in animates, and artificialls? Is it not
ridiculous, to make an indissoluble series, or conjunction of causes, where
(besides a deity) reason, and accident are ever and anon making an
interruption? Who will say, that all things are concluded by, and included
under Fate? Is there not much arbitrariness, whether one man will beget
another, or no? and much more, whether one man will kill another, or no? How
can there be so much as a natural fate or necessity over men, when we see they
are not all carried one way: as things of one nature or kind (beasts, birds,
fishes, flies) are? but men (although of one nature) are carried diversely, as
their wits and affections lead them. Were people have sundry Laws, and they
duly executed; how are they led along by their convenient edicts, rather than
by the fatal decree of the Stars? Are the laws of men and fate repugnant?
and are these more prevalent than they? If all things be necessarily bound
under Fate; what can be subject to reason, will, nature, occasion, time,
manners, prudence, counsel, society, contingency, casualty? Must not men's sins
and vices be necessary also, and enforced? Why should he be punished for
offending, that is not able to resist an impelling force? Is he to be blamed,
that is not of his own power? we may commend virtue, but what praise of the
virtuous, not so by labor and industry, but by fate and necessity? Do not the
Authors of Fate go, and come; speak, and keep silence; offer, and forbear;
consult, and deliberate; procure, and prevent; exhort and dehort, praise, and
dispraise; reward, and punish? and why should they do all this, if they did
believe their own doctrine of Destiny? Why should men study or labor, if their
fate be sufficient to make them both wise and rich? How many things are not as
the Fates will but as we will our selves? Have the Fates determined that a man
shall have children, that will not marry, nor once touch a woman? that he shall
be wise, that will not learn? that he shall be liberal, that will not give?
that he shall be drowned, that will not come near the warer? that he shall dye
in a strange Country, that will not travel? If Fate have appointed a wound, or
a disease to the body, is there not a medicine and meat to cure it? but if it
could intend any evil upon the soul or mind, yet is there not education, and
discipline to prevent it? Many things may be effected besides nature: may they
not much more then besides Fate? If every man may fabricate his own Fortune,
why not also contrive his own Fate? If Fate had never had name, or nature, or
power, would things have fallen out otherwise than they do fall out? why then
should Fate be inculcated, since (without Fate) there is Nature and Fortune, to
which all things (necessary or casual) may be aptly referred? In this old
Philosophical dispute, what easy Moderator would not give this censure? That
either side has said sufficient, to overthrow his Adversaries opinion; but
neither of them enough to establish his own.

7. Has not the constellatory Fatation introduced so many starry Gods into the
world? Yea, made so many providentiall, and tutelary Gods and Goddesses (some
Select, others Ascriptitious) to have a hand in the whole administration of the
Universe? But particularly so many Geniall or Genitall Gods and Goddesses, and
their sundry ordinations and offices at every man's geniture. As of Janus,
Jupiter, Saturn, Genius, Mercury, Apollo, Mars, Vulcan, Neptune, Sol, Orcus,
Liber Pater, Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Lucina, Fluona, Luna, Diana, Minerva, Venus,
Vesta. Moreover, Vitumnus, Sentinus, Men's, Mena, Iterduca, Domiduca, Abaona,
Adeona, and Dea Fatua too, not of the least ordination and operation, either in
the birth, or life, or death? And no marvel that they make so many
Consent-Gods go to the fate of a Man: when they will have so many to be busy
about the fate of an herb. As Seia fatally president of the sowing; Segetia or
Segesta, at the coming up of the Corn; Nodotus or Nodinus, at the knitting or
knotting; Volutina, at the involving of the leaves; Patellina or Patellea, at
the opening of the blade; Proserpina at the budding; Hostilina, at the equal
shaping of the ear; Flora, at the flourishing; Lasturtia, at the nourishing;
Tutilina, in the keeping; Matuta, or Matura, at the ripening; Messia, at the
mowing; and Runcina, not only at the weeding, but at the plucking up by the
roots.

8. Whether Fate be one or many? If it be one simply, then what needs any
reduction? if it be many, why is it not redueed to one? And then, in vain is
that done by many, which may be done by one: and it is profane, to ascribe
that to many, which ought to be ascribed to one. If it be one truly, then is it
undivided in it self, and divided from all others: which how can that which is
a series, or connection of so many things, be? especially having its inherence
in movables or mutables. If it be but one by accident, why should it imply all
under a necessity? If it be but one by aggregation, collection, connection, so
are things fortuitous as well as fatal. Besides, such an unity is in the
meanest degree of entity. Wherefore then should it order, and subordinate
things of a more perfect degree than it self? If it be many, or a multiplicity;
then is it unequal, indeterminate, uncertain, and next to a nullity. If it be
one, why then do they make it so diverse, according to diverse conjunctions and
constellations? If it be many, how can they make any certain and particular
pronouncing upon it?

9. Whether that they call Fate, be in the first, or among the second Causes?
If in the first, that is as much as to make it equal unto God: If among the
second, then is it inferior unto man. For among second causes, and especially
in involuntary actions, and all such as fall under humane counsel and
deliberation; the intellectual mind, and rational will has no superior. And
what more contrary to the order of nature and creatures, than that the less
noble should be disposing, and governing those more noble than themselves?

10. Whether there be a fatal necessity upon all acts or events? If upon all
acts where is Liberty? if upon all events, where is contingency? And whether upon
these, both good and evil? and that whether natural, civil, or spiritual?
If upon natural acts and events, good, or evil; then what use of means either
to preserve; or to prevent? If upon acts civil, and good; what merit? what
praise? if upon acts civil, and evil; what laws, what punishments? If upon
events civil, and good; what thanks? if upon events civil, and evil; what
hopes? If upon acts spiritual, and good; what free grace? if upon acts
spiritual, and evil; what free will? If upon events spiritual, and good;
what free bounty? If upon events spiritual, and evil; what free mercy?

11. How can there, or why should there be such a thing as Fate, imposing a
necessity upon actions, and events? when as divine providence it self does it
not: so as to exclude liberty, contingency, or casualty from things. But works
with second causes according to their own motion, and manner. Permitting
sometimes their exuberancy, sometimes their deficiency: preserving to them
their sundry orders, offices, and degrees of efficiency. Suffering the remoter
causes, or agents, to be impedited by the more proximate; that all effects
might not be taken for natural, and necessary; but that his own free disposing
might appear. Although nature, and every natural agent, be of it self, and
ordinarily, determinated to one effect; and to the producing of it after the
same way: yet he suffers it to be impedited by one debility, and indisposition,
or another (either to come to pass otherwise, or else to be altogether
prevented) that so he might preserve a contingency in all natural causes: to
the intent nothing might be thought absolutely necessitating, but his own will
and pleasure above. Much more does he confirm a freedom to the rational will;
not only that good may the more cheerfully be done, and accepted; but the evil
also that is done, or suffered; may not unjustly be imputed to providence,
because of a necessity imposed.

12. If fate be (as they define it) the Series, order, nexure, ligation,
complication, constitution, disposition of second causes, etc. what feeble
things are all those seconds put together without the first? what can their own
motion work to, without his special concurrence? what if he work not with
them? what if without them? what if against them? Leave them to themselves, and
what knot in a rope of Sand? Can there be a perpetual series, or indissoluble
connection betwixt causes so disparate, yea so adverse, as natural, internal,
necessary, and arbitrary, adventitious, accidental? yet after this order is
fate oftentimes finished. A languishing man not only consumes away within
himself; but the air, meats, drinks, poison, act the fatal consummation. To an
ordinated destiny of an unfortunate end; comes in inordinately fire, water, a
fall, a gun, a sword, an unlucky hand, etc. and has not this necessitating
fate now the complement by accident? and is there not a casual intervention
(of more force to the fatal effect) than all the causall connection? How many
accidents fall out fatally, that can have no second cause ordinatly assigned to
them; much less prospected in them (but must be referred merely to divine will
and pleasure) unless you will have accidental instruments (that interven
inordinately) to be such?

13. The Physical fate they will have to be a series of pure natural causes,
etc. ( viz. betwixt the stars, the elements, the temperament, the inclination,
the manners, the action, and the issue or event) now where are all these causes
knit together? in the efficient, the form, the matter, or the end? How are they
worthy to be called causes, or so proved? How are they pure, natural, and
necessary causes; when some of them are voluntary, and contingent? what
connection of them is that, which carrys on prime, and second causes; natural,
and voluntary; necessary, and contingent, with one fatal force, or inevitable
agitation? what series is that which (as has been said) is so often
interrupted? what copulation betwixt the first, and the last; when as (by their
own confession) the stars are not the causes of all events; neither do all
those effects fall out necessarily, whereof they are the cause; How are they
fatal then; or their complement of fate?

14. Whether in the series both of fate, and of fortune (although two
contraries) Astrologers have not delivered the same order, and connection of
causes (as the stars, tempers, manners, actions, events) or else what
difference do they make between them? Nay wherefore do the same Authors speak
of fate, and fortune so promiscuously, and indiscriminately? (especially in
their prognosticating, or predicting way.) Is it not because they are not able
to distinguish them? Or is it not because they are conscious of a
fortuitousness of event, even in their strictest fatality?

15. Whether (in the series of fatal causes) the effect does follow the
universal, indefinite, equivocall, and remote: or else the univocall,
proximate, specificall, and particular cause? And which of these is that which
does determine, and distinguish the effect? Does not a man generate a man; and
a Beast, a Beast; what ever the position of the stars be? Those that have been
borne in the same region, at the same moment, under the same position; have
they all been the same? nay, how diverse have they been (for all that) in their
ingenies, their fortunes, and fates? And why so? but because they have taken
their several affections, and inclinations from their particular causes?

16. As for second causes, means, agents, instruments; seeing God Almighty
makes use of them, to bring his own purposes to pass (not out of any defect, or
necessity; but to make his own efficiency the more perceptible.) Ye seeing he
often times renders the most noble, and convenient means ineffectuall, and uses
the meanest, and unaptest of them, to the producing of very eminent effects;
Why then should we be bound to lurk at that order, which God himself observes
not? why should our faith be taught to respect, or rest upon the middle things;
in a prejudice to that providence, which is the absolute beginning, and end of
all?

17. Whether the second causes be not ordained as the remedies, rather than as
the means of fate, or fortune? providence it self that has determined such an
accident, or event, has it not also ordained second means, to help, and
relieve, in such a case? wherefore are the creatures, and their offices created
to such ends: if they be not to be used to such ends, for which they were
created? what ever the fate, or fortune be; is there not a natural Law
(impressed in every creature) to labor for the conservation of it self, both in
its being, and well being? To what end has God given men a mind, will, reason,
affections, counsel, deliberation, science, art, observation, experiment,
means, instruments, etc. but as well prudently, and diligently to discern,
procure, fortify, prevent, remedy; as thankfully to accept, or humbly to
submit? Has not the Spirit of God secretly, and sweetly suggested to his
dearest children (in their sudden, and extraordinary perils, and perplexities)
even present advices, and succors; besides the inward consolations, and
confirmations of his grace? yea, is not this one cause why men are kept so
ignorant of future accidents (and of their utmost issues, after that they are
already happened) that men might not only prepare for them; but make use of
such means, as God himself has prepared against them? Otherwise, should they
not tempt God, in a neglect of them?

18. Whether there be not in the whole course of nature, in the universal
world, and especially throughout the whole Church of Christ, far more
effectual causes, means, orders, connexions, rules, guides, guards, helps of
life, of health, peace, liberty, society etc. for counsel, actions, passions,
accidents, events, than the celestial bodies can possibly be? ought these
then to be respected more than all they? or yet in comparison to them?

19. Who is able to bring into one series, or can reconcile to truth the old
Philosophical opinions, about the exercise, or execution of Fate, by second
causes? As whether by Angels, Spirits, Geniusses, Demons, Devils, by the Soul
of the world, by the Souls of men, by the total subservience of Nature, by the
motions and influences of the Stars, and caelestiall bodies, by sensible
agents, by artificial instruments, yea, and by very accidents and cafualties?
Christians know, and acknowledge all these creatures to be the ministers, or
instruments of providence. The Angels doing his will, are the more eminent
ministers both of his mercies and judgments: administering not only in
temporalls, and in spiritualls, but likewise to eternalls. And if it be so as
Philosophy says, that they are the Intelligencies, that move the caelestiall
orbs; then have they an ordination over the administration of the Stars. The
Devils are not only permitted, but wisely and justly used in the execution of
temptations, trials, judgments. (But how comes in Fate and Fortune? who can
tell? unless they intrude among the Devils, and be indeed of their foysting
in.) As for the heavenly bodies, they are to be confessed, as of Gods ordination
and employment in their order, light, motions, and prodigious appearances. But
he makes special use of men's reason, understanding, wills, affections,
memories, counsels, deliberations, policies, vocations, societies, arts,
artifices, Laws, Customs, actions, and experiments, in the government of the
world: and yet more especially their gifts, graces duties, offices, fervices,
in the governing of his Church. Last of all come in the whole host of
creatures to act here as he has ordained. Now what fatation, or fatal
necessitation to man, among all these? Angels or Devils can but inject into
the mind: they cannot compel, no nor yet incline the will. That Is only for the
infinite power of God himself to do, men (as to natural, civil, and moral
acts) are still actors in their own liberty. As for bodies (Celestial or
terrestrial) they work directly but upon bodies only: and the terrestrial are
held, and found to be the more proximately, particularly, and sensibly
disposing. Besides the friendship and hatred, the compliance and adversness of
men, is not the service, or disservice of the brute creature; the virtue or
venom of an herb or mineral; yea, the defense or offense of a sword, a knise,
a spear, a gun, a club etc. are not all these more sensibly apprehended, to be
more nearly advantageous or prejudicial to health or sickness, riches or
poverty, honor or disgrace, prosperity and adversity, life or death; than are
all the joint benevolences or malevolencies of the fatal Stars? If therefore
a fatidicall prognostication may be made from the Caelestiall: why not rather
from the terrestrial motions?

20. Whether Fate be above the Stars, as their governor; or else under them
as their minister? If above them, why make they the stars to be the causes of
fate? For so they must needs be superior to it. If under them, how then are
the stars themselves subject to fate? for so they must needs be inferior.
How then should the stars dispose of others fate that are not able to dispose
of their own? Is it for creatures (terrestrial or caelestiall) to perform that
to others, which they are not able to preserve to themselves? Ought not
therefore such a disposition to be referred solely to him, that has the
ordination, and gubernation of all things (both in heaven and earth) simply,
freely, eternally and immutably in himself?

21. How can the fatal series of causes be from the stars? when as the
stars themselves are not causes, as in humane and arbitrary actions. Not
causes, where they may be signs; as of things already done, and past. Yea, God
himself may signify many things, whereof he is not the cause: as in evil, and
sinful actions. Nay, have not the fatidicall Vaticinators themselves made many
fatal signs, which could never be causes, nor yet once come into any series,
or necessary connection? As in their aruspicies, and auguries; from the
entrails of beasts, flight, and noise of birds, etc. as also from lots,
dreams, prodigies, casualties, yea and physiognomies, etc.

22. How can the stars be the first in the fatal series of second causes?
When as (of all creatures) the spiritual, intellectual, or rational are the
supreme: and the corporeal, animate, or inanimate, their inferiors. Now the
stars are both corporeal, and inanimate; Spirits, and souls; as they have
more similitude to, so they participate more virtue of divine providence than
all other creatures: For they are both the cognoscitive, and the operative
instruments of providence, which the other are not. For these being but the
executive only: may either be directed, or diverted by the iutellectuall, and
ordinative. As acting of themselves with liberty, deliberation, discretion
observation of right rules, application of fit means, and intention to a due
end. And therefore are the more eminent ministers of providence, than all
things else, in heaven or earth.

23. Whether any such cut as fatation, may be properly said to be in, or from
the stars? For fatation imports a primordiall law or decree; not an influence
only, or effect: what sacrilege is it then to ascribe that to the instrument,
which is only peculiar to the principal agent? Since it is for instruments
(especially the inanimate) not to ordain, but execute only, (Yea, it is a
question, whether there be any fatation even in fate it self?) it being
accepted and discerned, not for a seminall disposition, but for an ultimate
execution: and that inherent in the moveable or mutable subject. Wherefore,
seeing fatation is neither in the stars, nor in fate it self: whether can any
thing be said to be fatal with respect to the stars? For the stars are but
second causes. And with respect to all such, some things may be said to be
natural, some things arbitrary, some things indifferent, some things
contingent, some things uncertain, some things casual: but few or none fatal.

24. Whether it be in the power and validity of the celestial bodies to impose
a fatal necessity, either upon humane actions, or yet upon natural things?
For if the stars be any such causes; then must they cause principally of
themselves, intentionally, directly, immutably. Now how can they be principal
causes; when providence is above them? how of themselves; when they work not
upon humane actions but by accident? how intentionally; since they want a mind,
or soul? how directly; when they operate upon humane actions but indirectly?
how immutably, when their ordination or disposition may be impedited? Again,
were they thus acting; then should there be no contingents, or accidents; no
liberty, or free actions, nor prevention of any events or issues; no
particular causes should be defective, nor distance of place, nor indisposition
of the mean; no neglect of the means, no endeavor to the contrary, or
opposition should be available: nay, not only the understanding, but the will
should be tied to corporal organs and matter; yea, and the stars should not
only be of sufficient, but of infinite power.

25. How do the celestial bodies work so fatally upon these inferiors: when
as they here operate not upon a necessity, as to the producing of the effect.
For albeit their impressions be natural; yet are they not received, but
according to the manner of the receivers, which are fluxible, and not having
themselves still after the same way. Because of the matter, that is in a
potentiality to many, yea, and to contrary forms. The matter also is movable,
and corruptable, and may easily defect of it self, may be intrinsecally
indisposed, and extrinsecally impedited. And the staries themselves are but
indefinite, and remote causes; to which the effect can never follow
determinatly, and necessarily, unless the middle causes be necessary; and then
they follow them, and not the other. But in the foresaid series the middle
causes are most of them contingent: and from many contingent causes can come no
effect of necessity, because any one of them, and all of them together, may be
defective, and not attain unto their end.

26. Seeing the heavenly bodies act not upon these inferiors, but by their
light and motion; and so communicate nothing to the matter they work upon, but
light, motion and heat: Now why may not all these flow from all the stars in
general? And why then should such, and such fatal inclinations, be attributed
to such, or such positions or conjunctions? And if there be any particular
virtues of the light and motion of some stars, contrary to the virtues of the
light and motion of other flarres; how is that demonstrated? And how comes it
to pass, that they should be operative and effectual one way, in their simple
natures or qualities: and yet another way in their relative aspects and
positions? Is an imaginary relation, or respect of more validity, than a real
substance or propriety?

27. They seem to define fate more acurately, that make it to be the series, or
connext order of natural causes. Now till they can directly and successively
deduce those natural causes, down from the stars, to those fatal events:
what reason is there to credit their proposition, much less their
prognostication? They likewise will have fate (in the best sense they can take
it) to digest and distribute all things, according to certain motions,
successions, orders, forms, places, times. Now if their fate cannot be well
understood, or discerned, without these same astrictions: why are they so
consounded at the inexplicableness of the circumstances? Otherwise, why do
they not predict usually the very times and places, together with the fates
themselves? Moreover, the first definers of fate, held it to be, not in the
superiors, but in the inferiors themselves. Namely, a disposition inherent in
the moveable thing: and that urging to an immovable event. If indeed it be
such; ought not every man's fate to be collected from himself, rather than from
his Stars?

28. How should the things of fate, and fortune be foretold; when it is not yet
(with one consent) told what things they are themselves? Some have gone so
high, as to say that they are Deities, or Gods: others are fallen so low, as to
make them vanities, and nothing. Some confound these two together: some set
them so opposite, as that they make them confound one another. Some admit many
things of both (as they say) at the fore-gate: and exclude all again at the
back door. Some place them in the beginning, in the middle, in the end of a
business. Some make us to be in their power: Some them in our power. Some would
have us believe both but inquire neither. But if they would no inquiry after
their nature, and properties: why make they such inquiry into their operations,
and effects?

29. Whether fate be mutable, or immutable? If mutable; how is it fate? Is
there not then a contingency of fate: as well as a face of contingencies? If
immutable; what hope? what color? what means? what remedy? Nay, if immovable;
how moves it (as they say) according to the nature, and order of all moveable
things? That is to say, with natural things, naturally; with necestary,
necessarily; with voluntary, voluntarily; with contingent, contingently; with
violent, violently; with remiss, remissely. And all this, not as a prime, and
free; but as a second, and necessary cause. Why may we not as well say, with
rational things, rationally; with brute, brutishly; with sensual, sensually;
with virtuous, virtuously; with vicious, vitiously; with prosperous,
prosperously; with adverse, adversely; with uncertain uncertainly, etc. And
then what irrefragable law of fate is that, which is fain to conform to, and
comply with every ones manners, and manner of working?

30. Whether fate be absolute in decree, or conditionate? If absolute; then can
it not be otherwise, and what remedy? Nay then is it infinite, omnipotent,
eternal, and with superiority? If conditionate (and that not from a liberal
dispensation of its own, but a natural ordination from another) what fatation
is that then, that comes upon condition? that depends upon others actions, not
its own determination? If it be absolute; then is it cruel, and unjust in many
things: if it be conditionate; then is it variable and certain in nothing. Set
aside the first act, which is the eternal decree; and the last act, which is
death: these indeed may be said to be both absolute, and conditionate; but
Christians are not taught to call these fate. But take it (as they do) for the
middle act; then can they make it to be neither absolute, nor conditionate.

31. Whether fate, and fatal events follow the body; or the mind? If the body;
what difference betwixt the fate of a man, and of a beast? In events (good or
evil) who is worthy? who is guilty? And how follow they the mind; seeing the
stars (necessarily and directly) make no impression there? Because it is
superior, according to the order of nature: and not subject to matter, time,
or place: but united to an intellectual, and spiritual substance; and
therefore cannot suffer from corporeal things, although celestial. Nor can
they so exceed their own sphere, and species; as to act directly upon it. And
if not upon the intellective faculty, which acts necessarily: much less upon
the elective power, which is free; and never acts but freely; nor is subject to
fatality, or fatal necessity. For then should the election of the will be no
more, but a mere natural instinct; should be determined to one thing; should
act but one way; should have the like motions in all, upon the like
representations; should not have any thing in its own power, to discern,
deliberate, choose, refuse, etc. but must be carried on, either naturally, or
violently, as the Stars do incline, or enforce?

32. Whether fate or fortune, be either in good, or evil actions? If fate be
in good actions; are they not necessitated, and enforced? if fortune be there;
are they not fortuitous, and accidental? And so, what praise of them? what
reward? The like may be affirmed of evil actions; and if likewise thus
inferred; what shame? what punishment? In vicious actions, either fate offers
violence to a man's will, or leaves to its own liberty. If the first, is not a
man's will to be excused in evil? and if the last, is not every man's will the
cause of his own fate? yea and of the hardest and heaviest fates? For they are
such which follow sin, and wickedness.

33. Wherefore should man (or his actions) be made the subject, yea the slave
of sat; when as indeed man, as man, is superior thereto? For fate being but a
sydercall service of second causes, must be reduced to the providence of the
first cause: and in that reduction, man himself has place, or preferment,
before all the stars of heaven. Because the divine providence receives to it
self, or extends it self in a more special way, to intellectual, or
rational: that it does to all other creatures else. In as much as they excel
all others, both in the perfection of nature, and in the dignity of end. In the
perfection of nature; Because the rational creature has the dominion over his
own actions, and operates voluntarily: whereas the other act not so much, as
are acted. In the dignity of the end; because the intellectual creature only,
by his operation, reaches to the ultimate end of the universe, sc. to know, and
love God. But the other creatures touch not that end, by an inspired intention;
but only according to some participated similitude. Furthermore, God provides
for the intellectual nature principally, and as it were for selfs sake: and
but for all other crtatures secondarily, and in order to it. The rational
creature is Gods agent: the other are but his instrumens. Now God cares more
for his agents than he does for his instruments. Yea they are the instruments
of this very agent: and he makes use of them either in his practice, or
contemplation. God has more regard to the free, and liberal: than to the
necessitated, and servile acts of his creatures. The rational creatures are
the more noble in themselves, and of more near accession to the divine
similitude; and therefore tendered by God, before and above all others. They are
the more principal parts of the whole universe: to which the less principal
are but subserving; as intended for their sakes, and working for their ends.
Intellectual natures have more assinity with the whole; as apprehending all
things else besides themselves: whereas every other creature is but a part, and
capable of no more but a bare participation of its own particular entity. Now
it is not for the inapprehending part, to have an ordaining power over the
apprehensive whole. By the course of nature, the rational creature uses all
other things for it self, as either for the perfection of its intellect, the
explication of its science, the exercise of its virtue, or else the
sustentation of its body, to which the intellectual nature is united. And
therefore it is not for them, to dispose, tule, govern, impell, necessitate him
him: but for him to observe, rule, govern, dispense moderate, and make use of
them.

34. Whether any thing can be said to be fatal (with respect to us) till it
have taken effect? For a fatality before it be, is but a contingency to us: and
to us a contingency, after it is, is a fatality. Why then should we be bound to
believe the prognosticated things of Fate or Fortune before hand? yea, though
they may have some natural cause, remotely necessary, or of some indefinite
probability: yet is not all this sufficient for our faith in particular;
because, as concerning many such natural causes, there is in us nevertheless
(besides the supreme) a liberty, and power to prevent.

35. Suppose the Fates have destinated one man to be hanged, or killed by
another; why should not that be prognosticated from another man's nativity, as
well as his own: seeing he also comes necessarily into the series of second
causes? Indeed some of the old genethliacks have boasted to foresee, or
foretell a man's fate, or fortune, from the nativity of his parents, Brethren,
children, etc. But have not others of them held it for a foolish fancy, that
the fate or fortune of one man should lie involved, not only in his own; but in
the constellations of so many men's nativities?

36. Whether they that suffer the same fate, have the same stars coupling, or
compacting thereunto? Et e contra. Suppose them suffering (and suffering to
death, the last line of Fate) for Christ, the Gospel, religion, and
conscience. Is this fatal destiny also from the starry order, and connection?
who ever heard that the stars made Martyrs, or necessitated unto martyrdom?
How then has it come to pass, that young, old, men, women, of several ages,
sexes, nations (and therefore not of the same constellations) have all agreed
to undergo the same event?

37. Whether that be true Fate, which they would mingle together with
providence? and how can divine providence, and Pagan Fate agree? For Providence
is the beginning, and continuation of all things: Fate is the end or utter
confusion of them. Providence is in the ordering of casuals, as well as fatals:
Fate is opposing all things fortuitous; and therefore not disposing them.
Providence is an act in God: their Fate is no more but an event upon the
creature. Providence is a disposition impendent, or out of the thing: Fate is a
disposition inherent, or in the thing. Providence comprehends all things (past.
present, and to come) so does not Fate in her connection of Causes. Providence
is in and over all things, from the greatest to the least (good, evil,
celestialls, terrestrialls, spiritualls, corporealls, universalls, singulars,
naturalls, rationalls, voluntaries, necessaries, contingents) so is not Fate.
Providence is more special to one, than to another: but Fate is a necessity to
all alike. Providence can work immediately, without, and against means: Fate
can operate nothing but according to her series, or connection. Providence can
act with every creature, reserving to it its own motion (as with free agents
freely; with contingents contingently, etc.) whereas Fate has no way to work
but fatally, that is necessarily, forcibly, inexorably, immutably, inevitably.
The rules, order, success of divine providence, are either written in his own
book, or in his own breast: and not in the Stars and Planets, as Fate is. The
wisdom, justice, power, goodness of his providence; all this is written in
his own book: the particular successes, issues, events thereof, all these are
written in his own breast. Even wise Providence it self is not herein to be
discerned or determined beforehand: what satuous thing is Fate then, that is
so obvious and trivial, as for the Faticanes to foretell? Is not this
difference enough between them, and never to be reconciled; Providence is a
prudent counselor, and will have the particular issues kept secret: Fate is a
silly babbler, and will have them commonly foretold?

38. Whether (had it not been for the fictions of Fate and Fortune) there had
ever been hatched opinions and heresies, so projudiciall to divine providence?
and that even amongst Pagans themselves, that had experience sufficient to
convince them of the truth, and power of it: and of the justice, yea and
goodness of it in great part. Had the divine providence ever been denied: if
Fate and fortune had not been held for Gods? Had God himself been implanted
under Fate, or made subject to the decrees of it, or slandered for a sloathfull
and careless spectator of humane things, and terrene: if they had not confined
and limited God to content himself with the reiglement of the heavens; as if it
had veen beneath his dignity and majesty, to vouchsafe to look down to sinall
things, or once to take notice of of what was done here below: but to commit
the care and rule of all sublunary and inferior things, to the stars and
celestial bodies; as his substitutes and their superiors? Had profane and
wicked men ever accused providence, and excused their impieties: had they not
heard of fatal stars necessitating and enforcing both their wills and
actions?

39. Was not the constitution of Fate and Fortune, first invented in a
derogation to God, and his divine providence: and that through a paganish and
infidelious scandal at good things happening to bad men here; and evil things
to good men, which had never been excogitated, or had soon vanished, had they
been thus Christianly instructed, viz. That the all provident Creator dispenses
these middle things with an indifferent hand, as unto creatures. That the best
men upon earth, are not worthy of the least of goods things: and may deserve to
be involved in the utmost of evil things, that can here befall them. That the
wise Disposer knows how to turn these outward good things to the evil, of
evil men: and these outward evil things to the good of good men. That this
present world is no time of full punishing, or rewarding: but these two
precisely pertain to the world that is to come.

40. Admit that either Fate or fortune was so indeed as they presage; or much
more than they can imagine: yet how is the best of them both sufficient to
moderate all fond hopes and fears? Or what is able to do that; but a lively
faith (void of these heathenish superstitions) and assuredly believing, That
there is an all-provident God, that only foresees all things necessary: and to
whom nothing is contingent or casual. That can, will, and does work (for the
best of his) both with second causes, and exterior means; as also without
them, yea and against them. That binds not the world, much less ties his
Church unto them. That has written his childrens names in the book of life:
and much more then (they may be assured) has numbered the hairs of their heads,
as concerning all earthly accidents. That shines, and moves in the Sun and
Moon, and stars: and makes their general influxes more, or less effectual,
as he is pleased to add, or abstract his special motion; or oppose his
immediate administration, or interpose the office of his more excellent
Ministers, Angels, and reasonable Souls.

CHAP. XIX. 19. From the affinity to Witchcraft.
1. WHat difference betwixt Astromancy, Magomancy, or Magastromancy (as
touching a sorcerous both superstition, and operation) and all these
after-named? viz. Stareomancy, or divining by the Elements; Aeromancy, or
divining by the air; Pyromancy, by fire; Hydromancy, by water; Geomancy, by
earth; Theomancy, pretending to divine by the revelation of the Spirit, and by
the Scriptures, or word of God; Daemonomancy, by the suggestions of evil
Demons or Devils; Idolomancy, by Idols, Images, Figures; Psychomancy, by
men's souls, affections, wills, religious or moral dispositions; Antinopomancy,
by the entrails of men, women and children; Theriomancy, by Beasts;
Ornithomancy, by Birds; I cthyomancy, by Fishes; Botanomancy, by herbs;
Lithomancy, by stones; Cleromancy, by lotts; Oniromancy, by dreams;
Onomatomancy, by names; Arithmancy, by numbers; Logarithmancy, by Logarithmes;
Sternomancy, from the breast to the belly; Gastromancy, by the sound of, or
signs upon the belly; Omphelomancy, by the navell; Chiromancy, by the hands,
Paedomancy, by the feet; Onychomancy, by the nails; Cephaleonomancy, by
brayling of an Asses head; Tuphramancy, by ashes; Capnomancy, by smoke;
Livanomancy, by burning of Frankincence; Carromancy, by melting of Wax;
Lecanomancy, by a basin of water; Catoxtromancy, by looking-glasses;
Chartomancy, by writing in papers; Macharomancy, by knives or swords;
Chrystallomancy, by glasses; Dactylomancy, by rings; Coseinomancy by seives;
Axinomancy, by Sawes; Cattabomancy, by vessels of brass, or other metal;
Roadomancy, by stars; Spatalamancy, by skins, bones, excrements; Sciomancy, by
shadows; Astragalomancy, by dice; Oinomancy, by Wine; Sycomancy, by Figgs;
Typomancy, by the coagulation of cheese, Alphitomancy, by meal, flower, or
branne; Crithomancy, by grain, or corn; Alectromancy, by Cooks or Pallen;
Gyromancy, by rounds or circles; Lampadomancy, by candles and lamps; And in one
word for all Nagomancy, or Necromancy; by inspecting consulting and divining by
with, or from the dead. The question is not about the difference of all these
(from the first, to the last) in matter, instruments ceremonies, or
circumstances; but whether they be not of like maleficall sorcery, for main
substance and formality? And whether divining by the Stars and Planets; be
not a cause enclining and disposing; at least an occasion inviting and
encouraging (what through imitation, estimation toleration) to all these sorts
of sorcerous divination, and the like?

2. Whether there be any kind of Magic simply so natural, or laudably so
arted* as many serve to abstract it from the maleficall, and diabolical? For
though there be many occult qualities and miracles of nature, and actives and
passives there, which perfectly known, and fitly applied, might help to work
wonders, without either tempting of God, or the Devil: yet because of the
difficulty of such things; and not that alone, but their uselessnesse: and
because of men's ignorance, and for all that their curiosity; and because of the
Arts insufficiency, and besides that, the fallacy; and chiefly because of
Satan's privy suggestions, and delusory seducements; the study and search after
these things proves very confused, indiscerned, unsafe and pernicious. And
because of all these the abuse of this astromagicall art is as palpable as the
practice: but the use as occult as the Art it self. But especially as touching
the practice of this art if there be an artifice of doing, wholly separate from
malefice; why then are the same things done by those, that are altogether
ignorant of the art; so they have but a says? and why (without such a faith)
is nothing to be done by the Art it self? How many things have been done by all
manner of Magicians, that can have no natural causes, no true rules of art, no
power or comprobation from God? and therefore must needs be acted by a
confederation and familiarity with some evil spirit. How many things have they
presumed to predict or foretell; which neither divine wisdom is pleased to
reveal; neither is it ordinarily for humane reason, or art to find out; but
must only be done by a demoniacall sagacity, or suggestion? what sounds, and
syllables, and words, and sentences do they murmr, or pronounce; and that to
the very inanimates; whom words can in no wise effect or move: or else are so
barbarous and insignificant, as that (if they were uttered to the intelligent)
they cannot conceive them, their extent, or use. Now by whose invention is it,
that such words should be most operative in magic art; that are operative upon
no understanding? How many rites, solemnities, ceremonies, preparations do
they use, which have naturally no force or virtue to the producing of the
effect; not yet can any way prepare the matter to the receiving thereof? What
sacrifices, immolations, consecrations, prostrations, adorations, invocations,
execrations, imprecations, attestations, comminations, exorcisms, adjurations.
etc. And none of all these commanded by God; and therefore not done to him: how
easy is it then to suspect, by whom all these are suggested, and for whom they
are intended?

3. Whether if be (in Magic, and Astrology) that the art has power over the
heavenly bodies: or the heavenly bodies power over the art? not the first
because for the Art to have power over the heavenly bodies (so as to stop, or
turn the course of the stars; or by odes, and incantations to fetch down the
moon from her orb. as the old Magicians have boasted) this is beyond the power
of a Devil, or an Angel: and were not only against the particular order of
nature, but would utterly confound the whole course of it. And (by
conjurations, or confections) so to prepare the matter, as to allure, or force
down influences; and to make it (by art) capable, and sufficient both to
receive, and retain them: this were to mingle heaven, and earth; to subjugate
the superior bodies, to their inferiors; to prefer accidents, to substances;
and turn the whole universe upside down. Not the second; for not only the
speculations; but also the practicks of their art (a many of them) are merely
intellectual, rational, arbitrary: over which the stars and planets can have
no power. The stars are corporal things, arts or sciences are mental: how
come these then to impress, and impose upon one another? All power is from
action; all action is from forms; all forms are either natural, or
artificial: now by what third kind of form do the stars, and the Art, work
one upon another? And how agree their proper forms to act upon a third subject?
How can the stars, or the Art (in introducing forms and producing effects) work
either naturally, by art; or artificially, by nature? Can a natural form give
principles of life, and motion, to an artificial matter: or an artificial, to
a natural matter? which way then will they have these two to conspire, or
consent, either for the operating between themselves; or upon a third?

4 Whether that power which Magicians, Necromancers, conjurers, inchanters
insultingly boast of, against Devils, and evil spirits, by way of coaction and
compulsion: be not indeed by way of invocation, and subjection? For though
Christ, and his Apostles subdued Devils; and ejected them by a divine, and
extraordinary power: but as for mere men, and the vilest of men, since God has
denied them the singular gift; who has taught them the trivial art of acting
over, or commanding evil spirits? Or have they taken it upon themselves (as
did the Jewish Exorcists Acts 19.3.) and is not indeed all their power and
authority of the same force, as was theirs? But instead of preaching to such,
let me first reason with them. Is it credible, that a mortal man should be
able to bind an immortal Spirit? and bind him by a word, a sound a syllable, a
character? and these insignificant, and no virtue of Gods promise in them? Can
these men do that to the Devil, which he cannot do to them: compel him to
do good, or evil? If they can compel him to do the thing that good is; then
are they able to do as much as God himself does: and to compel him to do
evil, that they need not, he is always as ready to do that, as they. Devils
are above the order, and power of sensible things: how then should they be
sufficient to move them, either by way of allurement, or constraint? If the
Devil do at any time work with man, he will not do it gratis, or freely;
unless it be upon his own errands, and to his own ends; for he hates mankind,
and their indifferent commerce. And therefore since he will not do it
voluntarily, and cannot be compelled; if he acts at all, it must either be upon
a temptation of his own, or else upon a confederation of theirs. And if he be
enjoined to obey by covenant or compact, then is not the malefice as much as
confessed? Reason and experience prove, that the Devil cannot be forced to stand
to his own promises: how much less then to any man's precept, or command? And
therefore if the Devil appear at the provocation, recede at the commination,
answer at the call, and obey at the command of a Necromancer; what
dissimulation of obedience is there on both sides? One secretly imploring, and
outwardly injoyning: the other outwardly observing, but inwardly inslaving. For
it is not they that bind the Devil; but the Devil that binds them to
obedience. Only he seems to be enforced to do theirs; that so he may make them
willing to do his will. Or that his feigned constraint might either the more
excuse him; or else set them the more without excuse both before God, and men;
what command or inforcement is that, which is done not only to others injury
but oft-times to the actors own hurt? especially if he be doubting, and have
not a strong faith, and observe not all the circumstances of adjuring; which
shows all the force (on one part, or other) to be only in a pactionall
artifice. The main thing that the Astrologicall Magicians, Necromancers,
conjurers, and inchanters pretend, is, that they can stand without his chain,
and yet bring him (will he, nill he) within their circle: and all by virtue of
the celestial orbs; only calling, and urging him under certain aspects,
conjunctions, constellations. But alas! these cannot impress, or impose upon
him (neither of themselves, nor by accident; neither directly, nor indirectly)
he being a mere spiritual substance, and formally united to no body. If
therefore he be observant upon such terms, it is to indulge a superstitious
faith, and persuasion of the virtue of such things, and efficacy of such an
art, besides, above, against the word of God. And he obeys now, not as
necessitated thereby, as by causes; but yielding thereto, as unto Signs. Signs
indeed of a compact, or confederation. And in that regard, seems very
observantially to submit, not only to stars, and Planetary constellations: but
to plants, herbs, stones, metals, circles, odes, verses, words, sounds,
characters, figures, fabrications, confections; and indeed to any rites or
ceremonies whatsoever, used as seals to such an intent. Otherwise, was it not
for the covenant on the one part, there would (notwithstanding all the art, and
authority) be but little performance on the the other. Having thus disputed with,
now let me preach to my magical Dominator; who by virtue of the spirit of the
world (not of the Lord) and by virtue of the spirits in the Planets (not of
him, that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars, Revel. 3.1.)
presumes that he has thus got the Devil in a string, and can make him bow at
a beck. Job. 41.1, etc.
Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which
thou let down? Can thou put an hook into his nose? and bore his jaw
through with a thorn? Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak
soft words unto thee? Will he make a covenant with thee? will thou take him for
a servant for ever? Will thou play with him as with a bird? will thou bind him
for thy maidens? Shall thy companions make a banquet of him? shall they part
him among the Merchants? Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his
head with fish-spears? Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle: do no
more. I hope he is not ignorant that the allegory is very apt for his own
application.

5. Whether Magicians and Astrologers be not only obnoxious, or liable to; but
noxious, or guilty of a diabolical compact, and commerce (not only implicit
but explicit,) As pretending to false science, propounding false grounds,
urging false causes, using false means, exhibiting false circumstances,
practicing false arts, provoking false affections, and intending false ends:
and especially, seeking, and teaching to supply the defect, or failing of all
these, by a false, and superstitious faith? A faith that is not in the things
of faith; and therefore cannot be divine. A faith that in the things of reason,
denis, and exclaims against the demonstration of reason; and therefore cannot
be humane. Must not the effect of such a faith be superstitious: and the event
prestigious? Moreover what proneness has here been confessed? what properties of
a diabolical covenant have been found? Besides a vanity, and superstition of
faith; likewise of observation, imagination, affectation, investigation,
invocation, adjuration, temptation. Signs empty, and delusory; Feats juggling
and prestigious; wonders wrought without the command, and approof of God;
creatures abused contrary to their nature, and institution; art pretended
without any true principles; words invented, and muttered, and they barbarous,
insignificant, false, absurd, apocryphal; yea though Canonical and sacred,
yet applied to such acts and ends, for which they were never ordained;
admirable efficacy attributed to syllables, sounds, numbers, rites,
solemnities, ceremonies, circumstances, of time, place, and person;
Fabrications of images, statues, figures, characters, circles, rings, seals,
etc. Confections of herbs, minerals, waters, oils, juyces, spirits, etc. acting
and effecting at an improportionate distance, and without convenient means;
spectrous Phantasmes, or apparitions, to affright men into a credulity;
ludibrious pranks, only to make sport, and so feed man's curiosity; and divining
predictions (of things, lost, absent, future) without either calling, or cause.

6. Whether Magical feats be wrought by things corporeal, or spiritual? Not
by things corporeal, because of improportionate matter, form, cause, effect,
means, instruments, distance, etc. How can a body work upon a body, to make it
sign, and signify things hidden, lost, absent, future? to make a dead body
walk, speak, etc. To make a living body walk invisible, transform its proper
shape, etc. And if by things spiritual; then whether by spirits good, or bad?
Not by the good (neither of Angels, nor men) for where is the true and good
cause, Minister, means, object, and end of Magical operation? Nay which of all
these is not evil?

7. Is it not the known property of God, to know things future absolutely, and
exactly? Wherefore then did the Devil arrogate to himself divination; but in
an emulation of Divinity? Now whether of these two do the Diviners imitate?
God, or the Devil? It cannot be God; because they have no command to imitate
him, in these his powerful properties; no promise upon the imitation. It must
be the Devil then; and to imitate him, must needs be maleficall. And they may
imitate him many ways: for he has used himself to divination, by spirits, by
men, by living men, by dead men, by the celestial bodies, by the elements, by
things natural, by things artificial; yea and by things sacred and religious:
and may not they then be like him in all these?

8. How easy is it for the Devil to predict those things which he intends to
act himself? As suppose he intends (by Gods permission) to practice the
sickness, death, destruction of man, or Beast: is it not easy for him to
suggest such his intention to his instruments, and Ministers; and so make them
to predict the same? Yea though it be done from him; is it not easy for him,
and them, to pretend it from some other cause: albeit abused besides the
natural end thereof? Is it a matter of much artifice, for veneficks, or
witches to forespeak their own purposed and labored malefice? How readily may
he presage another death, or ruin; that has him in his own power, and so has
already determined that such a day it shall be done. In like manner, how many
have perished according to wizzardly predictions: and that only because of
wizzardly purposes, and perpetrations? And therefore it may (not unjustly) be
doubted, whether many of those prognosticated evil fates, and fortunes,
against Princes, Magistrates, Ministers, and other Christians (especialy such
as opposed them in their fatidicall way) were not (besides the Astrologicall
speculation) practiced by goeticall Magic as by charms, curses, poisons,
treachery, violence; or by making maleficall images, pictures, figures,
constellated under the ascension of that man, whom they would maliciously
destroy, or prejudice. And why may not this be justly suspected of them; since
it is a thing not only of their own practicing, but of their teaching? And it
being so, how can they themselves deny? and what understanding man would not
pronounce upon them, for the most arrant inchanters, sorcerers, veneficks,
maleficks, wizzards, and witches in the world?

9. Whether there may not be an effascination, or bewitching, by inspecting the
stars; as by imagination, by breathing on, by looking on, by touching, by
fabricating of images, etc. We know none of these acts are malevolent, or
maleficall in their own nature: but that any one of these, as well as another,
may be abused to sorcery, and witchcraft, through a Satanicall stipulation, or
suffrage, who can deny?

10. What practice of sorcery, or malefice, more superstitious, than the
fabricating of Astrologicall, and of magical images, pictures, statues,
figures, etc. For as a tacit compact has been suspected, as touching the
Astrologicall: so has an express one been concluded, and confessed, as
concerning the magical configurations. And what is the one, on the other of
these? but the making of an image, or figure, either of man, or beast; in gold,
silver, brass, copper, wax, wood, stone, clay; under such a conjunction, or
constellation; For the inviting, and alluring of Angels; for the expelling and
ejecting of Devils; for the procuring of love; for the provoking of hatred; for
the atchieving of victory; for the effecting of death; for the raising, or
allaying of storms, or tempests; for the causing or preventing of pestilencies;
for the driving away of Serpents, and vermin, etc. Now in such a compact, what
virtue or efficacy, besides that of a compact only? what similitude, or
resemblance, betwixt the figure of a round star, or Planet: and a monstrous
many-shap't, magical configuration? The virtue of the celestials are but
universal, and indeterminate as to the producing of this, or that effect:
neither, but by natural, and particular causes. And who will say that any such
particular figures are either causes, or natural? what preparation can there
be of such a matter; for the receiving, and retaining such constellatory
influences? And what such kind of efficacies can it have thereby for the
admitting of such effects? The heavenly bodies operate no way, but naturally:
these figures or fabrications, operate no way, but artificially (being the
artifices of humane invention, and used arbitrarily) how then should these
modify, and determine those? How come their vast influences to be restrained
only to such a figure, and that only for such operations? How come the stars
and Planets so to neglect the matter, and its disposition; and so to respect
the figure, and its composition; as accordingly to dart in their influences,
for the figures sake; let the matter be what it will? what virtue can there be
(for all the celestial influences) more than the matter is disposed unto? what
efficacy, or aptitude of an artificial form, more than accidental, and
isntrumental? what principles of life and action from artificial forms? Is
not the virtue of the matter still the same, although of diverse forms or
figures? why should artificial figures be more apt to receive the starry
influences, than are natural figures? In all such configurations, must not the
efficacy of the Stars rather attend, or depend upon the imagination and fancy
of the artist, or artificer: than either upon the matter, or form it self? why
should the inscription of characters, letters, words, numbers, make the figure,
or image more efficacious? why should not the constellated virtue last so long
as the substantial matter lasts: but only so long as the accidental form or
figure lasts? Seeing therefore there is neither virtue nor efficacy in such
fabrications, or figurations, from God, Angels, nature, art, stars, matter,
form, or figure: whence then (if an effect follow) must all the efficacy be,
but from the sign? the sign of a diabolical and maleficall contract,
Sacrament, suggestion, suffragation, operation, and delusion. Who can think
otherwise even of a material image, or figure that cannot be operative or
efficacious beyond its proper species, and form? how much more then of that,
which is only fantastical, painted, or engraven?

11. Whether of such kind of configuration, were not the Jewish Teraphim,
especially according to the Rabbinical use, and account? likewise the
Talismanical sculptures of the Persians, together with these French toys,
Gamalies; which (set this fabrication aside) are but the Games of Nature (as
our English word founds, aptest) or her apish and accidental sports, by
confusedly shadowing one kind of creature in another. And causing them to rise
and fall in their own mud, (like the imperfect animals in Nilus) without any
further hurt or help to the whole universe: save that men may consider, that
He, who made all things of nothing, can make any thing resemble every thing:
and that Christians might learn to bless their Creator for their more perfect
formation. But idle-witted and fantastical men, have fancied figures, and
faces, in stones, and roots (like as we have done of late on Tobacco-box lids)
and therewith have fraught their studies, as Papists have done their Sacraries
with Relics: or as women have decked their closets with shells. Neither is the
vanity all; but they have superstitiously, nay, and forcerously made these
umbrages of creatures, to be the tutilaries of Kingdoms, Nations, Countries,
Cities, persons, from devils, thunders, tempests, shipwracks, pestilences,
poisons, serpents, vermin; and who knows what?

12. Whether a diabolical compact, and familiarity may not justly be there
suspected, where praestigious things are apparent, and yet miracles are denied,
the Law affords no precept, the Gospel has made no promise, Nature has no
power, Art has no principles, the means have no warrant, and the end has no
profit; no profit neither to Church, nor Commonwealth?

13. What is the difference betwixt those that call themselves Magicians,
Mathematicians, Astrologers, Prognosticators, Diviners: and those that are
called Soothsayers, Necromancers, Conjurers, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Wizzards,
and Witches? Is this all the difference, that the one is guilty of a compact or
covenant: the other not? Why there is an implicit covenant, as well as an
explicit; and one leading to the other: and by how many of both parties has
even an explicit covenant been confessed? Or that one is arted, the other
unlearned? What good of an art, without a gift? the more learned in an evil
art, the more to be abhorred. Let them both see to it, whether the main of
their learning be not of a delusive suggestion, rather then of a diligent
acquisition. Or that one is imperious over the Devil, whereas the other is his
supplyant? The Devil smiles alike at the pride, and at the humility of a
superstition. And can no more be enjoined then he can be entreated. And will
yield that either of them shall openly command, so they will but secretly
implore. Or that the one operates by the celestial, the other by terrestrial
imps? Has not idolatry, and superstition, (and why not witchcraft?) been
committed by things in Heaven, as well as things on earth? Me thinks a Magician
operates by the baser imp of the two. For a Witch works by a living dog, cat,
mouse, rat, etc. But he by a dead one, configured, constellated, written,
painted, engraven. Or that Witches are for the most part female, but they male?
Oh! the nobler sex abusing it self, is always the viler. Or that Witches are
poor, and envious, to the infesting of women, children, cattle, etc? How proud
are they then that dare do the like to Nations, Kingdoms, Princes, Magistrates?
etc. Or that Witches are violent and revengeful in their practices; but
Magicians are pleasant and merry in their pranks? Certainly, it is good neither
to play with Saints nor Devils; such their sports, are Satan's earnest. Does not
the one thus act with more reluctance, and the other with more complacency? For
such passions may have more of enforcement; and such pleasures more of assent.

14. Whether the appellations of Magicians, Mathematicians, Astrologers,
Genethliaks, Planetarians (to say nothing of the old Chaldeans, Egyptians,
Gazarens, Samanaeans, Hierophants, Beachmans, Gymnosophists, Thessalians,
Hetrurians, the Cabalistical Rabbis, the Greek Arithmeticks, the Roman
Augurizers, the French Druids, the English Bards, etc.) as also Necromancers,
Conjurers, Inchanters, Charmers, Wizzards, Witches, Sorcerers, Soothsayers,
Sophisters, Impostors, Circulators, loculators, Juglers, Gypsies,
Physiognomists, Fortunetellers, Prognosticators, Praedictors, Diviners, etc. be
not terms of a promiscuous usage? And whether the community of words, argue not
some community of things? Nay have not the holy Scriptures condemned them,
under these terms or names indifferently? Do not the Fathers, Counsels,
Schoolmen, Casuists, Divines, Historians, and Poets thus speak of them
indiscriminately? Have not the Ecclesiastical, Imperial, Provincial, Municipal
Laws, (under these mixed notions, and nominations) decreed, and doomed them
alike to penalty?

15. Why the Devil chooses to have, both his most solemn confederation; as also
the most stupendous operations, that follow thereupon, to be made and done
under certain constellations? Is it not because he would have the Stars
worshipped for Gods; who himself is worshipped in any thing that is not God? Or
that he would thus have all the malefice devolved upon heavenly bodies? For
what mischief he is permitted to do upon earth, he would make men believe it
comes from Heaven. Or indeed, that he would thus delude the Sorcerers
themselves; in persuading them, that what they do, they do not by fraud, but by
an innocent, nay, an exquisite Planetary Art? For how many rank wharsicks have
labored to excuse their execrable Arts, by accusing the malefick Stars?

16. How many Magicians, Astrologers, and Planetary Prognosticators, have had
their Paredrials, their Assessors, and Obsessors; their Consiliaries, and
Auxiliaries; their Martinists, Maisterels, and Ministrels; their Imps, and
Familiars, as well as other Witches? And whether have not they made the same
use, and employment of them, as the other have done?

17. Whether the Artists (in Magic and Astrology) denying, exclaiming, and
cautioning against Idolatry, Superstition, Sorcery, Witchcraft, be sufficient
to purge their Art, and quit themselves of the same? When as their very
speculations are expressly coinquinated with much in all these: and their
practices palpably guilty of much more; and that to all men's judgments, but
theirs that use them. Therefore rather, whether are not their intermingled
negations, and affirmations, disclaimings, and acclaimings, vowings, and
disavowings, cautions, and concessions, distinctions, and confusions, an
Argument of a consciousnesse, or conviction of something (in this kind) to be
greatly suspected, and censured?

18. How many of them that have pretended nothing but nature, and natural
causes; and boasted Art altogether, and principles of mysterious Art: yet when
the mystery of delusion, and iniquity, has been discovered; and themselves
straightly examined by prudent and careful Magistrates, or the day of their
disastrous and unfortunate ends or execution, approaching: I say, how many of
them have then confessed, and cried out upon compacts, confederacies, Devils,
delusions perdition, damnation?

19. Whether the superstitions of Sorcery and Witchcraft be not taught and
promoted, countenanced, and encouraged, by the Printing, and permitting such
multitudes of Magical books? Especially the translating of them (by way of
Vindication, and Apology) into the vulgar tongue?

20. Whether such books may be read? (unless with an inimical Science, not a
social Conscience; not with an invitatory operation, but an expugnatory
refutation.) And whether their signs and ceremonies may be used or assented to
by any (either ignorantly or affectedly) without great danger of being seduced,
and infected; if not with the Sorcery, yet with the superstition of the Art?
Let a man but well examine himself, and observe others; and he needs no
Oedipus: his own observation and experiment will soon teach him to resolve the
case.

CHAP. XX. From the Ominatings of vain observation.
1. WHether the superstition of vain observation, and the more superstitious
ominations thereupon; have not been occasioned, and increased, by the
prognostications, predictions, and divinations, of Magic, and Astrology? For
(besides the suggestions of Satan himself) where is the source, and root of all
such vanity, and superstition (at least the imitation, and example) to be
found: save in those Arts and speculations, that teach to observe creatures,
images, figures, signs, and accidents, for constellational; and (as they call
them) second stars: and so to ominate, and presage upon them; either as
touching themselves or others? As namely, to observe days, for lucky, or
unlucky; either to travail, sail, fight, build, marry, plant, sow, buy, sell,
or begin any business in; to bode good or bad luck, fortune, success, from
the rising up on the right, or left side; from lifting the left leg over the
threshold, at first going out of doors. From putting on the hose uneven or a
cross, and the shoe upon the wrong foot. Item, The Band standing awry, the
going abroad without his girdle on, the bursting of the shoe latchet, the
tingling of the ear, the itching of the eye, the glowing of the cheek, the
bleeding of the nose, the stammering in the beginning of a speech, the
stumbling as first going about an enterprise; the meeting a beggar, or a Priest
the first in a morning, the meeting of a Virgin or a Harlot first; the running
in of a child betwixt two friends, the justling one another at unawares, one
treading upon another toes, to meet one fasting that is lame or defective in
any member, to wash in the same water after another, to be over merry on a
sudden, to be given to sighing, and know no cause why; from the dreaming of
gold, silver, eggs, gardens, weddings, dead men, dung, etc. From the snorting
in sleep, from the sneezing at meat, the spilling of the wine, the overturning
of the salt, the dogs howling, the cats licking themselves, the swine grunting,
the cocks crowing unseasonably, the pyes chattering about the house, the owls
scritching, the swallows falling down the chymney, the crickets chirping behind
the chimney stock; or creeping upon the foot-pace. A hare crossing the way, a
crow lighting on the right hand, or on the left. To collect, or predict men's
manners, and fortunes by their names, or the Anagram upon the name, or the
allusion to the name, or the numbers in the name, etc. Who can reckon up all
the vain observations, and superstitious ominations of several Nations,
persons, sexes, ages, conditions, and occupations of men? And what hope is
there it should be otherwise; while such artifices and practices are tolerated,
which teach to observe them from signal constellations, and Magical operations?

2. Whether the vain observation of vain dreams, proceed not from the vain
dream, and fantastical of the celestial influences upon the fantastic
spirit? For do they not say, That as the celestial influxes upon corporal
matter produce diverse forms: so from the same influxes upon the fantastical
power, which is organical, phantasms are impressed, by a celestial
disposition, consentaneous to the producing of any effect, especially in
dreams; because the mind is then more freed from corporeal, and external
cares, or troubles; and so more freely receives those divine influxes? Whence
it comes to pass that many things are made known to sleeping men, in dreams,
which are hid to the waking. And if this be their chief reason, whereby they
would reconcile an opinion of truth to Dreams, why are they not agreed (among
themselves) of the causes, yea of the sydereal causes of them? One will have
the Intelligence that moves the Moon to cause them, by the means of its light,
whereby men's fantasies are irradiated, while they sleep. Others refer them to
the influxes of the superiors, yet by the means of certain species, whereby
they continually flow from Heaven. Another will have them to depend upon the
powers of the soul, the influxes of the Heavens, together with certain images,
or resemblances, whether of fantasy or configuration. Others will have them
wholly caused by their constellations And if they would bring in the Devil
among the rest (as some of them have confessed he is not to be kept out) they
should find him to be the greatest cause of all: especially of the vain
observation of them, and superstitious omination upon them. Who will deny, that
there may be some observation of some dreams, and some interpretation made upon
them, as touching either the health, or sickness of the body, the virtuous or
vicious inclinations and affections of the mind; yea, and (though rarely and
extraordinarily) for the caution, and encouragement, as touching some special
actions and events? But I demand, of Magical and Astrological men: not so much
whether there be one common rule to all, for the interpretation of dreams, As
whether this (taught by themselves) be either a second cause of dreams, or a
safe rule to interpret them? viz. That dreams are more efficacious, when the
Moon over-runs that sign, which was in the ninth number of the Nativity, or
revolution of that year; or in the ninth sign, from the sign of perfection.
For it is a most true and certain divination; neither does it proceed from
nature, or humane arts, but from purified minds, by divine inspiration. They
shall do well, not only (by true reason) to resolve us fully, of the truth
they speak: but also (in good sense) of the terms, they speak withal.

3. Whether the vain observations, and superstitious, nay ridiculous ominations
of Physiognomie, had ever been so vulgarly taken up, but by reason of Magic,
and Astrology? For without Physiognomy celestial; to what purpose is
Physiognomy terrestrial? Do they not gather the Physiognomie of Elements, from
stars, and starry influences or dispositions? And the physiognomy of Minerals,
Gemmes, and Stones; from starry signatures, and figures? The Physiognomie of
Herbs, and Plants, from the stars, and Planets? And from their natures and
influences; yea, from their signatures, and figure; and so conclude their
virtues of sympathy, and antipathie, to be accordingly? The Physiognomie of
Beasts, Birds, Fishes; still from starry signatures, and dispositions? Yea, and
the Physiognomie of Man, his powers, and parts, from starry temperaments, and
planetary inclinations? Nay, do they not call these kinds of impression, second
stars: and so prefer them in their Physiognomical ominating, or divining; and
thus, not conjecturing only (upon men's manners, and fortunes) but defining?
Herereupon (that I may proceed in their own order) are subtly obtruded upon
the simple world these particular observations, and ominations; so vain,
superstitious, ridiculous; even to the judgment of the Metoposcopists
themselves. 1. Obs. That a great head is an omen, or a sign of a sluggish Fool;
a little head, of a subtle knave; a middle head, of a liberal wit, a
roundhead, of a senseless irrational fellow; a sharp head, of an impudent
sot, etc. 2. Obs. That an hard hair signs, or ominates one valiant; and a soft
hair, effeminate; and a thin hair, luxurious; and a thick hair, churlish; and a
curled hair, covetous; and a plain hair, prodigal; and a white hair, timorous;
and a black hair, violent; and a yellow hair, ingenious; and a red hair,
treacherous. 3. Obs. That a great face signs or ominates an epicure; and a
little face, a flatterer; a fat face, a sluggard; a lean face, one envious; a
long face, injurious; a broad face, litigious; a round face, light; a smooth
face, deceitful; a wrinckled face, distrustful; a red face, riotous; and a pale
face, malignant. 4. Obs. That a broad forehead signs or marks a man stupid; a
little forehead, unconstant; an high forehead pertinacious, a low forehead,
lascivious; a square forehead, bold; a round forehead, loud; a wrinckled
forehead, thoughtful; and a smooth forehead, jocond. 5. Obs. That great eyes
portend, or signify shameless; and little eyes, covetous; gray eyes, fearful;
yellowish eyes, fierce; bluish eyes, pusillanimous; greenish eyes, stout;
black eyes, crafty; red eyes, cruel; brown eyes, impudent; spotted eyes,
perfidious; rolling eyes, angry, and lustful; twinkling eyes, irresolute; set
eyes, stupid; akewed eyes, envious; purblind eyes, perverse prominent, or
goggling eyes, simple; and hollow eyes, dissembling. 6. Obs. That the
eyebrows or lids, if they hang down, mark or note one intemperate; if thick,
shameless; if broad, foolish; if little, crafty; if they bend toward the
nose, austere and rigid; if to the temples, jeering, and dissembling; if long,
arrogant; if thin, silly. 7. Obs. That great ears, presage or note a fool:
and little ears, a knave; and long ears, a babbler; and hanging ears, a
clown; and prick ears, a medler; and red ears, shamefast; and plain ears,
rude; and soft ears, easy; and hard ears, inexorable. 8. Obs. That a very
great nose is a mark or figure of a man that is given to admire himself, and
deride all others; a very little nose, signs a man mutable; a long nose, bold;
a strait nose babbling; a crooked nose, crooked conditions; a thick nose,
impudent; a flat nose, pretending; a bottle nose, dull; a hook nose,
dissembling; a broad nose, churlish; a sharp nose, teasty; a round nose,
vainglorious; and a hawk nose, venereous; and a red nose, a lover of strong
drink. 9. Obs. That thick cheeks betoken a vain trifler; and fleshy cheeks, a
sound eater; and red cheeks, a notorious drunkard; and thin cheeks, a false
treacher; and round cheeks, a wanton deluder; and smooth cheeks, an easy
nature; and hairy cheeks, an harsh humor. 10. Obs. That thick lips forespeak
a foolish talker; and thin lips, a cunning pretender; a prominent upper lip, an
injurious slanderer; and a prominent under lip, a vain boaster; an hare lip, a
cunning cheater; a pouting lip, a peevish scold; a purse lip, a scraping sneak;
and a bladder lip, a nasty slut. 11. Obs. That a great mouth is an omen, or
presage of one manly or warlike; a little mouth, of one effeminate, or wanton;
a pouch mouth, of a great talker; a purse mouth, of a great liar; a wide mouth,
of a great eater; a narrow and contracted mouth, of a great envyer. 12. Obs
That a little chin signs one envious; and a short chin, perfidious; and a long
chin, loquacious; and a round and smooth chin, muliebrious; a diffected, and
retorted chin, libidinous; and a square and hairy chin, valorous. 13. Obs. That
if the teeth be long, sharp, thick, thin, broad, narrow, fast, loose; they
sign long lived, or short-lived; and mixtly, gluttonous, audacious, lying,
suspicious, envious, versatile, etc. 14. Obs. That a long tongue speaks a man
garrulous; a short tongue, dumpish; a broad tongue, liquorish; a narrow tongue,
querulous; a quick and voluble tongue, rash, and hasty; a slow and drawling
tongue, dull, and reserved; a stuttering or stammering tongue, ignorant, or but
half witted. 15. Obs. That as the voices of men are great or small, high, or
low, quick, or slow: so are they to be argued for angry, or gentle; true, or
false; audacious, or timorous; modest, or impudent, etc. 16. Obs. That to be
facile of speech, notes levity; and to be difficult of speech, morosity; short
speech, notes passion; and long speech, affectation; to speak through the
teeth, notes folly, and fantasticknesse; and through the nose, lying, and
dissimulation. 17. Obs. That a long and lean neck, notes one for talkative,
foolish, fearful; a short neck and fat, for rude, and voracious; a thick fleshy
neck, for angry, and ireful; an hard neck, for indocible; a fat neck, for
docible; a stiff neck and immovable, for pertinacious; a straight neck, for
proud and contumacious; a crooked or wry neck, for penurious and malignant; a
neck leaning to the right hand, for shamefast; to the left hand, for
shameless. 18. Obs. That a sharp and narrow throat signs a man light, and
loquacious, a wide throat, voracious, or greedy; the bunch upon the throat, if
it be outwardly prominent, signs a man malepert; if it be inwardly contracted,
it signs him difficult, and troublesome. 19. Obs. That a great breast is
marking and figuring a man strong, and magnanimous; a little breast weak and
pusillanimous; a broad breast, wise and honest; a narrow breast, witty and
subtle; a fleshy breast, timorous, and lazy; an hairy breast, libidinous; a
smooth, effeminate; an out breast, unconstant; an hollow breast, deceitful; a
red breast ireful; swagging breasts, drunken, and whorish. 20 Obs. That a great
belly and fleshy, shows one gluttonous, drunken, lustful, proud; an hard belly,
rude and gluttonous; a soft belly, honest and magnanimous: a mean belly,
prudent and ingenious; an hairy belly, lustful, light, instable. 21. Obs. That
strong ribs sign manly; weak ribs, womanish; slender and short ribs,
pusillanimous, malignant, voracious; puffed and swollen ribs, loquacious, and
nugatious; fat ribs, sottish; lean ribs, wily. 22. Obs. That a great back is a
sign of a man strong and stout, and a little back, of one wretched, and
timorous; a lean back witty: a fat back, lazy; an hairy back, rigid; a bunch
back, malicious. 23. Obs. That broad shoulders sign valiant; narrow shoulders,
illiberal; high, or out shoulders, arrogant; cromp shoulders, malicious. 24.
Obs. That long arms betoken a man ambitious; short arms, malevolous; brawny
arms, dull; and veiny arms, venereous. 25. Obs. That short thighs sign
envious; and hairy thighs lustful; and lean thighs, peevish; and thick
thighs, sluggish. 26. Obs. That loose kneed, signifies lascivious, and baker
kneed, effeminate. 27. Obs. That fat and fleshy hips sign mulierous; lean and
lank hips, malignant. 28. Obs. That the spindle legd, are fearful; hairy
legged, lustful; stump legged, servile; bow-legg'd, various. 29. Obs. That the
long footed, are fraudulent; and short footed, sudden; and splay footed, silly;
club footed, naughty. 30. Obs. That long and lean toes, sign rude, and unwise;
short and thick toes, rash, and heady; toes that clinch together, sign
covetous and luxurious; toes that start asunder, sign light, and loquacious.
Oh! Is not this a rare and profound art (fit for none but Gypsies and Juglers
to profess) that teaches to judge of men as men judge of horses; by their
shape, and making: or as country swayns estimate their cattle; by their horn,
and hide, and hoof?

4. As Metoposcopie, or the inspecting of the front, or forehead; (together
with other parts of Physiognomie) boasts it self for the Scholar: so whether
Chiremancy, or Palmestry; (the inspecting of the hand, or palm) may not be
accounted for a mistress, in observating, and ominating Magic, and
Astrology? Why distinguish they betwixt Chiromancy Physical, and Astrological?
As it physical conjectures were not enough; there must also be Astrological
divination. And to this purpose; what fictitious appellations of Minutes and
Lines to be reckoned according to the number; and explained according to the
nature of the Planets? What a Chyroscopical horoscope, or a Planetarian Manual,
of juggling, legerdemain, and superstitious imposture? From the Magical
characters of the heavens, in the hand; what Astrological prognostications, or
ominations; not of corporal motions, and temper; and not only of civil
actions, and events; but even of spiritual affections, and manners? Is it by
the help of art, that they here probably conjecture? Nay, is it not by
diabolical instinct, that they here peremptorily vaticinate, or ominate of long
life, short life, marriage, single life, fortunity, infortunity, virtue, and
vice? Yet for all that, what is here that is not as vainly observed, and as
ridiculously ominated and portended; as in any other part of Physiognomie? As a
great thick hand signs one not only strong, but stout; a little slender hand,
one not only weak, but timorous; a long hand, and long fingers, betoken a man
not only apt for mechanical artifice, but liberally ingenious; but those short
on the contrary, note a fool, and fit for not hing: an hard brawny hand signs
dull, and rude; a soft hand witty, but effeminate: an hairy hand, luxurious;
long joints, sign generous; yet if they be thick withal, not so ingenious; the
often clapping and folding of the hands, note covetous; and their much moving
in speech, loquacious; an ambidexter is noted for ireful, crafty, injurious;
short and fat fingers, mark a man out for intemperate and silly; but long and
lean, for witty; if his fingers crook upward, that shows him liberal; if
downward, niggardly; the lines spreading at the bottom joint of the thumb,
sign contentious, the line above the middle of the thumb, if it meet round
about, portends a hanging destiny: many lines transverse upon the last joint of
the forefinger, note riches by heirdome: and right lines there, are a note of a
jovial nature: lines in the points of the middle finger (like a gridiron) note
a melancholy wit, and unhappy: if the sign on the little finger be
conspicuous, they note a good wit, and eloquent, but the contrary, if obscure:
equal lines upon the first joint of the ring finger, are marks of an happy wit;
long nails and crooked, sign one brutish, ravenous, unchaste: very short
nails, pale, and sharp, show him false, subtle, beguiling: and so round nails,
libidinous: but nails broad, plain, thin, white, and reddish, are the tokens of
a very good wit. I say no more, but could they respect the heart, as well as
the hand (and not the substance, but the qualities of it) they might learn to
speak the words of truth, and soberness.

5. Which way go the Physiognomists, Metoposcopists, and Chiromantists to work
(for all this observation, and omination of theirs) but either (as they
pretend) from the cause, to the effect. And how is that? but first judging and
pronouncing the man, or the member, to be Saturnine, Jovial, Martial, Solar,
Venereal, Mercurial, Lunar. Or else, from the effect, to the cause (as they
say) by collecting their horoscope from the habitude of the body? And thus what
do they? but trifle, and delude which way they please, by inspections,
observations, ominations, predictions of manners, and fortunes, to the great
dishonor of God, and reproach of Nature; were it not that their art is proved
to be an absurd imposture, both by reason, experience, virtue, and Grace. For
what can they say? but that passions, and affections may break forth, and show
themselves in the alterations of some outward parts. What then? Because they
may do so in some parts: will they therefore make all to be signifying, and
signing? Nay, and even in those parts, where those eruptions, or significations
are, it is but upon a present provocation: will they then make such
collections, and presagitions by them, as if they were habitually seated there?
But I am weary of these frivolous Artists, I will therefore only turn them over
to their own fautors, who tell them plainly, that it is not necessary, nor of
any rational consecution, that the condition, manners, and studies, and
institutes of man's nature (together with the propensions, and agitations of his
mind) should be accommodated to external marks: neither yet to be measured by
any signal lineaments of his body. Because a man may conceive, and agitate many
things inwardly in his mind: whereof there is not the least show or appearance
outwardly in his body. And because a man may be of an enormous body, and
distorted members: and nevertheless possess a mind excellent in all good
culture: and on the contrary, be of a decent and complete frame or shape, and
yet of manners ugly and illfavoured enough. And that there is not the least
reason, nor any rule of truth for these their conjectures, observations, and
ominations: neither are they agreed among themselves, about their own absurd
figments. And therefore it is to be suspected, that these nugacious kinds of
men do only dote through the instinct of the devil, drawing them from error
into superstition, and from that into infidelity.

6. Whether Augurizing, auspicating, and aruspicinating (and all such
heathenish observations, and ominations) were not founded upon Magic and
Astrology? For not only these descended from the Chaldeans, to the Greeks,
and from them to the Hetrurians: and from them, to the Latins. But there had
never been (very like) neither faith in, nor practice of any such, had not the
Artists taught, that there are certain lights of praesagition, descending from
the celestial bodies, upon all inferior creatures: as certain signs in their
motion, site, gesture, flight, voice, color, meat, etc. So that omination, or
divination may well be made from the similitude, and convenience betwixt them,
and the stars. For beasts, and birds, their parts and entrails, their flyings,
and cryings, etc. How can these (considered only in themselves) be causes of
future events? Yea, how can they be so much as signs? Unless they be taken as
effects of some other causes, that may cause, or sign future things. And what
can they be, but the celestial motions? And therefore they must prenuntiate
future events, in their conformity to the celestial bodies: and subjection to
the disposition of the stars. So that thus it is, that they are brought to
presage (besides out of a natural instinct, such things as may concern
themselves, as in storms, and showers) out of a preternatural and astral
disposition, such ominous accidents as may befall others. To have observed an
old Augur, seated on the top of his tower, the air being clear, and
cloudlesse, with his Lituus in his hand; quartering out the regions of the
heavens, etc. who would not have taken him to have been an Astrologer? And who
would not take our Astrologers to be Augurs, and Auspicinators; that can fancy
no more apt and comparable motion of the stars: then that the stars flit and
hover in the heavens, just as the birds fly and flutter in the air?

7. Whether the Cabalistical art, was not the tradition of Rabbinish Magicians
and Astrologers? And what a shame is it that Magicians themselves should tell
us, that although the art be old, yet the name and appellation, is but of later
invention, and not known, till imposed by, and among Christians? But it is
well, that they themselves will acknowledge it, to be a certain Theurgical
Magic, and nothing else but a mere rapsodie of superstition, a play of
allegories, and speculation of idle brains. And indeed, who can think otherwise
of it? When they teach, that he who is expert in this Cabalistical Magic of
names, numbers, letters, characters, symbols, figures, elements, lines, points,
accents, spirits, and other minute things, all significative of the profoundest
secrets: he shall foreknow, and foretell things future; have power over Angels,
and Devils, command whole nature, make all things obey him as he will; work
miracles, rule the heavens, make the Sun stand still, and go back; divide the
Sea, dry up Rivers: remove mountains, raise the dead, etc. and all this at his
own will, and with less then a word.

8. Whether the paganish Oracles were not founded upon Magic, and Astrology,
or by Magicians and Astrologers? And whether it be not confessed by them, that
they could not ominate, or give answer: because the stars made not way for them?

9. Whether the art, called the Art Notorie, had ever been so notorious, but
for Magic, and Astrology? A notorious art indeed: and worthy to be noted with
a black coal, or a piece of the blackest art, for all the white pretext; Which
is, to attain unto science, or knowledge (not only of things natural, and
moral, but spiritual, and divine) by inspection of certain figures, and
characters, and prolation of certain unknown words: yea and by some pact
(solemn, or secret) with the devil: not without the vain observations of
certain superstitious acts and ceremonies, in fasting, prayers, confessions,
humiliations, invocations, adorations: upon certain days of the new Moon, about
Sun rising: either in Churches, houses, barns, fields, or woods. And so start
upon a sudden (by some inspiration or insused suggestion of an evil spirit,
prompting the mouth to speak like a Parrot, but not enlightening the mind to
apprehend, or understand) a preacher, a teacher, an expounder, a prophesier,
predictor, wiseman, artist: and that without any study, labor, hearing,
reading, conference; or other ordinary way of acquisite learning. And so to
boast himself illuminated and instructed, like any Prophet, Apostle, or Angel
of God. And now (it is agreed among themselves) their Art shall no more be
called the Notorious (for in truth, they neither conceive what they say, while
they are uttering, nor remember it after they have uttered: nor are able to
give any reason of their faith or science, that is in them, or comes from them)
but the art Spiritual, the Angelical, yea the Pauline art. For they are now
gotten beyond Solomon's way of wisdom, and have already attained to revelation
(after an extatick and enthusiastic manner) not unlike, nay not unequal to
that of Paul himself, when he was wrapped into the third heavens. Of this
Diabolical, Magical, Necromantical, Sortilegious, Fanatical Art, or injection,
fame is common, as concerning a young man (at this day) in our neighboring
Country: which I but only intimate from the general report, as not being
particularly informed thereof. Only I would ask of our Magical Planetarians,
what is the reason that they are so furious for the rooting out of the
Ministry? Is it not because they would set up others in their stead, according
to this their own Art of Ordination?

10. Whether Alchymie (that enticing, yet nice harlot) had made so many Fools,
and Beggars, had she not clothed, or painted her self with such Astrological
phrases and Magical practices? But I let this Kitchen Magic, or Chimney
Astrology pass. The sweltring drudges: and smoaky scullions of it (if they may
not bring in new fuel to the fire) are soon taught (by their past observed
folly) to ominate their own late repentance. But if they will obstinately
persist, in hope to sell their smoke, let others beware, how they buy it too
dear.

11. Whether Pericepts, Amulets, Praefiseinals, Phylacteries, Niceteries,
Ligatures, Suspensions, Charms, and Spells, had ever been used, applied, or
carried about: but for Magic and Astrology? Their supposed efficacy (in
curing diseases, and preventing of perils) being taught from their fabrication,
configuration, and confection, under such and such sydereal aspects,
conjunctions, constellations?

12. Whether many of the fantastic errors, and opinions, concerning the coming
of Antichrist, of the thousand years, of the end of the world, and of the day
of judgment: have not at least been renovated, and promoted by Astrologers and
Magigicians? For these have been suspected by their friends (such is their
arted fury) for dropping into enthusiastical and fanatical prophecies and
predictions. And we know they have undertaken to determine the time of the
worlds durance; and to foretell the day of judgment from the stars: and were
they but well interrogated about the other two; surely their allseeing Art
would not sit out.

CHAP. XXI. From the singularity of Prophecy.
1. WHether, as it has been a great pretext of humane curiosity, so it has
not been a great defect of humane incuriousnesse; in not discerning divine
Prophecy; but confounding it promiscuously, and synonymously with other
profane names, and mysteries: As Divination, vaticination, praenotion,
omination, ariolation, praesagition, praediction, prognostication,
conjectation, etc? All which terms are either of a bad acceptance; or not
good, save only in a civil sense, and that but as touching some particulars
only, whereas Prophecy simply is always taken in the best Part: neither is
the act of prophesying; nor the appellation of a Prophet, attributed to any
(the whole Scriptures throughout) that are not called and approved of God
Unless it be so ironically, as that the context, yea and the very adjuncts set
forth a plain note of difference; that they are only so called from their own
presumption; or else from a popular repute.

2. Whether these sundry differences have not been observed concluded,
confessed, betwixt divine Prophecy and divination in all the names, and kinds.
viz. 1. Prophecy is from God, a gift inspired by the Holy Spirit: Divination is
from the Devil, a delusion suggested by an evil spirit. 2: Prophecy was never
but according to Gods Covenant; Divination is seldomwithout a pact, or covenant
with the Devil. 3. Prophecy is Gods consulting with the creature: Divination is
the creature consulting with the creature. or, one is a consulting with God,
and not with the creature: the other is a consulting with the creature, and not
with God. 4. Prophecy is first motioned, and freely offered by God: Divination
is temptingly, and sorcerously sought for (as was Balaams own way) and not
only provoked, but presumed also. 5. Prophecy has been concerning some
special persons, and their extraordinary actions: Divination (even the Magical,
and Astrological) is ordinary for all men, their manners, and fortunes. 6.
Prophecy has never been, but of matters weighty, and serious: Divination has
often been of things vain, and ludicrous. 7. Prophecy is of those things that
are necessary to be known: Divination (Magical and Astrological) is of those
things that are not necessary to be known. 8. Prophecy is of those things, that
are only known to God; and cannot be known to others, without Prophecy, or
Revelation: Divination is either of those things, that cannot be known by
divination; or else of those, that may be known without it. 9. Prophecy is of
things true, certain, infallible; because immediately from God, the first
cause: Dvination is of things false, and uncertain, and but probable at most;
because either from the Devil, or but from the creatures, and second causes.
10. Prophecy considers things in God, and therefore is immovable: Divination
considers things in the creature, and therefore must be mutable. 11. No Prophet
ever made himself the author of his own Prophecy; but Thus says the Lord, etc.
But the Devil, and Diviners arrogate their predictions to themselves, and to
the absoluteness of their own Art. 12. The gift of Prophecy ceased in the act:
But Divination they will have to remain still in the Art. 13. Prophecy is not a
permanent habit, but a transient act, that the prophets themselves might know
and confess, that they had it not but by gift, and occasionally according to
Gods good pleasure ( for the prophecy came not at any time by the will of man.
2 Pet. 1.21.) but Divination, or Astrological prediction is a stated Art (as
they say) and they may not only study it, but practice it at their own wills
and pleasures. 14. It is not for every Prophet to know every thing that is
prophecyable: But (for so they pretend) it is for any prognosticator, to know
any thing that is prognosticable. 15. Prophets, besides the Spirit of Prophecy,
may have the instincts of their own spirits, which might sometimes deceive
them: But Diviners, and Prognosticators, besides the instinct of their own
spirit, are obnoxious to Satanical delusion; whereby they often both are
deceived, and do deceive. 16. Prophecy is true in the ground, although it may
fail in the effect; because the principle thereof is the prime verity:
Divination, though it take effect, yet is it false; both because of falsity in
the author, and ground, and means, and end. 17. The prevention of things
prophesied, argues no falsehood, or defect in Prophecy; because God may reveal
some things to his Prophets, as in their second causes, which may be impedited;
and some things might be prophesyed conditionally, and with intent that they
might be prevented; however to be referred to Gods good and wise dispensation;
yea and the Prophets themselves were instructed, and enabled to prophecy as
well of their prevention, as of their consecution: But who can say so much of
Divination? 18. God may (in mercy) suffer a true Prophecy to be frustrated:
and (in judgment) may permit a false divination to take effect. 19. The
Prophets were sometimes prevented, as touching their predictions of evils, and
judgments: But the diviners and false prophets were frustrated in their
predictions of blessings, and good things. 20. The Prophets foretold Gods
judgments with grief and condoling; wishing that they might rather be
accounted for false Prophets then that such heavy things should befall Gods
people transgressing: the Diviners, and Prognosticators, glory to presage
confusion to Nations, Kingdoms, Churches, Christians; and are very little
touched with the destruction of all or any; so their predictions may take
place. 21. That Prophecy has been prevented, or failed in effect, was merely
because of the liberty of Gods will: but Divination, or Astrological
prediction, may be defeated even by the liberty of man's will alone. 22.
Prophecy, enlightens the understanding, and perfects it: so does not
Divination; but only (after a confused manner) alters the imagination. 23. In
Prophecy, it is the intellect that moves the fantasy: but in Divination, it
is the fantasy that moves the intellect. For Prophecy illuminates
immediately, beginning at the mind and heart: which divination cannot do;
because it begins at the senses, and so to the fantasy, to the imagination.
So that a Prophet understands his own Prophecy: so does not a diviner his own
divination. 24. Ecstasies of Prophets did not so abalienate their minds, as
that they apprehended not what they did, or said: as indeed it is in the
dementating furies of divination. For theirs was only but an abstraction of
the mind from outward, sensible, and terrene things: not a distraction of it
within it self; as in these. 25. The Prophets mingled godly and wise
instructions, together with their Predictions; that they might not seem to
neglect the present, by prying into the future: both which, are both the
sloth, and business of all prognosticating predictors. 26. Prophesies serve
to instruct all ages: divinations, instead of instructing, have only proved to
distract present times, and that is all. 27. The gift or grace of Prophecy was
given for the things of Faith, and true worship: Divination has only been
used to seduce from both. 28. Prophecy was inspired by God, for the prevention
of Idolatry, superstition, sorcery: Divination has been suggested by the
devil, as an occasion, and promotion of them all. 29. All things are subject to
prophetical illumination; as things past, present, and to come, things
necessary, contingent, casual; things natural, supernatural, spiritual; things
intellectual, rational, arbitrary; things moral, religious, temporal, and
eternal: so are they not to divination, or Astrological prediction. 30.
Prophecy has been of the very thoughts of the heart themselves; because
immediately from God, who knows the heart: but Divination can discern of no
thoughts simply, as they are in the intellect; neither of affections, as they
are merely in the will: but only guesses at them by certain external species,
signs, or effects. Yea, though they be thoughts of the devils own injecting,
yet he discerns not their affirmation, or negation ( sc. their complacency, or
reluctance) in the immanent act of the understanding, or the will: save only
as transeunt, or breaking forth externally by certain signs and symptoms of
passions, and affections. 31. Prophecy is then most high and admirable, when it
exceeds all humane reason: Divination, or any such kind of prediction, is then
most vile and abominable, when it is not subject to it. 32. The devil can
neither prophecy, nor make prophets: but the devil can both predict and make
predictors. 33. Prophecy, as it is not hereditary by nature: so neither is it
propagatory by art: but Magical divination is the one; and Astrological is the
other. 34. Prophecy, in obscurest things, is sincere: Divination, in plainest
things, is equivocal. 35. Prophecy is not venal, or to be bought, and hired
with money, and preferments: as Magical divinations, and Astrological
predictions are. Neither were the true Prophets mercenary, covetous, ambitious;
as the false Prophets and Diviners were. 36. Holy men were always humble in
the gift of Prophecy: profane men have been proud of the Art of divination, or
prediction. 37. True Prophets never prophesyed things formally false: much
less those wittingly, and willingly; as false Prophets and Diviners have done.
38. True Prophets never hunted the favors of man in place, and power; by
flatring predictions even to evil men, and sad presages even against good men:
as Magical and Astrological Diviners have always used to do. 39. Prophesies
were then most rigorous, and the Prophets most zealous; when they themselves
were most persecuted, and despised: but let Magicians, Necromancers, Diviners,
Soothsayers, fortunetellers, Gypsies, Juglers, Prognosticators, and Predictors.
etc. be severely examined according to Laws; and then the sortilegious spirit
straightway leaves them. And now, they are able to forespeak no man's fate, or
destiny; they are so distracted in suspecting their own. Thus the Art perishes,
in the peril of the Artificer: as the malefice is prevented, or cured in the
execution of the Witch. 40. It was a curse, and expressly threatened as a curse;
for the Church of the Old Testament to want her Prophets: but it was a
blessing, and expressly promised as a blessing, that Diviners, Soothsayers,
and all such like, should be expelled out of her. And what faithful man and
wise, would not think it a like blessing to a Christian Church, and
Commonwealth? Now, if any man will take the pains to order this accumulation of
differences; how easi^ly might he observe (through various particulars)
Prophecy, and Divination, to be two things utterly different in Author, means,
matter, form, subject, object, end, and effect?

3. Whether these true signs of false prophesyings, serve not sufficiently to
discern falseness, or superstitiousness of Magical and Astrological
predictings; As 1. If the prophesying or predicting be of such things, as
humane reason, or prudence, might justly suspect, or easily find out, without
it. 2. If it serve to set open such presumptions, as are not according to the
eternal Law of the written Word. 3. If it pretend to put extraordinarily upon
such actions, to which the ordinary rules of the word are a plain guide; and
the exhortations a sufficient spur without it. 4. If it intends falsehood, under
a pretext of truth: or evil, under a color of good. 5. If it directly tend to
a discouraging of virtue, and virtuous men: or an encouraging of vice, and
vicious man. 6. If it be of some lesser good, to hinder a greater good. 7. If
it be for the use of unlawful means, although to seeming good ends. 8. If it
tend to heresy, error, innovation, schism, and faction in the Church of
Christ. 9. If to the subversion, or obstruction of good Laws in a Christian
Commonwealth. 10. If to set civil States in a combustion; especially such as
are Christian. 11. If it be to the advancement of a few; and to the
disadvantage of a Many: and those as dear children of God; as eminent in parts,
and piety; and every way as hopeful, as useful for Gods glory and the public
good. 12. If the prophesyer or predictor shall presume himself for singularly,
and extraordinarily chosen out, and stirred up, to reveal secrets, amongst a
hundred, both of more eminent places, and graces, then himself. 13. If he shall
pride himself in a singular gift: or prefer it to the favor, and comfort of a
saving grace. 14. If vain, or corrupt imaginations immediately forego, or
follow the revelation. 15. If erroneous, inordinate, passionate, affected
words, and phrases accompany the delivery, or pronuntiation thereof. 16. If the
person of the prophecyer or predictor be noted for idolatry, infidelity,
superstition, heresy, schism, athiesm, hypocrisy, profaneness, carnality,
insobriety, covetousness, ambition, sedition, curiosity, vanity, levity,
sorcery, envy, flattery, etc. Oh that we did but observe these, and the like,
to examine upon them! Doubtless, we might with sounder judgments, and safer
Consciences, pronounce upon our predictors, and their predictions; then either
of them could do upon us.

4. Whether the Devil can Prophecy, and Predict? Prophecy he cannot; for
that is to speak from the Holy Spirit; which the devil cannot, will not do. Yea
it is to speak so, as moved by the Holy Ghost. Now though the Holy Ghost may
move, or command the devil to speak whether he will or no: yet for him to do it
as moved, that was not only to be inspired, but to receive the inspiration
with approbation; or some conformity of affection, and intention; which to a
devil is incompatible. Nevertheless, predict he may in some things, through the
divine both permission and injunction. And but in some things. For the devil
cannot foreknow, or foretell such things, as depends absolutely upon Gods will.
Nor yet those things, which depend arbitrarily upon man's own will. Nor the
thoughts, and immaginations of man's heart. Nor what entertainments his own
suggestions have there, at their first motion. Nor what the good Angels intend.
Nor what they are sent to effect in the world, or the Church. Nor can he
foresee any thing in it self, nor any thing, that has not a natural, and
particular cause. Nor yet what particular impediment may hinder that natural
cause from effecting. Now I would ask of Magicians, and Astrologers; whether
they can foresee, or foretell more, then the devil himself can do? Yet I would
ask again; whether the Magical and Astrological prescience, and presagition, be
not much after the same manner, as the diabolical is? For the devil acquires
his, by long observation, and often experience of things. He knows well natural
causes, and can see their following effects as present in them. He understands
men's bodily temperaments, and to what passions or affections they usual
dispose: and which way men's sensitive appetites may ordinarily prevail to
incline their wills. He can recollect the wickedness of Times, and Nations; and
can guess by the multitude, lawlesness, and impunity of their iniquities among
men; how ne^r they are to the judgments of God; And accordingly can
conjecture, and predict the punishment of a people; by war, famine, pestilence,
etc. He can certainly foretell these things, that depend upon necessary causes;
and have no other natural cause to hinder them: as the motions of the stars,
Eclipses, conjunctions, etc. But if they be not necessary (although falling out
for the most part) but may have some other natural causes hindering them: those
he can foretell but probably, and by conjecture; as showers, storms, tempests,
etc. He can certainly foretell those malefices, which (by Gods permission) he
intends to act, either by himself, or by his sworn instruments. He can disclose
such corrupt cogitations as himself has injected: especially so far forth, as
he observed them to take impression with complacency. And for secret lusts,
manners, and actions (such as himself has been an intimate witness of) he can
reveal them to his Magical instruments: and make them (if God will permit)
object them to men's faces, and bewray them to the world. He is continually so
going to and fro in the earth, that he can tell what is doing even in remotest
places: and (such is his agility) can suddenly convey it to his absent
instruments, or Artists; and make them relate it as if they were present.
Hidden treasures, lost goods, thefts, murders secretly committed; these
(because done in his presence, and kept in his remembrance) he can disclose to,
and by his Agents; if men will consult, and God give leave. Yea, he can presage
many things from the prophecies of the Word; whose historical part he
understands better then men.

5. Why God permits the devil and Diviners often times to predict things future?
Is it not to distinguish betwixt his special, spiritual, and saving graces: and
his extraordinary, temporary, and transient gifts? That none might presume of
an enlightened mind, or a conformed will: because of such acts as may be
without the least touch, either of the one or the other? Nor arrogate to
themselves a likeness to Angels, for such presagitions, as wherein the beasts
may surpass them? Is it not, that ungodly men and profane may thus so much the
more be given over to their own superstitions, and diabolical delusions? And to
teach the faithful, and godly, not to covet, affect, admire, or undiscreetly
approve of those gifts: which are no perpetual and infallible tokens of Gods
grace, and favor. Especially, neither to be acting in, nor attending to, those
vain curiosities; which Satan may suggest, and wicked men and infidels may
attain unto.

6. Whether the devil or divining predictors, ought to be believed, should they
foretell truth? The Devil abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in
him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father of it. Joh. 8.44. Eve ought not to have believed him, because he spoke
of his own, Genesis 3. Ahab was not bound to be persuaded by him, 1 King. 22.20,
21, 22. Because though he had a Commission or permission from God; yet he
exceeded it, and spoke of his own. But I make a question whether Saul ought not
to have believed him; 1 Samuel 28.19. Because he now spoke not of his own. God is
to be believed even in the Devil himself. But then, it might be evident, that
he not only speaks the things of God, but from God: that is, both the truth,
and by a special warrant. Otherwise, there is no accepting of his Testimony (be
it never so true) if he take it up of his own Authority. And therefore our
Savior Christ would neither assent to, nor approve of the Devils, although
they spoke the truth, Mark. 7.24, 25. and 3.11, 12. No more did St. Paul, to
the truth that was spoken by the Spirit of Divination, Act. 16.16, 17, 18. We
are taught, that Satan may transform himself into an Angel of light, and so may
his Ministers likewise. And therefore we held our selves not obliged simply to
believe either the one, or the other; even in the best they can say. Because
they may lie, in telling truth; may tell truth, to deceive; may prejudice a
greater, in uttering a lesser truth; may usurp it of themselves; may arrogate
it to themselves. When did God send the devil on a message, to instruct his
Church in the truth; or to promise good unto his children? If he be sent
extraordinarily to pronuntiate to the wicked, and reprobates, their destinated
judgments, and deserts; they may be so conscious within themselves, as to have
cause to believe them. But as for holy men, and elect, if they be not tied to
believe their truth, how much rather ought they to take heed of their strong
delusions, as not to believe their lies?

7. Whether a wicked man may prophecy: or a godly man divine? Although godly
men are more subject to wicked men's sins, then wicked men are capable of godly
men's graces; Yet godly men (as godly men) cannot be infected with wicked men's
divining: neither can wicked men (as wicked men) be endowed with godly men's
prophesying. Joseph is pretended to divine: yet is it but a pretense, of a
pretense; if it be taken in the worst sense, as has been said before. Balaam
took up his parable (a dark saying, which he himself understood not) and God
put a word in his mouth (which never affected his heart) But Balaam had no more
the gift, and spirit of prophesying, then his Ass had the gift, and spirit of
speaking. May we not then determine it thus? God may be pleased so to dispense
prophesying, as sometimes to prompt a wicked man with the act, sound, or
prolation of it: but inspires, or indues godly men alone with the gift, sense,
and spirit of prophecy. For the spirit of prophecy delights in sanctity, and
purity. And to perfect prophecy is required, not only the illumination of the
mind; but the assent also of the will (as to Gods revelation, authority,
pleasure, message, truth, glory) which indeed cannot be in an ungodly man. In
Scripture a good man, and a Prophet, are Synonyma's: and a man of God, and a
Prophet, convertible terms. And a bad man is never so called, but with some
epithete betokening the abusive appellation. Goodness of manners, though it
necessarily prepares not of it self, to the acquisition of prophecy (because it
is a free, sudden, extraordinary insult, or illapse) Yet badnesse of manners is
always of it self, an utter impediment. Only, God may be pleased (in such
singular acts) so to abalienate, or suspend corruptions for the present, as
sometimes to make good use of ill instruments, for others sakes: but not often,
or for their own; as he has been been pleased to act with those, whose hearts
he has changed, and renewed.

8. How chance the Prophets that prophesied not only by words, but by Facts,
and by Signs also (and by so many, and ordinary Signs) yet none of them, once
prophesied from the stars, or their constellations? Was not that virtue in
them? Or was it not observed in them, in their time? Were they fain to make use
of terrestrial signs, because the coelestials were out of their reach? Nay,
was it not to let us understand, That God, and his Prophets could make the
meanest signs upon earth, to confirm their Prophecies: whereas the devil and
diviners are not able to make the greatest signs in Heaven, to confirm their
Prognostications? Why did Christ refuse to show a sign from Heaven, in proof
of his Messiahship? Matt. 16.1, 4. Because they sought it; and sought it
temptingly, and sought it for themselves. They would have signs among signs,
and miracles among miracles; and such signs and miracles as they themselves
fancyed; and such as might assimilate their own prognosticating superstition,
and vain observation; and such a sign, as was not prophesied, that the Messiah
should do; and such as had neither just cause, necessity, nor end, for which
they should desire it. Besides, that the Prophets revealed nothing from the
stars; and Christ denied to make any such demonstration of himself, his
doctrine, and miracles; because it was not prophesied of him: and therefore he
refers them only to a prophesied sign, the sign of the prophet Jonas: enough
to signify, of how little necessity all sydereal observation, or operation is
to pure Prophecy. But I demand further; if there were any congruity, or
consistency betwixt Prophecy, and mag-astro-mancy; why then was the one a
singular, extraordinary, and temporary gift to Gods people, and the other made
a common Art, or Trade, to Idolators, Infidels, and men profane?

9. Whether Prophecy be natural? Or yet of any artificial preparation? The
Occult Philosophizers, Magical Mirabilaries, and astral Fabricators, are for
both (yea besides the seed of the soul, and the humors of the body, they
pretend the parts of beasts, stones, herbs, and outward ceremonies, all to be
effectually disposing to Prophecy.) But the truth is for neither. For Prophecy
indeed is not natural, but supernatural: not artificial, or acquisite; but
infused, or inspired. Prophecy is immediate, sudden, momentany; the disposition
(at one instant) infused together with the act: yea and the very particular
disposition ceasing, when the particular act cease. It never finds it subject
capable to receive it, but makes it so: neither leaves it in the least capacity
to acquire, or expect it presently again. But if it please to return, it still
makes its own way (often times another, a new way) for it self. What inclination
of nature, or preparation of Art does it require; when it can take the
ignorant, as well as the learned; the Idiot, as well as the Artist; yea a
corrupt heart, and a false mouth and nevertheless make it forespeak its own
infallible truth? No nature or essence is prophetical of it self, but that
which is incomprehensible, and comprehending all things. If our nature had any
such inclination in it self; why should we not all prophecy? And always
prophecy? And prophecy when we please? And prophecy of one thing as well as
another? And one prophecy, as well as another? To whom then should we
prophecy? And how should our pronuntiating be of those things, which are
hidden to the common sense, and ordinary apprehension of men, among whom we are
conversant? How should Prophecy be said to exceed all natural cognition; if it
may proceed from any natural inclination? And how shall we distinguish betwixt
Prophecy, which has revealed, and reveals things, as they are in themselves:
and prognostication, which (at most) can but predict some things, as they are
in their natural causes, and dispositions? What praevious disposition to
prophecy (either naturally, or artificially) was there in Ames, when he said,
I was no prophet, neither was I a prophets son; but I was an heardman, and a
gatherer of sycomore fruit. And the Lord took me, as I followed the flock, and
the Lord said unto me, Go prophecy. Amos 7.14, 15. As for Elisha's calling for
a Minstrel: 2 King. 3.15. This was not to procure, or excite prophecy: but to
sedate passions and affections; and so make himself fitter for contemplation
and devotion. Not as if (according to the Rabbinical conceit) the spirit of
Prophecy had now made its recesse from him, because of some perturbation of
his, in being so exasperated against Jehoram; For that was a true zeal of God,
and that is never inordinate: neither serves it to abate, but promote Gods
gifts. But say he had been somewhat disquieted, and distracted from the spirit
of Prophecy; how was it in the force and virtue of Music to restore it?
Music could do that neither naturally, nor artificially: if it did it at all,
it must do it miraculously. The prophets very calling for Music, was a
prophecy; Signifying that the spirit of Prophecy rests not in turbulent,
distracted, factious, seditious minds: but in harmonious, unanimous, appeased,
and peaceable hearts. But let them contend Prophecy to be of natural
disposition, and artificial preparation; that would so take off theirs, from
being thought diabolical: what need we do so, that hold Prophecy to be wholly
divine? Nature, and Art cannot so much credit the Astrological, as they
prejudice the Theological prophecy.

10. Whether Prophecy be not now ceast? It was never intended to be perpetual.
Even while it was, it was an act; not an habit: not permanent, but transient.
The Spirit now in the illapse, and again upon the recesse. It was a gift or
grace, not so much personal, as vocational: pertaining not to ordinary duty so
much, as extraordinary occasion. Nor was it so necessary, that men should be
taught to look after things future: as how to use the present time aright. The
prophets were but types of that great Prophet: and all prophecy had its main
end, and completion in Christ. It was therefore meet that the shadow should
recede, now that the substance came in place; Prophecy was necessary for the
Church of the Old Testament, because Christ was not yet come: but not so in
this of the New; because Christ is come already. We have an Evangelical
prophecy, abundantly recompencing that lack of the legal: being a gift or
grace not extraordinary, but ordinary; not temporary, but perpetual; not
singular, but universal; not vocational only, but personal; not an act common
to reprobates, but an habit peculiar to the Saints. Not of propounding things
of future times: but of expounding the future things of eternity. Be it in
heaven or earth; Prophecies shall fail, when that which is perfect is come, 1
Cor. 13.8. In heaven, they must needs fail; because there is no future to be
contemplated, or expected; all is an eternal present. And in the Church of
Christ, they must needs fail; because there is no future truth (not another
Gospel) to be expected; the present truth is eternal. Prophecy failed in the
Church, as did the other extraordinary, and temporary gifts: viz. Working of
miracles, and speaking with Tongues. Nevertheless I conceive, God has
absolutely denied his Church none of all these: but that the Spirit may be
pleased to stir up some men, at some times, and to some particulars, to act in
any of them; if just cause and necessity be. Yet, though a man should be raised
to prophecy now, and that by the same Spirit; I cannot think it to be by the
same degree, or authority of the Spirit as the former Prophets were. Because
the authority of the Spirit in them, was not only prophetical, or historical:
but sapiential, and dogmatical. And so their prophesies were recorded, not
only for a particular and certain prediction of truth: but for an universal,
and perpetual instruction of Faith. And therefore, either there must be no end
of adding to the Scriptures: or else none such must now be raised. There may be
some prudential predictings of good men; and suspicious presagings of evil men;
and shrewd conjecturings of common men: but what are all these to the
prophesyings of holy men of God in old time? Yet we say, Gods hand is not
shortened, but that he can still raise up such: but who can say, that he will do
it? Or that there is just cause why he should so do? We conclude therefore, in
the general, that Prophecy is ceast. And that of an extraordinary gift at
first; it is become more extraordinary to after ages. What reason then have we
to be so blind of Faith; as to admit of a stated art of divination in its stead?

CHAP. XXII. From the rarity of Miracles.
1 WHether every thing that is affected above, besides, or against the course
and order, faculty and power, hope and expectation of nature; may truly be said
to be miraculous? Not every thing. 1. Because, it is not a thing effected
against particular nature, but against whole nature, that makes a Miracle. 2.
Because in particular nature, there are antipolliges, or occult qualities of
actives and passives; naturally acting, or disposed to act one against another.
3. Because it is neither nature acting contrary to some part of her self; nor
is it Art urging or tempting Nature: but it is God totally exceeding the law,
virtue, and order of Nature; that makes it to be a Miracle. 4. Because many
things may be done against Nature, or natural propensity; which notwithstanding
are but ordinary and trivial; as the causing of heavy things to ascend upwards,
etc. 5. Because there are many sins and vices, that are against Natures law and
virtue, which who will say that they are miraculous? Therefore we conclude
against Magical Mirabilaries? that although every Miracle be an act or effect
above Nature: yet every act or effect besides, or against Nature, is not a
Miracle.

2. Whether that may absolutely be said to be a Miracle, whose effect is
manifest; and whose cause is occult or unknown to us? No. Except it be acted
simply by the first cause; and for causes only known to him. 2. Except it
exceeds all man's exact knowledge indifferently; one as well as another. 3.
Except the cause be altogether past such finding out, even to sober and
prudential observation, art, industry. Otherwise, it should not be a Miracle,
so as it is in it self, but so as it appears to us. Our ignorance should
necessarily come into the cause of Miracles. That should be miraculous to one
man; which is not so to another. And a profane curiosity of Art would boast of
more light, and experiment in divine works: then indeed is vouchsafed to the
persuasion of a pious faith.

3. Whether the power of working Miracles be not proper to God alone? This must
be affirmed, and cannot be denied. 1. Because He only can work a Miracle of
himself, to whom nothing is a Miracle. 2. Because He only can work against the
order of Nature, and second causes, whose will is sufficient to institute,
Order, alter all things. 3. Because God is a transcendent, and is not under,
nor yet within the predicament, of any part of the whole order of Nature; as
the creature is: and therefore he only can act that against, and besides above
the order of Nature; which the creature cannot. 4. Because a divine power
requires not a subject to work upon (for it is able to create all things of
nothing) neither looks it at the possibility, or propensity of that subject, to
the producing of the effect, as every created power does. 5. Because the proper
cause of a Miracle must not only be uncreated, infinite, omnipotent,
indeterminate, etc. But it must also be occult, unsearchable, incomprehensible:
now no cause is simply so; but the hidden God himself. 6. Because it cannot be
a Miracle, unless it be absolutely, and universally wonderful; or to be equally
admired of all creatures of the same kind. Now it is only for God; and
neither for Angels, or men, to do such things, as shall be admirable to their
fellows, and not so to themselves. 7. Because if any other could work Miracles
but God, or but by God, then Miracles could not be the indubitable signs, and
proofs of a God; nor of Gods Word, and Truth.

4. Whether the good Angels can do Miracles? Ministerially, and instrumentally
they may: but not principally and authoritatively. For Angels are finite both
in their nature, apprehension, and power. And divine Miracles (absolutely
considered) are as strange and wonderful to them: as they are to us men. Yet
Angels (out of the virtue and perspicuity of their own nature) may know how to
do many things, that may seem miraculous, or be marveilous to us. Because they
are a superior power or virtue unknown to us; and may have a particular power
(over inferiors) not known to us; and therefore may act above, besides,
against the particular order of Nature, that is known to us. But being part of
whole created nature themselves, they cannot act against it (the main reason of
a Miracle) for so they should act against themselves

5. Whether Devils can do Miracles? If not Angels; much less devils. Neither
does the Lord make use of the devils to be instruments of his mighty works; as
he does of the Angels. For Miracles were never intended or effected
(immediately or mediately) but for the confirmation of the truth: to which the
devils are no apt instruments; because all that they do is with intent to
seduce therefrom. The devils indeed have a faculty, and sagacity (both much
enabled by long experience in things) above us men: and so may work (in many
things) to amaze, as well as delude us. But such stupendous and prodigious
facts, as they (by divine permission) busy themselves about, are no true
Miracles: because false, either as touching the reality of the effect; or else
the sincerity of the intent. And for the reality of effect, it is not so much
thanks to their admirable power, or manner of working, as to the natural
(though secret) disposition of the matter they work upon. Neither are they
permitted often to work any reality of effect (but only to delude with
prestigious appearances) because God seldom suffers Nature, or the creature to
be so blemished, or abused. And though they had a liberty to effect really, in
things to be admired: yet (so false is their disposition) they would choose, and
labor to be prestigious. And where they are tempted (or urged as they say, by
Art) to do those things that are not within their power, or permission: there
are they forced to be prestigious, and delusory; for the saving of their credit
amongst their own. Now this prestigiousnesse or illusion (whether freely from
themselves, or as it were forced by others) is a sign of their impotency, as
well as their fallacy: and either of them are a sufficient argument to exclude
them utterly from a power of working Miracles. And therefore, if they will
needs be contending for the devils power in, and by Magicians, Astrologers,
Necromancers Conjurers, Witches, etc. We leave both them, and theirs, to their
lyingwonders.

6. Whether there be any such secrets in Nature, as whereby to work Miracles?
Although it be confessed, that there are sundry admirable secrets hidden in
Natures bosom: yet we must profess, that her hand is here shortened. Because
it is the nature of a Miracle to exceed Natures power. It must be above,
besides, against Nature: and not particular only, but universal, or whole
created Nature. Though a Miracle be wrought in Nature, yet it must be quite
beyond Natures principles, law, order. Nature of it self must not so much as
incline or dispose to it. Yea it must be in the very nature of the thing to be
otherwise, then the Miracle has made it. Always, the more alien the effect is
to Nature, and the more remore from Natures order: the greater is the Miracle,
and the more to be admired. Wherefore we conclude (against those Mirions, who
would make themselves to be Natures Apes) that not only any particular nature,
is not able to work a Miracle besides, or against the order of whole Nature:
but the virtue even of whole Nature, is not able to work a Miracle upon any
particular nature whatsoever.

7. Whether Miracles may be wrought by Art? The flat Negative is to be
concluded upon these Arguments. 1. Art cannot exceed Nature. Now Nature (in all
her mirables) is but Miracles Ape; and Art is but Natures Ape: what then are
the Magical Mirabilaries (at most) but Apes of Art? 2. The strength of Art is
acquisite: the virtue of Miracles is infused. 3. An Art operates only
according to reason and knowledge: but a Miracle altogether above them. 4. Art
effects nothing, but according to ordinary rules, observations, experiments,
customs: but a Miracle is so extraordinary, that it were no Miracle, except it
were effected contrary to all these. 5. Art (for the most part) is of
necessaries: a Miracle (for the most part) is of contingents. 6. If Art served
to work Miracles, then were the power of them acquisite, arbitrary, of man's
will, and industry: yea one man might do Miracles as well as another. 7. None
of Gods servants ever wrought Miracles by Art. 8. If it were in the Artists
power, it should be a Miracle to one man, and not to another. 9. Profane men,
and the greatest tempters of God, the Devil, and Nature, should so do most
Miracles. 10. Art rather serves to prevent many things for seeming Miraculous:
because it helps to find out the sudden cause. For either it lets to
understand the cause, or not: if it does not, then it is no Art; if it does,
then it is no Miracle.

8. Whether it be lawful, necessary, convenient (not only for the working of
Miracles, but for the finding out of Mirables) to operate (either by Art, or
violence) against the order placed in Nature? Doubtless, it is no further
lawful; then it may be either necessary, or convenient. That is probably, and
directly tending to some public, or private use, or benefit. Nature may have
many pretty mirables (which they title Admired Auditions, Natural history,
Mirables of the world, Occult Miracles of Nature, Occult Philosophy,
subtilities and varieties of things, secrets, mysteries, memorables, unheard of
curiosities, etc.) Yet for all that, are they not such, as Magicians fain, or
fable, in animals, plants, herbs, stones, etc. Nor are they (a many of them) so
mirable in themselves; as either to men's fancies, or ignorances. Her actives,
and passives, simpathies, and antipathies, are so occult and profound: as who
can tell where to find them; or how to apply them; so as to urge Nature (by
the help of Art) to work wonders? Who can do such a thing (especially make it
his trade, profession, ostentation, so to do) and not be subject to, or guilty
of tempting God, provoking the Devil, tormenting Nature, abusing the creature,
losing time, disparaging himself, and deluding the world? It is for none but
God to work absolutely against the order of whole created Nature: because he
could have instituted another order of Nature. And all things are subject to
him; not so much from a necessity of Nature, and second causes: as according to
the absoluteness of his own power, and liberty of his own will. And it is for
none to undertake to alter the order of particular Nature; but in, by, under,
and for God: yea (I may say) according to God; and not otherwise. As. 1. God
acts not against the order of nature (in any particular of it) save only
upon just and weighty causes: how then dare profane men offer to do such a
thing joculatorily, jugglingly, to make sport and pastime; or yet for no other
end or use, but vain and idle experiments sake; or only to feed, or satisfy
vain and presumptuous curiosity? 2. God, though he may act against that order
which one creature has to another: yet acts he not against that order, which
the creature has to himself. For should he act against the order of nature, as
it depends upon himself; he should so act against himself: in like manner,
neither ought man to act against the order of nature, or of the creature so far
forth as it depends upon God; nor yet so far forth as it is not intended by
God, to be serviceable and useful unto men. 3. God acts not against the law and
course of nature, so as to violate his own great Law; so that of his wisdom,
goodness, justice, in disposing the creature: neither ought men so to do,
beyond the great Law of using the creature aright, and to those very ends for
which God ordained it. For it can never be lawful or warrantable, so to
transgress natures order, as to abuse the creature in any kind. Now do they
not know, that the creature may as well be spiritually, and speculatively
abused, by superstition, and curiosity: as practically, and carnally, by
violence, or sensuality.

9. Why, amongst all the Miracles that Christ wrought against the Devils, among
men, and in the other creatures: he did work none at all from, or by the
heavenly bodies, the stars? Besides the reason above mentioned, why he refused
to show a sign from heaven; this may now be added above all the rest. It was
because there now was a greater Miracle wrought upon the earth, then ever was
wrought in the Heavens. Even the mysterious Miracle, or miraculous Mystery of
God and Man. Doing such works upon earth, as whereat the Angels, and whole
powers of heaven might well stand amazed with admiration. Indeed there was a
wonder in Heaven, a star (a new star) at his birth: and another wonder in
Heaven, an Eclipse of the Sun (a new Eclipse) at his death. Such a star, and
such an Eclipse, as were miracles (in their nature, site, motion, portent) to
all other stars, and Eclipses. Such a star, and such an Eclipse, as were the
mysteries of all other stars and Eclipses. Set apart to signify his power in
Heaven, at the greatest instants of his infirmity upon earth. Thus they
testified of him; and yet was not among these Miracles, nor mighty works that
were wrought by him.

10 Whether Miracles may be wrought out of the Church. Although we make not the
power of working miracles to be the perpetual note of Gods Church: yet we
determine the Church to be the proper seat of them. And in determining, we do
thus distinguish; That God may be pleased to work miracles all the world over;
and that by his Angles, as his Ministers in the Government thereof: but employs
not men to that purpose, save only within his Church. And do distinguish
again, that privative miracles, or those of wrath and judgment, may be wrought
out of the Church: but not positive, or those of Grace and mercy. And our
reasons are. 1. Because the main end of working Miracles is for the plantation
and confirmation of the Gospel, the truth of Gods word: and that cannot be
without the Church. 2. The power of working Miracles is from a promise, and
that belongs to the Church alone. 3. In a Miracle is considerable not so much
the evident effect as the secret intent, and this consideration is only for
the faithful in the Church. 4. The truth of the word is not to be measured by
miracles; but the truth of miracles by the Word: and where is that but in the
Church? 5. Miracles tend as to the glory of God, so to the edification of the
Godly; and who looks for that or them, out of Gods Church. 6. Satan's stupendous
prodigies are mostly wrought out of the Church: but Gods wonderful miracles
within it. 7. Though it has been said, that miracles were intended for
Infidels; yet were they not effected but by believers: and by believers, either
to convince, or to convert those Infidels.

11. Whether wicked men and reprobates may be workers of miracles? Not by
Angelical assistance, not by diabolical confederation, not by the secret of
Nature, not by the study of Art: but by divine dispensation they may. 1.
Because God may be pleased to employ them to this purpose; and yet give them no
more but a faith of miracles; which is common to reprobates. 2. Because that of
miracles is a gift not simply making accepted: but may be given only for
others sakes. 3. God has wrought miracles by dead instruments: and why not by
men of a dead faith, and dead in trespasses and sins? 4. Wicked men may be
used in the working of miracles, for a testimony of Gods truth: yet not in a
manifestation of their own graces. 5. Bad men have been employed in working of
miracles: that good men might not be proud, or overweening of common gifts. 6.
The working of miracles is not appropriated to godly men: lest ordinary Graces
might be undervalued; and weak Christians might take scandal, and despair in
their defect of the extraordinary gift.

12. Wherein differ true and false miracles: or divine and diabolical;
Theological, and magical? 1. The one kind are wrought by God, by Angels,
Prophets, Apostles, and sometimes by the Saints: the other not but by devils,
magicians, Juglers, ungodly men. 2. The one are solid and real in effect: the
other are phantasmatical, and praestigiously deceiveing the sense. 3. The one
God freely calls to do: the other are not done but by tempting both God, and
the Devil. 4. The one are serious, and upon occasions of importance: the other
are ludicrous, and serve to make vain men sport. 5. The one tend to confirm the
Church: the other to seduce from it. 6. The one are liberal: the other
mercenary. 7. The one profitable: the other pernicious. 8. The one make humble
and modest: the other arrogant and full of ostentation. 9. The one serves to
instruct: the other only to astonish. 10. The one are wrought with devout
Prayer, Supplication, Thanksgiving: the other by superstitious imprecation,
adjuration, incantation; with many ridiculous signs, and execrable ceremonies,
nothing pertaining to the producing of the effect. And thus they differ in
their Authors, instruments, dignity quality, duration, utility, end, and effect.

13. Whether Magicians, Conjurers, Inchanters, Witches, etc work not their
miracles, (or rather signs, wonders, prodigies, portents) by the devils means?
It is affirmed that they do so, for these reasons. 1. Because they do them not
by God, Angels, Nature, or Art (as appears sufficiently by what has been said
already) and therefore they must needs do them by the devil. 2. Because they
operate upon a compact: which is evident in that invocation, adoration,
sacrifice, immolation, etc. is hereunto required. 3. Because they operate by
idolatrous, superstitious, sorcerous, execrable, ridiculous signs, rites and
ceremonies. 4. Because they secretly invoke, although they outwardly would seem
to command: which imploration, and imperiousness, yea and dissimulation
between both these, is to God, and good Angels, abominable. 5. Because their
Prayers and preparations are blaspheming, railing, execrating, threatening,
profane, superstitious, absurd, ridiculous: which neither God nor good Angel
can endure. 6. Because they seek either to allure, or compel their operating
power, by things sensible. 7. Because the fact exceeding Natures order, and
Arts efficacy: yet there can be no reasonable cause why such an effect should
be ascribed either to God, or good Angels. 8. Because the effect is by them
ascribed to times, places, figures, characters, rites ceremonies, etc. 9.
Because there are used hereunto words (besides names of God, and Angels)
barbarous, unknown, insignificant, incoherent, apocryphal, superstitious,
sorcerous, detorted, absurd, ridiculous, etc. 10. Because they make use of
means unlawful, unapt, and not ordained to such a purpose. 11. Because they do
their feats upon vain and light occasions. 12. Because they effect that (or
seem so to do) at a distance: which the causes themselves could not naturally
do, were they proximately applied. 13. Because their miracles or wonders are
not wrought, but at certain times, in certain places, and by certain means: as
under such constellations, by such configurations, by such animal parts,
stones, herbs, preparations, confections, etc. 14. Because they seem to make
many cautions in the preparation; which they violate in the execution. As they
caution to cleanness, chastity, temperance, sobriety, justice, charity, etc.
yet the exercise is wholly of, and to the contrary. 15. Because they are not
only ungodly men that do them: but they do them for wicked ends: As idolatry,
murder, theft, covetousness, lusts, pride, ambition, vainglory, etc. 16.
Because if there be any truth or reality of extraordinary effect, either
through natures secret disposition, or Arts studious operation: yet diabolical
suggestion intervenes, and prompts the instruments to mingle many vanities and
fallacies of signs and ceremonies, whereby to delude and deceive. 17. Because
they are seldom or never so prodigious and stupendous in effecting; as in
troubled and distracted States. 18. Because their monstrous prodigies and
portents are mostly wrought out of the Church, or in false and heretical
Churches, or where the Church is declining, and flitting; or else to the
scandal, prejudice, persecution of the true Church of Christ.

14. Whether there be any verity, or reality of miraculous effect, in those
things that are miridically done by the Devil, and Magicians: Reallity of
effect there may be seen; but of miraculous effect none: That is, there may be
some real effect upon the patient indirectly, and consequentially (as in
incantation, sorcery, effascination) although there be none such primarily, and
directly, as from a miraculous Agent. For we see that men are really affected,
and terrified, even from spectrous and ludibrious phantasmes. Our conclusion
therefore thus stated, stands firm, for these proofs. 1. The Devil and
Magicians cannot do that which is possible to neither apart, nor to both of
them together, (no though they had all the Angels joined to them) that is, to
work true miracles. 2. God seldom or never permits. and the devil seldom or
never intends, any verity and reallity of effect in such cases; Because he
delights to be a false emulator, but no true imitator of Gods works. 3. If
there be produced (at any time) any reallity of effect; it is not beyond the
secret disposition of the matter they work in; then which nothing can be more
defective to the form of a miracle. 4. All their miraculous transformations,
and transportations are but to substract one thing (by a swift and
imperceptible motion) and substitute another in the place; and so either delude
the fantasy, or deceive the sight. 5. Those mutations, or alterations which
they work, are but by actives and passives artificially applied; which though
nature alone would not have produced peradventure; yet art alone could never
have produced them, without some natural property or capacity thereunto in
nature. So that the virtue of effecting is simply and primarily in the natural
power, or property; and but secondarily, and conditionally, in the artificial
or cunning application. 6. All their representations, and ostentations are
phantasmaticall and spectrous; either in respect of the prestigious
transposition of the object, the organ, or the mean. 7. The intent and end of
such their operations are repugnant to true and faithful profession, and holy
and righteous conversation; and serving only to insinuate or confirm a lie;
and therefore must be but lying wonders at most.

15. Whether those things that were done by Pharaohs Magicians, in emulation of
Moses, were miraculous, and real in effect; as his were? Some contend they were
so: but others (upon better grounds) conclude they were otherwise. For 1. What
Moses did, he did at the call or command of God, Exodus 7.6. But the Magicians
did theirs at the call or command of Pharaob, verse. 11. And therefore seeing
there was not the same Authority of doing miracles; doubtless there was not
the like efficacy between them, or miraculous effect. 2. The Magicians of
Egypt, though it be said, they also did so, or in like manner: yet it is to be
understood in specie, non jure; in appearance, but not indeed. Because it is
added (by way of differencing) with their enchantments, verse. 11. And the
original word some derive from a root that signifies to flame, because with
fiery flashings, and flamings, they used to perstringe the eyes of the
beholders: and not only so; but was hereby the greatest incendiaries,
inflaming men's minds with idolatry, superstition, lies, and calumnies, etc.
Others derive it from another root, that signifies involving, covering, hiding;
to note, with what occult and involved slights and covertures, they sought to
conceal their prestigious pranks; so as they might appear otherwise then indeed
they were. Besides, the word is ocmmonly used (in Hebrew Authors) to signify
diabolical and prestigious works. 3. True miraculous effects may consist, and
concord together; and never oppose, or destroy one another: it is a sign of
false circulatory phantasms, that they are soon vanishing, and dispersing, when
they presume to come in competition with true divine miracles. Thus Aarons rod
swallowed up the rods of the Magicians, verse. 12. Whether his rod did so while
it was yet turned into a serpent, it skilleth not to dispute: the Miracle was
the greater, if it did so after it was turned into a rod again. For there was
the form of a miracle confounding the form: but here was the very matter of a
miracle destroying the very matter of an impostor. But what say you, if their
rods were as fantastical and prestigious as their serpents were: and therefore
the rather dispelled even by a substantial rod? 4. True miracles serve to
confirm the truth: but to what end served those false mirables of the
Magicians, but to roborate or harden Pharoahs heart, both against Gods message
and the true miracles? verse. 22.5. Concerning that of the Frogs (chap. 8 v 7.)
Why did not Phaaoh. command his Magicians, to take away their Frogs? Was it not
because theirs were only prestigious specter, and could offend no more but the
sight; and not infest the other (and less delusive) senses; as the other did?
And why calls he for Moses, and Aaron, to entreat the Lord to take away the
Frogs from him: but because they that were of his sending, were the real Frogs;
and those that really plagued him? v 8.6. Wherefore did God cause them to fail
in counterfeiting the least things ( the Lice v. 18.) but that he would thus
convince them by the least things, that their greatest were but counterfeits?
And while they confess, this is the finger of God, v. 19. Do they not as good
as confess, that each of theirs was the finger of Beelzebub. 7. When the
Magicians were smitten with boyls and blains, so that they could not stand
before Moses, chapter 9.11. Why did they not conjure up all their Art and force, to
infect Moses again: if that they had been able to do any thing really as Moses
did? 8. How stands the comparison of heretics resisting the truth; like as
Jannes and Iambres withstood Moses: 2 Timothy 3.8. But that these did it by
fallacies, or appearances of spiritual truth: as they did it by phantasmes, or
appearances of corporeal truth? Many Philosophical reasons might be added: but
these (so clear from the Text) are sufficient to prove them impostors. What may
we then judge of the later Gypsies: since it it was no otherwise with their
forefathers, these Egyptians?

16. Whether the gift of working miracles be not now ceas't? Miracles were
never but extraordinary, and temporary. Their very gift not perpetual: and
simply no saving Grace: but might instrumentally be acted even by reprobates,
as well as by the elect. Having no principles of working habitually remaining
in the Soul. Were intended only to be certain signs, upno great occasions,
and present helps, in the defect of ordinary means. Needful in the beginning of
the Church; to strengthen weak Faith. They have had their main end already (the
sufficient confirmation of the truth) and the end accomplished, that which was
destinated to the end, might well cease. Christ was not only the most eminent
in miracles; but in him they had their perfection, and completion. His
Disciples believed in him, before ever they saw him do a miracle: how much more
then may his Church, without them; that together with the memory of them, has
the ordinances and ordinary means? The permanency of miracles would but have
diminished the efficacy of Faith: because it would have been an occasion not to
have believed without them. The truth of the Gospel would still be called in
question, and thought dubious and uncertain; if it always needed such
confirmation. The promises and faith would thus be evacuated: because the
walking would be, not by Faith, but by sight. There would be no end of seeking
after sensible fignes and means; and so profane men would still be tempting
unto them; and weak Christians would be discouraged in their defect. Not only
ordinary graces would so grow vile; but even miracles themselves: for they
would be thought no miracles, by being so commonly obvious, and assiduous. What
need we to stand upon such, when the greatest work of God, and most profitable
for man, is not always the greatest miracle? Have we not perpetually Gods
spiritual miracles, in our vocation, conversion, justification, regeneration,
sanctification, etc.? And his ordinary miracles, in our creation, propagation,
conservation, etc.? And what need we more? To conclude, was there no other
cause, our sins are sufficient to make divine miracles to cease: shall we
then look after Magical miracles, signs, and wonders; such as are set up by
the sins of men.

CHAP. XXIII. From the fables of Miracles.
IS not the rarity of miracles (already proved) enough to prove the stories of
Magical Mirables to be but mere fables? We need not therefore their pardon to
call them so: nay, they ought to gratify us that we call them not worse then
so. Seeing the virtue of miracles and miraculous operation, is in Gods word
alone: and neither in Nature, nor Art, nor Artifice. What can we say less,
then that all such natural Mirables, are only for mere naturals to admire?
Whose Authors have been some of them spurious; most of them obscure; all of
them (in that particular) vain and nugacious. Who take up their authorities by
tradition; from paganish story, poetical fiction, and my thological relation,
of such wonderful things, as were never in Nature, or the world. Who use to
cite their mirables with such a (they say) as if they themselves were not only
ashamed to own them; but afraid to report them. Who stuff up their legendary
stories of magical mirables, with tales of such strange things, and they so
incredible; and under strange Names, and they so unknown; and in such strange
places, and they so remote: as that they are not worth seeking after; or if
they were, yet neither name, nor thing, nor place is to be found. Who urge us
only with this; that such their wonders are not to be proved by reason, but
referred to experiment: and yet we are as far from seeing the one; as from
hearing the other. Nevertheless, all these are impudently urged, and imposing
upon our Faith, to admit, and admire, what wonderful effects of configurations
constellations, influences, impressions, seals, characters; upon Elements,
Minerals, Stones, Vegetables, Animals; yea and Rationals not excepted. Nay and
a many of these so imposed, as tending effectually to Prophecy, Divination,
Prediction, Prognostication. And therefore omitting the ridiculous rabble of
magical mirabilaries (for I have neither list nor leisure to meddle with them
at large) I shall only instance in a few of them, which they not only report
confidently; but impudently prescribe to this very purpose. Advising the Reader
by the way, that (for all this) they cannot be believed without superstition,
nor practiced, without sorcery.

1. There is an herb among the Chaldeans called Ireos; among the Greeks,
Mutuchiol; among the Latins Elitropia: this herb is of so admirable virtue,
that if it be gathered in August, while the Sun is in Leo, and wrapped in a
Laurel leaf, adding thereunto the Tooth of a Wolf; and so at night laid under a
man's head: if any thing be stolen from him, he shall see the Thief, and all his
conditions.

2. The herb called by the Chaldeans Aquilaris, by the Greeks Valis, by the
Latins Chelidonia; if it be taken with the heart of a Mole, and be laid upon
the head of a sick man; it may so be discerned, or divined, whether he shall
dye of that disease, or recover ye or no: for if he now sing out, it is a sign
he shall die; but if he weep, then shall he not dye at that time. By the like,
the conquering of an Enemy, and recovery of a Suite is to be foreknown.

3. The herb which by the Chaldeans is called Luperax, by the Greeks Esifena,
by the Latins Viscus querei; this herb with another herb called Martegon: if it
be put into a man's mouth, and he begin to forethink who is a coming (be it
friend, or so) if he shall come, it will fix upon his heart; if he shall not
come, it will leap from it; nay, will it not leap out of his mouth?

4. The herb which the Chaldeans call Tsiphilon, the Greeks Orlegenea, the
Latins Centaurea; this herb (the Magicians say) has admirable virtue: for if
with the blood of a female Lapwing, and oil, it be put into a Lamp; it makes
all that stands by believe themselves to be Magicians; and that their heads are
in heaven, and their feet upon the earth: and if the same be cast into the
fire, the sta^s shining; the stars will seem to justle and skirmish one against
another.

5. The Stone called Sylonites, bred in an Indian Snail, confers the
prescience, and presence of certain things future* while a man has it under
his tongue, let him bethink him of any business, whether it ought to be done,
or may cometo pass, or not: and if it may, or ought; it will cleave so fast to
his heart, as that it cannot be plucked thence: if not, the heart will leap
back from it.

6. If thou would interpret dreams, and Prophetize of things future, take the
stone which is called Esmundus, or Asmadus; and it will give Prophetization,
interpretation of all dreams, and make to understand riddles.

7. If thou will divine of things future, take the stone called Celonytes, of a
purple and various color, and is found in the body of a Snayle: if any man
carry this stone under his tongue, he shall Prophecy, and foretell future
things.

8. By the stone called Elitropia (or as the Nigromanticks) the Babylonian
Gemme; with certain verses, and Characters, Princes have predicted by divining:
for which cause the Priests of the Temples made special use of this stone, in
the feasts of their Idols.

If thou would foreknow any thing future, take the stone called Bena, and put
it under thy tongue: and so long as thou so hold it, thou shall continually
predict by divining things future; and shall not (in any wise) err in divining.

10. If thou would judge of, or declare the opinions, and cogitations of
others; take the stone which is called Gerarides, and is of a black color, and
hold it in thy mouth.

11. If thou would whet the wit of any one, or increase his wrath, or foretell
future things: take the stone which is called Smaragdus, etc. For it (carried
about him) makes a man to understand well, confers a good memory, increases the
wealth of him that carries it about him; and if any man hold it under his
tongue, he shall Prophecy forthwith.

12. A Weasel is a creature sufficiently known, if the heart of this creature
be eaten, while it is yet panting, it makes to know things to come.

13. If thou would (as the great diviners have done) understand the voices of
Birds, take with thee two companions on the first of the Kalends of November;
and go into the wood with dogs, as if thou wentst an hunting; and that beast
thou first find, carry it home with thee, and prepare it with the heart of a
Fox, and thou shall straight understand the voices of Birds, and Beasts: and
if thou would that another should understand them, do but kiss him, and he
shall understand them likewise.

14. A Suffumigation made with the congealed blood of an Ass, and the fat of a
Wolf, and Storax, etc. will cause to foresee things future in sleep; whether
good, or evil.

15. If any one swallow the heart of a Lapwing, or a Swallow, or a Weasel, or a
Mole, whilst it is yet warm with natural heat; it shall be helpful to him for
remembering, understanding, and foretelling.

16. The stone that is bred in the apple of the eye of a Civet Cat, held under
the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine, or prophecy. The same is
Selenites, the Moon-stone reported to do. -- Also there is an herb called
Rheangelida, which Magicians drinking of, can Prophecy.

17. They say also, that a Tyke if it be pulled out of the left ear of a Dog,
and if it be altogether black; has great virtue in the Prognostic of life.
For if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, who stands at his
feet, and shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of
life: and that he shall dye, if he make no answer.

18. They say, that fumes made of Linseed, and Fleabane seed, and roots of
Violets, and Parsley does make one to foresee things to come; and does conduce
to prophesying. -- They say also, that if any one shall hold a Viper over a
vapor with a staff; he shall prophecy. -- So it is said that the stone
Selenites, idest, the Moon stone, and the stone of the Civet Cat, cause
divination: also vervaine, and the herb Theangelis, cause soothsaying.

19. Melancholy men, by reason of their earnestness, do far better conjecture,
and fitly conceive a habit, and most easily receive an impression of the
celestials. -- The Sybills and the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and
Ancon, were by their natural melancholy complexion, Prophets, and Poets. -- For
this, when it is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madness, conducing to
knowledge, and divination: especially if it be helped by any celestial influxe;
especially of Saturn, who seeing he is cold and dry, as is a melancholy humor,
has its influence upon it, increases, and preserves it.

20. The Rabbines say, there is an Animal called Jedua, having a humane shape,
in the middle of whose Navel comes forth a string, by which it is fastened to
the ground like a Gourd, and as far as the length of that string reaches, it
devoures all that is green about it: and deceiving the sight, cannot be taken,
unless that string be cut off with the stroke of a dart, which being cut off,
it presently dies. Now the bones of this Animal, being after a certain manner
laid upon the mouth; presently he whose mouth they are laid upon, is taken with
a frenzy, and soothsaying.

Now, what a rare Mirable of Art is Magical Divination, yea and Astrological
Prediction: that has all these, and many more (if one would take the pains to
collect them) Mirables of Nature, peculiarly subserving thereunto? I say even
Astrological Prediction. For without a constellated fabrication, or confection;
all these presaging Mirables (and the like) signify nothing in effect. And
therefore (for the manner of acting in, and by such as these) they caution
straightly to observe the Planet, benevolous, or malevolous; as they wolud
presage upon the effect, good, or ill. And not only so, but the dominion of
the Planet, and the day of that dominion, and the hour of that day: as they
would have the predicted effect to be now, or then. So that, to what end serve
the feigned Mirables of Nature, but to feign the Mag-astro-mantick Art for the
greatest Mirable?

CHA. XXIV. From the Ceremonies of preparation.
WHether these (and the like) rites, and ceremonies (taught, and practiced by
themselves) as preparing, and conducing to magical, and astrologicall
constellation, configuration, fabrication, operation, divination, prediction,
omination, presagition, conjectation, prognostication, etc. be not the most
blasphemous, idolatrous, superstitious, heathenish, heretical, hypocritical,
atheistical, sorcerous, prestigious, impostorous, profane and impious; not
only to pure minds, and consciences; but even to common reason, and sense? viz.

1. He which knows how to compare the divisions of Provinces, accordingto the
divisions of the stars; with the ministry of the ruling Intelligences, and
blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the lots of the Apostles, and typical
seals of the sacred Scripture; shall be able to obtain great prophetical
oracles, concerning every Region, of things to come.

2. If thou desire to receive virtue from any part of the world, or from any
star, thou shall (those things being used which belong to this star) come under
its peculiar influence, etc. -- When thou do to any one species of things, or
individual, rightly apply many things, which are things of the same subject
scattered among themselves, conformable to the same Idea, and star; presently
by this matter so opportunely fitted, a singular gift is infused by the Idea,
by means of the soul of the World. I say opportunely fitted, viz. under a
harmony, like to the harmony which did infuse a certain virtue into the matter
-- The celestial harmony produces that into act, which before was only in
power, when things are rightly exposed to it in a celestial season. As for
example, if thou do desire to attract virtue from the Sun, and to seek those
things that are solary amongst vegetables, plants, metals, stones, and animals;
these things are to be used, and taken chiefly, which in a solary order are
higher. For these are more availeable; so shall thou draw a singular gift from
the Sun through the beams thereof, being seasonably received together, and
through the spirit of the world.

3. By artificial mixtions of things, such as agree with the heavens under a
certain constellation, descends a virtue, by a certain likeness and aptness
that is in things amongst themselves toward their superiors. -- So from a
certain composition of herbs, vapors, and such like, made according to
natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, there results a certain common form,
endowed with many gifts of the stars. -- When therefore any one makes a mixture
of many matters, under the celestial influences; then the variety of
celestial actions on one hand, and of natural powers on the other hand,
being joined together, does indeed cause wonderful things, by ointments, by
collyries, by fumes, and such like.

4. Then the virtues of things do then become wonderful, viz. when they are
put to matters that are mixed, and prepa. red in fit seasons, to make them
alive, by procuring life for them from the stars, as also a sensible soul, as
a more noble form.

5. Magicians teach that celestial gifts may through inferiors, being
conformable to superiors, be drawn down by opportune influences of the
heaven: and so also by these celestial, the celestial Angels, as they are
servants of the stars, may be procured and conveyed to us. -- That not only
celestial, and vital; but also certain intellectual, angelical, and divine
gifts, may be received from above, by some certain matters, having a natural
power of divinity (idest) which have a natural correspondency with the
superiors, being rightly received and opportunely gathered together, according
to the rules of natural Philosophy, and Astronomy. -- That an Image rightly
made of certain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angel, will
presently be animated by that Angel.

6. A Magician does make use of things manifest, to draw forth things that are
occult, viz. through the voice of the stars, through fumes lights sounds, and
natural things, which are agreeable to coelesstiall: in which, besides
corporal qualities, there is a kind of reason, sense, and harmony, and
incorporeall and divine measures, and orders.

7. No man is ignorant, that supercelestiall Angels, or Spirits may be gained
by us through good works, a pure mind, purest prayer, devout humiliation, and
the like. Let no man therefore doubt, that in like manner, by some certain
matters of the world, the Gods of the world may be raised by us; or at least
the ministering spirits, or servants of these Gods. -- So we read that the
ancient Priests made Statues and Images, foretelling things to come, and
infused into them the spirits of the stars, etc.

8. Some suffumigations, or perfumings that are proper to the stars, are of
great force for the opportune receiving of celestial gifts, under the rays
of the stars; in as much as they do strongly work upon the air, and breath.
-- Wherefore suffumigations are wont to be used to them, that are about to
southsay, for to affect their fancy; which indeed being appropriated to any
certain Deities, do fit us to receive divine inspiration. -- The most powerful
fume is that which is compounded of the seven Aromaticks, according to the
powers of the seven Planets. -- Know also, that according to the opinion of the
Magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will, and the like, there must
be a good fume, odoriferous, and precious: and in every evil matter, as
hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume, that is of
no worth.

9. By certain Alligations of certain things, as also, suspensions, or by
simple contract, or the continuation of any thread, we may be able to receive
some virtues thereby. It is necessary that we know the certain rule of
Alligation and suspension, and the manner which the Art requires, viz. that
they be done under a certain and suitable Constellation, and that they be done
with wire, or silken threads, bair, or sinews of certain animals, or fine
clothes, and the like, according to the sutableness of things.

10. Rings also, which were always much esteemed of by the Ancients, when they
were opportunely made, do in like manner impresse their virtue upon us, etc. --
Now the manner of making these kind of Rings, is this; viz. When any star
ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect or conjunction of the Moon, we
must take a stone, and herb that is under that star, and make a Ring of the
metal that is suitable to this star, and in it fasten the stone, putting the
herb or root under it: not omitting the inscriptions of Images, Names, and
Characters, as also the proper Suffumigations, etc.

11. The countenance, gesture, the motion, setting, and figure of the body,
being accidental to us, conduce to the receiving of the celestial gifts; and
expose us to the superior bodies, and produce certain effects in us. --
Whosoever therefore does the more exactly imitate the celestial bodies, either
in nature, study, actions, motion, gesture, countenance, passions of the mind,
and opportunity of the season; is so much the more like to the heavenly bodies,
and can receive larger gifts from them.

12. It conduces very much for the receiving the benefit of the heavens, in
any work; if we shall by the Heaven make our selves suitable to it, in our
thoughts, affections, imaginations, elections, deliberations, contemplations,
and the like. For such like passions do vehemently stir up our spirit to their
likeness, and suddenly expose us, and ours, to the superior significators of
such like passions; and also by reason of their dignity, and neernesse to the
superiors, do much more partake of the coelestials, then any material things.
For our mind can through imaginations, or reason by a kind of imitation, be
so conformed to any star, as suddenly to be filled with the virtues of that
star; as if it were a proper receptacle of the influence thereof. -- We must
therefore in every work, and application of things, affect vehemently, imagine,
hope, and believe strongly; for that will be a great help -- Therefore he that
works in Magic, must be of a constant belief, be credulous, and not doubt at
all of the obtaining the effect.

13. The Arabians say, that man's mind, when it is most intent upon any work,
through its passion, and effects, is joined with the mind of the stars, and
intelligences: and being so joined, is the cause that some wonderful virtue be
infused into our works, and things. -- And according to this is verifyed the
Art of Characters, Images, Enchantments, and some speeches, and many other
wonderful experiments to every thing which the mind affects. -- For all those
things which the mind acts, and dictates by characters, figures, words,
speeches, gestures, and the like, help the appetite of the soul, and acquire
certain wonderful virtues, as from the soul of the Operator, in that hour when
such a like appetite does invade it: so from the opportunity, and celestial
influence, moving the mind in that manner. -- And it is a general rule in them,
that every mind that is more excellent in its desire, and affections, makes
such like things more fit for it self; as also more efficacious to that which
it desires. Every one therefore that is willing to work in Magic, must know
the virtue, measure, order, and degree of his own soul, in the power of the
universe

14. Those words are of greater efficacy then other, which represent greater
things, as intellectual, celestial, supernatural; as more expressly, so more
mysteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or from any of a
more holy order: for these, as it were, certain signs, and representations,
receive a power of celestial, and supercoelestial things, as from the virtue
of things explained, of which they are the vebieula: so from a power put into
them by the virtue of the speaker.

15. Proper Names of things are very necessary in magical operations. -- Hence
Magicians say, that proper Names of things are certain rays of things, every
where present at all times, keeping the power of things, as the essence of the
thing signified rules, and is discerned in them, and know the things by them,
as by proper, and living images. -- According to the properties of the
influences, proper Names, result to things. -- Every voice therefore that is
significative, first of all signifies by the influence of the celestial
harmony: Secondly, by the imposition of man; although oftentimes otherwise by
this, then by that. But when both significations meet in any voice or name,
which are put upon them by the said harmony, or men; then that name is with a
double virtue viz. Natural, and arbitrary, made most efficacious to act; as often
as it shall be uttered in due place, and time, and seriously, with an intention
exercised upon the matter rightly dispofed, and that can naturally be acted
upon by it.

16. In composing of verses, and orations, for the attracting the virtue of any
star or Deity; you must diligently consider what virtues any star contains; as
also what effects and operations; and to infer them in verses, by praising,
extolling amplifying, and setting forth those things, which such a kind of star
is wont to cause by way of its influence: and by vilifying, and dispraising
those things which it is wont to destroy, and hinder. And by supplicating and
begging for that, which we desire to get: and by condemning, and detesting
that, which we would have destroyed and hindered. And after the same manner, he
make an elegant oration, and duly distinct by Articles, with competent
numbers, and proportions.

17. Moreover Magicians command that we call upon, and pray by the names of the
same star, or name to them to whom such a verse belongs; by their wonderful
things, or miracles, by their courses, and ways in their sphere; by their
light, by the dignity of their kingdom; by the beauty and brightness that is
in it; by their strong, and powerful virtues; and by such like as these. --
Besides, with the diverse sorts of the names of the stars, they command us to
call upon them, by the names of the Intelligences, ruling over the stars
themselves.

18. Magicians command, that in every work, there be imprecations, and
inscriptions made, by which the Operator may express his affection: That if
he gather an herb, or a stone, he declare for what use he does it; if he make
a picture, he say, and write to what end he makes it.

19. When thou art working any thing which belongs to any planet, thou must
place it in its Dignities, fortunate, and powerful, and ruling in the day,
hour, and in the figure of the Heaven. Neither shall thou expect the
signification of the work to be powerful; but also thou must observe the Moon
opportunely directed to this; for thou shall do nothing without the assistance
of the Moon. And if thou have more patterns of thy work, observe them all, etc.

20. Thou shall observe that the Angles of the Ascendant and a tenth and
Seventh be fortunate; as also the Lord of the Ascendent, and place of the Sun
and Moon; and the place of part of the Fortune, and the Lord thereof; and the
Lord of the foregoing conjunction, and prevention, etc.

21. Magicians advise us, that in casting, or in graving Images, we would write
upon it the name of the effect; and this upon the back, when evil, as
destruction; on the belly, when good, as love. Moreover in the forehead of the
Image let be written the name of the species, or individuum, which the Image
represents; or for whom, or against whom it is made. Also on the breast let the
name of the sign, or face ascending, and the Lord thereof be written; also the
names and characters of its Angles. Moreover in making the Image, they advise
that prayer, for the effect for which it is made, be used. -- Now they use the
Images being made diversely, according to the virtues thereof. Sometimes they
hang them, or bind them to the body; sometimes they bury them under the earth,
or a River; sometimes they hang them in a chimney over the smoke; or upon a
tree, that they may be moved by the wind; sometimes with the head upward, and
sometimes downward; sometimes they put them into hot water, or into the sire.
For they say, as the workers of the Images do affect the Image it self; so
does it bring the like passions upon those to whom it was ascribed, as the mind
of the Operator has dictated it.

22. To make one fortunate we make an image, in which these are fortunate; viz.
the significator of the life thereof, the givers of the life, the signs and
planets. Moreover to the Ascendant, the middle of the heaven, and the Lords
thereof, be fortunate: also the place of the Sun, and place of the Moon, part
of Fortune, and Lord of conjunction, or prevention made before their nativity,
by depressing the malignant planets. But if we will make an Image to procure
misery we must do contrariwise; and those which we place here fortunate, must
there be unfortunate, by raising malignant stars. -- Also for the destroying or
prejudicing any, let there be made an Image under the ascension of that man,
whom thou would destroy, and prejudice; and thou shall make unfortunate the
Lord of the House of his life, the Lord of the ascending, and the Moon, and the
Lord of the house of the Moon, and the Lord of the house of the Lord ascending,
and the tenth house, and the Lord thereof etc.

23 The youth to be initiated to Diaination by magic spells, ought to be
chosen, sound, without sickness, ingenious comely, perfect in his members, of
a quick spirit, eloquent in speech; that in him the divine power might be
conversant, as in the good houses: that the mind of the youth having quickly
attained experience, may be restored to its divinity. -- If therefore thou
shall be a man perfect in the sound understanding of Religion and piously, and
most constantly meditatest on it, and without doubting believe; and art such
an one on whom the authority of holy Rites, and Nature has conferred dignity
above others, and one whom the divine powers contemn not; thou shall be able by
praying, consecrating, sacrificing, invocating, to attract spiritual, and
celestial Poems; and to imprint them on those things thou please; and by it
to vivifie every magical work.

24. Sacred words have not their power in Magical operations, from themselves,
as they are words; but from the occult divine powers, working by them in the
minds of those who by faith adhere to them: by which words the secret power of
God, as it were through Conduit pipes, is transmitted into them; who have ears
purged by Faith, and by most pure conversation, and invocation of the divine
Names, are made the habitation of God, and capable of these divine influences,
whosoever therefore uses rightly these words, or Names of God with that purity
of mind, in that manner, and order, as they were delivered; shall both obtain,
and do many wonderful things.

25. To work Miracles by divine names, words, seals, characters; all must be
done in most pure gold, or virgin parchment, pure, clean, and unspotted; also
with Ink made for this purpose of the smoke of consecrated wax lights, or
incense, and holy water. The actor also must be purifyed and cleansed by
sacrifice, and have an infallible hope, a constant Faith, and his mind lifted
up to the most high God, if he would surely obtain this divine power.

26. There are four kinds of divine phrenzy proceeding from several Deities;
viz. from the Muses, from Dyonisius, from Apollo, and from Venus. The first
phrenzy therefore proceeding from the Muses, stirs up, and tempers the mind,
and makes it divine, by drawing superior things to inferior things, by things
natural. Of which there are nine degrees, etc. -- The second phrenzie proceeds
from Dionysius; this does by expiations exterior, and interior, and by
conjurations, by mysteries, by solemnities, rites, temples, and observations
divert the soul into the mind, the supreme part of it self, and makes it a fit
and pure temple of the Gods, in which the divine spirits may dwell, which the
soul then possessing as the associate of life, is filled by them with felicity,
wisdom and oracles; not in signs, and marks, and in conjectures; but in a
certain concitation of the mind, and free motion, etc. -- The third kind of
phrenzy proceeds from Apollo, viz* From the mind of the world: this does by
certain sacred mysteries, vows, sacrifices, adorations, invocations, and
certain sacred Arts, or certain secret confections; by which the spirit of
their God did infuse virtue, make the soul rise above the mind, by joining it
with Deities, and Demons, etc. -- The fourth kind of phrenzie proceeds from
Venus; and it does by a fervent love, convert and trans-unite the mind to God,
and makes it altogether like to God, as it were the proper image of God. -- The
soul therefore being converted and made like to God, is so formed of God, that
it does above all intellect, know all things by a certain essential contract of
divinity. -- Does, besides that it has by its integrity obtained the spirit of
prophecy, sometimes work wonderful things, and greater then the nature of the
world can do, which works are called Miracles.

27. It was a custom amongst the Ancients, that they who should receive
Answers, certain expiations and sacrifices being first celebrated, and divine
worship ended, did religiously lie down, even in a consecrated chamber, or at
least on the shrines of sacrifices, etc.

28. Whosoever would receive divine Dreams; let him be well disposed in body,
his brain free from vapors, and his mind from perturbations; and let him that
day abstain from supper, neither let him drink that which will inebriate; let
him have a clean and neat chamber, also exorcized, or consecrated; in the which
a perfume being made, his temples anointed, things causing dreams being put on
his fingers, and the representation of the heavens being put under his head;
and paper being consecrated, his Prayers being said; let him go to bed,
earnestly meditating on that thing which he desires to know: so shall he see
most true and certain dreams, with the true illumination of his intellect, etc.

29. Every one that works by Lots, must go about it with a mind well disposed,
not troubled, not distracted, and with a strong desire, firm deliberation, and
constant intention of knowing that which shall be desired. Moreover he must,
being qualified with purity, chastity, and holiness toward God, and the
coelestials, with an undoubted hope, firm faith, and sacred Orations, invocate
them; that he may be made worthy of receiving the divine spirits, and knowing
the divine pleasure. For if thou shall be qualified, they will discover to thee
most great secrets by virtue of Lots: and thou shall become a true Prophet, and
able to speak truth concerning things past, present, and to come, of which thou
shall be demanded.

30. Whosoever being desirous to come to the supreme state of the soul, goes
to receive Oracles; must go to them being chastely and devoutly disposed, being
pure and clean to go to them; so that his soul be polluted with no filthiness,
and free from all guilt. He must also so purify his Mind, and Body, as much
as he may, from all diseases, and passions, and all irrational conditions;
which adhere to it as rust to iron, by rightly composing, and disposing those
things, which belong to the tranquillity of the mind; for by this means he
shall receive the truer, and more efficacious Oracles.

31 We must therefore first observe cleanness in food, in works, in affections;
and to put away all filthiness, and perturbations of the mind, and whatsoever
sense, or spirit, that offends, and whatsoever things are in the mind unlike to
the heavens; not only if they be in mind and spirit, but also if they be in
the body, or about the body: for such an external cleanness is believed not to
help a little to the purity of the mind, etc.

32 They that desire to have this spirit pure, and potent; let them use dryer
meats, and extenuate this gross body with fastings, and they make it easily
penetrable; and lest by the weight thereof, the spirit should either become
thick, or be suffocated; let them preserve the body clean by Lotions,
Frictions, exercises, and cloathings; and corroborate their spirits by lights,
and fumes; and bring it to be a pure and thin finenesse.

33. We must acquit and avert our minds from all multitudes, and such like
passions, that we may attain to the simple truth? which indeed many
Philosophers are said to have attained to in the solitude of a long time. For
the mind by solitude, being loosed from all care of humane affairs, is at
leisure, and prepared to receive the gifts of the celestial deities.

34. It is believed, and it is delivered by them that are skilful in sacred
things, that the mind also may be expiated with certain institutions, and
sacraments ministered outwardly, as by Sacrifices, Baptisms, and Adjurations,
Benedictions, Consecrations, sprinklings of Holy water, by annointings, and
fumes; not so much consecrated to this, as having a natural power thus to do.

35. Moreover, the Magicians when they made any confection, either natural, or
artificial, belonging to any star; this did they afterward religiously offer
and sacrifice to the same star: receiving not so much a natural virtue from the
influence thereof, being opportunely received, as by that religious oblation
receiving it divinely confirmed, and stronger, etc. -- Moreover to the
celestial and aetherical Gods white sacrifices were offered: but to the
terrestrial, or infernal, black etc.

36. Moreover, we must petition for, and to the effectors of the thing desired;
viz. Such an Angel, Star, or Heror, on whom the office lies: but observing that
our invocation on them must be made with due number, weight, and measure; and
according to the rules delivered concerning enchantments.

37. Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul,
being drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of our
works, according to the tradition of Magical Art rightly and lawfully prepared,
and our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding. -- So in the
consecration of water, fire, oil, places, paper, swords, etc. Let there be
commemoration made, etc.

38. Whosoever therefore thou art, who desire to operate in this faculty, in
the first place implore God the Father, being one; that thou also may be one
worthy of his favor: be clean within and without, in a clean place. -- Wash
your selves often, and at the days appointed, according to the mysteries of
number, put on clean clothes, and abstain from all uncleanness, pollution,
and lust. -- Be not thou coupled to a polluted or menstruous woman, neither to
her who has the Hemachoides, touch not an unclean thing, nor a carkase. --
Thou shall wash, and anoint, and perfume thy self, and shall offer
sacrifices. -- Further, perfumes, sacrifice and unction penetrate all things,
and open the gates of the elements, and of the heavens, that through them a man
may see the secrets of God; heavenly things, and those things which are above
the heavens, and also those which descend from the heavens, as Angels and
Spirits of deep pits, and profound places, apparitions of desert places, and
does make them to come to you, to appear visibly, and obey you.

39. Moreover, whatsoever thou operatest, do it with an earnest affection, and
hearty desire; that the goodness of the heavens, and heavenly bodies may
favor thee; whose favor that thou may the more easily obtain; the
fitness of the place, time, profession, or custom, diet, habit, exercise, and
name also do wonderfully conduce: for by these the power of nature is not only
changed, but also overcome. For a fortunate place conduces much to favor. --
What place is congruous to each one, must be found out by his nativity, etc.

40. Make election also of hours and days for thy operations. For not without
cause our Savior spoke, Are there not twelve hours in the day, and so forth?
For the Astrologers teach, that times can give a certain fortune to our
businesses. The Magicians likewise have observed; and to conclude, all the
ancient verse men consent in this; that it is of very great concernment, that
in what moment of time, and disposition of the heavens, every thing whether
natural, or artificial, has received its being in this world: for they have
delivered, that the first moment has so great power, that all the course of
fortune depends thereon; and may be foretold thereby.

All these are not ashamed to show themselves in English, ere this. I have
only now collected them here, and there (with a running hand) to the intent,
that (at one view) it might be discerned; at least (by comparison) examined;
whether these dignifications, qualifications, dispositions, preparations of
Magic and Astrology; be not only so superstitious; as of Magic and
Astrology; be not only so superstitious; as for conscience, and religion, to
abhor them: but so ridiculous as for reason, and sense to deride them? And
whether these their preparations, be not mere pollutions in themselves; and
these their dignifications very vilisications, to natural, and moral men: and
these their consecrations, be not utter abominations to God, and all good men?
Nay, and whether the most damnable witches, have not been initiated, by such
kind of preparative solemnities: and their most execrable witchcrafts operated,
by such effectual ceremonies, as these; yea and they more fair seeming, then
the fairest of them?

CHAP. XXV. From the folly of Interrogations, and Elections.
WHether, besides the superstition, and vain curiosity; it be not extreme
folly, and madness; to make observation, inquisition. election of days and
hours (from a man's geniture, and the disposition of the stars) wherein to
auspicate a business; be it greater, or less? Especially seeing the directing
Art it self is not only depraved commentitiously (as themselves confess) by
the arrogance, ambition, vainglory, covetousness, and deceitfulness of the
Artists: but how are they able to vindicate it from a more commentitious
invention, and idle speculation, or inspection (according to such numbers,
additions, substractions, such days, hours, minutes, scruples, etc.) of such a
star, or planet, in such a positure, or aspect; such a conjunction,
constellation, configuration; such a house, such a Lord of the Ascendant, such
a Lord of the Horoscope; such a significator, such a Promissor, such a
Peregrinator, such an ambulator, such a prerogator, such a dispositor, such an
Emissary, etc. with such motions, congressions, profections, fortifications,
oppositions, corrections, rectifications, directions, elections, etc. And how
do they prove that such fictions (not only of things, but of names) at least
such disorderly confusions of both, should not only be the Rulers ordaining,
and ordering; but the rules of foreknowing and foretelling men's fates and
fortunes, manners, actions, businesses, successes; fortunate or unfortunate,
etc.? Is it not great imprudence then, for any to be here onquiring? And as
great impudence for them to undertake to be here resolving?

1. As concerning Fortune in general; If you would know whether your
fortunatenesse or infortunity, prosperity or adversity shall be more, or less;
in the beginning, middle, or end of your life; in body, mind, name, goods,
relations, etc.

2. As concerning Religion; If you would know, whether you shall be of any
Religion, or none; whether of a true, or of a false Religion; whether
heretical, schismatical, hypocritical; whether constant, or wavering in
Religion, etc.

3. As concerning marriage; If you would know whether you shall ever marry, or
not; when, or about what age you shall marry; how many wives, or husbands, you
shall have; whether you shall get a wise easily, or after long and hard suit;
which shall love first, or most, sc. the husband the wife; or the wife the
husband; whether you two shall live long together; and love mutually, equally,
and constantly; whether your wife shall be a virgin, a widow, or an harlot; be
noble, or base; beautiful, or deformed; rich, or poor; faithful, or disloyal;
virtuous, or vicious; wise, or foolish; sullen, or cheerful; frugal, or lavish;
subject or imperious; modest and silent, or light and loquacious; which of you
twain shall die first, or the one bury the other, etc.

4. As concerning children; If you would know, whether your wife shall be
fruitful, or barren; whether she shall bring forth twins, or monsters; whether
boys, or girls; when and under what constellations to lie with your wife; for
the begetting of children male, or female; tall, or low of stature; fair, or
deformed; healthful, or sickly; dull, or witty; wise, or foolish; rude, or
mannerly; long lived, or short lived; whether your children shall be many, or
few; dutiful, or ungracious; thriving, or prodigal, etc.

5. As concerning friendship; If you would know, whether your friend shall be
true, faithful, useful, constant; or on the contrary; whether your enemies
shall be potent, or impotent; noble, or base; secret, or open; reconcilable,
or implacable; whether you shall have more enemies then friends; and your
enemies more ready, and able to hurt; then your friends to help; whether your
greatest friends or enemies shall be aliens, or allies, etc.

6 As concerning honors; If you would know, whether you shall be honorable or
despised; preferred or disgraced; abroad, or at home; whether you shall attain
to honor, and preferment by the Princes favor, by wealth, by the mediation of
friends, or by your own deserts; whether your honors shall last, and how long,
etc.

7. As concerning Magistery and Magistracy; If you would know what course of
life you shall lead; public, or private; military, or civil; liberal, or
mechanic; when, under what constellation, and with what election to auspicate,
or enter upon your Science, Art, Trade, Occupation, Profession, Office, Place,
Calling; what shall be your advantage, or prejudice hereby, etc.

8. As concerning servants; Whether you shall live, or die a servant; whether
you shall serve a good, or a bad master; when and under what planetary
elections to go to service, that so it may be both more easy, and beneficial,
etc.

9. As concerning building; when, or according to what electional houses of the
heavens, to build your house on earth: so as it may stand firm against wind,
and rain, escape fire, and be freed from rats, mice, etc.

10. As concerning husbandry; If you would know according to what sydereal
elections, to hire, let, plant, improve, plow, sow, reap, etc.

11. As concerning commerce; If you would know when and under what fortunate
position of the stars; to buy and sell, and gain by the bargain; what
commodities will be cheap, or dear, and when; etc.

12. As concerning Riches; If you would know whether you shall wax rich by
inheritance, acquisition, dead men's goods, merchandising, other men's money, by
mines, woods, cattle, husbandry, finding of hidden treasures, by offices,
places, executorship, feoffeship, etc. Whether you shall get goods lawfully, or
unlawfully; with ease, or industry; when your wealth will grow upon you, to
what measure or value they will amount, and how long they shall last: And
whether you shall become poor by suertiship, compartnership, contention,
idleness, luxuriousness, unprudence, fire, water, winds, rots, murrains,
thieves, robbers, plunderings, and whether your riches, or poverty shall be
first, or last.

13. As concerning Laws, and Lawings; If you would know on what lucky day, or
electional hour, to enter your suit: whether your advocate will be faithful and
diligent in pleading your cause; and the Judge just; and whether win the day,
or get the better of your adversary, etc.

14. As concerning traveling; If you would know under what aspects to begin
your jurney prosperously; whether it is safest to go by sea, or by land; by
night, or by day; with company, or without; on horseback, or on foot; whether
your journey shall be long or short, your travel pleasant, or tedious; your
return safe and advantageous, etc.

15. As concerning wars; If you would know under what happy conjunction to
raise your men, whether they shall be trusty and courageous; what weapons to
make choice of; what fortunate day to appoint for the battle; where to take
your ground; when to give the onset; when to retreat; how to get the victory,
etc.

17. As concerning things lost or stolen; If you would know where they are, who
is the thief, whether you shall recover your goods; and how improved, or
impaired, etc.

18. As concerning sports, and recreations; If you would know whether it is
best to take your pleasure within doors, or without; when to go on hunting
with sport, and success; whether you shall win, or lose, in playing at cards,
dice, etc.

19. As concerning the minutest matters; If you would know with what
auspication, and election, to wash your hands; kemb your head; cut your hair;
pair your nails; put on new clothes, greet a man, or meet a beast that is
coming toward you, etc.

20. As concerning health, or sickness; If you would know which of these shall
be first, or last; whether natural, or accidental; what degree of malignity is
to be gathered from the hour of decumbency; whether the sickness, or disease
be curable, and recoverable yea, or no; etc.

21. As concerning death; If you would know, whether it shall be natural, or
violent; honorable, or shameful; abroad, or at home; sudden, or after long
languishing; sooner, or later: whether you shall die by justice, cruelty,
treachery, and casualty; by poison, pestilence, sword, famine, thunder,
shipwreck, fire, water, beasts, thieves, robbers, servants, children,
neighbors, strangers; by open or secret enemies, etc.

Besides all these (and infinite such like) speculative interrogations, as
touching auspicating elections (common both to prescribers and consulters)
there are, together with these constellations, certain practical
configurations: as the fabrications of Images, statues, pictures, Talismanus,
idols (painted, molten, graven) under certain sydereal conjunctions; for the
repelling of things hurtful from you; and procuring of things helpful to you,
viz. If you would drive away any venomous serpent, or noysom beast; make the
figure thereof in some certain matter, under some convenient constellation, and
inscribe thereupon the name of the sign ascending, and the name of the thing
you would expel, etc. And for the contrary effect, do it after a contrary
constellation, etc. And observe the like, in alluring to love; or in provoking
to hatred; in curing of diseases, and procuring of health, etc. But by no means
(so conscientious, or cautious they are) ascribe the effect to the Image; for
that is (say they) idolatry, superstition, witchcraft: but to the constellation:
and I pray, what is that? But I am weary with reckoning up (in part) things of
so great folly; and of greater impiety. Only I ask (not them, but the sound,
and sober) if indeed they be not so? I mean, if the business, and folly of the
world (brought and sought to be directed by the business, and folly of an Art)
be not very much repugnant to humane prudence; and to divine providence much
more?

CHAP. XXVI. From the conviction of Confession.
WHether Magicians and Astrologers themselves, have not plainly and
plentifully, discovered and acknowledged, the vanity and impiety of Magic and
Astrology? And whether it be not an Argument irrefragable against an Art, or
operation: whenas the Arch-Artists are so far convinced, as to confess the
pravity, and obliquity thereof themselves? For who can more truly and fully set
them forth, then they that have given themselves over to study and practice
them? How many things (of old, and of late) have been spoken (either through a
spirit of recantation, a conscience of conviction, or a sury of exclamation) by
magicians, against Magic; and by Astrologers, against Astrology? Hear what one
of them says both against himself, and all the rest; of what kind or sort
soever.

Whatsoever things have here already, and shall afterward be said by me; I
would not have any one assent to them: nor shall I my self any further, then
they shall be approved of by the unit versal Church, and the Congregation of
the faithful -- Magicians, and those who were the authors of this Art amongst
the Ancients, have been Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, and
Arabians; all whose Religion was perverse, and polluted idolatry. We must very
much take heed, lest we should permit their errors to war against the grounds
of the Catholic Religion: For this was blasphemous, and subject to the curse;
and I also should be a blasphemer, if I should not admonish you of these things
in this science. Wheresoever therefore you shall find these things written by
us; know that these things are only related out of other Authors, and not put
down by us, for truth; but for a probable conjecture, which is allied to truth;
and an instruction for imitation in those things that are true. -- Of Magic I
wrote (whilst I was very young) three large books, which I called Of Occult
Philosophy; in which what was then, through the curiosity of my youth,
erroneous, I now being more advised, am willing to have retracted, by this
Recantation: For I have heretofore spent very much time and cost in these
vanities. At length I grew so wise, as to understand how, and by what reasons I
was bound to dehort others from this destruction. For whosoever do not in the
truth, nor in the power of God, but in the delusions of Devils, according to
the operation of theevil spirits, presume to divine, and prophecy, and by
magical vanilies, exorcisms, enchantments, love-potions, allurements, and other
devilish works and deceits, of Idolatry, exorcising prestigious things, and
making ostentation of phantasms, boasting themselves to work miracles,
presently vanishing: all these, with Jannes, and Iambres, and Simon Magus shall
be destinated to the torments of eternal fire.

The ancient Philosophers teach us to know the nature of the genius of every
man, by stars, their influx, and aspects, which are potent in the nativity of
any one: but with instructions so diverse, and differing amongst themselves;
that it is much disficult to understand the mysteries of the Heavens by their
directions, etc.

Cicers following the stoics, affirms that the foreknowing of future things
belongs only to the Gods. And Ptolomie the Astrologer says, that they only
that are inspired with a deity, foretell particular things. To them Peter the
Apostle consents saying, Prophesying is not made according to the will of man,
but holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Take heed that you be not deceived by them that are deceived. Neither can the
great reading of books direct you here, since they are but as riddles. How
great writings are there made of the irresistible power of magical Art, of the
Prodigious Images of Astrologers, of the monstrous transmutations of
Alchimists, of the blessed stone, by which, Mydas-like, all metals that were
touched, were presently transmuted into Gold, or Silver. All which are found
vain, fictitious, and false, etc. -- Whatsoever the monstrous Mathematicians,
the prodigious magicians, the envious Alchymists, and bewitching Necremancers
can do by spirits.

See where their Faith is placed, where their hope is reposed, who endeavor to
subject the Elements, Heavens, Fate, Nature, Providence, God, and all things,
to the command of one Magician: and seek for the preservation of a kingdom from
Devils, the enemies of public preservation; Saying in their heart with
Ochozias, there is not a God in Israel, let us go and consult Beelzebub, the
God of Achron, etc. -- Are they not delivered over to a reprobate sense, who
desire the certainty of secret counsels from the Devil, the father of lies: and
hope for victory elsewhere, then from the Lord of Hosts? -- All these ungodly
follies are wont to bring destruction to the admirers thereof: to which truly
they who especially confide, are made the most unfortunate of all men. --
Surely it is unknown to these Fools, and Slaves of the Devil for to find out
things to come; and to pronounce truth concerning those things which hang over
our heads, and are occult, and from heaven portended unto men; and to effect
things which exceed the common course of Nature, etc. -- O Fools, and wicked!
Who by these Arts would establish a kingdom; by which formerly most potent
Empires have fallen, and have been utterly overthrown.

It is now time to speak of the Mathematical disciplines, which are reputed to
be the most certain of all other; and yet they all consist not, but in the
opinions of their own Doctors; to whom much faith is given; who also have erred
in them not a little. Which Alhumasar (one of them) attests to us, saying; that
the Ancients, even since Aristotle's time, have not plainly known the
Mathematics. For seeing all these Arts are chiefly conversant about the
spherical, or round, whether figure, or number, or motion; they are forced at
length to confess, that a perfect round, or spherical, is no where to be found
neither according to Art, nor according to Nature. And these disciplines,
although they have caused heresies in the Church, few, or none; yet (as
Augustine says) they nothing pertain to salvation; but rather induce to
error, and recall from God: and (as Hierome says) are not sciences of piety.

This Arithmetic (vain and superstitious) has brought forth Geomancy, and
divination, and cogging, dicing, or chancing, and whatsoever is of that sort of
sortilegious numerals. Although almost all do adopt Geomancy to Astrology,
because of the like judicial way: and because they draw the power thereof not
so much from number as motion. -- Of this there have written among the
Ancients, Haly; among the modern, Gerardus Cremonensis, Bartholomeus
Parmensis, and one Tundinus. I also have written a certain Geomancy, far
different from that of others: and yet not less superstitions, and fallacious;
or if you will, let me say, not less lying then all the rest.

Neither do I think that to be passed over which the Pythagoricks did assert;
and which others think that Aristotle himself believed: sc. that the elements
of Letters do possess their certain numbers; out of which they did divine by
the proper names of men: the numbers of the letters of every one being
collected in sum; which compared, they gave to him the palm, whose sum
exceeded the other; whether it was enquired about war, or strife, or
marriage, or life, or any other the like. -- And there are, who by the same
compute, promise themselves to find out the Horoscopes: as I know not whom,
one Alchandrius by name, an obscure Philosopher, has delivered concerning them.

Moreover I cannot easily say, what Pythagoricall mysteries, what Magical
powers, they dream to be in numbers; although divided of things themselves: yea
and dare say, that the world could not have been created by God, but by those
instruments and exemplars: and that the knowledge of all divine things are
contained in numbers, as in a rule, of all, most certain. Hence arose the
heresies of Marcus, and Magus, and Valentinus, founded on numbers, and
proceeding from numbers: who presumed themselves able to find out, and declare
divine religion, and innumerable secrets of the divine truth, by most frigid
numbers. -- All which are vain, and feyned, and false; neither remains there
any thing of truth to these Arithmeticians, but an insensate and inanimate
number: and yet they suppose themselves to play the part of a divine, or
divining men, because they know how to number

The Astrology, which is Astronomy (or rather the Astronomy which is
Astrology) is wholly fallacious; and much more nugacious then the fables of
Poets, whose Masters (bold men in truth, and authors of prodigies) out of an
impious curiosity, after their own fancy, and above humane capacity (as if it
were Basilides the heretic his Abraxas) fabricate the heavenly orbs; and
depaint the measures of the stars, their motions, figures, images, numbers,
concents; as if they were but of late descended down from heaven, and had been
there conversant for some time: by which they imagine all things stand, are
done, and may be known. And yet about these very things they are greatly
disagreeing among themselves, and contrary, and repugnant one to another: so
that I doubt not to say with Pliny, it plainly argues the inconstancy of this
Art, and that it is none: in that, teaching the very principles of it, one way
think, or judge the Indians, otherwise the Chaldeans, otherwise the
Egyptians, otherwise the Mores, otherwise the Jews, otherwise the Arabians
otherwise the Greeks, otherwise the Latins; otherwise the ancient, otherwise
the modern Authors. For, treating of the number of the Spheres; Plato,
Proclus, Aristotle, Averroes, and almost all the Astrologers before Alphonsus,
a few only excepted, do number eight Spheres only; yet Averroes and Rabbi
Isaac say, that Hermes, and some of the Babylonians, placed the new orb, or
ninth sphere. To which opinion adhere, Azarcheles the More, and Tebith, and the
same learned Rabbi, Isaac, and Alpetragus; to which assent Albertus the
Almaine, of his age (I know not for what famous enterprise of his) called the
Great: and all they, who approve of the access and recesse of motions. But the
junior Astrologers now surmise, that there are ten Orbs; which Albertus
himself supposes Ptolomie also to have held Averroes also supposes him to
reckon up nine; when as in truth Ptolomie affirms no more but eight. But
Alphontius sometime following the judgment of Rabbi Isaac, by surname Bazam,
held nine Spheres: yet four years after the edition of his Tables, adhering to
the opinions of Albuhassen the More, and Albategni, he recal'd himself again
to eight. Also Rabbi Abraham Avenezra, and Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Abrabam
Zacutus, do suppose there to be no moveable orb above the eight: and as
touching the motion of the eighth Orb, and of the fixed Stars, they are very
various amongst themselves. For the Chaldeans and the Egyptians affirm it to
be carried with one motion only: to whom assent Alpatragus, and of the modern
Alexander Aquilinus. But the rest of the Astronomers, from Hipparchus to our
times, say that it is carried about with many motions. The Talmudisticall Jews
assign to it a double motion. Azarcheles and Tebith, and Johannes
Regiomontanus have ascribed to it the motion of Trepidation, which they say is
of access, and recesse; above the little circles that are about the head of
Aries and Libra. But in this they differ among themselves: because Azarcheles
says, the moveable head cannot be distant from the fixed, more then ten parts.
But Tebith says, not more then four parts, with ten, and almost nine minutes.
Johannes Regiomontanus says, not more then eight parts: and therefore the
fixed Stars not always varying to the same parts of the world; but they
conceive them sometime returning where they began. But Ptolomy, Albategni,
Rabbi Levi, Avennezra, Zacutus, and (amongst the modern) Paulue Florentinus,
and Augustinus Ritius (very familiar to me in Italy) affirm the Stars to be
moved always and continually, according to the successions of signs. The
latter Astronomers attribute a tripple motion to the eighth Sphere; one proper,
which we have called that of Trepidation; which is completed once in seven
thousand years: another which they call that of Gyration, from the ninth
Sphere, whose circumvolution is not finished in less then forty nine thousand
years: the third, from the renth Orb, which they call the motion of the First
moveable, or the motion of Rapture, or the Diurnall; which within a natural
day returns daily to his beginning. Furthermore they who attribut a double
motion to the eighth Sphere, do not all of them agree among themselves: For
almost all the modern, and they who admit of the motion of Trepidation, do
argue it to be hurried along in a superior Sphere: but Albategni, Albuhassen,
Alfraganus, Averroes, Rabbi Levi, Abraham Zaeutus, Augustinus Ritius, do think
that the Diurnall motion, which others think to be the motion of Rapture, is
not proper to any Sphere, but is done by the whole Heavens. And Averroes
himself says, that Ptolomy (in his book which he inscribed of narrations)
does deny the motion of Gyration. And Rabbi Levi says, he thinks with
Averroes, that the Diurnall motion is done by the whole Heavens. Again, they no
more agree, about the measure of the motion of the eighth Orb, and of the
fixed Stars. For Ptolomy thinks that the fixed Stars are moved one degree in an
hundred years. Albategni contends this to be done in sixty six Egyptian years:
To whom assent Rabbi Levi, Rabbi Zacutus, and Alphontius, in the correction of
his Tables. Azarcheles the Moore says, they are moved one degree in seventy
four years: Hipparchus in seventy and eight. Many of the Hebrews, as Rabbi
Iosue, Moses, Maymonides, Rabbi Avenezra, and after them Hay Benrodam, in
seventy years: Johannes Regiomontanus, in eighty years: Augustinus Ritius
holds the middle betwixt the opinions of Albategni and the Hebrews; thinking
that the fixed Stars are not moved one part of the Heavens, sooner then sixty
years; nor slower then seventy years. But Rabbi Abraham Zacutus (as Ritius
tells us) testifies out of the tradition of the Indians, that there are yet in
Heaven two Stars Diametrally opposite one to the other; which, contrary to the
order of signs, fulfill not their course in less then an hundred forty four
years. Also Alpetragus himself thinks, that there are in the Heavens various
motions, yet unknown to man; which if it be so, there may be Stars and bodies
there, to which those motions may agree; which either men cannot discern by
reason of the exceeding altitude; or no Arts as yet have by observation found
out. To which Phavorinus the Philosopher in Gellius, assents; in his oration
against the Genethliacks. It therefore remains to conclude, that no Astronomer
as yet has descended from Heaven, who could teach us the inerrant motion
truly and certainly. Neither has the true motion of Mars hitherto been known;
which also Johannes Regiomontanus complains of, in a certain Epistle to
Blanchinus. Also one Gulielmus de sancto Clodoaldo, an excellent Astrologer,
has left written the error of the same motion, in his observations two
hundred years since and more; and none of the latter has hitherto corrected
either him or it. Moreover it is unpossible to find out the true ingresse of
the Sun into the aequinoctiall points: which Rabbi Levi proves by many
reasons. But what should we speak of those that are found out since; how the
former have erred about them? For many, with Tebith, have thought the greatest
declination of the Sun to be continually varied: when nevertheless it is
always carried in one measure. Yet Ptolomy thought otherwise of it; and it wat
otherwise found out by Rabbi Levi, Avenezra, and Alphonsus. In like manner,
concerning the motion of the Sun, and measure of the year, they have found
it otherwise, then Ptolomy, and Hipparchus have delivered. Likewise, as
touching the motion of the Stage of the Sun, Ptolomy conceives one thing; but
Albategni, and the rest another. Moreover of the images, and considerations of
the fixed Stars; the Indians have delivered their opinions after one manner,
the Egyptians after another, the Chaldeans another, the Hebrews another, the
Arabians another, Timotheus another, Arsatilis another, Hipparchus another,
Ptolemy another, and the modern writers another. I pass by here to tell, how
they befoole themselves about the right and the left principle of the heavens;
concerning which St. Thomas Aquinas, and Albertus the Almaine, two
superstitious divines, while they seriously endeavored to say something, could
find nothing to say: neither could any man certainly ever find out any thing.
Moreover the Galaxia, or the milkie circle, what it is, the Astrologers are yet
ignorant of. I also forbear to lengthen my speech about the excentricks,
concentricks, apicycles, retrogradations, trepidations, accesses, recesses,
raptures, and other motions, and circles of motions: seeing all these are not;
are neither the works of God, nor of nature: but monsters of the
Mathematicians, and trifles of Feigners, derived from corrupt Philosophy, and
the Fables of Poets; to which nevertheless, as it were to true things, and
created by God, or established in nature, these Masters are not ashamed to give
so much Faith, as to refer unto these trifling vanities, as unto causes,
whatsoever things are done in these inferiors: and say, that those feined
motions are the principles of all inferior motions. Such Astronomers as these,
Anaximenes his maid has opportunely castigated, by a saying not to be
despised; for she using to walk abroad with her master Anaximenes, who on a
certain day going early out of his house to inspect the Stars, while he was
surely intent in looking up to the heavens, he, unmindsull of the places site,
fell suddenly into a ditch; then said his maid, I wonder Master upon what
reason you should persuade your self that you can foreknow such things as are
in Heaven; when as you cannot foresee those things that are before your own
seet. The same facetious passage is reported concerning Thales Milesius; in
like manner reproved by his hand maid Tressa. And it is not unlike to these,
that Tully says; The Astrologers while they are searching after the coasts of
Heaven, none of them perceives what is before his own feet. I my self of a
child, have taken in this Art from my parents; and further, I have lost much
time, and labor in it: at length I have learned that this whole art, and every
part of it, leaves you no other foundation, but mere toys and figments of
imagination. And it now irketh, and repents me of my labor lost heretofore;
and I did desire to bereave my self of all memory, and use of it, and had long
since cast it out of my mind; nor would I ever have reassumed it, but that the
violent entreaties of some potent ones (who are wont sometimes to abuse great
and good wits, to unworthy artifices) had compelled me to fall upon it again;
yea, and my own domestical utility did persuade me, that I ought sometimes to
enjoy their folly, and to observe them with trifles, that so greatly coveted
after trifles. I truly say trifles; for what else has Astrology, but mere
trifles of Poets and Fables, and portentous figments, with which they feign the
heavens to be fully stored? Neither do any kind of men agree more together,
then Astrologers and Poets do; excepting that they dissent about Lucifer and
Vesper: the Poets affirming, that on what day Lucifer appears before the Sun
rising, on the same day it follows the Sun setting; which almost all the
Astrologers deny to be done, besides those who place Venus above the Sun:
because those Stars which are more remote from us, they seem in their rising
to rise sooner, and in their setting to set later. But this discord of
Astrologers about the site of Stars and Planets, had I not now remembered it, I
had passed it by: in as much as it belongs not to Astrologers so much as
Philosophers. For Plato after the Moon, places the second Sphere of the Sun
(or the Sphere of the Sun second etc.) the same do the Egyptians, placing
the Sun betwixt the Moon and Mercury. But Arebimedes, and the Chaldaeans
place the Sun the fourth in order. Anaximander, Metrodorus, Chius, and Crates
say, that the Sun is the supreme of all, after which the Moon, and beneath
these the rest errant, and inerrant. Xenocrates thinks that all the Stars are
moved in one and the same superficies: and they discord no less about the
magnitude and distance of the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of the Stars.
Neither is there any constancy of opinion amongst them about the Celestials,
nor yet truth; neither is that any marvel, seeing the Heaven it self, which
they search, is of all other most inconstant, and most replenished with trifles
and fables; for the very Twelve signs, and the rest of the Boreall and
Australl images, had never ascended up to heaven, but by Fables. And yet the
Astrologers live by these Fables, and impose them upon others, and make a gain
thereby. But the Poats in the mean while (the egregious inventors of them) grow
poor, and hungry.

There remains yet another species of Astrology, which they call the
Divinatory, or the Judiciary; which treats of the revolutions of the years of
the world, of nativities, of questions, of elections, of intentions and
cogitations, of virtues, or powers; for the foretelling, casting up, eschuing,
or repelling the events of all things future; even of the secret dispositions
of divine providence it self. Hereupon the Astrologers do mart, or vent the
effects of the Heavens, and the Stars, from years most remote, and before all
memory of things, or the times of Prometheus, or (as they say) from the great
conjunctions before the Flood. And they affirm that the effects, forces,
motions of all living creatures, stones, metals, herbs, and whatsoever things
in these inferiors, do flow from these same Heavens, and Stars, and do
altogether depend upon them, and may be searched out by them. Verily these are
incredulous men, and not less impious, in not acknowledging this one thing,
that God had already made the Herbs, Plants, and Trees, even before the Heavens
and Stars. Moreover, the most grave Philosophers, as Pythagoras, Democritus,
Bion, Favorinus, Panaetius, Carneades, Possidonius, Timaeus, Aristoteles,
Plato, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Avicenna, Averroes, Hippocrates, Galenus,
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, and many more, who have
searched the causes of things from every Art and Science; yet never remit us to
these Astrologicall causes: which although they were causes, yet because they
plainly knew not the courses of the Stars, and their forces (which is a thing
most known to all wise men) they therefore cannot give a certain judgment of
their effects. Neither are there wanting among them (as Eudoxus, Archelaus,
Cassandrus, Hoychilax, Halicarnassaeus) most skillful Mathematicians, and many
other modern and most grave Authors, which confess, that it is impossible that
any thing certain should be found out concerning the science of such
judgments: both because of innumerable other causes cooperating together with
the Heavens, which must be attended together; for so Ptolomy bids: as also
because very many occasions do hinder them; as namely customs, manners,
education, shame, command, place, geniture, blood, meat, liberty of mind, and
discipline; seeing these influxes compel not (as they say) but incline.
Furthermore, they who have prescribed the rules of judgments, do for the most
part determine such diverse and repugnant things of the same matter; that it is
impossible for a prognosticator to pronounce any thing certain, from so many,
and so various, and dissonant opinions; unless there be in him some
intrinsicall sense of things future, and occult; or some instinct of presage,
or rather occult and latent inspiration of the Devil, by which, among these he
may be able to discern, or may be induced by some other way, to adhere now to
this, now to that opinion: which instinct whosoever wants, he (as Haly says)
cannot be a Tel-troth in Astrologicall judgments. Wherefore now, Astrologicall
prediction must consist not so much of Art, as by a kind of obscure, lot, or
chance of things. And as in the books, or games of Lottery, sometimes such an
one is drawn forth, as speaks truth, and hits right; yet not by art, but by
chance; so it is by chance, and not by art, that vaticinations come forth
truly either from the mind, or the mouth of an Astrologer. To which Ptolomy
attests saying, the science of the Stars is from thee and from them: meaning,
that the prediction of things future and occult, is not so much from the
observation of the Stars, as from the affections of the mind. Therefore is
there no certainty of this Art, but it is convertible to all things, according
to the opinion which is collected by conjectures, or imagination, or an
imperceptible suggestion of Devils, or some superstitious lot or chance. This
art therefore is no other then a fallacious conjecture of superstitious men,
who through the use of long time, have made a science of uncertain things: in
which, for the beguiling men of their money, they may deceive the unskilful,
and may also be deceived themselves. And if the Art of these men be true, and
be understood by themselves, whence then bubble out so many and so great errors
in their prognostications? But if it be not so, do they not vainly and
foolishly, and impiously, to profess a science of things, that are not, or not
understood? But the more cautelous of them pronounce not upon futures, save
obscurely: and such as may be applied to every thing, and time, and Prince, and
Nation. Out of a versatile artifice, do they feyne ambiguous prognostics; and
after that any of them shall happen, then do they gather the causes thereof;
and after the fact or effect, then do they establish old vaticinations with
new reasons; to the intent they may seem to have foreseen. Just as the
interpreters of dreams, who when they have a dream understand nothing of it
for certain: but after that something is happened unto them, then do they adopt
the dream to that which happened. Furthermore, seeing it is impossible, in such a
variety of Stars, but to find some of them well, some of them ill posited;
hereupon they take occasion of speaking what they please; and to whom they will
they predict life, health, honors, riches, power, victory, soundness,
offspring, marriage, Priesthood, Magistracy, and the like: but if they be ill
affected to any, to them they denounce deaths, hangings, reproaches,
destructions, banishments, barrenness, desolation, calamities, etc. not so
much out of a wicked art, as out of wicked affections, drawing on to
destruction those men that are credulous to these impious curiosities: and often
times committing among themselves both Princes and people, in deadly seditions
and wars. If that Fortune fall in with their prognostics; and among so many
ambiguous things, if that one or other of them happen to be true, it is a
wonder then to behold how they bristle, being crest-swolne; and how most
insolently they predicate their own predictions. But though they lie daily, and
be convinced of lying, then they excuse it by blasphemy, or cover one lie with
another, saying, a wise man rules over the Stars: when as in truth, neither
does a wise man overrule the Stars, nor the Stars a wise man, but it is God
that rules over them both; or else they say, that some ineptitude, or
incapacity of the receiver hindered the celestial influxes. And they are angry
at them who require any further faith, or proof. Notwithstanding these
circulators find Princes and Magistrates that believe them in all things, and
adorn them with public stipends: when as indeed there is no kind of men more
pestilent to a Commonwealth, then those that spread vaticinations, and promise
things future from the Stars, and inspected Ghosts, from dreams, and such like
artifices of divination. Besides they are men always offensive or abominable
to Christ, and to all that truly believe in him. Of whom Cornelius Tacitus
complains, saying, The Mathematicians (for so they vulgarly named them) are a
kind of men treacherous to Princes, and deceitful to those that give credit to
them; they have always been prohibited our City, and yet we could never have
them expelled thence. Yea and Varro, a grave Author, testifies, that the
vanities of all superstitions have issued from the bosom of Astrology. There
was in Alexandria a Tribute which the Astrologers used to pay, called
Blacenominon, for the folly of it; because by an ingenuous folly they got their
gain; and because that none but fools and rash men used to consult them. For
if from the Stars be men's lives and fortunes, why fear we? why are we
troubled? Rather let us leave these to God, and the Heavens, who neither can
err nor do evil. And since we are but men, let us not be over wise in high
matters, and more then is meet, and above our powers; but only so far forth as
behooveth humane creatures. And moreover, in as much as we are Christians, let
us leave to Christ the hours, and to God the Father the moments, which he has
put in his own power. But if our life and fortune be not from the Stars, then
does not every Astrologer run in vain? But there is a kind of men so timorous
and credulous, which (like as children do their Goblin tales) more believe,
and are more afraid of those things that are not, then those that are: and by
how much a thing is less possible, they fear it the more; and by how much it
is less like to truth, so much the more firmly do they believe it: who
truly, if there were no Astrologers and Diviners, would die for hunger. And
the foolish credulity of these men, forgetful of things past, and negligent of
things present, and headstrong upon things future, does so favor these
deceivers, that whereas in other men the faith of the speaker is rendered or
suspected by one lie, that all the rest of truths are thereby obscured? on the
contrary, as concerning these lying Masters, one fortuitous truth must get
credit even to notorious lies. To which truly they who trust most, are rendered
of all men the most unhappy. As these superstitious vanities are wont to bring
destruction to their observers; which antiquity witnesses in Zoroastes,
Pharaoh, Nebuchadonosor, Caesar, Crassus, Pompey, Diotherus, Nero, and Julian
the Apostate: who as they were most addicted to these toys, so they perished
most miserably in the confidence of them. And to whom the Astrologers had
promised all things fortunate and joyful; all things fell out most doleful
and unfortunate: as to Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar; to none of whom they
promised other, then that they should die old, at home, and with glory; and yet
every one of them perished miserably, and untimely. Verily this is a
pertinacious and preposterous kind of men, who profess themselves to foreknow
things future; and yet are ignorant of things past and present: and while they
profess themselves to all men, that they can declare all things, although most
occult, yet very often they know not what is done in their own houses, in their
own beds. Such an Astrologer More the Englishman taxes in this handsome Epigram.

Thou aerie Prophet! to whom every Star
Opens it self, and straight way makes a war,
Of each man's future Fate. Thou have a wife
That ope's herself to all; she is so rife.
This the Sun sees, and all the Stars; and yet
Not one of them forewarneth thee of it.
Saturn's aloof, as blind as e're; nor can
Though nigh, discern betwixt a stone and a man.
The beauteous Moon can with her bashful eye,
Being a virgin, a virgin only spy,
Jove heeds Europa, Mars, Venus; Venus Mars;
Sol looks to Daphne; and Mercury to Here Is,
Hence thy wifes Loves to thee they make not known;
They have enough to do, to tend their own.
Moreover, it is known to all, how the Jews, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Persians,
Arabians, do dissent in the very rules of the Judiciary way: and how Ptolomie
rejects the whole Astrology of the Ancients: and as Avenrodam defends him;
so Albumasar inveighs against him. And all these does Abraham Avenezra the
Hebrew lash. To conclude, Dorothaeus, Paulus, Alexandrinus, Ephestion,
Maternus, Homer, Tebith, Alchiudus, Zahel, Messahalla, and almost all the rest
conceive and think otherwise. And since what they say, they cannot prove to be
true; they only defend themselves by way of experiment: neither do they all of
^^em unanimously agree even about that. Neither do they differ less about the
proprieties of the houses; out of which they prole the predictions of all
events: which Ptolomie assigns one way, Heliodorus another, Paulus another,
Manlius another, Maternus another, Porphyrius another, Abentagel another, the
Egyptians another, the Arabians another, the Greeks and Latins another, the
Ancients another, the Modern another. And for as much as it is not evident
amongst them, after what manner they ought to constitute the beginnings, and
the ends of those houses since the Ancients fabricate them after one fashion,
Ptolomie after another, Campanus after another, Johannes Regiomontanus after
another: whence it comes to pass, that they themselves by their own
observations, do diminish all faith and credit to themselves; in that diverse of
them do ascribe diverse properties to the same places; and not only so, but
beginnings also, and ends. An impious kind of men! who attribute those things
to the stars, the stars, that are belonging to God alone: and do make us
freeborn, to be the stars born slaves. And whereas we know that God created
all things good; they deliver that there are certain stars malevolous, and
authors of wickednesses, and of evil influxes: not without the greatest injury
of God, and the heavens, that may be, defining that in those coelestials, and
in that divine Senate, evils, and wickednesses are decreed to be done. And
impute wholly to the stars, whatsoever is committed by us, through the fault of
our own will; and what may fall out against order in nature, through the fault
of the matter. Yea they fear not to teach most pernicious heresies, and
infidelities; namely, while they prophesse with impious temerity, that the gift
of Prophecy, the power of Religion, the secrets of Conscience, the command over
devils, the virtue of miracles, the efficacy of supplications, and the state of
the life to come, do all depend upon the stars, are vouchsafed by them, and may
be known from them. For they say, that the star of the Twins ascending, with
Saturn, and Mercury joined under Aquarius, in the ninth coast of heaven, a
Prophet must be born: and that therefore the Lord Christ was excellent in so
many mighty works because in the same place, he had Saturn in Gemini. Also the
sects of Religion, over which they place Jupiter as chief patron, they
distribute by commixtion of other stars: so as Jupiter with Saturn, should make
the Religion of the Jews; with Mars of the Chaldeans; with Sol of the
Egyptians; with Venus of the Saracens; with Mercury of the Christians; with
Luna, that of Antichrist, which they say is yet to come. And that Moses, from
Astrological rules and reasons, instituted the Sabbath of the Jews, to be
observed as a Religious day: and that the Christians therefore do err in not
resting from labor, and keeping holy day on the Jewish Sabbath, seeing it is
Saturns day. Also they think that the fidelity of every one, toward men, or
toward God, and professed Religion, and secrets of Conscience, may be
deprehended from part of the Sun, and from the third, ninth, and eleventh
houses of heaven: and they delivering many rules of foreknowing the thoughts,
and as they say, the intentions of men. And they set up the celestial
configurations as the causes of the very miraculous works of divine
omnipotence; as namely, of the universal flood, of the Law given by Moses, and
of the virgins childbirth: and they fable, that the death of Christ the
Redeemer of mankind, was the work of Mars: and that Christ himself, in his
miracles, used the election of hours, in which the Jews could not hurt him,
while he went up to Jerusalem; and therefore he said to his Disciples diswading
him, are there not twelve hours of the day? They say moreover, that whosoever
has Mars happily placed in a new house of heaven; he shall, by his sole
presence, expel devils out of the possessed. And he that shall make
supplication to God, the Moon and Jupiter, with the Dragons head, being
conjoined in the middle heaven; shall obtain all things, whatsoever he shall
ask. And further, that the felicity of the life to come is bestowed by Jupiter
and Saturn. And that if any man in his geniture* has Saturn happily
constituted in Leo; his soul, after this life, being freed from innumerable
miseries, shall pass to heaven, the first beginning of its original, and be
applied to the Gods. But for all this, to these execrable fopperies, and
pernicious heresies Petrus Apponensis, Roger Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnoldus de
nova villa, Philosophers; and Alyanensis, a Cardinal, and a Theologue, and
diverse other Doctors of a Christian name (not without an infamy of heresy) do
subscribe: yea and dare testify, and defend, that they have experienced these
for truth. But Johannes Picus Mirandula of late years, has written against
Astrologers, in twelve Books; and that in so great copiousnesse, that scarce
any argument has escaped him: as also with so great efficacy; so that
hitherto, neither Lucius Balnutius, an eager propugnator of Astrology, nor yet
any other defender of this Art, could save it from those reasons, that Picus
has brought against it. For he proves, by most strong arguments, it to have
been the invention not of men, but of Devils. Which self-same thing Firmianus
says; by which they have endeavored to abolish all Philosophy, Medicine,
Laws, and Religion, to the utter extermination of mankind. For first, it
detracts from the faith of Religion, it extenuates miracles, it takes away
providence: while it teaches that all things come to pass by the force of
constellations, and that they do depend by a fatal necessity upon the stars.
Moreover it patronizes vices, excusing them as descending from heaven upon us.
It defiles and overthrows all good Arts; especially Philosophy; traducing
causes from true reasons, to fables; and Medicine in like manner, turning from
natural, and effectual remedies, to vain observations, and perverse
superstitions, destructive both to body and mind. Further, it utterly undoes
Laws, manners, and whatsoever Arts of humane prudence: while it would have
Astrology only consulted, at what time, after what manner, and by what means
any thing is to be done; as if it alone, drawing its authority over all down
from heaven; did hold the scepter over life, manners, and all both public and
private matters; and as if all other things were to be reputed vain, that did
not acknowledge it for patron. Indeed an Art most worthy for devils to profess
from the first, to the deceit of man, and dishonor of God. Moreover the
heresy of the Manichees, wholly taking away all liberty of will, flowed not
elsewhere, then from the Astrologers false opinion, and doctrine of Fate. From
the same fountain also sprung the heresy of Basilides, who pronounced 365.
heavens, made of one another by succession and similitude, and the oftension of
these to be the number of the days of the year (or the number of the days of
the year to be the oftension of these) assigning to every one of them certain
principles, and virtues, and Angels, and feigning names for them: but the chief
of them all is Abraxas; which name, according to the Greek letters, contains
in it 365. which namely are the local positions of those heavens
commentitiously divised by it. These things are therefore shown, that ye may
know, that Astrology is the begetter of heretics. Furthermore, as all the most
eminent Philosophers do explode this divinatory Astrology: so Moses, Esaias,
Job, Jeremias, and all the other Prophets of the old Law, do detest it. And of
the Catholic Doctors, Augustine censures it as meet to be expelled Christian
Religion; Hierome disputes it to be a kind of Idolatry; Basil, and Cyprian do
deride it; Chrysostom, Eusebius, and Lactantius, do refute it; Gregory,
Ambrose, and Severianus inveigh against it; the holy Toletane Council forbids,
and damns it; also it was anathematized in the Synod of Martin, and by Gregory
the younger, and by Alexander the third, Popes; and was punished by the civil
Laws of the Emperors. Among the ancient Romans under Tiberius, Vitellius,
Dioclesian, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius the Emperors, it
was prohibited the City ejected, and punished; and by Justinian himself
condemned capitally, as is manifest in his Code.

This place admonishes me to speak of the other Arts of divination, which yield
vaticinations not so much by observation of the coelestials, as of inferior
things, having a certain shadow, or imitation of the coelestials: that they
being understood ye may the better know this Astrological Tree, from which do
fall such fruit: and from which, as a Lernaean Hydra, a beast of many heads is
generated. Amongst the arts therefore that are hasty to divine for their own
gain, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, Chiromancy, Aruspicy, the Speculatory, and the
Onirocritical, which is the interpretation of dreams, and the Oracles of the
furious, here challenge their seat. Now all these artifices are of no solid
doctrine, neither do consist of any certain reasons but inquire of occult
things, either by fortuitous lot, or agnition of spirit, or certain appearing
conjectures, which are taken up from quotidian observations of long time. For
all these prodigious arts of divination are wont to defend themselves no other
way, but by the title of experience, and to extricate themselves out of the
bonds of objections; so often as they teach or promise any thing above faith,
and beside reason. Of all which it is thus commanded in the Law; There shall
not be found among you any one that makes his son, or his daughter to pass
through the fire, or that uses divination, or an observer of times, or an
inchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a
wizzard, or a Necromancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto
the Lord.

Physiognomy, following from the inspection of the whole body, presumes it can
by probable signs attain to know, what are the affections of body, and mind,
and what a man's fortune shall be: so far forth as it pronounces him Saturnial,
or Jovial; and him Martial, or Solar; another Venereal, Mercurial, or Lunar:
and collecting their horoscopes from the habitude of the body; and from
affections transcending, as they say, by little and little, unto causes namely
Astrological; out of which they afterward trifle as they list.

Metoposcopy, out of a sagacious ingenie, and learned experience, boasts her
self to foresent all the beginnings, the progresses, and the ends of men; out
of the sole inspection of the forehead: making her self also to be the pupil of
Astrology.

Chiromancie feigns seven mounts in the palm of the hand, according to the
number of the seven Planets; and supposes it can know from the lines there to
be seen, what a man's complexion is, what his affections, and what his fortune,
etc. -- But we need no other reason to impugn the error of all these Arts, then
this self-same, namely, that they are void of all reason. Yet very many of the
Ancients have written of these, etc. -- But they all can deliver nothing beyond
conjectures, and observations of experience. Yet, that there is not any rule of
truth to these conjectures, and observations is manifest from this; because
they are voluntary figments; and upon which their teachers, even of equal
learning and authority, are not agreed. -- But this trifling kind of men is
wont so to dote through the instinct of devils, drawing them from error into
superstition, and from this by degrees into infidelity.

To the art of Augury they make faith, who teach that certain lights of
presagition do descend from the coelestials, upon all those inferior living
creatures: as certain signs constituted in their motion, site, gesture, going,
flight, voice, meat, color, work, event: by which, as by a certain ingraffed
hidden force, and firm consent, they so agree with the celestial bodies, with
whose powers they are affected; that they can presage all things whatsoever
that the celestial bodies intend to do, whereupon it is manifest, that this
divination follows not, but from conjectures, partly taken from the influences
of the stars, as they say: and partly from certain parabolical fimilitudes:
then which nothing can be more fallacious. Wherefore Panaetius, Carneades,
Cicero, Chrysippus, Diogenes, Antipater, Josephus, and Philo, have derided it;
the Law, and the Church, has condemned it.

They who endeavor to persuade that nothing is dreamed in vain say; that like
as the celestial influxes do produce diverse forms in corporal matter: so from
the same influxes in the fantastical faculty, which is organical, there are
phantasms impressed by the celestial disposition, consentaneous to the
producing any kind of effect; especially in Dreams; because the mind is then
more freed from the body, and external cares, and so receives those divine
influxes more freely: whence it comes to pass that many things are made known
in dreams to men sleeping, which are concealed from them waking. By this reason
chiefly they labor to reconcile an opinion of truth to dreams: and yet of the
causes of dreams, both intrinsical, and extrinsical, they do not all of them
agree in one opinion, etc. -- Of dreams nothing is delivered but mere dreams,
etc.

To these dreamers, we may number those, who give a faith of divinity to the
vaticinations of madmen: and think they have attained to a divine prescience of
things to come, who have lost all knowledge of things present, all memory of
things past, together with all humane sense: and that mad men, and sleepers see
those things, which wise men and waking are ignorant of: as if God were nearer
to them then to the sound, watchful, intelligent, and premeditating. In truth,
they are unhappy men, who believe these vanities, and obey these impostures;
who cherish these kind of artificers, and submit their wits, and faith, to
these their vain delusions.

All these artifices of divination have their rooting, and foundation in
Astrology. For whether the body, the face, or the hand be inspected; whether a
dream, or a prodigy be seen; whether an auspicie, or a Fury be inspired; they
consult to erect a figure of Heaven; out of whose tokens, together with
conjectures of similitudes and signs, they hunt for opinions of things
signified, and so all Divinations challenge to themselves the Art, and use of
Astrology; and confess this to be as it were the key to the necessary
knowledge of all secret things. Wherefore, all those arts of divination, how
far they are from truth they plainly discover themselves in this; in that they
use principles so manifestly false, and feigned by a poetical temerity: which
neither are, nor have been, nor ever shall be; yet are they made the causes,
and signs to which all events of things are to be referred, contrary to all
evident truth.

Magic is so near joined to, and of affinity with Astrology; so that he who
professes Magic without Astrology, does nothing, but erreth altogether.

There is an Art given to mortal men, whereby they might generate certain
latter things, not partaking of truth, and divinity, but might deduce certain
images like unto themselves: and Magicians, most audacious men, have gone so
far to perpetrate all things, that old and strong Serpent, the promiser of
Sciences, especially favoring them, that they, like to him, Apes, have
endeavored to emulate both God and nature.

To such a height of madness some of the Magicians are grown, that from
diverse constellations of the Stars, through internals of times, and by a
certain reason of proportions, being rightly observed, they think that a
fabricated image of the heavenly creatures may with a beck receive the spirit
of life and understanding, whereby it may answer those that consult it, and
reveal the secrets of hidden truth. Hence it is plain; that this natural
Magic sometimes inclined toward Goetie and Theurgie, is ensnared very often
in the wiles and errors of evil spirits.

Of ceremonial Magic there are two parts, Goetie and Theurgie. Goetie
unfortunately began by the commerce with unclean spirits, compacted of the
rites of wicked curiosity, unlawful charms, and deprecations, is exerated, and
banished by the verdicts of all Laws. -- These are they who carry about them
familiar spirits -- do feign themselves to prophecy. -- Some of them study to
call and compel evil spirits adjured by some certain powers, especially of
divine names, etc. -- Others most wicked, and by mischief detestable, and to
be punished with all fires, submit themselves to devils, sacrifice to them, and
adore them, and are become guilty of idolatry, and the vilest abasements; to
which crimes if the former be not obnoxious, yet they expose themselves to
manifest dangers. For even compelled devils do watch, to the intent they may
always deceive us in our errors. From this Sect (or rather sink) of the
Goeticks have issued all these books of darkness, etc. -- excogitated by men
of deplored wits. -- Which books to him that more acutely looks into them, and
into the canon of their precepts, the custom of rites, the kind of words, and
characters, the order of extruction, and the insulsate phrase, do openly
bewray themselves, to contain nothing else but mere toys, and impostures; and
to be pulcht up in latin Hims by the forlorn artificers of perdition, ignorant
of all ancient Magic, out of certain profane observations, mixed with the
ceremonies of our religion, many unknown names and seals inserted; that they
might terrify the rude and simple, and be an amazement to the senseless, and
such as know not good Letters. -- But this is the reason why these Goeticks
only make use of evil spirits; because good Angels will hardly appear; for
they expect the command of God, and assemble not but with men of clean heart,
and holy life; but the evil ones easily exhibit themselves to be invoked,
falsely favoring, and belying a divinity, are always at hand, to deceive by
their subtilty, to the intent they may be worshipped and adored.

Many think that Theurgie is not unlawful, as if this were governed by good
Angels, and a divine power: when as very often under the names of God, and
Angels, it is obstringed with the fallacies of evil spirits. -- Of this
school are the art Almadel, the art Noterie, the Pauline art, the art of
Revelations, and many more of the same superstition; which are so much the more
pernicious, as to the unskilful they seem the more divine.

The Cabalie is an art (as is reported) very ancient, and yet the name has not
been known among Christians but of later times. -- This art of Cabalie, which
the Hebrews so boast of, I sometimes have searched with much labor; and I
find and confess it to be nothing else but a mere rapsodie of superstition,
and a certain theurgicall magic, but if proceeding from God (as the Jews
boast) it any whit conduced to the perfection of life, to the salvation of men,
to the worship of God, and to the understanding of the truth; verily that
Spirit of truth, which (the Synagogue rejected) came unto us to teach us all
truth, would not have concealed it from his Church until these last times,
which truly knows all things that are of God. -- But that we try, and see,
that by the revolutions (as they call them) of this art, wonderful sentences of
great mysteries are wrested out of sacred Letters; the whole is nothing else;
but a certain playing upon Allegories; which idle men, busied in every letter,
point and number (which this tongue, and the manner of writing easily suffer)
do feign and refeigne at their pleasure. -- Therefore this Cabalie of the Jews
is nothing else but a certain pernicious superstition, which collecteth,
divides, transferreth words, and names, and letters scatteringly placed in the
Scripture; and as they list making one thing of another, they dissolve the
parts of truth, the speeches, the inductions, and making parables here and
there of their own fictions, they would adopt unto them the words of God,
defaming the Scriptures, saying, that their figments do consist of them, they
calumniate the Law of God by their impudently extorted supputations of
dictions, syllables, letters, numbers; they attempt to infer violent and
blasphemous proof of their perfidiousnesse. Furthermore, being puffed up with
these trifles, they boast themselves to find out, and to know the ineffable
mysteries of God, and secrets that are above the Scriptures; by which they are
not ashamed to lie with great boldness, and without blushing, that they
themselves can prophecy and work miracles and mighty works.

But let us return unto Magic, parcel whereof is the artifice of prestigious
things, that is, of illusions; which are only done according to appearance, by
which Magicians show phantasms, play many miracles by circulatory frauds, and
cause dreams: which is done not so much by Goeticall incantations,
imprecations, and deceits of devils; as also by certain vapors of perfumes,
lights, phyltres, collyries, alligations, and suspensions; and besides by
rings, images, glasses, and such like drugs and instruments of magical art,
and by a natural and celestial virtue. Also many things are done by a prompt
subtlety and industry of hand; of which sort we see some are done daily by
Stageplayers and juglers, which therefore we call Chirosophists, that is,
slight-handed. -- And now, by what has been said, it is plain, that Magic is
nothing else but a collection, or compact of idolatry, Astrology, and
superstitious Medicine. And now also there is, by Magicians, a great company of
Heretics risen up in the Church, who as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so
have they resisted the Apostolical truth.

All this is uttered against them by our Arch magician, I mean Cornelius
Agrippa: not a little to the like affect might be collect^d out of another of
them, namely Johannes Trithemius; yea undoubtedly, he that had but the
opportunity to peruse their Authors (old, and of late) needs for their
confutation, to urge them with no more, then their own confession. Only I
would ask of them this one thing, what do they think of this one Magician,
for this one act of his? Whether do they conceive him (in charity) to have
thus confessed, retracted, recanted, repented returned? etc. or, do they
uncharitably account him for it, to be humorous, cynicall, satyricall,
invective, distracted, mad, malecontent, etc? And whether for this one
undertaking of his will they have him called a Philosopher, a Demon, an Hero,
a God, all things, or nothing? Does not he himself tell us, what kind of
censure he suspects from all kinds of Mag-astro-mancers? Alas (quoth he) with
how many of their machinations will they oppugn me? with how many devices will
they assail me? with what ignominies will they persecute me? -- The impious
Mathematician will prescribe me both earth and heaven. -- The sortilegious
Pythagorist will suppute for me unlucky numbers. The pointing Geomantick will
cast unhappy figures, and project for me a prison, and sorrow. -- The Fatal
Astrologers will threaten any hanging, and by a slippery turning of the
heavens, inhibit my ascent to the Gods above. The menacing Diviner will ominate
all manner of evil to me. The importunate Physiognomist will defame me for
frigide, and insufficient. The doting Metoposcopist will pronounce me for a
brainsick Ass. The fatidicall Chiromantist will divine all things sinisterly
of me. The presaging Aruspex will exaugurate me with all manner of ill luck.
The portentous Speculator will send revengefull flames of Jupiter, and fires of
presaging thunder. The dusky Oniropolist, or Dream-teller will affright me with
nocturnall Ghosts and Goblins. The furious Vaticinator will deceive me with an
ambiguous Oracle. The prodigious Magicians will transform me (as another
Apuleius or Lucian) not into a golden, but peradventure into a dirty Ass. The
black Goeticke will persecute me with Specter and Spirits. The sacrilegious
Theurgist will consecrate my head to the Crows, or perhaps to the Jakes. The
circumcised Cabalists will imprecate their curse upon me. The old doting
praestigator will represent me as an headless Eunuch, etc. To conclude
therefore in a word, since this is the suspicion of one of their own, what then
must another expect from them? But (God be blessed) we are taugh to discover
their madness, and despise their malice, by a better light, and strength, then
all their own confessions can afford us.


