Dr. Pierce HIS PREACHING Exemplified in HIS PRACTICE. OR, An Antidote to the
poison of a surrilous and Libellous Pamphlet Sent by N. G. to a Friend in
London, and Printed without License.

In a Letter from a Friend of Truth and Justice unto a worthy Divine of
Cambrige.

Printed in the year 1663.

SIR,
THough I am yet a stranger to your Person, I have heard so much of your
Integrity and candor, and zeal for God and all good men, that I cannot but
believe you will think your self concerned in the news which at present I mean
to send you. It will suggest an opportunity of doing some right to the noless
injured then excellent Dr. Pierce, President of S. Mary Magdalen College in
Oxford. How great a blessing his Example and Government have been unto that
flourishing Foundation, since his Prince's favor and his own eminency of merit
fixed him there, they that envied all have been so unable to conceal, that
attempting often to find a fault, where their utmost malice had not wit enough to
descry one, they thought fit at last to accuse his virtues, and in stead of
blasting his matchless reputation, have by that very project undone their own.
The Terrae Filii (who mistake it for a part of their office to revile
Authority, and be factiously Scurrilous,) had a design to traduce him this last
Act, (as they did, to some purpose, many more of great Rank, besides the King
himself, and my Lord of London.) But the one of them was so loudly hist and
exploded for his pains, that we could not well understand by what he had a
mind to expose himself. The other, with an impudence great as his profanation,
in a place no less Sacred then S. Mary's Church, and before an assembly of both
Universities, and other persons of quality, spoiled the Ballad I am here
enclosing, by turning such plain English into worse Latin, and not fearing to
abuse the Text and Sermon both together, still concluded his ribaldry with an
[Ab initio non fuit Sic.] Ought it not to be for a lamentation, that a Sermon
made public by most express command from his Majesty, and for its
extraordinary worth and usefuless translated into foreign languages, and
countries abroad, should be thus set up as a Mark at home, for most unclean and
envenomed Tongues to shoot their arrows at (even bitter words,) whilst the
Romanists themselves were but examining their quiver for much more civil and
Christian Shafts? That God's Word and Servant should be thus blasphemously
trampled on by Professors of the Religion they presume so to shame, and resolve
to wound through one of it is stoutest Champion's sides, rather then allow him
the barely-just honor of having preached and published it is vindication?
Others there are, who madly spurning at the bonds which they know not how to
break or to cast off from them, are so vexed at the strictness of his impartial
and Christian discipline, that (like the proud enraged waters, still foaming
against the Banks which restrain their Insolency,) finding how much he has
lessened the Drunkard's company, they would needs make him their Song, and be
revenged upon him in rhyme. So much of it as has been gathered piece-meale, I
here present unto your view; when I shall first have assured you, that the
cutting down of the Walnut-Tree, objected in the fourth Stanza, was not by
command of the President, but, without his knowledge, by order of the Bursars,
(who are entrusted by the College with affairs of that nature;) much less is
the Bowling-green made a Turnip-garden (as some Cambridge-men and others, whose
curiosity was tempted by the confidence of that report, to let their own eyes
undeceive them, can abundantly testify:) though (for very weighty reasons, and
upon serious deliberation,) it was voted down by the far major part of the
whole Society; which is the very same power that does commonly lease out the
College Lands, and sure much rather may freely dispose of their Recreations.
All else here mentioned (by such as have hated to be reformed, and would not
choose the fear of the Lord,) was apparently done in such perfect conformity to
the Statutes of the College, the Canons of the Church, and the Law of the Land,
that if I had not before told you so, you would have concluded this charge to
have proceeded either from the Alehouse, or the Antipodes. And therefore I
leave you for a while, to read and pity these Poetasters, who thus have
gratified the Papists, and shamed themselves.

NEar to the Ford over which an Ass,
Or an Ox at least did pass,
And where the once bless't Magdalen
A Sinner is possess't again,
The man that sets up Innovation
By the Primitive Rule of Reformation,
And preached down Popery too in hope
To be in time Himself a Pope,
Makes new Religious Modes to grow,
Which from the Beginning were nothing So.
Demyes, and Fellows too, they say,
Are in the Chapel brought to pray,
As often as the Organs blow:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
The Founder's Laws are so set up,
That Scholars when they dine and sup,
Must bandy Latin to and fro:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
The Tree which Wallnuts forth did shoot,
Is voted down both branch and root;
And where Bowls ran, there Turnips grow:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
Demyships which were bought and sold,
Cannot now be had for Gold,
And Things called Merits current go:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
Fellowships eke are nothing worth
Which eightscore Pieces did bring forth,
And a Gratuity too, I trow:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
A Bellyful now for a Feast must suffice,
Whilst by an Abatement of Plumbroth and Pyes
Men are taught to be Temperate: But yet we know
That from the Beginning it was not So.
Depraved manners now must be
Reformed by Easter-Scrutiny,
Where none must his Accuser know:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
In time of Term it is lately said
That weekly Preachments must be made,
Whether the Preacher will or no:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
Gold is now wrested from the Fists
Of all the late Spurroyallists
Sent Prisoners to the Tower, as though
From the Beginning it had been So.
The Grammar School has also cause
To say New Lords do make new Laws;
Though Busby's followers needs must know
That from the Beginning it was not So.
Amongst the other modern Fashions,
All men are brought to Disputations,
Both great and small, from Top to Toe:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
If a good Fellow be Maudlin drunk,
Speak verba Brigosa or keep a Punck,
He straight must out of Commons go:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
If thereupon he make Appeals
For having fasted all those Meals,
He never must have Commons more:
But from the Beginning it was not So.
AND now, Sir, I hope you do not imagine that Satan's Journymen have in earnest
so far befriended Mr President as to give you a perfect catalogue of the
numerous Reformations which he has wrought; and which however stomack't at by
the Scandalous and incorrigible, are by Them that sincerely love God and
Goodness looked upon with great kindness and veneration, I will add, with
Thanksgiving unto so Exemplary a Governor, who under God is the Author of them.
To reckon up his Contrivances and Methods of advancing the College Interest and
honor, and the many ways he has studied of promoting piety and learning
within the walls he has adorned with rich patterns of both, would make my
Letter become a volume. That I be not so tedious, let me desire you to inform
your self as well of the Clemency as Justice which has been shown to Dr
Yerbury, out of the Narrative that was printed for private use, (if at least
you can come by a Copy of it,) whilst I give you no more Account of the
Drunkard's Darling then will consist with my own and the Carrier's haste.

This overgrown Bachelor of Arts, nicknam'd a Doctor, having an early ambition
to climb above his betters (the first temptation, wise men think, to his other
crimes,) did disloyally scrape an cringe to Cromwell's Vicechancellor for a
Degree, and (as if he had at the same instant bid defiance to authority, when
he bowed thus low to court-Usurpers,) at the election of the President he
earnestly endeavored to frustrate the Letters of the King, affirming to the
face of the then Bishop of London, that he could not vote for whom he thought
worthiest, (however sworn so to do,) because the King in those letters had
commanded him to do it. Yet so far was the President from loving Yerbury the
less, that he seemed to favor him much the more. I do not mean the more for
his Enmity to the King, but for opposing his Removal to Oxford, who had lately
set up his Rest in Kent. Insomuch as the President has often said, That if he
had ever broken his Oath by not executing the Statutes, or by showing
partiality to any member of the College, Dr. Yerbury was the man, out of Lenity
to whom he had so offended. I cannot give a better instance then in the several
gross Cheats and Defraudations, which in the President's first Audit he could
not choose but discover in Dr. Yerbury. For in a Bill (at one time) of above Ten
pounds, he did not only give an unstatutable Account, but an Account so sadly
Scandalous, that neither the President Dr. Oliver, nor the Vice President Mr.
Foreman, were able to write their Approbations. Which although Dr. Pierce who
succeeded Dr. Oliver was not able not to observe in his very first entrance
upon his Office, (which fortuned to be in a time of Audit,) yet he was able to
forgive it, and pass it by, without compelling him to refund it, (as by Statute
he should have done,) for fear an Act of mere Justice should be mistaken for
Revenge, by being done upon a man who had been against him. Thus one crime in
Dr. Yerbury had made it safe for him to commit many more. For, as then it did
appear by another Bill (of nine pounds wanting thre^ pence,) he had pocketed up
the College money, of which he gave no Account, yea he publicly confessed (when
an Account was required of him) that he was utterly unable to give up any. In
which case, notwithstanding there was Furtum notabile, which according to
Statute was to be punished with Expulsion, besides the restitution of so much
money; yet so tender was the President of this unthankful man's honor and
safety too, so unwilling to be doing Corrective Justice immediately after his
Instalment, especially on a person who had opposed his being there, (such was
the benefit of offending against a Merciful man, who took a great delight in
forgiving Enemies,) that making the best of so bad a matter, he only made him
make Restitution, not of all the whole Sum, but of less then half. Would you
not think that so much goodness should have led this Fellow to better life? at
least to gratitude toward a Governor who had been so excessively sparing to
him? Indeed he promised no less when he protested his Amazement at so much
Goodness. But what can be looked for from one who at once is a Cromwellian and
an Italianized Doctor? Had I time to show at large how he has taken all
occasions to affront and revile his obliging Governor, (to whom he swore due
Reverence and Obedience;) how he has all along conspired with a Factious Party
in the College, whom Thomas Goodwin left behind him unconverted to the King,
and whom the King has suffered there by his gracious Act of Oblivion only;
how, with them, he has acted against the Welfare and Peace of that noble
College, especially for the supporting of the Maudlintide Market, buying and
selling of Resignations, and of Suffrages in Elections, (for the putting down
of which this President will be thank't in the next Generation, though he is
envyed for it in this;) how he that charged good Subjects with disloyalty, did
scruple to vote against a Regicide, whom yet he basely underboard had
discovered to be such; how he has impudently boasted of his Dissimulation,
confessed Slanders and Lies which he was proud not to retract; how he showed
himself void of common honesty, by Embezelling the Revenue of that charitable
place, which had so long allowed him bread, and yet was so immodest as to
pretend he had a right to a place of Trust; first contending for a Bursarship,
to gratify his Avarice; then for the office of a Vice President, to stop the
mouth of his Ambition; I say, had I time to enlarge on these, and on a very
great number of other Crimes, which are as notorious as they are loathsome to
such as knew him in the College, you would admire at their Impudence who have
dishonored themselves by his Commendations, and though you never had heard of
his multiplied (...), yet you would need nothing more to make you perfectly
convinced, that there were too many causes of his Expulsion.

Leaving him to repentance, and his Abettors to reproach, and you to make what
use you please of this short Intelligence, I crave the favor of your
acquaintance, (at least for his sake, in our Zeal to whose cause we so well
agree,) and your favorable leave to write my self,

Your affectionate Servant J. F.


