CLAVIS COELI^ OR A TREATISE Setting forth The Nature, the Parts, and Kinds of
Prayer, with the Efficients thereof: the Object of Prayer; the matter of
Prayer; the time and place of Prayer; the gestures to be used in Prayer; the
Necessity, Excellency and Profit of Prayer: WITH Directions for the manner how
we ought to Pray. Many weighty Questions discussed, and diverse Cases cleared.

By William Gearing Minister of the Word.

Qui accedunt ad Dominum, debent in silentio, pace, and tranquillitate multa
preces fundere, nec uti clamoribus parum decentibus, and confusione plenis: sed
cum intention cordis, and cogitationibus cast is Deum prae oculis habere.
Macar. Homil. 6. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Francis Tyton at the three
Daggers in Fleetstreet, M.DC.LXIII.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN FAGG OF Wiston in the County of Sussex
Baronet, and to the virtuous Lady his Wife. AND TO Herbert Morley of Glyn in
the same County Esquire.
Right Worshipful,
ALl men while they are in this world are travelers, some journeying one way,
some another; but they are all gone out of the way: they are trees, some rooted
more firmly, some more weakly, but they have all been shaken: they are militant
soldiers, some fighting in one station, some in another, but they have all
received the foil: if we search the Scriptures, we shall find that the Church
is not so thoroughly refined, Ecclesia Christi fusca and formosa est; fusca quod
ad externum colorem, formosa quod ad interna linimenta. Hieron. ad Cantie.
Nigra propter ignobilitatem generis, and muliitudinem peccatorum, formosa ob
fidem and poenitentiam. Lyra.
but that she has some dross, neither is she so comely as the curtains of
Solomon, but she is also black as the tents of Kedar: If we examine the
Catalogue of the most righteous men that ever lived, we shall not find out one
among them all, but has been tainted with this leprosy: it is almost
impossible for a man to live in the flesh, to be as it were composed of sin,
and not to commit sin: In the Tabernacle, although the propitiatory was holy
and blessed; yet there was a lamp in it, that needed ever and anon to be purged
and snuffed; the like thing happens in every person. We have all of us some
corruption to be snuffed, some breaches to be repaired, some spots to be
cleansed. What? though a man has led his life unblameably before men, that
none can tax him with any wrong or indirectnesse at all, yet may he not
therefore think that he is innocent in the sight of God: For notwithstanding
all this, his own conscience will frame an undeniable Syllogism, proving him to
come within the reach of the curse of sin: the Major Proposition is taken out
of Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this Law to
do them, or that fulfilleth not the whole Law: Every man's conscience will frame
the Minor; and tell him, that he has not fulfilled the whole Law: The
conclusion follows, therefore he is under the curse: Every man's conscience (I
say) does conclude ex lege Dei, out of the Law of God, which does condemn us
for sin, and makes us like Adam, to run away from the presence of God; for fear
of his wrath and heavy displeasure: but every faithful soul has his
consolation in the Gospel, and in the great Mediator Christ Jesus, whom God
has appointed to stand in the gap between Heaven and Earth, and make up the
breach, to reconcile both together, upon whom man may discharge all his sins,
and God discharge all his anger, who like a strong and impregnable wall, keeps
our sins from approaching to God, and Gods vengeance from approaching to us: He
came into the world for our good, to seek and to save us that were lost, he
came from Heaven by accepting of humane nature, Venit enim filius hom nis de
Caelo in mundum, per humanitatis assumptionem quaerere per doctrinam suam,
salvum facere per grariam quod perierat per culpam.
he came to seek by his Doctrine, to save by his grace, those who had perished
through sin: He came to call us, and never came there such a suitor as he is:
he comes, he seeks, he calls, he omits no means, (being come) to draw us to
himself; by him we have immediate access to the Lord, and are imboldened to
speak to him as it were face to face, and mouth to mouth: It were then too
shameless and senseless a part to make use of other means to come to the
heavenly Majesty. Surely they do much injury to his grace, who talk of Warders
and Porters, Angels and Saints, to be solicited to admit us into the presence
of God; and to bring us to speak with him: services not unmeet for the
Governors of the earth, whose persons have need of guardance and attendance
for the safeguard of their lives, upon whose life the life of the Country, and
their people with whom they live, does depend: they have need of special regard
and guard to their bodies, or they may soon fall into danger. Besides, it is
true of Princes of this world, what Jethro told Moses, when he sat from
morning to evening to hear the causes of the people, Exodus 18. Thou both
weariest thy self, and the people that is with thee, the thing is too heavy for
thee, and thou can not do it thy self alone. And therefore infinite suits,
besides the distraction of many other businesses, requiring larger audience
than the ears of any mortal man can afford, drive them of necessity to the
entertaining of subordinate Officers, both to admit and receive, the coming and
requests of their inferiors: but there is neither danger in the person of God,
who rides upon the Heavens, and makes his enemies to perish, like as the
smoke vanishes away, or as wax melts at the fire: neither is his throne to
be approached unto after the same manner. It was the danger of Hesters life to
come before King Ahasucrus, unless she were called for, the Law being thus,
That whatsoever man or woman came into the inner Court, which was not called,
should die, unless the King held forth his golden Scepter: But the Scepter of
our Lord, the great King of Heaven and Earth, I mean the golden Scepter of his
grace, is ever held out to man, woman, child, bond and free, stranger or
Citizen, whether called or not called: they may safely approach (I name neither
outward nor inner Court) but even to the throne where the King himself sits.

And as there is no danger in his person, so no defect in his hearing, whose
ears are open to the prayers of the poor destitute, whose eyelids soundly try
and examine the children of men. He that boweth the Heavens, and comes down
with his all-discerning knowledge, has he need of intelligencers to inform him
of earthly things? He that planted the ear, does he not hear? He that knocks
at our doors, and calls for entrance, when we stand and knock at his; will he
not grant us entrance? Surely he is nigh to all that call upon him, Psalm.
145.18.
to all that call upon him in truth. To incline his ear to our prayers is to
accept them, and cast a gracious eye upon them, and so to inflame the hearts of
his people, that with faith and confidence they may pray unto him, and prevail
with him. If a King show a cheerful countenance to a poor man, that desires
to speak unto him, and turns his eyes toward him, showing himself attentive
to his words, will not this poor man rejoice? Will not the Kings countenance
and attention serve as a speech to him, and be as much as words, and a great
grace unto him? so in like manner we understand God to incline his ear to our
prayers, when he grants to us fervor of spirit in praying to him.

But has God ears? Is he a body, says a devout man? Far be it from us so to
think, for even a spirit is by many degrees more excellent than a body:
Savanarol. Meditat. in Psalm. 80.
What is Gods ear? Happily his knowledge, for by the ear we understand those
things that are spoken to us, but God has known from everlasting what ever men
have either thought or spoken: Surely Gods ear to us does insinuate somewhat
else that cannot be understood of his simple knowledge; for to some he does
incline his ear, to others he turns away his ear, but his knowledge is ever
the same: what then is meant by his ear? Surely his knowledge of approbation or
rejection. He enclineth his ear, and hears the prayers of the righteous,
because they please him, and are approved of him. He turns away his ear from
the prayers of the wicked, because they displease him, and because he rejects
them. Should I now give you the picture of a true supplicant, I should humbly
crave leave to tell you; He is one whose breast is sore with the stroke of his
own penitent hands, which are always either like Moses upon the Mount lifted
up toward Heaven; or the Publicans in the Temple smiting his bosom: His knees
are hardened with constant praying, his voice hoarce with crying and calling to
Heaven, and when he cannot speak, he delivers his mind in sighs and groans:
There Is not a tear falls from him, but an Angel stands with a bottle to catch
it; he thinks every man's sins less than his own, every man's good deeds more:
He desires not only men, but even beasts and trees to mourn with him: mercy
comes down like a glorious Cherub, and lights upon his bosom, with this
message from God, I have heard thy prayers and seen thy tears, and so with a
handkerchief of comfort dries his cheeks, and says to him in the words of the
Wiseman, Eccl. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine
with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works.

Let us then acquaint our selves with God, and walk with him as his friends,
then may we come with boldness to the throne of grace: it is accounted a great
matter to have recourse to the chamber of presence, but to go into the holy of
holies, to commune with God, and daily to present our selves before him, is a
most singular prerogative: And although hypocrites may draw near to God
outwardly, and honor him with their lips, and seem to be fearlesse of Gods
wrath; yet their security is but like that of Belshazzar, which as soon as God
awakeneth their consciences, becomes desperate trembling: but when the heart
is sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure water, then
does a man draw near to God with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, Heb.
10.22.

Suetonius says, Sueton. de Augusto Caesar.
that when one delivered a petition to Augustus Caesar, his hand shook, and he
trembled for fear; whom Caesar reproved, saying, That a man should not bring a
petition to a Prince, as he that brings meat to an Elephant, for fear of
being devoured by him: So for want of hearts fixed upon God, we cannot with
confidence put up our petitions unto him, but even quake for fear when we come
before him.

Right Worshipful, I here present unto you a Key that opens the heavenly
treasures. The Hebrew Doctors speak of four Keys that God keeps in his power,
which he will not give to any Angel: 1. The Key of Rain: thus he promises to
open the Heavens, to give rain in due season, Deuteronomy. 20.12. 2. The Key of food:
thus he is said, To open his hand, and fill his people with good, Psalm. 104.28.
3. The Key of the grave: Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, Ezekiel.
37.12. 4. The Key of the womb: thus he is said to open the womb of Kachel, Genesis
30.22. But the Scripture tells us, that God has many other Keys also: He has
the Key of the Scriptures, and the Key of the understanding: He is said
therefore first to open the Scriptures to the Disciples, Luke 24.32. and then
to open their understandings. He has likewise the Key of the heart: thus God
opened the heart of Lydia to conceive well: The ears of the Prophet to hear
well, Isa. 50.5. The eyes of Elisha's servant to see well, 2 King. 6.17. And
the lips of David to speak well, Psalm. 51.15. Here you have another Key, which
the Ancients call Clavem Coeli, the Key of Heaven, because it opens the gate of
Heaven to us, and Januam Paradisi, the gate of Paradise, because it lets men
in to God, and brings them with their requests into his presence: There is no
Lock but this Key will open, and Christ in whom are hid all treasures is the
Lord Keeper thereof, to whose conduct I commit your Worships, and craving
pardon for this boldness, I am

Your obliged Servant in the Gospel, W. Gearing.

INDEX RERVM.
CHap. 1. The Text, Mat. 7.7. opened. Chap. 2. The definition of prayer, with a
description of the parts of prayer: Petition, Thanksgiving. Chap. 3. Of the
kinds of prayer. ^ect 1. Of mental prayer. ^ect. 2. Of vocal prayer.
Chap. 4. Of the efficient of prayer, viz, the holy Ghost. A Question, whether
a regenerate man does pray truly, or the holy Ghost only prays in him,
answered. Chap. 5. Shows to whom we must pray. ^ect. 1. That we are to pray
to God alone. Some Objections answered. ^ect. 2. Diverse Objections of the
Papists answered. ^ect. 3. The gross Idolatry and Will Worship of the
Romanists condemned.
Chap. 6. Sect. 1. Shows in whose name we are to pray, viz. in the name of
Christ. Two reasons t^ prove it. Sect. 2. Diverse Questions propounde and
answered. Quest. 1. What is th Intercession that Christ now maket^ for his
people? Quest. 2. For what this Intercession of Christ? Quest. ^ For whom does
he make Intercession^ Quest. 4. To whom is Christ our Mediator? Quest. 5. When
did Christ take upon him this Office of his M^diatorship? Sect. 3. Shows,
That Christ is our on Mediator. An Objection answered. Sect. 4. Two other
objections answered.
Chap. 7. Shows the necessity of praye^ Sect. 1. The necessity of prayer
show in three things. Sect. 2. Confirmed by the examples Adam in his
integrity, and Jes^^ Christ, and all the Saints that ever live.
Chap. 8. Sect. 1. Of the matter of o^ prayers: or the things we are to pr^^
for: That spiritual things are to ^ first sought. Sect. 2. Of praying for
temporal thing A Question, whether a man may pr^^ for riches or not, answered.
N^gatively in three things. Sect. 3. Shows, that we are to pray for temporal
things not absolutely, but conditionally. An Objection answered. Five
extraordinary Cases laid down, in which a man may pray absolutely for temporal
things. Sect. 4. Quest. Whether a man may pray for temporal things for the time
to come, answered. Sect. 5. Shows, That the matter of our prayers must be
framed according to the will of God: And how we may pray according to the will
of God, showed in three things.
Chap. 9. Sect. 1. A Question, whether it be lawful to use set forms of
prayer, answered affirmatively. Three objections answered. ^ect. 2. Shows,
that set forms of prayer have been practiced by the Church in all ages. ^ect.
3. Four objections against set forms answered; yet conceived prayer commended.
^hap. 10. Shows, for whom we are to pray. ^ect. 1. That we are to pray for
all the faithful. Sect. 2. That we are to pray for all tha^ need our prayers:
Likewise that we are to pray for our enemies; and the benefits that come to us
thereby. Sect. 3. A Question, Whether we may not at any time pray against
enemies answered. Sect 4. Of the persons that more especially are to be praid
for. Of prayin^ for Kings and Rulers, and the reason thereof. Sect. 5. Quest.
Whether Princes if the^ be Heretics, Tyrants, or Infidels ar^ to be praid for,
answered affirmatively Sect. 6. Shows, That Ministers are t^ be praid for.
Sect. 7. Shows, what we are to pra^ for in the behalf of our Ministers, lai^
down in six things. Sect. 8. Shows, that Ministers mu^ pray for their people:
five reason thereof. Sect. 9. That Parents are to pray f^ their children; and
householders for their families, showed upon fou^ grounds: an objection
answered. Sect. 10. Shows, there are some person are not to be praid for, and
who they ar^ together with diverse reasons thereof.
Chap. 11. Shows, what gestures we are to use in prayer. Sect. 1. Two objec^
^is answered. Sect. 2. Three general rules for our direction herein. Sect. 3.
An objection touching covering or uncovering the head in prayer answered.
Chap. 12. Of the place of prayer. Sect. 1. Of public prayer. Sect. 2. Of
private prayer.
Chap. 13. Sect. 1. Of the time of prayer. Sect. 2. Quest. How a man may keep
his heart in a praying frame, answered in two things. A Question, whether a man
may not pray, but when the Spirit moves him to pray, answered with four
distinctions: affirmed by four reasons. Sect. 3. Quest. How often we must pray.
Resp. Eight reasons to show we are to be constant in prayer. Sect. 4. Shows,
that certain times be set apart for private prayer. A Discourse about Popish
Canonical hours. Sect. 5. Some objections answered. Sect. 6. Shows, that
there are four special seasons of prayer.
Chap. 14. The excellency and profit of prayer. Sect. 1. Showed in five things.
Sect. 2. A further amplification thereof. Sect. 3. An objectio^ ^^at many pray,
and few obtain their suits, answered in six particulars. Sect. 4. An objection
touching Gods deferring to answer his peoples prayers, answered in four things.
Sect. 5. An encouragement to importunate prayer.
Chap. 15. Shows who he is that ca^ pray aright, viz. the upright man* Three
objections touching wicked men praying, and Gods hearing them, answered. Chap.
16. Shows how we ought to pra^ in a right manner. Sect. 1. Direct. 1. Direct.
2. Sect. 2. Direct. 3. Sect. 3. Direct. 4. Sect. 4. Direct. 5. Sect. 5. Direct.
6. The Conclusion of thi^ Treatise.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling. S.T.P. Rev. i^ Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc. Land. a sac.
domest.
Ex Aed. Sabaud. Apr. 30. 1663.
Clavis Coeli.
MATTHEW. 7.7. Ask and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall find; knock and
it shall be opened unto you.


CHAP. I. The Text opened.
THese words contain the third part of this Chapter, and the eighth part of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, and they divide themselves into two main parts.

1. A precept for the practice of Prayer: Ask,] Seek,] knock.] Tria verba
addit, quae instantiam significant; petite, quaerite, pulsate. Ferus in loc.


2. A reason to enforce and urge us to the performance of it, from the promise
of audience, in these words; it shall be given you,] ye shall find,] it shall
be opened unto you.] We must ask, seek, knock.] Ask with the mouth; Seek with
the heart; Knock with the hand.

(...). D. ^layfer in hunc locum.
1. Ask with the mouth: One observes of Joachim, father of the virgin Mary,
that going to the wilderness to pray, he said thus: Prayer shall be my meat
and drink: where by, says he, it is evident, that a meat and drink (the
natural foo^ of the body) must go in at the mouth; so on the other side,
Praye^ (the spiritual food of the soul) mu^ go out of the mouth: which is the
reason why Pythagoras required h^ disciples to pray aloud; not that h^ thought,
God could not otherwis^ hear: but to instruct us, as Cleme^ of Alexandria
notes, Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. 4. Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus
videat: Sic loquere cum Deo tanquam homines audiant. Seneca. August. ad Probam.
Epist. 121.
that as or dealing with men must be, as in the sight of God, so our prayers to
Go^ must be as if in the hearing of me^ Men therefore ask of God, whats^ever
they stand in need of, says A^gustine, not to teach him their necessities (for
who can instruct the Lord: but to exercise themselves i^ prayers, and that they
may be capable of those things which he does willingly give them, and that
thereby it may appear that he is the giver of all good things, and that the
effects and events of things depend wholly upon him, that all good things are
to be looked for from his heavenly Majesty, and we thereby instructed to behave
our selves more thankfully and dutifully toward him.

2. Seek with the heart.] They which vainly hope, or foolishly wish, to find
God without seeking (or as she was in the Poet, Quae non inventa reperta est,)
what do they else but expect, or petition a just Prince to grant them contrary
to his own Laws and Statutes? for so strait a dependence has the God of nature
ordained between the means and the end, that Logic (the art that teaches us to
understand things aright) makes it an infallible demonstration from the one to
the other: and therefore, though some have sought and not found, yet none ever
found which have not sought. Seek the things which are above, says the
Apostle, Col. 3.1. and if spiritual things must be sought for, much more God
himself, who blesses us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. These must be sought, Ratione difficultatis.
Ratione dignitatis.


1. By reason of the difficulty of obtaining them; we must first quaerere
before we shall acquerere; without seeking they will not be had.

2. In regard of the dignity of them: Plato tells us, what is excellent cannot
be gotten with ease, and shall we think that he that is in singularity
excellent, infinite, great, and infinitely good, yea greatness and goodness it
self, will be found without seeking? Away then with the vain conceits of those,
who think that God and his blessings are to be had without seeking, that hope
to have him, though they never look after him: Now (as Christ adds in the
next verse) he that seeks finds; so as certain it is, he that seeks him
not, finds him never: Indeed! if we respect the first overture that is made
in this business, and compare the time present with the time already by past,
then is it most true what the Lord himself averreth, Isa. 65.1. I am found of
them that sought me not: because to the Gentiles (who were heretofore so far
from finding him, that they never so much as looked after him) now he has given
an heart to seek, and power to find what they seek, for we are lost by nature:
A thing is not said to be found unless it were first lost. The Saints are
compared to sheep that are apt to be lost, Isa. 53.6. first then we must pray
with David, Lord seek thy servant; and aftterwards learn of him, being his
servant, to seek the Lord; so shall we have the Lord to be good to us: The Lord
is good to him that trusts in him, and to that soul that seeks him, Lam.
13.25. Si Deus tam bonus quaerenti, quid invenienti. Bernard.
If God be so good (says Bernard on these words of the Prophet) to him that
seeks him, what will he be to him that finds him? But a strange matter it
is, as he says, (continuing his speech) that no man can seek God before he
has found him: God will be sought that he may be found of us, and he will be
found, that he may further be sought of us: Men cannot seek him, says he,
unless they have found him: and, certain it is, that they have not yet found
him who never sought him, or that do not still constantly and continually seek
him.

There is a twofold vocation on Gods part, and a twofold disquisition or
seeking on our part. 1. There is an external, general, or common vocation,
when God offers us the means, which does not always take effect: so, many are
called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 20.16. 2. The other is an internal,
special, and peculiar vocation, when Gods blessing does accompany those means,
which can not be without taking effect: for those whom he calls, he
justifies, and whom he justifies he also glorifieth, Romans 8.30. Now as the
calling on God's part is twofold; so on our part, there is a twofold seeking;
and that is first outward, in using the means, and in taking pains about them,
which does not always take effect; so says the Prophet, Hose. 5.16. They
shall go with their flocks, and their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall
not find him. Our Savior also says, Many shall seek to enter in, but shall
not be able. The other inward, when by the gracious assistance of Gods Spirit
thoroughly working upon their hearts they seek after God: of which the Psalmist
says, Blessed are they that seek him with their whole heart. And God by his
Prophet says, They shall seek me, and find me, because they shall seek me with
their whole heart, and this is the seeking of which our Savior here speaks.

3. Knock] that is with the hand. It was a proverbial verse of old, among the
Lacedaemonians, that a man should set his heart on prayer, and his hand on work
both together: We are all beggars full of sores, and must knock hard at the
gate of mercy. Macarius (...), Macar. Homil. 1. p. 17. Luther says, Vitam
hominis nihil aliud nisi orationem, desiderium, gemitum, suspirium, ad
misericordiam Dei esse oportere.
that God made not man's body (...) that nature, that it might have meat, drink,
and apparel of it self: nor his soul, that it might have life eternal of it
self, and in its own power; but appointed them of other matter, that being
without themselves, and the gifts of God, they might beg, seek, and knock hard
for them aliunde; a man that knocks not at heavens gate, is like him that
prayed in the Poet, Labra movet, metuens audire, moving his lips, as though he
were afraid to be heard. Da mihi castitatem, and continentiam, sed noli modo:
timebam enim, ne me cito audires, and sanares a morbo concupiscentiae, etc.
Aug. confess. lib. 8 cap. 7.
S. Austin tells us before his conversion, that he prayed against his sins
coldly, and faintly, Lord give me chastity and continency, but not yet; for I
did fear, lest thou should quickly hear me and cure me of the disease of
concupiscence: when through the strength of conviction he prayed for continency
with his lips, he prayed against it in his heart; he turned not a deaf ear to
his old lusts, but gave them leave to parley with him, and pull him by the
sleeve, and say, Dimittisne nos? and a momento isto, non erimus tecum ab
aterno? What? will thou leave us? from this moment shall we have no more to do
with thee for ever? Therefore says the Church, Lament. 3.41. Let us lift up
our hearts with our hands to God in the heavens; they say not, let us lift up
our hearts alone, but let us lift up our hearts with our hands; let us not
only seek with our hearts, but also knock with our hands; and these hands that
must be lifted up, must be holy, or pure hands, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.8.
One observes, of the precious stone Diacletes, though it has many sovereign
virtues in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put into a dead man's hand: so
Prayer (which is the only Jewel of a Christian) though it has many choice
virtues in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put into the mouth or heart of
a man that is dead in sin: He gets nothing at the beautiful gate, that knocks
not with a pure hand, but is sent empty away.

Thus much concerning the meaning of the precept, Ask, seek, knock: the success
follows, or reason of the precept: it shall be given you; you shall find; it
shall be opened unto you. God requiring a condition to be performed, set out
under three forms of speech, Ask, seek, knock, promises to give us all good
things whatsoever: all which is no more than this, pray and ye shall be sure to
speed hence I shall draw this doctrinall conclusion:

That devout importunity is never dismissed, and sent away empty: or, Praye^ is
a powerful means which God has appointed us for the obtaining of his
blessings: it is that long arm whereby we may reach even from earth t^ heaven.
A learned Divine of our calls it canalem gratiae, Hoard's Souls misery, chap.
4
a channel or conduit pipe by which the ful^ stream of all necessary graces is
derived and brought home to us: bu^ of this I shall speak more largely
hereafter.

CHAP. II. The definition of Prayer, with a description of the parts of Prayer.
IT was well said of Chrysostom, tha^ that is an excellent knowledge, an^ worth
ye indeed of a Christian man which teaches how to pray aright which that we
may be instructed t^ do, shall appear out of the definition of Prayer.

Prayer is an invocation or calling upon God, in the name of Jesus Christ,
Definition of prayer.
for whatsoever things we stand in need of. So it is called Acts 2.21. Joel
2.32. Romans 10.13. God has commanded it, Call upon me, etc. Psalm. 50.15. and
the Greek word signifies, to call upon another for help in extremity.
Invocation is as it were to call God into us, says Anselm. Invocare est quasi
intus, aut in se vocare. Anselm. Par. Expos. in Romans 10. (...). Damascen. l. 3.
Orthodoxae fidei. (...). Septuag. in Job 5.8.
Prayer is called invocation in Latin, because it must be performed with
inmost affections; says a good Divine. Prayer says Damascen, is Petitio
decentium, a request to God, for such things as are fit for God to give, and us
to have: Or I may say further, That prayer is an ardent affection mounting up
to God, whereby we do both ask and expect from God for Christ's sake, all
corporal and spiritual blessings. Prayer is called, A committing our cause or
putting our case to God, Job ^.8. a speaking to God, or a plead^ng with God.
Prayer, says Augu^tine, is our speaking with God; when ^hou read, God
speaks to thee; when thou prayest, thou speak with God. Prayers, says a
learned Divine, are those calves of men's lips, those mos^ gracious and sweet
odours, those ric^ presents and gifts, which being carrie^ up into Heaven,
Hooker. Eccles. Polit. l. 5. Sect. 22 Oration tua est locut^o ad Deum, quando
legis, Deus tibi loquitur, quando oras, cum Deo loqueris. August. sup. Psalm.
85. Orat^ est afflicti cordis affectio, and gemitus, quo divinum auxiliu^
suppliciter imploratur, sive hoc verbis, sive absque verbis, s^lis gemitibus
and suspiriis fiat. Tzegedin. loc. com. in T^ orat. Magna res est invocatio
nominis Dei. Melanct. lo^ com. de Baptismo.
do best testify our dut^full affection, and are for the obtainin^ all favors
at the hands of God, the mo^ undoubted means we can use. To call^ the name of
God is a great matter, sait^ Melancton.

The parts of prayer are two, Petition. Thanksgivin^


A Petition is either for the obtai^ing of good, or the removal of ev^ whether
the evil of sin, or the evil ^ punishment: He that opens his ca^ to another,
and spreads his wants an^ miseries before him,

1. He is sensible that he stands ^ need of help, as the poor Prodigal.

2. He earnestly desires to be he^ped, as the humble Centurion.

3. He earnestly sueth for help, as the father of the dumb child, Lord, if thou
can do any thing for us, have compassion on us. And as the woman of Canaan,
crying earnestly to Christ; to heal her daughter.

4. He goes to one that is able to help him, as our Savior did in the days
of his flesh, Heb. 5.7. therefore praying is a begging and craving those things
at the hands of God which we stand in need of, Luke 17.15. as the ten Lepers
that cried aloud to Christ to cleanse them.

The word craving is of greater im^ortance, than the word asking: we may ask
things that are due debts to ^s; but when we come to crave a thing, we fly
wholly to the love and liberality of that person whose ^ounty we entreat and
crave. When ^reat Kings and Princes would have ^eir inferiors do any thing,
they ^o but speak the word, Do this, and ^bey do it: Every word has the force
^f a command upon them, and binds them to obedience; but when a man ^f low
degree would have any thing from his superior, whom he cannon bind unto
himself, he falls to entrea^ties, to make requests and supplications: The poor
uses entreaties, Prov^ 18.23. moving them by argumen^ drawn from their
nobleness an^ bounty, to supply their wants an^ indigencies.

Seneca in an Epistle said, he would have us like fertile fields which render
more than they receive: So should we return more thanks than we receive
benefits, which how can we do to God? to whom when we return the most, we must
confess, it is less than we should, and when least it is as much as we can.
The second part of prayer is Gr^tulation or Thanksgiving. The Ph^risee stood
and prayed, God I tha^ thee, etc. Luke 18.10. Indeed this the highest kind of
prayer:

1. Because to make request concerning our selves, shows our lo^ to our
selves, but to render than^ shows our love to God.

2. Because the other is a takin^ this is a giving; and our Savior sait It is
a more blessed thing to give than receive.

3. Because our requests shall ce^ at length; but we must always prai^ the Lord:
So the Angels in Heav^ do ascribe Glory, and wisdom, and ^nour, and thanks,
and power, and mig^ unto our God for evermore. And therf^ those that shall be
(...), like un^ the Angels of God, should not alwa^ ^peak with the tongues of
men to ^eg, but sometimes with the tongues ^f Angels to praise ^he Lord for his
^oodnesse. With a song of Thanks^iving, singing out aloud unto him, ^ith the
Prophet David, Psalm. 103.1.
My soul ^less thou the Lord, and all that is with^n me bless his holy name:
For, if ever we expect an answer from God for ^uture requests, he must first
have a ^eturn from us of thanksgiving for those blessings which we have
received.

CHAP. III. Of the Kinds of Prayer.
Sect. 1. Of Mental Prayer.
HAving shown what prayer is, Tot sunt precationum genera, quot sunt pii,
animorum nostrorum motus. Cassian. Collat. 9. c. 8. Exodus 14.15. 1 Samuel 1.10,
13, 15.
I shall now treat of the kinds of prayer, which are Mental. Vocal.


1. Mental: so Moses prayed, when he spoke not a word, Exodus 14.15. and Hannah
spoke in her heart, when her lips moved not, and her voice wa^ not heard: yet
the Lord heard ho^ petition, though she prayed with he^ heart alone, and her
tongue stirred not. This kind of prayer is called A lifting up of the soul to
God, Psa^ 25.1. Unto thee O Lord, do I lift ^ my soul, that is, unto thee do I
pray The work of prayer is not so much to lift up the eyes to Heaven, to li^ up
the hand, and to lift up the voice as to lift up the heart, and the desire of
the heart to God. Prayer likewis^ is called, The pouring forth of the hea^
before the Lord, Psalm. 62.8. They a^ not our words, but our desires, sait^
Gregory, Gregor. in Job l. 22. c. 18.
that yield a most forcible soun^ in the most secret ears of God, for if w^ ask
eternal life only with the mouth, a^ desire it not in heart, Clamantes tacemus,
for all our crying we are inde^ but indeed but dumb: but if we desi^ it from
the heart, though we speak never a word, Tacentes clamamus, thoug^ we hold our
peace, yet do we cry. St Augustine August. in Psalm. 148. Homil. 16.
says, As our ears are to on^ words, so are Gods ears to our thoughts God who
is a Spirit, sees, hears and knows as well the thoughts o^ our hearts, as
the words of our mouths, Psalm 38.9. Lord all my desire is before thee, says
the Prophet. Though Zechary be dumb and cannot speak a word, yet the Angel
tells him, His prayer is heard, Luke 1.13. An afflicted soul may pray to God in
the midst of a company, and though no man hear him, yet God who knows his
heart, may hear his prayer. Such are the desires of Gods children many times,
as they are notable to express in words; 2 Samuel 7.20. Sometimes words flow in
abundantly in prayer; but the desires and breathings of their hearts do far
exceed their expressions; sometimes their prayers are interrupted, full of
intermissions and broken sentences, but they are perfected by these pantings
and gaspings of the soul begotten in them by the spirit of Christ. Sometimes
words fall short, Hoc negotium saepenumero plus agitur gemitibus, quam
sermonibus, and plus fleru quam affatu. Aug.
and quite fail them, being as it were ravished in spirit by a kind of divine
extacy, and then sighs and groans make a double supply of what is externally
wanting, they being loud cries in the ears of God, Psalm. 145.19. Therefore the
Lord is said to hea^ not only the requests, but also the desires of the
humble, Psalm 10.17 Yea God hears the sighing of hi^ people. As often as I
see thee sighing in the sight of God, says C^prian, I doubt not but in tho^
sighs of thine the holy Spirit dot^ breathe; when I see thee weepin^ me thinks
he is then forgiving.

Quoties te in conspectu Domini video suspirantem, Spiritum sanctum non dubito
aspirantem: cum intueor fleatem, sentio ignoscentem. Cypr. de coena Domini.
The Saints are assisted to pra^ with unutterable groans, Romans 8.2 so called,
because they cannot ^ expressed by words or gesture:

1. Not by the Saints themselves whose outward expressions come f^ short of
their inward affection prayer.

2. Not by hypocrites, who may fu^ counterfeit their voice, words and g^sture,
but can never express the i^ward affections of their hearts, wit^out the
assistance of the same Spirit God. David praised God upon an instrument of ten
strings; and he would never have told how many strings there were, but that he
made use of them all: God has given all of us bodies, as it were instruments
of many strings, and can we think it music good enough to strike but one
string, to call upon him with our tongues only? No, when the still sound of
the heart by holy thoughts, and the shrill sound of the tongue by holy words,
and the loud sound of the hands by holy works, do all join together; that is
Gods consort, and the only music wherewith he is affected. Sr Rio. Baker
Disquis. in Psalm. 51.
A strange child may use t^ same words to the parent with t^ true child, but
cannot conceive, mu^ less speak with the same affection Those that have felt
the pangs of t^ new birth, shall find themselves so^times at a stand, and that
all speech will ^e stopped, and words swallowed up, so that they cannot express
their holy ^assions, affections, raptur^ ^a^ishments and meditations. This ^as
I may so speak) is a kind of Angelical service. Angels have no speech, yet have
they their seraphical Hallelujah's, and so these (I may say) are prayers of
prayers, the very extract, quintessence and life of prayer. When our tongues
faulter, when our sentences are abrupt, when we pour forth our soul to God, not
by speech, but by tears, desires, sighs, sobs and groans; these are of the
spirits more immediate enditing, and therefore the more pure, the nearer the
fountain, and God is the more acquainted with them, and better accepts of
them. When the child cannot speak (it may be) for some extreme pain and
sickness, and great weakness, but looks on the parent, sigheth, groaneth,
weepeth, and casts up the eye and only breaths: Oh, how compassionate is
the parent, how do his bowels yearn within him? So it is in this case between
our heavenly Fath^ and us: Thou have heard my voice, hi^ not thine ear at my
breathing, at my c^ Lam. 3.56. Babes have no langua^ for the breast, but only
cries and tea^ and this language the mother c^ understand: yea looking up go^
for prayer: My prayer will I direct^ thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5.3. M^ eyes
fail with looking upwards, Psalm 69.3. The affections of the soul li^ smoke
break out at the window when the doors are shut. Tears ha^ a tongue and
language that our he^venly Father does understand: T^ Lord has heard the voice
of my we^ing, Psalm 6.8. I heard Ephraim ^ moaning himself, Jer 31.18, 20. G^
hears the voice of our tears, as weeping consisted of words and setences.
Sufficit auribus imber oculolorum sletus citius audit quam voces. Aug. de temp.
sermon. 226. Ambros. tom. 3. sermon. 46.
Austin says, He soon hears our tears than our wor^ Tears, says Ambrose,
are as were a speechless praying, the crave not pardon, yet they obtai^ it,
they open not their case, y^ they find mercy. The prayers ^ tears are much more
profitable tha^ the prayers of words. Words in ^rayer may deceive, tears
cannot: Words many times do their errands ^y halves, tears make demonstrati^n
of the whole affection.

Sect. 2. Of vocal Prayer.
PRayer is also vocal as well as mental, outward as well as inward; though the
heart be the prin^ipal, yet it is not the sole agent in prayer: All prayer is
not included ^n conceived prayer. God will have ^he honor of our tongues, as
well as of ^ur hearts, and the calves of our lips ^o be offered up unto him; he
has given us a body as well as a soul, and ^ooketh to be glorified with both.
A man may pray with his heart, but must not confine it to the heart alone:
Therefore the Lord says to the Church, Hos. 14.2. Take to you words, and say,
take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. Words are necessary in
prayer,

1. That others may join with us in prayer, for as it is a duty for the Saints
to pray one for another, so it is of great use to pray one with another: Now
unless we use word^ others cannot join with us in praye^ God requires that a
family should pray together, this brings a ble^sing upon the whole house: the
sam^ is necessary also in regard of public^ Assemblies, where Minister an^
people are to pray together, ther^ must be a distinct and audib^ voice, that
they which join wit^ us may understand it, and be edifie^ thereby.

2. To complete our own prayer when the heart and tongue go together in prayer,
this is a complete o^lation. Dr Holdsworth Sermon. in Hos. 14.2.
When the dart of prayer ^ pointed with zeal, and feathere^ with holy
expressions, it flies hom^ and hits the mark, as a learned man well notes.

3. It is necessary to use words i^ prayer, Voce interdum nos ipsos ad
devotionem acrius excitamus. Aug. Epist. 122, ad Prove. cap. 9. Utilis quoque
est quoniam fervit devotioni ja excitatae, quae erumpere solet, and redundare
in extremum a sectum. Moller. in Psalm. 54.
to inflame our devotio^ and quicken our affections. Pray^ is compared to
incense, therefore when the fire is upon the altar of the heart, it must be
blown up into flame by the billows of holy expressions: No man can long abide
in mental and ejaculatory prayer; if words be wanting, it is a hard matter to
keep up the affections in their due bounds, and the heart from running out in
many excursions.

4. Words are not necessary in regard of God, to enform him what we want, who
knows all our wants, and understands our thoughts afar off; or to
instruct him, as if he were ignorant of any thing; but in regard of our selves
to testify our obedience to his Commandments; who has commanded us in all our
necessities to call upon him, and likewise to testify our faith in the
promises of God.

5. Though there be no need at all of voice, when we make our private prayers
to God, in regard that God hears and beholds our hearts and minds; yet
sometimes (says Peter Martyr Pet. Martyr. in 1 Samuel 1.12.
) it may be used to very good purpose; because it may fall out, that we may
languish in our prayers, and our minds man be wearied, which the voice aga^
will refresh, and give thereunto new vigor. Therefore says D^vid, I cried
unto the Lord with ^ voice, and he heard me out of his h^ hill, Psalm 3.4. By
our tongues prayer we tell God how it is with u^ Lord, how are my troubles
increased Thus and thus it is with me. S^ Jeremy Chap. 20. 12. To thee I ha^
opened my cause. And David, Psalm 119.26. I have declared my ways un^ thee. And
though the words tha^ we utter in prayer are but few, ye^ if they flow from a
sincere affection it may be said of them, Quam multa quam paucis. Tul. Epist.
Fam. l. 11. Epist. 24. Aug. Epist. 121. c. 10.
as Tully i^ another case; How much is there i^ how few words? The brethren i^
Egypt, says St Austin, are reported to have many prayers; Se^eas tamen
brevissimas, and raptim quo^ dammodo jaculatus: but all of them very short, as
if their words were so many darts thrown out with a kind of a sudden
quickness. Give ear to my words, O Lord, says David, Psalm. 5.1. Let the words
of my mouth be acceptable in thy sight, etc. Ps. 19. ult. ^hus Abraham speaks
and pleads ^ith God in the behalf of Sodom, ^en. 18. Is it fit that dust and
ashes ^ould thus speak to God, as David did, ^ive ear to my w rds, ponder and
consi^er my words? Say but to thy fellow-^reature, if once he be above thee in
^uthority: Sir, consider my suit, ^onder well what I have spoken, ^eigh it well
before you judge; and ^ill he not presently take it in snuff, and think you
have done him wrong, as if you called his wits in ^uestion: but such is the
love and ^oodnesse of our great Creator, that ^e disdaineth not to be called
upon ^n those terms; ponder and consi^er well my words, that Magistrates may
learn (in like sort) to give ^oor suitors leave, if sometimes tran^ported and
carried away with the ^agernesse of their affections, they ^hance to forget
themselves. Memorable is that Story of a poor woman, who having a suit to
Philip King of Macedon, hearing him say, that he was not at leisure to hear
her, ^nswered him; Noli ergo regnare; Plutarch. Apopth.
^hen give over reigning, said she; which bold answer of her the Ki^ admiring,
and taking in good part gave her present audience, ar^ not to her only, but to
other also.

Quid prodest strepitus verborum, ubi cor est mutum? sicut enim vox sine
modulatione est quasi gemitus porcorum. Sic oration sine devotione est quasi
mugitus Boum. Isidor. Oration cordis est non labiorum, neque enim verba
deprecantis Deus intendit, sed orantis cor aspicit, and melius est cum silentio
orare in cord, sine sono vocis, quam solis verbis sine intuitu mentis Isidor.
Macrob. Comment. in Somn. Scipion.
Now it is not enough to use wor^ in our prayers, unless hearty affection go
with our words; for o^ may pray and not speak, and another speak and not pray;
this man voice (though never so loud) is n^ heard, because his praying is all
voice, nothing in virtue; in outwa^ sound, not in inward sense: T^ former is
heard, yet speaks no^ for though his mouth be shut, y^ his heart is open, and
his heart ta^eth with God, though his tongue ^ tied up before men. A sincere
Ch^stian, though he make use of ^ tongue in prayer, yet is he carefu^ that his
prayers go not out of feign^ lips, Psalm 17.1. and that when ^ draws near to
God, and honoure^ him with his lips, his heart be n^ far from him, Isa. 29.13.
The spirit of prayer, as one well note^ sets up the heart to its due height,
and then windeth up the words accordingly to it, and so makes a complete
Diapason, or harmony of the whole, to yield a grateful sound in the ears of
God.

CHAP. IV. Of the efficient of Prayer.
THe next thing I shall treat of, shall be the efficient cause of ^rayer, which
is the holy Ghost: ^or desire to pray, is not bred in us by nature, nor
acquired by humane ^udy or industry, but put into us by ^he Spirit of God,
Balls Treat. of prayer.
as a judicious Di^ine well notes: As no man can ^y Jesus is the Lord but by
the holy ^host, 1 Cor. 12.2, 3. So no man ^n be enabled to call upon the Lord ^
his Father sincerely and affectio^ately, but by the sanctifying Spirit. because
ye are sons, therefore God has ^nt forth the Spirit of his sons into your
^earts, whereby ye cry Abba, Father, ^al. 4.6. The Apostle exhorts the
Ephesians, to pray with all manner prayers and supplications in the Spirit
Ephesians. 6.18. The Spirit is the ri^ of true prayer, Bains Exposit. in Ephesians.
if it proceed n^ thence, it is an empty ring whi^ God regards not, says a
learn^ man. Prayer is not a work of man wit, nor of humane learning: F^ says
the Apostle, We of our selv^ know not what to pray for as we oug^ Now true
effectual prayer, is a wo^ a fruit, a gift, an effect of the sanc^fying Spirit:
The Spirit it self help^ our infirmities, and teaches us to pr^ Romans 8.26, 27.
As a Watch can^ go, unless the spring be wound u^ and an instrument can make
no m^sick, though it be in tune, unle^ we finger it, and play out; a^ reason
will make this evident us.

1. All good works are the fru^ of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. the^fore to pray
being a good work, it a fruit of the Spirit. I will pour w^ter upon him that is
thirsty, and flo^ upon the dry ground: The meani^ whereof he interprets in
the ne^ words, I will pour out my Spirit on ^ seed, and my blessing on thy
offspring; and they shall spring up as among the grass, and as willows by the
watercourse; ^ne shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by
the name of ^acob, and another shall subscribe with ^is hand unto the Lord, and
surname himself by the name of Israel, Isa. ^4.3, 4, 5.

2. As all the actions of Gods com^union with us, or communicating himself unto
us, are conveyed by ^e holy Ghost, as in the works ^f conversion,
sanctification, con^lation, etc. So all the actions ^f our communicating our
selves ^ him, are managed and dis^arged by the Spirit; as Faith, Re^entance,
Love, etc. so likewise this ^f prayer.

Quest. Does not then a regenerate ^an pray truly, or does only the holy Ghost
^ay in him, and for him, as Christ did, ^d does make intercession for his peo^,
or as one man may pray and does for another.

Resp. A regenerate man; foras^uch as he is spiritualized, etc. by ^rtue of
that increated heavenly nature and principle, may be truly sa^ to pray, and
properly too, as a m^ that has legs may be said to go; though prayer be the
gift of God, y^ it is the act of man. The Lord s^ of Saul after his conversion,
Bel^ he prays, Acts 9.11. But this d^ not exclude, but rather necessar^
include the concurrent assistance Gods Spirit, a special concurrence^ the
Spirit to produce this spe^ work; For of our selves we are not s^ficient for
one good thought, 2 Cor. 3 As he that has legs cannot go wi^out the common
concurrence Gods Spirit to that common actio^ so it is in the children of God:
A^ i^ with a wheel that has in it an^titude to turn about; but this m^ be done
by some hand, or some ^ternal, or internal motion, or a ^mation; if that cease,
the wheel ^ quickly stand still: so it is in all holy actions of a good man,
and this of prayer; there must be an citing and concomitant work of ^ Spirit;
the Spirit of God is set o^ the prayers of Gods people, it hat^ superintendency
over them, he ^ ^erneth them in their prayers, without whose assistance they
know not that to ask, as they ought: It is the ^ork of the Spirit ad preces
instigare, ^ stir up unto prayer, Et verba and ^spiria suggerere, and to
suggest ^ords and breathings into them, ^^ch prayers God will grant which ^e
reads written in the style of his ^wn Spirit. Ubicunque faciem suam Deus
contemplatur, illam merito a^at, and honor habet. Calv. instit. l. 3. c. 13.
The reason why God ^^ce^teth those prayers, is because ^^ey come from the
Spirit, and are the ^^pressions of his own Image, which ^od cannot choose but
love, where^ever he beholds it, as Calvin says.

Now the Spirit enableth a man to ^ray:

1. By convincing him of his sins, and of his miserable estate by them.

2. By working in him a desire to ^e delivered from them, showing ^im withal
the true and only way (...) recover out of that estate, viz. by jesus Christ.

3. By begetting in him a true faith and sanctified nature, by which he
^pprehendeth God to be his gracious ^ather in Christ, willing to receive ^im
into the arms of his embracements, upon his unfeigned repe^ance. And then

4. By stirring up spiritual desir^ and earnest requests unto God in ^ heart,
for putting words in ^ mouth, and so enditing his pray^ for him, that they may
be accep^ble; and this the Spirit does ordin^rily in every man's first
conversion^ and afterward upon occasion st^ring up his spiritual part; to po^
out it self in supplication, out of ^ holy acquaintance and familiar^ that it
has with God.

Hence you may see the grou^ why the prayers of the Saints are ^ powerful with
God, viz. not on^ because they are tendered and p^sented up in the name of
Christ; b^ also, because they are endited a^ put into us by the Spirit, who
tea^eth us to pray (both for matter a^ manner) according to the will ^ God,
Romans 8.27. The Spirit on^ knowing the mind of God, 1 Cor. 10, 11. and so God
knows and a^proveth the voice of his own Spirit thence it is, Crooks hypocr.
part 1. chap. 21.
that praying in the h^ Ghost, Jude verse. 20. They wr^stle with God, and
overcome him with his own weapons, and being strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, they do not only encounter Devils, but also prevail with
God, as a grave Divine notes. And thence it is, that their prayers pierce the
clouds, and ^ave present access to the throne of Grace, entering into the ears
of the Loord of Hosts. Our prayers are ^he works of Gods Almighty Spirit, and
therefore they have an omnipo^ent and irresistible power to prevail with him,
Genesis 32.26. Exodus 32.9, 10. And therefore those that desire this gift of
prayer, let them labor after ^he assurance of this gift of Gods ^anctifying
Spirit, that so they may ^ome into an holy familiarity with God by prayer and
supplication, This Spirit is gotten by our constant and faithful attendance on
the Word ^lainly and powerfully preached, Gal. 3.2. And as we prize that high
and heavenly exercise of prayer, having the Spirit, let us be careful we
quench not, nor grieve the Spirit, by our careless neglecting the motions of
it, nor resist it by our rebelli^ against it, and so cause it in disple^sure to
withdraw its influences from us, whereby we become secure, co^ and dead, and so
unfit for the ex^cise of all holy duties, especially t^ of prayer. It is our
duty theref^ to stir up the gifts of God in us, t^ all our prayers may be
quickened this Spirit of supplication, and every petition pouring forth w^ the
Spirit suggesteth to us. The ^ which God would have burning (...) on the Altar,
came from the L^ from Heaven, Levit. 9.24. All ot^ fires were strange fires,
Levit. 10 and the Sacrifices not accepted, the sacrificer punished: Yet must a
Christian give over this duty wh^ly to the Spirit of God, because Spirit
enableth us to do it, but must rouse up our selves, and m^ our selves (in what
we can) fit the Spirits guidance, continuing the diligent use of all holy mea^
that the Spirit may blow more a^ more strongly upon us. The Sp^ gives abillity
to pray, and in^citeth us to it, but we must pray ^he Spirit. Many cry, Lord
help, ^ho quicken not themselves to this ^uty; they think merely upon the ^ew
of supply that comes from the spirit; but if you keep your seed in ^he Garner,
God will not increase ^our store; you must plow and sow, and then in your
endeavors you may look for a blessing from Heaven. God has said, he will meet
his people, Isa. 64.5. but he expects that you should be going and then he
will come. Symonds deserted Souls case and cure.
God deals with his people (says a good Divine) as men do with young
swimmers, he will hold up your heads, but you must stretch out your limbs.

CHAP. V. Shows, to whom we must pray.
Sect. 1.
NOw am I to show, to whom our prayers are to be directed, and that is to God
alone. Prayer (as a Father well says) is a familiar conference with God; by it
we talk wi^ him (as it were) face to face: A^ what greater dignity and
priviled^ can be vouchsafed to sinful dust a^ ashes, then familiarity to talk
wi^ so great a God, and daily to have free and easy admittance into ^
presence, to manifest our necessit^ to him, and to crave his supply a^ succor?
God only is to be pray unto; he is styled in Scripture, ^ God hearing prayer,
Vid. Sharpij cursum theologica. Tom. 2. Quaest. 5. Col. 42. and 51.
Psalm 65.1. ^ thou that hear prayer, unto thee she all flesh come. Not
Angels, Saint nor any other creatures are to be called upon. David in his
distress ca^leth not upon any of the Patriarc^ departed, not upon Samuel or
Jon^than his dearly beloved frien^ whereas had he been of the Popi^ faith, he
would have applied himself unto them; for that as the P^pists hold, as the
Saints have a ge^neral care of the Church mili^tant, so more especially they at
ready to befriend such as the^ were acquainted withal in their li^ time.

The Reasons to prove, that God ^nely is to be prayed unto, are ^hese.

We have a precept for this duty, Psalm 50 15. God says, Call upon ^e in the
day of trouble, and I will ^eliver thee. Look as nature teach^th children to
come to their Parents ^or every thing they need, not to servants in house with
them; so grace and Gods word, teaches Gods children to come to him, and cry
Abba Father, and to fly to him in their necessities. All others are rather
persons praying to God, than persons to be prayed unto as God.

Object. But, are we to pray only to God the Father? (because our Savior
seems to direct us to pray only to God the Father, After this manner pray ye,
Our Father] and even Bellarmine and the Papists themselves do except, that it
is lawful also to pray to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: For if the word
[Father] were used exclusively, then might we deny praying to the Son, as to
Angels and Saints.

Resp. It is not necessary, the the word [ Father] should be u^derstood
personally, but rather esse^tially for the whole Deity. Call (...) man father
on earth, for one is yo^^ Father which is in Heaven, Matt^ 23.9. Thus the
Godhead is o^ Father, as well by Nature, as (...) Grace, by Creation, as
Adoption Isai. 64.8. He is called the Fath^ of spirits, Heb. 12.9 he being the
natural Father of Christ from a eternity; he also vouchsafes f^ ^his sake to
take us to be his sonn^ by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.20 In this acception
the Son is calle^ a Father, Isa 53.10.
an everlasting Father, Is^ 9.6. Isa. 8.8. And thus the Spir^ may be called
Father also, Unus potentialiter, trinus personaliter.
becau^^ by him we are regenerated, Joh^ 3.5. whereas the Angels an^ Saints
cannot be called our Fa^thers, but our Brethren, Rev. 22 9 in the Deity we must
think of thre^ Persons, but one divine Essence, on^ God.

2. If the word [ Father] were to be understood personally, yet is not the
inference the same; the Father is to be invocated, therefore not the Son, nor
the holy Ghost with these; therefore not the Angels nor Saints: For there is no
natural difference between the three Persons, for they are each the same one
invisible God; and therefore all their work, ad extra sunt indivisa: but there
is a natural and essential difference between the Father and the Angels, and
also an external difference. And therefore the Ancients have observed, That
when the Father is only mentioned, (...).
it is not to exclude the other two Persons, but only to difference the true
God from those that are not gods by nature.

Object. 2. Bellarmine excepteth, That Christ in that prayer does not teach his
Disciples to whom they should pray (for that they knew well enough) but for
what thing they should pray.

Resp. Christ taught his Disciples, not only materialiter, but formaliter, how
they should pray; as appears by their request, Lord, teach us to pray; which
request was general, as well of the form, as f^ the matter; whereas if they h^
meant of the materials, they shou^ have framed their requests thu^ Lord teach
us for what things w^ must pray. And although the knew he was to be prayed unto
yet they were ignorant how the^ should pray unto him; and ther^ fore he taught
them how to pra^ which comprizeth both matter are manner; and therefore thereby
yo^ may observe,

1. That the Apostles entreat o^ Savior in general, how they man pray, and not
in particular how t^ pray to God; for then it might have seemed, there had been
prayers distinctly, some for God, some for the Saints; but this general reque^
takes away all cavil.

2. Christ says, Cum oratis, Who ye pray, answering to their genera^ request;
and therefore is as much as Quoties oratis, as often as y^ pray. Now if Christ
here gave a^ general form to be used, then such as when they pray do not say,
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. ^hey do not pray: But such as call upon
the Virgin Mary, Angels and ^aints, dare they say, Our Father which art in
Heaven? Therefore christ taught no other to be called upon but God alone.

Resp. 2. Prayer is a part of Gods wor^hip; it is that which he requires of
^s, Hos. 14.2, 3. It is that wherein much ^f his glory consists, and his glory
^e will not give to another, Isa. 42.8. Now we glorify God by nothing ^ore
than by praying to him, Psalm ^0.15. Hereby we acknowledge ^im to be the
fountain of all mercies and blessings, we have or do desire; ^raising him for
his bounty and libe^ality toward us, as being both able and willing to help us
in all our ne^essities. The Heathen that knew ^ot the true God, and in what
man^er he was to be worshipped, did ^now by the light of nature, that God was
to be called upon in all ne^essities; therefore the Mariners in a^ storm, Jonah
1.5. Cried every man unto his God. Now, 1. This was good that they prayed; for
it is a tri^ute due to God, such a tribute as none can be excused for not payi^
2. Good also it was that they pray^ when they were in trouble. 3. N^ were they
to be blamed for crying their prayers; Sub errore religionis intellexerunt.
Naurae, aliquid numen verendum esse. Hieron.
so as it procee^ from fervency of affection, and ^ from vainglorious
affectati^ 4. It was good also that they joyed together in prayer: but h^ was
their fault, only they pray^ unto false gods; They cried e^ man to his god.
These Heather^ mariners under a false Religi^ understood that some Divine Po^er
was to be adored, says Jer^ and therefore they cry also to ^nas being asleep,
Awake, O slee^ and call upon thy God. The A^nians likewise set up an Altar w^
this Inscription, To the unknown G^ Acts 17.23.

Now as he is an Idolater, w^ prays to those who by nat^ are not gods; then
is he to be t^ counted godly, who prays he^tily to the true God: to him only
we are bound to pray, who^ we must serve and worship: B^ God alone is to be
served a^ worshipped by us, therefore to ^im alone must we pray, Deuter. ^ 13.

Prayer is a spiritual Sacrifice; ^ow under the Law, Sacrifice was ^o be
offered to God alone: Let ^y prayer be as Incense, and the ^ifting up of my
hands, as the Eve^ing Sacrifice, Psalm 141.3. When ^he Priest of Jupiter with
the people would have offered Sacri^ice to Paul and Barnabas, they ^ent their
clothes, and cried out, ^irs, why do ye these things? Acts 4.12, 13, 14. The
Rhemists Rhem. Annot. in Act. 14.
on that place tell us, That external Sacrifice is not to be offered to man
nor Angel, nor any creature, but to God alone. Now the Sacrifice of prayer is
^n higher and more excellent Sa^rifice, than any outward Sacri^ice can be, and
the offering up of ^he calves of the lips, more acce^table than a calf out of
the stall, ^or a Bullock that has horns and ^hoofs.

None ought to be called upon but Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him in
wh^ they have not believed? therefore pra^er must be made in faith: Psalm. 5 2^
2. therefore says David, hearken u^ the voice of my cry, my King, and God, for
unto thee will I pray. Psalm. 5 it is a wicked thing to derive fa^ from any
creature: Bellarmine Vid Jun. animad v. in Bellarm.
to ^clare the force of this reason, has ^ jugle: He cannot, says he, call ^
the Saints, who does not believe ^ there are Saints, and in a manner hop^ them:
but the Scripture teach^ that the Saints are in no manne^ be believed in, but
God alone. I^ one thing, says Mr. Ball, Ball's Treat. of Prayer.
to have f^ of the Saints, another to believe in Saints: he that holds not the
fo^er, denies the communion of Sai^ in the unity of the spirit; he t^ affirms
the other, has not learned Christ or piety.

^s well as the upright person, for he ^an give as good words, and make as ^air
shows as the sincere: but this ^he Lord only can do: God only ^noweth our
hearts, and what we ^nwardly desire. Jer. 17.9, 10. Acts 1.^4. God is
omnipresent, and hears ^ll prayers in all places, and at all ^imes; and as
for mental prayers, no Angels, much less can Saints know them; now the Lord is
present in all ^laces, filling heaven and earth; and ^e only is infinite in
knowledge, and truth it self, who can not deceive, ^or be deceived.

God only is all-sufficient, and able ^am. 1.17. who can irresistibly effect
^hatsoever is good for us. Mr. John ^radford Jo. Bradford. Meditat. in Orat.
dominic.
tells us, that three things ^ust of necessity be in that party, to whom
prayers must be made: 1. He ^ust be present in all places at once; and have
such ears, as he may hear all ^e world at once. 2. He must be so merciful, as
that he will part all the faithful that call upon hi^ and deliver them that
cry unto h^ and bestow such things as he kno^eth best for them. 3. He must b^
sufficient power to help all at onc^

Sect. 2.
BUt here it will be necessary to ^swer diverse Objections of Papists.

Object. 1. It is objected by the that Jacob prayed unto an Angel i^ behalf of
Joseph's sons. Genesis 48. The Angel which redeemed me from evil bless the lads,
and let my na^ named upon them.

Resp. By the Angel that deli^ed him is meant Christ, who is ca^ an Angel,
and the Angel of the ^venant. Basil. contr. Eun. lib. 2. Athanas. Orat. 4.
contr. Cyril. these. lib. 3. cap. 1. Hilar. in Psalm. 122. Procop. Gaz. in Genesis
48.
Mal. 3.1. he is set out b^ sacerdotall office, as being he was covenanted for,
or promised he that should administer the c^nant: and the Fathers are of op^ on
that this Angel was no cre^ Angel, because he is joined ^ God, mentioned
verse 15. and as ^ called an Angel here, and Exodus 23.^, 23. Behold I send an
Angel before ^ee. So is he called a man, Genesis 32.^4. because he was in a man's
shape; ^t was indeed true God, as appear^h by the name which was given to
^acob, after he had prevailed with ^im, verse. 28. and as himself did
un^erstand, verse. 30.

2. When Jacob says, Let my ^ame be named or called upon the ^ds, his meaning
is, that Jacob would ^ave Joseph's sons be counted for his ^ns, and be called
the sons of Jacob; ^s appears Genesis 48.5. as afterward ^ey were reputed, and
the Hebrew ^hrase does import no other, as it is ^sed, Isa. 4.1. and elsewhere:
besides ^ve never find, that ever they wor^hipped him after his death, but
rather the contrary; as may be col^cted from Isa. 63.16. and why should Jacob
require this of Joseph's ^ons, rather than of his own chil^ren?

Object. 2. They object further out ^f Job. 5.1. that speech of Eliphaz to ^ob,
Call now, if there be any that will ^nswer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? Job 5.1.

Resp. 1. This is meant rather of ^ Saints then living, than of the Sai^
departed, by the scope of the pla^ sc. those that were then present, that
conference, or any other the known unto him; to see if after ^peal to them, any
of them wo^ maintain him in his cause, or t^ the wrath of God did not at one
ti^ or other destroy the wicked man.

2. Or if it were meant of Sai^ departed, his meaning is, that could not give
instance of any ^ Saint in former ages, that ever s^fered the like with him;
theref^ they concluded, that he must ne^ be an hypocrite.

3. If Eliphaz did exhort Job to ^ for aid to the Saints departed, it f^loweth
not, that it was therefore la^full; for he that spoke not the tri^ in other
particulars, as Job 42.7. mi^ the more likely offend in this: a^ therefore
Bellarmine grants t^ this is not a convincing argume^ because Job himself
does not say^ but only as it was the custom to do.

4. Some understand this of the Angels: Call to the Angels and see, Mascus in
Ios. 5.13. Vatabl. Annot. Mercer.
any of them will vouchsafe to an^er thee, which may be to thee an ^rgument how
vile thou art: and so is an Irony.

Object. 3. Psalm. 139.17. where we ^anslate, How precious are thy thoughts me O
God? Vulgat. in Ps. 139.17.
the vulgar Latin turn^th thus; Mihi autem nimis honori fi^iti sunt amici tui:
Lord, thy friends ^te wonderfully honored of me: ^ow these friends (say they)
are ^aints departed, and this honor is ^vocation.

Resp. One of the original words ^gnifieth to be precious, (...)
and [ Reang] ^ough it sometime signify a friend, ^et it also signifies a
thought, and ^ so translated Psalm. 139.2. by the ^XX, and the vulgar Latin; so
that ^ may very well be translated, How ^etious are thy thoughts to me? and ^us
it would suit far better, if we ^ompare it with the context. But 2. ^et the
translation be according to their mind, what force is in it? For ^. It cannot
be proved, that David ^eant rather the Saints living than the Saints departed,
according that Psalm. 16.3. My goodness extend to the Saints that are on the
earth, the excellent in whom is all my deli^^ Psalm. 16.3. But 2. What if t^
were dead, and he did honor the yet what manner of honor this that he gave
them cannon proved: We confess that the Sa^ departed are to be honored, not
with the honor of invocat^ neither is there the least groun^ Scripture, that
ever the Patriarc^ Jews did ever honor the dead ^ if they did, this would
prove, tha^ should honor the Saints dead b^ Christ, of whom the Papists (are
otherwise mad enough with kind of adoration) make not^standing no account of
ad^ any of the Patriarchs dead b^ Christ.

Object. 4. One creature may b^ full to another, therefore we may p^ to another.

Resp. 1. No creature of it self be helpful to another, further God permits or
enableth them: says, Isa. 10.3. What will ye do i^ ^y of visitation, and in
the desolation which shall come from far? to whom ^ill ye flee for help? and
where will ye ^ave your glory? and Isa. 31.3. The ^gyptians are men, and not
God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit, when the Lord shall stretch out
his hand, both he that helps shall fall, and he that is hol^en shall fall
down, and they all shall fail together.

2. Its not a sufficient ground to move us to call upon another, because it may
be helpful to us (for then might prayer be made to unrea^onable creatures:) We
must know also; that he to whom we pray, hears us, and is both able and
willing to help us; but this we cannot say of the Angels and Saints.

3. We must distinguish between civil and religious worship; the former is
done only in civil respects, in such particulars, wherein we have some
ground, that the party we request can help us; as Ministers to instruct us;
Magistrates to protect us from wrong; Physicians to heal our diseases, and to
these we are to repair only as Instruments under God for our help, depending
on G^ and praying to him for blessi^ Now when we sue unto men help, such prayer
is not religion for that is to be made with assurance of faith, which is on^
proper to God, and therefore no creature. So that this A^gument is of no force
or co^quence.

Sect. 3.
HOw then does this condemn t^ gross Idolatry and Will-worst of the Papists in
diverse particulars: Regina Coeli, matter misericordiae, gratiae vita, dulcedo
and spe^ nostra.
that they maintain the Doctrine Angel-worship, of adoration Saints, and of the
Virgin Mary a canonized Saints, calling especia^ on the Virgin Mary, as the
Que^ of Heaven, the mother of mer^ the life of grace; the seed that shou^
bruise the head of the Serpent, and and in their Liturgy they have a L^tany
whereby they pray, 1. To he^ 2. To the Archangels and Angel^ 3. To Patriarchs
and Prophets. 4. T^ the Apostles and Evangelists. 5. T^ the Martyrs. 6. To
Fathers and Doctors. 7. To Popes and Con^ssors. 8. To Monks and Ere^ites. 9. To
all the Saints, Vir^ins and Widows, that they would ^oyn together to make
Intercession ^or them; and to these Saints they ^ave their set Holy Days, to
them ^hey burn Tapers, perform Masses and Trentals: Each have their sun^ry
Collects, Hymns, Prayers and Oblations; each have their sundry ^ffices designed
them. Some are ^ver Cities and Countries; some ^re over trades; some are over
di^eases; some have the special gift of ^estowing Arts and Sciences. Now what
is all this but to forsake the ^ountain of living waters, and to hew ^ut broken
cisterns that can hold no water, as God complains in a like ^ase? Jer. 2.12.
And what is the ^ise of all this, but from a prepo^terous admiration of Saints
depart^d (or I may say of some of them ^hey were rather Devils incarnate) and
from the perverse opinion of ^uch as make no difference between ^ivil prayer to
men living, and religious prayer to Saints departe^ Which error has been
maintai^ed and heightened by the pertina^ous ambition, and great avarice the
Popish Clergy; so that now Proverb among the French is without ground; Qu'on ne
cognoist Dieu plus enter les Saints.
God knows more than the Saints. Thus h^ they jumbled together God and Saints
in a promiscuous manne^ worship: Nay, to what an he^ of madness are they run,
in t^ the very bones, ashes, and garme^ of Saints departed are preserved them
in boxes, and publicly a^red, by carrying them about in p^cession, falling
down before the^ and praying to them, kissing them, burning incense before the^
and ascribing to them the po^er of working miracles, h^ing diseases, and
driving aw^ Devils.

Let us now therefore learn abhor all creature-adoration, b^ in deed and
desire; and pray only to the true God: all others ^ but miserable comforters;
as ^ our necessities, none can know the^ ^ut God only; none will more ^ity
them than God, as Austin ^ittily observes out of the Para^le of Christ, Nullus
de janitoribus respondit, q. omnes tenuerat somnus, non Angeli, non Propherae:
at licet pueri tui dormiunt, tu non dormis qui custodis Israel. August. in Luc.
11. Vid. Lycer. Harmon. cap. 107.
Luke 11.7, 8. where ^nely the master of the house an^wered, and gave what was
craved: None of the Porters answered; for ^leep had held them all, neither
Angels nor Prophets answered: But though thy children sleep; yet ^hou never
slumberest nor sleep, who art the keeper of Israel. Therefor to the Lord
alone let us seek, ^et no pretense divert us from him: It were an ill excuse,
for a wise to plead, she loved her husband dearly; and therefore in his absence
she must have others, to see them and embrace them, and communicate her loves
to them, as remembrances of him; but the husband would loath it, and account it
but a whorish love: Even so it would be far worse to give that worship to
others that is due to God alone. Besides, in all ^he Scriptures you shall not
find, that any Patriarch, Prophet or Apostle, has at any time put up any
prayer to any Angel or Saints departed. And, 2. ^gels have refused this honor,
^ would not accept thereof, w^men would have worshipped the Revel. 19.10.
Revel. 22.9. The A^stles also have refused to be w^shipped, while they were
living, ^ 10.25, 26. Acts 14.14, 15. And no ^vel, for if it be true what is
rep^ed of Olympias the mother of A^ander the Great, that hearing ^ he styled
himself the son of Jup^ she wrote to him, desiring him forbear doing so any
more, if ^ for his own sake, yet (at least) hers, because she feared the
disp^sure of Juno: Much more had ^ Angels and Saints cause to fear ^
displeasure of Almighty God, if t^ should adventure to assume to themselves
what was proper to him alo^ Origin Origin. contra Celsum, lib. 8.
teaches us, that this was ancient Faith and Religion of Church, showing that
God only to be worshipped, that Christians ^ make their pray^^s only to ^ by
Jesus Christ: That althou^ the Angels be so divine and exc^lent in nature, as
that the Scriptu^ sometimes calls them gods, and ^ey do bring unto us the
gifts of ^od, yet that we are not for all ^at to worship them, or to do divine
honor unto them, but that all pray^s, all supplications, intercessions and
^anksgivings are to be destinated unto God the Lord of all things by ^e
Highpriest the living Word, ^ho is God, greater than all Angels: that no man
should dare to offer ^rayers, but only to the Lord God who alone is abundantly
sufficient ^r all) by our Savior the Son of ^od. Theodoret. in Colos. cap. 2.
The Council of Laodicea also ^creed, Ne praecarentur Angelos, that ^en should
not pray to Angels, ^uch less did they intend that ^en should pray to men, who
know (...) not, and being only men, can be no ^ediators for our prayers, and
our ^aying to them can no whit avail to ^r salvation. No creature has ears ^ng
enough to reach the complaints, ^r stock large enough to supply the ^ants of
his fellow creature: there^re to God alone must all flesh ^me.

CHAP. VI. Shows in whose name we are pray.
Sect. 1.
NOw are we to show in w^ name we are to put up prayers to God, viz. in the n^
of Christ. One of the Fathers ^ much pleasure in reading T^ Hortensius, yet
this at last made lay it aside, because he found not^ name of Christ in it. As
the n^ of Christ is the ornament of B^ and Sermons, so it is the essen^ all
prayers. Verily, verily I say you, whatsoever ye shall ask the F^ in my name he
will give it you, In nomine Christi id fieri dicitur, quod fit secundum ejus
mandatum and voluntatem, invocato illius adjutorio, and ad gloriam ejus
amplificandam: per^stum mediatorem and invocare Deum debemus, and gratias ^
postquam Deus nos audiverit invocantes* Davenant. in Col.
^ our Savior Christ, John 16.23. W^soever ye do, do all in the na^ Christ,
giving thanks to God the him, Col. 3.17. Through him ^oth Jews and Gentiles
have entrance ^o the Father by one Spirit. God ^n himself is a consuming fire,
but ^a Christ he is a fire in the bush that ^urneth not.

Reas. 1. We are of our selves indis^osed to draw nigh to God by nature. ^rayer
is a communing with God, which presupposes a familiarity ^ith him: In Christ
we have bold^esse and access with confidence to come unto the Father, Ephesians.
3.12. By nature we are severed from Gods ^resence; Our iniquities separate
be^ween us and our God, Isa. 59.2. Un^er the Law, when people had sin^ed, they
must offer a sin-offering ^o take away their sin, and after^ard they might
bring their burnt-^ffering, Levit. 5.7, 8. so it is with ^s, we have all sinned
and gone ^stray, and we must by faith in our ^earts offer to God the Lamb
ta^ing away our sins, then may we ^ome boldly to the throne of grace, and offer
up a holy Sacrifice to God ^y Jesus Christ. As God by Christ ^econciled the
world to himself, so God by Christ discovers himself to the world; for we
cannot ha^ any knowledge of the Father, b^ by the Son: He is indeed entitul^
Our Father, but it is first as he the Father of our Lord Jesus Chri^ he looks
on his elect as parts Christ, and therefore they a^ called the fulness of
Christ, Eph^ 1.28.

2. We cannot draw nigh to G^ in prayer without Christ, becau^ Gods promises
ought to be t^ ground of our prayers, and the are all made unto us in Chri^ and
he that prays without a p^mise, cannot hope to speed in ^ prayers. That which
in the L^ God commands, in the Gosp^ he promises to give unto his people.
Joseph commands his brethren, that if ever they would see his face with
comfort, they must bring their brother Benjamine with them: So if ever we
expect any comfortable return of our prayers, we must bring our elder brother
Jesus Christ, and put up all our requests in his name. Tho. Stapleton prompt.
morale.
Now the Precepts and Pr^mises of God are the latitude of o^ prayers. And as
the promises co^ from Christ, so they are all Yea^ Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20.
S^ likewise the reward of our obed^ence comes from Christ also, pa^sing in and
through the hands ^ our Mediator; through this gol^en Pipe the treasures of
wisdom and grace are conveyed into our ^ouls.

3. Both the original of prayer ^ometh from Christ, and the acce^ation of our
prayers is in and through Christ: He is the Altar that sanctifies the gift,
Matthew. 3.19. Even the impure services, and weak endeavors of his people ^e
sanctified by him. In vain it (...) then to come to God without a ^ediator, to
procure access, audi^ce and acceptance for us; he it is ^at sits in Heaven
making interces^on to God for us.

Sect. 2.
HEre I shall propound diverse Questions.

Quest. 1. What is the Intercession that christ now makes for his people?

Quest. 2. For what is this Intercession Christ?

Quest. 3. For whom he makes Inter^sion?

Quest. 4. To whom is Christ our Me^tor?

Quest. 5. When did Christ take upon him this Office of his Media^ ship?

Quest. 1. What is the Inter^ on that Christ now makes for people?

Resp. This Intercession of Ch^ in his glory for us, is not in being of his
knees, corporal prosti^on, oral supplications for the el^ as he often did in
his estate humiliation upon earth; this seems not his glorious condit^ But

1. In a glorious presentatio^ himself, his perfect obedience, merits and
sufferings in the ^stial Sanctuary before the face God in the behalf of his
redee^ ones, Heb. 9 23, 24.

2. That as formerly upon e^ by outward voice and expre^ he earnestly prayed
for them, 17.11, 15, 24. So now in h^ven by inward affections earnestly
desires the benefit his righteousness and satisfa^on may be effectually
applied to them for their infallible sation.

Quest. 2. Consider for what is this ^tercession of Christ?

Resp. 1. That our persons, pray^s, and all other our pious endea^ours, and
holy services, (though ^ixt with many corruptions and ^perfections) may be
accepted of him ^ho is the beloved of the Father, ^h. 1.6. Phil. 1.11.

2. That neither our daily fail^gs and infirmities, nor the ma^inations and
oppositions of Sa^ and his instruments, may sepa^te from the love of God, nor
use our final Apostasy from the ^e faith: Christ tells Peter, Satan ^th
desired to winnow thee, but I ^ve prayed for thee that thy faith fail ^, Luke
22.31, 32. All which was ^gantly typed out, Levit. 16. by ^e Highpriests
entering into the ^ost holy place in the day of the ^onement. For, 1. The
expiato^ Sacrifice was offered at the door ^ the Tabernacle of the Congre^tion,
and afterward the blood ^s brought into the Sanctuary. Incense was offered up
with the ^ud, signifying the prayers and desires of the Saints, as it is
plained, Revel. 8.3. And, 3. U^ his shoulder and breast, he bare names of the
twelve Tribes, whom the typical Propitiation made; signifying Jesus Ch^ should
be a Propitiation for a sins through faith in his blo^ Romans 3.24.

Quest. 3. For whom does he ^ Intercession?

Resp. For his elect, such as in him: I pray not for the w^ but for them which
thou have g^ me, John 17.9. Yea for the c^ not yet actually in him, that t^ may
not perish in their unrege^rate estate. As the benefits of redemption were
available to forefathers before his incarnat^ by their faith in him that was
come; much more now after actual performance, even to the that are elected,
though not yet him; since Gods acceptance of is rather grounded on Christ's
redemption of us, than on any grace exist in us.

Object. But is not Christ an ^tercessour for the whole world, since ^he
Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world, ^ John 2.1.

Resp. 1. This one understands by the whole body of the Creation: ^o^ton.
Expos. in 1 John cap. 2.
for as by Adams ^^ll the whole world was cursed; so Christ by his death has
renewed the blessing to the world again, to the whole body of the Creation.
Noah being a Type of Christ, and making atonement for the world by Sacrifice,
God smelt a sweet savor and promised, that he would no more ^urse the earth
for m^ns sake^: that which was done by type in him, ^s perfectly procured by
Christ; All the creatures are redeemed in him, Isai. 44.23. are become Christ's
servants, subject to his dominion, he has bought them all, Romans 14.9. Christ
is now Lord of all; he has bought us, and all that we have, and he has so
purchased it, that the world, yea all the disorders a^ tumults of the world
shall be blessing to the Church. Christ ha^ bought the bad as well as the goo^
2 Pet. 2.5. So that they are Chri^ vassals, and are under his domin^on, as a
slave is to be ruled by h^ that has bought him, and the are bought for the
Churches serv^ to do them good. 2. By all ^ world, says Beza, Bez. annot. in
locum.
is meant, the Christ is a Propitiation for all so^ of faithful people in the
wor^ of what condition, degree, a^ or sex whatsoever they be. if he had said,
Not only we of t^ Jews have an Advocate with G^ the Father, but all the
faithful so even among the Gentiles; he is the Propitiation for the sin^ of
all believers in the whole wor^ To construe the words otherw^ and affirm, That
Christ in Heav^ prays for all, good and bad, el^ and reprobate promiscuously,
co^tradicteth the express saying Christ himself John 17.9. who sai^ he prays
for his Apostles, and believers, and not for the wor^ but for them whom his
father had given him out of the world, Quantum ad sufficientiam pro toto mundo,
sed quantum ad efficaciam, pro electis solis. Lyra in 1. Epist. Johan.

The smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8.4.
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand, this Angel is Jesus Christ, this
Incense his merits; the mingling of the prayers of the Saints with this
Incense, is the supplying, or covering the defects of their prayers, with the
merits of Christ; and the ascending of this Incense with their prayers before
God, is his acceptance of them, thus covered with Christ's merits: and the
reason why the prayers ascended, was because the Incense ascended, that was
their vehiculum, the pillar of smoke in which they mounted up to Heaven: the
prayers and good actions of men in Christ, are accepted of God, because they
are perfumed, and their defects covered from the face of God, by the merits and
intercession of Jesus Christ. Hoards Soul misery, etc.


ver. 20. Yea Nicholas Lyra (though a Papist) upon that place of S. John's
Epistle (that Christ is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world) says,
he laid down a sufficient price for all, but in respect of the efficaciousnesse
thereof, it is for the elect only: Christ's merits and satisfaction is
sufficient, though not effectual without faith; as a good medicine full of
virtue is sufficient to cure, but it cannot be effectual unless it be applied
unto the sore: therefore when S. Paul says, God has set forth Christ to be a
propitiation, he adds, through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. now all men
have not faith, 2 These. 3.2. nor do all men lay hold on Jesus Christ for an
advocate and propitiation: universal propositions, mu^ be understood according
to the subject matter, as when Christ says Whosoever asks shall receive; the
meaning is, whosoever asks in faith.

Quest 4. To whom is Christ our m^diatour?

Resp. I answer, to God our Father he is a mediator between God an^ man, 1 Timothy
2.5. We have an advoca^ with the Father, 1 John 2.1. again^ God our father
(especially) sin committed, Psalm. 51.4. which ^ against the work of our
creation which is originally ascribed to the Father, the first person in
Trinity Intercession is made directly and immediately to the Father, and in hi^
to the rest of the persons in the hol^ Trinity, having all the same will being
all the same one God.

Object. But o^n Christ be mediatou^ between God and man, himself being God, so
should he be mediator to himself?

Resp. There are two things i^ Christ; 1. His nature; so he is the Son of God,
and very God, and is in the form of God, and thought it u^ robbery to be
equal with God. 2. His office, the office of a mediator, God-man, man-God: As
he is the Son of God, he is the par^y offended, as the Son of man also the
party reconciling. 2. Though Christ be one with the Father in respect of his
divine nature, yet there is a difference thus far, that the Father is not
incarnate, but Christ the Son: and it agrees to the divine nature of Christ to
be mediator, not simply as a divine nature, but existing in such a particular
manner, as agrees not to the Father and the Holy Ghost.

Quest. 5. When did Christ take upon him this office of his mediatorship?

Resp 1. Christ was only slain once on the cross above 1600 years agone by a
real s^ffering; yet he is in diverse respects said to be slain before: 1. In
God's eternal preordination, viz. that he should be slain in the appointed
time. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. 2. By promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise
the serpents head. 3. In belief of the Fathers, which was the substance of
things hoped for. 4. In the sacrifices of the Fathers, which sacramentally were
the Lamb himself. 5. In his members, as suffering in their sufferings. Thus
Christ was slain in Abel; because (says Lyra) the slaying of innocent Abel was
a figure of the Lamb's slaughter. Pareus in Comment in Rev. 13.8.
From the beginning of man's fall; before his incarnation he performed his
Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetic offices; therefore called the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. to show that the efficacy of his death
is extended to the very first beginning of the world, and so to all the
faithful from Adam to the end thereof: Christ is a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110.4. and now sits at the right hand of God for
ever making intercession for his people: Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever: as by virtue of his death the faithful in all ages have
entered into Heaven; so by virtue of his intercession, they have continual
access to the throne of grace, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God through him, 1 Pet. 2.5. as he is, so he ever was, the way, the truth, and
the life; as no man can come, so never any man could come to the Father but by
him.

Sect. 3.
NOw the Lord Jesus Christ is our only mediator: there is but one God, and
one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Angels
cannot be our mediators, who are but ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. Saints
departed cannot, who are ignorant of our particular condition and necessities,
Isa 63.16.

Object. The Papists object, That Christ is our chief advocate, but Angels and
Saints are secondary advocates.

Resp. St Austin will admit no such distinction, but says, He that teaches
so, is rather Antichrist than an Apostle: and Zanchy Zanch. in 1. Ep.
Iohan-Perkins in Praefat. ante Orat. Dominic.
upon the Epistle of John, and Perkins before the Lords Prayer tell us; That he
that will be an advocation, must first be a reconciliation, and able to plead
his righteousness bestowed upon us, as the words imply; but so can no Saints or
Angels do. To the place 1 Timothy 2.5. the Papists reply, that Christ is our
mediator of redemption; but Saints and Angels be mediators of intercession: To
which I answer -- This distinction will not hold; for S. Paul speaks of
intercession in that place, and comes not to redemption till the next verse:
they therefore coin another distinction; saying, that there is one mediator
that pays the creditor for the debtour; and so only Bellarmine Bellarm.
confesses Christ to be our Mediator; and there is another mediator desiring
the creditour to be good to the debtour; It is an usual Term among graduates
in the University, Respondebit pro me Aristoteles; Aristotle the eye of nature
and heart of Philosophy shall answer for me: So we being not able to answer the
great God of Heaven and earth; we have no other Anchor-hold but this;
Respondebit pro me Christus, that Jesus our blessed Savior will interceed for
us. Rob. Wilkins Marriage Sermon. Ano. 1616.
and so they say, Saints and Angels are mediators: but yet they prove not,
that Angels and Saints, do either know our estates, or pray for any man in
particular; yet this is more than many of their other Papists will yield; for
sometimes they pray to the Saints as unto God, and place the Virgin Mary above
her Son, entreating her to command him; and to S. Peter, (whom they feign to be
heavens porter) thus they say, Sancte pater, miserere mei, holy father have
mercy upon me; Salva me, operi mihi aditum coeli, save me, open to me the
passage into Heaven, what can they say more to Christ? If we should admit all
the Saints in the Pope's Calendar, it would come to pass, that as the
Athenians worshipped an unknown God, so should we worship unknown men: for even
many Papists do doubt, whether there were ever any S. George, S. Christopher,
and S. Katherine: Cardinal Bellarmine himself says, that the Legends of these
three are very uncertain; and why may not we suspect as much of many others, as
they confess of these?

And to this I shall add, that the Saints on earth cannot be our Mediators
neither. For though they are bound to pray one for another; yet they cannot
make intercession as Christ does at the right hand of God; for they cannot pray
in their own name, nor for their own merits, as they confess of these.

That Christ is the only Mediator, was signified by types under the Old
Testament.

1. The Jews were to pray before the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat, Exodus 25.22.
and herein taught, (...).
that all their prayers should be accepted of God only in and, through the
mediation of Christ, who is not only a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.
but the propitiatory it self, Romans 3.25.

2. Because the people were not permitted to offer Sacrifice themselves, nor
enter into the holy place, Levit. 16.17. Luke 1.10. Heb. 13.15.
but stand aloof off in the outer Court, and join in their prayers with the
Highpriest, a type of Christ They were taught hereby, that ^ Christ's blood they
should have e^trance into the holy place, and ^ him to offer up the sacrifices
^ prayers and praises to God only One upon those words [We have ^ advocate
with the Father Jesus Chr^ the righteous, Io. Wall Sermon. in Hebr. 9.12.
and he is the propitia^^ for our sins] says, The one shows the greatness
of his Majest^ the other shows the obedien^ of his Ministry; while he tak^
the censer of his flesh, and fills with the coals of the Altar, a^ presents the
supplications of ^ Church, and makes the smoa^ of those spiritual odours asce^
before the Lord, as from the ha^ of an Angel.

It was one of Arius his heresy to attribute the office of a Mediat^ or
Advocate to the holy Gho^ and so to make more than one M^diator between God and
man, a^ so God to make intercession to Go^ the holy Ghost being God. Inde^ the
Greek word which is render^ Advocate, (...).
in the New Testamen^ ^s applied to the holy Ghost; but ^here is a great
difference between Christ's being an Advocate, and the Spirits being an
Advocate. Christ ^ith to his troubled Disciples; If I ^o not away, the
Comforter, or the Advocate, will not come unto you, that is, the holy Ghost.
Now one ^hus distinguishes well, Caryl on Job. The Spirit makes request for us
by making us to make requests. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.26, 27.
Christ is an Advocate by way of impetration; the Spirit is an Advocate by by
way of application: Christ is an Advocate with the Father to procure mercy for
us, the Spirit is an Advocate with us, to prevail on us to receive that mercy.
Christ appears for us in Heaven, Heb. 9.24. he appears as our Attorney in
the Court of Heaven; the Spirit comes down from Heaven, and appears in us,
and there makes intercession for us. Christ began the work of his intercession
upon earth, and perfecteth this work now in Heaven; He ever lives to make
intercession for his people: But the Spirits intercession is both begun and
consummate here: The Spirit does not properly plead for us, but make
intercession in ^ the Spirit stirs us up to pray, ^ Christ presents these
prayers ours to God, his, and our Father

Sect. 4.
Object. 1. IT may be objected, ^ Moses was a Mediat^ God for the Jews, Galat.
3.19. ^ Law was ordained by Angels in ^ hand of a Mediator. The word (...) is
diversely translated, Pax sequestra. Tertull. Cajetan. Chrysostom. Theophil.
Ambros. Aquin. Lumbard. Gagna^s. Ep^^^an haeres. ^6 (...). apud ^^^^^cholia.
by some seq^ster, one that stands disposed, yet ^ different to both parties;
by some ^miator, a parter of stakes betw^ two; by some an Intercessour; but
word (...) signifies a Mediator midler; and though many of the others
understand it of Christ: yet ^ Divines understand it rather of M^ses, for the
Law was given by M^ses, John 1.17. and the Apostle pro^ring Christ before Moses
says, He w^ Mediator of a better Covenant, H^ 8.6. And Moses says of hims^
Deuteronomy. 5.5. I stood between the Lo^ and you, to show you the word the Lord. And
Epiphanius and G^nadius, men ancient and learned, were of the same opinion.

Resp. The Papists do unjustly from hence infer, that Angels and Saints can be
Mediators: For,

1. Moses was appoinied by God to be a Mediator: but Angels and Saints have no
commission.

2. He was present with whom he was a Mediator, these have no communion with us.

3. Moses was a Mediator but once, and in one thing; these are pretended to be
Mediators at all times, and in all things.

4. He was a Mediator to the people from God, these are employed from the
people to God, in all which they fail from their ground, and derogate from the
mediation of Christ; Torshels 3. Quaest.
as a judicious Divine has observed.

Object. 2. Christ says to his Disciples, John 16.24. Hitherto ye have asked
nothing in my name: and tells them, In that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily
I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you, verse. 23. Here seems to be a contradiction.

Resp. There is a twofold asking an asking by way of interrogation o^
question, and an asking by way (...) supplication: The former is an asking that
proceeds from doubting or ignorance, for a fuller information and
satisfaction, the latter ^ an asking in order to reception for the supply of
some want; when ^ is said, Ye shall ask me nothing, it ^ not meant of asking in
prayer, bu^ putting of doubts and questions to him, which was usual with them
whilst Christ was upon earth: Before he told them, Yet a little whi^ and you
shall see me no more; an^ they said, What is this that he sai^ yet a little
while? And Jesus kne^ that they were desirous to ask him then he clears their
doubt, an^ tells them, in the day when h^ would send down his Spirit upon them,
they should not need to as^ him any questions, they should have a teacher
within them thi^ should resolve all their doubt; an^ then he falls upon this
speech, Whosoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you; hitherto
ye have asked nothing in my Name, ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be
full. Things in Scripture are said to be nothing, or not to be done, when not
so fully and perfectly done as afterward. As John 7.39. the holy Ghost was not
yet given, because Christ was not yet glorified, that is, not so fully given
before Christ's ascension as afterward: so the Disciples had hitherunto asked
nothing in his Name, i. e. so expressly, particularly and plainly, because that
which they did so weakly was nothing in comparison to what they should do
af^erwards, when more clear, light should break forth in them.

CHAP. VII. Shows the Necessity of Prayer.
Sect. 1.
WE are in the next place ^ set forth the necessity ^ prayer, which may thus be
demo^strated:

1. Prayer is a duty commande^ by God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray contin^ally. And all
Gods Command^ments are necessarily to be performed: To pray is a branch of the
Moral Law, and moral precep^ being perpetual, do always bi^ the conscience,
therefore we mu^ of necessity pray: It is the great design of the Devil to
hinder ^ from the exercise of this holy duty or to make us remiss or neglige^
therein. Satan would never labou^ to keep us from this duty, were ^ not
sensible that it is a duty of singular use and benefit to us, and w^ should
never be so backward to the doing of it, were it not an heavenly exercise.

2. We stand in daily need of many blessings from God: Two things necessitate
prayer.

1. Our duty to worship. 2. Our necessity and straits.
Rutherford.


Penury and poverty make the poor to use entreaties and supplications for
re^ief. And although God does not give his mercies because we pray, yet he
gives them to those that do pray. Though he promise many blessings to his
Church and people, yet for all this he looks to be enquired of by the house
of Israel. And where this is wanting, the Lord complains by his Prophet,
There is none that calls upon thy Name, ^here is none that stirs up
himself to ^ake hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. The Prophet ^here represents God as
some great person, that would bestow some benefit, and is ready to turn away
himself, yet none lays hold of him, or desires him to stay: So says he,
There is none that lays hold on God to keep him, that he go not away from us:
he means, there are none that pray earnestly, that God would stay among them:
The way to stop the wrath of God, and to lay hold of him, and st^ his hand when
it is stretched o^ against a people, is prayer: Pray^ has stopped God, Exodus 13.
says ^ to Moses, Let me alone. Prayer do^ as it were (to speak with reverenc^
bind the hands of God: Ezekiel 2^ God complains, that there was n^ stood in
the gap, intimating, had a^ stood in the gap by prayer, wh^ God was pouring out
his wrath up^ a people, his wrath might have be^ stopped.

3. The being of every creatu^ shows a necessity of his praying ^ his Creator;
the young Rave^ when they wander for lack of me^ are said to cry unto God, Job
38.^ They call unto him for relief, he g^veth to the beast his food, and to ^
young ravens which cry, Psalm 147 and shall not Gods children rep^ their wants
unto him? Be caref^ for nothing, says the Apostle, ^ in every thing by prayer
and suppli^^tion with thanksgiving, let your req^ be made known unto God, Phil.
4. One observes, Zanch. de rev. lib. 1. in praec. de invocat.
That there is n^thing in nature that grows, b^ that it has a kind of a
magnetic virtue, whereby it attracteth to it self such nutriment as it
wants: so there is no soul that ever took increase of grace, but there was in
it this appetite of heavenly desire, and attractive force of prayer, by which
it draws from God in Christ (as from its root) all things needful for it:
therefore prayer is not an arbitrary and indifferent thing, but a necessary
duty.

Sect. 2.
3. THe next consideration of the necessity of prayer, is the example of Adam,
of Jesus Christ, and of all the Saints of God that have ever lived, whose holy
examples are necessary to be imitated.

1. The first Adam in the state of integrity, before his fall, albeit he had no
need to pray for any blessings that he stood in need of, yet doubtless he
prayed (as Divines think) for perseverance in grace: Jo. Smiths pattern of
prayer.
For that he kept the Law of God during the time of his innocence, n^ man can
deny: and one part of the Law is Prayer, as has been sai^ before. Wherefore if
Adam (^ yet free from sin, and all the punishments of sin) did pray, whi^
need then have we to pray, upon whom both sin, and the curs^ of God for sin
has taken such fas^ hold?

2. We have the example of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ, who knew n^ sin, in whose
mouth there wa^ no guile found: he prayed; an^ being made under the Law for us
there was a necessity he should pray he stood in our place, sustained ou^
person, and therefore would giv^ us an example. That Christ ^ the only
begotten Son of God having no Superior (says a learned man) and therefore
owin^ honor unto none, neither standing in any need, should either give
thanks, or make petition to God, were most absurd: but, as man, what could
beseem him better, whether we respect his affection to Godward, or his own
necessity, o^ his love and charity toward man. And again, says he; Some
things he knew should come to pass, and prayed for them notwithstanding,
because he also knew, that the necessary means to effect them were his prayers;
and instanceth in those words of the Father to him, set down Psalm 2.8. Ask of
me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. That, says he, which here God promises
his Son, the Son prays for, John 17.1. Father, the hour is now come, glorify
thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee, according as thou have given
him power over all flesh. We read that Christ prayed at his Baptism, and while
he was praying, The Heaven was opened to him, Luke 3.21. Likewise he spent a
whole night in prayer, going up into a mountain to pray, Luke 6.12. and Luke
9.20. it is said, that Christ was alone praying, and his Disciples were with
him; And about eight days after he took Peter, James and John, and went up
into a mountain ^ pray, verse. 28. He prayed likewi^^ John 12.27. Now is my soul
trouble what shall I say, Father save me fr^ this hour? But for this came I i^
this hour; Father, glorify thy Nam^ Christ had never a greater bu^nesse in
hand than now; he wa^ to transact with God and divi^ Justice, and the Law of
God, the weighty bargain of paying of ransom of his most precious blou^ to
open the new way to Heaven as one observes: Rutherf. Christ dying.
He had to (...) with Devils, Principalities an^ Powers, to subdue death, hell
a^ Devils, and he was to offer (...) himself a Sacrifice to God through the
eternal Spirit, for the sins (...) all the elect, and he must use prayer in all
this great work: An^ says the same Author, thoug^ Christ knew of his own
deliverance, and was sure of it, yet h^ will not have it, but by prayer
likewise we read that going up t^ the Mount of Olives, he exhorts his
Disciples to pray, and then with draws from them about a stone^ cast, and
kneeleth down, and prays, Luke 22.^9, 40, 41. And this was not ^he first time
of his going up thi^her for this exercise; for the Text says; He did this, as
he was wont; whence we see how he usually spent his time, sc. the days in
preaching, and much of the nights in prayer. Gregory says, That all his moral
actions were our instructions; he did not walk in the fields for digestion, nor
go into the garden for to gather flowers for his delight and pleasure; nor go
to the river to bathe and wash himself for recreation: Though I will not hence
conclude, that to do these sometime is unlawful, or condemn those that use
lawful recreations moderately, to refresh their dull and over-wearied spirits;
but surely it condemns the profane customs of many persons in many places,
who (their Tables being removed, Qui remotis vel potius eversis mensis, ad
aleas taxillos, chartas, and tripudia ruunt.
or rather over-turned) run presently to cards and dice, and dancing, like
the Idolatrous Israelites, That ate and drank, and rose up to play, Exodus 32.6.
Christ undertook nothing witho^ prayer; and when he was in (...) agony he
prayed more earnes^ than before, When our Savior prays, Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, etc. Gods will was not absolutely
impossible; sed tantum ex hypothesi, sc. ex suppositione finis; and so it was
necessary that Christ should drink of that cup. 1. In regard of the
manifestation of Gods just. 2. His mercy. 3. His wisdom. 4. His hatred to sin.
5. (...) love to mankind. -- See a Dialogue between Justice and T^ at the one
side accusing, and pleading against man; and m^ and peace on the other side
interceding and pleading for (...) and Wisdom moderating between both.
Bosquier. The^ patient. page 150, 151.
Luke 22.44. his sw^ being as it were great drops, or cl^ of blood trickling
down to (...) ground: Before he had pray^ Father, if it be possible, let this ^
pass from me, verse. 22. and now ^ prays more fervently; and ^ only in the
garden, but also up^ the cross he prays for his en^mies. Now our Savior
thus prayin^ how does it behove us also to pr^ for that which we would obtain
at t^ hands of God?

3. All the Saints that ever live have prayed, and had need to pra^ Prayer, as
it is a commonplace so it has been the common pr^ctice of all the Saints in
all age Multitudes of examples there are in the Book of God, of the Saints that
have prayed, sometimes alone, sometimes with others, and in all conditions have
sought the Lord by hearty prayer. I need not give particular instances, the
practice is so general; that to be a Christian, and to call upon the Name of
the Lord, is in effect one thing. Ananias said Paul had authotity to bind all
that called on the Name of the Lord, Acts 9 14. Thus Paul describes the Saints
to be such that in every place do call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 1. 2. As soon as a child is born, those that are about it, say
presently, It cries; so when men are regenerate and newborn, and renewed by
the work of the holy Ghost, they presently cry, Psalm 53.4.
Abba Father. It is the note of an Atheist not to call upon God, Psalm 14.4.
and an hypocrite prays but now and then, he has not a stock or spring of
prayer, and therefore will he not always call upon God, Job 27.10. Prayer (as
one observes) is the first thing, wherewith a holy life begins, and the li^
wherewith it ends: for prayer^ the breath of faith, and as we b^lieve, so we
speak: The hypocri^ flattereth God with his mouth, Psal^ 78.36. and cries not
to God wit^ his heart, when he howseth upon his bed, Hos. 7.11, 14. his praye^
are moon-calves that are dum^ and cannot speak: Hypocrites ^ best do but lough
as beasts, Crooks hypocrite part 1. chap. 21.
or ba^ble as Heathens, as a judicious Divine notes.

CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1. Of the matter of our prayers, or the thin^ we are to pray for.
I Now come to consider the matt^ of our prayers, or the things ^ ought to seek
for at the hand ^ God, and they are all good thing such as may stand with Gods
gl^ry, and our own eternal welfar^ The things we are to pray for, a^ things,
Spiritual.
Temporal.


We ought in the first place to ask ^uch things as concern Gods glory, and then
those things that concern ^ur own good, because Gods glory ^s to be preferred
before all things; ^t is the end of our creation, and of ^ur redemption, and
the end that God propounds to himself, Prove. ^6.4. and that which we ought
also ^o propound to our selves in all things, doing all to the glory of God, ^
Cor. 10.31. Hooker. Eccles. polit. lib. 5.
The faithful have this comfort (says a learned man) that whatsoever they
rightly ask the same (no doubt) but they shall receive, so far as may stand
with the glory of God, and with their everlasting good, unto either of which
two it is no virtuous man's purpose to seek or desire to obtain any thing
prejudicial.

Now we are in the first place to ^ek the kingdom of God, and the
^ighteousnesse thereof, as our Savior ^xhorteth, Matthew. 6.33. We are ^bove all
things to seek for the favor of God in Christ, because t^ grace is the cause
of all other b^sings, Titus 3.7. Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 24. and therefore first to be
pray for, for all spiritual blessings ^ from this grace, and all temp^
blessings are appendixes of the sa^ Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 6.6. 1 ^ 3.22.
Likewise, it is the most ^cellent blessing of all other; how ^nest is David in
the book of the Ps^ in praying for the favor of God, 80.7. Cause thy face to
shine, and shall be saved, Psalm 27.8. Thou sa^ seek my face, and my heart
answe^ thy face Lord will I seek. In all ^ prayers we should principally ^ the
face and favor of God, part of sin, peace of conscience, ^ reconciliation by
Jesus Christ: other things let us leave them to ^ wisdom of God, for if we h^
the grace and favor of God we h^ all. As among men he that h^ the favor of a
great Prince, Dr Sibs Sermon. in Psalm. 27.8.
d^ not study this or that particu^ thing, having his favor, he kno^eth he
has that which will sta^ him in stead in all exigencies. T^ favor of God is a
storehouse of ^ all good, and better than life it self, Psalm ^3.3. as a grave
Divine ^ath well noted. David says, Psalm ^.6, 7. There be many that say, who
^ill show us any good? showing that ^arthly minded persons look for hap^inesse
only from earthly things: But then he prays, Lord lift up ^he light of thy
countenance upon us; ^s if he had said, Lord let me enjoy ^hee, and that shall
suffice: Then ^e speaks of the experience of that ^atisfaction he had
formerly found from God; Thou have put more glad^esse into my heart than they
had when their corn and wine increased. The ^ullest barns and wine-cellars
cannot yield that content to an earthly ^eart that I have formerly found in
^hee: Then he compares the satis^action he had found in God not on^y with
abundance of outward things, but with the increase of them: for it is the
increase of outward things that wins the hearts of the sons of men unto them.
David finds more content in God than worldly men could find in the increase of
corn and wine: Moreove^ says he, Thou have put more glad^ into my heart, then
they have w^ they abound with outward thing the joy that arises from Gods
^vour is infused into the soul; Go^ favor does not only yield matter joy to a
believer, and ground comfort; but gives as it were t^ very affection of it to
the so Earthly things infuse not joy into ^ heart of man; he that will have a^
good from them must extract a^ draw it out; and many times wh^ the heart and
the world do d^ most, it finds no satisfaction from worldly things: If we had
all lights and pleasures, and have ^ the favor of God, they will do no good.
What became of the w^dome of Achitophel, the honor Haman, the riches of Dives?
the end was full of sorrow and miser^ but the favor of God frees us from all
evil, and gives us the possession all good.

Now all our prayers for spirit^ and eternal things must be absolu^ We must
consider how God pro^eth his blessings, and accordingly we must make our
prayers. Now God promises eternal life absolute^y, 1 John 2.25. and the means
which ^re necessary thereunto, are Faith and Repentance: therefore we are ^o
pray for both absolutely, because Gods promise is absolute as to these things;
a'nd we cannot be happy without them, and this we must beg ^bsolutely for
others as well as for ^ur selves. Many people say to others, God send you
health, long ^fe, good luck, well to do: but for ^he pardon of their sins, and
the ^avour of God toward them, they ^ray not for it, think not of it, but ^aul
in all his Epistles wishes Grace, ^ercy and peace to the Churches: And ^ven
those that are sanctified have ^eed of more grace; they must be till prayed
for, that grace may be multiplied upon them.

Sect. 2.
FUrthermore, it is lawful for us to beg temporal things at the ^ands of God.
Our Savior has taught us to pray, Give us this ^ our daily bread: By which I
unde^stand corporal food, and all go^ means to preserve our temporal such as
the good things of the bo^ as health, due temperature, con^tution of body, food
and raime^ Physic and recreation: And o^ward good things concerning o^
temporal estate: So we may pr^ for all things necessary to our p^sons, places
and callings; when ^ pray for these outward things, ^ must seek only for
necessaries, a^ not seek superfluities or abundan^ observing Paul's precept,
Have food and raiment therewith to be ^tent, 1 Timothy 6.8. and it was his o^
practice, Phil 4.11, 12. I have le^ in what state soever I am therewit^ be
content. Israel was not conte^ with Manna, and would needs ha^ flesh, and they
had their desire a^ desert withal, Number. 11.31, 33. the^fore we must not lust
after evil thi^ as they did, 1 Cor. 10.6. nor after go^ things in an evil
manner. When m^ covet or desire more than God give^ they draw Gods curse upon
them, ^ those that would gather Manna un^easonably, had a worm in it that
^orrupted it: But better is a little ^ith the fear of the Lord, than great
^easures, and trouble therewith, Psalm ^7.16. What though men have ^bundance?
Yet man's life consists ^ot in the abundance of the things he ^ossesseth;
neither temporal life, nor ^piritual. Man lives not by bread ^lone, but by
every word that proceed^th out of the mouth of God, Deuteronomy. ^.3. The life of man
is not preserved ^nely by meat, drink and apparel, ^ut by Gods blessing on the
means; which we must earnestly pray for: Sicut homines baculo innituntur, ita
vita nostra pane innititur, Bread in therefore said to strengthen man's heart,
or ^o uphold life, as a man is supported by his staff, Psalm 104.15. Willet in
Levit. 26.
Gods blessing is an essential part of ^ur daily bread that we are to pray ^or;
and this is evident, in that the lord threatens to break the staff of ^read,
Levit. 26.26. and that they shall eat, and not be satisfied.

Quest. Here a Question may be propounded, viz. Whether a man may ^ray for
riches, and an abundance of outward things?

Resp. I answer, he may not: 1. Because a desire to be rich occasionet^
temptations and snares: They tha^ will be rich, fall into diverse tempt^tions, 1 Timothy 6.9. therefore we mu^ not pray for occasions of sin, b^ avoid all
occasions of evil.

2. Because a desire after rich^ argues covetousness, which is ^ inordinate
desire and disconte^ with our present estate; but that is fault, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Let your conversati^ be without covetousness, and be conte^ with what you have,
Heb. 13.5. therefore the fountain being evil, to stream cannot be good.

3. Agur prays only for food c^venient, Prove. 30.8. that is, necess^ries for
him and his; but pray against riches and poverty, and h^ example is not
contradicted by a^ rule of Divinity, therefore a perp^tual rule of direction
for us: pleased God well, that Solomon a^ed not long life, nor riches, nor t^
lives of his enemies, 1 Kings 3.10, 1^ but only a wise and understand^ heart.
Therefore neither pray s^ riches, nor against them, but every man proceed in
his calling, intending Gods glory, and if God send riches to be thankful for
them.

Sect. 3.
BUt for temporal things, as health, peace, deliverance out of such troubles,
etc. and all things not necessary to salvation, we are to pray for them, not
absolutely, but conditionally, because God so promises to bestow them: Go to
God then as a poor patient to a Physician, that desires health, and the means
of health; but because he knows not what means is best for the recovery of
his health, whether bitter pills, or gentle potions, he refers all to the
discretion of the Physician. We are all sick of the surfeit of sin, we must go
to God the spiritual Physician of souls for health and recovery of our
spiritual maladies, for which we must pray absolutely, because his promise is
absolute in regard of the end, viz. to give us a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. and
likewise the means leading to the end. He has promised, H^ will not suffer his
people to be tempte^ above what they are able to bea^, 1 Cor. 10.13. Now the
conditions that we are to use in praying for temporal things, are, If it may
stan^ with Gods glory, if it be agreeable with Gods will, if it may be for our
good.

Object. But here it may be said, That to pray conditionally with [Ifs] and
[Ands] is not in faith, but d^ubtingly, for he that prays so, is not
persuaded, that God will her him, but hangs in doubt and suspense.

Resp. We may pray conditionally, and yet in faith; and though God give us not
the same thing we ask, yet he will give us as good or better, Psalm 103.13. God
is a compassionate Father, and very indulgent, sparing his people as a Father
spares his own son that serves him, Malac. 3.17. Now what Father if his
son ask him bread will give him a stone, etc? Luke 11.11, 12. eirher the
father will give him that he asks, or if that be not good for him, he will
give something better, though it may not so well content him. God will give
unum e du^bus, says Bernard. I add, that to ask temporal things absolutely,
is not to ask in faith; because where there is no promise made to us, there can
be no faith to believe, that God will bestow such or such a blessing upon us.
Now there is no promise that God will grant particular requests for temporal
things. A man in sickness has no particular promise that he shall have
health; a man in danger and trouble has no promise of deliverance; and neither
of them can certainly believe health or deliverance, because he has no promise
to rest on. God has promised to give good things to them that ask them, Matthew.
7.11. and he has, said Psalm 34.10. that they that fear the Lord shall want no
manner of thing that is good for them: but whether health or deliverance be
good for us God knows; for though sickness and trouble for the present seem
grievous, and not good, Because no chastisemen^ for the present is joyous but
grievou^ Heb. 12.11. yet it may be goo^ for us, producing good fruits in u^ as
David says, Psalm 1.9. It ^ good for me that I was afflicted: Therefore in
such things as these, we are to pray conditionally; If it see^ good to the
Lord; if it be his will* if it make for his glory, and for our salvation, then
beg the restoring of health, deliverance from such a distress, else rest
contented and patiently bear the indignation of the Lord, because you have
sinned against him.

There are these extraordinary cas^ in which we may pray absolutely for
temporal things, if such cases should happen to us.

1. If we have a special command to ask such a thing at the hands of God, as
Ahaz had, Isai 7.11. to whom the Lord said, Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy
God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above: Now it was a sin for
him not to ask absolutely having such a command from God; but we have no such
command now-a-dayes.

2. If we have a special promise of temporal deliverance, as Israel had for
deliverance out of Babylon at the end of seventy years, then may we pray with
Daniel for the accomplishment thereof, Daniel 9.2, 4. otherwise, if we have a
general promise only, with reference to time, place and manner of our
deliverance, but no particular promise who shall be our deliverer, nor when the
time of our deliverance shall be, then may we not pray with Moses to see the
good Land, but conditionally; for though God has told us he will hear us, he
has not told us when he will hear us, nor in what, therefore it is indefinite,
and made conditional, sc. if it be good for us, else he will neither hear nor
help us; and thus in not hearing us, he does most hear us, Non ad voluntatem,
sed ad sanitatem, not in particular requests, yet in the general intention.

3. We may ask some temporal blessing absolutely, for the confirmation of some
extraordinary calling: as Gideon would prove whethe^ God would save Israel by
his hand, first if the dew should be on the fleece only, and it be dry on all
the earth beside, the^ if it be dry only on the fleece, and ther^ be dew on
all the ground; and Go^ gave him what he asked, Judges 6.37, 39.

4. We may ask some temporal thing absolutely for the confirmation of a
fundamental truth; as when the people of Israel halted between God and Baal;
Elijah the Prophet prayed, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, let it be
known this day, that th^^ art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and
that I have done all these things at thy Word; Hear me, O Lord hear me, that
this people may know the thou art the Lord God, etc. 1 Kings 18.36, 37.

5. When it proceeds from a^ extraordinary heroical spirit. Thu^ Joshua spoke
to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the
children of Israel* and he said in the sight of all Israel Sun stand thou still
upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, and they did so; and there
was no day like that, before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened to the
voice of a man, Joshua 10.12, 13, 14. Thus Elijah calls for fire to come down
from Heaven (being a man of God) to consume two Captains with their fifties, 2
Kings 1.10, 11, 12. But these cases are all extraordinary.

Therefore seeing we know not what is good for us, let us leave circumstances
and substance to God, not limiting God to time nor means, nor manner, but to
resign all to God; it is the readiest way to speed: As David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
said unto Zadok the Priest, Carry back the Ark of God into the City: if I shall
find favor in the sight of God, he will bring me again, and show me both it,
and his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold here
am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him; not to do thus, is to
capitulate, which little becomes beggars, to pray by indenture appointing when
God shall hear us, and what he shall grant us; this is a limiting of God his
counsai^ and a tempting and provoking o^ him.

Sect. 4.
Quest. HEre a Question may b^ propounded, sc. Wheth^ we may pray for temporal
things for t^ time to come, seeing our Savior sait^ when ye pray, say, give us
this day ou^ daily bread.

Resp. 1. We may with Joseph i^ years of plenty provide against a tim^ of
scarcity, and as the Apostles provided for the Church of Judea again^ the
dearth that should come in the days of Claudius Caesar, Acts 11.28 Go thou
sluggard to the Ant, conside her ways, and be wise, she provideth her meat in
summer again^ winter, Prove. 6.6. He that provider not for his family is worse
than an infid^^ 1 Timothy 5. Parents are to lay up for thi^ children, 2 Cor.
12.14. Christ forbi^ only covetous, carking, inordinat^ distrusting care,
which shows ^self; 1. In greediness. 2. In close^fistednesse. 3. In
niggardliness. 1. B^ getting goods by unlawful means, ^ force, fraud, etc. 2.
In keeping them, affecting and loving them too much when we have them, contrary
to Psalm. 62.10. 3. In parting with them unwillingly and basely -- 2. Christ
forbids an inordinate distrustful care only for to morrow, when he says,
Care not for to morrow; which inordinate care may thus be manifest: 1. When men
provide so much for them and theirs, as might serve many families many ages,
scrape as though they should never die; when they know no end of their wealth:
the King may not multiply silver, Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17. 2. When men think so to
settle themselves and their nests on high, that no judgment, chance, change
^or casualty shall befall them; though God can soon send the famine, word, and
pestilence to devour their ^ubstance. 3. When men are care^ull to provide for
to day and to morrow, contrary to that of our Savior Matthew. 6.34. Care not for
the mor^ow: now if we be careful for the morrow to day, we shall be forced ^o
care for it twice; nor do we need ^o morrow, till to morrow comes; this
present day is only the season^ our necessity; Fenner's Exposit. of the Lords
Prayer.
and God teaches ^ to pray every day for the m^cies of the same, which merc^
flow not from God all at on^ but some to day, and some ^ morrow, as one has
well obs^ved.

Now our Savior has giv^ us a rule about the seeking a^ obtaining of
temporal blessing First seek the Kingdom of God, ^ the righteousness thereof,
and then ^ these things shall be ministered unto ^ Matthew. 6.33. or given, (...).
One prays for grace, and God gives him both grace and peace; another prays
only for peace, and God gives him neither grace nor peace: not peace, because
he wants grace to use it; not grace, because peace is all the grace he cares
for; not peace, because he wlll punish him for not begging or esteeming grace;
and not grace, because he seeks not for it: many pray for outward blessings,
and God hears them not; others prosper in these things without prayer: what is
the reason? is it vain then to pray? surely no: pray for a blessing, and leave
the event to God; it is sometimes a blessing to want such an outward blessing:
by this dealing, God shows us, he is tied to no man by desert; he shows he
will do with his own what he pleases; he will exercise thy faith and
fortitude, peradventure he means to hasten thee to better favors: and for
the other that respects not prayer, and yet prospers in outward things; God
does it to allure him to him, or else it may be to fatten him up to the
slaughter, in which respect that prosperity is adversity, and that seeming
blessing is a true curse.
or cast over and above the bargain; Metephor being borrowed from merchants and
tradesmen, w^ use to give some overplus to the customers, either in number
things sold by tale, or by draft things they sell by weight, or hea^ to things
they sell by measure: so we seek spiritual things, God w^ cast in temporal
things if we a^ diligent in the use of lawful mea^ how justly then are they to
be repr^ved, that regard their bodies in t^ first place, their goods in the
secon^ and their souls in the last, and least, if at all.

Sect. 5.
MOreover! I shall add to this, that the matter of our prayers must be framed
according to the will of God; and those are only good and lawful which are
agreeable to his will: a thing is not first good, and therefore willed of God,
but therefore good, because it is wil^ed of God: God's will ought to be the
rule and ground of our prayers: if we ask any thing according to his will he
hears us, 1 Ioh. 5.14. that is according to his revealed will, for we must
ask nothing but what he commands us to do, and therefore have need to pray
for it: wha^ duty soever God requires of us, tha^ we are to pray for: so did
Davi^ Psalm. 119.4, 5. and when we pray according to Gods will, when he gran^
our petitions, and does our wills, h^ does his own will: we must no^ therefore
make our own affection the rule of our prayer, but the wi^ of God only must be
the rule o^ them; hence our Savior has taugh^ us to pray, thy will be done,
Matthew. 6*10. and his practice was answerab^ thereunto, Matthew. 26.39. Father if
^ be possible let this cup pass, yet not ^ will, but thy will be done. By the
w^ of God, I mean not his hidden or s^cret will, this is to be adored, n^
searched. Romans 11.33. Acts 1.6. W^ must not pray that this will of G^ be done;
1. Because it is alwa^ done, and cannot be resisted. Isa. ^ 10. My counsel
shall stand? who h^ resisted his will? Romans 9.19. where his revealed will is
generally resiste^ I would, ye would not, says Chri^ Matthew. 23.37. 3. Because
we m^ dissent from his secret will without sin, so we must submit to it, and
rest in his revealed will, as is evident, in Abraham's praying for the
Sodomites, Genesis 18.23, 27. and David for the life of his child, 2 Samuel 12.16.
and Christ for the removal of his bitter cup; we must walk according to Gods
revealed will, which is good, acceptable, perfect. [Good] because he wills
that which is good, that which makes us good, tends unto good, Gods glory,
and our eternal good. [Acceptable] because whatsoever we do according to his
will, and word, is accepted of God; if we do it of our own wills it is
will worship, Col. 2. lat. and vain worship, Matthew. 15 9. [Perfect] Because
nothing can be added to it, nor taken from it, Deuteronomy. 4.1. and because it
leads to perfection: therefore though Gods revealed will be sometime
different from his secret and absolute will; yet we must walk according to the
direction of Gods revealed will in his word: therefore even such prayers as are
contrary to his secret will are allowed of him, when they are agreeable to his
revealed will. An instance of this you have in Abraham, Genesis 17.18, 20. who not
knowing h^ should have any other child than Ishmael, that should be the child
of the promise, prays earnestly in the behalf of Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael
mig^ live before thee: but then God tell^ him that Sarah his wife should bear
hi^ a son, and he should call his name Isaac; and the Lord would establish his
covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him: an^
in verse. 20. he says; as for Ishmael I ha^ heard thee, behold I have blessed
him, an^ will make him fruitful, and multiply hi^ exceedingly: God does not
disallo^ the prayer of Abraham concernin^ Ishmael, though it was not accordin^
to his secret will, it being accordin^ to his revealed will: and though h^
gives him not what he desires, ye^ he gives him that which in his secre^ will
he had designed him for -- ye^ such prayers as are made contrary t^ God's
particular will revealed, a^ approved of God, when they a^ made according to
his general an^ ordinary will revealed; especially ^ his special
extraordinary will revealed, be not absolute and peremptory, but conditional;
as appears in the case of the Ninevites, Jon. 3.4. Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be destroyed: yet ver. 10. we read that upon their repentance,
God reversed the sentence, and repented of the evil he had said he would do
unto them, and did it not: now ye are to know, that the will of God was not
fully made known in the first part; and therefore Gregory says of God; Deus
mutat sententiam, consilium nunquam. Gregor.
he sometimes changes his sentence, but never changes his purpose intended;
and in such kind of sentences and threatenings there is always a condition
annexed to them, which is either expressed or understood, which is (as the hinges
of the door) to turn forwards or backwards the whole matter: Yet forty days
and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet not in twice forty years, if Nineveh shall
repent: So then Nineveh is not destroyed, because Nineveh is changed, and the
unchangeable will of God ever was, that if Nineveh repented, it should not be
destroyed: now he that discovers his mind conditionally, may change his
sentence, and yet not be taxt of inconstancy, and mutability. Let us go a step
yet further: when the will o^ God is absolute and peremptory, ye if it be not
so revealed to us, we may pray even contrary to the absolut^ will of God; as
David (without doubt) did well in praying for hi^ child, after he was threatened
with the death of it from the Lord, 2 Samuel 11 14, 16, 22. notwithstanding the
decree of God was that the child should die, because we have ground of hope and
help in such cases.

Quest. But what may we do that w^ may pray according to the will of God?

Resp. Let us entreat the Lord t^ frame our hearts and wills accordin^ to the
will of God, as well as ou^ own will: it is an happy thing, when God's will and
ours run both in on^ wheel; then may we speed and have comfort in our prayers;
but if w^ walk sensually, profanely, and contrary to God's will, we must no^
think that our prayers shall b^ heard.

2. If we cannot bring our hearts to this holy habit, yet let us study the word
of God, which is the revelation of God's will, and wherein we may rightly be
directed, how we may frame our prayers, so as God shall accept them; and hence
being truly informed, what is God's will, and taught how to pray; we must
renounce our own spirit and will, and endite our prayers (contrary to our own
carnal propensions) according to the direction of God's word, opposing the
will and word of God against our own private and corrupt inclinations; and the
more self-denial there is in our prayers, the better the Lord will regard them.

3. Crave the spirits assistance in this holy exercise; it is he that helps
our infirmities, 1 John 2.20, 27.
and teaches us to pray according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. the
spirit teaches us all things, and therefore what is the will of God; yea he
searches the deep things of God, and therefore can direct us to what is
according to his will: therefore let our prayers (especially in doubtful
cases) be limited with this clause, which Chri^ has taught us; Thy will be
done.

CHAP. IX. A Question, Whether it be lawful ^ use set forms of prayer;
answered.
IN the next place it will be necessary to answer a weighty question sc.
Whether it be lawful to use set form of prayer? This question is the more
necessary, because many there a^ that hold it unlawful; that to rea^ a prayer
out of a book, is no bette^ than praying on beads, a detestabl^ idol, a
sacrifice of fools; apocryphal trumpery, Samaritan worship the Egyptian Calf,
the smoke of the bottomless pit.

Resp. 1. I answer, It Is lawful and I prove it, 1. By precept, because God
has prescribed it to be used i^ his Church. 1. God gave Aaron ^ prescript
form, which he was to use and wherewith he was to bless the children of
Israel, Numb. 6.23, 2^ 25. On this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel,
and say to them, The Lord ^lesse thee, and keep thee, and make his ^ace to
shine upon thee, etc. 2. They were to use a set form of confession and
thanksgiving, when they were ^o bring their first fruits to the Temple, Deuteronomy.
26.3, 5. Thou shall go unto the Priest that shall be in those days, and say
unto him; I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the
Country which the Lord swear unto our fathers to give us; and the Priest shall
take the basket out of thy hand, and set it down before the altar of the Lord
thy God; and thou shall speak and say before the Lord thy God; a Syrian ready
to perish was my father, and ^he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with
a few, and became there a mighty nation and populous, etc. And verse. 15. they
were thus to pray, Look down from Heaven thy holy habitation, and bless thy
people Israel, and the land which thou have given us, etc. 3. God himself bids
the Church in the time of their defection; Take with you words, etc. and say to
the Lord, Take away all our iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we
render the calves of our lips. Ash^r shall not save us, and Hose. 14.2, 3, 4.
John Baptist taug^ his disciples a form of prayer; a^ Christ is so far from
misliking ^ that he teaches his Disciples a^ther.

Object. 1. But these forms of pra^ are prescribed, not to be used as praye^
but as patterns and samples of prayer.

Resp. 1. That cannot stand; so Aaron is bidden to bless the people not with
conceived prayer of h^ own, but with a prescript form Thus ye shall bless the
children of Isra^ and say unto them, the Lord bless the etc. using this set
form: and the the Son of Syrach says; Ecclus. 36.17.
Hear thou t^ prayer of thy servants according to ^ blessing of Aaron over thy
people; ther^by signifying, that the blessing wher^with Aaron blessed the
people was set form; it was used in the Chu^ches of Saxony, says Luther, after
the communion. And whereas sor^ object, that the Lord's Prayer is rule and
pattern according to whi^ we are to pray, therefore no praye^ I answer, the
reason or argument not sound; it is as if a man shou^ ^ay, the Creed is a
pattern of articles of faith, and confession of faith, therefor it may not be
used as a confession of faith: the standard is the rule of all measures;
therefore it ought principally to be regarded and used; and the Lords prayer
being the pattern of all true prayer, is therefore the best prayer; for if
measures be therefore just and true, because they agree with the standard, then
the standard is the truest: so if prayers be good, they are therefore good and
acceptable of God, because agreeable to the Lord's prayer.

Object. 2. That the Apostles who knew the meaning of our Savior, and followed
Christ's commandment, never used it as a prayer, but as a rule or pattern to
pray by; nor did they teach it others to say it over as a prayer, but according
to their necessities to show their requests to God.

Resp. 1. It Is a bold and blind assertion, it is an argument negatively from
authority; we read not that they used it, therefore they did not, non sequitur:
if this be good what may it not conclude? we read not that the Apostles
baptized infa^ nor prayed before their Sermons, ^ prayed in the name of the
Father Son, and holy Ghost; therefore she we think they did none of these.

2. Though it be granted, that t^ Apostles never commanded it to said as a
prayer, it is sufficient the Christ did, especially considerin^ that no Apostle
did ever forbid t^ use thereof.

3. They contradict the anti^ Fathers of the Church; Hieron. contra Pelag.
Gregor.
Jerome sait^ that Christ taught his Apostles, orationem dominicam dicerent
super s^crificio corporis: and Gregory the gr^ says it was the custom of the
Ap^stles, ut ad ipsam solummodo oration dominicam oblationis hostiam
consec^rent: no other liturgy nor praye^ but the Lord's prayer.

Object. No man can conceive p^ticulars in the Lords prayer, they a^^ infinite,
ergo the Lords prayer is not to used as a prayer.

Resp. 1. It is true, that there are i^finite things in the Lords prayer, a^
that our conceits are finite. Y^ 2. It therefore follows not: we m^ use it as a
prayer, though we conceive not particulars of every petition, as when David,
Psalm. 51. prays to God, wash me from mine iniquities, it was a true prayer,
yet he conceived not all particular sins, for he knew them not. Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his errors? When Paul wishes grace, mercy, and peace to the
Churches, he comprehends more in that prayer than he was able particularly to
conceive. 3. This makes as well against conceived prayer, for when we desire
God to be merciful to us, to pardon our sins, to take away our guilt, and to
remove our punishment, we cannot conceive the hundredth part of those particular
mercies for which we pray, nor of those sins against which we pray: if this
therefore be good reason, then may we not pray at all, because we cannot
conceive particulars; nor may we read the Scritures, because we know and
understand but in part, and cannot reach to the depth of the doctrine delivered.

Sect. 2.
2. TO use set forms of prayer ha^ been the practice of t^ Church of God in all
ages, both the Old and New Testaments: M^ses used a set form of prayer at t^
removing of the Tabernacle, a^ another at the pitching and resti^ thereof. When
the Ark went forward, he was to use this form ^ prayer: Arise, O Lord, and let
thi^ enemies be scattered, and let them the hate thee flee before thee: And
when rested, he said, Return, O Lord to t^ many thousands of Israel, Numb. 1^
35, 36. The first is as if he had sai^ O gracious God who have promis^ to be
present with us, and given (...) this Ark, for an outward sign a^ assurance
thereof, I beseech thee g^ before us, scattering and causing (...) flee all
those thine enemies, which would hinder us from entering in the Land of Canaan.
And for the second, it is thus much in effect: ^ Lord now thou have been
mercifu^ and gone before us, destroying o^ enemies, as we prayed: Babingt. in
Numb. 10.
hear us again, and return to our tents, granting us thy servants peace and
rest. When David brought forth the Ark, Asaph and his brethren, praised the
Lord in a form of words, and sang great part of Psalm 105. and all the 96
Psalm, and that by the appointment of David, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 7. which was Gods
Commandment, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. When King Hezekiah repaired the Temple, he
commanded the Levites to praise the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph
the Seer, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. The 92 Psalm was penned by the holy Ghost to be sung
on the Sabbath Day; and the 22 Psalm to be sung every day: and Psalm 102. is
styled, A prayer of the afflicted, or for the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaints before the Lord.

It was also the practice of the New Testament, for both parts of Invocation,
(...).
Petition and Thanksgiving. For Petition: Christ uses a set form of Prayer;
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass. Then he went again the third
time, and sai^ the same words, Mark 14.39. The^ for Thanksgiving, after his
last Supper, he and his Disciples sang an Hym^ or Psalm, Matthew. 26.30. The
Gree^ Hallelujah consisting of six Psalm viz. the 113, and five followin^ The
fourth Council of Toledo Council. Toled.
decree^ Vt unus ordo esset orandi atque Psa^ lendi per totam Hispaniam; tha^
there should be one order of pray^ and singing throughout all Spai^ And the
Council of Milevi Council. Milevit.
(when Austin was present) decreed, The no prayers should be used in the
Church, but such as were approve by the Council, giving this reason for it,
lest (say they) any thin^ in them should be against fait^ or good manners.

Sect. 3.
I Shall proceed to set down dive^ Objections made against set form^ of prayer,
and answer them.

Object. 1. A set form limiteth, an^ quenches the Spirit.

Resp. It does neither: As fire ^ extinct or put out two ways, either when no
fuel is put to it to feed it, or when water is poured on it to quench it: So
the Spirit, that is, the gifts of the Spirit, as knowledge, faith, hope,
humility, charity, are extinct either through sloth, when fuel is not put to
the fire, when we do not (...), stir up the gifts and graces of the Spirit
in us; by reading, prayer, meditation, and conference the billows always blow:
or by entertaining heretical opinions and wicked motions, which like water
quench them, and like thorns do choke them, but a set prayer does neither, but
is a means to kindle sparks of grace and devotion; as he that preaches a
penned Sermon, or reads one Chapter, and no more, is not said to quench the
Spirit; no more is he that reads a prayer, or says the Lords prayer, or any
premeditated prayer committed to memory: He quenches not the Spirit, that
utters not what the Spirit puts into his heart, but that entertaineth wicked
thoughts contrary to the inspirations of the Spirit.

2. It does not limit God, his power neither, imagining God cannot do this or
that, as the Israelites did, Psalm 78 19. nor prescribe God what to do; as to
yield to thi^ motion put into the mind, not to that: He that prays a set
praye^ limiteth not God: for though h^ is tied to set words, sentences an^
notions, so that he cannot express the desire that is happily suggest (...) by
the Spirit; yet if he pray, an^ desire it in heart, though he express^ it not
with his lips, it is no limitin^ of God. I say the Lords praye^ and when I say,
Give us this day o^ daily bread, this motion is suggeste^ Give me
contentedness; it is a particular of the general.

Object. 2. In true prayer, W^ know not what to pray as w^ ought, Romans 8.28.
But in a s^ form of prayer we know what to pu^ Ergo.

Resp. It Is a mistaking and ab^s^ of Scripture; the meaning is, w^ know not
what to pray for as w^ ought, neither in set forms, nor co^ceived prayer,
unless the Spirit make request, that is, prepare and touch our hearts, by
giving us the spirit of prayer and supplication: This therefore is against
conceived, as well as Book-prayer, whether way soever we pray it is true; For we
know not what to pray as we ought. Not but that a man of parts knows what
words and sentences to use, but that we cannot call on God in truth, except he
help our infirmities and make request, that is, cause us to make request to God.

Object. 3. Thus a man may buy his prayers at a Stationers-shop, and fetch
cause of sorrow from other men's writings, but absurd, for prayer comes from
the Spirit of God within us, teaching us to say, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15.

Resp. If by prayer we mean the form and frame of prayer, the tenor of words
and sentences, we may buy them, as we do Common Prayer Books at
Stationers-shops: And is this strange? Do we not buy Sermons that we read, and
buy the holy Scriptures also? If by prayer^ you mean groans and desires of the
heart, these cannot be bought: their money perish with them, that think t^ buy
the gifts of the holy Ghost; Act. 8.20.
ye^ are those gifts much excited an^ helped by Book-prayer. And when you say,
that we would have me^ fetch cause of sorrow from other men's writings, you
mistake and deceive your selves; Fallacia non causae, that is a cause that does
bu^ manifest the cause. The cause of sorrow is nothing without us, but our sins
within us, the greatness of which is displayed better in s^ forms, than
otherwise; as he that is touched in conscience at the preaching of the Word,
does not fetch his cause of sorrow from the Sermon but from his sins discovered
in tha^ Sermon.

Object. 4. It Is a part of the worship of Antichrist, maintaining superstition,
and a dumb Ministry.

Resp. If outward worship be used in Popery, true set prayers are a part, but
not therefore unlawful* for so reading the Scriptures, singing of Psalms,
preaching the Word, and conceived prayers themselves should be unlawful,
because used in Popery. If they say, that Antichrist invented it, and brought
it into the Church, they err egregiously many ways: For,

1. Set forms of prayer in the Old Testament were appointed by God, As is
before proved.
and by our Savior Christ in the New Testament; and there were Liturgies in
Churches before Antichrist was revealed.

2. But suppose they had been brought in by Antichrist, yet not therefore
unlawful. A thing may have a Popish original, yet a good and profitable use;
as the assembling of people together to our public Congregations by the sound
of a Bell, was brought in by Pope Sabinian, an enemy to Gregory the great; if
all things that had a Popish original, should be taken away, then Bells,
Steeples, Temples or Churches that we meet in, should all be demolished and
destroyed, and we should assemble together in private houses, at the sound of a
Trumpet, as the Jews did, Who knows not the matter of many prescript forms
of prayer to be lawful, good and necessary for all men? for all our prayers
are not laid open in the prayers which are conceived by the Minister or
Governor of the Family, and yet no man judges them unlawful, though they be
imperfect. He that confesses it possible to give thanks aright i^ a set form
of words devised by others, cannot deny the same i^ requests with any show of
truth, or color of reason: It is lawful to ask common blessings daily in a
set form of words, therefore it is not unlawful to use a set form of prayer,
and if to pronounce ^ be lawful, then to read it also. As pronouncing cannot
make a^ evil matter good; no more can reading make a good matter evil:
pronouncing and reading being adjuncts of prayer both indifferen^ Balls Treat.
of Prayer.
and every Sexton of a Parish to be a Trumpeter; or by loud voice of a Stentor,
as among the Turks; and every Clerk to be a Crier. An oath had an impure
original, sc. deceit and double dealing; yet is it Gods ordinance, and the en^
of strife; and so for a set form of prayer, it had a Popish original (which it
had not) yet were it not (therefore) unlawful.

Sect. 4.
YEt all this while I do not speak against conceived prayer, i^ those to whom
God has given the spirit of supplication, and are able in significant words to
express the desires of their hearts, this is a choice gift, especially in a
Minister, householder, or other that is to be the mouth of the company in
prayer: though the use of set forms of prayer be very lawful, as I have
proved, yet must we look to it, that we be not more for form than substance,
more for the outward ornament than the body, and more for the body, than for
the spirit of prayer and supplication; and if there be not the life and power
of faith in our prayers, bodily exercise will profit us but little. Let us take
heed we make not a formal business of set forms of prayer, resting on it,
because it is more facile and easy to perform than conceived prayer; let us
not be lazy, but be willing to take pains with our own hearts, to find out the
state of our own souls; then shall we be the better able to draw up our
petitions to God, and to lay open our hearts in a close and particular
confession of our sins, which multitudes of men, being sluggish, are unwilling
to do, and therefore they rest on general forms of prayer, and take no further
pains with themselves. Two men may pray, the one conceiving, the other reading
the one may frame words to hi^ mind, Vid. Pract. of the faithful.
which is more easy, the other may frame his mind to his words, which is not
so easy; yet both the one, and the other prays, if they pray with good
understanding, and godly affections. A man may pray without book and miss; he
may pray by a book, and obtain; for he that prays by heart without heart does
nothing but talk; whenas he that prays by book with his heart, does both read
and pray with devotion. One reads prayers, and prays not, who prays without
understanding and affection; and another likewise speaks, but does not pray,
that utters words rashly, not pondering what he says, not heartily wishing
the things he praye^ for, or speaks of. Some condemn the use of one prayer
often at one time; and it deserves censure, if the heart repeat not with the
tongue; but if there be an ingemination of affections, as well as of
supplications, it is not to be reproved: We can double the same sins in the
committing of them, why may we not? Nay, why ought we not ingeminate ^ursuits
and requests for the remission of them?

CHAP. X. Shows, for whom we are to pray.
Sect. 1.
NOw come we to consider the persons, for whom we are to pray. And to this
purpose, St Paul exhorts, That first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1. Calvin
tells us, That therefore the Apostle used so many several words to the same
purpose, the more to provoke us to diligence in the duty, and to condemn our
negligence, if we are slack and slow therein. Now for the extent of our
prayers, it is to all men; that is, to all sorts of men, but not to every
particular and singular man. Philo the Jew discoursing of Aaron Ephod, Joh.
Plant a vit. Florid. Rabbinic.
which he put on when h^ went to pray, says, it was (...), a representation o^
the whole world, having in it a colors to represent the condition of all
estates of all people whatsoever; this was Aarons practice: An^ a learned
Divine of ours says We err not more grossly in any thing, Joh. Whites Sermon.
An. 1616
than in wiping men's name and conditions out of our prayer^ as if our private
affections were the Calendar of every man's salvation. Now

1. We must pray for all the faithful, so Paul exhorts the Ephesian^ to pray
for all Saints, and for him all Ephesians. 6.18, 19. we must begin a them with whom
we are join in the bond of faith, and in the obedience of the Gospel. We ar^
commanded James 5.16. to pray ^ for another. And the Apostle Ephe 1.16. says,
I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in ^ prayers: He
being but one praye^ for all the Saints: therefore in the Lords Prayer, we do
not say, A^ Father, but our Father; nor give me, but give us, because the
master of Christianity would that prayers should be made for others, as well ^s
for our selves. Necessity compels every man to pray for himself, but brotherly
love exhorts him to pray for others. Non mi pater, sed pater noster: nec da
mihi, sed da nobis, quia Christianitatis magister noluit privatim preces fieri,
ut sc. quis pro se tantum precetur, pro se orare necessitas quemlibet cogit,
pro aliis autem charitas fraternitatis hortatur: Dulcior autem apud Deum est
illa oration, non quam necessitas transmittit, sed quam charitas fraternitatis
commendat. Chrysostom. sup. Matthew. Si pro te tantum rogas, pro te tantum rogabis:
sin pro omnibus rogas, omnes itidem pro te rogabnut. Ambros.
That prayer is more acceptable with God, not which necessity transmitteth, but
which brotherly love commends, says Chrysostom. If thou prayest only for
thy self, thou shall only have the benefit of thine own prayers, but if thou
prayest for all the faithful, they also will pray for thee, says Ambrose.

It has been usual in all ages, for men of the best rank to crave and call for
the prayers of their brethren. Thus Hezekiah sends to Isaiah, when Rabshakeh
blasphemed; Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that ^ left, Isa.
37.4. So Daniel about the interpreting of King Nebuchadnezzars dream, desired
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah his companion^ That they would desire mercies of
h^ God of Heaven, concerning this secre^ Daniel. 2.17, 18. Is any man se^ among
you, let him call for the elde^ of the Church, and let them pray ou^ him, etc.
and the prayer of faith sha^ save the sick, and the Lord shall rais^ him up,
James 5.14, 15. As the members of the body are ready t^ do all good offices one
for another so the members of the mystical body must perform all offices of
lo^^ one to another, of which prayin^ one for another is not the lea^^ Be a man
of never so excellent part yet this does not exclude him from the Communion of
Saints, as the beauty and comeliness of any pa^ of the body does not exclude
it from the fellowship of other membe^ now prayer one for another is (...) part
of this communion: Beside if a man be enricht with excelle^ gifts, and be
eminent in grace, has a treasure hard to be kept; and therefore says Basil,
Basil. exhort. ad Bapt.
A man had need to be the more watchful, and he advises to take three
adjutors, Jejunium, Psalmodiam, Orationem, Fasting, singing of Psalms and
Prayer; and not only our own prayers, but the prayers of others also.

Some there are indeed (and they ^o be reproved) that think they ^ave no need
of the prayers of others; their own private prayer is sufficient. Of such St
Jerome speaks, That some think they need not public teaching, they can
instruct themselves well enough, with reading good books at home; and some
regard not the Churches prayers; of themselves they can prevail with God. But
the best men have ^ver desired the assistance of others with them in prayer: as
Moses took Anon and Hur when he went to ^ay against Amalek, being consci^^s to
himself of his own infirmi^ies. The benefit is not small, O Lord, that thou
should be praised by many ^f us, and prayed unto by many for us, says
Austin. Aug. confess. lib. 10. c. 4.
For a man shall re^ benefit by the prayers not of a few but of many hundreds
and thou^sands; and if one faithful man prayer prevail much, James 5.1^ how
much more of many? So sha^ a man have an interest in the fellowship of the
Saints, wherever they are, and his graces the better flo^rish, and the better
keep what h^ has; for the best Christian her must not imagine himself to be
already a burning and shining ligh^ within the house of Heaven, Sic ardens and
lucens nondum in domo, se confidat, ubi sine omni tempore ventorum accensum
lumen deportatur, sed meminerit se esse subdio, and utraque manu studeat
operire quod portat, nec credat aeri, etiamsi videat esse tranquillum. Repent
enim, and (...) qua non putarunt, murabitur, and si vel modicum mu^remiserit,
lumen extinguetur. Bern. Sermon. 3. in Vigil. N^ Dom. 1.
when once kindled, there is no danger o^ any wind to blow it out; but man
remember, that he is yet in the open air, and must cover and defend the light
he carries with both hand^ nor be confident, though the a^ seem to be calm,
for sooner tha^ he is aware, if he take awa^ his hand, his light may be pa^ out.

We must pray for all the Elect, whether those that be now actually converted,
and called to Faith and Repentance, or those that shall be thereafter. Our
Savior Christ did so, I pray for them, etc. And ver. 20. I pray not for them
alone, but for all them that shall believe through their word.

Sect. 2.
2. WE are also to pray for every particular person, that shall stand in need
of our prayers; Some say that S. Stephens prayer procured S. Paul's conversion:
Si Stephanus non orasset, Ecclesia Paulum e Saulo non habuisset. Aug.
Thus we are to pray for Papists, Heretics, Schismatics, that God would
convert them; though we are not to pray with them, as persons out of the
Communion of Saints; yet are we to pray for them, being of our own flesh: we
know not how God has decreed concerning them.

Yea we are to pray for our very enemies: Our Savior has commanded us, That
we should love our enemies, and bless them that curse us, (...) do good to
them that hate us, and pray for them which despightfully use us, and persecute
us, Matthew. 5.44 David fasted and prayed for his enemies, Psalm 35.13. So did
Stephen, Acts 7. ult. That God would not lay that sin of theirs in murdering
him to their charge. So did Christ pray for his persecutors, Father forgive
them, they know not what they du, Luke 23.34. and he prays for the
forgiveness of their sins, one of the choicest and most needful blessings in
the world, for in it stands true blessedness, Psalm 32.1. Hence it
appears, that he prayed not for them that persecuted him maliciously, Ex odia
and invidia contra conscientias, Stella in Luc. 23. Verisimlle est, Christum
non orasse pro omnibus promiscue, sed tantum promisera plebe, quam zelus
inconsideratus, non autem deliberata impietas rapiebat. Calvin. ad loc.
out of hatred and envy against their consciences, as Stella notes; but for
such ignorant souls as being seduced, and misled by their blind guides, the
Scribes and Pharisees, of blind zeal thought they did well in crucifying him
the Lord of glory, which was the case of St Paul, Acts 9. and was converted (as
it is thought) by St Stephens prayer. So, says Calvin, very probable it is,
that Christ did not pray for all promiscuously, but only for the miserable
people, who were carried away more by inconsiderate zeal, than deliberate
impiety: Such were some both of the rulers and people, Acts 3 17. and that this
prayer of his was available, appears both by the conversion of the thief on
the cross, as also by that company converted at St Peter's Sermon, Acts 2.41.
Pendebat, and tamen petebat, as Austin speaks; Christ prayed when he hung upon
the cross, and by that prayer procured of God his Father, that within fifty
five days, eight thousand of his enemies should be converted: Of whom
Chrysostom says thus; Christi sanguinem quem antea saeviendo fundebant, tum
demum credendo bibebant. Chrysostom.
They at length drunk that blood of Christ by believing, which by raging
against Christ they had before poured out. Our prayers also for our enemies may
be a means of their conversion; much good comes to us many times by enemies.
One says, That enemies are the workmen that fit and square us for Gods
building, they are the rods that beat off the dust from our souls, were it not
for enemies, how could we exercise those excellent graces of love and charity,
of patience and brotherly-kindnesse? Had it not been for enemies, where had
been the crown of Martyrdom? Yea, enemies are the fire that purifieth; the
water that cleanses the dross and filthiness of our hearts, Petrar. Dialog.
much good comes to us every way by enemies, therefore it is advantageous to
pray for them. And this I shall add, that the praying for our enemies fits us
the better to pray for our selves.

Sect. 3.
Quest. HEre now comes a question to be answered, viz. Whether we are at no
time to pray against our enemies?

Resp. 1. We may pray against the sins of wicked enemies; as David does; O let
the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, Psalm. 7.9. 2. We may pray against
the plots, counsels, and enterprises of the wicked: thus David prays, that God
would turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15.31. and the
Apostles, Acts 4.29. who pray that God would behold the threatenings of their
enemies. And David Psalm. 5 10. prays, that God would destroy his enemies, and
let them fall by their own counsels: that God would scatter them by his power
and take them in their own pride, Psalm. 59.11, 12.

Object. But we read that David prays for the confusion of his enemies, Psalm.
109.7, 8. praying that his enemies may be condemned, and that their prayer
become sin, and that their days be few, etc. and Psa. 59.13. he prays thus;
Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may not be.

Resp. 1. This kind of prayer of David here, and of Jeremiah, Chap. 18.21.
savoureth of a peculiar zeal which they had, but are not to be imitated by
every Christian now: and therefore our Savior (to them that in all have would
have fire come down from Heaven, to consume the Samaritans that refused him,
and pleaded Elias his example to that purpose) says, ye know not of what
manner of spirit ye are, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, Luke 9.55. and yet David, Jeremiah, and S. Paul, 1
Cor. 16.22. pronounced not those curses, vindictae livore, Greg. Moral. lib. 4.
cap. 5.
sed judicio justiciae, upon a spleen to be revenged, but in judgment and
justice, for that they had a discerning spirit, and knew by the holy Ghost,
that those persons on whom they pronounced those curses, were rejected of God,
as one of the Fathers speaks. 2. S. Augustine takes those words to be rather
prophesies than prayers, as elsewhere he speaks of David's curse in particular,
that they were not, stomacatio maledicentis, sed praedictio prophetantis. Of
the Prophets in general he says thus; By the imprecations they made against
the enemies of God, Per imprecarionem quid esse^ futurum cecinerunt, non
op^antis voto, sed spiritu praevidentis. Aug. de Tempore. Sermon. 50. Gossen's
Trumpet of War.
they showed what was to come, not by way of wishing, but by the spirit of
prophesying: the persecuting Heathen Emperors, were great mountains, that stood
very high and stiff in the Churches way, but the faith and prayers of the
Church, according to the Promises of the word, has removed them, as a good
Divine has noted.

Sect. 4.
NOw let us speak more particularly concerning the persons for whom prayers in
special are to be made; and first of all for Kings, and all that are in
authority over us, 1 Timothy 2.^. both for supreme and subordinate; and great
reason there is ^ereof.

1. By reason of the weight and ^urthen that lies upon them, People are to pray
for Kings and Rulers, that God would give them judgment and righteousness,
Psalm 72.1. for justice is so necessary in them, that Austin says, justice
being removed, what are Kingdoms but great robberies. Tertullian says, we pray
always for all Emperors, that they may have a long life, a peaceable
government, a safe family, strong armies, a faithful Council, an honest
people, a quiet country, and whats^ever is desired of men and Caesar. Tertul.
apolog. l. 30.
if they be careful and conscionable to do their duties, as appears, Exodus
18.13. where it is said of Moses, that be sat to judge the people, the people
standing by him, from the morning unto the coming: and so great was his
burden, that he professes, that he was not able to bear them himself alone,
Deuteronomy. 1.9. What the government of ^ Kingdom is, Solomon was very sensible, when
coming to sit on his fathers throne, he thus speaks unto God; and now O Lord my
God thou have made thy servant God, etc. and I am but a little child, I know
not how to g^ out nor come in, and thy servant is in the midst of a great
people that cannot be numbered; give therefore thy servant a^ understanding
heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is
able to judge this thy so great a people? 1 King. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. This even some
of the heathen have confessed; and therefore one said, That a King from the day
he comes to his Kingdom, he begins to live to others, and die to himself,
laying down as it were his own person, and assuming the person of the
Commonwealth: This Epaminondas knew right well, therefore he would many times
watch and walk about the walls of the City, when his soldiers and subjects
slept: so likewise, Pelopidas another worthy General, going to the wars, and
being admonished and advised by his wise to look to himself, gave her no other
answer but this, that, that belonged to private persons, but it was the duty of
an Emperor, and part of a Prince, to look well to his soldiers: the
consideration hereof happily might make Saul to hide himself among the stuff, 1 Samuel 10.11. when he was called to be King of Israel. Seeing therefore their
burden is great, there is great reason they should be assisted with the prayers
of many, that they may be en^bled to bear it.

2. Because they are most in danger, and most assaulted by enemies both
temporal and spiritual. 1. For ^emporall enemies: the Philistines ^end and
spend the brunt of their ^^tell upon Saul and his sons, 1 Samuel Chap. ult. and
the King of Syria commanded his thirty two Captains, to fight neither with
small nor great, but with the King of Israel, 1 King. Chap. 22.31. the reason
surely was, because they knew, that if they could vanquish Saul and Ahab that
were the leaders, the rest of the people would quickly yield. 2. Satan, the
arch enemy of all mankind, and our spiritual adversary, as he labors the
destruction of all, so especially of the chiefest: he knows, that if he can
make Jeroboam an Idolater, and he set up two Calves, the one at Dan, the other
at Bethel, all Isra^ will run after the commandment o^ the King, and quickly
worship them, Hose. 5.12. he knows by long experience, that Regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbi^
-- and mobile mutat
semper cum principe vulg^^,


As the King is, so the Court will be* as the Court is so the country will
follow; therefore they being in mo^ danger, have most need of defense, and
prayer is a principal one, it is one of the pieces of the spiritual armor,
mentioned Ephesians. 6.

3. Because upon their safety depends the good of the whole Kingdom, both
Church and Commonwealth; Isai. 49.23.
for its their part and duty to be nursing fathers for the Church and to enact
good laws for the peaceable government of their people. S. Augustine tells us,
that every King and governor has two callings; one private, whereby ^e is
bound to serve God as a Christian; and another public wherein he must serve
God as King, whereof he says; Reges tunc serviunt Deo, ut Reges, August.
quando ita serviunt, ut servire non possent, nisi Reges.

This is by making of good Laws, and making their power a means to advance
Christ's Kingdom in their Kingdoms: to this they be ^xhorted, Psalm. 2.10, 11.
these things ^e Apostle coucheth together, say^^g when he exhorts us to pray
for Kings, that we under them may lead a ^uceable and quiet life in all
godliness ^d honesty: this cannot be done but ^y the help of Magistrates, and
Ma^strates shall not do it without God's blessing, and they cannot ex^ect that,
without their own and their people's prayers, as Calvin ^heweth, by the
similitude of the ^^rth, not bringing forth fruit without rain, and the rain
ordinarily not ^alling, but being procured by prayer.

Sect. 5.
Quest. IT will easily be granted, that Christian Princes must be prayed for;
but all the doubt is, that shall be done if they be heretics, and infidels,
and Tyrants, and prof^ enemies of the Church, must such (...) prayed for?

Resp. Surely they must: for su^ a one was Nebuchadnezzar, yet (...) must be
prayed for, and his wellfar^ God commands the children of I^rael that were
carried away captive^ from Jerusalem to Babylon: Seek (...) the peace of the
City, whither I ha^ caused you to be carried away captiv^ and pray unto the
Lord for it, for in the peace thereof, ye shall have peace, Jerem^ 29.7. and
Paul says, that the Heathen Emperors must be prayed for for such they were in
his time: a^ great reason, Si mali sint, rogandus est Deus, ut bonos faciat.
Calvin.
for if they are evi^ we are to entreat God to man them good, says Calvin: y^
though themselves be bad and vitiou^ both heretical for matter of judgment,
and wicked and profane for li^ yet they may make good Laws for the government
of others, as dive^ wicked Emperors and bad Princes have done, and as our own
Chronicle^ do report of Richard the third King (...) England, that he was a bad
man, b^ a good Prince; making good a^ wholesome Laws for the good of the
Nation: it is a misery to live in a ^yranny, under an evil governor, ^ut it is
thrice more miserable to live (...) an Anarchy where there is no^ing at all:
for without Laws and government, neither house nor vil^age, nor Town, nor City,
nor any ^tate can stand or continue: there is ^o judgment like no government.

Now if Kings and Princes must be ^tayed for, then surely the Papists ^old a
false position, viz. that Pro^estant Princes that in Ecclesiastical ^atters
will not put their hands un^er the Popes girdle, may be forsaken ^f their
subjects, exposed to dangers, ^e anathematized, yea deposed from their Crowns
and Kingdoms: this ^s the devilish doctrine of new Rome, much degenerated from
the ancient doctrine of old Rome in S^ Paul's and Peter's time, yea in Elutherius
his time, who lived about two hundred years after Christ, no such matter was
hatched or heard of: for thus ^iteth he to Lucius King of England, that beins
Custos utriusque Tabulae, and having both the old and new Testaments for his
direction he might out of them by the a^vice of his learned Council, a^ help
of his own Clergy, make Law for the good and pious government of his Kingdom,
witho^ any approbation of them from Rome: and Gregory sometime Bishop of Rome,
confesses, that Maritius the Emperor had power ov^ the souls of his subjects,
and that n^ only over soldiers, but Bishops a^ Priests also: and S. Bernard
writi^ to an Archbishop of France, tel^ him, that if every soul must b^ subject
to the higher Powers; the^ if he and his Clergy had souls, the^ must be subject
to the Emperou^ by St Paul's authority, Romans 13.1.

Sect. 6.
ANd as Magistrates, so Minister also are to be prayed for: T^ like the Apostle
begs of the Hebr^ Heb. 13.18. and of the Thessaloni^^ 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. Brethren,
pray for ^ See what arguments he uses to i^ treat the Romans to pray for hi^
^^m 15.30. I beseech you brethren, for the and Jesus sake, and for the love of
^^e Spirit, that you strive together in ^^r prayers to God for me. If you ^ve
any love to Jesus Christ, and as ^ver you felt Christ to do good unto ^ou, and
felt the efficacy and working ^f the Spirit in you, strive and wre^e with God
in prayer for me; and ^ in every Epistle he begs their ^nyers. This has been
the pra^ice of the people of God of old for ^e faithful Ministers. When Peter
^s in prison, earnest prayer was made ^ the Church of God for him, Acts ^.5.
And when Paul and Silas ^ent forth to preach, They were ^^mended of the
brethren to the ^eace of God, namely by prayer, Acts ^5.40.

Now where a people want a faith^^ll Minister, they are to pray for ^e. Thus
did Christ give in charge, Math. 9.38. Pray ye the Lord of the ^^rvest, that he
would send forth la^^rers into his harvest. That it is ^ecessary to pray for
able Mini^^ers, may appear by the Titles ^herewith the Scripture styles ^em.

1. They are called Seers, 1 Samu^ 9 9. and therefore they must see t^
themselves, and for others, seekin^ out the will of God, and making ^ known to
them.

2. They are called Speculators Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3.1. they mu^ therefore keep
Sentinel, and sta^ upon their Watchtower, to admonish the people of dangers
approaching, unless they prevent them b^ forsaking their sins.

John 21.15.
3. They are called Shepherds, E^ 34.2. they must therefore feed Go^ reasonable
sheep committed to their charge, in the green pastures of h^ Word, and lead
them forth by the wholesome waters of spiritual comfort.

4. They be Husbandmen, the^ must not thetefore be loiterers, b^ laborers,
painfully plowing up t^ fallow-ground of men's hearts, an^ sowing the immortal
seed of Go^ Word in the furrows thereof.

5. They be Gods Gardeners an^ Vine-dressers, therefore they mu^ pluck up the
briars, thorns a^ thistles, prune and lop away all ^ ^erfluous branches of
sin and im^iety, and plant, set and sow in the ^om thereof the seeds of
Virtue, Religion and Honesty.

6. They be Gods Factors: Therefor they must not wrap up their ^asters money
in a napkin, and bu^ it in the earth with the unprofita^le servant, Matthew.
25.18. but im^oy and improve to the uttermost those gifts of Nature and Grace,
^herewith God has endewed them to his Glory, and the Churches good.

7. They be Stewards of Gods house; and it behooves them to be faithful ^^d
wise, that they may have both ^ill and skill, to give every one of their
fellows their portion, and proportion of their masters provision, and that in
due season, as our Savior says, Luke 12.42. And hereby, ^all Interpreters
observe, Tritici mensuram vetus Interpres: inos olim erat, ut cuiliber serio
quolibet mense quaterni modii tritici admetiebantur, viz. Somewhat less than
four pecks, as the Notes on the Geneva Bible tell us.
he understands, that heavenly incorruptible food of the soul, whereof he
speaks by his Prophet Isaiah 55.1. This is the food that must be given ^ our
fellow servants, and it must ^ given them in due season: We mu^ fit both our
Texts, and the manne^ of handling them, to every circumstance of Place, Time
and Person and the Auditories capacity: Some must be fed with milk, some with
strong meat; to some we must b^ like James and John, Boanerges, denouncing the
threatenings of the Law against the obstinate; and sometim^ again, like Barnabas
and Barjona the sons of consolation, to comfor^ Jerusalem at the heart, and
pronounce the sweet promises of the Gospel to penitent sinners. Sometim^ we may
handle points of Controversy among the Learned, and sometime we must handle
points o^ Catechism among the unlearned, and we must evermore be guided by a
good conscience in both: Sometime truth must be confirmed, sometime falsehood
must be confuted: Some must mildly be admonished, as the weak Corinthians;
others must sharply be reproved, as the frowar^ and foolish Galatians. This wa^
St Paul's course, as he testifies of himself, 1 Cor. 9.22. not that he ^ecame
Apolypus, Protaeus, or Came^m, turning with the tide and time ^o serve his own
turn, but he did ^hese things in godly wisdom and dis^^^tion, for the
advantage of the ^^use, and furthering his Masters bu^nesse.

8. They be also called Fathers, ^ Cor. 4.14, 15. St Paul tells them, that he
wrote not those things (viz. ^e base account and mean esteem himself and his
fellow laborers, ^ere had in of the world, as ap^ars by the Context) to shame
them: ^t (says he) as my beloved sons I ^rne you, to beware of running into
^e same fault; then he renders them ^is reason, For though ye have a thou^^^d
instructors in Christ, yet have ye ^t many fathers, for in Christ Jesus ^ have
begotten you through the Gospel. To the same purpose he speaks ^so to the
Galatians, Chap. 4.19. Thus likewise St Ambrose was wont ^o call the faithful
of Millain his ^hildren, and other godly Bishops ^ave done the like. What
reason then have we to pray for our Ministers? For if Alexander could confess
himself more indebted to Aristotle his master for his breeding and making him a
civil man and a Scholar (which he calls his been esse) than to Philip his
father for his birth, making him a natural man, leaving him a Kingdom, all
which he calls but his ^sse; What would he have said (think we) had he lived in
a time where he might have had means to become religious, and a Christian man?
Ministers ought to tender their people more than Parents do their children,
because they have the soul, the more principa^ part to care for, which most
Paren^ (though falsely) think themselves discharged of. Possidonius Possidon. in
vit. Aug.
reporte^ of Valerius the good old Bishop o^ Hippo, that being a Grecian, and
s^ not able roundly to speak Latin c^ the benefit of his people, and
perceiving Austin to be a towardly youn^ man of good hope, he made him hi^
Coadjutor in the execution of h^ office, and in process of time, perceiving
him to be faithful and pai^full, and that the people profited well by him,
There were many in St Gregory's time, of whom he says, Ecce mundus
sacerdotibus plenus est, and tamen in mess Domini rarus inveni^ur operarius:
then he renders the reason of it, saying: Officium sacerdotale omnes
suscipimus; opus autem non implemus: Multi curati sunt, sed pauci rem Domini
curant; and pauci precari quidem inveniuntur, qui habent sanctam vitam cum sana
doctrina conjunctam. Gregor.
he resigned his Bishopric to him: hereby as a good spiritual Father, he
showed the care that he had of his peoples souls: A good president for such as
are able to live without a Church, and unable or unwilling to preach in a
Church; let such (at least) both for conscience toward God, and their credit
^owards men, get them sufficient assistants to help ease them of that burden,
which otherwise cannot choose but sit heavy upon them. Now that Ministers may be
able in good measure to perform the duties which those titles and relations
call for, they have need of peoples prayers.

Sect. 7.
NOw let us consider, what are the things we are to pray for in the behalf of
our Ministers.

1. Pray that your Ministers may be men of ability, that they may be men fitted
and furnished for the discharge of their duties, and that God would give a
blessing to their labors, One observes, That Caleb said to his men, Josh.
15.18. Jacob. Marchantii hortus pastorum.
I will bestow my daughter upon one of you, but he that will have her, must
first win Kiriath-Sepher, that is, a City of Books, he must quit himself like
a man indeed; and he that will be a true Minister of Gods word, must not run
before he is sent; he must not be a man of zeal without knowledge to guide it;
but one that is furnished by God, that has lain long before Kiriath-Sepher, and
been trained up in the Schools of the Prophets; such a one is a f^ dispencer of
Gods Word and Sacraments. All sufficiency in every kind comes from God, 2 Corinthians. 3.5, 6. There is no man fit to preach the Word of God, Nullus aptus ad
praedication^m verbi divini nisi per ejus gratiam, and qui ab eo missus, and
aliquo modo aptatus, licet non immediate, media^tamen. Lyra in Luc. 10.
but by the grace of God, says Lyra, and although a man be not sent from God
immediately, yet if God fit him by any means for the work of the Ministry, he
is one sent of God.

2. Pray that they may have a ^oor of utterance, and that they may have liberty
of speech to speak the mystery of Christ, Colos. 4.3. For there are many things
that usually stop the mouths of Ministers. 1. Ignorance and presumptuous sins
in a Minister; for polluted lips be no lips of utterance; a Ministers lips must
be touched with a coal from the Altar, and he must have his infirmity taken
away, and his sin purged, Isai. 6.6, 7. 2. Sometime the sins of the people do
stop the Preachers mouth, and make him dumb, as Ezekiel. 3.25, 26. God oftentimes
gives words to the teacher for the grace of the hearer, Propter malum populum,
etiam bonis tollitur sermo doctoribus. Gregor.
and sometime for the fault of the hearer, speech is taken away from the
teacher; by reason of an evil people, speech is taken away from good teachers,
says Gregory.

3. Ye are to pray that with all courage and boldness your Ministers may
deliver the Word of God, that courageously they may reprove sins and rebuke
sinners, and reveal God counsel without fear of any man face, Jerem. 1.8.
Lifting up their voices like Trumpets, and shewin^ Gods people their sins,
Isa. 58.1 When men are like the deaf Adder, that will not hear the voice o^ the
Charmer, Isa. 58.5. Yea when they are dead asleep in sin, they had need be
rouzed up with the Trumpet of the Word. Mitio hi^ mildness, and Eli's
softness will not reclaim children past grace Ministers must not always spea^
in a soft and still voice, as God to Elias, ^ Reg, 19.12, 13.
but they may and must sometime use the rod, Jerem. 23.13, 2^ There was to be
used among the Sacrifices salt and vinegar. In ^ word, a Minister must resembl^
the Cock, who alters his tone an^ crowing according to the time of the night.

4. Pray that they may delive^ the pure word of God; and nothing else, putting
nothing to Gods word and taking nothing from it. The chopping and changing the
Wo^ of God, Chrysostom compares to falsifying the Kings coin, which is done,
either by mingling baser metal among it, or else by clipping and ^aring away
part of it, and so im^airing the weight and worth of it; ^e least of which
faults is treason against the King, and is deservedly made death, by the Laws
of our ^and: And says that Father, the mingling of the Scriptures, and the
mangling of our own devices with them, is no less than high treason against
God; and how ill he takes ^t, and severely punishes it, we may read Revel.
22.18, 19. I would not be mistaken, as if I thought it to be unlawful, to make
use of humane learning, or allege humane Authors in Sermons by way of
illustration and amplification, or the like. Let Hagar take her place, and
at^nd on Sarah her Mistress; why ^all not the Israelites use and wear the
spoils of Egypt, that God has given them? But that which I say, ^ this, that
nothing is of force to love any point either dogmatical or moral, but what is
either expressly contained in the Scriptures, or may by necessary consequence be
collected from them.

5. Pray likewise that all faithful Ministers may have a free exercise of
their Ministry; that the Gospel may have a free and full passage, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
notwithstanding the rubs and impediments which the Devil and his Instruments
oppose to the same, Paul was in prison when he makes his request to the
Colossians to pray for him, Col. 4.3, 4. either it was at Ephesus, as some
think, or at Rome, as Cajetan Bifield in Col. Cajetan.
and others, and is most probable, by the Postscript: And when Peter was in
prison, the Church prayed for him, and God sent an Angel that enlarged him,
Acts 12, 5. the want of liberty in regard of his Ministry, and the exercise
thereof, to a good Minister, is more troublesome than his bodily restraint, or
to be in bonds: and if Ministers be at any time causlesly imprisoned or
persecuted, it is a peoples duty to pray for them, that they may be delivered
from absurd and unreasonable men, 2 These. 3.1, 2.

6. We are to pray, that Ministers may preach profitably to their hearers, that
they make the Gospel manifest, as ^t becomes them, Colos. 4.4. Sanctum non est,
quod sanctum geritur, nisi quod sancte peragatur. Cyprian.
Luther says, God loves Adverbs better than Verbs: For as in natural things,
their excellency depends upon the form, and the form is preferred before
the matter: So in moral things, the manner of doing the thing is better than
the thing done. So Cyprian says, That thing is not holy which is accounted
holy, but that which is done holily, as in praying, reading, meditating,
conference, etc.

7. Pray that Ministers may be holy persons, and be clothed with
righteousness, Psalm 132.9. Pray that those that teach you well may live well
themselves, that they may be burning and shining lights, not only in their
doctrines, but also in their conversations: Pray that they nay be men of
fervent spirits. A Minister should be the best pattern of ^al that a people can
have. What Nazianzen reports of Basil, is a fit emblem for a true Minister, a
pillar of fire with this motto, Talis est Basilius, such a one is Basil. Pray
that your Ministers may be men of industrious spirits, willing to take pains
among you, and may endure hardness (as good soldiers of Jesus Christ) if they
are called unto it, i^ is but equity that you should pray for your Ministers,
seeing they pray for you; nay they should account it their sin, if they
should not pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. Besides, all the good that comes by a
peoples prayer for their Ministers, it is returned into the common treasury of
the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. The Gospel it self fares the better by such prayers,
the current of the Gospel is opened, it runs strongly, and the Gospel is
glorified; it is like the falling of abundance of rain from the hills into the
valleys, that makes the riversswell and run over. And to this I shall add,
That all your prayers for Gods Ministers, shall return into your own bosoms
with advantage: As it is with a man's son that works abroad, and earns so
much money by the week, he brings ^ome his money at the weeks end to his
parents; but in effect, he works for himself: for when his father ^ies, or
gives over his trade, he posseseth all that his father has: So when you pray
for Gods Ministers, your prayers do fill up the bag, and when the bag is
opened, it shall return to your own advantage; therefore God does endew his
Ministers with so much learning and knowledge, it is for their peoples sake, --
and in that people are to pray for their Ministers, and that Ministers have so
much desired their peoples prayers; yea St Paul himself, though an
extraordinary man: Hence we may note, That the greatest in the Church may need
the prayers of the meanest, and that God is no accepter of persons, Orat
Apostolus pro plebe, plebs pro Apostolo: prose omnia membra orant; capur pro
omnibus interpellat. Aug.
but hears the prayers of the meanest Christian, as of the greatest Apostle.
The Apostle prays for the people, the people for the Apostle or Minister; all
the members pray for themselves, and the Head prays for them all, says
Austin.

Sect. 8.
ANd as people must pray for their Ministers; so likewise must Ministers pray
for their people: Thus the Priests of old were commanded of God, to bless the
people, and pray for them, Numb. 6.23, 24. And in the New Testament, Paul
prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.14, 16. That they might be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man: So likewise for the Philippians, he
says, That in every prayer of his for them all, he made request with joy, for
their fellowship in the Gospel, Phil. 1.4, 5. So likewise he prays for the
Thessalonians, That the God of peace would sanctify them thoroughout, 1
Thessal. 5.23. Likewise he prays for the Romans, That God would grant them to
be like-minded one to another, and that with one mind and mouth they might
glorify God, Romans 15.5. So Eli prays for H^nah, The Lord God of Israel grant
thy request, 1 Samuel 1.17. and she presently found her prayer answered. And as
they are to pray for all manner of blessings upon a people, so are they to pray
against approaching judgments ready to fall upon them: So did Moses beseech
God with strong arguments to forgive Isreal's sin, and to turn away his wrath,
and spare their lives, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13, 32. and after the people had
worshipped the Calves, he prays earnestly for them, That God would forgive
their ^^nne. So Joshua and the Elders of Israel, lie upon their faces, put dust
upon their heads, and pray earnestly to God, not to deliver them into the hands
^f the Amorites, and to remember his great name, Joshua 7.6, 7, 9. This ^s
commanded as a duty to be done ^y the Ministers: Let the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen
should rule over them, etc. I^el 2.14.

But especially Ministers are to pray for the people, that their Ministry may
be blessed to them: For ^aul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is God that
gives the increase. Ministers are not only to exhort, reprove, admonish and
beseech a people, and not only to propound good wholesome doctrines and
instructions to holy duties, but also earnestly to beseech God to give his
blessing thereunto, that God would enable them to understand, embrace and
practice what they teach them: and good reason there is for this;

1. Because every thing and person is sanctified by the word of God and prayer;
I mean not only i^ public, but also in private. To the public preaching and
prayers, Ministers must join private prayer also for a people: When they cease
to preach to them, yet they are not t^ cease praying for them; when the work of
preaching is done, the wor^ of prayer is not done: God forbid that I should
cease to pray for you^ says Samuel for the people, 1 Samuel 12.23. This is the
style of Moses Aaron, Samuel, Job and D^niel, that they were such as called
upon Gods Name, standi^ up, and pleading with God, for the people, with whom
they did converse.

2. It is one great part of the office Acts 6.4. when the question was put
about the relief of the widows in the daily ministration, the twelve Apostles
would not leave their work to intend that, but bid the Church look out men of
good report, that might intend that business: For, say they, we will give ^ur
selves continually to prayer, and to ^he ministry of the Word. One Chri^tian
ought in charity to pray for another, and doing it they do it ex ^haritate,
from that love that they mutually bear one to another; but a Minister does it
ex officio: it is part of his Ministry: for as Ministers are the mouth of God to
speak to the people, so they are the mouth of the people to speak to God; and
lay open the wants and necessities of the people committed to their charge.
Hence we find them in Scripture styled the lords remembrancers, and watchmen
upon the walls of Jerusalem, Isai. 62.



Isai. 49.4. I have labored i^ vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and
in vain; but they that seek the face of the Lord, shall not seek his face in
vain: Therefore God does not give success to many Ministers in their labors,
because their labors are not steeped i^ prayers.

5. Because the Devil does make

Hence people when they have any weighty case and important business, they
should commend it to the prayers of Gods faithful Ministers. So Hezekiah (when
Sennacherib had invaded Judah, and sent to Hezekiah to Jerusalem, etc.) he
sends Eliakim, Shebnah and the Elders of the Priests, covered with sackcloth,
unto Isaiah the Prophet, saying unto him, Lift up thy prayer for the remnant
that is left, Isai. 37.4. So St James exhorts, Jam. 5.14. Is any sick among
you, let him call for the elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. And
we find in Scripture, that men notoriously wicked have been mindful of this
duty: How often did wicked Pharaoh send to Moses and Aaron to pray for him,
Exodus 9.28. when the plagues of thunder, fire, and hail came upon Egypt, then
he sent to them (confessing his sin and acknowledging Gods justice) that they
would entreat the Lord that there might be no more mighty thundrings and hail,
promising to let Israel go; and when after this, he yet hardened his heart, and
the Lord brought other judgments upon him; upon the plague of the Locusts, he
sends for Moses and Aaron again, Exodus 10.17. and says unto them, I have
sinned against the Lord your God and you; now therefore forgive I pray thee my
sin only thi^ once, and entreat the Lord your God that he may take from me
this death also: And Moses went from Phara^ and entreated the Lord. So
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13.6. when he stretched out his hand against the Prophet that
prophesied against the Altar, and his hand withered; the King speaks to the man
of God to pray for him; Entreat now the face of the Lord thy God, and pray for
me that my hand may be restored me again; and the man of God did so, and the
Kings hand was restored, and became as it was before. So likewise Simon Magus,
when Peter cursed him in the ^ame of the Lord (Thy money perish ^ith thee) and
tells him, That he was ^n the gall of bitterness, etc. Then answered Simon, and
said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which you have
spoken come upon me, Acts 8.24. How much more then should the people of God
make conscience of this duty, to beg the prayers of Gods Ministers for them.

Sect. 9.
THis duty of prayer also belongs unto Parents, who are to pray for their
children. Thus Noah prays for Shem and Japhet his sons, Genesis 9.26. that God
would bless them and enlarge them. Thus Isaac prays for Jacob his son; God
give thee of the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of
corn and wine, let people serve thee, and Nations bow down to thee; be Lord
over thy brethren, etc. Genesis 27.28, 29. Thus Jacob blessed Joseph his son,
and said, God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which
fed me all my life long to this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil,
bless the lads, and let my name be named upon them, etc. Genes. 48.15, 16. So
David besought God for his sick child, and fasted and went in, and lay all
night upon the earth, 2 Samuel 12.16. So David prays for Solomon his son,
That God would give unto him a perfect heart to keep the commandments and
statutes of God, and to build the palace for which he had made provision, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. So Job, After the days of his children feasting were gone about,
he sent an^ sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, It may be my
sons have sinned, and cursed God in their heart: thus did Job continually,
Job 1.5. Nor is it sufficient for Parents to pray in general, but they ought to
pray particularly for them: As Parents who have many children, provide meat,
drink and clothing according to the number of them all, and have a particular
eye and are over every one of them, and provide portions for them all: So they
ought to put up particular requests to God for every one of them, suing out
some special blessings to come down upon the head of each of them. Thus
doubtless Job did, when the Sacrifice for every son was made, he sent up a
prayer to God, for the pardon and acceptance of every son, Caryls expos. on
Job 1.5.
as a judicious Divine has noted. This even Heathens have done for their
children; we read, that Cornelia visited the Temples for her sons Tiberius
and Caius, and offered Sacrifices to their gods for them, when they were in the
wars of Africa; for thus she says in an Epistle she wrote to them: Your
Father bequeathed you nothing but weapons, Jo. Benthams Christian conflict.
and from me you shall inherit nothing but books; for I had rather leave my
children good doctrine, whereby they may live, than evil riches whereby they
may perish: I do not cease to visit the Temples to pray for your health, nor
yet to offer Sacrifice to the gods for your honor. Mark this all ye Christian
Parents; and be tender of the good of your childrens souls, and be careful of
bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and in praying to
God daily for them, else even Heathens will one day rise up in judgment
against you.

Moreover, Masters of Families, and Householders are to pray with, and for their
Families. King Hezekiah prays for the people, That the Lord would pardon
every one that prepared his heart to seek God, though he were not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles 30.19. First, God
commands that ^en should pray every where, lifting ^p pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8.
therefore (...) the family. When God promises to pour out the spirit of grace
and ^upplication upon his people, he says, That every family shall mourn for
their ^imes apart; the family of the house ^f David apart, and their wives
apart; (...) family of the house of Levi apart, and the family of Shimei apart,
and ^^eir wives apart, Zech. 12.10, ^2, 13.

Secondly, It is set down as one ^eason why Husbands should dwell with their
Wives, sc. that their do^estical prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, Adam set up the worship of God in his family, how else could Abel
know what to sacrifice, and in what manner, Genes. 4.4. This practice was also
renewed by the care of Seth, being decayed, and corrupted by the posterity of
Cain; in his ^ime and by his means, Men began to call on the Name of the Lord,
Genes. 4.26.

Fourthly, Our Lord Jesus himself, when he was on earth, praye^ with his
Disciples which were hi^ family: we read, That he was alon^ praying, and his
Disciples were with him, Luke 9.18.

Object. How could he be alone, and yet have his Disciples with him?

Resp. He was not simply alone, but in comparison; the multitude being now
dismissed, and sent away: So a great man may be said to be private and retired,
when he has only his own family about him; from which practice of our Savior
Christ we have a good precedent and pattern for prayer in, and with our
families. It is said of David, That morning and evening, and at noonday he
prayed, and praised the Lord. And of Cornelius we read, That he was a devout
man, one that feared God with all his house, and prayed to God always, Act. 10.2.

Fifthly, Because the families of the godly are called Churches, Romans 16.5.
therefore they should be as the Temple, where morning and evening Sacrifice was
offered up to God every day; therefore every man's house should be a house of
prai^ to that family.

Sixthly, Every family is subject ^ particular wants, and prayer is ^e means
God has appointed us to ^ave these wants supplied.

Seventhly, In our families we ^ay be most free from distractions in ^ur
devotions; therefore Christ will ^ot so much pray among the mul^^tude, as with
his Disciples, lest (...) might be disturbed and inter^pted.

Lastly, God curses such families ^s call not upon his name, Jer. 10.25. ^very
family is to offer up the Sacri^^ce of prayer day by day.

Sect. 10.
YEt there are some persons that are not to be prayed for:

1. Not all men in general are to ^e prayed for, that are, or shall be: ^.
Because it is not the will of God, ^^at all mankind should be saved: for those
we may not pray, concerning whom we have Gods re^ealed will that they shall not
be saved: If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us, 1 John
5.14* Now his will is not that all me^ should be saved, therefore it is no^ his
will that we should pray for al^ men.

Object. But the Apostle tells us, That it is the will of God, that all men
should be saved. The Apostle exhorts 1 Timothy 2.1. That prayers, supplications
and intercessions be made for all men; and give^ the reason of it, ver. 4. That
God would have all men to be saved.

Resp. St. Paul's meaning is not, that God's will is to save every particular
man, but that all men (now in the time of the Gospel) should have the means of
salvation offered to them, as the next words do explain it, and come to the
knowledge of the truth. 2. Our Lord Jesus Christ would not pray for all
mankind, therefore we may not: I pray not for the world, says he, John 17.9.
now his example must be our warrant and direction. 3. The Prophets are
forbidden to pray for certain men, whom they knew by revelation from God to be
rejected (...) the Lord. God is offended with ^muel for praying for Saul, 1 Samuel ^.1. And the Prophet Jeremiah is ^bidden to pray for the Israelites, ^r.
7.16 Pray not thou for this peo^, neither lift up a cry nor prayer (...) them,
neither make intercession to (...), for I will not hear thee, Jerem. ^.16.

2. We are not to pray for such ^s we know do sin against the ^oly Ghost,
whether wicked An^s or men, 1 John 5.16. There is ^ sin that is unto death, I
say not ^^t a man should pray for it: And according to this direction, the
Church prayed not for the conver^^on of Julian the Apostate, but ^r his
confusion, because they knew that out of mere malice he perse^ted known truths
unto his death. Every sin is mortal, and no sin is venial, Romans 6.23. Every
sin deserves death; but yet there is a s^^ne not unto death, that is, there
is ^o ordinary sin but may be forgiven; but that is a sin unto death, that
not only deserves death, but that does certainly and inevitably procure
death. The Pharisees sinned this sin, Mark 3.28, 30 where it appears that
this sin against the holy Ghost is a malicious reviling, and wilful opposition
o^ Christ, and of the known truths (...) God. The Pharisees out of envy and
malice against our Savior contrary to the knowledge they ha^ of him, said, He
had an unclea^ spirit; and though they knew the miracles he wrought were done
by the finger of God, and by hi^ Spirit, yet they attributed thos^ miracles of
his, not to the holy Spirit of God, but to the Devi^ that unclean spirit. Now
if w^ know any to commit this sin, w^ are not to pray for them. Mr Cotton
Cottons expos. in 1 John chap. 5.
gives diverse reasons why suc^ persons are not to be prayed for.

Heb. 10.29. and the Spirit is (...) grieved, that it will not assist (...) ^n
any prayer made for such men. 2. From the like despite they of^er to Christ,
in whose name we are ^o pray. Upon these two wings our ^rayers fly up to
Heaven, the mediation of Christ, and the Spirit of grace, and with these two
they do ^revail: Now those that commit ^his sin, they make a scorn of Christ,
^hey trample under foot his blood, and put him to open shame and ^unishment, as
the most notorious ^alefactour, as one that suffered ^ot for other men's sins,
but for his ^wn.

2. Where Christ is not a Sa^^rifice Hebr. ^0.27.

3. We are not to pray for the dead: For,

1. In Scripture, there are neither Commands nor Promises, no^ approved
Examples to warran^ prayer for the dead: As for tha^ place in Macchabees, where
Jud^^ is commended for praying for the dead, which died in the sin o^
Idolatry, it is not Canonical Scr^pture, and to be excepted against* Yea, the
Papists themselves a^low not prayers to be made for such.

2. It is vain to pray for the dead, whose spirits the Lord hat^ disposed of,
and their judgeme^^ is past; For after death comes judgment: Prayer after
death then is like a pardon after death, an^ pleading after sentence, D. Willet
in Levit. 16.
says (...) learned man And as Chrysosto^ says, Neque gubernator postqua^
navis submersa est, neque medic^ postquam aegrotus obiit, quicquam pr^desse
potest: Chrysostom. hom. 75. sup. Matthew.
Neither the Pilot afte^ the Ship is drowned, nor a Phys^cian when a man is
dead, can profit any thing: So when men ar^ dead, if their souls be in Heaven
they cannot be in a better estate our prayers can add nothing t^ their
happiness; if in Hell, Look but on one that plays at bowls, who no sooner
than he has delivered his bowl, he screweth his ^^ly this way, and that way,
calling after it, that it may be either short nor over, nor wide on either
side; but all in vain; (...) bowl keeps on his course, and reaches to the
place, not where ^e mind, but the strength of the bowler sent it: Thus it is
with ^se that pray for the dead, they pray and call unto God, sing ^^iems and
diriges for the souls of men departed, that they may ^e sent to purgatory, not
hell: a course unwarrantable, unavailable: (...) as the body is laid down in
the dust, so the soul is gone to God (...) gave it, there to receive according
to the deeds done here in (...) flesh, whether good or evil. Dr Wincop Sermon.
Anno 1627.
they cannot redeem them, nor assuage their torments, therefore no way
^arrantable, because no way avail^ble.

CHAP. XI. ^heweth, what Gestures may be used in prayer.
Sect. 1.
If it be demanded now, What gesture is to be used in prayer?

I answer, That no special rules ^an be given hereof, inasmuch as we ^ave
neither commandment to use ^his or that gesture, nor promise that in so doing
we shall the rather be heard; nor example which ties us necessarily to this
gesture rather than to that. Some pray standing, as the ten Lepers, Luke 17.12,
13. and the Publican, Luke 18.13. Others kneeling, as Solomon in the Temple, 1
Kings 8 54. Stephen for his enemies, Acts 7.60. Peter for the restoring of
Tabitha, Acts 9.40. Others lying, as David, who lay all night on the ground,
when he prayed for the life of his child, 2 Samuel 12.16. and Hezekiah upon his
bed praying for his own life, Isai. 38.2. Others grovelling, as Moses, Deuteronomy.
9.18. and Joshua, Chapter 5.14. And lest any man should think they did amiss
herein, we have an example beyond all exception, sc. the example of Christ
himself, who prayed sometime standing, as when he raised up Lazarus, John
11.41. sometime kneeling, as in his agony in the garden, Luke 22.41. sometime
grovelling with his face to the ground, as in Gethsemane, Matthew. 26.39. Hence
there are confuted two errors: 1. The error or heresy (as Damascen calls it)
of the Agnoclitae, who thought it unlawful to pray any way, but standing.
Damascen. de haeresib. Contra Scripturam fecerit, siquis in Cathedra aut
subsellio sedens oraverit. Tertul.
2. Of Tertullian, who thought it unlawful to pray sitting; for if it might be
lawful to pray lying (as I have showed by the examples of David and Hezekiah)
much more is it lawful to pray sitting; in that sitting is a position of the
body, wherein we show more reverence than in lying along. Besides, we have the
examples of holy men for our warrant. When Jacob was ready to die, and had
sworn Joseph to bury him in Canaan, he worshipped God toward the beds head,
and sitting ^p in his bed, and leaning on his staff, Heb. 11.21. When the
Prophet Nathan came with a message to David from the Lord, and told him, That
he should not build an house to his Name, but that his son should build it:
David went and ^^e before the Lord, and prayed; Who am I O Lord? 2 Samuel 7.18.
Vaije^eb] which though it be taken by some to be a Catachresis, and that sedit
is put for resedit, yet I see not but it may be taken in its proper sense for
sitting: for so the LXX. translate it, (...). Sept. Aug. ad simplic. lib. 2.
Quaest. 4.
and the Vulgar Latin, sedit coram Domino, and the English, he sat before the
Lord. And Austin from this place concludes, That it is lawful to pray
sitting. The Greek Church in old time were wont to pray standing, Constrictis
ad pectus manibus, their hands being bound to their breasts; Vid. respon. Nicol.
l. ad Consul. Bulgar. cap. 54.
which custom some have approved; for they did thereby sentence or condemn
themselves, that they might not be condemned of the Lord; as the King of Syria
and his Captains, put ropes about their necks, to testify they had deserved
death, and submitted themselves to the Kings pleasure in that pitiful sort.
We read in the Gospel, of some bound hand and foot, and cast into outer
darkness; therefore the Grecians bound their hands to their breasts when they
prayed, as if they should say, Domine ne manus meas ligari praecipias, ut
mittar in tenebras exteriores, quoniam jam ego eas ligavi, and ecce ad flagella
paratus sum.

Now as no special rule can be given of the gesture of the whole body, so
neither of any part or member thereof; as of the hand, or of the eye. Moses is
said to have lifted up his hands when he prayed for Israel against Amalek,
Exodus 17.12. and Solomon in his prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Reg.
8 22. whereas the Publican is said, To have smitten his breast with his hand,
Luke 18.13. Christ is said to have looked up to Heaven, when he pray^d, Matthew.
14.19. And David says, I lift up mine eyes to the hills, etc. Psalm 121.1.
whereas the Publican ^s commended that he did not ^o much as lift up his eyes
to Heaven, when he went to pray, Luke 18.13.

Object. 1. But it may be said, That (...) are commanded to pray kneeling,
Psalm 95.1. O come let us fall ^own and kneel before the Lord ^ur maker. We
have likewise the ex^mples of many devout persons, con^tantly using this
gesture of kneeling in prayer. Greg. Nazianzen Greg. Nazianz.
says of ^is sister Gorgonia, that her knees ^ere as it were even grown to
the ground by continual praying. And Gregory says, That his aunt Thrasilla had
elbows as hard as horn by leaning on a desk when she prayed. Gregor. Dialog.
Hieron. in vit. Pauli Erem. Hier. Epist. ad Marcel.
And Jerome writing the life of Paul the Eremite, says, That he was found dead
on his knees, holding up his hands and eyes to Heaven: for says he, Etiam
mortui cadaver officioso gestu precabatur. Likewise we are sometimes commanded
to lift up our hands in prayer; Lift up your hands to the Sanctuary, and praise
the Lord, Psalm 134.2. I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
1 Timothy 2.8.

Resp. The meaning of the holy Ghost in bidding us fall down and kneel before
the Lord, is not to enjoin this gesture of kneeling more than any other; but
that we wholly subject and submit, that we dedicate and consecrate our selves
to his service and worship, using such comely gestures as may best express the
reverence and humility of the heart^ otherwise we are bound no more t^ kneel
when we pray, than to tremble and quake; because it is said Tremble before him
all the whole earth, Psalm 96.9. And by lifting up our hands, is meant
metonymically the lifting up of our hearts by prayer, as Psalm 141.2. Let the
lifting up of my hands be as the evening Sacrifice, that is, let my
supplication which I testify outwardly by lifting up of my hands, let that be
as an evening Sacrifice.

Object. 2. But some may say, Does ^ut our Savior command, that when ^e stand
and pray, we should forgive, and it shall be forgiven us; therefore ^t may seem
we are bound to pray stand^ng, Mark 11.25.

Resp. Some restrain these words only to prayer in the Temple, where men were
wont to pray standing; as ^e may see in the example of the Publican, and of the
Pharisee, who both went up into the Temple to pray, and both stood and prayed,
Luke 18.10, 11, 13. But I rather think, that ^he word [stand] is used by the
holy Ghost, for the framing, composing, and setting our selves to prayer;
standing being put for any ge^ture, whether kneeling, lying, or sitting, either
because it is the chiefest position, or that it was most used by the Jews in
the Temple, to whom Christ here applies hi^ speech; Mais quand vous vous
presenterez pour fair naison, pardonnez, etc. Fren.
and thus the French translate these words, cum statis (i.) sistitis vos, when
ye present or set your selves to pray, forgive.

Sect. 2.
ALbeit we are not to put any great Religion in outward gestures, and though it
be not much material, what manner of gesture, or position of the body we use
(so the mind be well disposed) seeing bodily exercise, and so bodily gesture
avails little; yet because we are to glorify God, as well in our bodies, as
in our spirits, as the Apostle commands us, 1 Cor. 6.20. And forasmuch as
that part of Gods outward worship does consist in these bodily gestures, as in
kneeling, in lifting up the hands and eyes, etc. So also considering, that the
Scripture makes so often mention hereof; necessary it is, that we have some
general Rules for our direction herein; the first shall ^e this:

1. In public prayer we are to ^ollow the lawful and laudable custom of the
Church wherein we live. I say Lawful:] for some ge^tures used by the old
heretics, the Gnostics, were not lawful, as being ^o obscene, that they
cannot once be ^amed with modesty. And I add laudable] because there be some
more lawful, that are not laudable; either in that they are not decent, or not
profitable, serving for edifi^ation. I say also in Public:] for that a man in
private, being in his closet alone, is free to use what come^y gesture he
pleases: but in pub^ick, whether in the Congregation or a family, he is to
conform himself to the custom of that place: for if he shall kneel when other
men stand, or ^and when others kneel (as some among us are wont to sit when
others kneel, it cannot choose but give offense, breed disorder, and happily be
the cause of schism and dissension in the Church.

2. We are to use such gestures as will best stir up devotion, an^ strike us
with the greatest reverence* We have this rule in a lively manne^ exemplified
by the practice of the Saints in all ages: some kneeling^ others lying in
sackcloth and ashes* others grovelling with their faces to the ground; others
knocking their breasts; and all to the end they might hereby be affected with
the greater reverence, when they came into the presence of God, and with a more
lively sense and feeling of their own unworthiness. Moses and Joshua are
commanded to put their shoes off their feet, when they came into the presence
of God, to work in them (doubtless) a more reverent opinion of Gods excellent
Majesty, his Holiness, and sanctity, and a baser conceit of themselves, their
unworthiness and insufficiency; the which examples, though we are not bound to
follow, and in particular (as the superstitious Priests among the Jews do, when
they go into their Synagogues, as is reported) and the Turks when they go into
the Temple of S. Sophia, because we have no such par^^cular commandment: yet in
ge^eral, we are to follow them, in ^sing such gestures, Moses Gerardensis.
as may best help and further devotion, reverence, ^umility, and the like: for
if such ^oly and devout men as they were, ^ed such outward Ceremonies to ^ork
reverence, and kindle devoti^n; how much more have we that ^e so cold and
profane in compa^^son of them? They therefore that ^orn, disdain, or neglect
these out^ard gestures, have either a pro^hane or proud heart; for they either
think them to be but idle Ceremonies, or that themselves are so devout, holy,
Angelical, that they have no need thereof.

3. The gesture of the body is to be fitted to the grace and disposition of ^he
heart, and so far forth used, and no further, than as it serves to testify
the same: The rule has two parts, 1. That the gesture fit the affection and
disposition of the mind; for if it be accounted a so^oecism in action, to speak
of Heaven, and point to the Earth; much more is it in manners, more in
Religion, most of all in prayer; when the heart and hand agree no bette^ than
harp and harrow; the hear^ affecting one thing, the hand expressing another;
therefore when w^ come before God with cheerfulness^ and confidence, we are to
lift up ou^ hands and our eyes to Heaven, a^ Solomon is said to have stretched
ou^ his hands to Heaven; and Stephen to have steadfastly looked into Heaven but
coming with grief and sorrow o^ heart, we are to cast down our eyes as the
Publican, who would not so much as look up to Heaven. 2. The gesture of the
body is no further to be used, then as it serves to testifi^ the grace and
disposition of the heart^ for if the outward gesture be without the inward
affection, it is nothing but hypocrisy, the outward man belying the inner man
of the heart: as when the Jews drew near unto God with their mouths, but their
hearts were far from him; when they lifted up washen hands with unwashen
hearts; therefore the outward action is never to be severed from the inward
affection: Let us ^t up our hearts with our hands to (...) in the Heavens,
says the Church, (...). 3. Hence it is, that the holy ^host puts the outward
action for ^e inward affection; the lifting up (...) our hands for the lifting
up of our ^arts, Psalm 141.3. [ Bereck] signi^th not only the bowing of the
^^e, but of the heart by blessing ^d praising the name of God in ^yer.

Again, As the outward action is ^t to be severed from the inward ^ection; so
it is never to go before (...), but always to follow it: the ^sture of the
hand, eye and out^ard man, being moved, cordis quasi ^ctro, being framed, and
as it were ^ted by the action of the inner man; ^h^refore with Manasses, we
must ^ow the knees of our hearts before ^e knees of our bodies; and with ^e
Church, Lament. 3. we must lift (...) our hearts with our hands; first ^r
hearts, then our hands; first our ^arts must be enditing a good matter, ^hen
must the tongue be the pen of a ^ady writer: the heart is to be rent, before
the garment, and to be humbled before the outward man; neither is this rule
contrary to the former, which says, the outward gesture is to stir up the
devotion o^ the heart, for they are concausae; the devotion of the heart first
framer^ the gesture of the body, and tha^ again stirs up the devotion of the
mind. S^ Augustine speaks very we^ to this purpose: Nescio quomodo ut cordis
affectus qui ut fierent, ista praecessit, quia facta sunt, crescit. August. de
cura pro mortuis. cap. 5.
I know not, sait^ he, how it comes to pass, tha^ the affection of the heart
which caused them, is increased b^ them.

Sect. 3.
Object. BUt happily some may her^ object the precept of the Apostle, who
enjoyneth one set kind o^ gesture to men when they pray, and t^ women another,
1 Cor. 11.4, ad 10.

Resp. We are to know that the precept of the Apostle ( verse. 7. tha^ a man
ought not to cover his head and verse. 10. Therefore a woman ough^ (...) have
power on her head, that is, a ^ail to testify the power of her hus^and, if she
be married, and man in ^eneral has over her) it is no mo^al precept, of
absolute necessity to ^e kept of all men in all places; but ^nely a rule of
decency or civility, and that only in such countries, as (...) the East,
especially where women ^f old, and at this day use to wear ^ng vails to cover
their faces, chiefly ^ public Assemblies, or in the pre^nce of their husbands,
in token of ^bjection. Abimelech alluding to ^is custom, tells Sarah, That
Abraham is a vail or covering for her ^es, or of her eyes, Genes. 20.16. that
is, that he is her husband, and ^o has power over her and hers, as ^ing her
Head, and that he was to ^^otect her, and that she was his ^ife, and therefore
to be subject unto him, and to be guided by him: ^d which are signified by the
vail: ^. I say it denotes man's superiority ^er her, in which respect it is
said, that Rebekah seeing Isaac, lighted off ^n Camel, and covered her self
with a ^il, Genesis 24.65. -- 2. His protecting of her; in which sense the Lawyers
say, That every married woman is under Covert-Baron, or Coverture, and so not
liable to suits of Law, he being to answer for her. 3. Her subjection in all
modesty and reverence to her husband: for hence it is that the Romans in old
time, and the Germans at this day, cover the new married Bride with a vail,
whence comes the word Nubere, Nubere quasi velare caput vel obnubilare. Festus.
which properly signifies to cover the head, as Festus says, and by a
Metonimy, to be given in marriage, in that she was given to the man covered or
veiled. And hence it is, that the Apostle says, That the woman ought to have
power over her head, verse. 10. where by the word power (by a Metonimy of the
subject) is meant a vail, which signified, that she was under the power and
authority of the man: Neither is this true of married women only, but of maids
also, who were not to pray, nor come in public without a vail, they being
inferior to man, and as yet under the power of their Parents, as Tertullian
shows at large in his Book concerning the covering of Virgins. Tertul. lib. de
Veland. virginib.


Now that this practice is not a rule of absolute necessity, to be used every
where, and that it is not simply unlawful for a man to pray or preach with his
Hat or Cap on, but a matter only of decency and civility, accor^ing to the
custom of the place where ^ man does live, may appear by these Reasons:

1. From the drift and scope of the ^postle in that place; whose mean^ng in
forbidding men to pray cover^d, is not to forbid all covering of ^he head in
prayer, as well Hat as Cap, but such only as women used ^o wear among the
Corinthians in Greece, and the greatest part of the ^ist, namely vails, which
covered their faces, which a man we^r^g could not be discerned from ^ woman;
for so much the word (...) signifies, and there^^re it is not so well
translated, A ^an ought not to cover his head, as ^n the old translation, and
as Beza Vir non debet velare cuput^ Beza.
^ith it, A man ought not to vail his head: so that if a man does but Caput
tegere, or aliquid in capite gestare, so that he do not Caput velare, and
thereby take away the outward note of distinction between man and woman, he
does not offend against the Apostles rule.

2. In that the Apostle appealeth to the judgment of the Corinthians, bidding
them judge, whether it b^ comely for a woman to pray uncovered* verse. 13. he
gives us to understand* that he urges it no further, then as a matter of
decency, and that tha^ gesture which is generally used of all* and so thought
decent and seemly, may lawfully be used, though i^ seem to others never so
absurd -- Diverse Countries have diver^ and different customs, and differen^
customs breed different opinion^ touching what is seemly, and wha^ unseemly:
so that if men in every Country keep their own customs behavior and attire,
not bringin^ in strange fashions, nor confoundin^ the distinction that ought to
be between the man and the woman, the^ shall not violate the precept of the
Apostle; though men pray covered, women uncovered, because they use that
gesture or attire which to themselves seems most decent: We hold ^t a seemly
thing for women in pub^ick Assemblies to go without a vail, because it is the
custom of our Coun^rey, whereas in Turkey, and in all ^he East, it is and always
has been ^ccounted a shame for a woman (...) whether maid or matron) to show
^er self abroad without her vail. ^^bekah seeing Isaac covered her self ^ith a
vail. We judge it an un^emly thing for a Minister to preach ^ith his hat on,
and that a little ^ore reverence would become him ^etter; whereas in the French
Church ^at is held to be the seemliest ge^ure of all, most agreeable to the
^ecept of the Apostle, who bids ^t us, to teach, exhort, rebuke with (...)
authority, (...).
Tit. 2.15. and most ^deeming the person which he su^ineth, being the
Ambassador of ^od. For if the Ambassador of an ^athly Prince is not to be
bare when ^e delivers his message, much less ^ay they) is the Minister, Gods
Ambassador in delivering his. -- Most men at this day think, that the most
reverent gesture for a man to pray is bare-headed, or uncovered, and women
covered: whereas the ancient Romans, as Plutarch (...). Plutarc.
shows, made supplication to their gods with their heads covered, testifying
their humiliation by covering their heads; for by this gesture of covering
their faces two things are meant: 1. They did hereby acknowledge themselves
guilty malefactors, worthy to die; for persons condemned to die had their
faces covered, not only among the Romans (as we may perceive by the saying of
Cicero: I lictor, manus ligato, caput obnubiro, arbori infoelici suspendito.
Cicero pro Rabirio.
when one was condemned to die, the Judge said to the Sergeant: Go thou
Sergeant, bind his hands, cover his head, hang him upon the gallows) but also
among the Persians, as we may see S^ct. 7, 8. where when the servants of
Ahasuerus heard him say to Haman, Will he force the Queen before me in the
house? knowing there was mischief prepared for him of the King, covered his
face. 2. The acknowledgement of the exceedin^ great glory and majesty of God in
whose presence they stood, that it was such, and so great, that they could not
behold the same. When God spoke to Moses out of the bush, and bad him put off
his shoes, it is said, that Moses hid his face, Exodus 3.6. and durst not
behold it, Acts 7.32. When God spoke to Elias in Mount Horeb in a soft and
still voice, ^t is said, He covered his face with his mantle, 1 Reg. 19.31. Nay
the holy Angels themselves are said to cover their faces with their wings, as
not able to behold the brightness of his glory, Isa. 6.2.

2. That the Apostle does not simply forbid a man to pray covered, may appear
by the like; for look how he forbids men to wear long hair, so he forbids them
to pray covered; for both these prohibitions are of the same nature, delivered
in the same place, and upon the same ground: now he forbids not long hair, as a
thing simply unlawful, but so far forth only, as it confounds the Sex, or
as it is unseemly, swerving from the custom of (...) God, 2 Chronicles. 6.8. God
approves of his intention; but the accomplishment of that work is devolved
upon Solomon his son: there be diverse actions which have special references
unto typical ends, such an action was the building of the Temple, the founder
thereof must be a type of Christ: David's person will not correspond with the
prefiguration of Christ, who is the Prince of Peace, he being vir sanguinis, a
man of blood: as for those actions which concern all men generally (as
Invocation, Adoration, and the like) they always require a haec facite, a
present dispatch; but as for such actions as are individual, ceremonial, or
have dependence upon some type, there consideration must be had of the
circumstances of person, time and place; such an action was the building of
this Temple: Solomon having built the Temple, it was called by the name of God,
Jerem. 7.11. and God said his Name should be there, 2 Reg. 8 ^9. thither all
the Jews out of their several tribes assembled themselves three several times
every year to celebrate those ^hree solemn Feasts instituted, Exodus ^3. viz.
the feast of the Passover, ^he feast of Pentecost, and the feast of
Tabernacles; in this Temple Christ jesus was presented to the Lord, Mary was
purified; Luke 2.
here it was that ^nna served God with fastings and ^rayers night and day; here
likewise ^is parents found him disputing with ^he Doctors, being but twelve
years ^ld; here he often taught the people, ^ter he taught publicly: from
^ence he drove out those that sold Oxen, and Sheep, Joh. 2. Lightf. harmon.
Evangel. Sigonius.
and Doves and the ^hangers of money sitting; these ^ere sold for Sacrifices,
Lambs for ^he Passover, and Bullocks for the ^stival after, and the Doves for
the ^effering of those women, and those ^epers cleansed that were poor and ^ot
able to buy a Lamb, as a Learned ^an notes. At these times there ^eing like to
be great store of Sacri^ces, they caused a Market to be kept (...) Je^usalem,
in the Court of the Temple, that those that came from ^arre to the Passover,
or to the ^ther Festivals, as Christ did with his company at this time, might
n^ be forced to bring their Lamb o^ Bullock for Sacrifice, but might bu^ them
for their ready money, when they came to Jerusalem. Twice di^ Christ whip out
these prophaners o^ the Temple, once at the beginnin^ of the execution of his
Prophetica^ office, John 2.15. and the secon^ time toward the end and
expiratio^ thereof, Luke 19.45. and in thi^ fact of his, there did plus quam
humanum apparere, Gualter. in Luc. 19.
appear more than a humane power; for I have read* that the year following,
Pilat^ bringing the Image of Caesar into the Temple to be set up, was resisted
by the people, notwithstanding hi^ place and great authority among them; as
also going about to take away certain moneys out of the Temple to employ to
make a watercourse for the use of the City, he was like to be torn in pieces.
Now the reason why our Savior deals thus sharply with these men, is set down
Luke 19.46. he said unto them it is written, My house is the house of prayer,
but ye have made it (...) den of thieves. Christ justifies his ^ct from the
Scripture, Isai. 56.7. and Jerem. 7.11. in the former of which places it is
said, That his house ^all be called a house of prayer to ^ll people or nations:
which words must not be taken and construed li^erally, as if all the world
should go ^o Jerusalem, and there pray, and do their devotions in the Temple;
but mystically and metaphorically fore^lling the calling of the Gentiles, and
^eir admission into the Covenant of Grace, who were by nature aliens ^im the
Commonwealth of Israel; he ^ith, they shall be joined in society with the rest
of the children of Abra^am, and join with them in the true worship and service
of the true God, which was conveyed from Jerusalem and the Temple to other
places; Zech. 14.8.
ac^ording to that of the Prophet, Isai. ^.3. Ezekiel 47 9. In the latter
place, sc. Jerem. 7.11. he reproves them for profaning and perverting (...)
evil purposes, what was set apart for holy uses: yea he deals plainly with
them, telling them they had made his house (a house of prayer) to become a den
of thieves; by way (...) allusion; because as thieves and robbers, are commonly
most impuden^ and audacious, when they be nee^ their dens and caves, where they
ca^ take covert, and hide themselves so they under the cloak of Religion
covered their covetousness an^ other impieties; for they had these things to
sell in the Temple, an^ that by permission, to the end tha^ all the people that
dwelt far off might there buy, whatsoever they would to offer, which should
tur^ to the profit of the Priests. But ^ shall digress no further. My house
shall be called a house of prayer, says our Savior; here we must remember,
that both the Prophet Jeremy and Christ alleging his testimony* do use a
Synecdoche, and by one part of Gods worship, understand the rest; for it were
an idle and senseless conclusion, to say, that therefore it is not a house of
preaching too: it were as good an argument, as to say, such a man is
quick-sighted, or can see well; therefore he hears very ill or not at all:
now in the service o^ God every duty must have its due ^ace: for prayer in the
Temple we ^ave Gods precept in the forecited ^ace, Isai. 56.7. for preaching
there, was Christ's constant practice; He ^ught daily in the temple, Luke 19.^.
This the Evangelist notes in ^e next words to that, where Christ ^id, It is
written, My house is the ^use of prayer; now what God has ^^ed together, let
no man put asunder; ^reaching must not thrust prayer out (...) the Church; for
it is an Oratory, (...) house of prayer; nor must prayer ^uffle preaching out
neither, for it is ^n auditory, and place for preaching: ^nely this we may note
in a word, that prayer is well-pleasing to God, (...) that both here and
elsewhere ^t is put for the whole worship of God.

The Jews had but one Temple which was at Jerusalem, where (and ^o where else)
Sacrifices might be offered. 1. To teach us that there Christ was to offer
himself an all-sufficient Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. 2. As also
to put us in mind, that there was but one faith and Religion, and that
particul^^ Congregations might not separat^ themselves from their mother
Church: But lest Barbarism might overspread other places, it was provided that
they had Synagogues i^ their Towns and Villages, where the Levites, (dispersed
over their Tribes) served, and whither the people inhabiting those places
assembled themselves, to hear the Word read and preached, and to pray together:
In these places Christ often preached on the Sabbath-dayes* 1. Bonum quo
communius eo melius.
That he might do the more good by the publicknesse of the place, whither the
more frequent concourse of people resorted. 2. That if his Doctrine were
cavilled at, it might have this for its defense, that it was not taught in
corners, as he told Pilate, John 18.20. by his practice commending the custom
of those Countries, where are public places appointed for public meetings.
Indeed we read in the book of Numbers, That God commanded his people when they
should come into the promised Land, not to let a grove, an altar, or a Temple
stand: but this precept is ^ot moral, but political, and there^re binds us
not, it had a particu^ reference only to that people: ^ey were to have a
Temple of their ^wn in this Land, and that Temple ^s to be a type of our only
Media^r Jesus Christ: and that it may be ^one, all other according to that
^recept must down: our Temples ^re not typical, therefore that precept ^eacheth
not us.

Therefore the Church or public ^eeting place ought to be frequented ^y us for
these Reasons:

1. That we might make a pub^ck confession of our faith before the people, to
show that we are not asha^ed of the Gospel and profession of Christ.

2. To show our charity and unity ^^e with another, by meeting in the ^ame
place to pray together with the ^ime-affection, and for the same thing.

3. Because here it is possible we may sooner obtain our requests at the hands
of God than elsewhere. For it is a Principle both in Nature and Policy, Vis
unita sortior, for^ and strength united receives more strength: It holds
likewise in Divinity: If the prayer of one righte^^ man avails much, than
much mo^ the prayers of many righteous me^ will avail with God. If the Rule of
the Synagogue obtained his sui^ which he made for his daughter much more the
Church and Congregation of Christ shall obtain for he^ children, Etsi duo magna
possunt quanto magis plures? If where two or three be gathered together in the
Name of Christ, he will be in the midst of them, then much more in^ the midst
of a great Congregation* and multitude of Gods people, i^ whom there is one
heart, one soul* one tongue, as if they were all but one man. Let us ever then
frequen^ the house of God, and say with the Prophet, Psalm. 122.2.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusalem; for there is a blessing
annexed to the public place of devotion, Exodus 20.24. In all places where I
record my Name (or se^ up my public worship) I will com^ to thee, and bless
thee, says the Lo^ unto his people: thus Zachariah the father of John Baptist
prays in the temple with, and for the people who were all praying without,
Luke 1.10, 11. so Peter and John go up into the temple at the ninth hour, being
^he hour of prayer, Acts 3.1. that was one of the solemn times when the people
assembled themselves together: let us not then draw one another, the left hand
down-hill way ^o Jericho or Beth-aven, to vice or va^ity; but the right hand
up-hill way ^o Jerusalem and Bethel, not to the ta^ern but to the temple, not
to the ^rofits and pleasures of the world, ^ut to the worship and service of
God.

But here, We read Luke 24.53. that the Apostles and Disciples were daily in
the Temple praising and blessing God: I then infer, had Temples as public
been unlawful, they ^ad neither been so credited by Christ, nor frequented by
his Apostles.
quis tam faerreus ut teneat ^e? how is it possible a man should ^alke the
taxation of that impiety, wherewith our temples are pestered? what are they but
idol synagogues? what needs all these expenses and charges about them? now that
Churches being used revoke not Judaism, will appear, if we consider the two
different ends of the Jewish temple: one was that it might figuratively by way
of pedagogy, teach them Christ^ this end of temples the coming of Christ has
disanulled; ours are not instituted for signification: a second use of the
temple was, that being a convenient receptacle, it might be accommodated to the
more opportune and decent dispatch of Gods public worship and service: this
end was no way ceremonial, and to this end we use all our temples.

A second sort there are that quarrel with them, and they are close fisted
Atheists, crying out, Quorsum perditio tanta? what needs all this expense about
them? we read that the Doricks dedicating their temples to Minerva, Mars, and
Hercules, built them incuriously strong, and so presenting in their neglected
beauty virilem majestatem, a masculine majesty: the Corinthes dedicating theirs
to Venus, Flora and the Nymphs, builded them exquisitely polished, and so
presented in their affected beauty, muliebrem levitatem, a feminine levity: but
the Jones, a third ^ort of Grecians dedicating theirs to ^no and Liber, built
such, as neither night, Horrorem ipsa operis simplici^te prae se far, nor yet
enervatam ^llitiem ex ornamentorum luxuria ^mmonstrare: our temples ought
neither be too despicably rude for ^ant of trimming, nor fantastically ^dundant
with the excess thereof: ^ey should neither be too gaudy, ^at will not suite
with the gravity ^f their employment; nor too slo^nly plain that will not
answer the ^ajesty of God whose houses they ^e. When Constantine, that worthy
^mperor had built some temples ^ore than ordinarily magnificent, (...) did
beseem both the author and ^ose times, some stood up and de^aimed against his
fact, until a Sy^d of holy Fathers then congrega^^, condemned both them, and
all ^ch as should plead for a necessary ^^temptibility of public meeting
^aces: a time there was when the ^vice done to G^d, was mostly in ^ivate
oratories; but afterward ^hen he had raised up Kings and ^mperors to be nursing
Fathers to his Church, then the Church looked about, how they might not only
safely, but fitly also execute their divine worship, and then every man's
devotion even in building temples, set it self plentifully on work.

Sect. 2. Of private Prayer.
I Am now in the next place to trea^ of private prayer; and touching this St
Paul says, I will that men pra^ every where, lifting up holy hands, etc 1 Timothy
2.8. prayer says Jerome, i^ Christiani armatura, the Christian man's armor;
therefore as it behooves not a soldier to be unarmed, no more should a
Christian b^ unprepared to pray; Ubicunque sunt pericula, and ubicunque Dei
auxilio egemus, ubi orandum. Hieron. Ubicunque pius fuerit, and fervens inter
pellantis affectio, oration vim suam habebit. Chrysostom.
wheresoeve^ there are dangers, and wheresoeve^ we want the help of God, there
mus^ we pray; and in what place soever a godly man shall be, and the ferven^
affection of him that prays, ther^ prayer shall have its force and efficacy:
Thus one says, As the whol^ world is (as it were) Gods Cathedral Church, so
every man's hea^ is his private Chapel. Thus L^ prayed in the wilderness,
Daniel in ^he Lions Den, Paul and Barnabas in ^rison, David on his bed, Jonas
in ^he whales belly, Peter on the house^op. Acts 10.19. our Savior went often
into mountains to pray, Luke ^, 12. Luke 22.39, 42, 44. and that ^e might pray
privately, he with^rew himself from his Disciples a^out a stones cast: Ab
hominum conspectu subducti, melius sensus nostros colligimus, and magis intenti
sumus ad id quod agimus: magisque familiariter sese denudat fidelis anima and
simplicius vota sua, genitus, curas, pavores spes and gaudia in Dei sinum
exonerat. Calvin. Comment. in Luc.
Calvin on these ^ords says, That being withdrawn from the sight of men, we do
the better collect our senses, and are the more intent upon what we do: and the
more familiarly does the faithful soul lay open it self to God, and more
plainly unburthen his desires, cares, fears, sighs, hopes, and joys into the
bosom of God: and if prayer be he elevation of the mind to God, as ^ath been
said, then is the mind the ^ater elevated, Cum qui orat, recedit, (...) a mundi
strepitu, and tumultu se sepe^a; when he that prays, goes a^de from the noise
and tumult of ^he world; as Stella notes: also in ^rivate, there is least fear
of vain-glo^y: upon this ground it is, that he bids his Disciples to enter into
their Chambers to pray, and to shut their doors upon them, Claude ostium tuum;
hoc est noli sermonem clamare, nec diffundere orat. onem tuam, nec jactare per
populos: sed in secreto suo ora seculus, ut te in secreto possit audire,
quoniam pidet and audit universa. Ambros. apud Arboreum. Oration privata debet
esse solitaria. Lyra. Si ipse filius Dei hoc adminiculum non neglexit, plusquam
insana superbia foret, non idem in usum nostrum transfer. Calvin.
and to pray to their Father in secret; this was given in charge to cross the
fashion o^ the hypocrites, who used to stand and pray in the synagogues, and in
the corners of the streets to be seen o^ men, Matthew. 6.5, 6. it is not intended
thereby to condemn prayers i^ synagogues, or in corners of the streets, or
market places, or upon the house tops, but to take away their end, which was
not to be hear^ and obtain, but only to be seen o^ men: Christ would have us
ente^ into our closets, and in our devotions especially approve our selves t^
God, and so order the matter (i^ thou can) to hide thy self from the world:
for as a man may pray in secret in an open place, as the Publican Luke 18. so a
man may pray for ostentation in a secret place, even under many locks and keys,
and with many doors shut upon him; if he withdraw himself, to the end he may b^
observed: Private prayer, says Lyr^ ought to be solitary. Solitariness i^
threefold. 1. Solitudo mentis, the ^olitariness of the mind, by which ^e may be
alone conversing with God in the midst of a multitude; ^aving our minds remote
from all ^^cular cares and businesses; but this ^s rare, and hardly performed,
and ^appy they that can attain unto it. (...) Solitudo corporis, the
solitariness ^f the body, when our bodies only ^e withdrawn from the company
of ^hen, and our hearts are busied a^out earthly things; now this is nothing
but hypocrisy, and not requi^ed of us. 3. Solitudo mentis and corpo^^, the
solitariness of the mind and ^ody; when having withdrawn our ^odies from
company, we also re^all our thoughts and retire our ^elves, ut orationi
vacemus, that we ^ay apply our selves to prayer: this ^^d Christ for our
example, Luke ^2.41. Great reason there is men ^ould be careful to perform
private ^ray^r.

1. Private prayer has much fa^iliarity with God, and is the truest ^yal of a
Christian; and to neglect ^his, is as it were a living without God, it argues a
man to be estranged from any one, with whom he cares not to converse.

2. Private prayer constantly and faithfully performed, keeps the heart of a
Christian in a soft and tender frame; where the duty of private prayer is
neglected, the heart will soon grow more hard and brawny; we sin daily, and
if every day we humble not our selves, and seek the face of God for the pardon
of our sins, our hearts will be the more hardened.

3. Without private prayer we cannot expect a sanctification of the particular
and private occurrences of the day; for all things are sanctified to us by
prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4.

4. In private prayer, a man may both ask those blessings, and confess those
sins, which he cannot so conveniently do in public: in private we may rip up
our whole life, with a particular confession of our sins, aggravated with all
circumstances, and this cannot be so safely, nor so decently, nor so
effectually done in public, as in private: commodius ista intus transiguntur;
these parts are not to be acted on the stage, but within ^he hangings; he that
acts these on ^he stage, will have the person of ^n hypocrite put upon him,
Matthew. 6.5. Besides

5. As Christ has commanded us ^o pray in secret, so he has promised ^o hear,
accept, and to reward such prayers, ver. 6. thy father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly: ^he Lord hears the very desires of ^he humble,
Psalm. 10.17. so he heard Daniel in the Lions den, Dan. 6.27. and Jonah in the
Whales belly, Jon. ^.1, 2. God takes special notice of Paul's private prayer
after his conversion; for says he to Ananias; behold ^^e prays, Acts 9.11.
he sends A^anias to him to open his eyes, and to reveal the truth more clearly
to him.

6. Private prayer is a great advantage to our growth in grace; praying in the
holy Ghost is a special means to build us up in our most holy faith, Jude ver.
20. What Solomon says of wisdom, Eccles. 8.1. sc. that it makes a man's face
to shine, the same may be said of private prayer: we read that as Christ
prayed, the fashion of his countenance wa^ altered, and his raiment was white
and glistering, Luke 9.29. The Learned note, he had then the same glory in
essence and substance, wherein he will come to judgment, though it differed in
measure, being but a glimpse only and so much, as those that were with him at
his tranfiguration were able to behold with mortal eyes, and in time and
continuance being now but transient, which shall then be permanent, and we then
able to behold it in the full perfection, and see him as he is, 1 John 3.2.
that Christ should pray for himself there was no need, his divinity being
always able (if it pleased him to show it) to support and su^ply all helps t^
is humanity: and yet he will pra^ in private diverse times for himself, Matthew.
26.39. and for Peter Luke 22.32. and for all the faithful, Joh. 17. and surely
if he would pray, that was God as well as man, and therefore could want
nothing; what must we do that be miserable and wretched men, and have nothing?
In private prayers consider ^hese five things.

1. You are to confess your parti^ular sins, which you do most rea^ily and
frequently commit, and those which were last committed by ^ou, Psalm. 51.4.

2. You must pray for particular ^trength against those particular corruptions;
thus did Paul, 2 Cor. 12.^, 8. when there was given to him a ^horn in the flesh
(which some think to be the thorn of the flesh) to assault him, he prayed
thrice for this thing, that it might depart from him.

3. You must consider what particular graces you want, and these you must pray
for, both for the gift of them and the increase of them, Psalm. 119.18.32.

4. You should consider what you are going about every day, and in private beg
the assistance of God: thus Abraham's servant being sent to fetch a wife for his
Masters Son, prays unto God: O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee
send me good speed this day, Genesis 24.12.

Lastly, In the close of every day consider what blessings you have received
for your selves that day, and for these you ought to give thank particularly
unto God.

Object. But many men are ready to object and say, We have so much public
business and employment in the world, that we cannot spare time for private
prayer.

Resp. 1. Those that have had as great employment and as much business as any
of us, have redeemed time for the performance of this duty of private prayer.
David was a King, yet he tells us, Seven times a day will I praise thee, O
Lord, because of thy righteous judgments. And Daniel, a man of public
employment in the Court of Darius, yet he misseth not to pray in private in his
chamber three times a day, Dan. 6.10.

2. Because the more business a man has, the more he may fear miscarriage
therein, if God does not bless it, Psalm. 127.1. Daniel was assiduous in private
prayer, though he endangered his life thereby.

3. If we pray not before we set upon worldly businesses, we shall be a danger
to be entangled by them: ^erefore, before you undertake any ^mployment, pray
with that holy ^an; Let the beauty of the Lord our ^id be upon us, and
establish thou the ^ork of our hands upon us; yea, the ^ork of our hands
establish thou it, ^sal. 90.17. To conclude! let public ^rayers be feasts, but
private prayer ^ur ordinary.

CHAP. XIII. Of the time of Prayer.
Sect. 1.
ORder will require that I now speak of the time of prayer: concerning which we
may say with Basil, Basil.
Orandi tempus tota vita, the whole ^ife of a Christian is the time of prayer;
the Apostle exhorts the Ephesi^ns to pray always, with all manner of prayers
and supplications in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18, 19. and bids the Thessalonians to
pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. or without ceasing: but by these places we
must not understand, that we must do no thing else but pray; for that is an
impossibility; nor is it convenient and requisite, that we should wholly attend
to this duty, and neglect all other duties of Religion, and that we should
always pray, and not eat, drink, or sleep, and do such other things as nature
necessarily requires: there were a sort of heretics in Austin's time, called
Messalians, and Euchitae, who would seem to spend so much time in prayer, as to
neglect all other duties whatsoever.

Now the Greek word [(...)] signifies such a performance of the duty, as that
we cease not to do it, at such times as God requires it at our hands; so then

1. A man is said to pray continually, when he prays, when he ought to pray:
the Philosophers judge a man idle, when he does not what he ought, in the time
wherein he should work: so a man may be said not to pray continually, when he
neglects praying when he ought to pray; when we would have a ^^ing frequently
done, we use to say, ^e that ye be always doing of it: ^^ose phrases of
praying always and ^^aying without ceasing, do com^only signify no more than
very ^equently: as Solomon's servants are ^id to stand ever before him, or
^^ntinually, 1 Kings 10.8. as we say (...) a tradesman that keeps much at ^ome,
that he is ever in his shop: (...) this purpose the Apostle exhorts ^e
Colossians to continue in prayer, ^^los. 4.2.

2. Prayer is to be considered, as respects the cause which is a cer^^in
vehement desire of charity; and ^in mind and spirit it is perpetual, Quia
fide, spe, and charitate, continu^i desiderio semper oramus, because ^ faith,
hope, and charity, with a ^ontinued desire, we do always ^^ny; as Austin said,
cited by Ursi^s: Vrsin Catech.
The spirit helps our infirmities, ^^d makes intercession for us, with ^oans
which cannot be expressed: and ^^us every Christian man may say, ^ith the
Church in the Canticles; I ^^ep, but my heart awaketh; for though a Christian
does not always pray with his tongue, yet his desires do always speak unto God;
The desire o^ his soul is to his name, and to the remembrance of him, Isai.
26.8. and therefore we say, Aliud est sermo multus,
Aliud est diuturnus affectus.
it is one thing to speak always, an^ another thing to desire continually and it
is one thing to pray in voic^ and tongue, another thing to pra^ in mind and
spirit, for that in hear^ and affection we should be alwa^ crying in the ears
of God; but i^ voice and tongue we are not enjoined always to pray, but to keep
ou^ appointed times both in public an^ private prayers, and as often as a^
extraordinary occasion shall be offered, to betake our selves to our
extraordinary prayers: our heart should always be in a praying frame we should
be evermore disposed an^ fitted thereunto, and exercise it upon every occasion,
either by words, o^ sighs, or groans sent up to God.

Sect. 2.
Quest. BUt here it may be demanded, How shall a man keep (...) heart in a
praying frame?

Resp. 1. Be much in meditation; deditation is a great advantage ^ereunto; when
the soul (like the ^e) is always sucking honey out (...) the sweet flowers of
Gods promi^^, when it can dwell upon the con^^mplation of Gods word, works ^^d
attributes, then will his lips ^^ke those of the Spouse) drop as the
^^ney-comb. What we digest by me^^^ation, is drawn out by prayer: ^e reason why
most people are so disposed to prayer, is, because they ^e strangers to
meditation; Let the ^^rds of my mouth, and the meditati^^ of my heart be
acceptable in thy ^^^ht, O Lord, Psalm. 19. ult. says Da^^l; his prayers were
the products of ^^us meditations.

2. Obey all impulses of spirit un^ prayer: when the wind of the spi^^^ blows
upon thy soul, than hoise (...) sails Heavenward, Quench not the Spirit in his
motions and excitations unto prayer: This was David's course, to answer every
impulse to prayer, Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek my face, my heart
answered, thy face Lord will I seek: it was a motion upon his heart, and his
hear^ eccho's to it again. One observes, That suitors at Court observe,
Mollissima fand. ^empora, their times of begging, when they have the Prince in
a good mood which they will be sure to take the advantage of: but especially if
they should find the Prince of himself begin to speak of the business which
they would have of him that season they lay hold of, and seldom come off, but
with good success: Thus when God by hi^ Spirit secretly speaks to the heart to
pray, observe such a time, and neglect it not; strike while the iron is hot,
for thou know not whereve^ thou may have the like again when God prepares
his peoples heart he will cause his ear to hear, Psalm 10.17. such a time must
needs be the best time of prayer, when God put holy desires into his peoples
hearts; ^^rst they are derived from him, and ^hen presented to him, then they
shall ^e accomplished by him.

Quest. Here a Question will arise, Whether or no a man may not pray, ^^at when
the Spirit moves him to ^^ayer; what shall a child of God do ^hen the Spirit of
God does not ^^ve, but seems to withdraw from ^im?

Resp. 1. I answer with some di^^inctions: we are to distinguish be^ween the
sensible motions of the spirit, and the secret motions of the spirit: the
Spirit sometimes moves, and we perceive it not: as Jacob said, ^he Lord was
here, and I was not ware. It is sometime with the im^ulses of the Spirit, as
with the pul^es of the body; sometime they beat ^^enuously, and sometime so
slow^^, as if not at all: so the motion of ^^e Spirit, is scarce perceptible by
us, ^^cause we do not enquire after it: ^ere be some strong motions in the ^ul,
which yet are not the motions ^f the Spirit; there may be a wind, and yet the
Lord not in it; a fire, and yet the Lord not in that fire; the Lord may be in a
still and soft voice, in secret motions of the Spirit which are hardly
discerned.

2. We must distinguish between the preventing and subsequent motions of the
Spirit, between those that go before duty, that bring on the soul to the
performance of it, and those that appear in duty: the heart many times hangs
the wing, and drives on heavily before it comes to prayer, but in praying finds
much enlargement, even beyond imagination. It is in this case with a Christian,
as with a vessel putting forth to Sea, it gets out of the Haven with much
tugging, rowing to and fro; but when once it comes into the main, the wind
takes it, and away it goes.

3. We must distinguish betwee^ the constant and arbitrary influence of the
Spirit: some motions of the Spirit are always moving to keep the main work
going on, though with a flower pace, and it is never so withheld from any true
Christian, but it strengthens and keep^ the grace of God alive in him, al^eit
to such an altitude it may be su^pended.

4. We are to know that the Spirit (...) to be considered; First, As the
^uthour of duty; Secondly, as the ^bject of duty. We may sometime ^ray by the
Spirit, and sometime ^ray for the Spirit: besides, there is double performance
of this duty ^f prayer, both for comfort, and in ^bedience.

These things being premised, con^^der, 1. That it is a great advan^^ge to the
soul, to be carried with ^ind and tide in this exercise of ^^ayer. 2. It is a
great disadvantage ^hen the Spirit withdraws, when either wind moves, nor
star ap^^ars, and the Spirit that should as^^^t us moves us not: Yet, 3. In
such ^ithdrawings of the Spirit, a Chri^^^an is to set upon the exercise of
^^ayer, and this he is bound to (...) at such times, for these Rea^^ns:

1. Because we are commanded to ^^re up the grace of God in us, Reas. 1.
(...), 2 Timothy 1.6. it is an allusion to the Priests that were to stir and
keep in the fire that came from Heaven; grace lies hid sometime like fire under
ashes, which with blowing revives again. A Christian must work upon his heart,
stirring up his whole man, and awakening it to the exercise of prayer, as David
stirs up himself to praise the Lord, Psalm 103.1. Praise the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me, prais^ his holy Name: for want hereof the
Prophet complains, There is non^ that stirs up himself to take hold o^
thee, Isa. 64.7.

2. Without this there were n^ difference between a regenerate, an^ an
unregenerate man; if a livin^ Christian by an intrinsecal activit^ had no power
to pray, nor to stirr^^ up himself to lay hold of God. No^ it is said of
unregenerate men, The they are dead, and without strength Romans 5.9. but the
regenerate ar^ quickened, have vital graces in them and therefore have strength
to pray the faculties of the soul are not d^stroyed in the new creation, as if
the Spirit of God should act and mov^ instead of them: for though Christ ^^ke
down the old frame, and raise a ^ew structure for himself; yet the ^ones of
that edifice are ours; the ^atter is ours, but the workmanship ^ Gods: indeed
in the first work we ^^e merely passive, in the renewing (...) our minds and
altering of our ^^ils, but afterward we are agents ^^l our days, therefore we
must ^ir up our selves to lay hold on God.

3. There is the same reason for ^^e duty as for all, and the same ^eed of the
Spirits assistance in all ^^ties, as in any: for if we are not (...) pray but
when the Spirit moves (...); then may we not hear the Word, ^or meditate, nor
perform any other ^^ty of Religion, nor withstand any ^^nne, nor resist any
temptation, but ^hen the Spirit moves us: and I ^ust no man will say, that a
man ^ay blaspheme, oppress, commit ^^cest or Sodomy, lie, or be drunk, ^hen
the Spirit is suspended, without fault of his own, what ground ^hen has any man
to neglect prayer, ^hen the Spirit seems to be with^rawn?

4. This is no other than a carnal and fleshly principle; for, first, it leads
men to live by sense, and not by faith. Secondly, it serves for little other
use than for a poor excuse to a lazy heart; whereas he is willing to serve God
at as poor a rate as he can, and therefore to save his pains, and muzzle his
conscience, he cries; the Spirit is gone, and I cannot pray without the
assistance of the Spirit; but there is no entering in at the straight gate
without striving, and no crowning without fighting, and what has a Christian
to fight withal, but Satan's temptations, and the encumbrances of his own
spirit? And when you say, you cannot pray without the Spirit; this I am sure ye
can do, ye may go into your closets, and fall upon your knees, and sigh and
groan after a praying Spirit, and though there be some stiffnesse upon a living
man when he first begins to move, yet a little motion makes him more agile. If
a man, (says a learned Divine) were to run a race, Dr Preston Sermon on ^ Thessalonians. 5.17.
or to do any bodily exercise, there must be strength of body, he must be well
fed, that he may have ability; but the use of the very exercise it self, the
very particular act which is of the same kind with the exercise, is the best
thing to fit him for it: So in this duty of prayer; it is true, to be strong in
the inner man, to have much knowledge, to have much grace, makes a man fit and
able for the duty: but if you speak of the immediate preparation for it, I say,
the best way to prepare us for it, is the very duty it self, as all actions of
the same kind increase the habits, so prayer makes it fit for prayer. Thus he.
Therefore when the Spirit seems to be withdrawn, set thy self to prayer, and
what know ^hou, oh man, but when thou art ^n the way of God, and about the
work of God, but the Spirit may meet thee there? Isa. 64.5. And to encourage
thee hereunto, consider, that although you have not the preventing motions of
the Spirit, yet you may have the subsequent motions of the Spirit, though you
come sadly on, you may go sweetly off from the performance of this duty of
prayer; and though you cannot se^ about the duty comfortably, yet this will
comfort you when you do it in obedience to Gods command. A Christian may serve
God acceptably, when he cannot serve him comfortably.

Sect. 3.
Quest. IF now you shall ask me, how often we must pray.

Resp. I answer, Twice a day at least. This was shadowed out under the Law, by
offering up the morning and evening Sacrifice in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 13.11.
Thus God commanded the children of Israel, Numb. 28.2. Ye shall observe to
offer unto me mine offerings in their due season, and what this season was that
God requires as his due, is expressed, verse. 3, 4. Two Lambs of the first year
day by day, for a continual burnt-offering; the one Lamb shall thou offer in
the morning, and the other in the evening, and this is called, a continual
burnt-offering, verse. 6. God hereby limited every Sacrifice to his proper day
and season, which if it ^ere let slip, that oblation might ^ot at any time be
offered: therefore ^e Jews had a common Proverb, Gnabar Zeban, Gnabar Corban.
^f the time be past, the oblation is past. ^ow this typeth out unto us, that
^e should at least morning and eve^ing come before the Lord in pray^^, to offer
up our morning and eve^ing Sacrifices of prayer and thanks^iving. The very
Birds twice a day, ^oth morning and evening are sing^ng and lifting up their
notes unto their maker: Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and make
a ^ise, and he shall hear my voice, says David, Psalm 55.17. Tertullian ^rayed
three times a day, at the ^hird, sixth and ninth hours. Au^^in's usual wish
was, That Christ when he came, might find him, aut precantem, aut praedica^tem,
either praying or preaching. S^ Ber^ard was so frequent in prayer day and
night, that his knees grew so ^eeble, that they were scarce able to uphold his
body: And Vitus Theodorus thus wrireth of Luther, That no day passed him,
wherein Luther spent not three hours at least i^ prayer. Daniel prayed three
times a day, and this was his constant practice, Dan. 6. Yea the very Scribes
and Pharisees (whom we should scorn not to match for devotion) prayed (...),
(as a Father says) often and long, thrice a day was ordinary, at nine, twelve
and three a clock; they divided their day into three parts; whereof one was
spent in prayer, the next on the Law, the third on their work: See here a great
shame to us Christians; God has two parts of three, themselves but one: Oh how
many among us that can scarce get leave of their worldly imploiments to bestow
one hour in a day in prayer to God. Notable is the example of Alfred, sometime
King of England, who flourished about 872 years after Christ, and about two
hundred years before the Conquest; he is famous for this, that dividing the day
natural into three even parts, he spent eight hours in hearing and determining
the matters of State belonging to his place, and but eight and no more) for the
provision for ^s body by meat, drink and sleep, ^d other necessaries, and the
^her eight hours in reading, wri^ng and praying. Great reason ^ere is we should
be constant in ^ayer: For

1. We sin daily, we all offend ^any times a day, and many in all: ^e most
righteous in his happiest day ^lleth seven times, therefore we ^ave need to
humble our souls before ^e Lord day by day; we are apt to ^nne continually,
therefore are we ^o pray every day for the pardon of ^ur sins.

2. We are subject to daily wants, and stand in need of a continual sup^ly from
Heaven; Gods mercies do ^ot flow from him all at once, some ^ow from him to
day, and some to ^orrow, he is said daily to load us ^ith his benefits, Psalm.
68.19. therefor we should sue to him continually ^or supply.

3. If once you neglect, and are ^ot constant in this duty of prayer, ^ou will
find your selves much indi^posed to it; you are at a constant loss while you
are inconstant in prayer. Christians have a rich stock of grace, and every day
they trade not with Heaven, they are at a constant loss; it is but a few days
we have to trade in, and what we sow that shall we reap; they that are
careless in this duty are at an unspeakable loss, their graces are much
weakened; God seems to be lost from that soul that seeks him never or but
seldom; consider what it is you traffic with God for, it is for God and
Heaven, and that brings in unspeakable profit to the soul: and i^ you neglect
the present season, you may lose that which you may never have the like again.

4. If we pray not constantly, God can soon deprive us of what we have; some
think they need no^ pray for what they have already; yet Christ bids us pray
for our daily bread* thou have bread now, thou may be deprived of it anon,
and if God give thee bread, and deny thee his word of blessing, thy bread may
be thy bane: Pray therefore for bread, as though thou wantedst bread, and
though thou know thou have God, ^et still seek him as if thou had not
^ound ^im.

3. Let us beware we lose not one ^pportunity of praying, lest if we will not
pray when we may, ^e shall not be able when we would.

6. If we come to the throne of ^race in the Name of Jesus Christ, ^e shall
find we have an advocate ^ith the Father, who ever lives ^ make intercession
for us, Heb. 7.25.

7. It is a note of an hypocrite to ^e inconstant in prayer: Will the ^ypocrite
delight himself in the Al^ighty? Will he always call upon God? ^b 27.10. the
meaning is, he will ^ot; a sincere Christian is constant (...) the duty of
prayer, but an hypo^rite prays when he sees his own ^me, and stinteth God in
time, as ^ell as in measure: When an hypo^rite is in trouble, he prays
earnestly ^ke Pharaoh to be delivered out of ^ouble, but when the storm is
over, he ^ves over praying; besides he will be ^ry earnest in praying, while he
finds ^e gets by it, but let him receive no further benefit by his prayer, if
God give him not his hearts desire, then says he (like those in Job) What is
the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have if we pray
unto him? Job 21.15.

8. God will not cease answering, till we cease praying. When Queen Elizabeth
demanded of Sir Walter Rawleigh, when he would give over begging of her; he
answered her, when your Majesty cease giving. We have a Proverb, Spare to
speak, and spare to speed. Christ taught a parable to his Disciples, to the
end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18.1. God would not
have us weary of praying, nor faint in our minds, when we receive not an answer
presently to our minds. Gods ears are always open to his peoples prayers,
Psalm. 34.15. or as some render it, His ears are in their prayers; intimating,
that if our prayers be weak, and cannot ascend to him, he will bow his ear, and
descend to them, Exodus 8.13. Exo. 17.6. Jud. 10.16.

Sect. 4.
WE hold, that it is fit, that certain times be set apart, as ^or public, so
for private prayer, to ^he end, that at those times men may leave all other
affairs, to attend their private prayers; therefore do ^he Rhemists Rhem.
Annot. in Act. 10. Sect. 6.
falsely charge us Prote^ants, that we account all set seasons ^f prayer
superstitious: But these things our Divines mislike in Po^ish Canonical
hours. 1. They ^ppoint too many of them; Antonine Antonin. 2. P. Tit. 9. cap.
12. sect. 1.
^aketh seven, Bellarmine nine, the ^ur Vigils of the night, and five ^oures in
the day. 2. They only ^ep the names of these hours, but ^ot the times
themselves; their day-^oures they shufle together and per^^rm before noon, and
their nocturns ^ey join with their matutines. ^. They place Religion in the
very ^oures, placing a certain kind of ^oliness in them; to this purpose ^here
was a book written in Spanish, ^rinted at Paris, by William Merlin, H ras de
n^estra. Seniora.
^nno 1556. styled, The Hours of our Lady. 4. In confining themselves to such
and such hours, they often pray without any due preparation of the heart, or
intention of the spirit; but then are we fittest to pray, when we pray with a
prepared heart; prayer is not to be tied to a fixed hour, but to be poured out
by a fixed heart. 5. The Athenians and Persians would not wage war, before the
one had called on their Montes, and the other on their Magi to be instructed by
them as by oracles. Baal and Ashtaroth lingua punica significant Jovem and
Junonem. Aug. sup. Judic. Col. 303. D.
They tie themselves to say over so many Pater Nosters, and so many Ave Mary's,
which any person may do, both void of understanding and devotion, saying them
over in a strange tongue, sc. in Latin, which many Papists understand not; and
so transgressing the rule of our Savior, who forbids vain repetitions, and
idle babbling used in prayer, Matthew. 6.7. When ye pray, says our Savior, use
not vain repetitions as the heathen do; for they think they shall be heard for
their much speaking: by which we see that heathens have prayed unto their Gods,
as Baals Priests crying from morning to evening, Baal hear us, and the
Mariners in Jonah, (being in a storm) crying every man to his God, Jon. 1.5.
and afterward to the true God, 14. verse. Thus diverse heathens ^ave made prayers
before they have gone to their wars, and after their ^ictories have given
thanks: Thus Ovid In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas, corpora, Dij
caeptis (nam vos mutatis and illas) Aspirare meis. Ovid. Ovid. Matamor. lib. 1.
the Poet begins his Metamorpho^s with a prayer: it were a foul ^hame for
Christians to come behind them, and not do so much as they ^ave done: But what
was their er^or that we must avoid, and the ^ult that Christ here finds with
them? not the matter that they ^ayed, but the manner of their pray^ng, viz.
that in their prayers they ^sed vain repetitions, or superfluous and
superstitious multiplying of ^ords: for repetitions of the same ^etitions are
not unlawful; David ^sed it, Psalm. 51.1. and Daniel uses ^, Dan. 9, 7, 10,
19. much less are ^ng prayers unlawful, for Christ ^ent a whole night in
prayer, Luke ^.12. and we need not doubt, but Moses and Elias, and He also
spent ^uch time in their forty days fast in ^rayer, and happily often iterated
the ^me request.

Ferus Ferus in Mat. 6.
upon these words of Christ ^ith, Non dixit salvator, multum precari, sed
multum loqui, our Savior said not, do not pray much, but do not speak much,
nor does he condemn the outward praising of God, than which nothing is more
divine: why does the kingly Prophet by a Prosopopeia exhort heaven and earth,
and all creatures in them both to praise God, Psalm. 148. but to excite men to
do the same, and shame them if they be backward thereunto? and why else has
God given us tongues and mouths, and endued us with reason and speech, but to
employ them in praying to him, and praising of him? and how else shall we be
conformable to the Saints, departed (our fellow-Citizens) already in actual
possession of what we have only in spe, they in re? Its not then long prayers
proceeding from true devotion, but many idle words uttered in superstition,
that our Savior reproves; When men honor God with their lips, and their
hearts are far from him, as the Jews, Isai. 29.13. and the Pharisees, Matthew.
23.14. and the ignorant Papists that number their prayers, but ponder not what
they pray; and this was the sin of the heathens, who endeavored rather to
exercise their tongues, than cleanse their hearts, Numerantes non ponderantes
preces: operam enim Gentes dabant, potius linguis exercendis, quam cordibus
mundan dis. Aug. ad probam.
as Austin speaks. In a word, St Jerome goes to the pith of the point, saying,
Ab^t in oratione multa locutio, in prayer ^et much babbling be far from us, Sed
^on desit multa precatio, but let not much intercession be wanting; and David
says, Trust in God at all times ^e people, pour out your hearts before him,
Psalm. 62. v. 8. hypocrites (like the heathen before spoken of) think the ^onger
they pray, that they shall be heard for their much speaking, although they
repeat over the same things again and again, not out of ^ffection, but from
affectation: But ^herein two gross errors are discovered. 1. They think by many
words, ^o enforce God to hear them, as the ^awling Priests of Baal, 1 King.
18.26. ^. They thought God must be informed and instructed of their wants, ^lse
he knew them not, nor could ^upply them: this false reason our Savior
confuteth with a true ^ound one to the contrary, saying, Your Father knows
what things ye have need of, before ye ask him: nor does he barely know his
peoples wants, but considers how to supply them: And Chemnitius Chemnit. in
Matthew. 6.
notes, the word is of the plural number [(...) quibus,] to teach us, That he
will not only give us what we ask, but whatsoever he knows we need, whether we
expressly mention it or not, Deuteronomy. 4.7.

Sect. 5.
Object. 1. BUt it may be said, If God know our wants before we ask him, Non
narratores, sed rogatores apud Deum agimus, aliud enim est ignoranti aliquid
narrare, aliud scientem aliquid perere: in illo est judicium, in hoc obsequium:
ibi fideliter judicamus, hie miserabiliter obsecramus. Hieron.
why then do we pray?

Resp. To this Jerome answers, When we come to God, we act not the part of
informers, but of supplicants; it is one thing to declare a thing to one that
is ignorant, it is another thing for a knowing man to beg any thing: in that
there is judgment; in this obedience; there we judge faithfully, here we
entreat miserably: And Chrysostom tells us, That in prayer we do not, docere
Deum, sed inflectere, teach God, but cause him to incline toward us: that he
needs not informing, himself tells us, Isai. 65.24. where he says to his
people, Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will
^^ear: but by praying we testify our obedience to his commandments, and faith
in his promises, Heb. 4.16. Psalm. 50.15. Psalm. 37.5. Psalm. 55.22. ^ikewise to
humble us and teach us our own weaknesses, and to whom ^o have recourse for the
supply of all our wants, James 1.17. 1 Cor. 4.7. and also that there may by
this means be the more familiarity and ^cquaintance between God and us.

Object. 2. Seeing God knows what ^e want, and will give it us, if he pur^^se
so to do, and it be his pleasure, what ^^ed we to trouble him, or our selves,
for ^t is immutable, and his purpose shall ^and?

Resp. 1. Although God knows ^ll our wants, and will give us what ^e
purposes, and though himself ^e immutable; yet God is said to be moved by the
prayers of his people; and they are said to wrestle with him, and prevail with
him; now when they come to the throne of grace, they do not only spread their
Petitions before the Lord, but they strengthen them with many strong and
forcible arguments; now all their pleadings and arguments do not work any
change at all upon God; we may not imagine that upon our prayers God takes up
any new thoughts, or puts any new resolves to do this or that; Quamquam Deus a
nullo modo potest moveri, ad aliquid volendum de novo, cum sit immutabilis:
tamen sicut voluntate aeterna producit aliquid in tempore; ita ab aeterno
voluit modum producendi.
for what we obtain from God by prayer this day, God purposed to give us before
the world was, therefore, Gods purposes are not changed by our prayers; but God
may be said to be moved by his peoples prayers, or to do this for them, or to
bestow that mercy upon them, when they pray, because he does what he purposed
to do for them when they should ask it at his hands: Besides, God frequenty in
Scripture speaks of himself after the manner of men: now as men usually bestow
favors, when they are moved thereunto by supplications and persuasions, even
to do that, which a day before they never thought to do: so God is said to do
his or that upon the prayers and ^arnest supplications of his people, which
[indeed] he intended to do ^om everlasting.

Sect. 6.
MOreover! albeit we must pray unto God at all times, and ^^ek his face by
prayer upon all occa^ons, yet there are some special sea^ons of prayer, and
they are these that ^ollow.

1. When you are to undertake any weighty business, begin it with ^rayer:
Invocandi sunt Dij antequam operi manus apponimus. Hesiod. Vide exemp. Ajacis
and Agamemnonis. Plut. Mor. 1. p. 388. Vide Homer Iliad. 1.
Abraham's servant being in^usted to seek a wife for Isaac, com^ends the success
of the whole busi^ess to God by prayer, Genesis 24.12. Nehemiah being about to
restore Re^^gion, and build the Temple, pray^^th earnestly to the Lord to
prosper ^im in that great business, Nehem. 1.^, 11. So when Solomon came to the
^hrone, he earnestly begs of God a wise and understanding heart, to judge the
people committed to his ^harge, 1 Reg. 3.9. When Christ was baptized, and was
entering into his ministry, he prayed at the bank o^ Jordan, Luke 3.21. Christ
undertaking this great work, goes to his Father for a blessing upon it, and
success in it, and at his prayer the heavens were opened to him: and the Spirit
descended then like a Dove upon him; to teach us, that our heavenly Father will
give the holy Ghost to them that ask him: Augustus Caesar missurus Caium
Caesarem filiae filium in Armeniam precatus est a Dijs, ei gratiam Pompeij,
audaciam Alexandri, and fortunam suam concedi. Plutar. A Jove principium musae,
etc.
So when Christ chose the twelve Apostles, he spent a whole night in prayer,
Luke 6.12. Thus did the Apostles, they prayed at the choice of Matthias into
the room of Judas, Acts 1.2, 4, and at the election of the seven Deacons, Acts
6.6. no man therefore is to undertake any weighty business without invocation
on the name of God: Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring it to
pass, Psalm 37.5.

2. We are to seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he
is near, Isai. 55.6. Esau came too late with his venison, when his Fathers
blessing was bestowed, and could not be recalled, Genesis 27. it was ^o late for
the foolish virgins to go ^y oil, and cry, Lord open to us, ^hen the bridegroom
is gone, and ^e doors be shut, Matthew. 25. it was ^o late for the rich glutton
to call and cry for mercy in hell; he should ^ve remembered that upon earth,
^uke 16. Jerusalem knew not her ^ay of Gods visiting her in mercy, and
therefore days of vengeance ^me upon her; God has a day to ^isit those in
justice, who refuse his ^isitation in mercy: there is a day ^f grace, when God
will be found ^f those that seek him: but Gods spirit shall not always strive
with ^an, Genesis 6.3.

3. Judas Macchabeus ever prayed, except twice, once against Eupator, and then
he lost the field, and once against Alcimus, and Bacchides, and then he lost
his life.
In times of danger and afflicti^n: howbeit prayer be a duty not to ^e
neglected or omitted, at any time ^r in any place; yet affliction and ^mes of
trouble are aptest to draw and drive us hereunto, and God ^alls upon us to call
upon him in time ^f trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Is any man ^fflicted let him pray?
says St James, ^ames 5.13. At that day shall a man ^ook to his maker, and his
eyes shall have ^espect to the holy one of Israel, Isa. 17.7. And Job says, I
will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, I will
complain in the bitterness of my soul, Job 7.11. And God himself says of his
people, In their afflictions they will seek me early, Hos. 5.13. Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. l. 2. c. 4.
Eusehius tells us of that renowned Christian Emperor Constantine, That he
never went into the field to battle, but he prepared himself by prayer, knowing
that the God of battle was the author of victory; and whereas other Princes
used to have their Pictures stamped upon their Coin, sometimes riding on
horseback for pleasure, sometimes sitting on their chaires of estate for their
pomp and port: Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5.
he (that he might testify his devotion) would be Pictured praying. When
Marcus Aurelius was in hot wars against the Germans and Sarmatians, and his
army almost ready to perish with thirst; certain of his Christian Soldiers
falling down upon their knees, betook themselves to prayer, which it pleased
God to hear; for immediately God sent a comfortable shower to refresh them, and
a most terrible thunder to affright their enemies; ^hereupon that legion was
ever af^^rward called legio fulminea, the ^undering legion. And Origin Origin.
sup. Exodus 17.
tells ^s, That one godly man may do more good by praying, than an hundred,
yea, a thousand sinners can do by fighting: Jacob in extremity prays, and is
delivered from ^is angry brother Esau, Genesis 32. Mo^es prays, and both he and
his people are delivered from Pharaoh and ^is host, Exodus 14. and from the
Ama^ekites, Exodus 17. Elijah also prays, and is delivered from Ahab and
Jeze^el; and Hezekias prayed, and was ^elivered from Sennacherib; and
Je^osaphat prayed, and is delivered from ^he Moabites, Ammonites, and
inhabitants of Mount Seir; Manasses ^rayed in his affliction, and God was
^ntreated of him, and restored him ^o his Kingdom* In a time of gene^all
judgment, it is our duty to pray ^or others as well as our selves; Jeremias was
instant in prayer to God for ^he King and People of Judah, Remember (says he
to the Lord) that I ^ood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away
thy wrath from them, Jer. 18.29. When the Ark of God was taken, and Israel
received a great rout by the Philistines, it is said, The word of Samuel came
to all Israel, 1 Samuel 4.1. Tho. Coleman Sermon. ad locum.
or (as one translateth) the word of Samuel was for all Israel; His daily words
and prayers, says he, were for that people, and for their good.

4. In the time of sickness, and in the hour of death, then especially are we
to commend our souls to God, as to a most faithful Creator: and as at all
times, so more especially when death approaches, have we need to pray; for
then Satan (our sworn enemy) will be most busy to assault us, and we then (for
the most part) least able to make resistance: and that we may be the better
able to pray when that day comes, let us inure our selves to the exercise
thereof, in the mean time before it comes; Ut qui viventes obliviscuntur Dei,
morientes obliviscantur sui. Aug.
otherwise, says Austin, It is just with God, that those persons should at
their death forget themselves, who through the course of their lives, were not
careful to remember God.

Let therefore the men of this world so busily employ themselves (...) the
affairs of this life, that they neither can, nor will spare so much (...) a
quarter of an hour in a day for ^rayer; let wicked Atheists, delu^ed by the
Prince of darkness, despe^ately jeer and deride this heavenly ^uty; let all
sottish, sensual, and se^ure Christians slight this serious ex^^cise as a
matter of no moment, or ^se it as a customary complement, ^hen they have
nothing else to do, ^t say over a few words dreamingly ^etween sleeping and
waking; let ^ypocrites neglect the private per^ormance of this holy duty,
practi^ng it only in public, pharisaically ^o be seen of men, using it as an
en^ne only to screw themselves into ^e peoples affections, and to win po^ular
applause, and be esteemed men (...) singular devotion; But let us bre^^ren,
pray always with all manner of ^ayers and supplications in the spirit,
^atching thereunto with all perseverance. One man may pray long, and ano^er be
but brief; yet both may obtain alike; God measures his gifts by his love, not
by the length of our prayers, by his own bounty, not by our brevity; one man
may pray long and miss for lack of devotion, another may be short, and yet
obtain; because his affection is large though his prayers be short; one may be
long in prayer, yet seem to be brief, because he prays fervently; whiles
another is short, and yet be accounted tedious; it is not so much the length,
as the strength of prayer, and the affection of him that prays, that God
regards.

CHAP. XIV. Shows the excellency and profit of Prayer.
Sect. 1.
LEt us now proceed to set forth the excellency and great benefit that comes
by prayer.

1. Prayer enlightneth the mind with divine light, and quickneth our wills with
the heat of divine love: it is very effectual to purge our understandings of
ignorance, and our wills from their depraved customs; it is that holy water by
which the roots of good desires do spring and bud forth. Struther. observat.
Cent. 1^
Some spiritual exercises augment light, as reading, hearing, conference: other
exercises increase life and affection, as meditation and praise: but prayer is
for both, it opens the mind to see more clearly, ^t makes the heart tender,
and more sensible; it brings a man to see God and himself in his light; it
fixes the mind upon him, and draws ^he heart unto him, the more clearly we
see him, the more we love him; ^t sets all the powers of the soul on God, and
pours out it self upon him, ^eceiving sweet influences from all ^is revealed
properties.

2. Prayer is the most immediate worship of God, wherein we draw ^igh to the
throne of grace, it is the ^adder of our ascension to Heaven. Prayer is nothing
else but the souls traveling to God, Nazianz.
says one of the Fathers; it is our faithful messenger sent to the throne of
God, which never returns in vain. What fruit can thou expect from all thy
labors, unless thou do first worship God? And can thou worship him better
than by praying to him? And the more frequently thou stand before him, the
better thou will love him, and render thy self absolutely to him.

3. Prayer is the strength of the soul: it fortifies a man against all
assaults, it is our buckler of defense; it is of that force and efficacy, that
Chrysostom calls it, A well-fortified guard, a great bullwark of the Church
which cannot be battered down. 1. It fortifies a man against temporal enemies;
the prayer of David turns the Oracle-like wisdom of Achitophel into
foolishness, 2 Samuel 15.31. The prayer of the Jews, and of Queen Hester lifted
up Haman on the same gallows which he had prepared to hang Mordecai upon, Esth.
7.9. The prayer of Daniel not only stopped the Lions mouths, but also brought
destruction upon his adversaries, Dan. 6.22. That vision mentioned Revel. 4.5.
is a description of the Church of God on earth, and there is ^ throne in it,
and round about the ^hrone the twenty four Elders sat: the whole company of
believers (typified by the twenty four orders of Priests in the Old Testament)
are ^ound about the throne, praying, and ready for an answer; And out of ^he
throne comes thundrings, lightnings and voices, that is, God returns
dreadful answers upon his enemies in answer to his peoples prayers. Prayer
has been very powerful with God when other means have ^ailed. When one told
Numa, say^ng, O Numa, the enemies prepare war against thee; he cheerfully
an^wered, But I sacrifice: implying that the force of enemies is more bro^en by
fervent prayer than by our ^wn forces. 2. Prayer is a good ^uckler of defense
against all spi^itual enemies; we must fight against the Devil and his weapons
by our prayers, says Hilary. Hilar. in Psalm. 65.
It is an unshaken munition or rampire, and dreadful to the Devil; it is that
which keeps off temptation from us. Pray, says our Savior to his Disciples,
that ye enter not into temptation, Luke 22. Austin says, That prayer is a
sacrifice to God, a succor to the supplicant, and a whip to drive the Devil
away. And Chrysostom says, That as a City without walls may easily be entered
by the enemy; so a soul not guarded, nor fenced by prayer, is easily surprised
by Satan, and laid open to his temptations: and as thieves and robbers will not
very soon set upon an house well fortified with men and weapons; no more will
the Devil be bold or busy with that man that is accustomed to fervent prayer.
Prayer is one of the pieces of the spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6. and must be joined
to it. We cannot furnish our selves with, nor fitly use the same without
prayer; we must pray for our armor, and this our armor must be fitted and
exercised by prayer: Be holy and pray; be patient and pray, believe and pray,
hope and pray; use the sword of the Spirit and pray: Prayer buckleth on all the
pieces of the spiritual armor about us, and set them on their proper work:
Prayer is the most necessary weapon; the force of prayer has quenched the
force of fire, has repressed the rage of Lions, has ap^eased wars, has
removed battles, has taken away tempests, has chased away Devils, has broken
the chains of death, has turned away sickness, and abolished judgments, or
removed them falling from Heaven, the subtilties of men and Devils, and all
evils have been removed by prayer.

4. A praying Christian is a living Christian; and whosoever does not pray unto
God daily, nor does desire to converse with God by fervent and constant prayer;
he is dead; and does wholly want soul and sense. And as this our body, when the
soul ^s wanting, is dead and soon stink^th; so the soul not given to prayer
(...) dead and miserable; and that we ^re to account it more grievous than
^eath to be bereaved of prayer; that ^oly man Daniel shows, in that he was
more willing to die, Chrysostom. Tom. 5. de precat.
than ^o be hindered but a few days from praying to his God, as Chrysostom
notes.

5. There is nothing more powerful with God than fervent prayer, it avails
much, says St James. There is nothing stronger here than a man rightly
praying. Luther calls prayers and praises, Christianorum bombarda, the
Christians artillery and gunshot, whereby Heaven is said to suffer violence,
and by a kind of battery to be taken by force: that which neither riches, nor
humane Policy, nor Physical skill, nor haughtiness of mind, nor multitudes of
helpers, could be able to effect, that the prayer of one poor and needy one
has been able to do. And says Chrysostom; If a woman by her importunity
could appease the fury of that unjust Judge, who neither feared God, nor
regarded man, much more shall h^ provoke God to be favorable to him who sticks
to continual prayer. Chrysostom says, That prayer is the key to unlock the
treasury or exchequer of Gods mercies. And St Austin says Ascendat oration,
descendat gratia Let prayer ascend, and let grace descend. Prayer is a means
whereby we have access continually into the presence of God. Without God we
can do nothing, and all our hope and help is in God, and his help is obtained
by prayer: Let us therefore come boldly unto the th^one of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. God hears
Abraham to the sixth request, and would have spared Sodom at his entreaty, had
there been but ten righteous persons in it, Genes. 18.32. he hears Lot, and
spares Zoar at his request, Genes. 19.20, 21. He hears Isaac for Rebekah,
and removes her barrenness, causing her to conceive and bear him children,
Genes. 25.21. He hears Jacob, and delivers him from his brother Esau,
Genes. 32. He hears the distressed Israelites, and delivers them out of
their Egyptian bondage, Exodus 2. Exodus 12. he hears Samson, and gives him
water out of the jaw bone of an Ass, Judge. 15. God will have an ear to hear,
while Saints have a tongue to speak unto him.

Sect. 2.
YEa many times God not only gives his people what they ask, when they ask it,
but even more than they ask, and before they ask it. Hannah the mother of
Samuel begs but a son of the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.11. and the Lord gave her an
excellent Prophet. And Solomon asked only wisdom, and the Lord gave him over
and above riches and honor, and all things belonging to the part of a Prince,
in such ample manner, as there was never the like before him or since, 1 King.
3. chap. Likewise Monica the mother of St Augustine, prayed only that her
son might be converted, and become a Christian, and it pleased God to make
him an excellent instrument of the conversion of many others. Likewise the
woman of Canaan prayed only for her daughters health, and obtained also a
singular commendation of her own faith, Accedens ad Christum canis vocatur,
discedens a Christo mulier vocatur: ipsa mutavit affectum, and ipse mutavit
vocabulum. August. Vox humilis, sed celsa fides, vel ipsum omnipotentem vincere
valuit. Seduli^^. Coelestis ausae janua semper paret, and quo saepius illam
precibus pulsaus, eo vis Deo gratior. Tertull.
Matthew. 15.^8. whereupon one says, She showing her self by her faith and
patience, and importunate wrestling with God, to be no Canaanite, but an
Israelite, he cease to call her dog, and calls her daughter, or woman. See
here the fruit of devout importunity. She knew, and was well acquainted [it
seemeth] that it went not in the Court of Heaven, as things are many times
carried ^n earthly Courts: here many times Kings and great Personages will be
offended to be importuned; but the gate of Heaven always stands open, and the
more frequently thou knockest at that gate by thy prayers, so much the more
shall thou be accepta^le to God, says Tertullian. And God, the more ardently
he is desi^ed by us, so much the more vehemently is he delighted of us.

Sect. 3.
Object. BUt it will be objected; If prayer be so powerful a ^eans to procure
Gods blessings; how ^meth it to pass, that so many speak, and so few speed, so
many put up their petitions, and so few obtain their ^uits?

Resp. St. James answers the Question, who tells us, That we ask and receive
not, because we ask amiss; because we ask what or how, and when we should not;
there is something faulty, either in the matter, manner, or end of our prayers,
and therefore they are not granted, Jam. 4.3.

1. For the matter; some are so impudent, as to ask absolute mala, things
absolutely evil and unlawful, and hurtful, as skill in poisoning, sorcery,
witchcraft, charming, conjuring, or the like: of which sort of things, St.
Austin says, Non petuntur in nomine salvatoris, quae petuntur contra rationem
salutis. August.
They are not asked in the name of a Savior, which are ask against the reason
of our salvation* and no marvel, if God deny such requests; as an earthly
father will not give his child a Serpent to sting o^ poison him, for Fish to
feed upon; o^ a stone to break his own teeth, or his brothers head, for bread
to eat; so God will not give any of his children things hurtful for them, or
things evil in their own nature: we mus^ ask things lawful only; to pray for
things unlawful, is altogether unlawful.

2. Others there are, that ask such things as are not good for them: This was
the case of David, desiring ^he life of the child that Bathsheba bare him, 2
Samuel 12.16 and of St. Paul desiring the removal of Sa^ans messenger sent to
buffer him, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. therefore he was not heard, that God might exercise
his patience, and keep him from spiritual pride, being apt to be puffed up above
mea^ure by the abundance of his revelations. God knows that as Bees be
drowned in honey, and preserved in vinegar; so his children are many times best
affected when most afflicted; as was the case of Job, who behaved himself
better on the dunghill ^han Adam in Paradise; for the one amidst his pains
resisted and stood, ^ut the other in all pleasure yielded and fell: thus it was
with David, Psalm 119. who says, Before I was ^fflicted, I went astray, but
now I have kept thy Word. Thus the Father will not give the Prodigal his full
portion, ^est he spend it all in riot, but reserveth something for him against
a wet day, Luke 15. nor will he always give us health and strength of body,
lest we abuse them to the hurt of our souls: thus he many times suffers the
outward man to be sick, that the inward man may be the more sound, and
increases the sores of our bodies, that he may decrease the sins of our
souls; in a word, the Physician better knows what may be beneficial to the sick
man, than the sick man himself does, and God does not always hear his people
at their pleasure, that he may always hear them for their profit: therefore we
must never beg these things but with condition, always submitting our wills to
Gods will, and in these requests never ask but what may make most for Gods
glory and our own good.

3. Some there are whose petitions are framed, not according to the wisdom of
God, but they arise out of the ignorance of their own estate, and then, aut
fiet quod petitur, aut expedit non fieri; either God will grant their desires,
or else a denial shall be better than a grant: How exceedingly did the Apostles
desire Christ's bodily presence always to ^e with them on earth? John 16.5, 6.
^ut Christ tells them it was expedi^nt they should be crossed in their ^esire;
It is expedient for you that I ^o away, for unless I go away the com^orter will
not come.

4. Many requests of Gods people may arise from carnal distempers of their
spirits, and be no works of the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, and
therefore no wonder, if the Lord deny them in those desires, wherein they ought
to deny themselves. Jo^as desired that all Niniveh should be destroyed
together, after he had proclaimed, Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed: This arose from self-love, and in regard of his own credit, for fear
of being accounted a false Prophet, therefore God denied him in his request.
When those two sons of Zebedee with their mother desired pre-eminence above the
rest of the Apostles, Christ crosses this desire of theirs, and reads them a
lecture of the Cross, and falls a discoursing of the cup of affliction.

5. The people of God may desire things good in themselves, yet things that
they are not fitted for, and suited unto; as when that horrible villainy was
committed in Gibea contrary to the Law of God and man, and rules of nature, the
rest of the Benjamites stood to maintain it, and the other Tribes resolved to
revenge it, and had the worst of it in two battles, their desires were just and
noble, therefore they spent a whole day in prayer to humble themselves before
the Lord: they needed more humiliation for their own sins, before they were
fit instruments to punish the sin of Gibeah.

6. Others there are that aim at wrong ends in their prayers, though they ask
things good or indifferent. Some desire to be great and rise in the world that
they may keep their neighbors down, and make them little: whereas if we may
desire the goods of the world, it must be to do good in the world. Some desire
health and strength of body, not to serve God and their Country, but the Devil
and their own lusts, by giving their strength to women, and by being strong to
drink wine, and ^our in abundance of strong drink. Some desire learning and
knowledge, and to be great Clerks, not to teach and edify themselves and their
bre^hren, but to advance themselves, and rise to high places, yea many ^imes to
disturb the peace of the Church and Commonwealth, as he^eticks and schismatics
use to do. Now in these and such like cases it is ^n usual thing with God to
send cursed Kine short horns, as the Proverb says, ^o dismiss such impudent
beggars without an alms, lest they might ^buse it.

Sect. 4.
Object. 2. IT will be further objected; If God be so quick ^f hearing, and so
easy to be intreat^d, as the Scripture tells us he is; ^w comes it then to
pass, that God ^oth defer to answer his people's ^rayers?

Resp. God does not ever hear and ^rant their suits at first, though he intend
to do it at last, for these Reasons:

1. Lest if he should presently yield to their suits, and grant their requests,
upon the first moving and making of them, they might imagine prayer to be
nothing hut a matter of course, and that he did rather grant their requests of
fatal necessity, than of his fatherly bounty. So, says St Ambrose, Si semper
exaudiret omnes, non tam ex voluntate libera, quam ex quadam necessitate facere
videretur. Ambros.
If God should hear all men always, he might seem to do it not so much of
freewill, as from a certain necessity: but it is not opus operatum, that will do
the deed.

2. God deferreth answering his peoples requests, to make his blessing the more
welcome to them when they come, than if they had them presently; God deals
with his children, as Laban did with Jacob, Genes. 29. who made him stay long
for Rachel, not that he should not have her, but that when he had her, he might
prize her the better thus God makes as if he sometime slept, to make us to
awaken him by our prayers, and he often defers us not that he means always
to deny us, but to make his gifts the more welcome to us. A Father many ^imes
makes his child ask him often for what he meant he should have at the first, to
make him value it the more, and esteem it the better when he has obtained it,
by how much ^he more hardly he seems to ob^ain it.

3. Although Gods will is fullfilled in his own time, yet the de^ires of his
people are not granted ^n the time that they determine, ^ut as God determines.
Moses ^xpecteth that Israel should be pre^ently delivered, as soon as he went
^n to Pharaoh, and delivered his message from God, and therefore ^e
complains, Exodus 5.22. Why is (...), O Lord, that thou have sent me? Moses's
time was now up, and he ^xpected the work should be now ^one: now the Lord
would give ^im his desire, but not at that time, ^ut in a fitter time for the
benefit ^f his people, the Lord would take ^ime to show his power upon Pha^aoh,
and that the enemies of his Church might be ripened for destruction: but on the
other side, it was performed exactly, at the time that God had determined,
Exodus 12.41. At the end of four hundred and thirty years, the very self same
day in Gods own time, though not in Moses time, all the Host of Israel came out
of the Land of Egypt.

4. He deferreth, and seems sometime to turn a deaf ear toward us, to awaken
our zeal, and make us the more earnest in asking: Thus our Savior Christ dealt
with the woman of Canaan, he makes three great stops and stays upon her
request, in the first whereof he delays and defers her, Matthew. 15.
as seeming to neglect and not regard her: he answered her not a word; this
strange dealing of his might have put her quite out o^ patience had it not been
strong. In the second he seems quite to deny her and her suit, and his
Disciples speaking for her, whether moved with pity and commiseration toward
her, or whether to be rid of her, because she was troublesome to them, by her
importunity, the Text being silent, I will say nothing: but for Christ's answer
it seems a flat denial: I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: She holds the canclusion stiffly, and presses the point hard, and came
and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me; as if she had said; Thou came to
seek and save that which was lost, Luke 19.10. and I am in misery, therefore
Lord I beseech thee show me thy mercy: But our Savior answered, and said unto
her, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give it unto dogs; This is
the sharpest repulse of all the rest; before he did but simply reject her; but
now he does reproach her, for [this terme] signifies one of a most base and
servile condition, ^elling her in effect, her turn was not yet come, the
children must be first fed and filled, perhaps some ^crap might fall to her
share at last, as yet she was too hasty: Israel was the firstborn, and must
have the benefit of his birthright, but she was an alien from the Commonwealth
of Israel; a stranger to the Covenant of promises. -- Now how does she digest
this bitter pill? Surely she swalloweth it; and however a man would have
thought these three repulses should have broken the heart of her; yet her faith
continues constant, and gets new force; yea she takes advantage from the
very worst word that Christ had given her; Truth Lord, yet even the dogs eat
the crumbs that fall from the childrens table: as if she had said, Seeing I am
no better than a dog, I shall be contented to be served like a dog; I deserve
not to sit at table with thy first born and ancient people, nor to be fed
either before or with the children; a little scrap or a crumb shall serve me,
that am a poor Gentile: I deserve not a loaf of bread, but a crumb of mercy, I
leave thy great miracles for thine own peculiar people the Jews; let me have
one mercy, one little miracle wrought for me that am a Gentile; and if I am a
dog, I am thy dog, and will not cease crouching, I will be importunate, till
thou hear me, and heal my daughter; then Jesus answered, and said unto her, O
woman great is thy faith; be it unto thee as thou will; he then gives her more
than she asked; according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.20. He gives
abundantly above what we are able to ask or think: for her daughter was made
whole, or the Devil went out of her, and departed from her; at her coming home,
she found her lying upon the bed, Non per aegritudinem, aut infirmita^em, not
by reason of sickness or weakness; but this quiet, peaceable gesture of hers is
opposed to those powerful pangs she had formerly had whiles ^he Devil
possessed her.

Sect. 2.
HEre we may see the benefit of importunate prayer; what though the Lord does
seem some^ime to bear a dull ear, yet we should not distrust of the success of
our prayers, perseverance and importunity will at last draw him to audience; if
our former requests be weak and infirm, fainting in the way to the mercy of
God, yet the latter may ascend, and draw down his blessings; the Apostle
requires us to use all perseverance in prayer, Ephesians. 6. What if God delay, yet
must we still like Jacob wrestle with God, and not let God go till he give us
the blessing; and like those remembrancers of Sion, give him no rest, till he
accomplish our desire. This perseverance in prayer is like showers of the first
and latter rain, and if the one fails of watering the earth, the other
moisteneth it sufficiently; and if thou have made thy prayers to God for a
blessing once or twice without success, pray again and again; cease not till he
hears thee. One says, That as seed which is the longest covered, Baine's
Expos. on Ephesians. 6.
rises the first with most increase: so do those prayers which God seems to
bury in forgetfullnesse a long time, if we persevere, they shall spring out
with the greatest blessing. The longer Abraham talked with God, the more he
obtained; he brought God from the whole number to fifty, and from fifty to ten
before he left him: Behold, says he, I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and
am but dust and ashes; let not my Lord be angry, and I will speak again; and
once more I have begun to speak; and once more, let not my Lord be offended:
Once more and again, you see are able to send away clouds of fire and
brimstone; and so far was God from being angry with his instant request, that
he gave him both patience and a gracious answer; If ten be found there, says
he, I will not destroy it: Far is it from him to be angry, or to command us to
be driven back, when we are importunate; no, he commands us to be
importunate, and will be angry, if we be not importunate. In the Parable of the
wicked Judge, Luke 18.
and the importunate widow, he teaches us, That importunity may get any thing
at the hands of God. God will at last avenge his elect of their enemies, if
night and day they cry unto him: So in the similitude of the man that came to
his friend at midnight to desire him to lend him three loaves, and his friend
answered him, his door was shut, and his children and servants in bed, and he
could not rise himself to give them to him, at length he still continuinging in
knocking, and that for him neither he, nor any of his might rest; to be rid of
his importunity, (not for that he was his friend) he rose up, and gave him as
many as he needed: Thus it pleases the heavenly Majesty to be long entreated;
therefore though at your first call he seems not to hear, yet you must call
again; and though he does yet suspend your desires in expectation, yet cease
not praying, and your importunity at last will draw him to audience: it
delights the Lord to hear our redoubled requests.

CHAP. XV. Shows what manner of person he is that can pray aright.
IN the next place, I shall show who they are that can pray acceptably, sc.
they that have the spirit of adoption, it is they that can cry Abba Father; The
sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the
upright is his delight, Prove. 15. He that turns away his ears from hearing
the Law, even his prayers shall be an abomination, Prove. 28.9. And, John 9.31.
the man that was born blind saw this truth, That God hears not sinners; but
if any man be a wor^hipper of him, and does his will, him ^e hears. And David
says, If I re^ard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm.
66.18. but in the next verse he tells us, That verily God had heard him, and
attended to ^he voice of his prayer. Indeed Gods ^ar enclineth to us, as our
heart enclineth to him, and if we decline from him, and incline to wickedness
with our hearts, we move him to decline from us, and incline to wrath; why
should God lend any man his ears, that regards not him in his heart? such may
expect to be answered, as God answered the Jews, Isai. 1.15. When ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear; the reason follows, because your hands are full of
blood: none can pray aright, but such as are endued with the Spirit of God, to
direct them how to form and frame their prayers, that they may have access to
God, and acceptance in Gods Court of audience; but this none but the godly and
regenerate have; therefore only such can pray aright, and as they ought.

Object. 1. But we read in Scripture that the wicked do sometimes pray unto
God: they are said to cry to God, and call upon him, Job 27.9, 10. Prove. 1.28.

Resp. 1. Such prayers are not true prayers, they are but lip-devotions,
drawing nigh to God with their mouths, and honoring him with their lips, when
their hearts are far from him, Matthew. 15.8. they are like instruments, and
bells out of tune, that make much noise, but there is no melody at all. 2. They
are but the expressions of their own private spirits, and not the fruits of
Gods Spirit in them. 3. There is nothing but flesh in their prayers, they are
bad trees, and cannot bring forth good fruit. 4. They are but a shadow of
prayer, therefore the Lord regards them not, he counts their prayers but as
the howling of beasts, and not as the voice of his Spirit, Hos. 7.14. because
when they had spent a whole day in prayer and fasting, yet the Lord counted it
as not done to him, because their heart was not toward God nor the good duty,
but like brute beasts they howled for corn and wine.

Object. 2. But wicked men may conceive many excellent forms of prayer, and
show much zeal, etc.

Resp. Prayer stands not in the copy of words, nor noise of the voice, but in
the holy desire and disposition of the heart: they have often burning lips, the
words of prayer, yet pray they do not; they want those sighs and groans of the
spirit, which the Spirit of God works in the hearts of the faithful: its the
voice of the regenerate part, animated, informed, and quickened by Gods Spirit,
that God hears, and knows the meaning of, that God accepts, and
rewards: hypocrites have the wood and frankinscence, but they want fire to
cause heat, and a sweet savor, their prayers are dead and liveless.

Object. 3. It may be further said, That God hears the wicked sometimes, and
grants their requests: thus God heard the voice of Hagar and Ishmael, when
they were ready to perish for thirst, and opened the eyes of Hagar to see a
well of water, Genesis 21.17. When King Rehoboam had established the Kingdom and
strengthened himself and forsook the Law of the Lord his God: the Lord stirred
up Shishak King of Egypt against him who took their fenced Cities, whereupon
the King and Princes of Israel humbled themselves, and the Lord granted them
some deliverance.

Resp. 1. I answer, That whenever God grants the requests of wicked men;
its not for their sakes, but for the promise that he has made to his own
ordinance, and to commend that: Item, we shall still observe, that they be
temporal blessings and no other, that they obtain, that he bestows upon
them, as we may see in Ahab, 1 Kings 21.29. who when he heard the words of the
Prophet denounced against his house; he humbled himself before the Lord,
therefore brought not the evil threatened in his days, but in his sons
days: ^s for these outward blessings, God many times bestows them upon
wicked men; thus he gave Egypt ^or a reward to Nebuchadnezzar for his service
to God against Tyrus, Ezeck. 29.18, 19.

2. God sometime hears the cry, of beasts, Jon. 3.8. compared with Jon. 4.11.
man and beast was covered with sackcloath in Nineveh, and cried mightily to
God, and the Lord had compassion on them, and heard them; now who will say that
they pray? Lyra Lyra in Jon. 3.8.
expounds it well of their roaring, braying, lowing and bleating, every one
making a noise in their several languages, for lack of food; yea, happily they
put up and pent the young ones from their dammes, and then what a pitiful cry
there would quickly be; we may easily see, but by keeping calves from the kine,
and lambs from the ewes awhile: the young ravens are said to cry to God for
food, and he feeds them, Psalm. 147.9.

3. God hears the wicked sometime in his wrath, but never in his mercy, and
therefore it were better he did not hear; quia poenam pro^munere poscunt: thus
he gave the old Israelites (weary of his ordidinance) a King in his wrath: thus
when they lusted for quails, he gave them their requests, but sent leanness
into their souls, Psalm. 160.15. Sometimes what he gives to the wicked, is given
but in common mercy, as they are his creatures; The Lord is good to all, and
his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. his spiritual
blessings are bestowed only upon the faithful.

Therefore there must be in him that prays, an earnest desire to forsake all
sins: prayer is a sacrifice whereby we labor to appease Gods wrath conceived
against us for our sins, now if we do this with a purpose to continue in our
sins, we cause God with indignation to reject our prayers. There is no
adulteress so shamelesly impudent, as to desire pardon of her jealous husband,
having her lover still in her arms, with whom she has often had wanton
dalliance in times past, and is resolved to have the like for the time to come.
If any be so shameless to make suits in this odious manner, Jo. Downhams
Christian Warfare.
says one, they are sure to be repulsed, and find wrath and vengeance where
they look for grace and mercy: but thus do they behave themselves toward God,
says he, who remaining polluted with their sins, do offer up their prayers
unto him; for they bring their accusers, even their defiled consciences, and
crying sins, which continually accuse and condemn them, calling for that due
punishment which they have deserved. I will wash my hands in innocence, so will
I compass thine altar, O Lord, Psalm. 26. If ye abide in me, and my words abide
in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you, says Christ,
Joh. 15.7.

CHAP. XVI. Laying down directions how we ought to pray in a right manner.
Sect. 1.
IN the last place, I shall lay down diverse directions to teach us in what
manner we ought to pray to God, when we draw near to God in prayer; let us come
before him as we ought to do.

Direct. 1. Let us not come rashly into the presence of God, there ought to be
in him that comes to the throne of grace, animus been compositus, a mind well
composed and disposed thereunto; we must not pray unadvisedly, without
considering with the mind what the tongue is to offer, lest we reap a curse
instead of a blessing: what is it to offer the sacrifice of fools, but rashly
and unadvisely to pour out our prayers to God, not considering what, Greg.
Moral. l. 26. c. 29.
or how, or to whom we speak? What is nearer to us than our heart, says St
Gregory, and yet if once it be set a wandering, what thing is it in the whole
world that is in a trice so far from us? Away then with all perfunctory
prayers, which is the practice of too many in our days, who utter a form of
words, as is the manner of hypocrites, or the Gentiles was, or as the Parret of
Ascanius recited the Creed, rather of custom than zeal, flattering God with
their mouths, and dissembling with him with their tongues: when we are at our
prayers, let not our minds be roving after our worldly affairs; when we bow the
knees of our flesh, let the knees of our hearts bow also, and let not our
prayers go out of feigned lips: that the mind should be well composed in
prayer, some even of the heathens have seen; Orontis est nil nisi coelestia
cogitare.
and therefore one says; It becomes him that prays, to think of nothing but
heavenly things. Drexelius tells us of a vision, that a religious man had at
prayers in the Congregation: Drexelius.
He saw a several Angel at the elbow of every one present, ready to write down
his suits and requests: those who prayed heartily, their Angels wrote with
gold; such as prayed but coldly, their Angels wrote too, but it was but with
water; such as prayed customarily only, but from the teeth outward, theirs
seemed seemed to write too, but it was but with a dry pen, no ink in it; such
as slept, their Angels laid their pens by; such as had worldly thoughts, their
Angels wrote in dust; and such as had malicious thoughts, their Angels wrote
with gall: the mo^all (at least) is of use: for if God, as Job Job 14.17.
says, has a bagg for our sins, and a bottle for our tears, ^s David says:
Psalm. 56.8.
then he has a ^ook for our prayers too, Lierle's Sermon P^al. 95.1.
as one well notes; if we shall answer for every idle word we speak one to
another, much more for every idle word we speak to God.

Direct. 2. We must pray in humility; the prayer of him that humbles himself
pierces the clouds, and will depart, till God hears it, says the son of
Syrach: the chiefest motive that can humble us, is a double meditation, one of
God, another of our selves; God so infinitely great and holy, and we infinitely
base and evil: God is infinitely great both in respect of his majesty, and
also of his mercy; the consideration of both these humbled Job even to dust and
ashes; therefore, says he, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job
42.5. So Isaiah coming near to God, cries out, Woe is me, for I am undone, I am
a man of polluted lips, Isai. 6. So the poor justified Publican stands afar
off, and would scarce lift up his eyes to heaven, but smites on his breast,
crying, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13, 14. So wise Agur speaking
to God in prayer, see how he directs his speech to him, Cobbet Treat. of
Prayer.
Prove. 30.1, 2. The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy the man
spoke unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ueal: Ithiel signifies, he that is my
God; and Ucal that mighty one; and you see how humbly he speaks to him, verse.
2, 3. Surely I am more brutish than any man, I have not the understanding of a
man in me, nor have I the knowledge of the holy; he looks upon himself as most
unworthy to speak of God in way of instruction to others, and to speak to God
himself in way of supplication: wherefore as one was wont to say to Caesar: Qui
apud te O Caesar audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant, qui non audent,
humanitatem tuam nesciunt: they that dare speak to thee O Caesar, do not know
thy greatness, they that durst not, are ignorant of thy humanity and weakness:
I may say far better, our Savior is meek and lowly in heart, that we may
speak unto him, but he is so great in majesty and power, that we ought to speak
in all humility; let us then fall low before his footstool, and not come into
his presence without great reverence: our blessed Savior prostrated himself
upon the ground, when he prayed to his Father; Et prostratus in terra orat
medicus, and non inclinatur aegrotus? Shall this heavenly Physician kneel, and
shall we think much to stoop to that infinite Majesty, who is higher than the
highest on earth? Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am
but dust and ashes, says Abraham interceding for Sodom, Genesis 18. the
consideration of Gods greatness and holiness will abase and humble us, and such
a humiliation will be a means to lift us up to glory and blessedness.

Sect. 2.
Direct. 3. LEt us pray in faith: faith indeed is requisite to bring us near to
God: Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
an unbelieving heart departs from God, Heb. 3.12. but faith brings us into
the presence of God; he that comes to God must believe, Heb. 11.6. that God
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him: hence arises the ground
of our confidence, when we know that God is both able and willing to help us:
this we signify saying, Our Father which art in heaven, this St James
requires, James 1.6. Ask in faith nothing wavering; for he that wavereth, is
like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed, if we have not faith
in our prayers, we cannot choose but shake and tremble when we come before the
Lord: says makes a person to come with boldness to the throne of grace, Ephesians.
3.12. all our prayers must be grounded on Gods promises, which are in Christ
Yea and Amen, i. e. they have their foundation and perfection, their beginning
and ending, in, and upon Christ, Habent fundamentum and complementum principium
and finem. Rolloc. in Psalm. 32.
as Rollock notes. Now we cannot apprehend either of him, or any promise made
to us in him, but only by faith: yea, this is a condition required always in
all our prayers, 1 John 5.13, 14. yea, in all our actions, Romans 14.23. Heb.
11.6. the defect and want hereof made St Austin pronounce of all the moral
virtues of heathen men, that they were but splendida peccata: Aug. in Psalm. 83.
for says he, As birds lose their young ones being chilled and killed with
cold, and that fall out of their nests; so all those things that we commonly
call good works come to nothing, if they be not bred and brought forth in the
nest of faith: a faithful prayer returns not empty, But as it goes rightly
up, carried with the wings of faith, so it comes heavily down laden with
blessings: Therefore, 1. We must believe that our persons are accepted in
Christ. 2. That our suits are welcome with our persons, Isai. 45.19. I
believed, and therefore have I spoken, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.10. no
sooner had he laid hold on faith, but his tongue was presently exercised in
prayer: let faith then (I say) be the ground of our prayer, the first round of
the ladder whereby we ascend unto God, Et juxta mensuram fidei erit mensura
impetrandi, the more faith we have in our hearts, the more favor shall our
prayers find in Gods ears. This is manifestly proved unto us from the
examples of them that came to Christ. The Ruler of the Synagogue believed, that
if Christ came and laid his hands upon his daughter, she should be healed. The
woman with the bloody issue believed, that if she might but touch the hemme of
his garment she should be healed. The Centurion said, but Dic verbum, Do but
speak the word, and my servant shall be whole: Each one had his desire
according as he believed: Whatsoever ye ask in prayer, if ye believe ye shall
receive it, says Christ, Matthew. 21.22. For indeed we mock God to pray unto
him, and to doubt that we shall not have our requests granted us, or that our
prayers shall not be heard: Therefore Christ, teaching us to pray, directs us
first to say Our Father, to make us confident of obtaining, and concludes with
Amen, to signify, that we shall undoubtedly receive what we faithfully desire:
therefore whenever we pray to God, let us lift up holy hands without doubting.

To this Section I shall also add, That as we must pray in faith, so also must
we pray with understanding; blind devotions God regards not: For without
knowledge the mind cannot be good, Prove. 19.2. A blind Priest, and a blind
Sacrifice are abominable, Leviticus 21.18. Malachi 1.8. Hosea. 4.6. Affection
depends upon the understanding; we must not pray for we know not what, as the
Papists do in their Latin service. Such men as are not rational in their
worship, They worship they know not what, as Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, John 4.22. as we must labor to know whom we have believed, so
likewise to know whom and what we worship.

Sect. 3.
Direct. 4. IF we will pray so that we may be heard, we must pray with zeal and
fervency; a fervent suitor cannot but have audience when he speaks unto his
God, and when at any time our prayers want success, the defect is in our
selves. Gods answer is according to the vigor of our prayers, if the cries we
send up come not from the very fervency of the heart, they sound not in the
ears of God: The prayer of the righteous man avails much, if it be fervent,
says St. James; else even the prayers of the just, if they be perfunctory and
cold, rather of custom, than of devotion and piety, they avail not but to
condemnation, they procure us not audience from God, but rather shall be
answered by God as the prayers of those Idolaters in Ezekiel. 8. Though they cry
in mine ear with a loud voice, I will not hear them, says the Lord. Whereas
many times we find that an earnest seeking with the heart has prevailed
without any words uttered by the tongue: He that hears without ears can
interpret our prayers without tongues, and the voice of the one is not more
audible to him than the intention of the other.

That all our prayers ought to be made with earnestness of affections, and
enflamed with the fire of an ardent zeal, the Scripture shows us by the
several terms by which fervent prayer is set forth unto us: sometimes it is
called a crying unto God, Exodus 14.15. Exodus 17.4. Jonah 2.2. a wrestling with
God, Genesis 32.24. compared with Hosea 12.4. a striving with God, Romans 15.30 a
taking hold of God, Isai. 64.7. Prayer is typed by incense in the old Law, that
gave no sweet smell, till the fire came to it: so prayer is nothing without the
fire of zeal, it makes no sweet savor before the Lord: And good Reason there
is for it:

1. Because all religious duties ought to be performed with our choicest and
chiefest affections, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Eccles. 9.10. and therefore this of prayer
which is a principal duty of Religion

2. Because in fervent prayer we pour out our hearts before the Lord, which God
requires, Lam. 3.19.

1. This condemns the simple practice of the Lay-Papists, who think that God
regards their vain repeating over so many Pater nosters and Ave Mary's, and
other Latin prayers by their Beads, though they understood not what they say,
nor respect how they run them over, so they be said, they care not how they
be said with how litttle devotion.

2. This condemns also the Opinion and Doctrine of their Clergy, who ascribe
virtue to their Opus operatum in prayer, and other good works.

3. It gives a check to the coldness and stupid laziness of many amongst us,
who do so slightly, and so hastily, and sleepily slubber over this duty of
prayer, both publicly and privately, without any manifestation of the least
measure of zeal and affection. Some content themselves (though they be in
health) with two or three words carelessly, heartlesly, and foolishly bolted
forth, while they lie in their beds between sleeping and waking; some pray as
they are a making themselves ready or unready; some are so far from praying
fervently that they pray not at all.

Therefore when we pray, let us pray fervently, for,

1. The thing that we pray for are of absolute necessity, viz. the glory of
God, the justification of our persons, the sanctification of our natures, the
salvation of our souls, therefore we must go about them, as about matter of
life and death, and beg of God as a condemned person for his life of his Judge.

2. He that prays coldly, seems to be careless whether he be heard or not,
and teaches God to deny him his request.

3. Those that be dull in prayer will much more be dull in giving thanks: we
should therefore pray, as those that mean to speed, and be so eager, as those
that will take no denial.

4. This is the reason why so many find so little comfort and success in their
daily prayers, namely want of zeal, they have not the answer of God upon their
spirits, who pray without life and affection: our zeal herein should be like
the fire that the vestal Virgins kept in Rome, or rather like the sacrificing
fire upon the Altar under the Law, that ever burnt, and never went out: As
loathing of meat and painfulnesse of speaking are two symptoms of a sick body,
so carelessness of hearing, and irksomeness of praying, are signs of a sick and
diseased soul, says a Learned man.

Sect. 4.
Direct. 5. LEt confession of sin be joined with prayer: Confession is
sometime put for prayer, Dan. 9.4. I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my
confession. Many are the benefits of penitent confession of sin.

1. Confession opens the wounds of sin, and prepares a passage for the
medicine to be applied to the malady, Confessio aperit vulnus peccati. Gregor.
says Gregory. And Origin says, It is the vomit o^ the mind that cleanses the
stomach, and unloads the conscience of sin. And another says The Church by
confession does with the thief on the Cross, lif^ up her self from Earth to
Heaven: O latronem laudabilem, mirabilem, imitabilem; nos vocem latronis, si
nolumus esse latrones. August.
O thief worthy of praise worthy of admiration, worthy of imitation, says St
Austin: worthy of praise, for praising him that was praiseworthy, saying This
man has done nothing amiss worthy of admiration, for confessing the truth
against himself: We receive things due to our deserts, Luke 23.41, 42. and
contrary to the expectation of all that were present, he confesses to Christ
as a Lord, then set in the lowest degree of a servant: to Christ as a Mediator,
then and there to suffer as a malefactor: to Christ as a King, though crowned
before his eyes with a crown of thorns: notwithstanding all this, he confesses
and prays in these words, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom^ and worthy he is of imitation, not in the parts of his life, but at
the point of his death; not in his actions, but at his execution. Let us then
take up this saying of the thief, lest we prove thieves to our own souls.

2. Confession of sin, makes a man sensible of the nature of sin, and
engages the heart strongly against it.

3. Confession of sin glorifieth God: not that he needs our confessions to
inform him what our sins are: for he knows all our sins, 2 Kings 19.27. My
son give glory to God, and confess thy sin, says Joshua to Achan, Josh.
7.19. by a free confession we give God the glory of his power and authority
over us, if he should show his strength against us.

4. Confession is a great ease to the conscience: David tells us, Psalm 32.3,
4. that when he kept silence, that is, did not confess his sin, consenuerunt
^ss^, his bones waxed old, and the marrow and moisture of his body consumed and
dried away through the greatness of his sorrow, which drew from him an
unaccustomed crying, making him roar and bellow like a beast, and that without
intermission, even all the day, or day by day, and yet neither silent nor
crying finds he any ease, till he eases himself by a free confession of his
sin.

5. There are many virtues in this grace of confession: It is the hope of
believers, the glory of sinners, the expeller of all vice, it keeps the soul
within the compass of obedience, it is the language of unfeigned repentance,
it shuts the pit of hell, it opens the gate of Paradise, because it opens the
way to the merry of God, Dr. Holdsworth ex Augustino.
as a learned man notes out of the Fathers.

6. Confession of sin makes way for pardoning grace: If we confess our
sins he is faithful and just to forgive them, 1 John 1.9. David had but a
thought of confession, Psalm 32.5. and God saved him the labor of a farther
expression, on the resolution of confession, there is a resolution of pardon: I
said I will confess, or I purposed within my self so to do: Some of the
learned say, that in the Hebrew tongue, the same word signifies both to speak
and to think; to teach us that our mouths should be the faithful messengers of
our minds: Confession of sin is not only grounded upon Gods mercy, but also
upon Gods truth, and therefore upon his justice, which leads him to pardon
penitent confessing sinners: we should be ashamed to commit a sin, but not be
ashamed to confess it: as men should sear to take surfeits, and cast
themselves into sicknesses and diseases, but not to take physic, whereby they
may be cured again, and recover their health. Thus David, Manasses, Mary
Magdalen, Peter, Paul, Theod^sius the Emperor, and others of the faithful,
have not been ashamed to confess their sins, nor should any of us at any
time.

This reproves such as are ready enough to creep into other men's consciences,
but will take no notice of their own naughtiness, being not unlike certain
Witches called Lamiae, of whom Seneca Senec. Epist. ad Lucil.
writes in one of his Epistles, That when they went abroad, they would put
their eyes in their heads, yea sometimes take them in their hands; so curious
and critical they were to pry into others actions, and epsy small faults
abroad; but coming home again, they either put them in their pockets, or locked
them up in their cupboards, because they would not see their own sluttishnesse
or nastinesse. There be too many such that are sharp and severe enough to
censure others, but if it happen that themselves be guilty of the same, or as
great a fault, then the case is altered, an example hereof we have in Judah,
who when his daughter in Law Thamar is accused of whoredom, will have justice
done upon her, and according to the Law she must be burnt presently, Genes.
38.24. but when she had proved that she was with child by himself, though he
confessed the fault, yet is he well enough content to remit the punishment, and
talk no more of burning: both we and our prayers are vile and unclean, Job
40.4. but express confession is necessary, Fenners Gatechisin.
when the conscience is fouled with guilt, as one well notes.

Sect. 5.
Direct. 6. IN all our prayers, let us express the grounds of them; and use
such reasons unto God, as may most move him to grant our requests: not as
though God needed any reasons to inform him of our necessities, or to move him
to supply them, for he knows them better than our selves, and is more ready
to help than we to ask, but he delights that his children should plead with
him in prayer: besides this is an evidence of the graces of God in us.

1. Of our knowledge: an ignorant man is not able to plead his cause with
another; this argues a knowing Christian, when he thus pleads with God.

2. This is an evidence of our faith; he that pleads with God in prayer for any
mercy, shows that he is confident of an answer. Now herein the Lord takes
pleasure, and therefore he will have us reason it out with him. Thus Christ
dealt with the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22, -- 28. as has already been
showed. This is manifest likewise from the nature of prayer, which is called a
standing in the gap, Ezekiel 22.30. a wrestling with God, Genes. 32.24. The
strong reasons of faith do much prevail with God, and this is one principal
part of the efficacy of prayer, by which we prevail, and our supplications
become effectual, viz. in laying down such strong reasons as may move God to
grant our reque^^. In prayer we put our case into Gods hand; you know if a man
be wronged and oppressed among men, when he comes to a Judge or an Advocate,
that he thinks will undertake his business, and do him right, will he not
use many reasons and arguments to him? Now when men apprehend that God is a
mighty God, both ready to hear, and able to help his people in time of need,
this makes them cry mightily to God. This advice Eliphaz gives to Job, Chap.
5.8. I would seek unto God, and to God commit my cause; True prayer is a
putting our case to the Lord, and a pleading with him, and this requires
strength of reason and arguments. Now when we come to God, it is not enough to
pray by proposing our desires; but we must pray enforcing and pressing our
desires, backing them with good reasons, such as may make them warrantable and
acceptable, not such as are made for vain respects, Jam. 4.3. and to this
purpose:

1. Let us be thoroughly sensible of the want of those blessings we pray for;
then shall we beg hard for them: if a beggar be stripped of all, and have not a
bit of bread, and be ready to starve, how will he plead for some relief?

2. Get spiritual ingenuity. Wisdoms scholars are not fools; where true grace
is, it will make the soul quick and sagacious in holy reasoning, as is evident
in the woman of Canaan, Matthew 15.27. It is Satan's language, as well as the
Scripture's, to tell a Christian, that he is the chief of sinners; but even
then may he argue from his condition, as Saint Paul did, 1 Timothy 1.15. I am
the chief of sinners, yet one whom Christ came into the world to save: Thou art
one of the lost ones, says the Devil; Oh then say, Christ came to seek and
save that which was lost: his seeking denotes his diligence, his saving
denotes his power, and [both] his love.

Yet let us not think or imagine that words and arguments of themselves are
powerful with God; for if any man be heard, it is not for the sweetness of
words, the variety of matter, the multiplicity of reasons, but through the
intercession of Jesus Christ, which makes God propitious to us, and to accept
our poor and humble prayers: If therefore our prayers be heard, let us ascribe
it to God's dignation, not to our dignity, to God's benignity, not to the
Rhetorique or excellency of our prayer's; to to God's ear, and not to our
tongue.

To conclude; let us be sure, that when we are wide-mouthed to ask of God, we
are not close-fisted to those that ask of us: Many will ask much from God, and
part with nothing to others; yea many will promise much, and perform little:
But God is open-handed and open-hearted, his promises are performances, and his
words are works; he is truth, and cannot lie; virtue, and cannot fail, and
his power is sufficient to make good his promises. Among men promises are often
as empty as the wind; some would perform and cannot; some can and will not:
but God both can and will; his will is not larger than his power; but what God
does will that does God work, and whatsoever God is able to will, he is able to
work also.

FINIS.
These several Books following are Printed, and to be sold by Francis Tyton at
the three Daggers in Fleetstreet.
Large Folio.
BIshop Andrews Sermons. Perkins first volume. Hammond on the New Testament.
History of the Wars of Italy, from 1613, to 1644. translated by the Earl of
Monmouth.
Small Folio.
Dr Hammond on the Psalms. Lawsons Body of Divinity. Bishop Gawdens Ecclesia
Anglicana. Browns Vulgar Errors. Pemble's Works. Burton's Melancholy. Morris
on the Sacrament. Cooks English Law. Petavius History of the World. Renodeus
Dispensatory. Habbington's Edward the Fourth. Leigh's Description of the Temple
of Solomon's. Gwilliam's Heraldry.
Large Quarto.
Hugh's Monotomia. Abridgments of Acts and Ordinances. Jacksons Annotations on
Job, Psalms, etc.
Small Quarto.
Strong's Jesus Christ, Gods shepherd. Spelman de Sepultura. Catalogue of
Chancellors. Blackwoods Commentary on Matthew. Hammond's Dispatcher Dispatched.
Refuter, Refuted. Sedgwick on Faith. Gilbert's Pathway to Heaven. Sovereign
antidote against error. Libertine Schooled. Blessed Peacemaker. Hollioks Tree
of Life. Gwild on Samuel.
Large Octavo.
A Discourse of the Mystery of Dreams Allin's Henry the Seventh. Chirologia, or
the language of the hand. Gearing's Arraignment of Pride. Turkish History
continued to 1660. Book of Judgments. Heylin's Examen Historicum. Robinson's
Eudoxa. Harrison's Spiritual Pleadings. Lawson against Hobbs. Patrick's Mensa
Mystica, or, A Treatise on the Lords Supper. Jewish Hypocrisy, wherein is
shown both the false and true way to a Nations or Persons complete happiness,
from the sickness and recovery of the Jewish State: unto which is added a
Discourse upon Mic. 6 8. belonging to the same matter. By S. Patrick.
Small Octavo.
Lawrence's Christ's power over bodily diseases. Gearing on Gods Providence.
Mount of holy Meditation. Habbingtons Observations on History. Haughton's Rice,
growth, and fall of Antichrist. Eurialus and Lucretia -- Perkins Catechism.
Wards three Theological Graces. Sydenham for Infant Baptism. Swaffield's
Failings of the Saints. Orders of Chancery. Dornford's Gospel Light and life.
Discovery of Sincerity.
Twelves Large and Small.
Academy of Complements. Esop Greek. Greek and Latin.
Greek Psalter. Owens Epigrams. Martials Epigrams. Seneca's Tragedies with
Farnaby. Wollebius Compend. Pierce's Calvinists Cabinet unlockt. Skillful
Physician. Harris threefold State of man. Barton's Psalms. His Scripture-Hymns.
Biddle Dispossessed, an Answer to his Catechize. Spanish Inquisition. Bradshaw
of Justification. Vine's Saints neernesse to God.

