A Brief EXPLANATION Of several Mysteries of the HOLY MASS, And of the Actions
of the PRIEST Celebrating. Very Necessary for all Roman CATHOLICS For the
better Understanding thereof. Together with Certain Reflections upon the
APOSTLES CREED, Touching the Blessed SACRAMENT. AND ALSO, Diverse Meditations
and Prayers both before, and after Communion.

By T.G. Heretofore Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxon, deceased.

LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson For the Brother of the said T.G. 1686.

THE THOUGHTS Wherewith Generally I use to Hear, and to Assist AT MASS.
THe true end of the Mass, is that which Christ set For his Remembrance; And,
methinks, the whole Body of Ceremonies, (consisting in several Actions, Words,
Postures and Ornaments, which make up the External Parts of the Mass,) do
Represent to me (as in a kind of Perspective) not only, the Several Things
which Jesus Christ did, and Suffered, whilst he was here upon Earth Durand's l.
4. c. 1.
20 Acts 27.
; but also, The whole Council of God touching man's Salvation by him. All what
he has already done; or shall yet farther do, (to that purpose,) even from the
beginning of the World, to the very last day of Judgment, is here set before
me, in Shorthand.

Whereby, I am put in mind (in the very entrance to my Devotions) that That One
great propitiatory Sacrifice, made Once upon the Altar of the Cross, was
offered up, as for all Mankind in general, so particularly for every single
Person that has been, is, or shall be, from the Worlds beginning, to its end,
according to that Expression in the Revelation, 13 Revel. 8.1 Pet. 1.19, 20.
Of the Lambs being slain from the beginning of the World.

And (consequently) that this Sacrifice in the Mass is the Commemorative one,
of that Perpetual Sacrifice; which never has, nor ever shall cease to be
Offered (in some kind,) since the Fall of Adam. For the Virtue of that
Sacrifice on the Cross is diff^s'd throughout All Times, both preceding and
following the ^on of Jesus Christ.

And by I^ are saved, all that have or shall be saved. In which sense, it is
called, the General Perpetual Sacrifice of the whole Church.

Upon the Priest 's Recess from the Altar, and standing at a distvnce on the
lowest degree thereof.
BEing thus Disposed and Figured by this Fundamental Notion: I no sooner see
the Priest in his Sacerdotal Habit, or Vestment, Ascending up to the Altar
first, and suddenly Descending again to the very lowest degree; But it
remembers me instantly, of Man's Propinquity to God in Adam whilst he stood
Innocent; and then of his being thrust out of his Presence again quickly, upon
Adam's sin; of which, by being derived from him, we are every one Guilty, and
so, not only driven out of Paradise, but even debased down to the lowest degree
that such a Creature could fall.

DEVOTION.
O My God! I am sensible of my present Condition; that, during This Life I am
in a Banishment from Paradise; caused by that sin, which I committed in my
first Parent Adam; and that, by That Original, and many more Personal
Transgressions, (whereof I stand Guilty before Thee,) I am fallen into the
Lowest State, that a poor Creature can (likely) be brought unto.

And I feel, that (by thy Grace, which Thou art pleased to Afford me, even in
this miserable Condition of mine) I do thereof Repent me, and therefore Ought
to range my self, (as I do,) among the Lowest of any that can pretend to be Thy
Servants, (that is,) among the Penitents.

It Is also by the same Grace, that Thou put'st me in the Humble Posture of a
Stranger and Wayfaring-man only in This World; by causing me to Turn again (by
Little and Little, as the Motions and Conduct of Thy Holy Spirit Guide me)
toward That Paradise, out of which, for my sins I was driven.

O keep me Thus Humbled, I beseech Thee, and never suffer me to forget either
of these Low Conditions, which are so proper to the state of a Sinner, and so
proper to the state of a Convert too: Nor let me swell higher by the least
proud Conceit; That being It, that ruined me at First.

Take out of my Spirit all Inclinations to Things of Greatness or Port, and
give Me a Holy Affection to Meanness, as being most suitable, to what, indeed,
I am; to the Example of my Savior Jesus Christ, as He lived here; and
especially, to this present Cendescention of His, in the Sacrament, Humbling
himself to be, in such Ordinary and Despicable Elements, and this, at the Word
of a poor frail Man.

The Confiteor.
THe Priest standing Thus, at a distance, yet still between Hope and Despair;
bethinking himself what to do. 1. Bowing. 2. Advancing the Cross of Christ. 3.
Calling on the Trinity. In Nomine, etc. Vt supra.
and encouraging himself toward God. 4. By a Psalm of David's, Judica, etc. 5.
At last in an Humble Posture; he acknowledges, and Confesses, That he is
unworthy to approach nearer to Him, or so much as to His Altar: And that Thus
it is with him, most deservedly; (as for that Original sin, wherein he was
Conceived, and to which he Implicitly Assented; so likewise) for many other
committed by him, with a more express Will, throughout the whole course of his
Life.

And here, I conceive, that surely, he makes not this Confession for Himself
only, but for Every one Present; yea, for the whole Church; (for in Her Name he
comes now to Offer the Sacrifice.) And hence it is, that the Minister who
represents the People, makes a Confession with him in the same Words.

By It, is the whole Assembly, and every one of us in particular, (for whom he
therefore speaks in the Singular Number) Invited to put himself, together with
him, in the Posture and State of a Penitent; and to acknowledge before God, our
own unworthy Condition.

DEVOTION.
VOuchsafe me, O my God! The Grace of Tenderness of Heart; Seriously and deeply
to resent my own vile and dangerous Condition, so far at least, that Presently
(without any longer delay) I may lay open the worst of my Self, and Confess to
Thee, (together with the Priest;) and Own in Thy sight, All my Faults; by a
Repentance so True and Real, as may last, and make it self, ever hereafter,
appear to be so, more and more in All the Actions of my Life to come.

Imprint in my Soul a Restless desire of Returning to Thee for Good and All:
Eternally to serve Thee: Beginning this Service now in this World, as I mean to
continue it hereafter in the next, without Interruption or Relaxation; at
least, carrying it on, so Evenly, from this my last Penitence; that so, I may
make Reparation (in some sort) for my Failings and Recidivations, and Breaches
of Faith and Promise, since my First Conversion; which I should have taken
care, not to have proved so false unto, nor ever once to have violated.

Upon the Priest's Re-ascending to the Altar and Kissing It.
Deus tu Conversus, etc.
AFter this Confession; and that the Priest and Minister have openly avowed
their Faults and Indignities, both severally and jointly Praying for each
other: They further Animate and Encourage one another, by Reflection on God's
Mercy, expressed in Words of a Holy Boldness and Confidence, as they find them
in the Scriptures Psalm. 85. of the Messiah.
Deus tu Conversus, etc. Ostende nobis Domine, etc. So proclaiming
(alternately) that, though from themselves they can hope for Nothing, yet they
cannot but grow most Confident in their God, considering what he has given his
Word for, to perform.

With such Holy Cheerfulness; and yet still checked by a private Awe,
occasioned by his particular sins (secretly (then also) Prayed against;) The
Priest adventures up again to the Altar, and Kisses It. In token (say I) of a
New Reconciliation to Christ Jesus, and all His Church-Triumphant: for by the
Altar is represented Christ Crucified, and by the Relics of some Saints
enchas'd in It. The whole Body of that Triumphant Society, now more nearly
joined to their Head, and becoming even one with Him.

DEVOTION.
I Adore, O Lord, this Infinite Mercy of Thine; which is now brought into my
Mind by the Priests going up again unto Thy Altar, and Kissing of It, in Token
that Thou art again Reconciled to us.

So early was Thy Goodness to us, that no sooner had We Offended Thee, but
instantly Thou had projected a Way, by which we might come to be Pardoned. As
appears by thy Calling after, and searching out, our first Parent in Paradise,
immediately after he had fled from Thee, and lost himself.

In that so Ancient, and indeed Eternal project and design it is, that Thou
have already (in effect) Pardoned us, so long before We were Born; and extended
Thy Grace even to Us, in Jesus Christ, before all Ages, as one of Thy Apostles
has computed it.

And now, Thy Mercifulness, still equally willing to make good that Design, and
to appear as Great and as Ready to save in Time, as it was to Project, in
Eternity; does here Receive Us into Favor again, as soon as ever We but
Acknowledge, and Confess our Faults, as that Prophet of thine has Noted, and
as Thou publicly declarest to Thy whole Church, in admitting the Priest thus
to Kiss thy Altar (which is an Image, and stands in stead of thy self) suddenly
after he has ended His and Our Confession: Thereby to show, that Perform we
but our Duty once in a true Confession of our Faults, and there is no doubt to
be made, but Thou, in the same moment art Reconciled unto Us.

I most Earnestly beseech Thee to give me the Grace to value, and entertain,
this Immense Bounty of Thine, with a Respect due to it; and to enable me, in
some degree to imitate it: That is, that, (First, never, never willingly
Offending Thee, never so; next) for those Involuntary Lapses, and
Delinquencies, which my surpised infirmity so often stands guilty of (and in
this frail Life, are utterly unavoidable,) I may so take all diligent Care, to
discharge my self of Them, as soon as ever I perceive them committed, as Thy
Goodness is ready to Pardon them, as soon as ever, in a true Penitence and
Detestation, I acknowledge them before Thee.

At the Introit.
THis which is called the Introit Vide Durand. l. 4. c. 5. Goar. p. 124.
of the Mass, signifies, That great Declaration Evangelical, which God made to
Mankind presently upon Adam's Fall, Of his good Pleasure and Will to deliver
them from that Misery, wherein they lay; and to restore them to Grace and
Favor again, by giving them a Savior

This seems so to me; because every Introit in particular, either Prays, or
gives Thanks for, or Celebrates with some Joy, some special Execution of that
Will of God, suitable to the Feast or Mystery, for which the Mass is said.

DEVOTION.
I Thank Thee, O my God, for that, ever since that first Inclination and Good
Will of Thine: To be again Reconciled to Mankind; Thou have taken care, (all
along) to make it evidently Appear to men, by some real effect thereof; and by
some particular Grace and way of Dispensation, suitable to each Age, have gone
on, advancing and Accomplishing by little and little, that thy Great Design of
Redeeming and Saving the World, even to the very Fullness of Time, wherein it
was to be, Entirely perfected.

O that the Resolutions which I, too, have already taken; or shall, farther
yet, take to do Thee Service toward this End, might have something in them
also, of the Stability and Immutableness of that, Thy unchangeable and
everlasting Purpose. And that (though sometimes I be not able to Execute them
fully according to my Intention, yet (even then) they may discover themselves
in some (partial yet seasonable) Effects, enough to testify, that I have not
forgot them, or am Unfaithful to Thee; but only do expect, (with some Passion)
the Time wherein I may, according to my little Abilities, most completely
acquit my self.

Kyrie Eleison, Kyrie Eleison, Kyrie Eleison, etc.
WHat are these, but ardent Aspirations and Sighs of the Saints for the
fulfilling of that Promise of the Father in the sending his Son; addressed to
the Son himself, whom they Invoke as a Savior, and would incline Him to come
quickly?

They are Thrice repeated in Honor of the Holy Trinity, from whom they beg the
accomplishment of that Mystery.

Christ Eleison, Is said in the second place to show 'twas the second Person,
they demanded to be their Savior. And every person is Invoked thrice, to show
the numerous multitude of these Desires which they put up to the Trinity before
the attaining them.

The number of Three, signifying ( Often, or many times) in Scripture: So St.
Paul is said to Pray Thrice, etc. (1.) Often, to have his Temptation removed.

DEVOTION.
INcrease in me, O Lord, my Faith Of the Holy Trinity, and of Thy Incarnation,
by which means thou art become the Savior of the whole World; and kindle in my
Heart a lasting, longing Desire of Thy second Coming; no way Inferior to What
the Ancient Patriarchs had to See Thy First.

As the chief Point of Their Piety and Devotion consisted in This, Of a Strong
Faith and Passionate (yet Patient) Attendance for the Day of Thy Incarnation
and Resurrection; So, (by thy Grace and Favor) Let It be the scope of Mine;
still to be, in an Earnest Expectation and Waiting for the Great Day of thy
Triumph; when Thou shall appear so Gloriously to All Men, and to All Angels.
And let me Live (in This Interim,) with the Eye of my Intention, so uncessantly
fixed, Upon Thy Divine Person; as thou thy self Live, by having Thine
perpetually placed, on That of Thy Father: And may my Heart ever and anon
breath out her Wishes, in these words, Veni, veni Domine and Noli tardare; Even
Come, Come Lord Jesu, and tarry no longer!

Gloria in Excelsis.
NOw is Represented the Performance of That Promise of the (so much desired,
and so long expected) Messiah coming; together with the Joy of Men and Angels
immediately upon It. This being the Hymn Sung at His Nativity.

Very properly therefore is This Angelical Hymn of Joy, omitted upon days of
Sadness and Penitence; such as are days of Commemorations of the Dead and
Ordinary Feria's which (in going before Sunday, the day of the Resurrection)
sitly shadow out to us the Time of this Life to be a Time of Repentance and
preparing our selves for that Great Lord's Day at the General Resurrection. And
so this Hymn of Glory is Sung still on every Lord's Day, and the days of the
Blessed Virgin, and the other Saints now Regnant in the Glory of Christ their
Lord.

DEVOTION.
I Humbly Thank Thee, my God! That thou have been pleased, to give Me my Being;
Now, after thy Incarnation and Nativity; Under the New-Law, and In Thy Holy
Church; Thus separating me, from so many Infidels; so many Heretics and
Schismatics, as be without: and (if I be not Treacherous to my self, from) so
many False Christians, that Live, even in the midst of It, as if they had as
little Faith as those.

I beseech Thee, that, As the Reflection upon this Transcendent Good, is
deservedly the Cause of so Great Joy and Jubilation, common, to All the Angels
in Heaven; and on Earth, to All Men, of good Will; so It may ever Affect my
Soul, more sensible and more piercingly, then All the Pleasures, or then All
the Pains that can befall It in this World.

Make me count it, my chiefest Felicity, to be One, in the Number ber of those
Men of Peace and Good Will, that the Angels Saluted and gave the Joy to at Thy
Nativity.

Give me that Peace which the World cannot give, and That Good Will, which
alone gives me back again to Thee. There Is no good, Good Will, but in a True
Love of Thee; O, give me That!

Dominus Vobiscum.
HEre the Priest turning about to the People and Blessing Them, seems to
Communicate to them the Benedictions of Christ Jesus, now born in the Flesh,
for this very purpose to Bless Mankind. And therefore his Blessing in
particular, is, That God may continue amongst Us: Expressed in those very words
which unfold That Name, which the Scripture gives to Christ in order to his
Incarnation, that is, Emanuel, as much as to say. A God with Us.

But before he pronounces This Blessing, He Kisses the Altar, as It were
taking It in his Mouth, first from Jesus Christ himself, (in whose stead stands
the Altar,) as from whom, being an in-exhaustible Spring, opened by God for our
refreshment: All manner of Blessings, Favors and Graces are derived upon Us.

DEVOTION.
VOuchsaefe me the Grace to lead, ( in this Blessed Time of the New-Law, and in
the Communion of thy Holy Church, where thou art still Present with Us, after a
special manner) such a Life, as may render me capable of all thy Blessings;
that thou may still Turn thy Face toward Me, and lift up the Light of Thy
Countenance upon Me, to succor Me, and to impart unto Me, every day more and
more of that Rich Treasure which thou have provided for Me.

V;upon the Priest's turning back again, and Praying. Oration.
HAving breathed forth this Benediction over the People; He turns him to Jesus
Christ again, (1. to the Altar) to present to Him some Prayers (as the time
requires, one, or more) for Confirmation of That Blessing, and humbly to
testify his Dependence on him, as not being any thing, but his Instrument; nor
able to confer on others the least good, but only by way of Humble Petition to
his Divine Majesty.

DEVOTION.
ENable me to Pray, without Ceasing, as thy Scriptures Command me; since, in
this Life thou bestowest Nothing upon Us for our good, but by being Petitioned
first.

Let me then still be putting up Requests unto Thee; often Re-inforcing the
Old; and Multiplying ( as Thy Priest at the Altar does) New, upon every
important occasion.

At the Reading the Epistle.
NExt is read The Epistle, taken sometimes out of the New Testament: Sometimes
out of the Old: This puts me in mind of that Notice which was all along given
To the Jews of the Coming of their Messiah; first by the Prophets foretold;
and then exhibited to them by St. John, and the Apostles.

And for this reason (I think) it is read on that Corner of the Altar which is
on the Priest's Right Hand; because the Jews were a Nation chiefly Beloved of
God, and at first his chosen People, to whom he entrusted his Oracles.

DEVOTION.
I Do not a little Wonder at Thy Constant and Vntyr'd Love to the Jews; who
were the Only People, whom Thy Prophets were sent to Save, to whom Thou thy
Self came and Preached'st the Gospel: And (though not the Only, yet) the
First, to whom Thy Apostles declared Thy Resurrection. Thy Resurrection; A
point of such moment, that to Represent It the more Lively; The Priest, ( who
sustains the Person of Thee Risen) throughout the Whole Mass, even in the Act
of Sacrificing and Oblation, Celebrates all Standing.

O, my God, Permit not Me, to Slight Thy Holy Word; or to Undervalue its
Preachers, who come to Us in Thy Name, and on thy Errand: As that Stiff-necked,
Hard-hearted and Rebellious People have rejected the Addresses of the Prophets
and Apostles Thy Servants, nay, of Thy Son Christ Jesus himself.

Let not thy Holy Commands be a New Occasion and Aggravation of Sin to Me, as
to Them It was; but Improve them to Me into True Gospel, and Words of
Salvation; by Inspiriting me to do That which Thy Law injoyneth; and not
suffering my Sinful Inclinations, to Quench this Spirit, and Evacuate Thy Grace.

Gradual and Alleluja, or Tractus.
Immediately after the Epistle read, succeeds the Gradual, with either Alleluja
or the Tractus.
IF with the Alleluja, I apprehend that thereby Priest and People join in
Acclamations of Praise and Thanks to God; as It were in lieu and Supplement for
the Jews Ingratitude, Infidelity, and great neglect of the Gospel, as if
therefore by way of Reparation we would show our selves the more zealous, and
by certain Degrees of Versicles and Benedictions raise our selves to be more
Attentive to what they slighted.

Or, if in the place of Alleluja, a Tractus be annexed; (which being a Mournful
Ditty, therefore appointed for days of Penitence and Sorrow; and to be read
more Gravely, and drawn out more leasurely, and Sadly,) We are admonished
thereby to compose our selves to ask Pardon of God, for Those Sins, which we
also, (no less than the Jews) have committed, in our Great Neglect of the
Gospel; and to look on our selves as partakers of their Guilt, and to be
Penitent for It.

DEVOTION.
LEt Thy Goodness prevent me from such Jewish Ingratitude, and more; Now I have
received from thee, so many more and Greater Favors than They. As,
particularly, The Light of the Gospel, the Grace of Baptism; and then a greater
Portion of Thy Holy Spirit Confirming Me, and Even Thine Own Body and Blood for
Nourishment.

Be It the Business, to take up All my Thoughts All my Life long, To weigh the
Greatness, and Variety of Thy Mercies: And may Nothing in the World have such
Power, as to make me pass by inconsiderately, much less to forget, the least.

The Tractus. DEVOTION.
I Fall down before Thee, O dear Father with Shame, and great Confusion of
Face; calling to Mind Those Sins which I have committed, particularly, against
the Precepts of thy Gospel; which Gospel, I (though I refused not with the
Jews, but entertained it with Protestation to Live according to it; and if need
were, to Die for It, yet) have violated frequently by Great and Enormous
Crimes; being so much less excusable than They, into how much stricter an
Oblation I entered into.

I have Cause enough to fear, O my God, that Thou should Abandon Me too, at
last, as Thou have for saken Them; because, having contracted a deeper Guilt
than They, it is but Reason I should be more severely punished.

To provide against such a mischief in Time; I now beg of Thee, The Spirit of
Repentance; which I beseech Thee to Give and continue to Me, to my last gasp;
whereby, to Expiate my grievous Faults, and to put me again into the Quality of
a True Christian.

For the Spirit of Repentance It is, which is the very Beginning of
Christianity; and most Proper Condition of the New Law; delivering us from the
Sins, and consequently from the sad Effects of the Old; ( which is, according
to the Apostle, the Law of Wrath and Death) and working out of us by degrees,
still more, what yet it finds in us as Relics of the Flests, of Judaism, or of
base Earthliness.

Upon the removing the Book.
UPon this Action, my Consideration is; That The Jews (refusing to Hear and
understand aright the Prophets and Apostles) were at length Neglected; and the
Apostles turned unto the Gentiles, bringing The Gospel and the News of a
Savior to Them; which is now represented, by changing the place of the Book,
from the Right Hand of the Priest, to the Left; denoting that Christ, had now
left the Jews, who before were the people of His RightHand; and that (in their
stead) The Heathens at His Left (that is, abandoned heretofore to the Curse of
God, and not His people) were now made his people, and dearly Beloved; and That
among Us it is that Jesus Christ now keeps Residence and Establishes His Church.

Here is made indeed No intimation at all, that the Gospel was ever Preached to
the Jews, (though to them it was Preached first;) and here is something
betokening; as if Christ had Preached It to the Gentiles (which yet he never
did:) But the Reason of Both is,

First, That That is omitted; because that Preaching of it to the Jews was so
In-effectual and Fruitless, as not considerable; especially in respect what
Glorious Entertainment It had afterward, among the Gentiles, in the full
Explication and vigor of It, as of a New Law.

And Secondly, That This is solely insisted on, Because, though Christ Preached
not Himself in person to the Gentiles, but only by his Apostles and Ministers,
yet was It, in so wonderful Success and Communication of Grace, and
Benediction, and Reformation of Manners (the True Fruits of the Gospel) that
Now only, among these, seems He to have fully Exercised his Office of an
Evangelical Preacher; now only, indeed, to have promulgated the Law of Grace in
the quickening Spirit, as opposed to That of the Jews in the Killing Letter.

DEVOTION.
NEver, O Lord, take away, The Grace thou have Given, from Me, to Confer It on
Another, as, in thy Justice Thou have removed Thy Gospel from the Jew to the
Gentile.

Let Thy Gifts in me be without Repentance, as Thy Scripture speaks.

Make me ever Remember That saying of St. John 3 Apoc. 11
( a Figure of Thy Elect!) Take heed, Hold fast That which Thou have, that no
man take Thy Crown.

Let me not be Tempted to prize my self as more Worthy than such Offenders,
whom thou have not favored, as Thou have done Me; least I come under that
Curse and Malediction wherewith Thy Apostle Threatens the Gentiles, 11 Romans 20,
21, 22.
if they arrogantly insult over the Jews, whom Thou have rejected.

Transplant Me, Out of those Countries of the World, where Thou art not duly
Worshipped, into some Holy Land, Exempt from its Malignity and Corruption;
where I may serve Thee more freely, and more Faithfully.

Make me comprehend the force of those words of the Apostle, Exhorting Us to
follow Thee, On the Right Hand, and on the Left; that at all turns, Of
Adversity and Prosperity, Health and Sickness, Life and Death; I may cleave to
Thee unseparably.

The Gospel.
THe Book being removed to the Left Hand of the Priest, To show (as I have
said) the publication of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, now to those on his
Left Hand, That were his Enemies, the Gentiles; After some preparation, by, 1.
Particular Prayers for Assistance. 2. And Benediction. 3. He Crosses the Book
and Himself. 4. And Names the part he intends to Read.

5. The People stand up, and Answer, Gloria tibi Domine; and in that posture,
(continue during the Reading) 6. Testify, not only their readiness to Hear, but
also to put in Execution, whatever is therein proposed.

7. The Gospel being read, the people give again their Approbation. 8. With
Laus tibi Christ, and the Priest saying. 9. Per Evangelica Dicta, etc. Kisseth
It. All testifying a high respect to the Gospel.

The Book continues in that same place almost to the end of the Mass:
Intimating thereby, the continuation of the Gospel among the Gentiles only, to
almost the end of the World.

DEVOTION.
GIve me the Grace to understand, and take the Words of Thy H. Gospel, as one
of thy Faithful Ones; that is, As a Man ready to do, as It says, and to
practice suitably to what he Professes to Believe.

Make Me Stand always firm, and Erected above All, that (otherwise) might be
Impediments to my Ready Obedience; Hearing thy Voice as a Friend of the
Bridegrooms, and joying in nothing so much, as rightly to Understand Thy Will,
and fully to Accomplish It.

Let My Spirit Kiss Thee, ( as at the End of the Gospel, the Priest does the
Book,) thereby, in all Holy Reverence to Adore Thee, after I have gotten a
glimpse of Thee, by that Light, which thou have Now been pleased to dart into
Me, from Thy Words.

Make me always keep thus, Close unto Thee; and continue in this Union with
Thee, which certainly I Owe unto Thee, as to One that has the Words of Eternal
Life, and Art the very Soul of the Gospel. O, whither should I go from Thee?
Never let any Occurrence in this Life, never any danger that any Enemy of mine
may engage me in, be able to separate Me from my Obedience to Thee.

It is in This preparation of Heart, for whatsoever Thou shall Command Me, (be
the Consequencce what It will,) that I desire to lay the Foundation of all my
Piety and Devotion.

At the Credo.
THe saying of the Creed, is a Protestation of our Faith and Obedience to the
Gospel coming to Us from God through the Lips of the Priest.

DEVOTION.
But let me not Content my Self only with this Inward Preparation of Heart To
Believe, and Serve Thee so; but give me Courage to profess before all the World
the Sincerity of an Unfeigned Faith in Thee, and Constant Love to Thee; by
which, I pretend to Honor and Observe Thee in all things, without ever being
ashamed of the Truths and Maxims of Thy Gospel. Of every one of which; as well
the least as the greatest, let me still have an equal undispensable esteem; and
be ready to maintain all in General; nay, each one in particular, (though with
the certain loss of whatever belongs to me beside; even of my Life it Self, and
Salvation too, if That were possible) in All the Occasions and Encounters that
the Conduct of Thy Providence, for Trial, shall engage Me In.

In special, O my Savior, I Believe that Thou art the Son of the Eternal
Father; That You both, Produce the Holy Spirit from everlasting; and that You,
all Three, Reside after a most signal manner in The Church; which is so the
House of the Faithful, as that out of It, There is no Faith at all to be found;
or, at most none such, as shall any thing avail, toward Salvation.

I am resolved to Believe, as Truth, all that is delivered to Me as from You;
and to confirm and justify my Belief by my Words; and my Words, by good Works
of all sorts; and my Works, by all the Variety of Sufferings, that You shall
think fit to send me.

The Second Dominus Vobiscum.
AFter this Profession of Faith, or (if that be omitted,) immediately after the
Gospel, the Priest, having first Kissed the Altar, turns to the people, to
Bless them in Christ's Name for so Respectful a Reception of the Gospel, and
public profession thereof.

DEVOTION.
HElp me, O Lord, to receive with Pious Affections This Blessing which Thy
Priest now Dispenses, (in turning Himself toward Thy Faithful) as from Thee;
Now, that we have Assented to Try Word, and thereof made a public Profession.

And Bless me thereby more Internally Thy Self, that this Thy Grace may cleave
to, and continue in my Heart, enabling It to Persevere in Thriving and Growing
up thereby to a Holy Life, and constant practice of Obedience to all Thy
Commandments.

The Offering and Offertory.
HEre was brought in (Antienly) Immediately after The Benediction, the peoples
Offerings, as an Effect (as it were) of that Benediction. Then before these
Offerings laid on the Altar, Sung both Priest and People certain Praises to
God, (which, were called the Offertorium, or That, with which They presented
their Offerings,) to terstifie the Sincerity and Joy of Heart wherewith they
brought their Gifts, and appeared before Him.

Anciently (before Things came to be set in better Order by the Church) These
Offerings were Numerous, and had their good Use, and Edification too. For every
particular Christian presented Bread to the Priest, both for Materials to be
Consecrated for the Sacrifice, and withal, for a Token of his Union to the
Body of Christ Jesus, and Communion with the Church; The whole Congregation
uniting it self (by This means) and putting It self (as it were) between the
Hands of the Priest, to be Offerred up with the Body of Christ Consecrated, and
made, in that Bread which they Contributed.

The Priest, indeed, Consecrated not all that was brought, but took only One or
Two, (as occasion was) in the lieu of all; that, so as the many Breads, offered
severally, (by each of the Faithful Ones) represented the diverse Members of the
Church; the Paucity of the Breads chosen out of all for Consecration might
likewise Typifie the Unity of those Members amongst themselves, and with the
One Body of Christ, where all by Participation were United together.

DEVOTION.
I Here Offer up unto Thee, my God, All that I have, oram; in Acknowledgement
and Return, for That Light of Truth, which Thou have imparted to Me by Thy
Gospel at this Time; being convinced, that, in respect of It, All other things
are but as dross, or nothing; and that Thy Merciful Favor and Love, is
incomparably more worth, than this Life it self; Nay, than the Lives of all the
Persons now in the World put together, and Offered up to Thee all in one Great
Sacrifice.

I strip my self of all that can any ways be called mine before Thee, and here
put it into Thy Hands; that there may be nothing about me, to hinder me from
entering into that close and perfect Union, that ought to be between Thee and
me, and Me, and every Member belonging to the Body of Thy Church; being well
assured, that nothing causes a Division between Thee and those Members, or
amongst Our selves between one anoother; nor slackens the Bond of Charity more,
than an Adhaesion to the Things of this World.

The Oblation or Suscipe.
The Priest having received the Offerings, presents them to God, by heaving
them up toward Heaven upon the Paten. For that Bread which He offers up on the
Paten, is instead of all that was brought to Him by the people, either
effectually and really, or Spiritually and Intentionally only; and so
represents the whole people to be Incorporated, and Offered up with the Body of
Jesns Christ, in that Holy Sacrisice.

Hence It is, that the P^iest declares, that He makes this Obiation for, and in
the Name of, All the Faithful, Living and Dead, and particularly for All (
Circumstantibus) there present. For the present, brought their Offerings, not
only for themselves, but for the Dead also, as Owning their Communion with the
Body of Jesus Christ, and with His Church; and this is still the Intention
Comprehensive, and secret meaning of the Charity of every Faithful Christian,
though It be not then Actually in his Mind or Thought

And it is to be Noted, that the Priest professes He makes this Oblation, for
the Numberless Sins, not only of Others, but of His Own, [ Meis] Because the
sins committed every day by the best amongst Us, are in every deed innumerable;
and it is impossible to know their Multitude and variety; our Infirmity and
Concupiscence vitiating those Actions, in some degree, which seem to be most
Holy, to let pass others.

DEVOTION.
I Beseech Thee, that, As the Priest presents to Thee upon the Paten, That
Offering which He is to Consecrate for all the People; so, This Oblation that I
have Now made of all that I have, and am, may likewise be received and accepted
by our Lord Jesus Christ, as tendered together with It: That the same Priest
may Offer, and Consecrate it also to Thee for Me, that so it may please Thy
Divine Majesty; who have set such Order to things, as not to receive any thing
from us, but by Him.

And may this Oblation dispose Me, by little and little to Immolate and
Sacrifice my self wholly to Thy Glory, in what manner It shall best please Thee
to require It.

That it may conduce toward the Expiation of All my Sins, known and unknown;
and what other Obliquities are hourly occasioned by my frail and Infirm Nature.

And, since I cannot be totally exempt from These, unless by death, which is
the only sure-End of all Offending; Grant, that (to Cancel their account as
fast as It grows upon me) I may offer up, and Consecrate to Thee, sincerely All
the short Remainder of this Life; and then pass so much the more Joyfully into
the next, as where I shall be secured from discontenting Thee any longer.

Of the Mixture of Water and Wine.
THis puts me in mind of the Union of the Divinty and Humanity in the Person of
Jesus Christ; and then of the Unity of all the Faithful (well denoted by Water,
a Symbol of Weakness) which Jesus Christ (well typify'd by Wine, an Emblem of
strength.)

And as the Priest Offered up The Bread before, so now he makes 1. Oblation of
the Wine and Water; and in Them again of the People, to God.

The Suscipiamur.

2. And lastly, Oblation Generalis ^
He makes the First General Oblation of All, Bread, Wine, Himself and People
altogether, jointly, with Humility and Contrition, into the Hands of God, and
thereby Sanctifies and Prepares the whole matter of this Sacrifice.

DEVOTION.
O Strengthen my Weakness (represented by this Water) with a new Force and
Virtue of Thy Spirit, which is the Must or New Wine of the Law of Grace. Make
me depend on Nothing, nor cleave to any Thing but Thee; since Thou alone art
the Power of God, and Vigorous Life of the Soul; in whose Absence, the
strongest Activity in Man, is but miserable Infirmity.

And, as now, The Priest presents to Thee the Chalice, thereby to Sanctify It
before He proceed to Its Consecration; so help Me, O Lord, to Offer up my Self
to Thee, Fortified and Heightened by Thy Blessing and Grace; by which I may be
Encouraged and Enflamed, and so make my self every time more and more capable
to be Offered up in Sacrifice to Thee, and even to Die for Thee. Which is
really the Greatest Favor that thou can do any Mau, during His Abode here.

Washing of the Priest's Hands.
THis means Repentance for the daily Pollutions we incurr by our Frailty; For
there is no approaching This Holy Sacrifice, without renouncing and quitting as
much as is possible, such Impurities by a sincere Grief for, and loathing of
them; though but Sins of Infirmity.

Hence It is that the Priest Washes only the Tops of his Fingers: To signify,
that when one comes to Offer this Sacrifice; it is no time then to set about
Repentance for Mortal Sins (such, one should have been freed and purged from,
before;) but all that is to be done, is only to Wash off (yet by unfeigned
Grief and true Compunction) those lesser Impurities and Defilements, which in
the course of this Life, and by Conversation with things of this World, we
cannot avoid, but that they will be sticking, at least to the Outward parts,
(as it were) of our Souls; and to the Works of our Hands. But those that
willingly neglect to Purify themselves from these, though never so small
Imperfections, are unworthy of this Sacrament, says St. Denis; as, on the
contrary, The greatest Sins and Abominations that be, cannot render those
unworthy of approaching to It, who have dis-engag'd their Wills from them, and
truly detest them in their Hearts.

DEVOTION.
SVffer not, O my God, the Pollutions of this World, so to Defile My Hands, (
that is, My Actions) as that they should contract any store of Filth from It;
but (since it is impossible to Converse here, in this Earthly Habitation,
cleanly, without All Sullying;) Grant, that, at most, The Spots, may but arrive
to the outmost and lesser parts of Them, as It were to the very Tops of the
Fingers only. (A Petition suggested to me, by the Priests Washing His.)

First, Possess my Heart, entirely, and at all times; and then let my Actions
regard Thee too, as their Principal Object; and if secondarily in their
Outsides, and parts farthest off, They touch the fouling Earth; Let me never
cease Washing them with Tears of True Repentance, and in the Water and Grace of
Thy Holy Spirit, till They be again Purified.

Especially, as often as I come before Thee, to partake of the Communion of Thy
Blessed Body, and to assist at That most Holy Sacrifice, to which it would
become Us to approach, in the greatest Purity, Man in this Life can be capable
of. Because It is a darker Vision of God; and some Representation of our
Employment in Heaven, whither no Unclean Thing can Enter.

Upon the Suscipe Sancta Trinitas, The Kissing the Alar, and Orate Fratres, and
the Secreta.
Suscipe Sancta Trinitas.
THe Priest having put himself into This Purity of Body and Mind, with most
profound Humility makes a Second General Oblation of all. Oblation Generalis 2
1. Directing it to the proper Object of Worship, The Holy and Blessed Trinity;
And 2. Applying it to the right End. Of Commemoration of the Passion,
Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ, Of Honor to all the Glorified
Saints; in the Church Triumphant, and of Salvation to all yet in the Militant,
by their Intercession implored. 3. Kisses the Altar.

Orate Fratres.
THe Priest having already implored the Intercession of the Glorious Saints
above, for the things specified, and particularly for that Acceptance of This
Oblation and Sacrifice; Now turns himself to the People desiring them to Join
their Prayers to the same End.

DEVOTION.
DErive into me, O Lord, That Grace which the Priest Receives, upon the Kissing
of the Altar that stands in stead of Thee; that assisted by It, I may bear a
part in That Common Prayer, which He now Exhorts all the Faithful to join in
with Him; To Supplicate Thee, favorably to Receive The Sacrifice He is here
going to Offer unto Thee, in the Behalf of the whole Church.

And do it the rather, for the Honor of those Great Mysteries, and Those Holy
Saints, which he has just now made particular Commemoration of; on purpose to
teach us, the Value of this Extraordinary Act of Grace, by the Greatness of the
Means employed to obtain It.

Agitate now, in the Strictest Closet of my Soul, by the means of this other
Prayer, which the Church calls Secret; and produce therein the proper Effects
of those good Thoughts, which Thou have been pleased to form in Me, to Prepare
me the better for this Sacrifice.

The Preface.
SO called; because it is the Entry to the Canon of the Mass, and the last
Immediate Preparation-general to the Sacrifice.

For, here, the Priest endeavors to prepare the People, by putting them in
mind, 1. Of raising up their Heart in Devotion to God, and taking It off from
all Thoughts or Inclinations to any thing here below. That they begin this
Sacrifice of Offering up Christ to His Father, by first Offering up their own
Hearts, which must be still the Anti-Sacrifice to all others, or else they will
be of no profit.

2. And when the People Answer, that They have their Hearts so Elevated and
disposed, and set upon God, as he desires them to have. 3. The Priest rests not
therewith Content, unless They make present Reflection upon This, and Consider
that it is not They themselves, but God that has raised their Hearts, and
drawn them toward Himself; and therefore that they ought Instantly to make
their Acknowledgement thereof by public Thanks, before they go any further. 4.
Gratias Agamus, etc.

5. To which they Reply, that this is very fitting and just; and so they
proceed to do it by the Priest, in public and in private by their own
particular Resentments; moving their Hearts according to the Words which they
hear from him. For so now he begins here, in a Louder Tone. 6. To acknowledge
the Mercies and Blessings, that God showers down on Men, at all Times and in
all places; and in particular, those which at that very occasion, the Churches
Order recommends to be Commemorated.

7. But then She, by great Modesty, Conscious to her self how mean a Thing Her
Lauds and Praises are, to be tendered to Gods Supreme Majesty, she makes haste
to join her Self in this Action to her Lord and Spouse Jesus Christ, and by Him
to present her Praises, and Thanks to the Father; Offering up withal (jointly)
those Infinite and Eternal Benedictions, that he uses to give him.

8. And not t^ omit any Hymns of this Nature, she endeavors to make one too,
in the Consort of Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims, that Magnify, Adore and
tremblingly Reverence (through Jesus Christ) The Majesty of God.

Hence It is, that she joins her self to Them under Him, as under the common
Patron of Men and Angels; That so, All together by their chief Head, may
Worship and Glorisie the Deity. And therefore now uses she here, upon Earth;
That very Ditty, which the Scripture has revealed to be used by the Angels in
Heaven, in their Honoring of God; Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus.

9. And to It adjoyns another, Triumphantly Sung by Men of Jerusalem to Jesus
Christ, Benedictus qui venit, etc. Testifying hereby, the Unity of Spirit
moving Angels and Men to Praise the Divine Majesty, for the Approach and Coming
of his Son.

DEVOTION.
Raise up my Spirit, at this Instant, Great God, far above all the things of
this World; to fasten It upon, and make It Conceive, both the Variety and
Greatness of Thy Blessings; especially those conferred upon us, by Thy Son
Jesus Christ his Assuming and Uniting our Nature into Himself.

I must needs acknowledge that my single Abilities are much too Weak to perform
this as I ought, and therefore cannot Thank and Praise Thee as I should:
Vouchsafe to permit and help Me to join the very best I have, to those of the
Choire of Angels above; borrowing from, and using with them, those Transcendent
Acclamations wherewith they Adore Thee to all Eternity; that so I may begin to
Honor Thee here on Earth, as they do in Heaven; and imping my Wings with
Theirs, mount not according to My feebleness but Their force.

Enrich me also, with a Part of the Innocence, and (almost Angelical) Purity of
those Souls, who Sung to Thee, that Triumphant Jubilee at thy Entrance into
this lower Jerusalem; that so the Song, that I would now take Thee with, might
be more perfectly, made up of all its parts; especially that Canterelle of
Angels, and This Base of Men.

Why not prepare my Self, in this Solemn manner? To, (certainly) the greatest
Action upon Earth, The Sacrificing of Thy Son: By, (as much as I can procure)
The Holiest Hosanna 's and highest Ravishments of Spirit that Mortality can
bear up with.

In this Elevation and Ecstasy, (such as it is) Thee I adore My Savior Jesus
Christ, sitting at the Right Hand of Thy Father. To Thee, as High Priest, and
prime Sacrificer, I join, this Wretch, my Self (though Infinite, Infinitely
unworthy, to be, not only in thy Company, but here, among the Angels and
Blessed Saints now Assembled at this Sacrifice of a God. O amaze me, with that
Confusion, that belongs to me, for not being, such as I ought, at this
Solemnity!)

For the Entrance into the Canon.
The Canon.
NExt succeeds the Canon of the Mass, so termed because it is the Rule, and
Constant Order which the Church observes in the Celebration of this Sacrifice;
This is alone never to be altered, as the other parts of the Mass are, which
use to be varied according to the diversity of several Mysteries, and the
Feasts by which they are Celebrated: But this being the chief part, becomes, as
the Sacrifice it self, Immutable.

Te igitur, etc.
ANd it is considerable, That it begins with an Address to the Father,
presenting to Him the Sacrifice, as being the Prime Principle and Beginning not
only of all Creatures, but also of the Divine Persons in the Holy Trinity.

We Offer up this Sacrifice to Him, by, and through Jesus Christ, His Son our
Lord.

That is, By Jesus Christ, as our Only Mediator, taking part of the Father, in
being His Son, and so God, from all Eternity; and taking part with Us in being
made Man, by his Humanity; wherein, He has received the Power and Dominion
over Heaven, and Earth; and always Offers up A Sacrifice to His Father, as the
only High Priest, to whom all other Priests here in the Church are but
subservient Officers and Ministers, Offering up the same with Him.

For, That which the Son of God in Heaven, and This which the Priest here
below, Offers, however it differ in the manner, is in Reality and Substance but
One and the same Sacrifice. And it is Offered here principally for the Whole
Catholic Church, in whose Name, the Priest presents himself, before God, to do
Homage. For though this here, and that Sacrifice there (as it is said) differ
not in the Substance of the Thing, yet in the manner of Offering, it does; and
accordingly this is offered, but for the Church Only, and all the Faithful
within its Communion, though the other of which (This, yet, is Commemorative,)
be for the whole World, as the Scripture testifies.

DEVOTION.
O God the Father!

1. I Here Worship, and pay Homage to Thee, as to the prime Principle of all
Things, both in Earth and Heaven too; of all Sanctity in Men and Angels, of all
the Persons in the Godhead, of the whole Trinity, and of all the Deity it self
also; as far as Thy Church, taught by Thee, can, and does (though but
Lispingly) speak it.

It is to Thee. (I acknowledge) in this quality of prime Principle that this
Sacrifice is due; and so to Thee is It Now Offered by Thy Church, and by Thine
own Son, who is prime Priest, as Thou art the prime Principle.

2. I Worship Thee also, as the chiefest and last End of all Creatures,
recurring and Ebbing into Thee, as They flowed from Thee.

3. Vouchsafe me the Grace to Reflect upon Thee always after this manner; as
well by the Motions of my Will too, as I do still by the Tendencies of my
Nature, which rests, only and un-interruptedly, upon Thee, as Its Author and
support.

4. Let me account it a Happiness, that I can Perish for Thee, and not Be; as
well as I have received from Thee, to be: And that in some forward Disposition
to This, I may now present my self to Thee at this Sacrifice of Thy Son, To be
Offered up with Him, and to die every day Thus beforehand, to make my self
readier to be Sacrificed to Thee, Once, really, and indeed; To yield up this
Life, for Thee, (which Thou have given me) in any such Occurrences, as it shall
please Thee to fit for Me, and Me for it.

5. Lastly, I Worship Thee in the Foresight of that Last Sacrifice, which, at
the End of the World, Thy Son shall make to Thee of all other Creatures, before
He Offer up his Elect to Thee, (as a Sacrifice too, but) after a far more
Admirable manner. For He shall first Consume by Fire all visible Things; to
make men see, by the Light thereof; That Thou alone art a fit Object for their
Love, as Thou alone art He, that have a Being, firm, and Incorruptible.

The first Memento.
COnsequently the Priest descends to some Particulars in the Church, yet
living, Commemorating, First Those for whom especially he Intends the Offering
of this Sacrifice; And being thus United to the Living here, in Charity in,
Honor and Reverence (growing too from the same Charity) he next aspires to
join with the principal Saints Living in Paradise, as the Glorious and Blessed
Virgin, The Apostles, and chief Prelates of the Sea Apostolic together with
other Great Saints in several Conditions: Imploring Gods protection to be
granted through their Prayers: Thereby, in this Mystical Bond of Mutual Love
testifying the Communion and inseparable Conjunction of the Church-Militant and
Triumphant.

DEVOTION.
I Offer unto Thee, O my Lord, Thy whole Church all Thy Chosen, and especially
Those, whom thou (in a manner) have given me; uniting them to Me by a
particular tie, that in This little number I may represent to my self Those few
which Thy Father has Chosen out of all the World, and Given to Thee, from all
Eternity; that I may Love Them, and Serve Them, as Thou do uncessantly Love,
and Assist all Thine.

Have in mind, O Lord, Them and Me, by the Intercession of All Thy Saints; and
particularly of the Blessed Virgin; of the Apostles and Bishops of the
Apostolic See; who are now made by Thee the chief in Heaven, as They were
First the Chief in Thy Church, here on Earth.

I desire to make one among These, in the Offering up my Self together with
them, This Sacrifice.

Upon the Priest's holding over his Hands, and saying, Hanc Oblationem.
Hanc igitur Oblationem.
AFter all, the Priest makes the Third General Oblation of the whole matter of
the Sacrifice, Oblatio Generalis 3
putting his Hands over both the Host and Chalice together.

By this putting His Hands over them, He joins Himself and the whole
Congregation, and Church to this matter of the Sacrifice, protesting then to
God, That He Offers and Sacrifices all this to him; and substitutes in the
place, this to be Sacrificed for Himself, and Them, since it is not permitted
that they should Sacrifice so as to destroy themselves.

Such a thing, just did God Ordain in the Old Testament, where he commanded the
Jews to lay their Hands upon the Head of the Sacrifice, which they Offered to
Him; to show that they were One with It, and that in their stead it was
Sacrificed.

DEVOTION.
STretch forth Thy Divine Power Over me, as now the Priest Extends his Hands
over That Bread and Wine which He is about to Consecrate; that I also, with
those Elements may in some sense be Converted into the Body and Blood of Thy
Son, and consequently in Him be Offered up as an Acceptable Sacrifice and
Holocaust, which thou can not Despise.

The Consecration and Elevation.
THis Protestation made, the Priest proceeds to the Prayer of Consecration,
including a Commemoration of what Jesus Christ, did, and said when He
Instituted This Holy Mystery; and Imitating Him, Blesses and Consecrates the
Bread and Wine in the same manner, and with the same Words as He used.

And immediately after Consecration, and profound Adoration of Each, (to give
Example to the People in all Piety,) He Elevates each aloft; both to show that
He Offers them up to God the Father, above in Heaven; and also to make the
People more Visibly behold Jesus Christ, and so to bow down and Worship Him.

DEVOTION.
BRing now fresh into my Memory, and fill my Fancy with all that Thou did for
Us, that Night before Thy Death; when Thou Institutedst the Blessed Sacrament
of thy Body and Blood, as the last, and most incomparable Pledge of Thy Love to
Us, and a Memorandum indelible of our Obligation to Thee.

Assist Me with Thy Grace, O my Savior, and I will Imitate Thee, and give my
self to Thee, (even as thou gave Thy Self to Me) without any reserve.

Change my Heart, as Thou Changest This Bread!

Create a new Heart in Me, by this new Body!

Transubstantiate in Me, that seeming Life and Strength, (which yet is (indeed)
but a dying feebleness,) into a True and Divine Spirit; as Thou changest the
Wine, which is but the Blood of the Grape, a Terrestrial juice, into the Vigor
and Blood of God.

Grant that this present Elevation of Thy Body and Blood in mine Eye, may
produce another like It in my Heart and Spirit; as to Crucify my Flesh, (that
is) my Passions, and to deliver me from all Affections to this World; so also
to inflame me with a desire of that Life above, and always to keep my
Conversation in Heaven, with Saints, with Angels; and with thine Own Dear Self,
sweet Jesu.

I Adore Thee, O my Savior in all Thy Elevations. Thy Elevation on the Cross,
the Day of Thy Passion, Thy Elevation in the Air, at the great Day of the Last
Judgment; Thy Elevation to the Right Hand of Thy Father, in that never-ending
Day of Eternity!

Immediately upon the Priest's reposing the Body and Blood upon the Altar.
DEVOTION.
SAnctify me here now by Thy Presence, Renew me again by Thy Nativity, Purify
me, by the Memory of Thy Passion, by which Thou have Obliterated in Thy Self
the Memory of those Sins, which lay so heavy upon Thee, to the very last Gasp
of Thy Life here.

Vnde and Memores Domine, etc.
THen immediately to express that by Words, which he (just now did in Action,)
the Priest makes a Solemn and more distinct Oblation to God the Father, Avowing
that He Offers this (now Holy, Pure, and Immaculate Sacrifice; as for the whole
Church, so in the Person of Jesus Christ, whose room he supplied in the Mystery
of the Consecration.

And he says he does it in the Honorable Memory of the three great Mysteries
of the Son of God, His Passion, Resurrection and Ascension. In the word
Passion, including whatsoever the Son of God Suffered for Us, from the first
Moment of his Conception to the very last of his Death: All which space, was
one continual Suffering for the Redemption of the World.

By these Three, methinks, the Church in this Sacrament, (which she calls
Mysterium Fidei) would represent unto our Thoughts the very principal and most
necessary Objects of our Faith, without which we cannot be saved: Which are (in
St. Augustin's Judgment,) the Passion and Resurrection (of which the Ascension
is the accomplishment) of Jesus Christ.

And for this very Reason (perhaps) is the number of Three so often observed in
the Benedictions, Crosses and Oraisons; to intimate to Us; the Holy Trinity,
the Capital Object of our Faith, and withal this Blessed Sacrament, which is
Offered up to all Three Persons therein, though attributed more particularly to
the Father.

This may here be Noted by way; that the Crosses made by the Priest on the
Host after Consecration, are not (as others) Benedictions, but only marks of
Crucifying of the Host, intimating the particular manner of its Immolation.

DEVOTION.
BLess me, O my God, by frequent Impressions made upon my Soul, of Thy Death
and Passion; as the Priest makes Tokens thereof, by so often Signing the Cross,
upon Thy Body and Blood, after he has Offered them up unto Thy Father.

Multiply upon Me, Thy Graces in abundance; Now that thou have vouchsafed to
Consecrate and make Me Thy Son by Baptism, and to Feed me in the Fucharist with
thine own Substance, the same with That of the Son of God; That my Whole Life
may be suitable to so Divine a Birth and Aliment.

Accord me the Grace, I Pray Thee, that in all Occurences of This Life, Good or
Bad, I may still draw Comfort from Thy Cross to support me; that I may Ever and
anon, renew in my mind the Memory thereof so effectually, as thereby to sweeten
to my self, my Sufferings, and to learn Moderation in Happier Success; and
throughout the whole course of my Time, to find still, in That History,
seasonable Applications to all my Necessities.

At the Supra Quae.
NExt He Prays God Graciously to accept from Us, This Sacrifice, remembering how
well he was pleased with That of Abel, that of Abraham, and that of
Melchizedech; that so, having so kindly taken from those Holy Men (the most
Famous Sacrificers in all Antiquities,) such remarkable Types and Figures of
This; he would not less favorably receive from Us The Substance it Self; but
endue us with some of that Grace and Purity, wherewith They accompanied the
Offering up of what was indeed but the shadow of This.

DEVOTION.
I Beseech Thee, O my God, That as This Sacrifice is altogether Spiritual and
Divine; having nothing in It of Sensible or Earthly, but only the Outward
Appearance, and Shell as it were; so I may Offer it up to Thee, together with
the Priest, by a Motive and Inspiration wholly Spiritual and Divine; in such
manner, as That, the very External Actions themselves flowing from; and
governed by it, may have Nothing of Flesh or Corporealness in them, except the
bare Appearance, and Outside only: And that all the Works and Services which I
pay to Thee, during my whole Life, may be One Continual Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, Internal and from the Heart: That being (according to the
Scriptures) the Chief Sacrifice that thou likest and Call for.

Thus let me Imitate the Devotion of those Holy Patriarchs, Abel, Melchizedech,
and Abraham; who Sacrificed to Thee after the same manner long before the
Evangelical Law of Grace by Voluntary Affection, and not by Command, in the
Spirit, not Letter; and became thereby the most Notable Figures, of the
Sacrificing that Thou performd'st afterward, more perfectly, to Thy Father; and
that all Thy Faithful are obliged to perform, together with Thee, all their
Life long.

Let me not Rest in, or Content my self with, the bare Outward Actions and
Ceremonies how Solemn and Pompous, and truly Great soever they are themselves;
but Worship Thee, chiefly by a Movement that comes into my Heart (like that
Fire of Old) from Thee thy self, in that Spirit; and in That Truth, which alone
Soveraignly Ingratiate to Thee whatever is Offered; Even this very Oblation of
Thy Self.

Supplices te Rogamus.
HE proceeds higher, and Prays that this Sacrifice, may now be Offered, rather
upon that High-Altar of Gods in Heaven by his most Holy Angel. For touched with
a Consciousness of his own great unfitness to Offer a Sacrifice so
transcendently Holy, he falls back, to Re-substitute Jesus Christ in his own
room, that He, himself (who is The Angel of the Great Council,) would Offer It
up to the Divine Majesty.

By this employing, that as Jesus Christ is the only High Priest for this
Sacrifice, so He alone is fit to be the Presenter of It to His Father, and to
hear the Name of Angel, (however it be in some sense Communicated to other
Priests also,) and that no man is worthy to be, in this; no, not so much as His
Deputy.

DEVOTION.
YEt, (after all) it is not Me, O my God, it is not Me, nor any one else here
Offering Sacrifice to Thee, that I desire Thee to Regard in this Action; Regard
Jesus Christ; who is That Angel, That Mediator between God and Men, That
Sacrificer for the whole Church, Regard Him.

Be He the Person, that now Presents to Thee this most Holy Host; and be We
merely and barely His Instruments; not stirring in this Heavenly Operation, in
the least guise as we are Animated, and Moved by His Spirit.

And whatsoever we have about us, Impure and Unclean, let It all sall off, aad
be quite removed from us by the Cleansing power of Thy Grace! That, As, in very
deed, It is not We that Live, but He that Lives in Us; so It may truly be said,
It is not We now that Offer up to Thee this Sacrifice, but It is He that Offers
it in Us; as who alone has the Faculty and Power to do It.

But keep Us, (all the while This is doing) in a Trembling Posture, looking at
this Sacrifice and Mystery, as that which the Church has thought and styled
Terrible; that, all our Confidence in a Business of this High Nature (so
infinitely beyond the Port of our low and despicable Condition) may be raised,
and support It self solely upon Jesus Christ; and we be no more than the
visible Hands of that other Invi^sible one, by which he presents It to Thee
above, upon that Caelestial Altar.

The Second Memento.
THis Sacrifice now fully perfected, He designs it, First for the Dead;
Offering It up for Them in a particular Commemoration; (following here in the
custom, ever practiced in the Church. 2. And then for the Living; and more
earnestly and (intimated by a Thump on the Breast, and a more Audible Tone) for
such as are Present; that we may all be joined to the Society of Those in
Glory; not for our Merits; but for those of Jesus Christ; since we have none of
our own, but what He pleases to Impart to Us, and account Ours.

DEVOTION.
DO not forget, O Lord, Those Souls whom, (though gone out of this World;) Thou
have yet a Favor for; because they are better disposed for the receiving the
Effects of Thy Mercy, in That Condition, than those, who are still joined to
this Body of Clay.

Haste, so much the more to help Them, as They do more Humbly, and more
Patiently wait for Thy help; desiring no other Happiness than to fulfill thy
Will, and good Pleasure; and therefore, finding (so far as That is done upon
them) even in Purgatory, and in the midst of extreme pains (which they suffer)
a kind of Paradise.

I would, I had as much Purity as They; to be the more capable of Interceding
for Them! But since I come far short of That; I interpose, and present Thee
with that of those Saints, who now reign with Thee, (which is the best that can
be found among Creatures,) but especially with that of the King of Saints Thy
Son; from whom, as from the Fountain and Head flow all those Graces and Merits
which Thou have Communicated to Thy Servants; and to whom, thou can not deny
the farther Perfecting, and Final Accomplishment of Thine Elect; since Thou
have already begun to work Righteousness and Holiness in Them.

Add then, and Finish the Rest of what is to be done in Them; and Unite both
the Living and the Dead to Thy Son; as to the proper Head of Their Body, and
only Source of their Virtue and Victory; that, together with Him, they may Sing
to Thee Triumphant Lauds to all Eternity, after they have Labored, and
Suffered, as He, and in Him, to Thy Glory, in this World.

At the Nobis quoque Peccatoribus.
DEVOTION.
O That these Words, now spoken out, by the Priest, might Humble me
Effectually, to make me Cry to Thee for Mercy; for my self and all Thy
Faithful upon Earth; who all, with me now, appear before Thee, but as One and
the same sinner, and one and the same Penitent.

Work in me the Flexibleness, and Humble dejection of that Publican, whom Thou
have Justified, in the Temple and under the Law; that smiting my Breast, like
Him, I may obtain the same Grace, which Thou accorded'st to Him, at the same
time that Thou did blast the Pride of the Pharisee.

Per quem Haec Omnia, etc.
ANd from this Acknowledgment of our own Worthlessness, the Priest goes on, to
another much Greater; Confessing to God the Father, that also This Sacrifice
(now upon the Altar,) and all its worth and Virtue, or what ever else contained
in it, comes only from Him by Jesus Christ, by whom He Creates It, to be a
Source of Sanctity and Life, and all Blessings; and so Gives It to Us.

Not, but that Jesus Christ was all this before; But because by the same Act by
which He produces Him in this Sacrament, He likewise Communicates to Him all
those Graces and Virtues which he has; as, by that Act by which He begot Him
from all Eternity, He also endowed Him with all those Excellencies and
Perfections proper to the Son of God; and so, is the production of this
Sacrament, a lively Image of that Eternal Generation.

Nor is this yet all, that is acknowledged; but farther, That the same God the
Father thus producing and qualifying this Sacrament, also Gives it to Us,
(Praestas Nobis) and by it derives into Us a Participation of all the
Excellencies it contains; so that this Sacrament, becomes not only an Image of
that Eternal Generation of Jesus Christ before all time, but also of that
Incarnation of Him, by which, in time, the Father gives Him to Us, and with Him
all His Perfections by a New Production; as in many Places Holy Scripture
testifies.

DEVOTION.
THee, O God the Father, Thee I Adore, as the Prime and Original Author of this
Sacrifice, and wonderful Mystery.

The Holy Ghost makes It by the Priest; Jesus Christ makes It by the Holy
Ghost, but Thou make It by Jesus Christ; and it is from Thee, as from its
Fountain, that all the Graces, all the Perfections, all the Great things
contained in this Sacrament are derived; and It again becomes another Fountain
of them to Us.

I Admire and Celebrate, from the bottom of my Heart this Miracle; and more yet
that Bounty, which (after it has wrought it) so Applies it to Men; thereby to
Feed them; thereby to Save them; just as, (for Thy Works have no Parallels, but
Thy works,) just as, Thou gave Thy only Son to Men by another Miracle of
Incarnation in the fullness of time after Thou had first begotten Him in Thy
bosom before all Time, by (which transcends all Miracles) an Eternal Generation.

O let this account of Thy goodness debase and cast me down as low, as does
mine own Illness; since, in the midst of all these Fountains and Sluices of
Graces, so super-abundantly deluging from forth this Mystery; wretched I, shall
still remain, parched, and barren, and dry, and Withered I, unless thou stream
into me from thence, (and that uncessantly) another new Grace, by which I may
suck in the Benefit of all the rest.

Per Ipsum, and cum Ipso, and in Ipso, etc.
NExt to these Two Acknowledgements; the Priest here makes a Third; That That
Honor and Glory that arises to God the Father from this His Infinite Bounty,
comes not to Him, but By, and With, and In Jesus Christ.

By Jesus Christ, as through the Hands of a Mediator, for God receives nothing
from Us immediately, nor we from Him; but Jesus Christ standing in the middle
between, Hands all things from the Father to Us, and so back again from Us to
the Father.

With Jesus Christ, Because the Son being in all things equal to the Father,
receives too equally with Him, the Glory that men render unto Him, and all in
the Union of the Holy Spirit.

In Jesus Christ, Because He is the Vine, and all men but the Branches in Him,
and only by being in Him can they bear any Fruit to His Father, the Husbandman.

DEVOTION.
EStrange me, O my God, from from all Humane Inventions, and ways of
Worshipping Thee, of what sort soever, though never so specious and Holy in
Appearance!

In things of Thy Service, let me never be Acted by my own private Spring; by
my own proper Spirit; nor upon any Motive, tending to give my self
Satisfaction: That I may do nothing, but at the Call, and in submission to the
Conduct, and by the Spirit of Thy Son; since Thou Receivest not any thing from
Us, but what we Offer unto Thee by Him, as being the Mediator; nay, as being
the First Mover and Author of all the Good we do; nor received'st it so,
neither, but in the same Act by which He receives It, together with Him,
because both are one and the same Nature, One and the same God; and therefore
are both equally concerned, and Honored by the Homages we pay.

Lastly, Thou receivedest nothing but in Him also; (that is,) but from Those,
who are so in Him, as that He, and They are but One; living in the Unity of His
Body consisting of such Members, and Co-integrated with Him, (in a True, though
not Ordinary sense) In one person.

May I never be persuaded to acknowledge any other manner of Honoring and
Serving Thee, or of Performing Acts and Exercises of Holy Religion to Thee, but
This, wherein are comprised, and to which tend, all that be good and True, so
that (in Effect) The Eucharist, and Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Thy Son,
may be to Me not only a Lively Representation and Continual Memorial of His
Passion; but also a complete and moving Model of all the Actions and good Works
that belong to a Christian Life.

O, Holy Body of my Savior! Let Virtue Issue out from Thee to Bless me; Now
that the Priest Lifts Thee, and the Chalice a little up from the Altar into the
Air, and presently re-placeth you there again. It is, even so O Lord, that thou
usest to give Us sudden and short Glympses of Thy Self, in this Life, by
certain quick Gleams of Light, which dure not like those Thou displayest in
Heaven, permanently, and Eternally! But it is enough to make me Thine for ever;
that but once, thou vouchsafe to pass before the Eyes of my Soul, though but
like a flash of Lightning, as heretofore thou did to Elias.

Humble my Soul lowly with the Priest, still as He bows so often before thee at
Thine Altar, and Adores Thee in Silence. Let the Eyes thereof show their Modest
Submission, in Closing themselves to All the Objects of this World, and They
shall quickly discern Thee upon the Altar of my Heart within, when I am Thus
become Thy True Temple.

At the Pater Noster.
NOw these acknowledgements (or Acts of Faith) being thus Solemnly made; that
whatsoever Good we receive from, or whatsoever Service or Worship, or Glory we
thereupon pay to God, do all pass through Jesus Christ; the Priest proceeds to
desire that this devout Spiritual Commerce between Heaven and Us may be put in
Execution; and he begs It, not only in the Name of Jesus Christ, joining
himself to Him, as a Brother, imploring one common Father; but in Those very
words which Jesus Christ taught Us to say; Testifying thereby, that, not only
the External Vocal Prayer (which he recites) is His; but the Internal, Mental
one too; and that It is He, and His Spirit that Prays in Us, and makes Us
Pray, and say so.

But because, in the very first words of this Lords Prayer, we are to call God
Our Father; The Priest reflecting upon the greatness of the Honor we receive
by being permitted the Use of That Title; because of Gods Infinite Eminency and
Grandeur above Us, vile and abject Creatures, Infinite unworthy to take such a
Term into our Mouths, He excuses this Presumption in Himself, and Us;
declaring, that if we dare to call God Our Father, It is, not only by the
command of Jesus Christ; but also by the very Express form of words so drawn by
Himself, for Us to do It by; which we much less dare to alter, or omit.

Wherefore he proceeds to say it; as with some Considence (shown by a louder
Tone) so, with Earnest and flagrant Desire, that what is contained in this
Prayer, may be accomplished, and stand Ratified for ever; To which Vote the
People give their most Hearty Assent, by their subjoyning the last Clause (as
it were Subscribing and Sealing it with) Et Libera nos a Malo.

And thus is the Canon of the Mass closed with the same Joint desire of Priest,
and People; and with the same Elevation of Hearts, and Aspiration toward God,
as its Preface began with.

DEVOTION.
It Is most properly Now, (Certainly) Now at the Holy Mass, that Thou Obligest Us
to believe Thee to be Our Father; Now that Thou here dispencest to Us Thy
Childrens Bread, ^^eding Us, with the Body and Blood of thine only Son, with
His very Substance, Humane and Divine, to make Us Gods too, and Children of the
most High.

This Largess and Honor is so Great, that, though our Faith permits not to
doubt of It, yet an Humble Estimate of our selves and true Acknowledgement of
our great vility and unworthiness makes it (almost) incredible; at least
suffers us not to receive any assurance thereof, but in the single and bare
contemplation of thy Mercy only.

Imprint, (we beseech thee,) This Resentment so deep in our Souls, that we (
growing as little in our own esteem, as we are designed to be Great in Thine)
may, therefore be made the more certain of this Great Favor, and
Incomprehensible Dignity; and by this means be in a better disposition and
preparation to receive the precious Earnest thereof, in the Communion of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which is but the Typical Pledge of that Other
Infinitely Higher and more August, which thou reserv'st for us in Heaven.

Only, take such Care of Us, in the mean time, that we no way degenerate from
this Divine quality of being Children of Thine; nor render Our Selves unworthy
of having Thee for Our Father, by some Ungracious deed, that may argue Us to
Be, no less than thy professed Enemies.

O, (if the frailty of this Present Life, is not Compatible with an absolute
Freedom from all sorts of Faults, as (we are sure) the Felilicities of the Next
will be; yet) Guard Us, at least, that we incur none but such, as are
altogether Inseparable from this Frailty; and so ruin not that Dignity, which
Thou have given us, of being Thy Children, for all This: Only take we good heed
still, of Explating them again, as soon as ever committed; and of Procuring
from Thee our Own Pardon, by Pardoning in like manner, freely and from the
Heart, whosoever have Offended Us; since this is that most Equitable Condition,
which thou have so wisely cautioned in this Admirable Prayer, and wilt surely
Observe, so as not to Pardon the Trespasses, against Thee Our Father; unless we
first forgive those that our Brethren commit against Us.

I cannot say, that I would desire such Exact Purity, or so Perfect an
Absolution from all my Sins, for any other reason, but that I may be so able
more Holily to Serve and Glorify Thee; having no desire of any one thing in
this World so much, as to see Thy Name Hallowed, Thy Kingdom come and
Established in the total Ruin of Thine Enemies; Thy Will be done in the utmost
Latitude, as well by good Men as Bad, These fulfulling It, though against their
Own Will, but those in perfect Love, and True Obedience.

Libera Nos quaesumus Domine, and Da Propitius Pacem.
THe Canon ended; the Priest now begins to prepare Himself to the Participation
and Communion of this Sacrifice. Which he does First, by Imploring Peace from
God. 2. And then wishing and deriving It to the People; (still showing that he
can impart to them, nothing of Himself, but must first receive it Himself from
God.)

Now Peace is the chiefest and prime qualification or disposition toward the
Receiving of this Sacrament, which is a Sacrament of Union and Love: And
therefore, as this Sacrament is the most Powerful means to work it in them, who
partake thereof Worthily; so does It prae-require It in Them (as far as they by
other means can procure It) that they may Worthily partake thereof by express
Precept of the Son of God so often repeated; and especially in that famous Text
which Commands us to go, 5 Mat. 24.
and be Reconciled to our Brother, before we Offer up our Gift at God's Altar.

DEVOTION.
I Now supplicate Thee, O Lord, for this First Preparatory Peace, which is the
necessary and best Disposition toward the receiving of that other, which Thou
desir'st to confer on Us by this Holy Sacrament and Sacrifice; for in the
Gospel we learn, Luc. 10.6.
that Thy Peace cannot rest upon any but such as are First the Sons of Peace.

This Peace, then, not finding how to Repose It self upon me here, in a perfect
Aboliton of All Passions, ( as It shall do hereafter in Heaven,) may It, at
least, Possess me in a perfect Absolution from all my past Sins; which let me
Hate and Abolish perfectly, by a True and Vnintermitted Penitence: That so, I
may begin to receive now, in the Communion of this Sacrament That Peace, which
consists in a total Ruin and Extirpation of Passions; which are Calmed and
Cured more effectually by the Blessed Eucharist, than by any other Remedy
whatsoever!

Upon the Fraction of the Host.
IT is worth the Noting here; That, after the Priest has made Supplication for
This Peace of God, before He derive It, by way of Blessing, to the Church, He
first divides the Host into three parts, representing the 3 several Estates and
Portions of the Church, for which He has implored Peace. And the part
representing this Portion of the Church Now Militant here on Earth, He lay
down upon the Altar; that, which is for That other Portion Now Expectant in
Purgatory, He holds still in his Hand; after he has severed from It, a third
Part, which he puts into the Chalice, to signify, both that third Portion of
the Church, Now Regnant, and Triumphant (and as it were imbibed and absorpt
into the Deity) in Heaven: And also Jesus Christ Himself, as the First Born
from the Dead, and Re-uniting His Body and Blood, and so entering into the Glory
of God, as the Head and Elder Brother of all the Saints.

Pax Domini.
ANd hence, in the very joining of this third part of the Host to the Chalice,
he wishes the Peace to the People, informing Us thereby, that Jesus Christ
raised again, and Entered into Glory, gives Peace to his Church; and that This
Peace is nothing else, but an overflowing of that Complaisant Tranquillity,
which in His Glory, himself infinitely abounds with, and fully satisfies the
Blessed in Heaven.

DEVOTION.
INcrease in me, O my Father, Faith and Charity; That I may Believe, as this
Sacrament now lying upon the Altar, is but one Bread only (that came down from
Heaven) so, That the whole Church together with Jesus Christ make but one Body;
and that the distinction and separation of Persons in It by distant places, do
no more hinder Its Unity, than if They were all, and always visibly to the Eye,
closely compact and joined together, even as this Host upon the Altar, is
still, (after its division into parts here, representing the diverse Members in
the Church) as truly and precisely one, as it was before.

I beseech Thee, Enable me to Love and Embrace Jesus Christ in Heaven; and his
Members wherever dispersed throughout the World, with an Affection as True,
and with an Enamouredness, as Great and Constant as if they were perpetually by
me, and I enjoyed their Personal Corporal Presence; Thy Grace Uniting Me to
those, from whom I am absent; and severing me (in a Holy Abstraction) even
from, those to whom I am most Present; my very self, and all to whom Thou have
any way joined me in this World.

The Agnus Dei.
TO Jesus Christ therefore in particular, is this Address made for that Peace;
Praying Him three several times to vouchsafe It. Now to that part of his
Church, here, yet remaining; as at His Ascension he gave it there to them he
left behind; and as He Himself now enjoys It. and makes others enjoy It too;
His Fellow-Citizens in that Jerusalem above, that City of Peace. And all this
enforced, not only by an Ardent Affection (implied in the Repetition) but also
by a Choice and most pertinent Compellation of of Him, as of the Lamb of God,
just now lying upon the Altar to take away our Sins, (the Impediments) and so
making our full Reconciliation and Peace with the Father.

DEVOTION.
I Presume, O God, to Petition Thee for Thy Peace, though it be, indeed, The
greatest of all Thy Gifts, since, but the day before Thy Death; thou left'st to
Us this Legacy, in the Persons of Thy Apostles, as the Close and Accomplishment
of all the Rest; and were pleased to style Us Children of Peace.

But let It be Thy Peace; not that of the World: The Inward Peace of Thy Holy
Spirit to at subsists un-impair'd, in the midst of all pains and outward
Conflicts to be sustained by Us for Thy Service.

Let it be a Peace, wholly proceeding from Thy Mercy: The Result of a
Conscience undefiled, and of Remission of all Sins; The Crown of a Perfect
Righteousness, obtainable only by Thee, who art That Lamb of God, Sacrificed to
Reconcile Us unto Thy Father, and to make Peace between Heaven and Earth, which
the Sin and Rebellion of Men and Angels had set at so great an Enmity.

I beg of Thee, then, That Peace, which is settled upon the Full Forgiveness of
Sin, which caused that division between Thy Father and Us; that the Peace which
I ought to have with Men, may be the Natural Issue of what I have with God
First; and so be no Humane but a Divine Peace.

For, as the Wisdom of men, with Thee is but Folly, so neither is Humane Peace,
any thing else than a War, displeasing to Thee; in so much that Thou have
professed to Persecute all those, and disperse their Bones, who so Combine
together.

I am transported with a particular Joy, and Consolation; to hear it now Thrice
Asserted, that Thou art He who take away Our Sins; I were undone, but for
That Mercy, and but for that farther Assurance which Faith gives me, that Thou
in bearing our Sins in Thy Body, do also Extinguish them; The Lost Sheep upon
Thy Shoulders, being both Carried, and Cured.

The Pax Tecum.
THen he gives the Pax to all present, immediately after he has asked It of
Jesus Christ, by the peculiar Prayer to Him for that purpose, Domine Jesu
Christ: And after he has (as it were) taken It from the Altar submissively by
a Holy Kiss, a Symbol of Peace.

But in the Mass for the Dead, all this is omitted and only Their Rest Prayed
for; because the Giving of the Pax among the Faithful Assembled together,
(which was Anciently by a Kiss Oral, as now by Kissing an Instrument, as a
Crucifix, etc. for that use) was held as a Pledge of the Joy and Tranquillity in
Paradise; and so thought less proper for the days of Sadness and Mourning for
those who yet by their Sins were detained from Entrance into That Joy.

DEVOTION.
SO Cured, I will take, and Kiss the Pax which is given to Me on the Priest's
part, or rather, in truth, on Thine; since He himself, before He derives It to
the People, takes It from Thee, in That Kiss given to the Altar, which is in
stead of Thee.

O, make me keep always This Peace, this Sacred Peace; and let me never care
for other, as I am not taken with any thing called good, unless it come from
Thee.

And in this Preparation let me Approach to the Communion of Thy Blessed Body,
which (as is said,) is the Earnest and beginning of That more Perfect Peace,
that we Hope to enjoy in Heaven, intimated by Thy Prophet, promising on Thy
part, A Peace that transcends all other Peace.

The Communion.
NExt, the Priest having disposed Himself: to Communicate, by those two
Prayers, Domine Jesu Christi, Fili Dei, etc. and Preceptio Corporis; and
protested His own great Unworthiness, in those Words of the Centurion, Domine
non sum dignus, etc. thrice re-doubled; after a little pause, (or Humble
Examination,) Eats the Body, and then Drinks the Blood in the Chalice: After
each, adding a short Rapture or Meditation.

Then he proceeds to Communicate the Others that are disposed thereunto.
Showing, hereby, that both Priest and People do partake of the same Sacrifice,
are fed with the same Spiritual Food, from the same Table, admitted to the same
Pasture, all in quality of being the Sheep of the same Shepherd.

And in this the Priest seems to Acknowledge: First, In Humility, that in that
Respect of being a Sheep of Christ's, and to be fed by Him, He is nothing at
all different from the People.

Secondly, In Charity, that the dispensing the things of God to the People,
ought to proceed from the fullness which He has received from God Himself; and
that He is to feed the Faithful out of his Store, and that which remains over
and above.

DEVOTION.
LOrd, I am not worthy of the least of all Thy Mercies, much less of the
Greatest, as is this Communion of Thine own Body and Blood, by which, Thou
enterest into Me, and (in a most ineffable manner) minglest Thy self with my
very Substance; transplanting into Me, Thy Humanity, Thy Divinity, Thy Person;
nay, (together with It,) The whole Trinity; so that I am, not only their
Temple, as before, but in some kind, even one, with Thee and It.

This is a Favor so great, and so incomprehensible, that I may well look on my
self as most unworthy of it; not only because I no way deserve It, but because
I can no way Understand It, since it surpasses all thoughts of Men or Angels.

Grant me, that, after a Communion and Union so Miraculous, I be never any
thing but Thine, never any thing but Thee: And that nothing be ever able to
separate me, in the least kind, from Thee: But that I may see all Creatures far
removed from, and Infinitely below Me, who am in Thee; and that, as I am not to
Live, but In Thee, so I may have no Affection neither, No sense, but for Thee;
Not coucern'd in any thing, but so far as thou will have Me, or as thou
esteemest Thy self concerned in It.

Let this Food be my Everlasting Nourishment, and let me so Relish It, that it
may make me loose the Taste of all things else, and the gust of My self
especially.

That remaining un-alter'd, and Incorruptible in my Heart; it may Consume all
the Corruption in my Body and Soul, and Sublimate them to a Being totally
Spiritual and Incorruptible too; partly, Now; but Perfectly, at the Great
Resurrection.

May it be within me, a Head and Fountain of Life; perpetually running into
Actions, and Increasing, toward that Life wholly Divine and Immortal; and
retarding and putting off farther and farther the Encroachments of a Death,
(which I still carry about Me;) In like manner, as the Corporal Food, which I
take, respites me from the Assaults of Death, and helps to lengthen and prolong
this Mortal Life of my Body.

let it be always at Hand, since It ought always to be in my Heart. And let the
Remembrance and Respect wherewith I shall every Moment, (in a kind of
Mastication and Chewing) Honor and Adore: It Innure me to Taste and Comprehend
the Excellency thereof, as far surpassing All Manna, or whatever other most
Delicate Dainties, which can never free Us quite, from Perishing, but Perish
themselves; whereas This on the contrary has an undecayable Life in It self,
and makes Us to live everlastingly.

Let It be to me instead of all other! Affecting me with all the Pleasures and
Gusts that any Spiritual Refection is capable of, as That Manna is said to give
the Jews, all the Delicious Relishes that were to be sound in any other repast
of the Body.

Let is fully satisfy me; and make me so Reflect upon this great Happiness of
being fed, now in this Life, with the same Bread which so abundantly blesses
with all Felicities Men and Angels, that I never Covet more.

Let this Sacred Body, be the Soul of my Soul, as my Soul is the Soul of my
Body; and let all my Thoughts and Affections, all Energies, Motions and
Actions, whatever I feel or do, proceed from It; as all my Natural Movement and
Operations come from my Soul.

Let it be in me A Spring of all Graces, streaming them out unto me every
moment suitably to my Necessities; That Well of Living Waters flowing up to
Everlasting Life, which it has pleased God to open, not only in the midst of
His Church, as in the middle of Paradise: But also in the Middle and Heart of
every Faithful Soul, which is to Him, no less a Paradise, and a Church, than
the whole Universal.

Let this Divine Source, quench the Thirst of my Soul; Allay my Heats, and
Irregular Desires, by Nourishing another Supernatural Heat of Grace and Divine
Love, which Dissipates those strange Inflammations, and Carnal Fevers of
Concupiscence; and may that Love consume in me the very Seed of Sin, as it
Cherishes and makes take root that other Seed of Life and Immortality.

Let this Admirable Spring float my Soul, higher and higher above all Creatures
Visible and Invisible, till it bring it up into my God, from whom it self is
fed; it being natural to all Waters to raise themselves as high as their
Beginnings, and to Advance thither too, whatever they carry.

Let this Food, as soon as I have taken It, give Proof of its Efficacy; in
making me Strong and Potent against those occasions of Sinning, which before
abused my Feebleness, and were too prevalent over Me.

Let it give me New Spirits and Light, First to discover and discern; and then
to Crush and destroy the least Relics and Remains of any Sin, into whatever
part it is Retired, or under what disguise soever It lurks and hides: These
being, indeed, the True Idols and Abominations which God has commanded to put
from Us and utterly to annihilate, if we mean to Receive and Conserve His Grace.

Lastly, It is My Savior Himself that is in This Sacrament: O, that I might
Love (according to His Example here,) Retirement, Re-collection, Abstraction
and Separation from all Creatures, as He continues still unmixed with any, (
now, no less, in, within me; than in the whole Church) always, In a Profound
Silence? under a Wonderful Humility, leading, here, a Life perfectly Internal,
and absorpt in a Contemplation, and Adoration perpetual, of the Greatness and
Incomprehensible Majesty of God his Father!

Upon the Priest's gathering up the Crumbs and lesser particles of the Host,
and sucking in the rest in the Chalice.
DEVOTION.
THe Fragments, O Lord! The least Crum that jalls from Thy Table, the least
Drop of Thy Wine, no Remainder of Thy Honey Comb, is so little, but is enough
for me, as well as for that modest Canaanite; and for Thy Apostles, at that
miraculous Entertainment in the Desert, or at That Collation upon Thy
Resurrection.

Indeed all the Graces, that we are capable of in This Life, are but Crumbs
falling from That Thy Table above; but few drops of that Inexhaustible
Fountain, with which, Thy Blessed in Heaven, are so abundantly Refreshed, but
on Us here, are but sprinkled, a little to relieve our Necessities, and sustain
Us from fainting in our Passage through the Desert of This World.

Yet; (as Thou art, no less whole and Entire, in the pettyest Particle and
Attom of these Symbols, than in the biggest Portion; so) I avouch, that there
is force enough to Nourish me, and to Strengthen me too, against all mine
Enemies; in the Lightest Grain of Thy Grace; because Thou art always All in It;
and With, and By It do uncessantly derive Thy Spirit into Our Hearts.

Which, well considered, should Oblige Us, everyone, to live Contented in This
Life, (as we shall do in the Next) be the Gifts Great or Small that we receive
from Thy Mercy.

Upon the bringing back again of the Book to the Right Hand.
IT is to show, that the Gospel which was removed from the Jews, at first,
shall return to them again, and be received, toward the end of the World.

And then, (the whole Church, consisting both of Jew and Gentile, being United
together,) The Priest Blesses God for all the Favors shown to it in order
thereunto; and particularly for the Present Communion, by which he has
reunited so many; beseeching Him that this Receiving of Him at this time may
tend to His everlasting Honor.

DEVOTION.
I Admire and Adore, O my God, Thy Goodness and Insinite Patience; who, having
been so long Opposed and Vilifi'd by the Jews, wilt yet, at last, before the
end of the World receive them again for all that, and restore to them the Light
of the Gospel, before taken from them: as is signified by bringing back the
Book, before the Mass ends, to the place It had at the beginning.

God forbid, I should ever Despair, of any Sinner, how Great, or Wretched and
Hardened soever he be, as long as He yet Lives! No, let me rather, in all
Humility wait, till Thy Mercy or Thy Justice declare it self toward Him, in the
Season that Thou have appointed; and the mean while Pray for Him: Wishing Him
Thy Grace, with the same Charity, wherewith Thy Church still implored It for
the Jews her Enemies and first Persecutors, though receive it they should not
till after many Ages; and at present, are Hardened, and even Abandoned by Thee,
after a manner most notoriously Hideous.

O let me so Intercede for a Mercy, and a true Repentance, for the worst of
mine Enemies! make me carry them always in my Heart, though they little deserve
It, and have turned me out of theirs; as Thou lodgest and bear me in Thine,
without considering my unworthiness; and were willing to receive me, even when
I hated Thee, and ran from Thee as fast, and as far as I was able.

Sweeten me into a Benignity! that as I have received Thy Grace without all
merit; so I may keep it without all Envy, and be an earnest Suitor unto Thee,
that Thou would vouchsafe it also to those, who (I am sure,) cannot less
deserve it than I. Nay, let it be to me a particular delight and joy, when ever
Thou shall be pleased to indulge it to them in a greater abundance than Thou
have done to me; that so, even their abundance may be as truly mine, and the
^^ches of them supply what is wanting in me, as Thy Apostle says.

At the last Benediction.
AFter this tender of Thanks; in Conclusion of all, the Priest turns to the
People, to Bless them; as was used to be done in the Old Law, after the
Sacrifice, and shall be more fully done hereafter by our Savior Himself, in
that General Benediction, of all the Elect, at the end of the World. Hence is
it that he reads the Gospel of St. John, treating particularly of the Eternal
Generation of the Word, and the Highest Mysteries of that His Deity; To show,
that, immemediately after that Last Benediction, we shall pass into Heaven;
there to be better acquainted with, and Eternally Admire and Praise these
Mysteries: And that Jesus Christ, having gathered together all His chosen,
shall lead them in, and place them in the Bosom of His Father, where He is from
all Eternity His Only Son; and where He shall admit Us as His Brethren, that
where He is, We may be also; and this without any prejudice of His being still
the Only, because He shall make Us One with Him. Amen.

DEVOTION.
I Beseech Thee, O my God, to make me so partaker of Thy Body and Blood, and so
to Order the rest of my Life; that I may receive That great Benediction which
Thou shall give to Thy Servants at the Last day; The which, is now Represented
unto Me by This, which the Priest gives to the People, in the end of the Mass.

In the Hope of This let me live, and grow Invincibly strong, against the
rudest Assaults of the Enemy. In the expectation of so great Comfort, let my
Heart be so Established as to Dread nothing; nor can the greatest Beauties or
Pleasures in This World seem any thing to the sight of That last Glory, or to
the perception of That Blessing accumulative of all Blessings, which then shall
be received, in the presence of Millions of Angels, and of all Men, which ever
were, or shall be.

The Blessing, and St. John's Gospel.
DEVOTION.
ANd, after that Solemn Benediction, take me, O my God, with Thee into Heaven;
that Heaven of Heavens! Where I may enjoy Thee in Thy Majesty, in thy
Beatitude, and Life so Glorious! A Scantling of which seems to be Represented
to Us, by that Beginning of St. John 's Gospel, which is said after the Mass.
Wherein those two Sublime Points of Our Faith, the Trinity, and the
Incarnation, are Insisted on, to show that Our Eternal Happiness shall consist
in the Clear Vision of That, which here we have humbly acknowledged and
embraced though but in the obscure and Imperfect Light of Faith; and that We
shall Live Eternally, By Contemplation of the Essence, and Trinity of the
Persons in the Godhead, as Thou Thy self live in it, by Comprehension.

Remove, O Lord, out of my mind any other Thought, and out of my Heart all
other Delight or Pleasure! Let me now in Time, take full Contentment in This
Object, which (and no other,) must make me Happy in Eternity.

NOw by what has been Intimated throughout this short Reflection of my
Thoughts, it may be inferred, perhaps not Impertinently, (what was said in the
beginning,) That the Whole Mass is a Re-view, and Commemoration, of the being
Driven out of Paradise, for the Sin of Adam; and of Our Return again into
Paradise, By the Blood and Grace of Jesus Christ.

Certain Reflections upon the CREED, thereby to prepare the Heart the better
for being more Confirmed in another Article of the Catholic Faith, touching
the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
PREFACE.
I Believe.
O My Savior and my God! When I consider that this Heavenly Manna, thy most
Holy Body, (so miraculously contrived to be our Nourishment, as we pass through
the Desert of this World) is affirmed to be truly and Substantially present
upon the Altar, immediately after the Words of Consecration; I am struck with
wonder and amazement, and have not a word left me to say, but this, (which is a
plain confession of my ignorance, and all that those Israelites could reply
upon the first view of that other Manna) Man hu, Man hu.
What Is this! What Is this!

Lord have pity on me! My best natural understanding, my Judgment, as rational
and humane, all my Senses set themselves in opposition to it, and frame a
thousand objections to the contrary, to deterr me away: (say they,) How can it
possibly be that Christ should give us his very Flesh to eat? This is the
hardest saying of all, never to be conceived, never to be Believed.

But it is by thy Grace, O my God, that these Seducers in my own Bosom have not
yet prevailed upon me; I have done still, as those two great Servants of thine
Councel'd me, St. Ambrose and St. Austin: I have fled presently to my Creed;
and opposed to all their contradictions, that Symbol, that short Lesson, which
thy Apostles took care to teach thy servants heretofore. In the first place, I
Arm my self with that, as with a sure Cart of thy protection: with It I close
and shut up my Heart as with a Signet, that none of all these suggestions can
find the way in; and like a well-stor'd Quiver, it has afforded me a thousand
and a thousand good Shafts, by which I am enabled to keep them off, and ruin
them all.

What? (say I;) if all other Arguments were nothing; does not this one word
alone, that stands in the very Front of my Creed, (I Believe) suffice to defeat
the forces of all such Rebellious Thoughts, and make them fall backward?

I Believe, It Is the word that was given me at my first entrance and Enrolment
in this sacred Militia, and was pronounced by me then, at my Baptism, by the
mouth of those who there undertook for me; and I must still make it good.

I am therefore, not one that pretends to be an understander of the Mysteries
of my Salvation; not a Disputer, not one of the Intelligent; but my Profession
is to be one of the Faithful, a Believer. And therefore, by how much hard and
incomprehensible this Sacrament is made appear to me, by so much the more is it
likely to be one of the Articles I am to believe, and so rendered by its
proposal more venerably credible; For Faith There, comes to its true Luster,
and is seated, as it were on its Throne; where the Understanding is most
humbled by Obscurities.

ARTICLE I. In God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. etc.
God is God in all his works, God.
but his Deity appears to us most in his Greatest: And because this Sacrament
is confessed to be one of them (if not the very Greatest of all) what surer
Testimony can it bring with it, to make me believe it to be so, (the work of
the Almighty,) than its being wonderful, and un-intelligible?

Are there not Three distinct Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in one and
the same single Essence? A complete Trinity in a most simple Unity? That Faith
which has swallowed and digested this transcendent difficulty; how comes it
now to stick, and make scruple of Believing One and the same Body to be in
diverse places at once?

God defend me from the temper of those Rebellious Children, The Father.
that came to question his Omnipotent Arm; and say, can he prepare a Table for
us in the Wilderness? (And could all their projecting thoughts ever have pitched
upon such a way as that of Manna?)

Well, whatever part of this Paschal Lamb I cannot Chew by my Reason, I will
cast it into, as it were, the Fire of the unlimited power of this Father,
Almighty.
whom I believe to be Almighty; These little Clouds of Difficulties, that so
intercept, and put this Sacrament out of the sight of our Natural Eye, how
easily do they vanish in the clear Sunshine of Gods Omnipotency? What so hard,
that this Fire consumes not?

The bare Word God has had such Virtue, Maker of Heaven, etc.
as to give a Being to such things as were not at all; How much more is it able
to give a different Being to what already is? and how? and in as many places as
he pleases? He has made that which was Not at all any where, to be
Some-where; why can he not as well make That which is but Some where, to be
every where.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.
Whilst I am assured, O my Savior, His Son.
that thy Father so loved the World, as to give Thee, (his only Son) to be its
Feeder, and Physician; What wonder is it, (say I within my self,) if this Son,
of equal Love and Bounty with his Father, do (further) give himself to be its
very Food, and Physic too; thereby to make himself more intrinsecally, a
Savior, and King, Our Lord.
and Lord over All, and through All.

Which was conceived of the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary.
So were thou Conceived O my God, in the Womb of a Virgin, without any use of
Man! And why then do we look for Natural Conditions and Properties in That
Body, Conceived.
which was made at first; not according to the Order of Nature? and Born of a
Virgin.

Since thy Body took up no place then, when it came forth through the un-open'd
and Virginal Womb of thy Mother, (for, otherwise, Born.
it had forced the Seal of her Virginity) piercing it only as the Sunbeams do
the Crystal; How should it seem incredible, that in the Sacrament, it needs as
little Locality.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried.
He that Loved Thee so dearly, O my Soul, that, (when he could have saved thee
with shedding but one drop of his Blood only; nay, by the least of his
Sufferings; yet) was so willing to expose all his Body to such Torments, and
Passion, and to a most bitter Death too, that thou might have Life; Ah! He
it is; the very same He, who, (that This life might be preserved and maintained
in thee) gives thee That Body to Nourish it too! Or is this only so hard to be
believed, from his Love? whilst every Mothers Love, contents not it self, to
have brought forth an Infant, partaking of the same substance with themselves,
unless with the same substance they proceed to Feed and Nourish it too?

The truth is; After so many diverse Shadows, and Representations of that
Passion of His, wherewith his Servants were once sustained; as the Paschal
Lamb, Manna, and many others; It had been a very lean and hungry Commemoration,
a cold Entertainment of it for his Children; If, to that purpose there had been
set before them, nothing, but mere Bread and Wine.

He descended into Hell, the third day He rose again from the Dead.
Again, if he, that would have Visited his Friends, Descent.
lodged in the Bosom of Abraham many other ways; yet had rather Descend in
Person, and visit them by the Real Presence of His Soul: Why should it seem
strange, if, in like manner, though he could have found out infinite other means
to Nourish Us by, yet he made choice of This as the most endearing, most
Admirable, most Amorous, even to give his Own Flesh to Us for Food

If by his Raising It from the Dead, Resurrection.
he has quite freed His Body from those grosser Properties of Passibility or
suffering violence, of Weight, of Thickness, of Opacousness and the like; so
that with It he penetrated the Stone of his Sepulcher, passed through Doors
that were shut, (which could never be done but by causing two Bodies to be so
in one place, that the One should take up no room) made it invisible,
Vnpalpable, Imperceptible, and to take up no place at all; why can he not make
It so in this Sacrament, though never so excluded from Room or Sense; since he
has affirmed It to be there? Why should we tie him still to the conditions of
a mortal and Corruptible Body?

He Ascended into Heaven; Sits on the right Hand of God the Father Almighty.
Can it seem strange to us that This Body of his, should come into Our Bodies
Really and substantially, though supernaturally; when as mounting lighter and
swifter than any Bird, Ascent.
beyond all the Laws of a Humane Body, It soared above all the Spheres, and sat
It Self down at the right Hand of God his Eather, far beyond the highest
Heavens, out of all Place and Where? (for what Superficies can environ That
Body, which is above all Bodies?) And then, what hinders but that It may be
present here too, after the same manner, without filling any Place or Vbi.

And from thence He shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead.
And so, no longer confined to Place or Vbi, His coming.
nor subject to Weightiness; He shall appear at the last day with His Saints in
the Air, made Visible to all Men, wherever they are (though to diverse
effects,) as Miraculously as he is now Invisible to them in the Sacrament.

And then shall He Judge as Guilty of His Body and Blood, those that have
participated of this precious and adorable Sacrament unworthily, because they
discerned not the Body of their Lord.

Of what kind of Meat was it ever said, but this; that He that eat It
unworthily, became Guilty of the Blood of Jesus Christ? because it being Really
the Body of Jesus Christ, It makes them too really guilty of It, who abuse It,
and discern it not. No such severe Sentence is given about Manna, or the
Paschal Lamb, though that in Eating Them, Christ was to be Fed on too,
Spiritually, and by Faith.

I Believe in the Holy Ghost.
As all that God has done heretofore he has done it by Holy Ghost.
the Operation of the Holy Ghost; so does he now by the same Holy Ghost, work
these Supernatural Things, which none but Faith conceives.

How shall this thing be, said (the Blessed Virgin) since I know not Man? The
Angel Gabriel replied, The Holy Ghost shall come upon Thee, and the Power of
the most High shall overshaddow Thee.

So now, thou demandest the like; How shall the Bread be made the Body of Josus
Christ? and I, I answer then just so, The Holy Ghost overshadows and works
these things inneffably, un-conceivably. That Holy Ghost that dictated the
Sacred Text, would he have ever put in these words there, so plain and
punctual, as are, This is my Body, were it not the true Body of our Lord? would
He not have added there some declaration of his meaning, had it been other than
what those words do bear in their principal and proper acception? He that was
sent to teach the Church all Truth, would He have let it follow an Errrour and
a Lie, in an Article of such importance? and so long together?

The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
And (in good earnest) how could one call the Church Holy (which is never but
One, H. Cath. Church.
in all times and places, where, and when it is,) if it did not maintain the
Truth, as well in this point as in others, in all times, in all places, and
amongst all Nations, which it has not done, if the True Body of our Lord be
not in the Sacrament?

Again, Communion of Saints.
is there any more perfect Communion of Sts. than this? whereby we are One
Bread and One Body, for as much as we are all partakers of the same One Bread
that came down from Heaven, living in It Self, and also giving life? And how
can it be (precisely) understood, that we should all Eat of One and the same
Bread, if this Bread were not the Body of Jesus Christ? otherwise, look how
many places, nay, how many Persons; so many Breads (in strictness of speech,)
there would be. And if you understand it so, that we Eat all One and the same
Spiritual Food by Faith only, what greater Communion hereby, Saints, Christians.
has one Christian now with all other Christians than He has done with those
Jews of Old, who Fed on Jesus Christ by Faith, and consequently on One and the
same Spiritual Food?

The forgiveness of Sins.
Lord, thou have said that Thy Body and thy Blood in this Sacrament was Given,
Broken, and Shed for many, for the Remission of Sins. Ah, neverlet it enter
into my thoughts to Believe, that any Other Blood was spilt, any Other Body
given for the Remission of my Sins, than what was proper, and naturally Thine!
And what? A simple Figure and Commemoration only of That, can it ever have such
a Power? The Blood of the Heyfer sprinkled, (though the true and near Figure of
that Blood shed upon the Cross, yet) served only to the Purification of the
Flesh: No, it is the Proper Blood of God alone, that purges Our Consciences from
dead works, to serve the Living God.

The Resurrection of the Body.
O Gracious Jesus! When shall It be, that in a moment, in the twinkling of an
Eye, at the last Trump, the Dead shall arise; and the same Flesh of every One
now crumbled into Dust, and scattered a thousand ways, shall be re-compacted
again into an Incorruptible, Immortal Consistency?

Good God, the Miracle of Miracles This! And yet I am contemplating one (well
nigh) Equal That in a Moment too, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the Trumpet of
thy Word, that very Body of Thine, Seated at the right Hand of thy Father in
Heaven is in a certain manner Reproduc'd in this Sacrament, in all places
wherever the Mystery of It, is duly Celebrated.

But, O my wonderful Savior! If a little Leaven can Leaven a great Lump of
Dough: If one Spark of Fire be enough to Inflame a whole House; if one Grain of
Corn put into the Earth, there works so, as out of that Earth to cause so many
more to grow, and shoot up; How may I hope that Thy Blessed Body entering into
mine, will, Greg. Nyssen, cap. 37.
in its due time, ferment it so, as to make It rise; warm and heat, and Inflame
It so as to make It like Thy Glorious Body, and cause it to come up, Immortal,
Impassible, Subtle, Nimble, Clear and Shineing with all the Radiant Qualities
that belong to Its perfection, and may be expected from so Divine a Seed. This
Efficacy, I confess can never be in the Figures of thy Body: It comes only from
the true and Real Presence of thy Precious Body It Self being There.

The Life Everlasting.
And indeed what other Nourishment, Blessed Savior, but thy dear Body alone,
can possibly give A Life Everlasting? It must be Bread that Lives It Self, or
it cannot give Life, Bread that comes down from Heaven to give a Heavenly Life;
Bread, that is no other than Thine Own Self my Lord and my God, to give an
Immortal, Eternal, Everlasting Life.

The Manna which was a true Type and Figure of thy Body, yet could not do That,
there is need of some Food to be had more Substantial, and Solid, and Spiritual
for such a Life, and what can that be, but Thy Self who have Life in Thy Self,
and Live now, and for evermore, World without End, Amen.

This you see (if you have Read and Weighed it well) that the Articles of Our
CREED, cannot be considered in that full height, (wherein they ought to be
literally and expressly believed, and professed by every good Christian;) but
that withal, they dispose the Soul to a Firm Faith of the Real Presence of the
true Body and Blood of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament; which Article,
(thereby) seems to carry a very Natural and congenious proportion to all the
rest, at least as the possibility, I may add, and probability of it; which is
enough for the first step.

The next step shall be to weigh the several Testimonies of the Fathers, and
Their various Expressions; wherein they seem to Labor, so to set down what
they believed in this High Mystery, as that it might not be mistaken by Others;
wherefore from Them it will further appear, that the Faith of the greatest part
of the Church in all Ages, was, (as it is now,) of the Real Presence.

Lastly, Shall the particular Exceptions, Answers, Limitations, Distinctions,
Subterfuges, of latter Dissenters, as to those Testimonies be produced and
brought into the Light, One by One.

All this, if you receive not Satisfaction before; and if not after, I have no
other way left to help you with, but Prayer. Jam hoc qui dicit, Non meis
Disputationibus Refellendus sed Sanctorum Orationibus Revocandus est. Aug.

Preparatory Prayers toward the due Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament;
Authorized by the Church.
Ad Mensam Dulcissimi Convivii, etc.
TO Thy Table, O most Bountiful Lord Jesus Christ, where, with such Delicious
and Heavenly Food, Thou usest to Entertain and Feast Pure Souls; I a sinner,
though not presuming on any Merit or Desert of Mine, but solely, on Thy
Goodness, and Gracious Invitation; do (yet) Tremble and Fear to approach.

For,
I have a Heart still prone to evil; and Treacherous evne to the deceiving of
my Self:

A Mind unconstant in all good Purposes.

A Body enslaved to sin, and which has been Tainted, and rendered loathsome by
Corruption Original, and many Crimes committed in it:

Senses wholly deprived, and by long Custom disposed, to admit any sort of
Temptation.

Members, all retained for the Service of some Vice or other.

A Tongue especially, an unruly Evil, and under no Guard or Discipline; It self
a very World of Iniquity.

And therefore now, in this Misery and great Perplexity, (what to do, and how
to carry my self (in this Conjuncture of Thy Call, and my own Wretchedness,)
toward Thee, a God of so much Benignity, but of such a Frightning Majesty
too,) I nevertheless, am here come unto Thee.

But
To Thee, as the Fountain of Mercy:

To Thee, as the sole Curer of all my Maladies and Distempers, at Present; and
the best Preserver against all Ills to come: And whom I dare not appear before,
as my Judge; I humbly Sue to have for my Savior.

To Thee, O Lord, as such I here unbind, and lay open my Wounds and Sores:

To Thee I discover my shame.

I know my Sins are great, and many; and they cause this Fear in me; but I hope
in Thy Mercies, which are without number or stint.

Look upon me, Then, with those tender Eyes of Thy Compassion, O Merciful
Jesus, Eternal and most Munificent Savior, God and Man; Crucified for Man!

Hail Saving Sacrifice, Offered up on the Altar of the Cross, for Me, and all
Mankind!

Hail, Precious, and Royal Blood, poured forth of the Wounds of my Crucified
Lord; and Cleansing a whole World from Sin.

Remember Lord, this Creature of Thine, for whom Thou have spilt that Blood.

I am sorry that I have Offended Thee, I desire to Amend what is Amiss.

Take from me, O most Indulgent Savior, all my Iniquities and Transgressions,
that so beset me, and cleave so close to me; that being Purged and Sanctified
throughout, in Spirit, Soul, and Body, I may come Worthily to feed at Thy
Table; on the Holiest of all Things

And Grant, that this Sacred prae-libation and fore-taste of Thy Body and
Blood, which I now intend to take, though most unworthy, may be to me,

A full Remission of my sins:

A perfect Evacuation of all vitiated and peccant Humors.

A chacing out of my Mind all unseemly Cogitations:

A producing therein a Series of better Thoughts and Sentiments:

An Effectual and Active Principle of doing, ever hereafter, Things pleasing to
Thee:

An Impregnable Defense, both of Soul and Body against all Assaults or
Treacheries of mine Enemies.

A Token of present Grace; and a sure Pledge and Earnest of future Glory. Amen.

Another.
ALmighty and Immortal Father! Behold I come to this Sacrament of Thy only
begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.

I come,

As an Infirm and Languishing Person, to the Physician that gives Life and
Health.

As one Defiled and Unclean, to the pure Spring of Grace and Mercy.

As the Blind, to a Light of never failing Clearness.

As a Poor and Indigent Creature to the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

I humbly supplicate, and beseech Thee, therefore, in such Abundance, and so
copious overflowing of Plenty of Favors, To daign me

A Cure of mine Infirmity,

A Cleansing from my Defilements,

A Recovery from Blindness,

An Enriching of my Poverty,

A Nuptial Garment, for hiding my Shame and Nakedness.

That, being admitted a Guest at Thy Table, and Feeding on the Bread of Angels,
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; I may demean my self, with

So great Reverence and Humility,

So true Contrition and Devotion.

So much Purity and Faith,

That purpose and Intention,

As may most conduce to the Salvation of my Soul.

Grant me now, (I pray Thee) to Receive, not only the Sacrament of our Lords
Body and Blood, but the Virtue also, and real Effect of the Sacrament.

O most Merciful God, Grant me in such manner to Receive This Body of Thy only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, which he took from the Virgin Mary; that I
may thereby become Incorporated into His Mystical Body, and be one of its
Living and Sound Members.

O most Indulgent Father! Vouchsafe, that this Thy Beloved Son, whom now I
intend to Receive, as here He comes Masqu'd and under these Veils; So I may
hereafter be admitted to Enjoy, with open Face, in full Vision, as with Thee,
and the Holy Spirit, he Lives and and Reigns, one God, World without End, Amen.

Prayers after Communion.
I Give Thee Infinite Thanks from the very bottom of my Heart, and with all the
Powers and Faculties of my Soul and Body, Holy Lord, Omnipotent Father, Eternal
God!

Who have now Vouchsafed Me, a Sinner, a most unworthy Servant, upon no account
of any Merit in me, but in mere condescension of Thy Mercy; to have an Interest
in this Inestimable Sacrifice, and Holy Communion, of the Precious Body and
Blood of Thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

Which I have now Offered, and fed upon,

In Honorable memory of His Death and Passion;

In Gratitude for all Benefits Received, etc.

For Reconcilement, and Remission of my Sins, etc.

For increase of Grace; to, etc.

In Memory and Veneration of such and such Servant or Saint of Thine, etc.

And I humbly beseech Thee, that these Acts of Devotion and Worship of Thee,
may not be to me any new Guilt of Sin, to be Punished; but an Effectual
Intercession rather, and Procurement of Pardon!

An Armory of Faith, and Shield of Good Will;

A clean riddance of all Vices in me.

A total quenching of Lust and Concupiscence.

An Increase of Divine Love and Patience; of Humility, Obedience, and all other
Virtues.

A Fortress against all the Machinations of my Enemies, Visible and Invisible:

A perfect Calming of all Commotions from Flesh or Spirit.

A close adhaesion to Thee, the only True God; and the Happy Conclusion of my
Life.

And after this Viaticum, Conduct, I beseech Thee, Thy Servant, to that
inexpressible, never-ending Feast where Thou, together with Thy Son, and Holy
Spirit, Indivisible Trinity; art to Thy Saints,

Their true Light,

Their full Satisfaction,

Their everlasting Joy,

Their complete Delight, and

Their Every perfect Happiness.

Through Jesus Christ. Amen.
Another.
O My Lord Jesu! Sweet above all Sweets!

Infuse into my Heart, my Bowels, and inmost Entrails of my Spirit; such a
strong Passion for Thee; so True, Clear, Apostolic, and most Sanctified
Affection to Thee; that my Soul may languish and be always melting with a Love
of Thee only! Long for Thee; pant after Thy presence in these Thy Courts, the
places of Thy particular Residence and Worship; wish to be quite dissolved, to
be with Thee, yet nearer.

Make my Soul Hunger after Thee,

The Food of Angels,

The Refreshment of Sanctified Spirits,

Or daily Super-substantial Bread, full of all Delightful Relishes and
Suavities, Savouring of the Varieties of all-pleasing Tastes and Gusts.

After Thee, whom the Angels so much Covet to pry into, let my Heart always
have an Appetite, and feed on Thee;

Let it ever Thirst for Thee;

The Spring of Life,

The Fountain of Wisdom and Knowledge,

The Source of Eternal Light.

The Torrent of Pleasures,

The Plenty of God's House,

Court Thee; seek Thee; find Thee; run after Thee; over-take Thee: Muse on
Thee, Talk of Thee, do all things to the Praise and Glory of Thy Name.

With Humility, With Discretion, With Delight, With Felicity, With Affection,
With Perseverance.
And be Thou only at all times, my Hope, my Confidence, my Riches, my Pleasure,
my Divertisement, my Joy, my Rest, my Peace, my Delight, my sweet Perfume, my
Meat, my Sauce, my Meal, my Retirement, my Aid, my Wisdom, my Portion, my
Possession, my Treasure; on which my Mind may still run, my Heart be ever set,
fixed, and unchangeably Established.

Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross.
A Brief Discourse of Confession to a Lawful Priest, wherein is treated of the
last Judgment, By P Manby Dean of London-Dery,

A Manual of Controversies, clearly proving the Truth of Catholic Faith, by
Texts of Holy Scripture, Councels of all Ages, Fathers of the first 500 years,
Common Sense and Reason, and fully Ansering all the Principal Objections of
Protestants, and all manner of Sectaries By H. T.

A most Excellent way of Hearing Mass with Profit and Devotion. Containing the
whole Mase in Latin and English; with diverse Select Prayers before and after
Confession and Communion; and an Examen of Conscience, etc.

A Manual of Devout Prayers, fitted for all persons, and all occasions. To
which is added the Rosary in Latin and English. Prayers to the B. V. The
Prayers of St. Bridget, etc. with the Vespers or Even-Song.


