A NEW DISCOVERY OF An Excellent Method OF Bee-Houses and Colonies, TO FREE The
Owners from the great charge and trouble that attends the Swarming of Bees, and
delivers the Bees from the evil reward of Ruin for the benefit they brought
their Masters; advantaging their Owners many-fold above whatever any Method
heretofore practiced does.

Experienced seven years by John Gedde, Gent. Inventor; and approved by the
Royal Society at Gresham-Colledge.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by D. Newman at the Kings Arms in
the Poultrey; and Ship and Anchor at the Bridg-foot on Southwark-side, 1675.

Advertisement.
THat his Majesty has given and granted by Letters Patents under the great
Seal of England, to John Gedde and his Partners, the full and sole Power,
Privilege, and Authority of using, practicing, exercising and enjoying the new
Art and Invention for the Improvement of Bees, during the space of 14 years,
according to the Statute made in that behalf: Barring and excluding all others
whatsoever from Making, Using, Practicing, Counterfeiting, Imitating, or
Resembling the same, without the special License and consent of the said John
Gedde and his Partners, first had and obtained, under the Penalties by the said
Statute in like case provided.

Introduction.
THe Honey-Bee is known by long experience to be such an Industrious and
profitable Creature, that it has been ever accounted a delightful and
profitable labor to provide for its preservation, by providing it a House to
live and work in, and Food in Winter and other bad seasons, when through
distress it cannot provide for it self.

Melissus King of Crete, is reported to be the first that invented and taught
the use of Hives, and of Honey, which is become so profitable for the health of
man.

Gulielmus a Conchis writes, that in his time, a Consul of Rome was so much
delighted with this excellent Creature, that he caused Hives of Tinn-horn to be
erected in his Gardens, that through the horn he might observe their work.

History affords many more instances of honorable persons in all ages, who
have delighted in this care of Bees: Yea, many at this time in Poland, and
other Kingdoms, make good Revenues by the profitable improvement of
Bee-keeping; and it is certain, that if Apifactories were encouraged, a Kingdom
might be considerably advantaged thereby.

But the former forms of Hives, are subject to so many inconveniences, charge,
trouble, and casualties, that men have been much discouraged from the pleasant
and profitable improvement of Bee-keeping; this many have discovered and
complained of: And I have found it by experience, wherefore it animated me to
essay if by a new form of Hives these Inconveniences might be redressed or
prevented. So after I had tried several forms, I at last found one which
answered my expectation, which is the same that I publish in this little Tract.

After I had communicated in general my experience to several persons of
quality, they judged the invention commodious, and better then they any way yet
devised; and they desired me to publish it, which I was unwilling to do, until
by further experience I had found the great advantage and convenience of the
same.

But while I was thinking only of communicating this Invention to my Friends
and Acquaintance, I was advertised by an Ingenious Gentleman, that the
Illustrious Royal Society at Gresham-Colledge (those great Encouragers and
Promoters of Learning, and Honourers of Invention) had in a Transaction (Numb.
96. July 21. 1673.) given a description of one of my Boxes (which they had
gotten from Sr. Robert Murray, and he from Sir William Thomson, who had got it
from me, together with a written Description of its parts and use, not intended
for publication, but for private satisfaction only:) And that they had approved
of the same as the best form of Hives yet invented.

This encouraged me to the publication of the House and Hives together; for (I
supposed) if that Illustrious Society esteemed so much of a lame and defective
representation of a part, then would they much more esteem the whole Invention,
when certified of the long experience of the commodiousness and convenience
thereof.

The subject matter then of the Tract, is the description of the Hives and
Houses, together with their use advantage and excellency beyond any other forms
of Hives yet invented; which I intend to treat of with all possible brevity and
perspicuity: But first I would propose the following Hypotheses or fundamental
truths, upon which, as upon a base, the whole Structure of the ensuing
discourse is founded; and they are these:

1. It is natural for all Bees to begin at the top, and to work downwards.

2. That Bees swarm for want of room.

3. That a great hinderance of their labor is confusion about Swarming, and
mispending their time in Luxury.

4. That Idleness, causes Luxury, and extravagant and unprofitable increase of
Bees, which being by this commodious method of labor and industry prevented,
the usual, but unkind requital of smothering and drowning is likewise avoided.

5, That the great charge and trouble attending upon Swarming of Bees does
discourage the Owner and consume his profit.

The Description of the Boxes, or Hives.
THE Boxes may be made of Wainscot, Dimension.
or Firr-Deals, or of the same materials that the London-Pales, for carrying
water, or as your Bushel or Peck-measure in the Country.

For their Dimension, it is fit that each Box be of that largeness, that it may
contain a Bushel, the height not exceeding 12 Inches, and its breadth one third
more than the height; that so they may the more conveniently stand upon one
another; and that when the Bees come in Laden, they may not have a great
height to go up.

The Box is in figure an Octagon, or eight square, or round, each side 9 inches
in breadth; it is covered close at the top, having a square hole in the middle
4. inches long and broad, with a shutter that slides to and fro in a Groove,
Figure.
about half an inch longer than the hole. It has 4. Windows, each in figure a
Rhombus, Parts.
or like an ordinary pain of glass, opposite to one another, and in them pains
of glass, shutters to cover them. The Door for the Bees is divided into 6.
holes, half an inch wide, and an inch in height, for the better helping the
Bees to carry out their dead; each of these holes has a shutter, that slides up
and down in a Groove, to cover less or more as the season requires, or as
occasion offers. Each Box has two Iron handles, with joints to be placed about
the middle of the Box on the sides thereof, for listing the same up, to set
another under it, or for transporting the same for use, when the Bees have
wrought down to the lower Box. At the top of the Box there is a crease or
rebbit all round it, about half an inch in depth on the outside, and an inch in
height, and another in the inside at the bottom, which serves to six them, when
set upon one another. Each Box has also a hole at the bottom upon the side,
that shuts with a sliding cover; this is to be opened and used (when the Boxes
are placed upon one another, and the uppermost is full of Honey, and all the
Bees are wrought down to the lower Box) for shutting the square hole in the top
of the lower Box, that its cover may divide and cut the work, in the upper Box
from the work in the lower; And for this end, it is fit that the square end of
that sliding shutter be covered with Lattin or Iron well sharpened, that it may
cut the work the better.

Within each Box there is a square frame made of four posts joynted together,
by 12. small sticks, and 6. other crossing these, and one standing
perpendicular in the middle of the frame, the frame consisting of the 4. posts,
and 19 small sticks; this frame is to be put within the Box, and fastened to 4.
sides thereof by 8. screws, two in each post; upon this frame are the Bees to
fasten their work, and this is very convenient, for when you have removed a Box
full of work, unscrew the frame, and then you may take out all the work without
breaking the Box frame or work, and then you may with pleasure behold the
excellent Fabric, which these industrious Insects have ingeniously framed.

The use of the pains of glass, is not only for pleasure, to behold the work
and labor of the Bees; but also to know their strength, idleness, fullness, or
want of room, that so you may enlarge or remove them as you please. And whereas
some may think that the work of the Bees will darken the glass; I declare that
I have found the contrary by experience.

A description of the several Figures of a single Box, its frame, and of a
Colony, or three Boxes placed on the top of one another.

Fig. 1. Represents a Box projected, lying on its side, with its open end to
the eye where the frame is projected, etc.

B B B B B B B B The Box.

C C C C The screw pinns.

E O The Windows.

F X The doors for the Bees to go in and out at.

G The place by which the cover of the hole in the top is shut.

H H The inner rebbit, or crease at the bottom.

Fig. 2. Represents a Box standing upright.

H The Bee-hive set upright.

B The square hole through which the Bees work down,

X The shutter that covers the hole upon occasion.

D The piece of Wood that fills up the Groove in the Box that is upmost.

E X The doors for the Bees.

F N Two sliding shutters that slide down, each covering three holes.

G H The windows with pains of glass in them.

beehive diagrams

beehive diagrams

beehive diagram

beehive diagram

Y, The handles for lifting the Box when full.

I, The rebbit or crease a top for fastening Boxes upon one another.

K, The pegs that fasten Boxes together.

Fig. 3. Represents the frame.

A, The frame for the Bees to fasten their work on.

B, The nuts for the screw nails fastened in the 4. posts or pillars upon which
the whole frame hangs, and to which 12. sticks are fastened.

C, The 6. cross sticks that cross the rest.

B The perpendicular stick in the middle, by which ascend and descend, betwixt
the Boxes.

Fig. 4 Represents a Colony, or 3. Boxes standing a top one another, it needs
no description; for it is nothing else but 3. Boxes placed a top one another.

The Description of the Bee-House.
THe House may be made either of wood, bricks, or stone, etc. And covered
either with Lead, Tile, or etc. yet what ever it be covered with, it must be
seil'd closely with good well seasoned wood, and so smooth as no Vermin may
have access or place to lodge in* also the bottom must be lined with boards
well joined together, it will be convenient that it be two foot high above the
ground, and stretched half a foot without the door, that it may be convenient
for the Bees to rest upon, before they enter the House, and when they come
forth to view the weather, or to lie and sun themselves in a fair day; this
extension of the floor will serve also for preserving the floor from Vermin,
that none creep up the wall of the House, or enter.

A L The height of the wall of the House, which is two yards from the floor to
the lower part of the Roof.

B Two arising above the side-wall.

C The forepart of the House, it must be covered, so as at convenient times it
may be all laid open to the view of the Sun, whereof it must have

D First, A long and broad door hanging down upon Iron hinges to fold up, and
so fastened by an Iron. The breadth of this door must be half the height of the
wall of the house, and it is so long as betwixt one corner of the house and the
other.

E, O, two doors fastened with Iron hinges side-ways, joining in two creases
made in them, as two opening doors are commonly made to join; they are of equal
breadth and length.

F, X, two narrow doors, each in length equal to the proceeding, but far less
in breadth; these open side-wayes, and shut in a rebbit, or crease made, as in
the former doors: these doors are open all the Summer, and shut all the Winter.
The reason why the doors are thus fashioned and fastened, is: First, The great
door hanging downward, is only to be lifted up, and opened once or twice in the
year, at most, when you are to remove any Boxes for taking your Honey, or when
you are to add a Box more then are all opened. The other two doors next to it,
are opened upon like occasion, or oftener, as the Bee-Master pleases, when for
pleasure he desires to view their work; for they give light to the glass
windows; so that when he looks through the doors in the back of the House, then
the glasses receiving light, at the other side will show the work the better.
But observe, this must not be done in the heat of the day; also, the upper
folding door is kept shut at those times to keep off the rays of the Sun from
the Boxes and the Bees.

In the figure of the back of the House, G L B represents the 3. doors therein
opposite to the 3. Colonies placed within the house; if you place more
Collonies, you may make more doors.

Y Z and R, represents that part of the floor of the house, that below the two
lowest doors in the front of the house, is protracted some 3. or 4. inches.

Each pillar of the house must be protracted 1 half foot below the floor, for
feet for the house to stand on, and to keep out Vermin.

Your house must be furnished with good Locks, Hinges, and other things thereto
belonging.

Also you must make a spout of Lead, to convey the water that drops off the
Roof, to the corner of the house, that it may fall there, and not upon the part
of the floor in the front of the house, upon which the Bees rest themselves,
when going out or coming in, lest it should kill any Bees.

The house may be made Nine foot long, and a yard in breadth within from side
to side.

As for the height of the Roof above the walls, it may be made flat, or of any
convenient length, as the Bee-master pleases.

And thus we have described the House, next of its Situation.

Of the convenient situation of your Bee-Houses.
HAving described the Boxes and House, it will be sit in the next place to
advise you how to situate your House with greatest convenience for the
warmness, quiet, and convenience of flying abroad, and returning home of your
Bees.

First: Of all your Gardens, Commons, and Enclosures, that which you would
bestow most pains upon, in Planting and Hedging, is the fittest place for
building of your Bee-House in, for Bees get their most Profitable Food of Trees.

Secondly: Take care you be well guarded from the Northwind, or cold storms,
and see that the House be fencible against all their Enemies and yours.

Thirdly: Place your House in the most Valley-ground, that the ascent may be
when they go abroad, and the descent when they return home laden with work.

Fourthly: Build not your House directly East and West, but a point or two from
the South-east, to the North-West, because the Bees come not forth in the
Morning before the Sun is risen, and they continue after the Sun is set, at
work and exercise, if the Night be fair and calm, whereby several days some
hours are gained to their advantage.

Fifthly: Beware that you over-lay not your ground with too many Colonies, for
there will be more profit of a few Colonies well nourished, then of many in
over-laid ground: Wherefore, build your House according to your ground.

Sixthly: It well be worth the expense and pains of any Bee-Master to plant
such Trees in his ground, as conduce most for the food and nourishment of Bees,
as the Oak, Palm Tree, and Elm, etc. Also, it will be convenient that he plant
his Gardens with Time, Balm, etc.

Seventhly: If the House be built near Meadows, where Cattle feed, it will
conduce for their thriving; for it is observed that Cattle thrives best where
there are most Bees.

How the House is to be furnished with Colonies; how the Boxes are to be
placed, and the Bees transplanted into them.
YOur House being built in a convenient place, you must next know to replenish
it; and for that end, the fittest time of the year must be observed, which is
the beginning of Summer, when Bees are at the Swarming, and looking out for a
new Lodging, then is the fittest time to transplant them from the old Hives to
this new form of Hives, which you may thus effect.

First, take one of your Boxes, and rub it, and dress it with such things, and
after the same manner as you use to do your old Hives when a Swarm is to be put
into them. Then open the square hole in the top of your Box, and place your Box
in the middle or center of the Bee-house, in respect of the length; and as to
the breadth of the House, within an inch of the door of the House, place that
front where the little holes are, by which the Bees go in and out. Then a
well-filled old Stock, or a well-furnish'd new Swarm in the old form of
Straw-Hives, and taking care first to mark that side of it that is the usual
passage of the Bees in and out; place it upon the top of the aforesaid box,
with its front to the front of the box; then having clay ready prepared,
plaster it round on the edge of the old Hive, so as to stop all passsages from
the Bees coming out any other way but through the box; and if it happen that
the old Hive be broader then the top of the box you are to place it on, then
take a thin board made broad, with a hole cut in it even with the hole of the
box, and so put the Hive on it, being between the Hive and box; let all the
Windows of the box be kept shut, except at such times as you have occasion to
look at them toward Evening, or in a Morning, to see how they go forward with
their work.

Also, let all the doors of the House be kept shut but upon like occasion,
except the small ledge at the bottom, which must be always open, save in the
Winter.

When you find that first box full of Work and Bees, except it be very late in
the year, take another box of the Collony, and having prepared it as the
former, lift up the first box, with the Hive upon it, by a Pulley fastened to
the top of the house, or by hands, and put the second box in the place of the
first, under the first box and Hive, having persons ready upon the lifting up
of the box and Hive, with their hands to direct it so as they may fall in the
creases or rebbits; and so leave the Bees to work down into the second box,
till they have filled it also, which is not to be expected the first, Summer
except the Summer be very advantageous. Then at the usual time of the year, for
taking of Bees, take off the old Hive for use, which will be filled with work,
but no Bees, for they will be working in the lowest box. This transplantation
of the Bees, is only used the first time that you build your house and erect
your Colonies.

How to remove your Honey seasonably.
FOr the commodious removal of the Honey, you must observe, that although there
be three boxes in one Colony, yet you must know by your glasses, that there be
two of them full of work, and the body of the Bees working in the lowest box.
Likewise special respect must be had to the season of the year, that plenty may
be left to the Bees; also see that season be good, the situation good, and the
house and boxes well ordered, there is no doubt but two boxes may be taken off
of one Colony, being once well stockt with Bees; the boxes are to be taken off
in this manner. First open the little door on the side of the upper box, and
shut the hole of the lower box top, then having well considered of their
strength, take off the upper box, then unscrew the pinns of the side, and let
out the inner Frame with the whole Fabric, in which there will be no Bees; and
out of it you may take what may be well spared of Honey and Wax, then may you
screw in the Frame into its place again; then opening the Passage between the
Hives, the hole in the top of the lower box, then put on again the box you took
off in the place it was, for to be a relief to the Bees, in case the lowest
hold not out to be Provision enough for the Winter. And so let it always be
Circulated as soon as the lowest box is full of Bees; and the provision made,
you may even in Summertime take off the upper box of Honey, and put in an
empty Box under the lowest.

A Remedy, in case of absurdity committed by the Inspectors of the Bees.
When through the indiscretion or mistake of the Bee-masters, by reason of an
ill season, too small a quantity of provision shall be left, then feeding may
be necessary. The best expedient is to put a Box with suitable provision under
them. There are several sorts of provisions used by Bee-masters, as Honey,
boyld Wort, Bean meal mixed with Honey, and many other expedients which we
refer persons to, according to the conditions of their Family and the Country.

In case there be no small springs, brooks, or rivulets wherein there are
pebble-stones a little surmounting the surface of the water, then set troughs
of water with little chips swiming in them for the Bees to light on, and take
the advantage of the water without hazard.

Of the Excellency of the New Method above the old.
THe Excellency of this New Method above the Old, will most clearly appear by
comparing them together, by showing the inconveniences of the old, and the
conveniences of the new, for it is an approved axiom that Contraria juxta se
posita magis elucescunt. First then I will propose the inconveniences of the
old method.

1. The charge of keeping a person all the three months of Hay and Corn
Harvest, to attend them.

2. The trouble of preserving them in their Swarming from going away and
getting them into their boxes.

3. From the loss of time in the confusion that they are in before they Swarm,
for three weeks or a month, and their unsettlement for a week afterward, which
takes up one third of their time.

4. The mispending of their time in Idleness and Luxury, wherein they only
beget a numerous brood of Beggars that dye in the Winter, instead of employing
all that time in a channel of profitable labor for their Owners, which with
the former loss makes two thirds of their time.

5. The destroying of the most industrious part of the Bees by smothering or
drowning, which is an ill reward of the industry of so good Servants, and a
great loss to the Owners of them.

6. The Inconveniency of being exposed to Cattle, Vermin, and excessive heats
and colds, with many other Casualties.

Secondly: I will propose the Conveniences or advantages of this New way.
1. In this New way there is no charge of keeping a Person to attend them, only
their Recreation in having inspection into them, how they go forward in their
work, and having no occasion to Swarm.

2. In this way they Hive themselves by an additional box.

3. By their additional box which preserves them from swarming, idleness and
luxury; there is two thirds of their time gained for their Owners profit.

4. All the vigorous Bees are preserved alive, to repeat their industry for
their Masters advantage.

5. By the commodiousness of your house, which is close and strong, and the
convenience of your Boxes which are also close, you have safety and
preservation to your Bees.

6. By reason of your glass lights, you are always able to make a judgment of
the state of your Bees.

Now considering the charge, trouble, loss and hazard in the old method, that
eats up the profit, and discourages the Owners. This new method that frees from
all these inconveniences of charge, loss, etc. must of necessity by any
judicious person be preferred for the good of the Commonwealth, and of every
Bee-master.

Further, The profit of 3. Collonies may be supposed in a seasonable year to
accrue to the Owner, the value of 14 or 15 pound per annum when settled, and
that without any charge or trouble; whereas the old method, with as many Bees
as these 3 Collonies are stockt with, will not amount to above 3 or 4 pound per
annum in Honey and Wax, from which is to be deducted the charge of a person for
3. months in Hay and Corn harvest, which cannot be worth less than 40 shillings,
besides trouble and hazard, etc.

Several objections Answered.
1. Object. Some may object, that this new method is only a project that has
never been practiced or experimented, and consequently not fit for a wise man
to disburse a sum of money upon. I answer, That the Rationale of the proposal,
with the present certificate of several substantial persons living near the
place where this has been practiced and experimented with success full Seven
years; together, with an express account thereof given in the printed
Transaction (Numb. 96. July 21. 1673.) Of the Illustrious Royal Society at
Gresham-Colledge, is enough to encourage any ingenious person to run so small a
hazard, for so great an advantage.

2. Object. If then this experiment of so great an advantage, has been known
for several years by many persons, how comes it to pass that it han't been
practiced also by many persons? Answer, That person that managed it, has not
been so free to accommodate persons with the perfect measures and secrets of
it, although it has been often and earnestly desired of him by persons of
Quality.

3. Object. Seeing the Bees are still preserved from destruction, then we find
by calculation, they will increase to so great a number and swarm, as the Collony
will not be able to contain them. Answer, If the Honey be seasonably taken from
them, so as Room be left to work in, they will be more industrious, and less
luxurious; so that experience will teach you, that they increase in number
only, because of idleness and heat, for these make them luxurious.

4. Object. That you depriving them of their Honey, and not destroying them,
keeps them only alive to be starved in Winter.

Answer. It being clear from the premises, that they have redeemed of their
time, and consequently made of provision more in that time, the Owners may as
safely take away of their Honey, upon a right judgment made by inspection
through the glass, and leaving but one third, as they that leave a stock full
of Bees and Honey.

5. Object. That the charge of 5. or 6. pound in setting them up at first, does
bring a present inconveniency upon the Owner.

Answer, The ample and sudden aforementioned advance of his profit and freedom
from the continued charge of old Bee-Hives, does abundantly overbalance that
present inconveniency or charge.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Introduction, page 2. line 2. read thin: p. 9. l. 12. r. two Gavels:
line 19. r. first D. line 22. r. Iron hinge: l. 23. r. one third. p. 10. l. 23.
r. they all p. 11. dele and 2 p 12. l. 4. r. a foot and a half: p. 16. l. 8 how
to: p. 17. l. 13. r. take a p. 20. l. 14^ r. the season.


