THE Church History OF ETHIOPIA. WHEREIN, Among other things, The Two Great
Splendid ROMAN MISSIONS into That Empire are placed in their true Light. To
which are Added, An Epitome of the Dominican History of That Church. And an
Account of the Practices and Conviction of MARIA of the Annunciation, the
Famous NUN of Lisbon.

Composed By MICHAEL GEDDES, D.D. Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

To the Right Honorable AND Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop
of LONDON; One of the Lords of His MAJESTY's Privy Council.
May it please Your Lordship,
THE following Book being the History of a Church that was never at any time
under the Papal Yoke, and which when its Princes, instead of being Nursing
Fathers, struggled hard of late years to have brought its Neck under it; never
rested until it had both broke that insupportable Yoke asunder, and secured it
self from ever having the like Attempts made again upon its Liberty: To whom
can it so naturally go for Patronage, as to a Noble and Great Prelate, who had
the Courage, when Popery was in the height of its last Triumph among us, in
his own single Person to give it the first Public Check that it met with (a
kindness the Church and State of England will, I hope, never forget, I am sure
they ought not), and who has furthermore, for near these Twenty Years, made it
his chief Study, by creating a right understanding betwixt all Antipapal
Churches, to unite them all into one Body; that so they may be the better able
to withstand their common Enemy, who is still indefatigable in his Endeavors
to bring all Churches yet into bondage.

Which Consideration, together with the great Obligation the Compiler of this
History is under, to neglect no opportunity of owning to the World how much he
has been beholden to your Lordship; as they have put me upon dedicating it to
You, so I cannot but hope, that a Person of Your Lordship's High Birth, and
admirable Benignity and sweetness of Temper, will both pardon my Presumption in
so doing, and pass by any weaknesses that may discover themselves in the
Composure; and also accept it as a small Testimony of my being,

Your Lordship's Devoted, and most humble Servant, Michael Geddes.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN in the Preface to the Synod of Diamper, I promised, from Portuguese
Relations, to give some Account of the Churches which were never within the
Bounds of the Roman Empire; I intended to have begun with the Church of Mosul,
or Babylon; but not having hitherto been able to procure those Informations of
it which I had then some reason to expect; and having, during my nine Years
Residence at Lisbon, furnished my self with all the Portuguese Books which do
any ways treat of Ethiopia, I was persuaded by some Friends to alter my mind,
and to begin with That Church, which of all others, till within these Two
hundred years, had had the least Communication with the Roman; and which,
notwithstanding all the pains its Princes and the Jesuits have been at of late,
to bring her under the Bondage of the Papacy, has, tho with a terrible
struggle, maintained her Primitive Liberty and Independency on that Ambitious
and Usurping See; and does to this day, with greater Zeal than ever, assert
them.

And that I may not seem Actum agere in publishing an History of Ethiopia after
the Learned Mr. Ludolphus: I am to acquaint the Reader, That whereas the two
great Splendid Roman Missions into that Empire, are the most remarkable things
that have come to our knowledge in the History of that Church; so if some of my
Learned Friends are not mistaken, Those Two Missions, with all their Steps and
Circumstances, are here placed in a truer Light than they were ever seen in
before.

And tho I will not promise that my Conjectures upon the dark and hidden things
of those Missions are all true; as who indeed that makes many, and especially
in matters which have been industriously disguised by men of Art, will venture
to promise? yet this I can safely say, that I have not made one but what I
thought I had some ground for; And as to matters of fact, I do assure the
Reader, that in the matter of the Missions, I have set down few or none, but
what I had out of Roman Catholic Writers, and licensed by the Inquisition, and
who for the most part were Jesuits.

There are Four things, whereof, if I am not mistaken, this History will
abundantly satisfy the Impartial Reader.

The First is, That the Roman Missionaries, but especially the Jesuits, having
neither the gift of Miracles, nor of Patience, to wait for the slow issues of
the old method of converting Nations by preaching the Faith to them, are every
where (where they can come at them) for dispatching it with Dragoons, or by
some other violent and sanguinary way. The Jesuits being all to a man of the
same opinion with their great Apostle of the Indies, Francis Xaveir, whose
Maxim, as Ravarette informs us, was: Mientras no estiuveron debaxo del
Mosquete, no avia de ver Christiano de provecho; that is to say, Missionaries
without Muskets do never make Converts to any purpose: The truth of which
Maxim, John Bolunte, a Missionary Jesuit, tells us, is confirmed by universal
Experience. Ni^en^el Brasil (says he) Peru, Mexico, Florida, Philipinas, y
Maluca, ha havido Christianidad, ni Conversion, sinla sombra de vel Poder
Secular; that is, Neither in the Brasils, Peru, Mexico, Florida, the Philipins,
or Maluca, have any Conversions been made, without the help of the Secular
Power; affirming in another place of his Book, Que en nenguna part se ha hecho
fruto sin Armas, that is, That Missionaries have done nothing any where,
without Military Arms.

The Second is, That there is no Tyranny in the World equal to that which the
Roman Prelates (where they have the Secular Arm at their command) do
continually exercise, and that without the common relentings of humanity, upon
all sorts of people, that will not turn to their Religion.

The Third is, That Missionaries, when ever they have inspired a Prince, the
main Body of whose Subjects are Anti-papists, with a bigotry to introduce their
Religion into his Country, do commonly before they have done with him, either
run him out of breath, or make him run his head against a wall.

The Fourth is, That Ambition did very early take possession of the Jesuits
Order, that Society not being above ten years standing in the World, when it
had engrossed a Mission to it self, which did promise both greater and cheaper
Honors to its Ministers than ever any Mission had done before.

The clear discovery of which Truths, together with that of the true Spirit and
Temper of Missionaries, and the Precipices they put Princes upon, who are so
unhappy as to be their Converts, must make This History to be of some use to
all Protestant Countries, which may therein, as in a glass see, what treatment
they are to expect from Popery, when ever the Supreme Power is in its hands.

I have as an Appendix, given the Reader an Epitome of the Dominican History of
Ethiopia, writ by a Friar of that Order, and printed at Valentia, in the Year
1610. and not only licensed by the Inquisition, and all the other Regular and
Secular Licensers of the Diocese, but recommended likewise by them to the
World, as a true, useful, and edifying History: As also a Full Account of the
Practices and Conviction of Maria of the Annunciation, the Famous Lisbon Nun;
which I take to be two such Originals in their several kinds, as are not easily
to be met with.

A Catalogue of the Authors out of whom this History was composed.
AThanasius. Ruffinus. Philostorgius. Elmirinus. Paulus Venetus. Damianus Goer.
Zaga Zabo. Francis Alvarez. The Patriarch Bermudes. John de Barros. Antony de
Gourea. Osorius. Pereira. Thomas a Jesu. Wunsleb. Job Ludolphus. Baronius.
Spondanus.
These that follow were all Jesuits.

Maffeius. Gueriro. Pays. Godinus. Almeyda. Fernandez. Tellez. Rodriguez. Vega.
The Patriarch Mendes. The Missionaries Letters. Virichus.
A TABLE.
A.
THE Abuna (or Patriarch) never grants any Indulgences, page 88. A false
Account of his Election, 111. His Office, 112. He comes to Court, and is angry
with the Conferences that had been held without his leave, 301. The Conferences
are renewed before him, 301. He leaves the Court in wrath, and excommunicates
the Emperor, 302. He promotes an Association in defense of their Religion, 303.
Being invited to Court, goes thither well guarded, 305. The Abuna and Monks
wait on the Emperor in a Body, 306. Upon the Emperor's slighting their
Complaints, they leave the Camp in a rage, 307. He goes against Julius in
person, 309. and is slain, 311. Adam succeeds Claudius, 201. a fierce Enemy to
Popery, 201. is slain in battle, 206. is succeeded by his Son Malac Saged, who
takes no notice of the Missionaries, 207. Alaf is succeeded by his Son Adjam
Saged, the present Emperor of Ethiopia, 465. The Agaus take up Arms, 303. The
Agaus having sent to a Prince of the Royal Family, who had taken sanctuary
among the Gauls, to take the Crown of Ethiopia upon him, take up Arms in
defense of their Religion, 356. Albuquerque sends two Envoys to Helena, the
Governess of Ethiopia, 43. Alelujah, the most famous of all their Monasteries,
31. The Discoveries were intermitted and revived again by Alphonso. The
Alexandrian Submission he refers to, was a mere Trick, 231. They make a
Remonstrance of their Case to the Emperor, 360. They by a Trick necessitate the
Emperor to declare his willingness that his good Subjects should enjoy their
old Religion, 390. The strong Mountain of Ambucanet is stormed by Gama, 130.
Father Antony Fernandez's Letter to the Father Visitor of the Indies, 320.
Ambassadors from the Portuguese and Habassins had their Audience of the Pope at
Bononia, 78. The Habassin Ambassadors submission to the Pope, 79. Ambassadors
are sent from Ethiopia to Portugal, 289. A particular Account of the
Ambassador's Journey, 293. They are industriously sent out of the way, 294. They
are kindly received by the Comical King of Gingiro, 297. They are stopped by the
Prince of Combute, upon an intimation of their not having been sent by the
Emperor, ibid. They are suffered to proceed on their Journey, 299. They are
thrown into Jayl by the King of Alaba, and afterward sent home stripped, ibid.
The Archbishop of Goa sends one Sylva, a Secular Priest, into Ethiopia, 229.
The Archbishop of Goa writes to the Abuna to submit himself to the Pope after
the Example of the Patriarch of Alexandria, 231.
Athanateus's Letter to the King of Portugal, 281. His Letter to the Viceroy of
the Indies, 282.

B.
BAhurnagays takes up Arms against Adam, 203. He is routed, and goes over to
the Turks, 205. He brings the Turks into Ethiopia, and delivers Matrua and the
other Seaport-Towns to them, ibid. Bartholomew de Tiroli, Founder of the great
Dominican Convent Alelujah, 470. Basilides throws his Uncle Raz Cella into
Prison, p. 396. He sends for the Patriarchs and Fathers Arms, and banisheth
them all to Fremona, 396. Having extirpated Popery, recovers most of his lost
Provinces, 465. After an happy Reign of Thirty two years, he is succeeded by
his Son Aelaef Saged, 465.
John Bermudes before he went, was was consecrated a Bishop by the Abuna.
Habassin Ordination by a single Eutychian Bishop, was allowed to be valid by
the Pope when he came to Rome, 120. Bermudes having his Title to the Abunaship
of Ethiopia confirmed by the Pope, goes from Rome to Lisbon, 121. Where he
acted as the Habassin Abuna, ibid. He returns to Goa, having, as it is said,
obtained an Order for 400 Soldiers, ibid.

C.
TWO Italian Capuchins come to Suaghem, 453. Six French Capuchins are sent by
several ways into Ethiopia, 450. Don Edward Calvam, chief of the Embassy, dying
in the Island of Camera, was succeeded by Lima, 48. Cavillam and Payo, who both
understood Arabic, are sent by the way of Memphis to find out Habassia, 40.
Cavillam (Payo dying by the way) goes first to the Indies, then to the Southern
Coast of Africa, and at last enters into Habassia, 40. He was kindly
entertained by the King, whose name was Alexander, 41. He was detained as a Spy
by King Nahod, ibid. He sends an account. of the Country by an Habassin Monk,
ibid. Cella Christos's Letter to the Pope, 291. He turns Roman Catholic, 285.
The Cardinal of Portugal prevails with the Pope to call the Patriarch out of
Ethiopia, 210. The High Chamberlain's Speech, 341. The Church that had been
turned into a Mosque, is consecrated by the Abuna, 131. The Churches built by
Queen Sheba, and Queen Candace, 473. Claudius the Emperor invaded by Nur, King
of Adel, 199. Gives him battle, in which he was slain, 200. Claudius has some
success in the beginning, but was quickly after obliged to retire to the
Mountains, 122.
The Coadjutor's Letter to the Emperor, 181. He goes to Court, 182. He is
received with great ceremony, 183. He urges the Emperor to submit himself to
the Pope, 184. The Coadjutor thunders out an Excommunication, 197. A Dialogue
betwixt the Emperor and Coadjutor, 202. The Coadjutor and the Fathers made
Prisoners by the Turks, 206. The Patriarch dying at Goa, the Coadjutor becomes
Patriarch, 207.
A Conference between the Emperor and a Portuguese about Religion, 178. Several
Conferences about Religion, 195, 300. The Congregation de Propaganda fide,
being dissatisfied with the Conduct of the Portuguese Jesuits in Ethiopia,
takes the Mission from them, and gives it to the Capuchins, 446. The
Congregations answer to the Patriarch, 455.
The Courtiers finding that none but Papists were favored, turn civil to the
Fathers and their Religion, 300. The Country is much alarmed therewith, ibid.
The Croisade is totally defeated, and the old Abuna slain, 311. A fifth
Croisade raised against the Emperor, 349.
D.
THE Damotes take up Arms for their Religion, and are routed, 318. The Emperor
David's Letter to Emanuel King of Portugal, 50. His Titles, 50, 51. His Letter
to King John the Third of Portugal, 58. His Letter to the Roman Pontiff, 64.
His second Letter to the Roman Pontiff, 71. He brings a terrible Storm upon
himself, by seeking to enter into an Alliance with the Portuguese, 118. He
sends one John Bermudes a Portuguese (after having given him a Title to succeed
the Abuna when he died) to Rome and Lisbon, to solicit and hasten some Succors,
120.
Dembea Lake, its Description, 4. its Islands, ib. Eight Dominicans arrive at
Ethiopia, and are kindly received by Prester John, 467.
E.
EManuel King of Portugal, sends a splendid Embassy to the Emperor of Habassia,
47. He sends Almeida with a great Fleet to take Ormus, and some other Seaports
in the Indies, 42.
The design of the Habassin Embassy, 110. The Emperor being acquainted with the
arrival of the Portugueses, writes to Gama to come and join him, 128. The
Emperor being restored to the quiet possession of his Kingdom, quarrels with
the Portuguese, 145. The chief cause of his quarrel was, the Abuna urging him
to turn Roman Catholic presently, 145. He is resolved never to turn Roman
Catholic, 146. He thereupon writes to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to send an
Abuna into Ethiopia as formerly, 147. He enrages the Portuguese thereby, ibid.
He receives the Abuna, whose Name was Joseph, at Deberea, 148. He rids himself
of the Popish Patriarch Bermudes, ibid. His defense of himself and his Faith,
167. His Confession of Faith, 185. He offers to lay the Debates about Religion
before his Council, 189. He answers the Coadjutor's Book, and writes one in
defense of his own Faith, 196. He invites Father Peter to Court, 239. He
greatly admires Father Peter's Sermon, and therefore sent him his Dinner from
his own Table, 248. He discovers his Intention to Father Peter to turn Roman
Catholic, 250. His Letter to the Pope, 251. His Letter to the King of Spain,
253. He marches against the Rebels, 257. He is killed fighting, 259.
The New Emperor sends to Father Peter to come to him, 273. He offers to write
to the King of Portugal and the Pope, and is encouraged by Father Peter to do
it, 275. His Letter to the Pope, 276. His Letter to the King of Spain, 278.
These Letters were probably forged by some Missionary, 280. A mock Emperor set
up and massacred, 284. The Emperor and his Brother Raz Cella Christos,
convinced of Christ's having two Natures, 285. He publishes an Edict,
prohibiting any to affirm that there is but one Nature in Christ, 301. He
publishes a Proclamation, commanding all his Subjects to turn Roman
Catholics, 303. He is addressed to, not to trouble his Subjects about their
Religion, 304. He is deaf to all such Addresses, 305. An Attempt made upon his
Life, 308. Upon his Victory, prohibits his Subjects to observe Saturday, 312. A
severe Libel comes out against him, 312. By a second Proclamation, he commands
all Subjects to work upon Saturdays, 203. A Rebellion breaks out upon it, 313.
His Speech thereupon, 315. He sends an Army against the Rebels, and routs them,
317. He reconciles himself to the Church of Rome, 319. He grows jealous of his
Brother Raz Cella, 331. He sends him against Gabriel, who was at the head of a
Croisade, 332. His Letter to the Patriarch, 333. He is obliged to employ his
Brother against them, 357. Dom Apolinar d'Almeyda brings Letters, and a Jubilee
to the Emperor, and to the Prince, 364. The Emperor's Zeal revived by this
Letter, and a Jubilee, 368. He is defeated by the Peasants of Lasta, 372. He is
passionately addressed for a Toleration, ibid. He speaks to the Patriarch about
it, and will nor be denied, 373. The Toleration proclaimed. The Patriarch's
Protestation against it, 374. The Emperor's Answer to the Patriarch's
Protestation, 377. He declares his Resolution to continue a Roman Catholic,
379. The Patriarch baffled in a great point of his Jurisdiction, 380. The
Country People in good humor by a Toleration, yet not satisfied without
reestablishment of their old Religion, and banished the Patriarch and Fathers
of Ethiopia. Raz Cella going against the Peasants with an Army, is routed, 381.
The Romanists have all their Churches and Lands taken from them. The Emperor
dies, and is succeeded by his Son Basilides, 395. The Emperor marches against
them, and obtains a Victory, 382. He is moved by the passionate Remonstrances
of the Grandees and others, to restore the Alexandrian Religion. 383. The
Patriarch and Fathers endeavor to divert him, 385. He continues immovable in
his Resolution, 388. The Patriarch's Manifesto, 392. A Proclamation for
restoring the Alexandrian Religion. Festivities thereupon, 394. The Emperor
hearing thereof, commands the Patriarch and Fathers to leave Ethiopia, 422. He
writes to the Bashaw of Suaqhem, 454. The Bashaw murders them all three, and
sends their heads to the Emperor, 454. The Emperor's Library founded by Queen
Saba, 471. His Treasury, 472. The Empress arrives at the Camp, 127.
The Eucharist is administered to Children when they are baptized, 95. Eugenius
the Fourth translates the Council from Florence to Rome, upon a sham Pretense
that the Emperor of Ethiopia was sending an Ambassador with a submission of
himself and his Church to him, 23. Esimetheus made King of the Homerites,
deposed by the Habassin Army, which put Abraham in his place, 17. Ethiopia, the
Climate, 1. The true Title of the Emperor, ibid. The Provinces, 2. Its several
great Rivers beside the Nile, 6. Its great mixture of People, 7. The Court
Language is Amchara, ibid. The Emperor names his Successor, ib. The Royal Arms,
ib. The Queen of Sheba reported to have been its Empress. Her Son by Solomon
said to have introduced Judaism into it, 8. The Eunuch that was baptized by
Philip, is said to have been of this Country, and to have introduced
Christianity into it, 9. Frumentius, Bishop of Axum, its Apostle, 10.
Constantius's Letter to the Princes of Axum, 11. Nine Monks come into it, 14.
Justinian sends an Embassy into Ethiopia, 15. The business of the Embassy, 16.
The Ethiopians send an Ambassador to the Patriarch of Alexandria, 17. James the
Abuna of Ethiopia deposed by the Queen, and restored by the King afterward,
18. The seventh place in a general Council given to the Abuna of Ethiopia, by
the Arabic Canons of the Council of Nice, 20. The first Discovery of the
Church of Ethiopia by the Portugueses, 29. The account of the Succession of
their grand Abbots, 29.
F.
TWO Fathers are sent from Fremona to congratulate Suseneus, who took the Name
of Seltem Saged, 272. Seven of the Fathers purchase leave to go to Dio, but the
Patriarch is detained, 433. Four Fathers condemned as Traitors, and executed by
the Mob, 446. Father Fermandes sollicits for Troops, 208.
The French King's Rage against Protestants, superior to that of the Arians
against the Orthodox, 13.
G.
GAma enters into Ethiopia with his Troops, and the Roman Patriarch, 125. He
sends an hundred of his men to fetch the Empress to his Camp, 126. He is
intercepted in his march toward the Emperor by Granhe, 132. An huffing
Message, with a ridiculous Present, is sent to Gama by Granhe, ib. Gama returns
Granhe a Message, with a Present no less huffing than ridiculous, 133. Gama
besieged on all sides by Granhe, 134. He opens a passage to himself, with the
bravery of his men, being assisted with Artillery, ib. He obliges Granhe to
retreat, Gama conducted by a Jew to a Mountain, of which, and a great drove of
Horses, he makes himself Master, 137. He routed and taken Prisoner, 140. Is
beheaded, 141.
The Gauls invade Ethiopia, surprise Buco the Viceroy, and are driven home by
Raz Cella, 348. Granhe, a Mohammedan Prince, obtains several Victories over
David, 119. He drives him at last, in a manner, out of his Empire, ib. Granhe
being reinforced by a Body of Turks, and a Train of Artillery, forces Gama to
come to a Battle, 139. Granhe killed fighting, 144.
H.
THE King of Habassia victorious over the King of Aden, 19. Pretty Stories sent
from Habassia, 346. The Habassins hold the Scriptures to be the perfect Rule of
Faith, 31. Their Monasteries little Villages, 30. Monkery much the same in
Habassia, as it was in the beginning, ib. They are Eutychians, ib. They deny
the Pope's Supremacy, ib. The Emperor is Head of the Church, 32. Their Priests
marry, ib. They have diverse Forms of Baptism, ib. All that are present at the
Celebration of the Sacrament must communicate. They do not elevate nor adore
the Host, nor keep it after the Communion. They break it after it is
consecrated, ib. They reckon the receiving of it breaks their Fast, ib. They do
not believe Transubstantiation, 33. They have only a General Confession, 34.
They deny Purgatory, Confirmation, and Extreme Unction. They condemn Graven
Images. They keep Saturday and Sunday. Their Offices are all in the Vulgar
Tongue, 34. They are devout. They never go into a Church with their Shoes on,
nor sit in it but upon the ground, 35. They seldom preach, ib. The Habassin
Embassy to the Pope little regarded, 74. After having lay'n five years
neglected at Lisbon, it was sent to Rome as an honorable Appendix to a
Portuguese Embassy, 75. The Habassins believe Original Sin, 89. Their Clerks
may marry, ib. The Habassins have a great Veneration for their Churches, 91.
They are all baptized every year on the day of the Epiphany, 92. They
circumcise both Men and Women, 93. They give the Eucharist to Children when
they are baptized, 95. Circumcision is not observed by them as a Sacrament, but
a Civil Custom, 96. Children of Christian Parents before baptized, called half
Christians, 98. Confirmation and Extreme Unction no Sacraments. The Scripture
the perfect Rule of Faith, 100. They all receive the Sacrament in both
Elements. It is not kept in their Churches; it is never received but in the
Church, 101. It is never administered but once a day in a Church; it is not
showed to the People. No Masses said for the Dead, 102. Justification of their
abstaining from Meats made unclean by the Law, 103. An expression of the
greatness of the Habassin Zeal against Popery, 164. The Empress Helena sends
two Envoys to Albuquerque, 44. Father Hierom is sent into Europe to solicit for
Troops, and to justify the Jesuits Conduct in Ethiopia, 443. He obtains nothing
at Rome but Blessings, and at Madrid and Lisbon but fair Promises, 444.
The Homerites conquered by the Ethiopians. Their Deliverers, 16.
I.
A Ridiculous Imposture does Popery some disservice, 362. The Infant Don
Henry, the first and most zealous Promoter of the discovery of unknown
Countries, 36. Ignatius Loyola labors to engross the Habassin Mission to his
new Order, 149. The Jesuits leaping so quickly into such high Dignities,
contrary to their Vows, create them Enemies, 159. Two Jesuits are sent in a
disguise to Ethiopia, 226. They were discovered, and made Slaves in Arabia,
227. A Maronite Jesuit is sent in disguise to Ethiopia, ibid. He is discovered
and put to death, for having professed himself a Mohammedan, 228. The Jesuits
erect a College at Di^, 233.
Jacob, the Natural Son of Malac Sagued, was then Emperor, 237. Jacob is
deposed, and Za Danguil made Emperor, 239. Some Instances of the Jesuits
sacrificing all other Interests to that of their own Order, 241. Upon Jacob's
delay of coming to the Army, he is chosen Emperor by them, 264. A Message is
sent to him by the Army, 265. The Army upon receiving a Letter from Jacob,
declare for him, 266. Jacob comes to the Army, 267. Jacob makes Susunaeus great
Offers, provided he would give over pretending to the Crown, 268. Jacob
marches toward Susunaeus, 269. His General goes over to Susunaeus, 270. Jacob
and Susunaeus come to a Battle, 271. Jacob is killed fighting, ibid.
The General of the Jesuits makes the Emperor's Submission to the Pope, without
any Commission from him to do it, 323. He sends a Nuntio to acquaint him
therewith, ibid. The Jesuits reckon their work done, before it was well begun,
345. They never wrought Miracles in Ethiopia, 379. The Cruelty of the
Persecutions raised by them, 410. The two remaining Jesuits in Ethiopia are
protected by the Peasants of Lasta, 451.
Julius enters into an Association, and takes the Field against the Emperor,
303. Julius the Emperor's Son-in-law, takes up Arms for the defense of their
Religion, 308. He marches with a great Croisade against the Emperor, 309.

K.
THE great Champion Kebo is sent into Tigre to be sacrificed, 359. The King of
Spain's Letter to the Emperor of Ethiopia, 286.
L.
A Lady put to death for her Religion, 351. The History of the Lisbon Nun,
called Maria of the Annunciation, 481. The Imposture discovered, 485. Her
Penances assigned, 486.

M.
THE Island of Madera first discovered. No Masses are said for the Dead by the
Habassins, 102. A long Justification of their abstaining from Meats that are
made unclean by the Law, 103.
The King of Mombucca's Speech to his Subjects, after he had massacred all the
Portugueses that were in the City, 436. He is justified in part by a Portuguese
Historian, 442. The Portuguese are baffled before Mombucca, 443.

N.
RIver Nile, its Original, 3. Cause of its Rising, 5. It was known by the
Ancients, ibid. Diverted from coming down to Egypt, and turned into its old
Channel again, upon the intercession of the Bishop of Alexandria, 19.
O.
O Kay undertakes to protect the Patriarch, 422. He promises to carry the
Patriarchs and Fathers to Matzua, 429. Okay finding no Portuguese Succors come,
delivers the Bishop of Nice and three Fathers, who by his Connivence remained
behind in his Country, to the Emperor, 445. They are all Four condemned as
Traitors, and executed by the Mob, 446.
P.
A Patriarch, two Bishops Coadjutors, with ten Friars, all of the Jesuits
Order, are nominated to go into Ethiopia, 150. The Patriarch and one of his
Coadjutors are consecrated at Lisbon, 158. The old Patriarch was lodged at the
Jesuits College in Goa, 173. Sent home and dropped in the Island of St. Helena,
174. The Patriarch's Answer to the Pope, 214. The Patriarch arrives at Goa,
333. The Patriarch lands at Baylar, 336. He comes to Court, 338. He is
graciously received by the Emperor, ibid. He preaches before the Emperor, 339.
A new Revenue is settled upon him, 344. He excommunicates a great Man for
keeping Church Lands, 353. He hastens the downful of Popery by two indiscreet
Acts, 361. He opposes a Toleration when proposed to him by the Emperor, 363. A
Toleration is proclaimed. The Patriarch's Protestation against it, 374. Is
baffled in a great Point of Jurisdiction, 380. Is advised by his Friends to
give over Preaching, 395. The Romanists have all their Churches and Lands taken
from them, ibid. The New Emperor disarms the Patriarch and Fathers, and
banisheth them all to Frenona, 396. The Patriarch's Letter to the Emperor
thereupon, 398 The Emperor renews his Orders for banishing and disarming them
400. The Patriarch's second Letter to the Emperor, 401. The Principle of the
Seekers is advanced by the Patriarch, 405. The Patriarch, so soon as arrived at
Fremona, sends Four Jesuits to the Indies to solicit for Troops, 421. He sues
to Okay, a discontented Lord, for Protection against the Emperor, 422. Okay
undertakes to protect him, ibid. The Patriarch sends to Okay for a Guard, 427.
The Patriarch and Fathers are lodged safe in Okay's Territories, 428. The
Patriarch and most of the Fathers are put into the hands of the Turk at Matzua,
431. He gets to Gea, 445. He sends and dedicates a Book written on the Six
first General Councils, with a Catechism, to the Congregation De Propaganda
Fide, 455. He gives Sacred Relics to the Capuchins of Goa, 460. He sends an
Habassin and a Banean into Ethiopia, with a Commission to a Priest to be his
Vicar General, 461. The Patriarch is named to the Archbishopric of Goa, but
was dead before his Nomination arrived, 464. An inhumane Persecution is raised
against the Alexandrians, 353. Father Peter, a Spanish Jesuit, steals into
Ethiopia, 237. He sends the Secular Priest home before he went to Court, 241.
He is highly complimented by the King, and the whole Court, 247. He withdraws
from Court upon a slight pretense, 256. A Rebellion breaks out presently after.
He repairs to the Victorious Rebels, 261. Finding them divided, he retires to
wait to see where the Crown would fix, ibid. He builds the Emperor a standing
Palace, 307
Pope Alexander the Third pretends to have received an Ambassador from Prester
John, 21. Pope Clement pretended to have received an Embassy from the same
Prince, 22. The Pope gives a Title to the Crown of Portugal to all the new
Countries they shall discover, 38. The Pope's Answer to the Habassin
Ambassador, 80. The Pope sends an Italian Bishop to Ethiopia, 229. The Pope's
Letter to the Emperor, 288. The Popes are civiller to remote Heretics, than
domestic ones, 289. The wonderful change Popery had wrought on the tempers of
its Converts, 352. Pope Urban the Eighth's Letter to Seltem Saged Emperor of
Ethiopia, 364.
The King of Portugal thinks of sending a new Patriarch into Ethiopia, 149.
Wisely suspecting that things were not so ripe in Ethiopia as they were
reported to be, sends an Envoy for true intelligence, 160.
The Astrolabe and Tables of Declination found out by the Portugueses, 39. At
the River Zaires in the Kingdom of Congo, the Portugueses first heard of the
Habossins, 39. The Reason why the Portugueses sent no Troops into Ethiopia,
when so-strongly solicited to do it, 220.
The Prelate of the Jesuit's Order was an Usurper, 173. It is probable that
there never was any such Emperor as Prester John, 22. The Rigor of the Priors
of Plurimanos and Allelujah, who are the chief Inquisitors of Ethiopia, 471.
The Proclamation for restoring the Alexandrian Religion, 394.
Q.
THE Queen Mother hearing of a Portuguese Fleet being in the Red Sea, sends two
Envoys to the Admital, to implore some Succors, 123. They obtain 400 Soldiers
of the Portuguese Admiral, which were commanded by Don Christopher de Gama, 124.

R.
RAZ Cella Christos's Letter to the Patriarch, 334. He is accused of plotting
with the Portuguese to make himself Emperor, 354. He is routed by the Peasants,
381. He writes passionately for Troops, 462. He is put to death, 464.
Rodriguez the Jesuit, who went with the Envoy into Ethiopia, his account of
their Voyage and Negotiation, 162. No mention of Rodriguez having seen the old
Patriarch, tho his chief business in Ethiopia was to fetch him from thence, if
he found him alive, 172. Rodriguez frights the old Patriarch out of his
Province, to make room for his Successor, 172.
The Romanists lose ground at Court daily, 359. The Romanists have all their
Churches and Lands taken from them, 195.

S.
STory of the Queen of Sheba and her Son, 94. Seltem Saged curses his
Grandfather's Soul, for not having submitted himself to the Romish Church, 24.
Susunaus proclaims himself Emperor, 262. He will have the Crown or nothing, 268.
Sylva, under the disguise of a Banean Sailor, gets into Ethiopia, 230.
T.
TEcla Haymonot his Miracles, 468. He founded the Monastery of Plurimanos, 469.
Father Torquato is sent by the Patriarch to Suaqhem, for to bring him
intelligence, 456. He meets with the News at Moqua, of Basilides being turned
Mohammedan, 457. At Suaqhem, he hears of the three Capuchins having been
murdered, 458. He is fortunate in finding the Skulls of the two Italian
Friars, and a Bone of the French, 459.
A Tribute laid on the Patriarch of Alexandria, by the Cailiff of Egypt, 18. A
Trick of an Alexandrian Monk, 177.
V.
THE Viceroy of Gojam proclaims the Prince Basilides Emperor of Ethiopia, 369.
The Viceroy first wheedles, and next threatens the Fathers and the Portuguese
to surrender themselves and Arms, but is hindered by the news of a great Army
advancing toward him, 369. He commands a Monk, his own first Cousin, to be put
to death for having turned Roman Catholic, 370. The Viceroy's Servants being
tortured for railing against Popery, the Viceroy is secretly put to death soon
after, 371. The Viceroy, who had no Ships nor Troops to spare for Ethiopia,
finds both for Mombucea, upon its having revolted, 434.

Z.
ZAgazabas, the Habassin Ambassador at Lisbon, his account of the Religion and
Customs of his Country, 81. A Censure on Zagazabas Confession of Faith, 117.
Za Mariam carries the message thereof to the Patriarch, 391. The Emperor Zera
Jacob's Letter to the Habassin Monks at Jerusalem, 25.
BOOKS Printed for Rich. Chiswell.
FOLIO.
WHarton's Anglia Sacra, in two Volumes. Dr. Tho. Brown's Vulgar Errors, and
other Works. -- His Religio Medici alone: With Digby's Annotations. Tho. Pope
Blount Censura Celebriorum Authorum. Clark's Annotations upon the Bible.
Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum and Fugiendarum, in two Vol. per Edvardum Brown.
History of the Island of Ceilou, by Capt. Knox. -- Of the State and City of
Geneva. -- And Antiquities of the Church of Peterburgh.
Dr. John Lightfoot's Works, in two Vol. Rushworth's Historical Collections,
1st. Vol. -- Idem 2d. Part, in 2 Vol. -- Idem 3d. Part, in 2 Vol.
The Laws of the Kingdom of Scotland at large, with Skene de Verborum
significatione. Dr. Towerson's Explication of the Apostles Creed, Ten
Commandmandments, Lord's Prayer, and Sacraments, in 4 Vol.
QUARTO.
DR. Pet. Allix's Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the ancient
Churches of Piedmont and Albigenses, in 2 Parts. Bishop Burnet's Collection of
Tracts, relating both to Church and State, from 1678. to 1694. in 3 Vol. Dr.
Cresner of the Judgments of God upon the Roman Cath. Church. -- Camdeni and
Illustrium Virorum ad Camdenum Epistola. -- Disqusitiones Critica de variis
Bibliorum Editionibus.
The London Divines Examination of Bellarmins's 15 Notes of the Church, with
Tables. -- Examination of the Texts which the Papists cite for proof of their
Religion, with Tables.
Dr. Patrick (now Lord Bishop of Ely) his Parable of the Pilgrim. -- His
Commentary on Genesis. -- His eight Sermons upon several Occasions.
Usserii Historia Dogmatica de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis. Warren's
Geologia: Or, a Discourse of the Earth before the Deluge, in answer to the
Theory of the Earth. Dr. Wake's eleven Treatises against Popery, in 2 Vol. Dr.
Tennison (now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) his account of the Conference with
Pulton the Jesuit. -- His nine Sermons upon several Occasions.
The secret Consults, Negotiations and Intrigues of the Romish Party in
Ireland, from 1660, to 1689, for settlement of Pepery in that Kingdom: With
several other Treatises and Papers relating to those Affairs. An Impartial
History of the Wars in Ireland, in two Parts, with Copper Sculptures. By Mr.
Story, present in the same.
OCTAVO.
LOrd Bacen's Genuine Remains; with an account of his Works. By Dr. Tennison.
Dr. Burton's Discourses, or Sermons, in 2 Vol. with Archbishop Tillotson's
Preface. Dr. John Conant's Sermons. The Letters of Father Paul, Councellor to
the State of Venice; with an account of the same, in a large Preface. Tullies
Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts. The Jesuits Memorial for the
intended Reformation of England, found in King James's Closet. The Indian
Prince, or Self-taught Philosopher. A Discourse of Simony, by Mr. Metford. The
present State of Germany, by Edmund Bohun Esquire; The Unreasonableness of the
Romanists. Bishop Wilkins's Principles of Natural Religion. Dr. Wake's Sermons
and Discourses. Dr. Salmen's Supplement to his London Dispensatory. Bishop
Patrick's Answer to the Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel. -- Exposition of the
Ten Commandments. -- Prayers for several extraordinary Occasions.
Considerations of Eternity, by Drexelius, 12o. Bishop Wettenhall's Method and
Order of private Devotion.
Lately Printed.
DAwson of the Origin of all Laws. Fol. Archbishop Cranmer's Memorials. Fol.
The Present State of England, by Dr. Chamberlane, 8vo. 1694. The History of the
Troubles and Trial of Archbishop Laud, wrote by himself; published by Hen.
Wharton. Fol. Whartoni Historis de Episcopis and Decanis Londinensibus and
Assaventsibus. 8vo. Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons of Sincerity and Constancy
in the Faith and Profession of the True Religion; published from the Originals,
by his Chaplain Dr. Barker, 8vo. 1695. -- His 16 Sermons on several Occasions,
being a 2d. Volume; published from the Original, by Dr. Barker, 8vo. 1696.
Remarks on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers, against Bishop
Burnet. Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers,
against Bishop Burnet. Dr. Williams's Sermons of Divine Revelation, preached at
the Lecture founded by Robert Boil Esquire; for the Year 1695. -- His Vindication
of Archbishop Tillotsons's Sermons against the Socinians; and of the Bishop of
Worcester's Sermon of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. To which is
annexed, a Letter from the Bishop of Salisbury to the Author, in Vindication of
his Discourse of the Divinity of our Savior, 4to.
Reflections on a Libel lately printed, entitled, [ The Charge of Secianism
against Dr. Tillotson considered, etc.] 4to. Dr. Salmon upon the London
Dispensatory. The 6th. Edit. 8vo. 1696. A Discourse of the Power and Efficacy
of Charity. By Mr. John Whitesoot Senior, of Norwich. A Discourse concerning
Coining the New Money lighter. In Answer to Mr. Lock's Considerations about
Raising the Value of Money. By Nicholas Barbon, Esquire;
ADVERTISEMENT.
HEylin's Cosmography, with very large Additions throughout the whole, made by
Edmund Behun, Esquire; is fitted for the Press, and will in short time be begun to
be printed by Subscription.
THE Church History OF Habassia, or Ethiopia Alta.
HABASSIA, The Climate of Ethiopia.
or Ethiopia Alta, or Ethiopia super Egyptum, which are all the same, according
to the Newest and best Accounts we have of it, is 9 Degrees in length, reaching
from Bergamo in the 8th Degree of Northern Latitude, to Focay, which is in the
17th Degree of the same Latitude; and about 140 Leagues in Breadth, taking it
from the Shore of the Red Sea to the Banks of Nile.

The King or Emperor of Habassia, The true Title of the Emperor of Ethiopia.
is called the Naggasi, that is, the Lord or Ruler, and not Prester, Presbyter,
nor Preto John, which Title was first given him by the Portugueses, upon their
imagining him, when they first discovered this Empire, to have been the great
Christian Prester John, who had been so much talked of, and so little known in
Europe; not considering, that all that had spoke of that Great Prince, had
placed his Empire in Asia, to the North of China, and not in Africa: And as to
Zaga Zabi, calling him in his Relation published at Lisbon, Precious John, in
that he played the Ambassador, rather than the Historian, not caring to
undeceive Europe at the expense of a Title which made his Master's Name much
greater in it, than it would have been otherwise.

Now though our Geographers have in their Maps been very liberal to this
Emperor, having extended his Empire 30 or 40 Degrees from South to North, his
Neighbors have not been so kind to him, who within these 100 years have very
much contracted it.

The Countries he is at present in possession of, are Tigre, The Provinces of
Ethiopia.
Gojam, Amhara, Dembya, Bagemeder, Enarea, part of Zoa, Mazaga, Salem, Ogara,
Abergal, Holcait, Salgade, Cemen, Saloa, Ozeca, and Doba: The Countries that
have been taken from him, are Anget, Doaro, Ogge, Balli, Adea, Alam-ale Oxela,
Ganz, Betazamora, Gurague, Sugama, Baharguma, Catrbut, Boxa, Gumer, Couch,
Damota, Mora-Aura, Habera, Oyfal, Guedem, Marabet, Manz, Beramo, with all the
Ports he had formerly on the Coast of the Red Sea. Tigre, which is the chief
Kingdom in the Habassian Empire, begins at Matzua, a small Island not far from
Arkiko, a Seaport Town in the 15th Degree of the Northern Latitude; it is 90
Leagues in length, and 50 in breadth, and is by much the most Fertile and
Trading Country in Ethiopia, for which reason the Jesuits fixed their first
and greatest residence in a Town called Maegoga, or Fremona, which stands near
the middle of it.

The Kingdom of Bagemder lies to the North of Tigre, and reaches to Amhara,
and to the Banks of Nile; it is about 60 Leagues in length, and at present not
above 20 in breadth, several Provinces having lately been torn from it, which
when united, made its breadth to be near equal to its length.

The Kingdom of Gojam is 50 Leagues in length, and 30 in breadth, and is in a
manner encompassed by the River Nile, whose Head is near the middle of it, in a
Country called Sacabala; it is either the Island of Meroe, so much celebrated
by the Ancients, or else there was never any such place.

The Head of Nile, The original of Nile.
which was so long reckoned among the Chief Secrets of Nature, is now known
certainly to be in a Lake in this Kingdom of Gojam; the Lake which gives birth
to it, is not above a Stones throw over, and so full of Bushes, that in the
Summer one may step upon them to two deep and clear Fountains, which are near
the midde of it, and not 40 yards from one another; the Streams of which
Fountains, as is visible from the Verdure of the Herbage, does run under ground
for near half a mile, where they break out; and being joined, do make a good
large Brook; and then bending Northward, after a Course of 15 Leagues, the
River Jama runs into it; after which Conjunction it bends its course toward
the East, and is presently joined by two Rivers more, whose names are Kelti,
and Branti; after this it runs directly East, till it enters the great Lake of
Dembea, which is about 20 Leagues distant from its Head in a right Line; and
without intermixing its water with those of the Lake, runs into the Channel it
has opened to it self on the North side of it.

This Lake, A Description of the Lake of Dembea.
which the Habassins call the Sea of Dembea, lies in the Latitude of 13
Degrees and a half, and on its South-shore is about 20 Leagues in length, and
on its North 35, not reckoning its windings, which make it a great deal more;
near its middle, and where it is deepest, it may be about 10 or 12 Leagues
over: Its Waters are very clear and wholesome; it abounds with Fish of all sorts,
and has great herds of Sea-Horses, which come ashore daily and graze on the
Plains; but for Snakes and Crockodiles it is as free from them, as it is from
Tritans and Mermaids, by which it has been reported to be inhabited.

Diverse great Rivers beside the Nile discharge themselves into this Lake, which
is the common Receptacle of all the Prodigious Floods of Rain which in the
Winter Months do tumble down from the high Mountains of Dembea; and this Lake
having no other source for this vast body of Water but the Channel of the Nile,
it makes bold with that, and thereby increases its Stream prodigiously.

The Lake of Dembea is adorned with One and twenty Islands, Islands in the Lake
of Dembea.
some of which are pretty large, namely that of Dek, which contains as much
Arable Land as 40 Yoke of Oxen can plough; there are several Monasteries in
seven or eight of these Islands, which were anciently very great; they do all
abound with Oranges, and other delicious Fruits. Even within Habassia, the Nile
has some Cataracts, its first is near a place called Depeqem, which is about 9
or 10 Leagues above the Lake of Dembea; the second is 6 or 7 Leagues below it
in the Kingdom of Begamder, at which it makes a prodigious noise; the fall of
the first is about 50 Palms, and that of the second about twice or thrice as
much.

The cause of the rising and falling of the Thames at Oxford, The true Cause of
the rising of Nile.
is not more certainly known, than that of the Nile in Egypt is now; for the
Winter in Ethiopia, which is one continued Storm of Rain, being in the Months
of June, July and August, by sending a vast body of water into the Lake of
Dembea, which has no other vent for its Waters than the Channel of the Nile,
does swell that River to a prodigious height, all which Torrent of water being
kept together by steep Mountains on both sides, until it comes down into Egypt,
which is a flat open Country; it there expands it self, impregnating the Land
thereof with its Mud, which was hindered from subsiding before by the
unconceivable rapidity of that River, while it was pent in on all sides by high
Mountains.

This is the true Cause of the rising of the Nile; which though the world would
not, It was known by the Ancients. Strab. lib. 15. Plin. lib. 5. c. 9.
it seems, believe, was told by Nearchus, Pliny, Strabo, and others; neither is
their calling them the Summer-Rains any Argument at all of those Learned Men
having been ignorant of the time of the Year when they fell, but rather the
contrary; for notwithstanding the Habassins upon the account of those great
Rains do reckon June, July, and August, their Winter Months, yet in Egypt and
all other Places without the Northern Tropic, they are reckoned Summer.

Besides the Nile, Several great Rivers besides the Nile have their Fountains
in Ethiopia.
there are several other great Rivers that rise in Habassia; namely, Pacaza,
whose Head is in the Mountain of Axgua, in the Kingdom of Angot; and the River
Zabee, which is much bigger and swifter than the Nile; it rises in the Kingdom
of Narea, and taking its Course Southward falls into the Sea at Momboca; Haoa
is likewise bigger than the Nile; it rises in the Kingdom of Zaoa, and running
North-East, does the same good office to the parched and thirsty Countries of
Adeld and Zegla, that the Nile does to Egypt; and as the River Maceb, which
rises within Two Leagues of Fremona in the Kingdom of Tigre, does to the dry
Province of Derqhem.

Now that Countries wherein it seldom or never rains, should have that great
want thus supplied by the overflowing of Rivers, is a clear evidence both of
the Goodness and Wisdom of Providence.

Habassia is reported by the Jesuits to abound with pure Gold; which we have
reason to think was represented by them to be much finer and more plentiful
than it really is, on purpose to prevent the Kings of Portugal and Spain
growing weary of the great Charges of their Missions. Where the Land is Arable,
it is said to produce good Wheat and Barley; and in several places to have
Three Harvests in a year. It produces likewise Silk, which is gathered off the
Bushes, as it is in India; and in some places extraordinary Sugar Canes. Its
Horses and Cows, with which it is said to be well stocked, are much larger than
the Europeans. It has also great store of Lions and Elephants, and those of the
best Cast; but the Wild Beast that is the most remarkable in it, is the
Giratacahem, that is to say, the Smoothhead, which is reported to be so tall,
that a Man on Horseback may ride under its Belly.

There is a great mixture of People in Habassia, There is a great mixture of
People in Ethiopia.
from which the Country is said by some to have had its Name.

As Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans of sever Nations; but the Main Body of its
People are Christians. The Jews speak Hebrew, or rather Syriack; the Heathens
as many different Languages as there are Kingdoms; but the Court-Language, and
which is spoke by all Persons of any Quality, is the Amehara. The Empire does
not descend to the Eldest Son, but to him whom the Emperor at his death is
pleased to Name for his Successor. The Emperors formerly kept their Court in
the City of Axum, from which the African Ethiopians were commonly called
Axumites; which is at present reduced to a Village of about a hundred Families.
The Royal Arms of Habassia are a Lion holding a Cross, with this Motto, The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah is Victorious. I do but just mention these things,
my Intention in this Work being to write the Ecclesiastical, and not the
Natural or Civil History of Ethiopia.

Of the Religion of the Habassins.
IT is a constant Tradition among the Habassins, The Queen of Sheba is reported
to have been Empress of Ethiopia.
That the Queen of Sheba that went to Visit Solomon, was Empress of their
Country, whose Name, they say, was Maqueda; and who, within a few weeks after
she returned home, was delivered of a Son, Begat by Solomon, whom she Named
Menileher.

Menileher, so soon as he was of Age to undertake so long a Journey, was sent
by his Mother to Jerusalem to receive his Father's Blessing, and to be
Instructed by him in the Law of Moses, and all other useful Sciences.

Solomon having received his Son when he arrived at Jerusalem, with great
Tenderness and Affection, made him change the Name of Menileher, for that of
David; and having thoroughly Instructed him in the Jewish Religion, Her Son by
Solomon is said to have introduced Jud^ism into it.
and made him promise to introduce it into his Empire, he dismissed him with
Noble Presents, giving him also several Priests and Levites to take home with
him to assist him in so good a Work. David being returned home, did with the
help of the Priests and Levites, set immediately about introducing the Mosaical
Law into his Empire, and was so successful, that in a few years it was embraced
by the whole Body of his People, and continued to be professed by them, until
the Publication of the Gospel among them. Upon which Fable, for I cannot look
upon it as any other, they have built an hundred more, which are much sitter
for a Legend than an History.

Neither is the Habassins having used Circumcision, any argument at all of
their having been ever of the Jewish Law; since there is nothing more certain,
than that that Rite was the ancient usage of the Ethiopians, and diverse other
Nations, who were always Enemies both to the Jews and their Religion.

And as the Habassins will have their Forefathers to have been of the Jewish
Faith, from the days of Solomon till the Preaching of the Gospel; so they will
have Christianity to have come among them early in the Apostles time.

It being a Tradition among them, The Eunuch that was baptized by Philip, is
said to have been of this Country, and to have introduced Christianity into it.
That the Eunuch that was Baptized by Philip the Deacon, was Steward to their
Empress; and who returning home after he was Christened, Converted his Mistress
and her whole Empire to the Christian Faith, in the Profession whereof they
have ever since continued steadfast. Which Story, notwithstanding I take it to
be of a piece with that of the Queen of Sheba and her Son, yet this may be said
for it, That it has a greater Air of probability than most of the Traditional
Histories of the first Conversions of Countries.

What is known from History of the first Introduction of Christianity into
Ethiopia, is, That in the beginning of the Fourth Century, one Meropius, a
Christian Philosopher, going into India with Two of his Scholars, whose Names
were Frumentius and Aedesius, Frumentius Bishop of Axum, was the Apostle of
Ethiopia.
had the misfortune to touch on the Coast of Ethiopia; where Meropius was
inhumanly Murdered by the Natives, but his Two Scholars having their Lives
spared, and being found to be Youths of fine Parts, as well as Beauty, they
were carried to Court, where Frumentius was put into the Secretaries Office,
and Aedesius into the Buttery.

When the Emperor, who had always been very kind to them, came to Die, he gave
them both their Liberty; but as they were preparing to make use of it and
return home, the Queen Regent was importunate with them to stay, and to
undertake the Tutelage of her Son till he was of Age, which they having
consented to, did during that time, write to all the Roman Merchants residing
in the ports of Ethiopia, that were Christians, to assemble together to Worship
God, as they themselves, and the Converts they had made at Court, did Daily.

When their Pupil came to take the Administration of the Government upon
himself, they both desired Leave to return home, which having obtained with
great difficulty, they left Ethiopia; Aedesius went to Tire to live with his
Relations; but Frumentius having a greater love for his Religion, repaired
directly to Alexandria, with an intention to acquaint the Bishop thereof, who
at that time was the Great Athanasius, with the footing Christianity had taken
in Ethiopia.

St. Athanasius, who was overjoyed at this good news, having consulted with his
Clergy what was fit to be done, persuaded Frumentius, whom he observed to be a
Person of great Zeal and Piety, to be Consecrated a Bishop by him, and to
return into Ethiopia with that Character, to accomplish a Work he had so
happily begun; and accordingly he was Consecrated a Bishop by St. Athanasius;
and going back to Ethiopia, did in a short time Convert both the Emperor and
the main Body of his People to the Christian Faith.

This Account of the Introduction of Christianity into Ethiopia, is to be met
with in the 9th. Chapter of the 1st. Book of Ruffinus, who says he had not
this Story from the chat of the People, but from Aedesius's own mouth, who was
Ordained a Presbyter at Tire.

And as Frumentius was undoubtedly Orthodox as to the Doctrine of our Lord's
Divinity when he was Consecrated a Bishop by St. Athanasius; so the World
coming afterward to complain of its being turned Arian, could not shake his
Constancy in the True Faith, as appears from Constantius's Letters to the
Princes of Axum, whose Names were Abra and Azba; which Letter I shall here set
down as I find it in St. Athanasius's Apology to that Emperor.

AS there is nothing we study so much as the knowledge of the Truth,
Constantius's Letter to the Princes of Axum.
so we reckon our selves obliged to recommend the same diligence and industry
to all sorts of people, that we may all think so of the Divinity, as to pass
our lives in hope, and without dissension, concerning what is true and just.

Wherefore since we do think fit to extend this our Care to you no less than to
the Romans, we do enjoin you to maintain the same Doctrines with them in your
Churches; and to that end to send Bishop Frumentius into Egypt with all
possible expedition, there to be judged by the most Venerable George, and the
other Egyptian Prelates, in whom is the Supreme Authority of Ordaining and
Judging af Bishops. For unless you will pretend to be ignorant of what all the
world knows, you must be sensible that Frumentius was consecrated by
Athanasius, a man made up of wickedness, and who not being able in the least to
vindicate himself as to any of the Crimes he stands charged withal, was
thereupon deposed, and has since that turned a Vagabond, roving from one
Country to another, as if he hoped to lose his Guilt by shifting his dwelling.

In case Frumentius should yield a ready obedience, and give a full account of
the whole Conspiracy, so that it shall be certified that he does not dissent
from the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Faith that is now established, and it
does appear that he is a Person of a Good Life, he may then be ordained a
Bishop; which at present he is not of Right.

Whereas if he shall seek delays, and decline coming to Judgment, that will be
an undeniable Proof of his having been seduced by the words of the most
Profligate Athanasius; as also of his acting impiously against God, and of his
being involved in the same Crimes whereof Athanasius stands convicted: In which
case if he should be suffered to go on without control, as he will do all that
he can to corrupt your People with his Wicked and Impious Words, and not only
disturb and destroy the Church, and belch out Blasphemies against the Supreme
God; so he will likewise bring Ruin and Destruction upon all Nations. Whereas
if he could be persuaded to come and converse familiarly with Venerable George
and other Learned Men, he would reap great Benefits thereby, and return to his
Bishopric well instructed in all Ecclesiastical Discipline. God preserve you,
my most dear Brethren.

As this Letter is a clear demonstration of the greatness of the Arian Rage
against the Orthodox, which not being satisfied with having Persecuted them
with the utmost Barbarities in all parts of the Roman Empire, pursued them
beyond its bounds; so such a boundless Rage was never more conspicuous in
Constantius, or any other Persecutor of the Professors of the True Faith, than
it was in a Modern Prince, The French King's Rage against Protestants, superior
to that of the Arians against the Orthodox.
who not being contented with having harassed and destroyed several Thousands
of Protestant Families within his own Kingdom, did within these Ten Years write
to all his most dear Brethren, the Great Turk not excepted, to drive all his
Protestant Subjects, if they did not presently turn Roman Catholics, out of
their Territories; or which was worse, did by Solemnly withdrawing his
Protection from them in Popish Countries, leave them at the mercy of the
Inquisition.

Baronius in his Roman Martyrology, according to his humor of multiplying
Saints, has made Two of a single Frumentius; for whereas in the Martyrology, it
is said among the Indians, for so the Habassins were called anciently, of St.
Frumentius, who was there first a Captive, and afterward Ordained a Bishop by
St. Athanasius, and did propagate the Gospel thorough that Country; the
Cardinal in his Notes adds, At the same time there lived another Frumentius,
who was Bishop of Axum in Egypt; whereas Axum is in Ethiopia, and not in Egypt;
and was the City Frumentius mentioned in the Martyrology was Bishop of.

Philostorgius, who was himself an Arian, speaking of Theophilus Indus, having
been sent by Constantius on this Embassy, insinuates as if the Ethiopians had
been turned by him to the Arian Sect. But Philostorgius being the only
Historian that insinuates any such thing, we have little reason to believe it
upon his bare word.

About the Year 480. Nine Monks come into Ethiopia.
Nine Monks are said to have been sent from Rome into Ethiopia; their Names
were Araguai or Michel, Alef, Gavi, Afe, Adimata, Cuba, Garima, Saham, Lebanos,
Pantaleon; the Patriarch Mendez, who quotes the Chronicon Axumense for this,
truly observes, That by Rome here, is meant Greece; which after the Roman
Emperors had fixed their Court in it, was called in these remote parts by that
name; but the Dominicans in their History of Ethiopia, of which the Reader will
meet with an Epitome in the Appendix, will have all these Monks, though dead
near a Thousand Years before Dominick was born, to have been Friars of his
Order sent from Old Rome, and having turned Adimata, whom they call Imata, into
a Woman; they have made her likewise a Holy Sister of their Order that
accompanied the Eight Brothers in their Mission.

Metaphrastes, and after him the whole herd of Legendaries, do speak of one
Elesbean a Christian King of Ethiopia in the time of Justin the Emperor; of
whom, and of his having Vanquished a Jewish Tyrantin Arabia, who had been a
Cruel Persecutor of his Christian Subjects, they have framed a tedious blind
Story, that is not fit to be offered to any Reader that has not a Legendary
Nose.

But as most Fables have something of History for their foundation, so if this
of Elisbean has any, it must be the following History that is met with in
Procopius's Persian War.

Justinian the Emperor being engaged in a War with the Persians in the Year
530. Justinian sends an Embassy into Ethiopia.
sent one Julian Ambassador to the King of the Axumites, or the African
Ethiopians, and to the King of the Homerites, a Nation Inhabiting the Asiatick
Coast of the Red Sea that is opposite to Ethiopia, to engage them, being
Christians, to join with him against the Persians, the common Enemy of their
Religion.

The King of Ethiopia's Name at that time was Hellesteus, who a few years
before had out of Zeal for Christianity, the Christian Homerites having
complained to him of their being miserably oppressed by the Jews and Heathens
they lived among, crossed the RedSea with a Numerous Fleet and Army, and having
in a pitched Battle Defeated and Killed the King of the Homerites, who had been
a Cruel Persecutor of Christians, he advanced one Esimetheus, an Homerite
Christian to the Throne, but upon Condition that he and his Successors for ever
should pay a yearly Tribute to the Crown of Ethiopia.

The main thing proposed by the Ambassador to the Ethiopian for the incommoding
of the Persians, The business of the Embassy.
was to open a Trade for Silk to the Indies, which the Romans, who used to buy
those Silks of the Persians, would promise to take off his Merhants hands: But
for the Homerites, the Ambassador desired Esimethus, who was their King at that
time, to enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with their Neighbors the
Madaans, who were Sarazens; and having joined their Armies, for to invade
Persia. The Kings did both promise to do what the Romans had desired of them;
but when they came to execution, they found their parts not to be feasible; the
Silks that were brought by the Indians being all constantly bought up by the
Persian Merchants, who lay much nearer to them than the Ethiopians; and for the
Homerites, the vast Deserts they were to pass thorough before they could come
at the Persians, discouraged them, at this time, from attempting it, though
King Abraham did attempt it afterward, but with no success.

But as it is the common Fate of Nations, The Homerites conquered by the
Ethiopians, their Deliverers.
that invite their Neighbors into their Country, to be conquered by their
Deliverers, so it fared with the Homerites at this time; for the Servants, and
Thieving part of the Ethiopian Army, finding Arabia a much better Country than
their own, they resolved to remain where they were; and not being long
contented to live among the Homerites as Inmates, they set up to be their
Masters; and having by force of Arms deposed Esimetheus, Esimetheus made King
of the Homerites, deposed by the Habassine Army, which put Abraham in his place.
they bestowed the Crown upon one Abraham a Christian, but who had formerly
been a Slave to a Roman Merchant that resided at the Port of Adel in Ethiopia.

Hellenesteus having received Advice of the Pranks his Subjects, that remained
in Arabia, were playing, dispatched 3000 Soldiers thither to chastise their
Insolence, and restore his Creature Esimetheus to his Royal Dignity; which
those Troops were so far from doing, that having been corrupted by some
Emissaries sent among them by Abraham so soon as they landed, when they came to
engage the Rebels, after having slain their Chief Commander, who was a Prince
of the Blood, they all went over to them, with a Resolution to stand by Abraham
to the last.

Hellenestens being much troubled at this Loss, sent a greater Army than the
former against Abraham, which coming to blows, was totally routed by him; after
which Hellenesteus growing weary of the Charge of the War, gave it over,
leaving the unfortunate Esimetheus to his unkind Stars.

Elmicinus, in his Sarazen History, reports, The Ethiopians send an Ambassador
to the Patriarch of Alexandria.
That in the 39th year of the Hegira, which is 659 of Our Lord, an Ambassador
was sent from Ethiopia to Simon Syrus, the Jacobite Patriarch of Alexandria, to
entreat him to ordain them a Bishop, and some Presbyters; which the Patriarch
having, I know not for what reason, denied to do, the Ambassador complained of
him to Adulmelius the Sarazen King of Egypt, who commanded the Patriarch to
ordain him as many as he desired; but the Ambassador did so highly resent
Symon's denial, that when he offered him his Service, he would not make use of
him, but employed another Bishop; which was the cause of great Disturbances in
the Church.

In the 561st year of Diocletian, James the Abuna of Ethiopia deposed by the
Queen, and restored by the King afterward.
which is the 845th of our Lord, says the same Historian, there was a Bishop
in Ethiopia whose name was James, whom, the Queen, taking advantage of her
Husband's absence in the Wars, banished Ethiopia, substituting another Bishop
in his room, for which the Kingdom was plagued with a great Drought, and
Pestilence; but the King returning home, and being much dissatisfied with the
Queen for what she had done, sent to the Patriarch of Egypt, whither the
deposed Prelate was retired, to command him back to his Province; which the
Patriarch did, and the Bishop, when he returned, was received with the general
joy of the whole People.

In the Eighth year of Chalifatus Mutamidi, or as others will have it, A
Tribute laid on the Patriarch of Alexandria by the Calif of Egypt.
in his Seventh year, which was the 265th year of the Hegira, one Michael being
Patriarch of the Alexandrian Jacobites, he had a Tribute of 20000 Crowns laid
upon him; for the advancing of which Sum, he was obliged to sell to the Jews
the fourth part of all the Churches in Alexandria, and the Lands belonging to
him in Habassia, as also the Church in the Neighborhood of Malaca in Cosvoim,
in the City of Misra, and to tax every Christian at a Kirati yearly; all which
amounted to but half the Sum of the Tribute.

In the 807th year of the Martys, The Nile diverted from coming down to Egypt;
and turned into its old Channel again upon the Intercession of the Bishop of
Alexandria.
which is the 1165th of Christ, the Nile being extremely low in Egypt, the King
thereof, whose name was Mustausirus, sent the Patriarch Michael with rich
Presents to the King of Ethiopia, who having received the Patriarch with great
respect, did, at his request, order the Nile to be turned into its old Channel
again, out of which he had diverted it; whereupon the Nile rose in one night to
its usual height in Egypt, to the great joy of the King and the whole
Country, who, when the Patriarch returned home, did him great honors.

Paulus Venetus reports, that in the year 1258. an Habassin King having been
hindered by his Counselors from going in person to Jerusalem, did send a
Bishop thither, The King of Habassia victorious over the King of Aden.
with rich Offerings, who, was not only robbed of all he had as he passed
thorough the Kingdom of Aden, but upon his refusal to turn Mohammedan, was sent
home with a mark of infamy upon his Body; at which barbarous Treatment the
Habassin was so much incensed, that having got together a great Army, he
marched against that Sarazen Tyrant; and having beat him in a pitched Battle,
and made great Desolations in his Country for some Weeks, he returned home
laden with Spoils and Honors.

Haiton Armenus in his Directions to the Christians, how to recover the Holy
Land, advises them to write to the King of the Nubians, meaning the Habassins,
to invade Egypt with a numerous Army, which would divert the Sarazens from
coming with their whole force against them into Syria.

When, or wheresoever the Arabic Canons, falsely attributed to the first
Council of Nice, were made, the 36th of them relates wholly to the Bishop of
Ethiopia, and runs as follows,

THE Ethiopians have no power to create or choose a Patriarch, The 7th place in
a General Council given to the Abuna of Ethiopia by the Arabic Canons of the
Council of Nice.
whose Prelate must be rather under the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Alexandria; or in case they should come at any time to have one among them in
the place of Patriarch, and who should be styled Catholicus, he shall not,
notwithstanding that, have a right to ordain. Archbishops, as other Patriarchs
have, having neither the Honor nor Authority of a Patriarch: And if it should
so happen that a Couneil should be assembled in Greece, and this Prelate should
be present at it, he shall have the seventh Place therein, next after the
Bishop of Seleucia; and in case he should have at any time power given him to
ordain Archbishops in his Province, it shall not be lawful for him to advance
any of the Natives to that Dignity; whosoever does not yield obedience to this,
is excommunicated by the Synod.

If there were nothing else to prove these Arabic Canons to be spurious, this
Canon alone would do it abundantly; it being plain from Ecclesiastical History,
that the Title of Patriarch was not known in the Church for some time after the
Celebration of the First Nicene Council; neither was there any Bishop or
Christian in Ethiopia at that time: Frumentius, who was the Apostle, or first
Bishop thereof, having been consecrated a Bishop by Athanasius, when he was
Primate of Alexandria, which he was not till after the Nicene Council.

In the Year 1177. Pope Alexander the IIId, Pope Alexander the IIId pretends to
have received an Ambassador from Prester John.
while he was at Venice, whither the Emperor Frederick had driven him, either
received, or pretended to receive, a Message from the Great Christian Emperor
Prester John, desiring to submit himself to his obedience, and to have a
College at Rome, and an Altar at Jerusalem for the use of his Subjects.

The Pope having made a noise with this Message, pretended to send Philip a
Physician, who was said to have brought it, back again with a Letter to Prester
John; I shall not trouble the Reader with that Letter; for besides that it
contains little else than Hyperbolies of St. Peter and the Pope's Supremacy, it
is probable that that whole Affair was a mere Fiction, invented on purpose to
make the Roman Emperor ashamed of persecuting the Pope, at the same time, when
so remote a Christian Emperor was ready to throw himself at his feet. For had
this Message of Philip's, whom some call Peter, been a real thing, it would
certainly have taught the Court of Rome in what part of the World Prester
John's Empire lay, whether in Asia, near Tartary; or in Africa, beyond Egypt:
Whereas, long after this, that Empire, though called Ethiopia, was still
supposed to lie somewhere in the North of Asia; for which reason it was still
joined in the same Missions with the Tartars and Ruthens, and committed to the
Charge of the Dominican Provincial of Poland, as being its next Neigbour.

In the Year 1308. Pope Clement pretended to have received an Embassy from the
same Prince.
Prester John was brought upon the stage again; Pope Clement the Vth being said
to have received a most splendid Embassy from him, consisting of 30
Ambassadors, by whom he was assured, that their Master had no less than 74
Kings under him, and who, excepting five of the smallest that were Mahometans,
were all Christians; and that he had likewise within his Dominions an 127
Archbishops, every one of which had 20 Bishops under his Jurisdiction: Which
pious Fraud was spread about at that time on purpose to encourage the Latins to
undertake a new Expedition to the Holy Land, being assured of the Assistance of
this mighty Christian Emperor, whose Dominions were still reported to lie
convenient enough for the carrying on of a Holy War in Syria; It is probable
that there was never any such Emperor.
insomuch, that I am apt to think, that the whole Story of this Enchanted
Asiatick Christian Empire was invented and kept up by the Trumpeters of the
Holy War for that very purpose; no such Empire having ever to this day been
discovered in Asia; what is reported by the Portuguese Missionaries of the
Kingdom of Thybot, amounting to no more at most, than that those People were
formerly Christians, but without the least Evidence of any Prester John, or
Great Christian Empire having ever been in those Parts, But how they come to
call a Country which they supposed to lie toward Scythia, Ethiopia, is one of
the unaccountable Blunders of those Ignorant, though Fraudulent Ages; unless we
will say, That they having heard something of a Christian Empire in Ethiopia,
did either, for the foresaid Ends, industriously transiate it into Asia; or
were so ignorant in Geography, as not to know what part of the World Ethiopia
lay in.

In the Council of Florence (for so low we must come before we meet with any
thing more of the Ethiopick Church) Eugenius the IVth, after he had dismissed
the Greeks, Eugenius the IVth translates the Council from Florence to Rome,
upon a sham Pretense, that the Emperor of Ethiopia was sending an Ambassador
with a submission of himself and his Church to him.
finding it necessary for his Affairs to have the name of a Council still
sitting, so long as that of Basil, which had deposed him, and chosen the Duke
of Savoy Pope, was on foot against him; but being withal desirous to have it at
Rome, for want of a better, gave this for the reason of his translating it from
Florence thither: That it was convenient that the splendid Embassy from Zerah
Jacob the High and Mighty Emperor of Ethiopia, which was on its way to that
Council, with the submission of that Church and Empire to the Pope, should not
find the Council sitting in such a paultry Town as Florence, but in the
Metropolis of Christendom, which would add something of Authority to it, and
accordingly it was translated.

But as it is certain that no such splendid Ethiopick Embassy ever came to
Rome, so it is as certain, that it was never so much as thought of in Habassia;
on the contrary, Zera Jacob, when he was solicited by some Jerusalem Monks on
this Occasion, did absolutely refuse to submit his Church to that of Rome; for
which denial, the Jesuits above 200 years after his death, made Sultan Saged,
his Great Grandson, Sultan Saged curses his Grandfather's Soul for not having
submitted himself to the Romish Church.
and their Convert, to curse his Soul to the Pit of Hell, saying, A curse on
King Zera Jacob, who was the cause of our not being at this time in the
Portuguese or Roman Faith, for which he is now tormented in Hell.

Now though this Convert had been never so certain of Zera Jacob's being in
Hell for having denied to submit himself to the Pope; yet considering he was
his Great Granfather, he might very well have spared his Curses; such impious
Expressions of Zeal, for I can call them no other, being much fitter for the
Mouths of Profligate Algerine Renegadoes, with whom they are said to be common,
than for a Prince who turns from one Sect of Christianity to another. Besides,
Zera Jacob, abating him that one thing of his having refused to submit the
Ethiopick Church to the Roman, was no such Miscreant as to deserve to be thus
cursed by his Posterity: as appears by a Letter written by him to the Habassin
Monks at Jerusalem, to whom he sent the Collection of Canons which is now at
Rome, giving them likewise several Lands for uses which the Church of Rome
allows to be pious; this Monastery of Habassins stands on Mount Gabor.

Zera Jacob 's Letter to the Habassin Monks at Jerusalem.
In the name of the Father, and Son, The Emperor Zera Jacob's Letter to the
Habassin Monks at Jerusalem.
and Holy Ghost, one God, whom I adore with all my heart, and on whom I rely
with all my strength, and with all my mind, to whom I am bound with the tie of
sacred Worship, which is not to be broken.
THIS Letter is written in this Book of Canons by us Zera Jacob, whose Name,
since we took the Government upon us, is Constantine, in the 8th year after the
God of Israel in the multitude of his mercies was pleased to place us on the
Throne of the Kingdom of Ethiopia, being in Seava, which is called Teglet.

Let this come to the hands of my beloved, the College of Saints who reside at
Jerusalem the Holy City.

In the peace of the Lord. Amen.

I do proclaim you very happy, for having in the first place obeyed the word of
the Gospel, which says, He that forsakes not his father and mother, wife and
children, etc. for which reason you have left the world, and have taken upon
you the Yoke of Monkery; the word of the Prophet has likewise bound you, which
says, I will not go into the tabernacle of mine house, nor climb up to my bed;
neither will I give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I
find the house of the Lord, the habitatian of the God of Jacob. Whereupon you
determined to repair to Jerusalem, the City of the Great King, not being
discouraged from going thither, either by the Incommodities of the Journey, or
the heat by day, or the cold by night, nor by the dangers of Robbers; where
when you arrived, what was said by the Prophet was fulfilled in you: Let us
therefore go into his house, and worship in the place where the face of our
Lord stood; for to you it is given to kiss the place which his Presence has
hallowed, from his Nativity to his Ascension: For which cause I do very much
rely on your Prayers, and on the Afflictions you have suffered for God's sake.

I do salute you from the bottom of my heart, saying, Health to you the Sons of
Ethiopia, whom the Earthly Jerusalem has tied to her self, that she may convey
you to the Heavenly.

Health be to your Faith which is perfect in the Trinity; and to your course of
life, which is like to that of Angels.

Health be to your Feet which walk, to your Hands which touch, to your Lips
which kiss, to your Eyes which do freely behold Galilee where God was
Incarnate, and Bethlehem where he was born, taking our Nature upon him, and the
Cave where he lay, and Nazareth where he was educated, and Jordan where he was
baptized, that he might cleanse us, and Corontum where he fasted for our sake,
and Calvary where he was crucified for our Redemption, and Golgotha where he
was buried and rose again, that he might quicken us, and the Mount of Olives
where he ascended to his Father and our God, that he might introduce us into
the Inner Vail of the highest Heavens, into which he himself entered, and
introduced the Apostles who were before us, and the Oratory of Sion where the
Comforter descended on our Fathers the Apostles.

Health be likewise to your Eyes, which behold the Light that comes out of the
Sepulcher of our Lord on the Old Sabbath, to wit, on the Eve of our Passover.

May your Peace, and Love, and Prayers, and Benedictions be with me for ever,
Amen. Behold I have sent you this Book of Synods, that you may receive
Consolation from it on the Old Sabbath, and on the Lord's Day, and that they
may be a Memorial of me through all Ages. Amen. I Zera Jacob, whose Name, since
God was pleased to place me on the Throne of the Empire, is Constantine, in the
Eighth Year of my Reign, do Bequeath unto you the Land of Zebla, and Half of
all the Tributes arising from it, for Two Years, which amounts to an Hundred
Ounces of Gold, toward your Food and Raiment; and do give it to the Monastery
of Jerusalem, that it may be a Memorial of my self and of our Lady Mary, and
for the Celebration of Her Feasts, to wit, That of her Nativity on the 1st of
May, that of her Death on the 22d of January, and that of her Translation on
the 15th of August; as also of the Feasts of her Son, our Lord Jesus, on the
29th of December, when he was Born, to be celebrated by you at Bethlehem,
together with the Festivities of his Passion, and lively Resurrection from
Death. You shall likewise celebrate all the Festivities of our Lady Mary, which
in the Book of her Miracles are Thirty two in number. And shall furthermore
keep a Lamp burning for me in the Sepulcher of our Lord; and another in the
Entry thereof; and on the right side one, and on the left another; as also at
the place of his Burial three; three at the Monument of our Lady Mary in
Gethsemane; and at the place where Mary Magdalen saw him one; and in our
Chapel three; one also at Bethlehem where our Lord was born; and another at
the place in the Mount of Olives where our Lord ascended. Let them he all
maintained at my Charge, and take care not to suffer them to go out at any
time, nor to give way to any Person contributing toward them. And since I do
rely on the Bond of your Love, let your Prayers and Benedictions be with me
thorough all Ages. Amen.


My Beloved, Don't you offer to say, Light descends only upon us, that your
glorying in your selves be not in vain; since you know that evil attends
glorying, and blessing humility. Peace be with you, the Peace of our Lord be
with you. Amen. The Jesuit Guerrira, speaking of the forementioned Ethiopick
Embassy, says, That the whole Story of it was either a mere Fiction, not
knowing its like, of its having been made use of for so great a purpose by a
Pope, or that it had no manner of effect.

But it is no matter whether it was a Fiction or a Reality, so long as it
furnished a good pretense, for a present turn, and tended to the Disparagement
of the Council of Basil, which, together with the ground it stood upon, was
blown up purely by Tricks of this nature; the Yoke the Council of Constance had
laid on the Neck of the Papacy, being broke by Pretenses, of the Greek and all
other Churches and Patriarchs having submitted themselves to it.

This is all that I have been able to meet with in Greek or Latin History
concerning the Church of Ethiopia before the Year 1490, when it was first
discovered by the Portugueses. And as for Histories of their own, I do not find
they have any, besides some Fabulous Legends of the Lives of their Monks; of
which I shall only give the Reader a Taste.

In the Life of Tecla Haymanot, the most famous of all their Monks both for
Piety and Miracles, the following Account of the Succession of their Grand
Abbots is given.

The Angel St. Michael gave the Cowl to St. Anthony; St. Anthony gave it to St.
Macarius; Macarius gave it to Pachomius; Pachomius to Abbot Araguni, or
Michael, who was one of the Nine Monks that came into Ethiopia; Araguni gave it
to Bazana; Bazana to Mazralmoa; Mazralmoa to Abbot John; John to Abbot Jesus;
Jesus to Tecla Haymanot, to whom Christ appeared, and promised, that whosoever
should kill a Serpent upon a Friday, should be pardoned all the Sins he had
committed in Forty Years.

But notwithstanding the Lives of the Habassin Monks are all of a piece with
the Lives of all the other Monks that are extant, that is, extremely fabulous;
yet this must be said for them, that Monkery continues to this day much the
same among them, as it was in the beginning, from which in the Church of Rome
it is so strangely degenerated.

For in Habassia, Monkery much the same in Habassia, as it was in the beginning.
any one that has a mind to be a Monk, retires thereupon to the Desert, where
he puts on what Habit he pleases, or judges to be most suitable to his
pretensions. Their Obligation so long as they profess themselves Monks, which
they are always at their liberty to give over, is to fast every day in the Year
till three a Clock in the Afternoon, and to Assemble together at Midnight, and
at other certain Hours to perform their Devotions; they do generally exercise
great Austerities upon themselves, being very strict in their Fasts, many of
them eating but once in two days, and some never but upon Sundays; some of them
are said to have made Holes in the Trunks of Trees, and to have lodged in them
till the Trees have grown to shut them in.

Their Monastries are more like Villages than Roman Convents, Their Monastries
are little Villages.
every Monk having his distinct dwelling House with as much Land laid to it, as
a Man is able to cultivate, and when they come to dye they dispose of their
Goods as they please, only the Land remains still to the Monastries. Now this
course falls in exactly with that of the Primitive Monks, who always lived in
Deserts, where they worked hard, and were under no Vows; whereas the Roman
Monks have their Monastries in or near Princes Courts, and in all Populous
Cities; and tho generally hurried into that Profession, either by their
Parents, or by some sudden fit of Melancholy, are fettered in it by Vows for
their Lives, and are so far from putting their Hand to any work, that they are
every where become proverbial for Laziness; and as for their Buildings, they
are much more like Palaces than the Dwellings of People that have renounced the
World, and taken a Vow of Poverty upon them.

The most famous of all their Monastries, is that of Alelujah, wherein formerly
there are said to have been 40000 Monks together, all the Country about having
been given to the Monks thereof to cultivate.

I do not find that any sort of Learning did ever flourish among the Habassins,
so that they have but few Books besides the Bible, the Canons of the first
Councils, the Homilies of the Greek Fathers, and the Lives of their Saints.

The Habassins do hold the Scriptures to be the perfect Rule of the Christian
Faith, The Habassins hold the Scriptures to be the perfect Rule of Faith.
insomuch, that they deny it to be in the Power of a General Council to oblige
People to believe any thing as an Article of Faith, without an express warrant
from thence.

Their Canon of Scripture consists of 85 Books; the Old Testament consisting of
46, and the New of 39.

As to the Doctrine of our Savior's Incarnation, They are Eutychians
they are all Eutychians, holding that there is but one Nature in Christ, which
is the Divine, by which they will have the Humane to have been swallowed up;
they were led into this Heresy by Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, who was
condemned with Eutyches for it, by the General Council of Calcedon, whose
Authority they for that reason reject, pretending that its Decrees were imposed
on the Church by Marcian the Emperor; on which account they call all those who
have yielded Obedience to it, Mellites or Royalists, as they themselves are
called Jacobites from one James, a Syrian, who was a great Stickler for the
Eutychian Heresy.

They allow the Bishop of Rome to be the first Patriarch, They deny the Popes
Supremacy.
but condemn his pretending to a Supremacy over the whole Church as
Antichristian; and do detest Popery to that degree, as to declare, That of the
two, they would sooner turn Mahometans than Roman Catholics.

The Supreme Authority in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, The Emperor is
Head of the Church.
is in the Emperor. They have but one Bishop at a time, who is styled the
Abuna, that is, our Father; he is always an Alexandrian Monk, and upon notice
of a Vacancy, is consecrated and sent into Ethiopia by the Alexandrian
Patriarch, to whom this Church has always been subject; he has the seventh
place in a General Council; he Ordains only by Imposition of Hands; he has
Lands both in the Kingdom of Dembea and Tigre, from which, besides several
Perquisites, he receives a considerable Revenue. Their Priests Marry.
Their Priests may Marry after they are in Orders, and as often as they are
Widowers.

They are said to have diverse Forms of Baptism, viz. I baptize thee in the Holy
Spirit; They have diverse Forms of Baptism.
I baptize thee in the Water of Jordan; Let God Baptize thee; Come thou to
Baptism. They Circumcise both Males and Females, and all are Baptized every
Year on the Feast of Epiphany; they hold that Men derive their Souls, no less
than their Bodies, from their Parents; and that the Children of Christian
Parents, and especially of a Christian Mother, are saved notwithstanding they
dye without Baptism.

They celebrate the Eucharist but once a day in a Church, All that are present
at the Celebration of the Sacrament must communicate. They do not elevate nor
adore the Host, nor keep it after the Communion. They break it after it is
consecrated. They reckon the receiving of it breaks their Fast.
at which none must be present without communicating; the Laity as well as the
Clergy receive the Cup; they do not elevate, nor Worship the consecrated
Elements, neither are they kept after the Communion; they consecrate unleavened
Bread, which they break after it is consecrated; they reckon the receiving of
the Sacrament breaks their Fast, for which reason they never receive it on
Fasting-days till after Three a Clock in the Afternoon. They do not believe
Transubstantiation.
They do not believe Transubstantiation, as is plain from their Liturgy, in
which the Words of Institution are thus set down, This Bread is my Body, this
Cup is my Blood, which Propositions the Romanists themselves acknowledge cannot
be understood otherwise than siguratively.

Ludolphus farther tells us, That when he asked Gregory the Habassin, Whether
he did not think that the Substance of the Bread and Wine was changed and
converted into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ? That he made
answer, That no such sort of Transubstantiation was known or understood by his
Countrymen, who were not so scrupulous, neither did they use to start such
thorny Questions. Nevertheless it seemed to him probable and likely, That the
Common Bread and Wine was changed into the mysterious Representation of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and so was altered from Profane to Sacred, to
represent the true Body and Blood of Christ to the Communicants. Than which
Declaration, nothing can be more agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of
England concerning the Eucharist. Finally, Paul de Roo, Secretary to the Dutch
East India Company, was in the Year 1691. told by the Habassin Ambassador, who
was sent to the Governor of Batavia, That Transubstantiation and the Adoration
of the Consecrated Bread in the Sacrament, were what the Habassins abhorred.

They confess their Sins only in general, They have only a general Confession.
saying, Habassea, Habassea, I have sinned, I have sinned, without descending
to particulars.

They deny Purgatory, They deny Purgatory; Confirmation, and Extreme Unction.
They condemn Graven Images. They keep Saturday and Sunday. Their Offices are
all in the Vulgar Tongue.
and know nothing of Confirmation and Extreme Unction; they condemn Graven
Images; they keep both Saturday and Sunday; and do never fast on either of
them, no, not in Lent, nor upon any day betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide; their
Church Offices are all in the Vulgar Tongue, and are performed with
extraordinary Devotion, but especially their Litanies; they go all betimes in
the morning to Church to pay their Devotions, which they do with great fervor,
and for the most part leave something of an offering behind them.

Whenever they come to any place that has a Church, They are very devout. They
never go into a Church with their Shoes on; nor sit in it, but upon the ground.
let their Business be never so urgent, they repair to it immediately; they
never go into any Church with their Shoes on, nor sit down in it, unless it be
upon the ground; on all occasions they express a deep sense of Religion, but
chiefly when they visit the Sick, which they are very forward to do: They are
charitable to the Poor, and to all Strangers, if they are satisfied of their
not being of the Roman Church; for all whose Members, the Cruel Persecutions
which were raised and carried on for some years by the Jesuits, while the
Emperor was at their Devotion, have created a perfect detestation in them. The
whole of their Divine Service consists in reading the Scriptures, They seldom
preach.
and some Homilies of the Fathers, and the Administration of the Sacrament,
preaching being a rare Exercise among them; at which when Mr. Ludolphus seemed
to wonder, he was asked by Gregory the Habassin, Whether we of the Western
Church thought our Preachers could say any thing better than what was written
in the Sacred Sacred Scriptures, and the Homilies of the Fathers? or whether we
thought their Sayings more efficacious than the Word of God? and whether we did
not fear lest those Preachers should utter something which might be repugnant
to our Faith and Salvation, and which might prove of dangerous consequence to
the Peace of the Church?

An Account of the Discovery of Ethiopia by the Portugueses.
DON ENRIQUE the Fifth, The Infant Don Henry, the first and most zealous
Promoter of the discovery of unknown Countries.
Son of Don Joan the first King of Portugal by his Queen the Lady Philipa, the
Daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, being a Prince much addicted to
the study of Mathematics, was the first that ever entertained any thought of
making Discoveries on the Western Coast of Africa, to which he is said to have
been encouraged by some Information he received from the Moors in Barbary, when
he was a Soldier there under his Father; he was Master of the Military Order of
Christ, which together with his other Ecclesiastical Pensions, brought him in a
great Revenue; all which, together with his whole time, he resolved to dedicate
entirely to the gratification of his Curiosity after new Discoveries.

And in order to the better carrying on of this his great Design, he retired
from Court to a place in the Algarves, called at that time Terranable, but
since, from him, Villa de Infant; a few Months after his retirement, he fitted
out two Ships, which having passed the Pillars of Hercules, at that time the
non ultra of Navigation, they sailed to the Promontory of Ganaria, but were
discouraged from proceeding any further, partly by strong Currents, and partly
by that Promontory, running so far into the Sea, that they could not discover
its Cape.

This first Voyage was made in the Year 1410. His ill success at first.
after which it was 10 years before the Infant could prevail with any body to
make a second Attempt; the first Adventurers having to excuse their Cowardice,
reported terrible things of the Dangers they had escaped.

Neither did the Infant, during all that time, Not discouraged thereby, nor by
Railery, nor by grave Nonsense, from going on with his Projects.
escape the discouragement that new and great Enterprises do commonly meet
withal; his Designs, for some years, having been not only the Jest of the Lazy
Buffoon, but were also censured as Chimera's, or Idle Projects, by Men of
Speculation and Gravity, who said, The Countries the Infant was in quest of,
were neither better, nor worse, than the Sandy Deserts of Arabia; that God
having allotted those Countries to Wild Beasts for their habitation, if men
should offer to intrude into them, they would either die, or turn wild like the
Natives; and that the very sight of them would turn Whites, Negroes; that there
had never wanted younger Brothers among Princes, who had sought to remedy the
misfortune of their Birth, by new Discoveries, but which had always miscarried:
That the Infante's Father, who was a wise Prince, finding Portugal wanted
People, had invited Strangers from all parts into it, and had given them Lands
to cultivate; whereas, if his Project should take effect, it would tend to the
depopulating of it; with a great many other such idle Reflections.

But the Infant, who had too great a Soul to be discouraged either by Railery,
or grave Nonsense, having with much ado wrought some Mariners up to an Opinion
of the feasibleness of the Undertaking, in the Year 1420. he equipped several
Vessels, which after having met with violent Storms, discovered the Island of
Madera; after which he went on discovering more and more yearly, The Island of
Madera first discovered. The Pope gives a Title to the Crown of Portugal to all
the New Countries they shall discover.
until they made the Mountains of Leaena, which lie 360 Leagues to the
Southward of Ganaria.

The Infant, to encourage the Portugueses to go on with the Discoveries he had
so happily begun, obtained a Bull from Pope Martin the Vth, and which was
afterward confirmed by diverse other Popes, whereby he gave to the Crown of
Portugal a Title to all the Countries that should be discovered by its Subjects
from the Promontory of Ganaria, to the farthest Indies.

But notwithstanding this Grant, The Discoveries were intermitted, and revived
again by Alphonso V.
after the Infante's Death, these Discoveries were for some years at a stand,
until they were renewed again by Alphonso the Vth, whose Captains sailed first
beyond the Mountain of Leaena, as far as Caboverde, and afterward advanced as
far as the Promontory of St. Catherin, which is two degrees and an half to the
South of the Equator.

John II. who succeeded Alphonso, set his heart extremely on carrying on those
Discoveries; and having got some Eminent Mathematicians about him, he commanded
them to consult together to see whether they could invent any thing that might
be of use in long Voyages; the most eminent of them, were Rodrigo and Josephe,
his two Physicians, and one Martin Bohemo, The Astrolabe and Tables of
Declination were found out by the Portugues. At the River Zaires in the Kingdom
of Congo, the Portugurses first heard of the Habassins.
who had been Scholar to Johannes Monteregius. These Learned Men, after diverse
Conferences, invented the Astrolabe, and the Tables of Declination.

With the help of this Instrument, one Canus, a famous Sea-Commander, carried
on the Discoveries as far as the River Zaires in the Kingdom of Congo. This
River is said to rise in the same Mountains with the Nile, and in the Winter to
run into the Sea with that violence, as to make the Water fresh for 80 miles:
Here it was the Portugueses first heard of the Habassins, and of their being
Christians; of whom, when King John came to be informed, he resolved to send
some by the way of Egypt, to try to get into that Country; the first that were
sent being ignorant of the Arabic Tongue, were quickly discouraged, who having
visited Jerusalem, returned home without doing any thing.

Only to excuse themselves, they raised Stories that were enough to have
daunted others from attempting that Voyage a second time.

But the King understanding what it was that had made his first Attempt
miscarry, and having found two men who were both great Masters of the Arabic
Tongue, whose names were Petro Cavilham, Cavilham and Payo, who both understood
Arabic, are sent by the way of Memphis to find out Habassia.
and Alphonso Payo; he sent them on the same Errand, with a strict charge not
to come back without an Account of the Situation and State of the Habassin
Empire and Religion, promising them great Rewards if they did it effectually.

They went first to Alexandria, and from thence to Memphis, and from thence to
Medena, where being informed of the Indies being on the left hand, and Habassia
on the right, they agreed to part there; and having cast lots, it fell to
Payo's share to go to Habassia, and to Cavilham to go to the Indies, having
appointed to meet at Memphis, after they had made all the Discoveries they were
able in their several Provinces. Payo, whose Province was Habassia, died by the
way before he got thither; Cavilham, Payo dying by the way, goes first to the
Indies, then to the Southern Coast of Africa, and at last enters into Habassia.
but Cavilham had better luck, and arrived safe in the Indies, where having
observed all the Chief Ports and Commodities of those Countries, he made Maps
of the one, and set down an exact Account of the other, which were afterward
of great use to the Portugueses, as well as an encouragement to them to go on
in their Discoveries. After having finished what he had to do in the Indies, he
failed to the Coast of Africa, where having touched at Oramata, and the
Promontory of Prasus, and at Rapti which stands on the Mouth of the River
Sengi, as also at Melinde, Quiloa, and Cephala, he was there certainly informed
by the Merchants and Mariners, that there was a passage to the Indies, in the
Latitude where the Cape of Good Hope was since discovered to be.

Cavilham being overjoyed at this Intelligence, made all the haste he could to
Memphis, where being arrived, he met with the bad news of Payo's Death; and tho
he was willing to have returned to Portugal with the Intelligence he had got,
yet remembering how much the King's heart was set on the discovery of Habassia,
of which he was able to give him little or no Account, he resolved to take a
Journey thither, which he did, having first sent the King in writing an exact
Information of all the Discoveries he had made in the Indies, and on the Coast
of Africa, by some Merchants that traded from Memphis to Lisbon.

In the Year 1490. Cavilham enters into Habassia, and was kindly entertained by
the King, whose Name was Alexander.
Cavilham first entered into Habassia, of which at that time one Escander or
Alexander was Emperor, who being satisfied of the truth of what Cavilham had
told him, of his having been sent to him by the King of Portugal, and of the
Greatness of that King; he entertained him civilly, and was preparing to have
sent an Ambassador along with him to Portugal, but was prevented from doing it
by Death.

But Nahod, who succeeded Alexander, He was detained as a Spy by King Nahod.
was so far from executing what his Father had designed, that he would neither
send himself, nor suffer Cavilham to return home, whom he looked upon and
treated as a Spy. He sends an account of the Country to Portugai by an Habassin
Monk.


Cavilham finding that there was no hopes of his ever getting out of Ethiopia,
persuaded an Habassin Monk, who was going to Jerusalem, to take a Journey to
Lisbon, by whom he sent the King a full Information of the State of the
Habassin Church and Empire, which coming safe to the King's hand, gave him
abundant Satisfaction.

Nahod having reigned 13 Years, was succeeded by his Son Lebna Danguil, or
David, who being a Child at his Father's Death, the Empire during his Minority
was managed by his Grandmother Helena, who had been Wife to the Emperor Beda
Mariam, and who for her admirable Wisdom and Learning, was highly esteemed by
all sorts of People. She had a great Dowry in the Kingdom of Goiam, where she
built the most stately Church that had ever been seen in Ethiopia.

This King had three Names; his Baptismal Name was Lebna Danguil; his second
Name, which he took when he assumed the Government, was David; his third was
Onay Segued; he was a Prince of great Courage; but as we shall see hereafter,
was ruined by the vast hopes he had conceived of the Advantages that would
accrue to him by his new Alliance with the Portuguese.

Emanuel succeeding John, Emanuel, King of Portugal, sends Almeida with a great
Fleet to take Ormus, and some other Seaports in the Indies.
both in the Kingdom of Portugal, and in his heat for carrying on the Discovery
of the Indies; after the Great Gamas having got thither, and entered into
Alliances with the several Princes, did reckon that there was no security to
his Trade in those Parts, without getting some of the best and strongest of its
Ports into his own Hand; he thereupon sent Francisco de Almeida with the
greatest Fleet that ever was sent before or since to the Indies, to take
Adenum, Ormus, Malaca, etc. to which and all that he was able to Conquer in
those Parts, the Popes, who pretend to a right to dispose of all Infidel, as
well as Heretical Kingdoms, had given him a Title.

Almeida sailed from Lisbon with his great Fleet on the 26th of March in the
Year 1502. and after a troublesome Voyage arrived at Quiola, where he deposed
the King, and bestowed the Crown upon the most popular Man he could hear of;
and having found a convenient Situation for a Castle, he run one up in twenty
Days, and left a good Garrison in it, which commanded both the Port and the
Town; from Quiola he sailed to Mombacca, which having taken by Assault, after
having plundered the Town, he burnt it to the ground; after that he sailed to
Cranganor, where he likewise built a Castle which commanded both the Port and
the Town.

In the Year 1507. Alphonso Albequerque having plundered most of the Towns upon
the Coast of Melinde, sailed to the Island of Socatora, the Inhabitants whereof
are Christians of the Jacobite Sect, as the Habassins are, where having taken
the Fort of Benninum by Storm, he entered into the Persian Gulf; Albuquerque
sends two Envoys to Helena the Governess of Ethiopia.
and after having destroyed the Ports of Curiate and Mascat, and taken Zaor,
Orfazana, and Ormus, he sent two Envoys, whose Names were Joan Barmudes, and
Joan Gomez, to the Emperor of Habassia, who was well-known in those Parts, to
desire some Troops of him.

The Empress Helena, who was still Governess of that Empire, having heard of
the great things that had been done by the Portuguese Captains every where in
the Indies, received those Envoys with great Ceremony, and expecting to reap
great Advantages from an Alliance with a Nation that was so powerful at Sea,
she dispatched one Matthew an Armenian, Ambassador in her Grand-Son's Name to
the King of Portugal, joining an Habassin of some Quality in Commission with
him; their Business was to conclude a League offensive and defensive betwixt
the Crowns of Ethiopia and Portugal, and that in order to drive the Turks out
of all the Ports they were possessed of on the Coast of the Red Sea.

The Ambassadors having got to Goa, were there very kindly received by
Albuquerque, who had taken that City but a little before, and were carried to
Lisbon by the Fleet that went thither in the Year 1513. where they were
splendidly received by the King; Matthew, besides his Letters of Credence,
carried a piece of the true Cross from that Empress to the King, which had been
sent her, for Names sake, it is like, by the Habassin Monks at Jerusalem.

The Letters of Helena, Grandmother of David, the Precious John, to Emanuel,
King of Portugal, written in the Year 1509.
In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one only God in Three Persons:
The Health, Grace, and Benedictions of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Virgin Mary, Born in the House of Bethlem, be upon our beloved
Brother, the most Christian King Emanuel, Lord of the Sea, and Conqueror of the
cruel Infidels, the Mahometans.
THE Lord Prosper you, The Empress Helena's Letter to the King of Portugal.
and give you Victory over all your Enemies, and may your Kingdoms and
Dominions be spread far and wide by the devout Prayers of the Messengers of
Christ, our Redeemer, the Four Evangelists, St. John, St. Luke, St. Mark, and
St. Matthew, whose Holiness and Prayers preserve you.

We do certify you, most beloved Brother, That your two Envoys are arrived at
our Court, the one is named John, who says he is a Priest; the other is named
John Gomez, upon whose having desired Succor and Provisions of us, we sent our
Ambassador Matthew, a Brother of our Service, with the good leave of our
Patriarch, Mark, who gives us Blessing, and sends Presbyters to Jerusalem, and
who is our Father, and the Father of our Kingdoms, and the Pillar of the Faith
of Christ, and of the Holy Trinity, to your great Captain, who fights for the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in India, to let him know how ready we are to
supply him with what Soldiers and Provisions he stands in need of.

We are informed that the Prince of Cair is bringing together a great Fleet to
go against yours, to be revenged on you for the damages he has sustained by
your Captains in the Indies, whom may God so prosper daily, that all Infidels
may be brought under the Yoke; we have determined to send Forces to your
assistance against the said Prince; they shall be ordered to the Straits of
Mecha, namely to Babel, or Mendel, unless it should be more convenient for your
Service that they should be sent to the Ports of Jidda, or Thur, that so we may
drive the Mahometans and Infidels out of the World, and that the Gifts and
Oblations which are sent to the holy Sepulcher may no longer be devoured by
Dogs.

The promised time, which was foretold by Christ to his Mother, is now come,
who said, That in the last days a King should rise among the Franks that would
destroy the whole Race of Mahometans, and Barbarians; now this must undoubtedly
be that very time.

Whatever our Ambassader Matthew shall say to you, you may give credit to, as
if it were spoken by us in person; he is one of our chief Ministers, for which
reason we sent him to your Court.

We had committed this Message to the Envoys you sent us, had we not been
afraid lest by that means our Affairs might not have come so perfectly to your
knowledge, as we desire they should.

We send you by this our Ambassador Matthew, a Cross that is undoubtedly made
out of the Cross whereon our Savior Christ was crucified at Jerusalem: She
sends the King a piece of the true Cross, as it came to her from Jerusalem.
We made two Crosses out of a piece thereof that was sent to us; one whereof we
keep to our selves, and the other we have sent to you by our Ambassudor; the
Wood is of a black color, and it hangs by a small Silver Ring.

Furthermore, If you shall think fit to marry, either your Daughters to our
Sons, or your Sons with our Daughters, it will be extremely acceptable to us,
She desires a Daughter of Portugal for her Black Prince.
and will be much for both our Advantages, by laying a foundation of a
Brotherly Alliance betwixt us. Which Marriages we are and shall always be ready
to enter into with you: What remains, is, That the Health and Grace of our
Redeemer Christ Jesus, and of our Holy Lady the Virgin Mary, may extend
themselves to you, your Sons and Daughters, and your whole Family. Amen.

We do furthermore certify you, That in case you and we join our Forces, we
shall, with God's assistance, be strong enough to destroy the Enemies of our
Holy Faith; for at Sea, where by reason of our Empire's lying so much within
Land, we are not able to do any thing, You, praised be God, are the most
powerful of all, Jesus Christ being your Helper; for in truth, the things done
by you in the Indies are miraculous, and more than humane: If you will set out
a Fleet of a 1000 Ships, we will take care to furnish them with all Necessaries.


Upon the Emperor of Habassin's having made this glorious Proposition to him,
King Emanuel resolved to send a splendid Embassy to his Court, named Don Edward
Calvam, who had been Secretary of State to two Kings, and Ambassador at the
Courts of Vienna, France and Rome, and one Rodriguez de Lima, and Francis
Alverez, one of his Chaplains in Ordinary, to go Ambassadors, sending rich
Presents by them, both to the Emperor, and his Grandmother.

These Ambassadors, with Matthew in their Company, went to Goa, on the Fleet
that carried the Viceroy Lopez Suares; by whom they were sent in the Year 1520.
with a strong Convoy to Arkiko, a Port in the Red Sea, belonging at that time
to the Habassins. Galvam, who was the first in Commission, dying by the way, in
the Island of Camara, was succeeded by Lima; who having made but a short stay
at Arkiko, begun his Journey toward the Habassin Court, where when he arrived,
he was received by the Emperor with extraordinary joy and kindness; Matthew,
who died in the way betwixt Arkiko and the Court, having been splendidly
interred by the Ambassadors in the Monastry of Bisoym.

The Ambassadors who were to have returned to the Indies by the same Fleet they
came upon, having brought their Negotiation to a speedy issue, made what haste
they could back to Arkiko, where, to their great mortification, they found the
Fleet they were to have embarked upon, gone, the Moncons or Trade-Winds, which
in those Seas blow six Months from one Point, and six months from the opposite,
not permitting them to wait any longer for them: And to increase the
mortification of this Disappointment, they met with Letters which had been left
for them by the Admiral, that advised them of the Death of King Emanuel, the
greatest and most fortunate Prince that ever wore the Crown of Portugal.

The Ambassadors not knowing how long it might be before they should have a
Fleet to carry them to Goa; and being certain, that by reason of the Moncon it
must be at least six months before one could possibly come to them, they
returned to the Court again, where they remained four years before any
opportunity for Goa offered it self. But at the end of four years they embarked
upon a Fleet at Arkiko, sent on purpose to fetch them, carrying an Habassin
Ambassador home with them with Letters to the King of Portugal and the Pope.

The Ambassadors did not arrive at Lisbon before the Year 1527. where the
Habassin Ambassador, whose name was Zaga Zabo, was received with all the marks
of friendship and kindness; but whatever was the cause of it, he was, to his
great sorrow, detained above 10 years in that Court. He has given the World a
large Account of the Faith and Customs of the Habassins, which, though false in
abundance of Particulars, I shall set down at length, having first translated
the Habassin Emperor's Letters to the Pope, and the King of Portugal.

The Letters of the most Serene David, Emperor of Ethiopia, to Emanuel King of
Portugal; writ in the Year 1521.
In the name of God the Father, as it was always, and who has no beginning; In
the name of God the only Son, who was like unto him before the light of the
Stars was seen, and before he laid the foundations of the Sea; but who in time
was conceived in the Womb of a Virgin without Human Seed, and without Marriage,
for after this manner was the knowledge of his Office: In the name of the
Comforter, the Spirit of Holiness, who knows all Secrets that are, or ever
were, and all the height of Heaven, which is sustained and upheld without
Pillars, and who enlarged the Earth, which before was not known, nor created,
from the East to the West, and from the South to the North, neither are they
First and Second, but a Trinity joined in One Eternal Creator, and One Council,
and One Word through all Ages. Amen.
THESE Letters are sent by Mani Tinghil, that is, the Frankincense of the
Virgin, which was the name that was given me at my Baptism; but the name I
assumed when I took the Government upon me, is David, the Beloved of God, the
Pillar of the Faith, of the Race of Judah, the Son of David, the Son of
Solomon, the Son of the Pillar of Sion, the Son of the Seed of Jacob, the Son
of the Hand of Mary, the Son of Nau, by the Flesh, Emperor of the Great and
High Ethiopia, and of Mighty Kingdoms and Provinces, King of Xoa and Affate,
and of Fatigar, and of Angote and Bara, and of Baaligaura, and of Adea, and of
Vangue, and of Goiam, where the Nile rises; and of Damarua, and of Vaquem
Edri, Ambea, Vagni, Tigri, Mahon, and Sabaym, where Queen Saba lived, and of
Barnagaes, and Lord of all the Countries as far as Nubia on the Confines of
Egypt.

These Letters are addressed to the most Potent and Excellent King Emanuel, who
lives in the love of God, and who continues steadfast in the Catholic Faith,
the Son of the Apostles Peter and Paul, King of Portugal and Algarves, the
Friend of Christians, the Enemy, Judge and Conqueror of the Mahometans, and
Heathens of Africa and Guinea, from the Promontory and Island of the Moon, to
the Red Sea of Arabia, Persia and Ormus, and of the whole Indies, and of all
the Provinces, Islands and Lands belonging to them, the Destroyer of the
Mahometans, and of all the mighty Heathens; the Lord of Towers, and of High
Castles and Walls, the Propagator of the Faith of Jesus Christ.

Peace be with you, King Emanuel, who relying uton God's Assistance, do
slaughter the Mahometans, and with your Fleet and Armies every where drive the
Infidels out as Dogs: Peace be with the Queen your Wife, the Friend of Jesus
Christ, and the Servant of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of the Savior of the
World: Peace be with your Sons, who are as flourishing Lillies in a
Spring-Garden, and are as a Table furnished with Meat: Peace be with your
Daughters, whose Attire adorns them, as Tapistry does a Palace: Peace be with
all your Kindred, who are procreated out of the Seed of the Saints, as the holy
Scripture says, The Sons of the Holy are blessed, and are great both at home
and abroad: Peace be with your Counselors, Officers, Magistrates and Judges:
Peace be with the Governors of your Castles, and Frontiers, and of all your
strong Places: Peace be with all Nations, People, and Cities, and all their
Inhabitants, excepting Mahometans and Jews; Peace be with all Parishes, and
with all that are faithful to Christ and you. Amen.

O, Lord King, and my Father, I am informed, That when the fame of my Name
first reached your ears, by the Voice of my Ambassador Matthew, that you
forthwith assembled all your Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates, to return
thanks to God for so good News, and that you did also receive Matthew with
great kindness and respect: When I came to hear of this, I was overjoyed
likewise, and did return thanks to God for it, as did also all my People. I was
much troubled at Matthew 's Death, who dyed in the Monastery of Basayn, within
my Dominions, as he was returning home; he was not sent by me, for I was then
but a Boy of 11 years of Age, and had not taken the Government upon me after my
Father's death, but by Queen Helena, whom I reverenced as my Mother, and who at
that time administered the Affairs of the Empire. Matthew was by Profession a
Merchant, and his true name was Abraham, which he changed, that he might travel
through the Turkish Dominions with the more security.

But having, notwithstanding his Disguise, been discovered to be a Christian,
at Dabul he was cast into Prison, where he lay till he was taken out by some of
your stout Soldiers, upon his having acquainted them with his Confinement, and
his being our Ambassador. The General of your Army, after he had rescued him
out of the hands of the Enemy, took care to convey him to your Court; at which,
as Matthew was punctual in acquainting you with all that he had in Commission
to say, so he was the same in sending me word how honorably he was entertained
by you, and how you had loaded him with Gifts; all which was confirmed by your
Ambassadors, who were conveyed hither by Didacus Lopez de Segueiea, the Admiral
of your Fleet; and by the Letters which were to have been delivered to me by
Edward Golvam, who died in the Island of Camera, and were delivered by the
surviving Ambassadors. I rejoiced exceedingly at the sight of your Letters, and
did return thanks to God for them. I was overjoyed likewise to see your
Ambassadors have Crosses on their breasts, and did enquire of them concerning
the Rites of the Christian Faith; being desirous to know which are the True.
But the thing that affected me with the most devotion, was the Story your
Ambassadors told me, of Ethiopia having been first discovered to your Fleet by
a Miracle: Which after it had given over all hopes of finding it, was conducted
to one of our Ports by a Red Cross that appeared one morning in the Heavens; as
this appears to me to have been a Miracle, so undoubtedly the Admiral of your
Fleet, who had such an extraordinary honor done to him, must be exceedingly
beloved of God.

This mutual Embassy of ours was foretold by the Prophet in the Book of Life,
and in the Passion of St. Victor, and in the Writings of the Holy Fathers,
which do all testify, That a great Christian King should conclude a Peace with
the Emperor of Ethiopia: But little did I expect that this prophecy would have
been fulfilled in my days. But God knew it certainly, praised be his Name, who
first brought Ambassadors from you to me, that I might likewise send
Ambassadors to you.

My Father in Christ, and Friend, it is my desire that we should be of the same
Religion; I never had an Embassy sent to me before by any Christian King,
neither was I certain that there was a Christian King any where besides my
self, having been always encompassed with Moors, the Sons of Mahomet, and with
Heathens and Slaves, who do not acknowledge God, and with some who worship Wood
and Fire, and with others that worship Serpents as Gods; with whom I have never
lived well, because, though the Faith has been preached to them, they refuse to
come to the Truth. I am now at ease, God having given me rest from all your and
my own Enemies; against whom when I march with my Armies, they turn their backs
toward us; my Captains are also everywhere victorious over them: So that God
is not angry with me, but as the Psalmist has it, He has fulfilled the desire
of Kings, who desire nothing but what is righteous: For which, no praise is due
to us, but all thanks ought to be returned to God, for it is he that has given
us the World, and the Land of the Gentiles for ever, and all the Countries from
your own Borders to those of Ethiopia: For which I do give great thanks to God,
and do proclaim his mighty Power, hoping the Sons of the Gentiles will be
brought under the Yoke, and to the knowledge of the true Faith; for I do not in
the least doubt, but that your Sons, and you, and I, shall abundantly rejoice
in our Victories; and you must never give over praying to God until he has put
you in Possession of the Holy Temple of Jerusalem, which at present is in the
hands of the Enemies of Christ, that is, of Mahometans, Heathens, and
Heretics; which work if you could perform, your hand will be full of praise.

Of the Ambassadors you sent unto me with Matthew, Three died by the way; the
Admiral of your Fleet, after having had a Conference at Matrua with the King of
Bernagays, who is our Vassal, dispatched the surviving Ambassadors with great
Gifts to our Court: Your Gifts were acceptable to me, but your Name is more
precious to me than all Jewels and Treasures.

But let us pass over these things, and begin to Treat how we may Invade and
Conquer the Countries of the Infidels; I for my part will Contribute a Hundred
thousand Drachms of Gold, and as many Thousand Armed Men, and moreover Timber,
and Iron, and Copper, toward the Building and Equipping of a Fleet, with
abundance of Provisions of all sorts; let us therefore join together. And
whereas it is not our Custom, nor agreeable to our Dignity, to send Ambassadors
to any Prince to sue for Peace, you did therefore first send Ambassadors to
desire a Peace with me, wherein you verified the Words of Christ, for it is
written, Blessed are the feet which bring peace; for which I am also prepared
after the manner of the Apostles, who were unanimous and of one Heart.

O King, and my Father Emanuel; the Only God, who is the God of Heaven, and is
always the same, growing neither older nor younger, preserve and protect you.

The Envoy, of those that arrived, who was first in Commission, was named
Rodrigo Lima, with whom was joined one Francis Alvarez, who for the singular
Piety and Probity of his Life, was very dear to me; he did also return very
proper answers to all the questions I put to him concerning Religion; you ought
therefore to prefer him, and to call him Master, and to employ him in the
Conversion of the people of Matrua and Zeila, and of all the other Islands of
the Red Sea, all which are on the Coast of our Empire; I have bestowed a Cross
and a Staff upon him, as Badges of Authority, and would have you to do the
same, and to make him Bishop of those Countries, for he well deserves it, and
is very fit for that Office. God be propitious to you, that so you may always
be Valiant against your Enemies, and may bring them all under your Feet.

God grant you a long life, and make you partaker of as good Places in the
Kingdom of Heaven as I wish for my self; for I have heard many good things of
you, and have seen with my eyes what I never expected to have seen: May God
make things succeed from good to better, and may your place be over the Tree of
Life, which is the place of the Saints.

I as your little Son, have done what you Commanded me; and if you will send
Ambassadors to me, I will always obey you, that so we may help one another; and
whenever your Ambassadors shall arrive, as these did at Matrua, or at Dalacam,
I will be sure to take that care of them that you desire I should, there being
nothing I am so ambitious of, as that we should be united in Councils and
Actions; and whenever your Fleet shall come upon my Coast, I shall join them
immediately with an Army: And whereas on my Borders there are no Christians,
nor Christian Churches, I am willing to give all those Provinces, which Border
upon the Mahometans, to your Subjects to Inhabit; make haste therefore to
execute what you have begun.

In the mean time I would have you send me some of your Learned Men, as also
some Gravers of Images of Gold and Silver, and some Lead, Copper, and Iron
Smiths, as also some Printers, that understand our Letters, to Print Books for
our Churches, and some that know how to make Bracelets, and how to Gild Metals,
they shall be all well entertained in my Palace, and whenever they shall have a
mind to return home, they shall be well Rewarded for their Pains; and I do
Swear by Christ Jesus, who is God, and the Son of God, that they shall have
free leave to depart.

This I do desire and expect from your known Virtue and Goodness, being
sensible that you have a great kindness for me, by your having treated Matthew
so Honorably and Liberally, and by having sent him back as you did.

I do most earnestly desire to have all the forementioned Artificers sent
hither, and do promise that you shall never have any cause to repent of your
having sent them; for I will take care that they shall all be well rewarded;
wherefore since a Father ought not to deny what his Son desires of him, and you
are my Father, and I am your Son, let us be joined together as two Bricks are
in a Wall, that so we may be two with one Heart, and may agree in the Love of
Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the World, all that are in him being as Bricks
joined together in a Wall. Amen.


The Letters of the same David Emperor of Ethiopia, to King John the IIId. of
Portugal, written in the Year 1524.
In the Name of God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all
things that are made, visible and invisible: In the Name of God the Son, the
Council and Prophet of the Father; and in the Name of the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter and living God: Who is equal to the Father and the Son, and who spoke
by the mouth of the Prophets, and inspired the Apostles, that they might Thank
and Praise the Perfect Trinity in Heaven and on Earth, and in the Depths
always. Amen.
I The Frankincense of the Virgin, for that was my Baptismal Name, but who with
the Scepter of my Kingdom have taken the Name of David. The Beloved of God, the
Pillar of the Faith, the Offspring of Judah, the Son of David, the Son of
Solomon, Kings of Israel, the Son of the Pillar of Sion, of the seed of Jacob,
the Son of the hand of Mary, the Son of Nau by the Flesh; do send these Letters
and this Ambassador, to the Greatest, most Powerful, and High, John King of
Portugal and Algerves, the Son of King Emanuel: Peace be with you, the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you always. Amen.

When I heard of the Power of the King your Father, by whom the Moors, the Sons
of the filthy Mahomet, were subdued, I gave great Thanks to God for the
Increase and the Greatness of the Crown of Conservation in the House of
Christianity. I did likewise take great pleasure in the arrival of the
Ambassadors who brought that King's words to us, because by that means a
singular Love, Friendship, and Correspondence, was established betwixt us, in
order to the Extirpating of all the Wicked Mahometans and the Unbelieving
Heathens that lie betwixt our two Kingdoms. But while I was full of this Joy,
before I had sent any Ambassador to him, I received the News of your and my
Father's Death, which turned my Joy suddenly into Sorrow, whereof our Court,
Prelates, and Monks, and, in a word, all our Faithful Subjects, did deeply
partake: Our Sorrow upon this News becoming equal to our former Joy.

Sir, From the beginning of my Reign there was no Ambassador nor Envoy sent to
me by the King or Kingdom of Portugal, but by your Father, who sent some of his
Captains hither, and with them some of his Nobles, and Clarks, and Deacons, who
brought with them all the Utensils of a Solemn Mass.

I must tell you, I was overjoyed at their arrival, and did receive them with
great Affection, dismissing them after they had done their Business, that so
they might return home in Peace and with Honor: But being come to the Port of
the Red Sea that is on my Borders, they found the Admiral of their Fleet gone;
who, as he certified me himself, could wait no longer for them, by reason of a
Custom that you have, of changing your Admiral every Third Year, which,
together with no other Fleets having touched at any of my Ports for some Years
after, was the cause of your Ambassador's having staid so long at my Court.

I do now send, what I desire of you, by Brother Christopher Licanot, whose
Baptismal Name is Zaga Zabo, that is to say, The Grace of the Father, who will
lay my Demands before you. I do likewise send Francis Alvarez to the Pope, to
yield Obedience to him in my Name, as it is just I should.

O Lord my Brother King, attend and apply your self to the Friendship that was
begun betwixt us by your Father, and do not neglect to send Letters and
Ambassadors to us frequently; for I am extremely desirous to receive them from
you, as from my Brother: And since we are both Christians, and the Mahometans,
though Wicked, are still in Peace with all of their own Sect, it is fit it
should be the same betwixt us. And I do declare, That for the future I will
receive no Embassy from the King of Egypt, nor from any of those Kingdoms,
which have formerly sent Ambassadors to us, nor from no other King but only
from your Highness, from whom I do earnestly desire to have them come; for the
Mohammedan Kings, by reason of the difference that is betwixt us in Religion, do
never look upon me as their Friend, and do only pretend to have a Kindness for
me, that they may Trade with the more convenience and security within my
Dominions, from whence they draw great Profit, exporting Yearly great
Quantities of Gold, whereof they are extremely Covetons, while at the same time
they have no real Friendship for me, for which reason I take no pleasure in
their Gain; but this having been a Custom of my Ancestors, was to be endured;
though after all, the only thing that hinders me from making War upon them, and
Confounding them, is the fear of provoking them thereby to violate and destroy
the Temple of Jerusalem, where the Sepulcher of Christ is, which God has been
pleased to leave in the hands of those filthy Mahometans, and to demolish the
Churches that are in Egypt and Syria; this is the only cause why I do not
Invade and Conquer them, which I am sorry I am not at liberty to do.

O King, I can by no means rejoice in the Christian Kings of Europe, who, as I
am informed, do not agree in one heart, but are at War one with another; be you
all Unanimous, and in Friendship one with another; for my own part, had I a
Christian King in my Neighborhood, I would never be absent from him. I do not
know what to say of these matters, nor what to do, since God seems to have
ordained things to be as they are.

My Lord, let me have Ambassadors from you frequently; for when I see your
Letters I think I behold your face; there being a greater Friendship betwixt
those that live far asunder, than betwixt Neighbors, by reason of the stronger
desire they have one for another; for he that has hid his Treasure thinks the
oftener of it, and loves it the more for not seeing it, according to what Christ
says in his Gospel, Where your treasure is there will your hearts be also; my
heart is therefore with you, because you are my Treasure, and you ought also to
make me your Treasure, so as sincerely to join your Heart with ours.

O Lord and Brother, observe this word, for I am told you are very Wise, and in
Wisdom like your Father, of which, when I was informed, I returned Thanks to
God for it, and throwing away Sorrow, did put on Joy, and said, Blessed be the
Son that is Wise, and who has a great Head; the Son of King Emanuel who sits
upon the Throne of his Kingdoms.

Sir, Have a care you do not grow weary, since you are no less Valiant than
your Father, and do not discover your self to be Weak against the Mahometans
and Gentiles, whom, with God's Assistance, you may easily Conquer; and have a
care how you say, The Forces left me by my Father are small; for they are
abundantly sufficient, and God will always help you: I have Men, Gold, and
Provisions, like the Sand of the Sea, and the Stars of Heaven; so that we two
being United, may with ease destroy the whole Barbarous Race of Mahometans; I
desire nothing of you, but Experienced Officers to Discipline and Command my
Soldiers.

O King, thou art of a just Age, whereas Solomon took the Government upon
himself when he was but 12 years old, and notwithstanding that had great Power,
and was wiser than his Father. I also when Nau my Father died, was but 11 years
of Age, and have, notwithstanding that, with God's assistance, acquired more
Power and Riches since I sat on the Throne of my Father, than ever he had;
having conquered all the Neighboring Nations and Kingdoms; we have both cause
therefore to thank God for so singular a benefit. Hearken to me, Brother, and
Lord; for there is one thing I must request of you, which is, That you would
send me some of your Learned Men, as also some Artificers, that understand how
to make Images, and how to Print Books, and to make Swords, and all sorts of
Military Weapons, with some Masons, Carpenters, and Physicians and Surgeons,
and some who skill to beat Gold, and gild, and how to work in Mines: I would
also have some that know how to cover Houses with Lead, and to make Tile; in a
word, all sorts of Artificers shall be welcome to me, namely, such as make
Pistols. Help me, I beseech you, to all these things, as one Brother ought to
help another, and then God will help you out of your Troubles.

The Lord hear your Prayers, and Petitions, as he has received holy Sacrifices
at all times, namely, the Sacrifices of Abel, and of Noah when he was in the
Ark, and that of Abraham when he was in the Land of Madiam, and of Isaac when
he went from the Trench of the Oak, and of Jacob in the House of Bethlem, and
that of Moses in Egypt, and of Aaron in the Mount, and of Joshua the Son of Nun
in Galgala, and of Gideon on the Rock, of Sampson when he was in a dry and
thirsty Land, and of Samuel in Rama of the Prophets, and of David in Naceea,
and of Solomon in the City of Gabeon, and of Elias in Mount Carmel, when he
raised the Daughter of the Widow over the Pit to life; and of Jehosaphet in
Battle, and of Manasses when he turned to God after having sinned, and of
Daniel in the Den of Lions, and of the three Companions, Sidrach, Mesack and
Abednego, in the fiery Furnace, and of Hannah before the Altar, and of
Nehemiah, who together with Zerobabel built the Walls; and of Matathias with
his Sons, on the fourth part of the Earth; and of Esau upon the Blessed: In the
same manner may God receive your Sacrifices, and Supplications; and assist you,
and be on your side against all wickedness, at all times.

Peace be with you; I do embrace you with the Arms of Holiness; as I do also
your whole Council, and all your Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and
all Men and Women; the Grace of God, and the Blessing of the Virgin Mary, the
Mother of God, be with you, and with all People. Amen.
The Letter of David, Emperor of Ethiopia, to the Roman Pontiff, in the Year
1524.
In the name of God, the Father Almghty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all
things visible and invisible; in the name of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who
was the same with him from the beginning of the World, and who is Light of
Light, and very God of very God; and in the name of God the Holy Ghost, who is
true God, and proceeds from the Father.
I The King, at whose Name the Lions do tremble, who am by the Grace of God
called Achami Tinghil, that is the Frankincense of the Virgin; the Son of King
David, the Son of Solomon, the Son of the Hand of Mary, the Son of Nau by the
Flesh, and by Grace the Son of St. Peter and St. Paul; do send these Letters.

Peace be with you.

O Just Lord, and holy, powerful, pure and sacred Father, who art the head of
all Bishops, and fear nobody, because there is none that has power to
curse thee, who art the most watchful Curate of all Souls, and the Friend of
Pilgrims, and the sacred Master and Preacher of the Faith, and the Enemy of
every thing that offends the Conscience, and the lover of all good Manners, and
a holy Person, whom all do bless and praise.

O happy and holy Father, I do obey you with reverence, because you are the
peace of all, and do deserve whatsoever is good; so that it is but just, that
according to the divine Commands of the Apostles, all should yield obedience to
you: This belongs to you; but they have likewise commanded us to reverence all
Bishops, Archbishops and Prelates, and to love you as a Father, and to
reverence you as a King, and to believe in you as a God.

For which cause I do humbly with bended knees, and with a sincere heart, tell
you, holy Father, That you are my Father, and I am your Son.

Holy and most mighty Father, Why have you never sent any Nuncio's to us, to be
informed of our health; for since you are our Pastor, and we are your Sheep,
you ought not to have been unmindful of us, nor ought you to have reckoned us
to have been too remote from your Territories, for your Nuncio's to have
visited us; seeing from the most remote Kingdom of the Earth, that is Portugal,
your Son, King Emanuel, has commodiously sent his Ambassadors to us; so that if
God had deferred calling him to Heaven, the things he and I were treating
about, had undoubtedly had a happy Issue before this time.

I should be glad to hear healthful things from you by certain Nuncio's, having
never had a word from your Holiness, nor heard of you by any other way, but by
some of our vowed Pilgrims, who neither carried Letters from us to you, nor
brought any from you to us; and who therefore, when we enquired of them, could
only tell us, That going from Jerusalem, after they had performed their Vows
there, to visit the Thresholds of the Apostles at Rome, they had seen you,
giving us a general Account of your Affairs. I took great pleasure in their
Relations, beholding in them the Image of your holy Countenance, which appeared
to me to be like that of an Angel; and I must own, that I do love and reverence
you: Nevertheless, it would be much more grateful to me, devoutly to
contemplate your Words and Letters: I must therefore beg it of you, that you
would send a Nuncio to me, to exhilerate my heart with your Blessing; for since
we agree in Faith and Religion, that is the thing of the World that I desire
most, and that my Friendship may be as the Ring you wear on your Finger, or as
the Gold Chain that is about your Neck, that so I may be always in your heart
and memory: Friendship being much increased by greateful Words and Letters,
when holy Peace, from which all human Joy does flow naturally, embraces them:
For as one that is very thirsty is extremely desirous of cold water, as the
Scripture has it; so Nuncio's and Letters coming to me from remote parts,
either from your Holiness, or any Christian King, will fill my heart with
extraordinary Pleasures; such as theirs are filled with, who after a Victory,
come to gather rich Spoils: All this may be done with great ease, now the King
of Portugal has opened a way to it; who some times since sent Ambassadors, with
other Persons of Quality, to us, which was a thing had never been done by any
Christian King, or Pope, before to any of our Ancestors: Only in the Archives
of our Great Grandfather Zera Jacob, who was King of all the Kings of Ethiopia,
and a most Formidable Prince, the Copies of some Letters to him from Eugenius
the Roman Pontiff are still preserved, the purport whereof is as follows.

EUgenius the Roman Pontiff, to our beloved Son King Zara Jacob, the King of
all the Kings of Ethiopia, and who is mightily dreaded: He goes on, and tells
him, That his Son John Paleologus, who had been dead two years, the King of the
Kings of the Romans, had been called by him to celebrate a holy Synod, to which
he came accompanied by Joseph the Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great many
other Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates, as also with the Procurators of the
Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, who had all united themselves
to him, in the love of the holy Faith, and Religion: So that now the Unity of
the Church was reestablished, and all the old Controversies, through God's
assistance, were ended; and whatever was erroneous, and contrary to Religion,
dissipated, and right Order restored, which had filled all People with joy.

We do here send you that Letter of Eugenius, which has been preserved entire,
and would likewise have sent you the whole Order and Power of the Pontifical
Benediction; had it not been so large a Volume, it being bigger than the Book
of Paul to the Gentiles; the Nuncio's that brought these Papers from the Pope
hither, were Theodore, Peter, Didimus, and George, the Servants of Jesus
Christ: You would do well, holy Father, to command your Papers to be looked
over, among which, it is like, you will meet with some Records of these
Matters. You may see by this, holy Father, that if you should be pleased to
write any thing to us, the memory thereof will be preserved in our Archives
thorough all Ages: And happy is the Man whose Memory is preserved in the
Records of the holy City of Rome, the Chair of St. Peter, and St. Paul, who are
the Lords of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Judges of the World; and my
believing them to be so, was the cause of my writing these Letters to your
Holiness, that I may obtain your Favor, and that of your holy Conclave, and
therewithal all sorts of Blessings, and the increase of all good things.

I do furthermore supplicate your Holiness, to send us the Images of some
Saints, namely, that of the blessed Virgin Mary, that by that means your
Holiness may be frequent in our Mouths, and Memories, and that I may be always
delighting my self in your Gifts: For the same reason I do earnestly entreat
you, to send me some Learned Men, and Artificers, namely, Carvers of Images,
Sword-Cutlers, and Gunsmiths, and Gilders, and Carpenters, but especially
Artificers who knew how to Build Houses with Stone, and to cover them with Lead
and Copper; I should be glad likewise, to have some that understand how to make
Glass, and Musical Instruments, and how to play well upon them, with some
Pipers and Trumpeters: These Artificers I desire chiefly from your Holiness;
but in case you should have none to spare, I must entreat you to order some of
the Christian Kings, your Sons, who are all at your Commands, to send them unto
me: Which Artificers, when they arrive here, shall be treated honorably, and
rewarded according to their deserts; they shall also have good Wages, and
whenever they shall desire it, they shall have free leave to return home, and
be well rewarded for their pains; for I will detain no body against his will,
how beneficial soever his stay should be to me: But to pass to other things.

I must expostulate with you, holy Father: Why do you not exhort the Christian
Kings, your Sons, to lay down their Arms, as becomes Brethren, and to agree
among themselves; seeing they are all your Sheep, and you are their Pastor?
Your Holiness is not ignorant of the Gospel-Commands, and of its having said, A
kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, but will become desolate. For if
those Kings would but all join together, they would quickly destroy all the
Mahometans, and with ease demolish the Sepulcher of their False Prophet: Apply
your self therefore to this, holy Father, that so there may be a firm Peace and
Confederacy established among them, and exhort them to assist us, who are
besieged on all sides by Wicked Mahometans, and Moors: The Turks and Moors can
assist one another, and their Kings and Rulers do all agree together: I have a
Mohammedan for my Neighbor, who is constantly supplied with Arms, Horses, and
all Military Weapons, by Princes of his own Sect, namely, the Kings of India,
Persia and Egypt; this is a great mortification to me, to see the Enemies of
the Christian Religion enjoy Peace, and live together like Brethren; and at the
same time, to see Christian Kings, my Brethren, not in the least concerned at
the Injuries I endure; not one of them offering to succor me as becomes a
Christian, notwithstanding the filthy Sons of Mahomet are always ready to
succor one another; not that I desire any Soldiers of them, for I have enough
of my own, and to spare; but all that I desire of them, is, only their Prayers
and Supplications, and your Holiness, and my Brethren's Favor: The reason why
I want your Friendship, is, that I may be furnished by you with such things as
are necessary to terrify the Mahometans, the Enemies of the Name of Christ: And
that my Neighbors may be made sensible of my being favored by the Christian
Kings, my Brethren, and of their being ready to assist me whenever there shall
be occasion; which would be much for the honor of all of us that are of the
same Faith and Religion, and do intend to persist therein.

God fulfill your Desires to the praise of Jesus Christ, and of God our Father,
who is praised by all through all Ages; and you, my Lord, and holy Father, with
all the Saints of Christ at Rome, embrace me; and let all my Subjects, and all
that dwell in Ethiopia, be received with the same Embraces; and let thanks be
returned to Christ with your Spirit.

These Letters your Holiness will receive from my Brother, John, King of
Portugal, the most Powerful Son of King Emanuel, who will send them to you by
our Ambassador Francisco Alvarez.


A Second Letter of David, Emperor of Ethiopia, to the Roman Pontiff, written
in the Year 1524.
HAppy and holy Father, who art made by God the Conservator of the Nations, and
who do sit in the Chair of St. Peter; To thee are given the keys of the
kingdom of heaven; so that whatsoever thou binded or loosest on earth, is bound
and loose in heaven, according to what Christ has said in St. Matthew 's
Gospel.
I the King, at whose Name the Lions tremble, who at my Baptism was called
Atami Tinghil, that is the Frankincense of the Virgin, but who, when I took the
Administration of my Empire upon me, assumed the Names of David the Beloved of
God, the Pillar of Faith, the Prince of Judah, the Son of Solomon, the Son of
the Pillar of Sion, the Son of Zara Jacob, the Son of the Hand of Mary, the Son
of Nau by the Flesh, Emperor of the Great and High Ethiopia, and of vast
Kingdoms and Dominions; King of Xoa, and Caffate, and Fatigar, Angot, Baru,
Baaltinganze, Adea, Vanga, and Mahon, and Saba, from whence the Queen of Saba
went, and Barnagays; the Lord of all Nubia, to the Confines of Egypt: All which
Countries, and a great many more not here mentioned, are under our Dominion;
neither have I mentioned the forenamed out of Pride, or Vaingloy, or for any
other reason, but that the Great God may be the more praised, who of his
singular bounty has been pleased to bestow the foresaid Christian Empires upon
my Ancestors; and who has likewise been gracious to me, after a special
manner, that I might constantly do service to his Religion; making me Lord of
Adel, and the Scourge of the Mahometans, and Gentiles, who do worship Idols: I
do after the manner of other Christian Kings, my Brethren, to whom I am no-ways
inferior, either in Power or Religion, send to kiss your Holiness's Feet:
Within my own Territories, I am the Fillar of Faith, neither am I assisted with
any Foraign Succors, but I do place my whole trust and confidence in God, as my
Ancestors did before me, who have all been sustained and governed by him, ever
since his Angel spoke to Philip, who instructed the Eunuch of the powerful
Queen Candace, Empress of Ethiopia, in the Faith, as he was coming from
Jerusalem to Gaza; Philip then baptized the Eunuch, and the Eunuch afterward
baptized the Queen, with the greatest part of her Court, and People, who from
that day to this, have continued Christians, and strong in the Faith: My
Ancesters, without any other than Divine Assistance, have propagated the Faith
through vast Regions, which I likewise labor daily to do; being fixed between
the large Borders of my Kingdoms, as a Lion encompassed within a Wood; and
strongly fortified against the Mahometans, and other Nations, that are Enemies
to the Christian Faith, and who will not give ear to the Word of God, and my
Exhortation: For which reason, I with my Sword girt about me, do persecute
them, and will by degrees expel them, relying on the Divine Assistance, which
is never wanting to me, which is more than all Christan Kings can say, who, if
they would but agree together, might with the help of your Blessing, easily
enlarge the Bounds of their Empires; of which Blessing I do partake. Among our
Books there being Letters which were sent by Pope Eugenius with his Blessing to
Zera Jacob; which Blessing having descended to me, I do now enjoy it, and
rejoice in it mainly.

The Holy Temple of Jerusalem is a place I have great Veneration for, and do
frequently send Oblations to it by our Pilgrims; and I would send both more and
greater, were I not Besieged on all sides by Mahometans and Infidels; who
besides that they Rifle our Messengers, will not allow them a free passage;
whereas if the ways were but once opened, I should then be able to Correspond
with the Roman Church, as well as other Christians, to whom, as to the
Christian Religion, I am nothing inferior; for as they believe One Right Faith,
and One Church, so I do profess the same, and do most sincerely believe in the
Holy Trinity, and in One God, and in the Virginity of our Lady the Virgin Mary;
I do also hold all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and do keep them as
they were writ by the Apostles.

And now that our good God has been pleased, by the hand of the most Potent and
Christian King Emanuel, to open a way by which we may Correspond by
Amdassadors; since we are joined in the Faith, let us likewise with all other
Christians join together in the service of God. During the time the Ambassadors
of that King were at our Court, we received the News of his Death, and of his
Son, and my Brother John, having Succeeded to the Crown; and as I was extremely
afflicted at the News of the Death of the Father, so I did very much rejoice to
hear of his Son's having succeeded him; for I do hope that by joining our
forces, we shall be able to open a passage both by Sea and Land, through the
Regions of the Wicked Mahometans, and to terrify them to that degree, as to
drive them quite out of those Countries, so that Christians may go to, and
return from Jerusalem without any molestation; and I do most vehemently desire
to partake of the Divine Love in the Temple of the Apostles Peter und Paul: I
do likewise desire to receive the most Holy Blessing of Christ's Vicar, which
your Holiness is undoubtedly. And as the things I hear of your Holiness by our
Pilgrims, which go from hence to Jerusalem, and from thence to Rome, and that
not without a Miracle, do fill me with incredible Joy and Pleasure; so there is
nothing I would rejoice in so much, as to have a shorter way found out for my
Ambassadors, that so I might hear from you before I die, which I trust in God I
shall do by some means or other. I beseech God to preserve you in Health and
and Holiness.

I Kiss your holy Feet, and do humbly beg your Blessing. Your Holiness will
receive these Letters from our Brother, John King of Portugal, who will send
them to you by our Ambassador Francis Alvarez.

We may judge what mean thoughts King John had of these Letters and Ambassadors
to the Pope, The Habassin Embassy to the Pope little regarded.
by their lying unregarded Five Years at Lisbon before they were sent to Rome;
and by his sending them at last, only to do Honor to his Nehpew Don Martin de
Portugal, when he sent him Ambassador to that Court with the following Letter.

To the most Holy Father in Christ, and the most Blessed Lord, Pope Clement the
IIId. by Divine Providence presiding over the whole Church.
To the most Holy Father in Christ, and the most Blessed Lord, the most devout
Son of the same Holiness, John, by the Grace of God, King of Portugal and
Algarves on this side and the other side of the Sea of Africa, Lord of Guinea,
and of the Conquests, Navigation, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and
India: After having most humbly kissed your Holy feet.
MOST Holy Father in Christ, After having lain five years neglected at Lisbon,
it was sent to Rome, only as an honorable Appendixto a Portuguese Embassy.
and most Blessed Lord: The King, my Lord and Father, being sensible how
acceptable it would be to God, that the most remote Regions of Ethiopia and
India, which in these parts had been only heard of by a doubtful fame, should
be Sailed to by the industrious Navigation of Christians, did at the beginning
of his Reign, send diverse of his Captains and Subjects with great Fleets, to
discover the Coasts of those Countries; which he did to that end, that the
Mahometans and Heathens of those Climates might be brought to acknowledge the
Truth of the Christian Faith, not knowing but that some Nations which were
Christians already, (for such there were reported to be) might be found out in
the Course of such Discoveries; thus thorough the Divine Direction, the whole
Country of Guinea was traveled over, in which the King of Manicongo, with vast
numbers of his Subjects, was Baptized; as were several other Nations in India,
Persia, and Arabia, by the Industry and Piety of our Subjects; and even those
Provinces which were not forward at first to embrace Christianity, do now begin
to follow the Example of their Neighbors; who notwithstanding the great Losses
he sustained in his Ships, Captains, Nobles, and other Subjects, was not, as
becomes a Pious Christian, discouraged thereby, so as to give over those
Voyages, in the Progress whereof our Fleets have penetrated into the Red Sea,
in which no Christian Ship had ever been before, that Sea being wholly in the
hands of the Turks; and did after a long and sharp War discover the Coasts of
the most Potent King of Ethiopia, who is commonly called Pretegya, and who with
all his Subjects is a Worshipper of Christ; to which King our Father
immediately dispatched an Ambassador, with an intention to reduce him to the
Obedience of the Holy Apostolical See; by certifying him, That your Holiness
sits in the Chair of St. Peter, and are the only Vicar of Christ upon Earth, to
whom all Christian Kings do with great Veneration use to yield Obedience. And
not long after, the said King of Ethiopia sent two Ambassadors, in Company with
ours when they returned home; one of which was his Naturalborn Subject, and the
other a Stranger; during which time, God was pleased to take our Father's Soul
to himself; and we having succeeded him in the Throne, did without delay
endeavor by our Captains that were in India, to certify the said King of
Ethiopia of our Father's Death, and of our Resolution to carry on and finish
what he had so gloriously begun for the Service of Christianity: This our
Declaration having been highly extolled by the said King, he thereupon
dispatched an Ambassador to us, who is still Resident at our Court, and with
him our Chaplain Francis Alvarez, who was one of the Ambassadors sent into
Ethiopia by our Father. This Francis Alvarez is now sent by the said King to
Rome, to yield Obedience to your Holiness in that King's Name, and in the Name
of all his Subjects: We have detained him here for some time, being willing for
diverse Reasons, that he should accompany our dear Nephew, Martin de Portugal,
our Councellor and Ambassador, whom we have ordered to present the said Francis
Alvarez, Ambassador of the said King of Ethiopia, to your Holiness, to yield
Obedience to you; as also to acquaint you with what the Ambassador of the said
King that was sent to us, has laid before us, together with the Copies of that
King's Letters to us; wherefore your Holiness will do a thing that will be very
acceptable unto God, if in all this Affair you do give entire Credit to the
said Martin, our Ambassador; for certainly great thanks ought to be returned to
God, for having in the time of your Pontificate done so great a favor to your
Holiness, that a Portion of Christians, who as to the largness of their
Country, are nothing inferior to this of ours, should consent to the Catholic
Faith, and to the Roman Church, by yielding Obedience to it. We for our parts
are very thankful to God, for having made use of our Ministry in the Reduction
of this King: There being nothing more for the praise of true Piety, than to
behold Ethiopia joined with Europe in the Unity of the Christian Profession.
May our Lord God be pleased to increase and preserve the Felicity of your
Holiness according to your own desire.

Dated at Settuval the 28th of May, 1532.

King John having made the Habassin Emperor's Complements, in his Letters to
the Pope, to amount to a formal submission of himself, his Church and Empire,
to him, must make his having detained an Embassage of that Moment, and which he
himself Magnifies so much, so long at Lisbon, to be the more wonderful: But
what it should be, that after having slighted this Embassy for five long Years,
induced him to trump it up thus, if it were not to do his Nephew Honor, is a
Mystery I shall leave to the Reader to unriddle; having only observed, that
there were two Creations of Cardinals soon after it came to Rome.

The Portuguese and Habassin Ambassadors being arrived at Bononia, The
Portuguese and Habassin Ambassadors had their Audience of the Pope at Bononia.
where the Pope and the Emperor Charles the Fifth were together at that time,
they had the 29th of January given them for the Day of their public Audience.
When being introduced into a public Consistory, at which the Emperor was
present; the Portuguese presented his Master's Letters to the Pope, together
with the Copies of those which had been sent to him and his Father by the King
of Ethiopia. When the Portuguese had done, the Habassin presented his Master's
Letters to the Pope, and with them a Gold Cross that weighed about a Pound. And
having made the submission of the Emperor of Ethiopia, and of his whole Church
and Empire, to his Holiness, he was afterward admitted to kiss his Foot, and
after that his Hand, and at last his Mouth; and having delivered the following
Speech in Portuguese, it was spoke aloud in Latin by the Secretary of the
Portuguese Embassy.

MOST Holy and Blessed Father, The Habassi^ Ambassador's submission to the Pope.
the most Serene and Potent Lord David, King of the Great and High Ethiopia,
who is commonly called Pretegya, and who is no less glorious for the veneration
he has for the True Religion, than for his Empire, Wealth, and Kingdoms, has
sent this Ambassador to your Holiness with the Letters he has delivered to you,
commanding him to yield obedience and subjection to your Holiness, in his Name,
and in that of his Kingdoms, as Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor, and
the Chief Pontiff of the whole Church, and to present you with a Gold Cross,
which he hopes your Holiness, not regarding the value thereof, which is but
small, but the veneration that is due to it, for Christ's having suffered
thereon for our sakes, will be pleased to accept of; beseeching your Holiness,
in the name of the said Prince, to accept of all that he has offered, with a
pious affection of a Father, for your most devout Son.


To which Harangue the Pope's Secretary returned the following Answer.

OUR most holy Lord does receive you, The Pope's Answer to the Habassin
Ambassador.
my Lord Francis Alvarez, the Ambassador of the most serene David, King of
Ethiopia, together with his Obedience, Gift and Letters, with a good Will, and
Paternal Affection, and does return Thanks to God that such Letters, and such
an Ambassador should come in the time of his Pontificate, from so great and
remote a Christian Emperor; he has heard what you have said, with Attention
and great Joy, and has with his Venerable Brethren, the Cardinals, graciously
accepted of your Master's Obedience, as also of his Gift, both for the Honor
that is due to the Holy Cross, and the good Affection of the Donor. And he does
furthermore highly extol, in the Lord, the most serene King of Portugal, who
besides the other great Services done by himself and Progenitors, to the
Commonwealth and Christian Faith, has likewise deserved well of King David, by
having entered into an Alliance with him, and having procured your being sent
with these Letters to the Pope. What remains is, his Holiness will endeavor to
the utmost of his Power, so far as the great distance that is betwixt their
Countries will permit, so to satisfy the desires of the said King, as to make
him sensible of his being in the Place of a most dear Son in Christ, and in the
Affection and Esteem of his Holiness, and the Holy Apostolical See, no less
than other Christian Princes. And his Holiness will treat with the Ambassador
of Portugal and you concerning these Affairs, and will by his Letters and
Nuncio's Return an Answer to all that your King has desired.

Zaga Zaba having nothing else to do at Lisbon, Zaga Zaba's (the Habassin
Ambassador at Lisbon) Account of the Religion and Customs of his Country.
and being willing to ingratiate himself with that Court, by representing the
Habassin Church as agreeing with the Roman in the Chief Doctrines wherein the
Reformers contradict her; did put Pen to Paper, and drew up the following
Account of the Religion, Customs, and Rites of his Country.


An Account of the Habassin Religion, and Customs, composed by Zaga Zaba, the
King of Ethiopia's Ambassador; and written with his own Hand at Lisbon.
In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

WE believe in the Name of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who
are One Lord, and Three Names; One Divinity, and Three Faces, though but One
Similitude; and are an equal conjunction of Persons; equal, I say, in Divinity;
One Kingdom, One Throne, One Word, One Spirit; the Word of the Father, and the
Son, and the Word of the Holy Spirit; and the Son is the same Word, the Word
with God, the Word with the Holy Spirit, and with Himself, without any defect,
or division; the Son of the Father, the Son of the very Father, without any
beginning, and at first the Son of the Father without a Mother; the Secret and
Mystery of whose Nativity is known to none but the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. This Son in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was the Word with
God, and God was the Word: The Spirit of the Father, the Holy Spirit, the
Spirit of the Son the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit its own Spirit; without
any diminution or augmentation: That Holy Spirit is the Comforter of the living
God, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, and who spoke by the mouth of
the Prophets, and descended in a flame of fire on the Apostles in the gate of
Sion, and who preached the word of the Father, which Word the very Son was all
over the World; wherefore as the Father is not first, notwithstanding he is the
Father; nor the Son last, notwithstanding he is the Son; so likewise the Holy
Spirit is neither first nor last, but they are Three Persons in One God, who
sees, and is seen by nobody; and who by his only Council created all things.
The Son did of his own accord, the Father being willing, and the Holy Ghost
consenting, descend from his highest Habitation, and was incarnate by the Holy
Spirit in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; who was adorned with a double Virginity,
the one Spiritual, the other Carnal; he was born without any Corruption, his
Mother, Mary, remaining a Virgin after her delivery; and by a Miracle, and a
secret Flame of the Divinity brought forth her Son Jesus, without blood, and
without pain; who was perfectly Innocent, and without Sin; being perfect God,
and perfect Man; and having only one Aspect, he grew by degrees as an Infant,
sucking the Milk of the Virgin Mary, his Mother; and coming to Thirty Years of
Age, he was baptized in Jordan, and did walk, and was weary, and did hunger and
thirst, as other men do; all these things he suffered voluntarily, and of his
own accord, and wrought many Miracles; restoring, by the power of his Divinity,
sight to the Blind, curing the Lame, cleansing the Lepers, raising the Dead;
after all which, he himself was apprehended, and whipped, and scourged, and
crucified: He languished and died for our Sins, and by his Death overcame
Death, and the Devil; and by his lively Agony dissolved our Sins, and bore our
Infirmities: By the Baptism of his Blood, that is, his Death, he baptized the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and descended into Hell, where the Souls of Adam and
his Sons were, as also his own Soul, which was from Adam, which Soul Christ
received from the Virgin Mary, who by the power and splendour of his Divinity,
and the strength of his Cross, broke the brazen fiery Gates of Hell, binding
Satan with Iron Chains, and rescuing Adam and his Sons. All these things Christ
did, because he was full of the Divinity; and the Divinity it self was with his
Soul, as it was also with his most holy Body, which Divinity gave virtue to the
Cross, and was what he always had, and will have for ever, in Trinity and Unity
in common with the Father: Neither did Christ, during the time he was in the
Flesh, ever want the Divinity and Dignity thereof for one moment. He was
buried, and on the third day Jesus Christ himself, the Prince of the
Resurrection, the most sweet Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ the Prince of the
Priests, Jesus Christ the King of Israel, did with great power and strength
rise, and after having finished all things which were foretold by the holy
Prophets, he ascended with glory into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of
the Father, and will come with glory, carrying a Cross before him, and in his
hand a Sword of Justice, to judge the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom
there shall be no end. I believe one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; I
believe one Baptism, which is the Remission of Sins; and I do hope for the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the Age to come. Amen.

I believe the holy Lady Mary to be a Virgin both in Spirit and Flesh, and do
reverence her as the Mother of God, the Charity of all Nations, the Holy of
Holies, and the Virgin of Virgins. I believe in the holy Wood of the Cross, the
Bed of the Agony of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, who is our Salvation,
for thorough him we are saved; which, notwithstanding it is an offense to the
Jews, and to the Gentiles foolishness, we do preach, believing it to be the
power of the Cross of our Lord Christ, as our Doctor St. Paul has commanded. I
do believe St. Peter to be the Rock of the Law, which Law is built upon the
holy Prophets, and the Foundation and Head of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church of the East and West, where the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ is; the
Power of which Church is in St. Peter, as is also the Kingdom of Heaven, with
which he can open and shut, bind and loose, and who shall sit with the other
Apostles, his Companions, upon Twelve Seats with honor and praise, together
with our Lord Jesus Christ; who upon the Day of Judgment is to pass Sentence
upon us, which will be a day of joy to the Saints, and of sorrow and gnashing
of teeth to Sinners, when they shall be thrown into the flames of Hell, with
their Father the Devil. I do believe the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs,
and Confessors, to have been true Imitators of Christ, whom, together with the
most holy Angels of God, I do venerate, and honor, and do in the same manner
embrace and reverence all their Followers.

I believe there ought to be an Oral Confession of all Sins made to a Priest,
by whose Prayers, thorough Our Lord Jesus Christ, I do hope to obtain the
salvation of my Soul: I do furthermore acknowledge the Roman Pontiff to be the
first Bishop and Pastor of all the Sheep of Christ. I do likewise observe and
obey all Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, of whom he is the
Head of the Ministers of Christ.

This is my Faith, and Law, and the Faith and Law of the People of Ethiopia,
who are under the Empire of Precious John; which Faith and Love of Christ are
so established among us, that neither Death, nor Fire, nor Sword, relying on
Christ's assistance, shall ever be able to oblige me to deny it, this being the
Faith we are all to carry on the Day of Judgment before the Face of Our Lord
Jesus Christ.

I come now to explain the Discipline, Doctrine, and Law, which the Apostles,
assembled together at Jerusalem, did lay down in the holy Books of Synods and
Canons, called by us Manda Abethlis, those Books of the Law of holy Church are
Eight in number; concerning which, having had some discourse with several
Learned Men here in Portugal, I never met with one that had ever heard of them
before. The Observances prescribed in those Books are as follows. (1.) That
we are to fast upon all Wednesdays, in memory of its having been decreed by the
Jewish Council upon that day, That Christ should be put to death: We are
commanded likewise to fast upon all Fridays, because Christ was crucified, and
died for our Sins on that day; upon which two days we are commanded to eat
nothing till Sunset. During the 40 days of Lent we are commanded to fast with
Bread and Water, and to be employed seven hours in the day in Divine Service;
by the same Edicts we are commanded to Administer the Sacraments in the
Evenings of Wednesdays and Fridays, because our Savior expired at that time on
the Cross: We are furthermore commanded to assemble together unanimously on the
Lord's Day in the Church three hours after Sunrising, to read and hear the
Books of the Prophets, and afterward to preach the Gospel, and Administer the
Sacrament; they have furthermore appointed Nine days to be observed as
Festivities in honor of Christ, to wit, the Annunciation, the Nativity, the
Circumcision, the Purification, or Day of Candles, of Baptism, of
Transfiguration, Palm Sunday, until the Octaves of Good Friday, which are
twelve days, of the Ascension and Pentecost, with their Festivities according
to these Books: We are without exception to eat Flesh every day from Easter to
Pentecost, neither are we bound to fast till after the Octaves of Pentecost,
which is observed for the greater honor and veneration of the Resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ; they command us likewise to celebrate the Days of the
Death and Assumption of the Virgin Mary with great honor: But besides the
Precepts of the Apostles, a certain Precious John, whose name was Zara Jacob,
ordained 33 days in every year to be kept in honor of the said Blessed Virgin;
and a day in every Month in honor of Christ's Nativity, which is always the
25th of the Month; and a day likewise in every Month to be observed in honor
of St. Michael.

Furthermore, in obedience to the said Synod of the Apostles, we do celebrate
the day of St. Stephen, and other Martyrs, and are bound by the Institution of
the Apostles to observe two days, to wit, the Sabbath, and Lord's Day, on which
it is not lawful for us to do any work, no not the least, on the Sabbath Day,
because God, after he had finished the Creation of the World, rested thereon:
Which Day, as God would have it called the Holy of Holies, so the not
celebrating thereof with great honor and devotion, seems to be plainly
contrary to God's Will and Precept, who will suffer Heaven and Earth to pass
away sooner than his Word; and that especially, since Christ came not to
dissolve the Law, but to fulfill it. It is not therefore in imitation of the
Jews, but in obedience to Christ, and his holy Apostles, that we observe that
Day, the favor that was showed herein to the Jews being transferred to us
Christians; so that, excepting Lent, we eat Flesh every Saturday in the Year;
but in the Kingdoms of Barnagaus, Tigre, and Mahon, the Christians, according
to ancient custom, do eat Flesh on all Saturdays and Sundays, even in Lent. We
do observe the Lord's Day after the manner of all other Christians, in memory
of Christ's Resurrection: But as we are sensible that we have the observation
of the Sabbath Day from the Books of the Law, and not from those of the Gospel,
A Falsehood.
so we are not ignorant that the Gospel is the end of the Law and the Prophets:
On those forementioned Days, we believe the Souls of the Just departed this
Life, not to be tormented in Purgatory, which ease will be granted by God to
them upon those two most holy Days, until the term of their suffering for their
Sins is expired, and they are entirely delivered; to the shortning and
mitigating of which Torments, we believe the Alms that are given for the relief
of the Souls in Purgatory do contribute much; toward the remission of which
Souls, the Patriarch grants no Indulgences, The Abuna never grants any
Indulgences.
which we believe belongs to God only, and that he only constitutes the time of
their punishment; neither does the Patriarch grant Indulgences on any occasion.
The Gospel obliges us to observe only the Six Precepts, which Christ with his
own mouth has explained, as follows, I was hungry, and you gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you entertained me;
naked, and you covered me; sick, and you visited me; in prison, and you came
unto me; which are all words that will be spoke by Christ at the Day of
Judgment; For the Law, as St. Paul says, shows us our sins, which Law,
without Christ, The Habassins believe Original Sin.
none is able to keep: Paul witnesses likewise, that we are all born in sin,
by reason of the Transgression and Curse of our Mother Eve; Paul says
furthermore, that we died thorough Adam, and do live thorough Christ, who of
his infinite mercy gave us these Six Precepts, that when he comes in Majesty to
judge the Quick and Dead, we may be saved: With which Words and Precepts he
will on the Tremendous Day of Judgment allot everlasting Glory to the
Righteous, and to the Wicked Fire and Everlasting Damnation. We do reckon only
five mortal Sins, as they call them, which are gathered out of the last Chapter
of the Revelations, where it is said, Without are dogs, and witches, and
unclean persons, and murderers, and idolaters, and every one who loves and
makes a lie.

It is constituted by the holy Apostles, Clerks may marry.
in the Book of Synods, that it is lawful for Clerks to marry, and that even
after they have some knowledge of Divine Matters; who after they are married,
are received into the Order of Presbyter, to which none are admitted before
they are 30 years of Age; neither are Bastards ever admitted to it. Holy Orders
are conferred by none but the Patriarch; and after the death of their first
Wives, neither Bishops nor Presbyters are permitted to marry a second time,
unless the Patriarch shall think fit to dispense with them, which he does
sometimes, to eminent Persons, and when it is for the Public good: Neither are
they suffered to keep Concubines, unless they do voluntarily give over
officiating, after which they must no more meddle with holy things; and this is
so strictly observed, that the Presbyters, who marry a second time, must not
presume so much as to take a consecrated Candle in their hands; and if any
Bishop or Clerk is found to have had a Bastard, he is deprived of his Orders,
and all his Ecclesiastical Benefices; and his Goods, if he dies without
Children lawfully begotten, do all go to Precious John, and not to the
Patriarch: That it is lawful for Presbyters to have Wives, we have received
from St. Paul, who would rather have both Clergy and Laity to marry, than to
burn; who says likewise, that a Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife, that
is unblameable and sober, and in the same manner the Deacons; and all
Ecclesiastics as well as Secular ought to have their own lawful Wives. Our
Monks, notwithstanding this, do not marry, and neither Laics nor Clerks among
us can have above one Wife at a time.

With us Marriages are not celebrated at the Door of the Church, but in private
Houses; we are taught likewise by the Constitution of the Apostles, That if a
Priest is convicted of Adultery, Murder, Theft, or of having given false
Testimony, that he ought to be deprived of his Orders, and punished as other
Malefactors in the same kind; and that an Ecclesiastic, or Layman, after
having known his Wife, or having been polluted in his sleep, ought not in 24
hours after that to enter into the Church, which Women are not to enter into,
till the 7th day after their menstrua's are over, and until they have washed
all the Clothes they had on at that time: Furthermore, a Woman that is
delivered of a Man-child, is not suffered to enter into the Church till after
40 days, and of a Female, not till about 80 days, which Custom of the Old Law
is commanded likewise by the Apostles, whose Laws, Constitutions and Precepts,
we do, so far as we are able, observe in all Cases.

It is likewise forbidden among us to suffer Heathens, or Dogs, or any other
such Creatures, The Habassins have a great veneration for their Churches.
to come within our Churches; neither is it lawful for us to go into them
otherwise than barefoot; or to laugh, walk, or spit, or speak of secular
things, in them: For the Churches of Ethiopia are not like the Land wherein the
People of Israel did eat the Paschal Lamb, as they were going out of Egypt,
where God commanded them to eat with their shoes on, and with their loins
girt, because of the pollution of the land: But they are like the Mount Sinai,
where the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Moses, Moses, put off thy shoes, for
the ground whereon thou treadest, is holy: Now this Mount Sinai was the Mother
of our Churches, from which they derive their original, as the Apostles did
from the Prophets, and the New Testament from the Old.

Furthermore it is not lawful for a Priest, or Layman, or any other Person of
what condition soever, after the receiving of the Venerable Sacrament, to Spit
from Morning till Sunset, The Habassins are all Baptized every year on the day
of the Epiphany.
and whoever does it, is severely Punished. In Memory of Christ we are also
Baptized every Year on the day of Epiphany; which is not done by us as a thing
necessary to Salvation, but only for the Praise and Glory of our Lord; Neither
is there any Feast that we Celebrate with so great Solemnities as this, because
it was on this day that the Most Holy Trinity first appeared manifestly, when
our Lord Jesus Christ was Baptized in the River of Jordan, on whose Head the
Holy Spirit Descended at that time, in the Figure of a Dove, and a Voice from
Heaven said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Which Holy
Spirit being in the Shape of a White Dove, did appear with the Face and Figure
of the Father and Son in One Divinity: After the same manner Christ was seen by
the Prophets under various Forms and Similitudes; first in the Figure of a
White Ram, for the preservation of Isaac the Son of Abraham; after the same
manner he called Jacob Israel; and Jacob called Judah, to whom he gave power
over his Brethren, A lions whelp, saying, My son thou wentest up to the prey,
and resting did lie down as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall rouse thee?
He manifested himself likewise to Moses in the Figure of a flame of fire on
mount Sinai; and in the likeness of a Rock to the Holy Prophet Daniel; and to
Ezekiel as the Son of man; and to Isaias in the Form of an Infant; he appeared
to King David and Gideon in dew upon a fleece; and besides the forementioned,
was seen under diverse other Similitudes by the Holy Prophets; under all which
various Figures, he still bore the Similitude of the Father and the Holy Ghost;
and since God, when he Created the World, said, Let us make man after our own
image and similitude, and he did make Adam after his own Similitude ahd Image;
we do for that reason say, That the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three
Faces in one Similitude and Divinity.

We have also retained Circumcision from the time of Queen Saba till this day;
They Circumcise both Men and Women.
this Queen's true Name was Maqueda, who had Worshipped Idols after the manner
of her Ancestors, until having heard much of the Wisdom of Solomon, she sent a
Prudent Person to Jerusalem to certify her whether that King's Wisdom was so
great as it was reported; and after being satisfied that it was so, she took a
Journey to Jerusalem her self, where among other things, she was Instructed by
Solomon in the Law and the Prophets, and had the Books thereof bestowed upon
her: As she was on her Journey home, she was Delivered of a Son begot by
Solomon, whom she Named Meilech, and carried with her into Ethiopia; where
having remained till he was Twenty Years Old, he went up to Jerusalem to Visit
his Father, and to learn Knowledge and Wisdom by him; the Queen by Letters
entreated Solomon to Consecrate his Son Meilech King of Ethiopia, A blind story
of the Queen of Sheba and her Son.
before the Ark of the Covenant and the Testament of the Lord, and that after
such a manner, as to make it Unlawful, for the future, for a Woman to Reign in
Etoiopia, as was then the Custom, and that the Males only in a direct Line
should Inherit the Crown; Meilech when he came to Jerusalem, did with ease
obtain all his Mother had desired, and instead of Meilech, was Named David by
Solomon; who having sufficiently Instructed him in the Law and other Sciences,
sent him home to his Mother, in much greater State and Splendour than he came
with, sending several of the Nobles, and of their Sons, in his Train to serve
him, and together with them Azarias a Prince among the Priests, the Son of
Sadock, who was likewise a Sacerdotal Prince; whereupon Azarias put David upon
asking leave of his Father for him to offer Sacrifice before the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord for a prosperous Journey, which he obtained; Azarias after
having with great speed and secrecy got Tables made in imitation of the Tables
of the Covenant of the Lord, did whilst he was offering Sacrifice, with great
dexterity steal the true Tables of the Ark of the Covenant, and put his new
ones in the place of them, none but God and himself being conscious to what he
had done; this among us in Ethiopia is declared to be a most certain and sacred
Truth, being delivered to us in the History of the said King David, which is a
Book about the bigness of St. Paul's Epistles, and very pleasant to read: When
David was come to the Borders of Ethiopia, Azarias going one day into his Tent,
discovered to him what he had so industriously concealed, telling him he had
brought the Tables of the Covenant of the Lord along with him; whereupon David
went straightways with him to the place where those Tables were kept, and after
the example of his Grandfather David, danced before them with great exultation,
as did also the whole Company: When he returned home, his Mother resigned the
Empire to him immediately, from which time, which is now near 2600 Years to
this day, the Empire of Ethiopia has desecended from Male to Male in a Right
Line. We have also ever since retained the Law of God and Circumcision, and the
Ministries prescribed by Solomon to his Son for the Government of the Court;
all which do to this day continue in the same Families, and in the same Order;
neither is it lawful for the Emperor to put People of another Race into any of
those Offices. Furthermore, at the Command of the said Queen Maqueda, Women are
Circumcised also among us: Men and Women are Circumcised on the Eighth day, but
Male-Children are not Baptized till the Fortieth, The Eucharist is Administered
to Children when they are Baptized.
nor Female till the Eightieth day after their Birth, without it be in case of
Sickness, and when that happens the Children are not allowed to Suck their
Mothers until after they are purified; the Water wherein Children are Baptized
is Consecrated by Exorcisms; and on the same day they are Christened, they
Receive the Venerable Body of Christ under the Element of Bread.

We were among the first Christians that received Baptism, that Sacrament
having been brought among us by the Eunuch of Candace Queen of Ethiopia, who is
spoke of in the Acts of the Apostles; his Name, according to our Tradition, was
Indick, from which time to this day, both Baptism and Circumcision have been in
use among us, and most Religiously and Christianly observed, and thorough God's
Grace will be so for ever. We do observe nothing but what we find in the Law
and the Prophets, and in the Books of the Synods of the Apostles; or if any
thing else is observed by us, it is done only for the sake of Order, and for
the Peace of the Church, so as not to reckon it to be a Sin not to observe it;
Circumcision is not observed by them as a Sacrament, but as a civil Custom.
wherefore our Circumcision is not Uncleanness, but it is the Law and Grace,
which was given to our Father Abraham, and which he received from God as a
Sign, not that he or his Sons should be Saved by Circumcision, but that his
Posterity might be distinguished thereby from all other Nations; and as for
what is signified by Circumcision, we do observe it exactly by having our
Hearts Circumcised; neither do we Glory upon the account of Circumcision, or
prefer our selves to other Christians thereupon, or reckon our selves for it
the more acceptable to God, with whom there is no acceptance of Persons, as
Paul testifies; who tells us likewise, that we cannot be Saved by Circumcision,
but by Faith; for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature; now by this, Paul did not intend to destroy
the Law, but to establish it, for he himself was Circumcised, being of the Seed
of Benjamin; he Circumcised Timothy likewise after he was made a Christian, his
Mother being a Jewess, notwithstanding his Father was a Gentile, knowing that
God approves both of Circumcision that is in Faith, and of Uncircumcision which
is by Faith, for as he himself tells, he was made all things to all men, that
he might save all; to the Jews he became a Jew, that he might gain the Jews;
and to those that were under the law, as if he had been under the law, which he
was not, that he might gain those who were under the law; and to those who were
without the law, as if he had been without the law, whereas he was not without
the Law of God, but was in the Law of Christ, that he might gain them who were
without the law; he also became weak, that he might gain the weak; which he
did, that he might show that it was not by Circumcision, but by Faith that we
must be Saved; and so when he Preached to the Hebrews, he spoke to them as
Hebrews, saying, God has at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke to our
forefathers by the Prophets; and from thence proved to them that Christ was of
the Seed of David according to the Flesh; he Preached likewise to them, That
Christ was with our Fathers in their Tents in the Desert, and did lead them by
the hand of Joshua into the Land of Promise; he furthermore testified, That
Christ was the Prince of the Priests, and had entered into the Holy of Holies,
which is the New Tabernacle; and had by the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood,
abolished the blood of Goats and Bulls, by which none that came, could be
justified; and that he had spoke to the Jews in diverse manners, and did suffer
himself to be Worshipped by his People with diverse rites, and an holy and
incorrupt Faith.

Furthermore, The Children of Christian Parents before they are Baptized are
called Half-Christians.
Those Children are looked upon by us as Half-Christians; who, as I am told,
are reckoned to be Heathens by the Roman Church, upon account of their dying
without Baptism; whereas being the Children of the holy Blood of Parents, who
have been Sanctified by Baptism and the Holy Spirit, and the Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, upon which Three Testimonies, all that are Christians are reputed
to be such, they ought to be esteemed Half-Christians; for there are Three who
bear Witness on Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, as St. John
testifies in his first Canonical Epistle; the Gospel says likewise, That a
good tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit; wherefore the
Children of Christians are not as the Children of the Gentiles, Jews, and
Mahometans, who are dry Trees without Fruit, but are chosen in the Womb of
their Mothers, as the Prophet Jeremy and John the Baptist were.

The Children of Christian Women are furthermore Chosen and Sanctified by the
Communication of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, received by their
Mothers, from whom they derive their Nourishment, during the time they are in
their Wombs; for as an Infant in the Womb rejoices or is sorrowful, according
as its Mother is affected, so it is nourished likewise by its Mother's
nutriment; for as our Lord says in his Holy Gospel, Whosoever shall eat my
body and drink my blood, shall never taste death; and again, He that eats my
body, and drinks my blood, shall be with me: Paul likewise speaks to the
same purpose, when he says, the unbelieving husband is justified by the
believing wife, and the unbelieving wife by the believing husband, otherwise
your children would be unclean, whereas now they are holy. Now if the Children
of an Unbelieving Mother are notwithstanding that, Sanctified by the Faith of
their Father, how much more holy must they be, whose Father and Mother are both
Believers? For which reason it is much more pious to call such Infants before
they are Baptized, Half-Christians, than Pagans.

The Apostles in their Book of Synods do likewise affirm, That all who had
Faith, though they were not Baptized, may be called Half-Christians; in which
Books it is said, that if a Jew, or Gentile, or Mohammedan, do embrace the
Faith, he shall not be received presently, but must first come to the door of
the Church, there to hear Sermons, and the words of our Savior Christ, and
that being disposed to Believe, he may understand what Christ's yoke is, after
which he may be called an Half-Christian, even before he is admitted to
Baptism; which is also according to the Gospel, which says, He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be condemned.

It is also the custom among us, for Women when they are with Child to Confess
their Sins and receive the Lord's Body before they are Delivered; and they who
neglect to do this, are looked upon as Wicked and Impious Christians, as are
also their Husbands for not having obliged them to it.

Confirmation and Extreme Unction are not reckoned Sacraments among us,
Confirmation and Extreme Unction no Sacraments.
neither are they in use in our Church, as I see they are in the Roman.

We do surthermore reckon it contrary to the Law of Moses, and the Institutions
of the Apostles, to eat unclean Meats, from all which we do abstain merely in
Obedience to the Law and the Scriptures; which with us consists of Eighty one
Books; that is to say, the Old Testament consists of Forty one Books, The
Scripture the perfect Rule of Faith.
and the New of Thirty five; which Canon, or Number of Books, we have expressly
delivered to us by the Apostles themselves, and to which it is not lawful for
us to Add or Diminish any thing, no not though an Angel from Heaven should
persuade us to it; and we do look upon him as Accursed, that shall offer to do
any such thing; so that neither our Patriarch nor our Bishop do reckon that
they can either by themselves, or in a Council, make any Laws, That People are
under an Obligation of a Mortal Sin to observe.

In the Books of our Synods it is ordained by the Holy Apostles, That we must
confess our selves before we can receive Penance from a Confessor, according to
the greatness of our Sin: They teach us likewise how we ought to Pray, and
Fast, and how to exercise Charity. Confession is much in use among us; for we
have no sooner committed a Sin, than we run and throw our selves at the feet of
a Confessor; this is the constant practice of all Men and Women of whatsoever
Quality or Condition; and whenever we Confess, we do receive the Body of our
Lord under both Species, They all receive the Sacrament in both Elements. It is
not kept in their Churches.
and in Wheaten and Unleavened Bread; so that if we Confess our selves daily,
we do daily receive the Sacrament, as well Layicks as Ecclesiastics. The
Sacrament of the Eucharist is not kept in our Churches, as it is here in
Europe; neither is it at any time Administered to the Sick, until after they are
recovered. All among us Layicks, as well as Clerks, do receive the Sacrament at
least Three times a Week; which is never received any where but in the Church,
It is never received but in the Church.
no not by the Patriarch, or Precious John himself.

We do always make use of the same Confessor, and do never go to any other, but
when our own is absent, to whom when he returns we are bound to repair. The
Confessors do in the Name of the Church, absolve from all Sins, there being no
cases, no not the most heinous, reserved to the Bishop or Patriarch; Presbyters
are not allowed to Confess themselves to those that they Confess; and among us
all Presbyters and Monks, and all Officers of the Church, do live by their own
Labor; for the Church has no Tithes, it has Lands which are Cultivated by the
Priests and Monks, either in Person, or by their servants; and as for Alms,
they receive none but those that are offered in the Church for the Burial of
the dead, and other Holy Offices; it not being lawful for any of them to beg
about the streets, or to extort Alms from the common people.

Furthermore, The Sacrament is never administered above once a day in a Church.
It is not showed to the People. No Masses are said for the Dead.
in our Churches there is never but one Mass a day, which we do reckon to be a
Sacrifice; neither is it lawful for us, according to ancient Custom, to
Celebrate more; for which Mass we never receive any Money; the Sacrament of the
Eucharist is not showed to the People among us, as I observe it is here; and
all Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, and all People whatsoever that are
present at the Celebration, are obliged to Communicate. We say no Masses for
the remission of Souls, but our Dead are Buried in a Consecrated Place with
Prayers and Crosses, over whom, among other things, we recite the beginning of
St. John's Gospel, and do offer Alms for them the day after they are Buried,
and at certain other times, when we have Funeral Feasts.

This is what I have to say of our Faith and Religion.

But whereas since my coming to Portugal, I have had several Debates with some
Doctors, namely with Didacus Ortis Bishop of the Island of St. Thomas, and Dean
of the King's Chapel, and Pedro Magalho, concerning the distinction of Meats,
it will not be improper for me to say something of it in this place.

It is to be observed, that it is in obedience to the Old Testament that we
observe a distinction of meats, which distinction is ordained by the Word of
God, who was afterward born of the Virgin Mary, and walked and conversed with
his Apostles; which Living Word of God had always an entire and irrevocable
Speech or Word, and who did no where in his Gospel say, that such things might
be eat, as were before prohibited as unclean. For as to those words in the
Gospel, That whatsoever enters into the mouth does not defile the man, but
that which comes forth of the mouth; Christ's intent therein, was not to
dissolve the Law he had formerly enacted, but only to confute the Superstition
of the Jews, who blamed the Apostles for having eat Bread with unwashen hands;
neither did the Apostles, A long Justification of their abstaining from Meats
that are made unclean by the Law.
while they conversed with Christ, make use of unclean Meats, or so much as
taste any thing that was prohibited by the Law, which was what none of them
offered to transgress, no not after the time of our Lord's Passion, when they
began to preach the Gospel; there being nothing in their Writings from whence
it can be gathered, that they did ever kill or eat any thing that is unclean.
It is true, Paul says, Eat all that is sold in the shambles, asking nothing
for conscience sake; and again, If any that are infidels invite you to a feast,
and you are disposed to go, eat whatsoever is set before you, asking no
questions for conscience sake: And again, If any one shall say, This is offered
to idols, do not eat for his sake that told you so, and for conscience sake,
etc. All which Paul spoke in compliance with those who are weak in the Faith,
betwixt whom and the Jews there were frequent Debates; and in order to the
putting a stop to those Disputes, the Apostle complied much with the weaker
Christians, which he did not do that he would have the Law broke, but that by
gratifying such People in the relaxation of Rites, he might allure them to the
Faith.

The same Apostle says likewise, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not; for he that eats, eats unto the Lord; and he that eareth not,
eats not unto the Lord. It is therefore an unworthy thing to reprove
Christians, who are Strangers, with so much bitterness, as I have been reproved
here, concerning this very matter, and other little things, which do no ways
belong to Faith: It would certainly be much wiser for Christians, whether
Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, or of any of the Seven Christian Churches, to
bear with one another in Charity, and in the Bowels of Christ, in all such
matters, and to suffer one another to live and converse with their Christian
Brethren, being all Sons of Baptism, and unanimous in the true Faith; neither
is there any cause why they should debate so sharply about Ceremonies; or why
every one should not be suffered to observe his own, and that without hating
and persecuting others for theirs; neither ought any one in a strange Country
to be debarred the Communion of the Church for observing his own
Church-Ceremonies.

As to that we meet with in the Acts, of Peter's seeing a Cloth let down from
Heaven by the corners, wherein were all Four-footed Beasts, and all creeping
Creatures, and Birds of the Air; and of his having heard a Voice that commanded
him, to rise, and kill, and eat; to which Peter replied, Far be it from me,
Lord, for I have never eat any thing that is common and unclean; to whom the
Voice answered, What God has purified, that do not thou call unclean; which
having been done three several times, the Vessel was then immediately taken up
into Heaven; whereupon the Spirit sent him straightways to Cesarea to
Cornelius, a holy Man, fearing God, to whom when Peter spoke, the Holy Spirit
descended on all who heard the Word of God: After which Peter baptized
Cornelius and his whole Family: Now when the Apostles and Brethren, who were in
Judea, came to hear of what Peter had done, they were angry, and asked him, How
he came to go to men who were uncircumcised, and to eat with them? but after
Peter had declared to them the whole Vision, they were satisfied, and returned
thanks to God, saying, He has given repentance unto life to the Gentiles; and
they remembered the word of the Lord, which he spoke when he ascended into
Heaven, Go over all nations, and preach the Gospel to all creatures, in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and he that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be condemned: Then
the Apostles begun to preach the Gospel over the whole World to every Creature,
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, insomuch that their sound went
thorough the whole Earth: Now this Vision, wherein things clean and unclean
appeared, we of Ethiopia interpret thus: The clean living Creatures were the
People of Israel, the unclean were the Gentiles; who were therefore said to be
unclean, because they worshipped Idols, and did the Works of the Devil, which
are unclean. So that the Voice saying, Peter kill, was the same as if it had
said, Teach and preach the Faith, and the Law of Christ, both to the People of
Israel, and the Gentiles; besides, it is most certain, that we read no where in
the Scriptures of Peter, or of any other of the Apostles, killing or eating any
thing that was unclean after this Vision: We are to observe likewise, That when
the Scriptures speak of Bread, it is not to be understood of a Corporal Food,
but of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

It is therefore advisable for all Doctors and Preachers to teach high and
sublime things of this Linen Cloth which was showed to Peter, and not low
things, which do no way appertain to Salvation; and least of all to draw
Arguments from thence, to prove it to be lawful for us to eat things that are
unclean, seeing no such matter can be gathered from the Scripture; but that is
not all, for the Apostles themselves, in their Book of Synods, have forbid us
to eat any thing that is strangled or tore, or half eaten by Beast, or Blood,
hecause the Lord loves cleanness and sobriety, and hates gluttony and
pollution; and loves those much who abstain from Flesh, and those more who
fast with Bread, and Water, and Herbs, as John the Baptist did, who eat nothing
else: As also Paul the Hermit, who lived in the Desert, and fasted 80 years;
as St. Anthony, and St. Macarius, and a great number of their Spiritual Sons,
who never so much as tasted Flesh.

Wherefore, Brethren, we ought not to contemn and persecute our Neighbors; for
St. James says, He that speaks evil of his brother, or judges his brother,
speaks evil of the law: Paul teaches likewise, That it is much better for
people to rest satisfied with their own traditions, than to contend with their
Christian brethren about the law; and that in such matters they ought not to be
wiser than is necessary, but to be wise to sobriety, according as God has
dealt to every man a measure of faith. Wherefore it is a very undecent thing to
contend with our brethren about the law and distinction of meats, since meat
cannot commend us to God; A charitable Admonition.
and especially since St. Paul has said, Whether ye eat plentifully, or do not
eat, ye are never the worse: Let us therefore look after higher things, and the
food that is heavenly, and forbear such low and empty disputations. What I have
writ concerning Traditions, I have not writ out of a spirit of contention, but
to defend my Countrymen against the violent reproofs of those who paid so
little respect to the most Potent Precious John and his Subjects, as to load
them with Reproaches, calling us Jews and Mahometans, because we circumcise,
and sanctify the Sabbath, after the manner of the Jews, and do continue our
Fasts till Sunset, as the Mahometans do: They do likewise object to us with
great bitterness, That our Priests do marry, after the manner of the Laymen;
and that mistrusting our first Baptism, we are baptized yearly; and that we
circumcise not only Males but Females also, which the Jews never did; lastly,
that we observe a distinction of Meats with great strictness; and that we call
Children Half-Christians before they are baptized: To which things I was
obliged to return an Answer, to vindicate our people from the Calumnies that
are cast upon them, and to render the Roman Doctors more affable to us, who,
how piously I will not say, have ever since I came into Portugal, which is now
Seven Years, denied me the Sacrament; so that, I cannot speak it but with
extreme Grief and Tears, I am treated by my Christian Brethren as a Heathen and
an Anathema: He that enliveneth all things, to whom I commit it, does take
notice of these matters.

I was not sent by the most Potent Lord the Emperor of Ethiopia, to the Roman
Pontiff, and to the most Serene John King of Portugal, to brangle and dispute,
but to contract a Friendship and Alliance betwixt them; not to increase or
diminish Human Traditions, but to enquire diligently into the Errors of Arius
the Prince of Heretics; and to learn whether the European Christians do agree
with us in confuting his Opinions; upon account of whose Errors a Council of
Three hundred and eighteen Bishops were assembled at Nice under Pope Julius:
And that I might learn likewise whether what the Apostles have commanded in
their Book of Synods, was observed among the European Christians; to wit, That
Two Councils be celebrated every Year in the Christian Church, to treat
concerning Matters of Faith; the first whereof they ordered to be assembled at
the Feast of Pentecost, and the second on the 10th. of October: And to learn
also how it stood betwixt us as to the Errors of Macedonius; upon whose account
a Council of an Hundred and Fifty Bishops was assembled at Constantinople under
Pope Damasus: And also the Errors of Nestorius, against whom a Council of Two
hundred were assembled at Ephesus under Pope Celestine: And lastly, That I
might be informed of the Fourth and Great Council of Chalcedon, assembled upon
the account of the Errors of Eutyches, at the time when St. Leo was Bishop of
Rome; from which Council, after having had hot Disputes, the Bishops returned,
without having concluded any thing for the Peace of the Church; both Parties
maintaining their own Opinions.

The Books of which Synods, and of diverse others that were afterward
celebrated, my Lord the Emperor of Ethiopia has by him, who is very much
troubled, as are also all his Christian Subjects, at the Tares which the Devil,
the Enemy of Truth, has sown among Christians.

Our people from the beginning have acknowledged the Roman Pontiff to be the
first Bishop, to whom, as the Vicar of Christ, we do at this time submit our
selves; and in whose Court we would be frequently, were it not for the great
distance we are at from it, and our being denied a free passage through the
Mohammedan Kingdoms which lie betwixt us; insomuch that many times after having
exposed our Persons to great dangers, we are not able to get thither.

The most Prudent and Invincible King Emanuel, of happy memory, was the first
that by Divine Direction opened a Passage by his Navigation to the East Indies;
which for the future gives us great hopes of a commodious Correspondence:
Emanuel made himself Master of the Red Sea with his Fleets; not being
discouraged from doing it by the greatness of the Charge, that so he might
augment the Faith of Christ, and open a Passage for us to correspond with him,
and to make use of each other's assistance; by which means we do hope, with our
united Forces, to drive all the Mahometans and Heathens not only from the
Coasts of the Red Sea, but also out of Arabia, Persia, and India. And as we do
not in the least doubt but that we shall be able to do this, so we do wish that
all European Christians were in Peace with one another, that so they might join
together, The design of this Habossin Embassy.
in order to expel the Enemies of the Cross of Christ out of the Mediterranean
Countries, and Pontus, and other Provinces; that according to the Word of
Christ, there may be but one Law, one Shepherd, and one Pastor, upon the face
of the whole earth; of which we have two Prophecies, one in the Prophecies of
St. Ficator, and another of St. Synoda a Hermit, born among the Rocks in the
extremities of Egypt; both which Prophecies do agree in this matter: For which
reason we have reckoned the Events of those Prophecies to be drawing near, ever
since my most Potent Lord had Ambassadors sent to him by the Serene and Wise
King Emanuel. And it is certain, that ever since that time my Prince has
thought of nothing so much, as of destroying the Mahometans from off the Face
of the earth; for the advancing of which design, and of some other matters
which I have laid before the most Serene King John, the Son of Emanuel, I was
sent hither by my most Potent Lord, and not to engage in frivolous and empty
Disputations. I do wish the great God may bring the Intentions and Endeavors
of my Prince, which I was sent hither to promote, to an happy Issue, so as to
be for his Glory. Amen.

Having given some Account of these things, I will now with great Brevity say
something of the state of our Patriarch, and Empire.

When our Patriarch dies, Precious John our Emperor immediately dispatcheth a
Messenger to the Monks that live at Jerusalem; A false account of the Election
of the Abuna.
who having received notice, and the Presents that are sent to the Holy
Sepulcher by the Emperor, do straightways choose a Patriarch by a Majority of
Voices, who must always be an Alexandrian Monk, of an unblameable life.

When they have chosen a Patriarch, they seal up their Votes, and transmit them
by the Emperor's Messenger, to the Patriarch of Alexandria, residing at Grand
Cairo, who immediately consecrates the Monk that is chosen to that great
Dignity, and sends him with the Messenger into Ethiopia. The Person elected,
according to ancient custom, must be a Monk of the Order of St. Anthony the
Hermit; and who when he arrives in Ethiopia, is there received with great Joy
and Honor. This Affair is not sometimes finished under a Year or two; during
which Vacancy, all the Rents of the Patriarch are paid to Precious John. The
chief business of the Patriarch is to confer Holy Orders, which none besides
him can either give or take away. He collates to no Bishoprics, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Benefices; which are all in the Gift of Precious John, who
bestows them as he thinks good. When the Patriarch, whose Revenues are very
great, dies, the Emperor is his sole Heir. It is furthermore the business of
the Patriarch to excommunicate all such as are obstinate; to which Censures
there is so great a Respect paid, that all who slight them are condemned for
their whole life to a strict and perpetual Fast. He grants no Indulgences,
neither are the Sacraments of the Church denied to any Sinners, but Murderers.

The Patriarch in our Tongue is called Abuna; only he who at present is in
possession of that Dignity, is called by his Baptismal Name, which is Mark; he
is an Hundred Years of Age and upward.

With us the Year begins on the First day of September, which falls always on
the Vigil of John the Baptist; the other Holidays, as the Nativity, Easter,
etc. are observed at the same time as they are in the Roman Church.

The Gospel and Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ was first preached among us by
Philip the Apostle. If you would know the name of our Emperor, it is always
Precious John, and not Presbyter John, as it is here falsely reported to be in
our Language: It is John Belul, and in the Chalde, John Encoo, or Precious or
High John: Neither is he ever called, as Matthew falsely reported, Emperor of
the Habassins, but of the Ethiopians; for he being an Armenian did not
thoroughly understand our Affairs, and least of all those relating to our
Faith; which made him report several things to the wise King Emanuel of happy
Memory, that were false; which was not done by him with an intention to
deceive; for he was an honest Man, but because he was not well Instructed in
the Matters of our Religion.

The Empire does not of right descend to the Eldest Son, but to him on whom the
Emperor is pleased to bestow it. So the present Emperor was the third Brother,
and got the Crown by a Pious piece of Reverence: For the last Emperor having
when he was upon his Deathbed commanded all his Sons to sit down by him on
Royal Thrones, they all did so, except my Master, who said, Far be it from me
to sit in the Chair of my Lord; for which act of Piety, his Father bestowed the
Empire upon him. His Name is David, and his Dominions of Christians and
Heathens are very large, in which there are diverse Kings, Princes, Earls,
Barons and Nobles, who are all extremely submissive to his commands. He has no
other than Foreign Coin within his Territories, Gold and Silver being paid, and
received among us by Weight: We have a great many Cities and Towns, tho not
built as they are here in Portugal. Precious John keeps his Court perpetually
in the Camp, which he does on purpose to accustom the Nobility to the Hardships
and Exercises of War: Neither is it to be omitted, that we are Besieged on all
Sides, by the Enemies of our Faith, with whom we have frequent Battles, but are
always Victorious; which Victories we Attribute to the Divine Assistance.

A Written Law is not in use among us, neither are the Complaints of Litigants
Transacted by Papers, but by word of Mouth; which makes, that Lawsuits are not
Protracted by the Avarice of the Judges and Advocates to any great length.

I am to tell you likewise, that Matthew was not sent by our Emperor David, to
the Invincible and Powerful King Emanuel of happy Memory, but by Queen Helena,
who was Dowager to the Emperor; The Hand of Mary, who was Grandfather to David,
and who, David being under Age, at that time was Regent of Ethiopia: She was
undoubtedly a most Wise and Religious Princess, and was Mistress of so much
Learning, that she Composed two Books in the Chaldee Tongue: The Title of the
first was Euzara Clebaa, that is to say, Praise the Lord with Organs; in which
she discoursed Learnedly concerning the Trinity, and the Virginity of the
Blessed Virgin: The Second is called Chedale C^ay, that is, the Beam of the
Sun, in which she has diverse accurate Discourses concerning the Law of God.

All these things relating to the Faith, Religion, and State of our Country, I
Zaga Zabo, that is, the Grace of the Father; a Bishop Presbyter, and Bagama
Raz, that is to say, a Soldier and Viceroy of the Province of Bagana, could not
deny to Thee Damianus my dearest Son in Christ, nor indeed to any one that
should have desired it of me: And that for two Reasons.

1. Because I was commanded by the Most Potent Lord, Precious John, Emperor of
Ethiopia, not to conceal any thing relating to our Faith and Country, from
such as should desire to have an account thereof, but to Communicate the whole
truth of all such matters to them, both by Writing and word of Mouth.

2. Because I judged it convenient to acquaint this part of the World with our
Manners, Rites and Institutions; and that the rather because I had neither
said, nor writ any thing thereof before; not that I grudged my labor, but
because no Christian Soul since I came into Portugal, had ever desired me to do
it, which is a thing I cannot wonder at enough.

I do therefore, knowing you to be extremely curious to be acquainted with our
Affairs, beseech you by the Wounds and Cross of Christ, to Translate this
Confession of Faith and Religion into the Latin Tongue, that so the Integrity
of our Manners and Rites may be known to all European Christians; and if you
should at any time happen to go to Rome, I must entreat you to Salute the Pope,
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and all the other Worshippers of
Christ in my Name with the Kiss of Peace: And to desire the Pope to send
Francis Alvarez back to me with an Answer to the Letters of my Most Potent Lord
the Emperor of Ethiopia, that so I may at last return to my own Country, and
once more see my own House, having been detained here too long already; and
that before I am arrested by Death, which by reason of my great Age I must be
in a short time, I may carry back an Answer to my Master; and having finished
my Embassy, may Dedicate the remainder of my Days to God, and Divine Matters:
And in case this Treatise should not be so accurately Composed as it ought to
be, I must beseech you to Correct it, and Adapt it to the Latin Phrase, but so
as not to alter the sense.

Finally I must entreat you, in the Translation thereof to consult the Old and
New Testaments, that you may the better understand out of what Books I have
taken my Quotations, and may be able to translate them the more faithfully. And
in case matters should not be so curiously handled therein, as to satisfy
Critical Readers, the fault thereof must be imputed to my want of Chaldee
Books, of which I have not one by me; those I brought from home with me, having
been unhappily lost in the Voyage. So that what I set down, was what occurred
to my Memory; which I have done with great Fidelity. Farewell my most beloved
Son in Christ. Lisbon, the 24th. of April, in the year of our salvation 1534.

After having writ this, I called to mind the passage wherein I had affirmed,
That Christ had descended into the lower parts, for the sake of Adam's Soul,
and his own which he received from his Mother, the holy Virgin Mary: Of the
truth whereof we have a certain Testimony in the Books of Government, as we
call them; which Books were delivered by our Lord Jesus Christ to his Apostles,
and they are likewise the Mystery of Doctrines; insomuch that their Testimony
is admitted as infallible among us. The Portuguese Divines are of Opinions that
are contrary to those Writings; but that does not hinder that from being true
which these Books affirm, viz. That the Souls of men are derived from Adam;
that is to say, As our Flesh is derived from the Flesh of Adam, so our Soul, as
a Burning Light, is derived likewise from the Soul of Adam, which makes us to
be all of the Seed of Adam, both as to Body and Soul.

In this large Confession of Faith, A Censure on Zaga Zaba's Confession of
Faith.
albeit Zaga Zaba discovers himself to have been piqued, by the Portuguese
Clergy having teased him as they did about his Religion, and to have disputed
himself into some warmth upon several Ceremonial Points; yet as to the
Doctrines wherein the Roman Church was at that time contradicted by the
Reformers, namely, the Three great ones, of the Pope's Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, it is visible that to ingratiate himself
with the Pope and King of Portugal, and to make his Court the better, he did
both stretch his Conscience, and sacrifice his Resentments to the Public
Character he bore: Those Doctrines having never been at any time the Doctrines
of the Habassin Church: Which Charge of Infidelity is justified both by the
Jesuits, and his Countreyman Gregory, who never spoke of him but with
detestation, calling him commonly a Beast of the Field. And as to his saying,
that his Emperor's Name was Precious, and not Prestor John, it was a plain
Trick in him, designing by such a slight Correction of that word, to establish
the opinion of his Master being the Prince was meant by Prestor John in Europe:
For whereas the present Emperor's Name was David, so I do not find that there
was one of the Name of John in the whole Line of those Princes. Neither is
there any color for its having been a constant Title among them.

But while David's Ambassador was thus detained at Lisbon, The Emperor David
brings a terrible storm upon himself by seeking to enter into an alliance with
the Portugueses.
disputing, Whether it was lawful to eat Black-Puddings, he himself continued
involved in a rude and cruel War, brought upon him by his new Correspondence
with the Portugueses, whose Name at that time was become very formidable all
over the East.

For whereas the Habassin, as is plain from his own Letters, did expect nothing
less from his new Alliance, than the utter extirpation of all his Infidel
Neighbors, Heathens and Mahometans; so natural it is for people to overvalue
any new and untried advantage, and to expect much more from it than it is
capable of yielding; so his Infidel Neighbors, and particularly the
Mahometans, apprehending that an Alliance betwixt the Habassins and
Portugueses, might prove a thing of dangerous consequence to them, did all
conspire to interrupt it, by disabling the Habassin, before any Portuguese
Troops could come to his assistance.

In prosecution of which Design, Granhe a Mohammedan Prince, obtains several
Victories over David.
one Ahamed, whose Nickname was Granhe, or Left Hand, a Mohammedan Prince,
having joined his Forces with those of the King of Adel, upon whom the Habassin
had begun a War, he marched against David, resolving to give him Battle before
he was reinforced by the Portuguese Troops; which though they did not come in
several years after, were expected by every Moncon. David being flushed by some
former Victories, and having an Army superior in number to that of Granhe and
Adel joined together, was so far from declining to fight, that he marched
directly toward the Infidels: The two Armies no sooner met than they came to
blows, and after a long and bloody Fight the Habassins were totally routed,
most of them being either killed or taken Prisoners.

David having narrowly escaped, He drives him at last in a manner out of his
Empire.
retired to the Mountains, where he sculked about for Two Years with a small
flying Body: During which time Granhe made himself Master of all the best
Provinces of that Empire, burning down the Churches, or profaning them by
converting them into Mosques wherever he came.

David seeing his Empire in imminent danger of being totally conquered, David
sends one John Bermudes, a Portuguese, after having given him a Title to
succeed the Abuna when he died, to Rome and Lisbon, to solicit and hasten some
Succors.
dispatched one John Bermudes, a Portuguese, who had been in Ethiopia ever
since the Empress Helena her Government, to Rome and Lisbon, to acquaint those
Courts with the Ill Circumstances he was in, and to conjure them, as they had
any regard to the Preservation of a great Christian Empire, to send him some
considerable Succors with all possible Expedition; for otherwise the Habassin
Church and Empire would be speedily lost beyond recovery. And in order to make
his Court the better with the Pope and that King, he obliged the Abuna Mark not
only to consecrate the said Bermudes, who till then was a pure Layman, a
Bishop, but to declare him also his Successor in the Sea of Ethiopia.

Bermudes being thus consecrated a Bishop, John Bermudes, before he went, was
consecrated a Bishop by the Abuna. His Habassin Ordination by a single
Eu^ychian Bishop was allowed to be valid by the Pope, when he came to Rome.
and declared Successor to the Abuna, began his Journey for Rome, over land;
and being arrived at that Court in the year 1538, was graciously received by
Paul the IIId. who did not only allow his Habassin Orders to be valid, but did
furthermore confirm his Nomination to the Patriarchate of Ethiopia.

So that whatever it is that hinders the Popes from allowing the Orders of the
Church of England to be good, unless their Infallibilities will contradict one
another, it cannot be what they pretend, to wit, either the Heresy of her first
reformed Bishops, or their not having been three to consecrate; since in this
case, the Consecration of a Bishop by a single Heretical Bishop was allowed by
the Pope to be valid. But England is England, and Ethiopia is Ethiopia, and
Policy may not allow that they should be both treated alike.

Bermudes having dispatched his own Business at Rome, Bermudes having got his
title to the Abunaship of Ethiopia, confirmed by the Pope, goes from Rome to
Lisbon.
which was all that was to be done at that Court, which seldom or never takes
the expense of any Missions, or holy Wars upon it self, further than its
Blessings will go. He began his Journey for Lisbon, and being arrived there, he
was kindly entertained by the King, to whom the Pope had left the honor of the
whole expense and trouble of succoring Ethiopia, and was acknowledged by him,
and the whole Court, as Habassin Patriarch in Possession, and not in Reversion;
and as such, though I cannot learn for what Misdemeanor, Where he acted as the
Habassin Abuna.
he threw the Ambassador Zaga Zaba into Prison, loading him with Chains, in
which he intended to carry him home, had not the King interceeded for his
Liberty.

The Patriarch Bermudes having, as it is said, He returns to Goa, having, as it
is said, obtained an Order for 400 Soldiers.
obtained an Order from the King to the Viceroy of the Indies, for four or five
hundred Portuguese Musketeers, embarked upon the Fleet that was bound for Goa,
where he arrived in the Year 1539. but however the King's Orders were, if there
were ever any, it was two years after his landing at Goa, before any Portuguese
Succors set their Feet in Ethiopia.

During this time, David by some means or other, is said to have got so
considerable an Army together, as to have ventured with it out of his
Fastnesses, and to have beat Granhe in a pitched Battle; but however this were,
in the progress of the War, which lasted from the Year 1528. until the Year
1540. in which David died, it is certain he was driven by Granhe out of the
greatest part of his Empire, he having no other Countries left him at his
death, but such as defended themselves purely by their barrenness and
inaccessibleness, such Countries being the common Receptacles of all conquered
Nations, that have the convenience of them.

David died in the 47th year of his Age, David dies, and is succeeded by his
Son Claudius.
and the 36th of his Reign, leaving his Son Claudius a broken and distressed
Empire, and all Princes, an Example of the folly of depending upon remote
Foreign Succors, and of being encouraged by the hopes of them, to provoke their
Neighbors, or to make them jealous of them.

Upon Claudius's coming to the Crown, Claudius has some success in the
beginning, but was quickly after obliged to retire to the Mountains.
the Empire, as if its Ill Genius had departed with David, began to revive a
little; For he having got a small Army together, marched from among the
Mountains, and having surprised a Mohammedan Prince, whose name was Amirizmon,
and defeated him in a pitced Battle, he recovered the Province that Infidel had
in the late Scramble made himself master of.

But the Joy of this Success lasted not long, for Amirizmon having recruited
his Army with Mohammedan Auxiliaries, obliged Claudius to come to a Battle,
wherein he beat him to that degree, that he forced him to retire to a remote
mountainous Country called Zaa, only with 70 men in his Company; Cabelo
Oanguel the Queen Mother, The Queen Mother leaving of a Portuguese Fleet, being
in the Red Sea, sends two Envoys to the Admiral to implore some Succors. The
Envoys meet the Portuguese Fleet at Matzua.
taking sanctuary at the same time in an impregnable Mountain that was at no
great distance from the Red Sea; where she had not been long, before she
received advice of a great Portuguese Fleet being come into those Seas,
whereupon she dispatched two Envoys, who were Bahurnagays, and the Grandee
Robel, to the Portuguese Admiral to beseech him, if they met with him, to spare
her Son some Troops, and a Train of Artillery, to drive the Mahometans out of
Ethiopia, of which they were in a manner become absolute Masters.

The Envoys not knowing any place where they were so like to meet with the
Portuguese Fleet, as at Matzua, repaired thither to wait for it; and the Fleet
not having been able to execute the Design that had brought it into those Seas,
which was to have burnt the Turkish Galleys in the Port of Sues, happened, for
it does not appear that it was by Order, to touch as they were returning home,
at Matzua, to the great joy of the Habassin Envoys; Who having waited on the
Admiral, and delivered the Empress's Letters to him, told him plainly, That if
he did not spare them a good Body of Troops, and a Train of Artillery, Ethiopia
was for ever a lost Empire; adding, That the Fortune of a great Christian
Empire was now entirely in his hands; and as it would be for his immortal
honor to save it, and the rather, because it was nothing so much as its new
Correspondence with the Portuguese that had brought this dreadful Storm upon it
from all Quarters, so they were certain his Master would not thank him, for
suffering it to be utterly lost, when it was so much in his power for to have
saved it.

Upon these Passionate Remonstrances of the Empress, and her Envoys, the
Admiral called a general Council of War, to consult what was best to be done in
so important an Affair; and after some Debates, it was unanimously agreed, That
something must be done to preserve a sinking Empire; and the rather, because it
was visible its new Alliance with Portugal had brought this great storm upon it.

The Council of War having come to this Resolution, They obtain 400 Soldiers of
the Portuguese Admiral, which were commanded by Don Christopher da Gama.
several Persons of Quality offered themselves voluntarily to command the
Troops that were to be employed in the Expedition; as, to give the Portuguese
Gentlemen their due, they are seldom or never backward to go whither their
honor calls them. The Person that was named to command in Chief, was Don
Christopher da Gama, Brother to the then Viceroy Don Stephen da Gama, and Son
to the Famous Don Vasvo da Gama, the Discoverer of the Indies.

The Portugueses say, The Council of War agreed to send a 1000 Men under Gama,
but the Envoy would not hear of so great a number, Bahurnagays having
generously declared, That he would never be guilty of carrying Brave Men into a
Country to starve them; that for 400, sufficient Provisions would be found,
but not for more; but whether this was so or not, the Portuguese Historians
have made the 400 that were sent, to have done the work of 4000 Stout men; the
common fault both of the Portuguese and Spanish Writers; who by their Romantic
way of magnifying the Feats of their Countrymen, do render the truth of the
whole of them suspicious.

On the 9th. of July 1541. Gama enters into Ethiopia with his Troops, and the
Roman Patriarch.
Gama with his 400 Select Men, and a small Train of Artillery, were put ashore
at Arkiko, having the Habassin Envoys, and the Patriarch Bermudes in their
Company; they had a tiresome March over Rocks and Mountains for the first six
days, being many times forced for want of Mules and Horses, to draw their
Artillery by strength of Arm; at which work Gama is said to have been still one
of the foremost: After a continued fatigue of six days they arrived at Deboroa,
a Province belonging to Bahurnagays, where the Monks and Christians, who were
retired into the Mountains for fear of the Mahometans, having heard of their
arrival, flocked in to them from all parts, Praising God, and giving Gama and
his Men a thousand blessings for having come to deliver them out of the
grievous bondage they were brought under by the Mahometans: Gama seeing them
all in tears, endeavored to comfort them, by telling them, That as it was
nothing but the strong desire he had to restore their Prince and them to their
former free and happy state, that had brought him into Ethiopia, so he did not
doubt, but with God's Assistance, to do it both speedily and effectually for
them, and to make the Infidels repent of their having invaded a Brother and
Ally of the King of Portugal, and of the Ravage they had made in a Christian
Empire. The People, being much comforted by these assurances, waited upon Gama
to a Church that was not far off, where having all performed their Devotions,
Gama with his men, repaired to the Tents that were provided for them by
Baburnagays, where they were entertained with all the dainties the Country did
afford.

The day following Gama divided his men into Six Companies, putting 50 in a
Company, and ordered the other 100 to be a Guard to the Royal Standard, He
sends an 100 of his men to fetch the Empress to his Camp.
and to be immediately under his own Command; the Captains were John O Affonso,
Manuel da Curnha, Humphrey da Abreu, and Francis Velha; Curnha and Velha were
dispatched immediately with their Companies to wait upon the Empress with
Gama's Complement to her, and to guard her to the Camp: The Empress when she
heard of their being at the foot of her Precipice, for such it was, rather than
a Mountain, ordered the Baskets to be let down, and when she saw them, she
weeped for joy, and thanked God, and the King of Portugal for so seasonable a
succor; and having enquired after the state of Gama's health, and some other
particulars, she ordered them to be conducted to the Lodgings that were
provided for them, where they were entertained as handsomely as the place and
the Empress's Circumstances would afford. The next Morning the Empress, who was
quite sick of her Confinement, was let down from the Rock, and having mounted a
Mule richly equipped, she marched with her Portuguese Guard toward Gama, The
Empress arrives at the Camp.
who when he had notice of her being near, rode out to meet her, having first
ordered his men to stand to their Arms, and upon a signal given, to salute her
with three Vollies: The Empress to do Gama the greater honor, Unvailed her
head when he came up to her, receiving him with extraordinary respects.

Gama after having done the Obeisances that were due to her Character, told
her, That as he and all the Men she saw, were sent by the King of Portugal to
her and her Son's Assistance, so they were all to a man resolved to sacrifice
their Lives for the Faith of Christ, and in defense of that Christian Empire.
The Empress thanked him very cordially, and told him God would certainly reward
him for such a service, though her Son and she should happen never to be in a
condition to do it, not but that she hoped, that his Valor and Conduct would
raise them to a capacity of being bountiful to their Benefactors.

After the Compliments were over, the Empress with the Ladies that attended
her, went to the Tent that was provided for them, being waited upon to it by
Gama, and most of his Officers. On the second day after her arrival in the
Camp, Gama drew all his Men up in a body before her Tent, and exercised them
before her; she was extremely pleased with their Persons and Discipline, and
promised her self great things from so well Disciplined a body.

In a Council of War, at which the Empress and Baburnagays were present, it was
agreed, That their Camp should remain where it was till the end of October, and
that in the mean time they should send to the Emperor to acquaint him with the
arrival of the Portuguese Troops. The Emperor being acquainted with the arrival
of the Portugueses, writes to Gama to come and join him.
The Emperor, so soon as he received advice thereof, writ immediately to Gama,
desiring him to March toward him with all the haste he could make, to prevent
the Enemies putting himself betwixt them to hinder their conjunction.

But whatever was the cause of it, it was the 5th. of December before Gama
decamped from Debora; when taking the Empress along with him, and being joined
by 2000 Habassins, he Marched toward the Emperor in as good order as the nature
of the Country would permit him; the Mahometans, who were employed by Granhe
to raise Money, flying before him as he Marched; and the Habassins, so soon as
their Lord Dans were gone, running in to him from all parts for Protection,
supplying him with all Necessaries. On the 1st. of February 1542. they came
before a strong Mountain which Granhe had got into his hands by Treachery, into
which by reason of its Commanding all the Country about, he had put a Garrison
of 1500 men; this Mountain is not above Three days March in a right line from
Debora; but what made them to be near Two Months in getting to it, was their
having fetched a great Compass in order to the reducing of several of the best
Provinces to the Emperor's Obedience, which they did only by Marching thorough
them.

Gama finding all they had done, if they did not make themselves Masters of
this Mountain, would signify nothing, did resolve, whatever it cost him, to
attempt it; the Empress was much against his doing it, and gave this for her
Reason, That should the Portugueses be baffled in that Attempt, as considering
the Strength of the Place and the Garrison, it was too likely they might, the
Mahometans to whom at present their Name was become terrible, would recover
their courage again: But Gama offered such strong reasons for their not leaving
such a Garrison behind them, that the Empress was overcome by them, and gave her
consent to its being Attaqued.

The Mountain was both High and Steep, and on the top of it was a Plain of near
a League in compass, in which was water sufficient for the Garrison: It had
Three Entries which were all strongly fortified both by Art and Nature; The
Chief of them was called Amba Cane^, which is the Name of the Mountain it self:
The Second is called Amba Xambut: The Third Amba Gadalet. They had all of them
Governors, with a Guard of Five Hundred Men well Armed, with Bows and Scimiters
to defend them.

Gama after having strictly Surveyed it, judged it the best way to make an
Assault upon all the Entries at once; and accordingly charged Francis Velho,
and Manoel da Cunha with the First, and John de Fanseca, and Francis d' Abrew,
with the Second; who had each of them Three Fieldpieces, taking the Third,
which was by much the strongest, to himself. In the Night he ordered several
false Attacks to be made, on purpose to make the Enemy spend their Arrows,
which they did in great showers, without Killing or Wounding one of the
Portugueses; who having performed their Devotions, and received the Patriarch's
Blessing, advanced so soon as it was Day with their Artillery; with which
having played for some time upon the Entry, they afterward fell palmall upon
those that Guarded them, by whom they were warmly received and repulsed twice:
Gama, who little expected to have met with such a stout Resistance, was much
concerned to see his Men beat off so; nevertheless resolving since he had begun
it, either to carry his Point, The strong Mountain of Amba Canet, is stormed by
Gama.
or to lose his Life in the Enterprise; he made a Third Attack, in which after
a long struggle, he obliged the Enemy to leave the Pass, and Retreat with a
great loss of Men to the top of the Mountain: The other two Passes were
likewise opened by his Men much about the same time; but the Garrison after this
was so far from offering to Capitulate, that they disputed every Inch of the
top of the Mountain with the Portugueses, fighting it out to the last man: Of
the Porrugueses there were but 7 Killed, and 40 wounded in all this Action.

Gama so soon as he was absolute Master of the Place, sent down one to wish the
Empress Joy of it; and to desire her, to do her Mountain Amba Camet the honor
to visit it, assuring her that she might now safely do it; there being not one
Mohammedan left alive upon it; the Empress was overjoyed at the News, and
having magnified the Portuguese Valor and Conduct beyond measure, she returned
her Thanks to Gama for the great Service he had done her Son in reducing such a
strong Place, but desired to be excused from visiting of it: For besides that
it was very steep, she had not courage enough to behold the Carcasses it must
be covered withal. He sent likewise to the Patriarch to come up and Consecrate
the Mosque, which he did, The Church that had been turned into a Mosque, is
consecrated the by Abun^.
Dedicating it to our Lady of Victory, in which after he heard Mass, and Buried
his Dead, he went down to wait upon the Empress, who received him with the
greatest Joy and Respect imaginable, extolling his Courage and Conduct to the
Skies. She gave the Government of the Mountain to a Captain that was in her
train, whose Ancestors had formerly been Governors of it.

The Camp continued near this Mountain all the Month of February, for the sake
of the wounded men; during which time, Gama received a Message brought by two
Portugueses from Manuel de Vasconselho, who had been sent by the Viceroy with
Five Ships, to learn where the Turkish Galleys were, and with a fresh Supply of
Arms and Ammunition. Upon this advice Gama sent Francisco Velho with a Guard of
40 Portugueses well armed and mounted, to Matzua, where Vasconselho was with
his Fleet, with an Order to receive the Arms and Ammunition that was sent to
him by his Brother; to whom he gave a full account by Letter, of the State of
Affairs in Ethiopia, and of all that he had done in it. Having dispatched this
business, and their wounded men being all either dead or cured, the Empress and
Gama marched into a fertile Country, whose Prince was a Christian, by whom
they were joyfully entertained, wanting for nothing that was necessary for
their Camp. But they had not been many days in these good Quarters, before Gama
received Letters from the Emperor, desiring him to march toward him with all
the haste he could, he being informed that Granhe had resolved to get betwixt
them with an Army, which neither of them alone could be able to deal with.

Upon this Advice Gama made long Marches to have got to the Emperor, Gama is
intercepted in his March toward the Emperor by Granhe.
but was notwithstanding that intercepted by Granhe; from whom, upon
Palm Sunday, he received a Message, telling him, That he wondered at his having
the Impudence to come as he did into his Kingdom with a Handful of men, A
Huffing Message, with a ridiculous Present is sent to Gama by Granhe.
for which, tho he well deserved to be chastised, to discourage others from
making such mad Adventures; yet considering he was but a Boy, and had been
wheedled into it by the Empress, who was certainly the falsest Woman in the
world; he was ready not only to pardon him, but to convey him and his men safe
back to their Ships; desiring him withal to accept of the Present he had sent
him, which was a Monk's Cowl, and a Rosary of Beads, as much more proper for
him than a Sword and Armor. Gama treated the Messenger civilly, presenting him
with a Silk Vest and a Medal, bidding him tell his Master, That he should have
an Answer from him in a day or two.

A Council of War having been called thereupon, it was agreed that Gama should
return the following Answer to Granhe, That he was sent into Ethiopia by the
great Lion of the Sea, and the most powerful Lord of the Earth, whose custom it
was to succor all that are in distress; and who having been informed that the
most Christian Emperor of Ethiopia, his Brother in Arms, was conquered, and in
a manner driven out of his Empire by Infidels, and the Enemies of the holy
Catholic Faith, had sent him with some Troops to restore him to his Empire,
which tho they were but few in number, yet he did not doubt but they were
enough to fight the greatest Armies of one who had been so wicked, as without
any reason or color of Justice, to dispossess a Prince of his Empire, and that
not with his own strength, but because the true God was pleased to permit it to
be so for the chastisement of the Sins of the Habassins, whose Wrath he hoped
was now abundantly satisfied with what they had already suffered, so that he
would now in his great mercy restore them again to their Ancient Liberties, and
give them the Lands of their Forefathers, of which he had so unjustly robbed
them. With this Answer he sent him a large Looking-glass with a pair of
Pinchers, such as Women use. Gama returns Granhe a Message, with a Present no
less huffing than ridiculous.
Granhe though desperate mad at this Answer and Present, yet could not forbear
saying, That Captains who had the courage to fight Armies with handfuls of men,
deserved to have great honors done them by all Princes: But perceiving the
Portugueses were not to be persuaded to lay down their Arms, he thought the
best way to deal with such desperate People, would be to starve them; which he
reckoned would be easy for him to do, they being at that time but 350 fighting
Men, whereas his Army consisted of 15000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, besides 200
Turks with Firearms.

But the Mahometans, after having besieged Gama at a distance for some days,
being ashamed of taking such a course with a Body of men, which they reckoned
would not be a Breakfast to them, did oblige Granhe to change his Measures, and
to lead them up to the Enemy, whom when they came near, they found strongly
encamped. Gama besieged on all sides by Granhe.
Granhe finding the Enemy thus posted, and being neither willing to discourage
his Men by marching back again, nor to hazard them by making an Assault,
ordered a Breast-work to be run up within Musket Shot of them, from behind
which he for some day mauled the Portugueses with his Firearms; Gama, whose
number could not long endure this sport, resolved whatever it cost him, next
night to dislodge the Infidels, which with the help of his Artillery he did in
a few hours, obliging them to keep their former distance, which was without
Cannon Shot of his Camp, in which Action he had several wounded, but not one
killed. He opens a passage to himself with the bravery of his Men, being
assisted with Artillery.


After this Gama was more at ease for the present; yet being sensible that this
would not do his business, the Enemy, as they lay, keeeping him from supplies
of Provisions, he was forced to decamp, which he did before day, and in very
good order, bringing up the Rear himself.

The Infidels perceiving so soon as it was light, that the Portugueses had left
their Camp, pursued them with great fury, reckoning now they had got them upon
plain ground, to have made short work with them.

But Gama, when they were come near him, plied them so with his Artillery, that
he made them retreat in disorder, leaving several of their best men dead, or
wounded, behind them, Granhe himself having his Horse shot under him, and
receiving a wound in his Thigh with a Musket-bullet; there were 11 Portugueses,
one of whom was an Ensign, killed in this Action, and several wounded; Gama
himself having received a slight wound in the Leg; who having lain still 12
days to cure his wounded men, and observed that the Enemy had resumed his first
method of starving them, he determined to fall upon them in their Quarters,
which he did with good success, driving them from their Posts, and making a
great slaughter among them; in this Attack Gama lost 14 more of his
Portugueses, besides two that were blown up by a Barrel of Gunpowder, which
took fire by accident; the noise of which was of no small advantage to him, the
Enemies Horses being put into such a disorder therewith, that the Officers were
not able to bring them together again; he had likewise 70 wounded, two whereof
died of their Wounds.

Granhe finding there was no breaking this Body of Portugueses by reason of
their Discipline and Artillery, He obliges Granhe to retreat.
the noise whereof neither his Men nor Horse could bear, he retreated for eight
days together into a Mountainous Country, leaving the Portugueses to the mercy
of the heat, and barrenness of Ethiopia, which he hoped would make an end of
them in a little time.

Gama having thus rid himself of the Enemy, removed his Camp to the Banks of a
large and pleasant River, where he had been but two days, when the Portugueses
he had sent to Matzua returned to him, but without bringing any thing of that
they were sent for, the Ships that brought the Arms and Ammunition having been
frighted away before they got to Matzua, by some Intelligence they had received
of a Fleet of Turkish Galleys making toward them. Bahurnagays likewise came
back to him at the same time with a Body of 500 Habassin Foot and 30 Horse.

Gama, though much troubled at this disappointment, yet that he might lose no
time, resolved with this small Reinforcement to pursue Granhe, and if it were
possible, to drive him out of the Fastnesses he was retired to: And so instead
of marching toward the Emperor, as he had been desired, that he might engross
the whole glory of overcoming Granhe to himself, he marched from the Emperor
after him for eight days; but as we shall see by the sequel of the Story, was
at all this pains to catch a Tartar. He had fallen upon Granhe as soon as he
came up with him, had he not been hindered by the Empress, who protested against
coming to a Battle before they had their whole Army together, and with much
a-do persuaded him to expect the Emperor with his Troops, which were reported
to be much greater than they were.

While Gama was in these quarters, a certain Jew, who was Governor of a strong
Mountain called Oaty, in the Province of Cemen, came to wait on him, and to let
him know, That in the neighboring Mountains there were great numbers of
curious Horses which were but weakly guarded, offering if he would send any of
his men to seize them, to be their Guide himself; he further told him, Gama
conducted by a Jew to a Mountain, of which, and a great drove of Horses, he
makes himself master.
That it was absolutely necessary for him to make himself Master of all the
Passes of that Country, for otherwise it would not be possible for the
Emperor, who he knew was not strong enough to force his way to come at him;
Gama was much concerned at the last part of the Jew's Intelligence, having
imagined the Emperor to have been much stronger than he assured him he was;
whereupon he asked the Empress what she thought of the Jew's report concerning
her Son's Army? She told him frankly, That she thought it was but too true;
hereupon he determined to go, and either make himself Master of those Horses
and Passes, or die in the Attempt. In pursuance of which resolution, that he
might not alarm Granhe, he marched secretly out of his Camp by night with a 100
of his Portugueses, and never halted till he came to the great River Tavaze,
over which he was forced to waft his men upon Boracho's, or Hides full of Wind;
but what was worst of all, when they came near the Mountain his design was
upon, he found the Garrison much stronger than the Jew had represented it to
have been, there being no fewer than 3000 Foot and 400 Horse in it; but Gama
was gone too far to think of Retreating, and therefore Fight he must, and did;
and after having killed the Governor Cid Ahamed with his own hand, the Infidels
being but raw men, dispersed upon it, and were most of them knocked on the head
by the Jews, who are the Natives of that Country; the Jew who was the Guide,
is said to have been so struck with this Victory, and particularly with there
not having been one Portuguese Killed or Wounded in the whole Action, that
looking upon it as a Miracle, he immediately turned Christian, and thereupon
had the Government of the Mountain conferred upon him by Gama, being ordered to
send word to the Emperor of the Passes being opened for him and his Army: There
were 300 Mules, and 800 good Horses taken, all which Gama ordered to be brought
after him to the Camp, whither he with the greatest part of his Men Rode Post,
fearing lest he might have been intercepted by Granhe.

Neither was Granhe Idle all this Winter, who having observed that his Army,
besides that it would require time to bring them to endure the Thunder of
Cannon, were strangely cowed by their having been Beat so often by a handful of
Portugueses, writ to the Bashaw of Zebid, a Province in Arabia, for some
Turkish Troops, and a Train of Artillery, to enable him to deal with the
Portugueses; representing the driving of them out of Ethiopia, as one of the
best Services that could be done the Grand Seignior: The Bashaw having 3000
Turks, all Veteran Soldiers, for the Guard of the Red Sea, sent him 600, some
say 900 of them, with several Pieces of Ordnance; and besides these, he is said
to have received considerable Supplies from some of his other Friends in Arabia.

These Foreign Troops came up to Granhe the very night that Gama returned to
the Camp; Granhe being reinforced by a Body of Turks and a Train of Artillery,
forces Gama to come to a Battle.
with which Auxiliaries he instantly advanced toward the Portugueses, and
Encamped so near them, as to make them both hear and feel that he had now got
Cannon as well as they.

Upon this new scene of Affairs, Gama called a Council of War to consult what
was fit to be done, and it being agreed on all hands, That there was now no
possibility of Retreating, no, nor of waiting where they were till the Emperor
came up with them, they had therefore nothing to think of but of Fighting it
out, so as either to Conquer, or to sell their lives dear; only, that they
should do all that they were able to avoid coming to Battle before the Mules
and Horses that had been taken lately by Gama arrived in the Camp.

But Granhe having now got men that were not afraid to go upon the mouth of a
Cannon, advanced next day within Musket Shot of the Portugueses, resolving if
they did not come out to Fight, to storm their Camp, which he reckoned himself
strong enough to do: Gama perceiving their design, Sallied out to demolish a
Mount Granhe was raising to plant his Cannon upon, and which would have
commanded his whole Camp; in which Sally he made the Turks give ground, until
overpowered by Number, he was forced to retreat; having lost some Officers, and
several of his Soldiers in the Action; Gama made several other brisk Sallies,
but was still repulsed with loss, Gama routed and taken Prisoner.
and in one of them was himself Wounded: When night came on, the Empressand all
the Officers were at Gama to retire to the Mountains, it not being possible for
them to hold out another day against so great and welldisciplin'd an Army: Gama
was put into such a rage by the motion, that he drew his Sword, and brandishing
it, cried out, They that will steal away by night may do it, but for my own
part I am resolved to stay and fight the Infidels; and if his Countrymen would
be so base as to desert him and leave him alone to defend the Camp, he could
not hinder them, but out of it he was resolved not to stir unless it was to
Fight the Enemy. The Officers finding there was no persuading of Gama to go
with them, laid violent hands on him, and having set him upon a Mule, carried
him with them as a Prisoner. They were not well got out of their Camp with
Gama, (the Empress and Patriarch having departed some time before) when the
Turks broke into it, where finding 40 Portugueses, who by reason of their
Wounds had been left behind, they knocked them all on the head; and
understanding that Gama could not be got far, a Body of Turks was ordered
immediately to pursue him, who having before Sunrising got between him and the
Mountains, by noon they found them lying under a Tree quite spent with the loss
of Blood, and the Fatigue of the Battle; and having mounted him on a Horse,
they carried him to Granhe.

The Portuguese Historians, as if they reckoned that to have neither Fear nor
Wit, were the true Character of a Hero, do according to their custom, on this
occasion sacrifice Gama 's discretion to the Reputation of his Courage: Who,
they say, upon Granhe's asking him, How he would have treated him, had the
Fortune of War made him his Prisoner? made answer, That he would have cut off
his Head, and have sent it as a Present to the Emperor. The foolish Bravery of
which Answer was so far from obliging Granhe to give him his Life, that he gave
him Lex talionis; having, after he had treated him barbarously for a day or
two, Gama beheaded.
ordered his Head to be chopped off in his presence; at which the Turks, who
designed to have made a Present of him to their Bassa, are said to have been
very angry.

A Portuguese who was a Prisoner, and present when Gama was murdered, having
afterward made his escape, gave an ample account of all the Particulars of
Gama's carriage at his death; and among other things, affirmed, that he saw
with his own eyes a great fountain of most delicate water gush out of the earth
Gama 's Head fell upon, when it was chopped off. This Miracle was the easier
swallowed, it being no more than what the Heads of all Legendary Saints have
done, who have happened to be beheaded.

This is the substance of the so much celebrated Expedition of Don Christopher
Da Gama, which as I have related it, is I doubt big enough for the belief of
any indifferent person, but is much too great for that of the most credulous,
if impartial, as it is magnified by his Countrymen; to whose Romantic way of
writing their Lives, the Memory of their Heroes (of which Race few Kingdoms of
its bigness have produced either more or greater than Portugal) is little
beholden: Which common Fault in the Spanish and Portuguese Writers, I do not in
the least attribute to any defect of Natural Judgment in them, that being a
talent that few Nations excel them in; but purely to their reading Romances so
much when they are young, and especially Ecclesiastical ones, that is, the
Lives and Legends of their Saints, the Writers whereof, instead of troubling
themselves to collect Informations, do shut themselves up in a Cell, and say
every thing of their Hero that they think will make for his Honor.

After this Rout, the Empress and Patriarch retreated to the strong Mountain
Gama had made himself Master of a little before; The Emperor joins the
Habassins and Portugueses.
where they had not been Ten Days, before the Emperor came to them with a small
Army; but having after some Months got a Body of 500 Horse and 8000 Foot
together, he resolved to march and offer the Enemy Battle, being strongly urged
to it by the Portugueses, who tho but 90 in number, were mad to revenge the
Death of their General.

Cunha, who after the Defeat had retreated with 40 of his Portugueses into
Tigre, was sent to to come and join the Gross; but that not being possible, by
reason of the Enemy's being posted betwixt them, the Emperor advanced with the
Forces he had with him; and being come within sight of the Enemy, encamped
himself strongly for some days; during which time there were frequent
Skirmishes; in all of which the Portugueses are said to have done Wonders, if
not to have wrought Miracles. The Habassin General, in whose Conduct and
Courage the Soldiers placed their chief confidence, happening to be slain in an
Ambush the Turks had laid for him, the Emperor had much ado to keep the Army
from dispersing upon that unlucky Accident; and to prevent it, was obliged to
offer the Enemy Battle some days sooner than he had otherwise intended to have
done.

The Portugueses having desired it, had the Van given them, and were joined
with 250 Habassin Horse, and 3500 Foot: The Rear, which was commanded by the
Emperor in Person, consisted of the same Number of Horse and Foot.

The Enemies Van, which was made up of 200 Turks with Firearms, 600 Moorish
Horse, and 7000 Foot, was commanded by Granhe himself; and the Rear, consisting
of 600 Horse, and 6000 Foot, by a great Turkish Captain.

The Two Armies were no sooner drawn into the Field, He fights and routs Granhe.
than they ran upon one another, with great Fury, making a great Slaughter on
both sides; and the Body of Turks happening to charge the Habassins that were
in the Van, gave them such a shock as obliged them to retreat in great
disorder; which having been timely observed by the Portugueses, who were hewing
their way through the Battalions they were engaged withal, they wheeled about,
and attacked the Victorious Turks with that vigor, that they quickly forced
them to give ground, and with the loss of a great many of their best men to
retire to their Gross; but the Portugueses not being content with that,
followed their Blow, and with the Assistance of the Habassins who had rallied
again, broke into the Main Body of the Enemy, so as to make it give ground
apace; which being perceived by Granhe, he galloped up to them, and having put
himself on their Head, did act the part both of a great Captain, and a stout
Soldier, till he received a Mortal Wound with a Musket Bullet in his breast:
Granhe killed fighting.
His men when they saw him fall from his Horse, instead of seeking to revenge
his Death, or to carry off his Body, threw down their Arms, and betook
themselves to their heels; only a Turkish Captain who was near him when he
received his Death's Wound, defended his Body with his Scimiter in his hand
till he fell dead upon it, and sold his own life dear.

The Portugueses and Habassins pursued the Enemy so close, that few of them
escaped; the Turks were all killed to 14, who keeping together in a Body, got
before it was day to the place where Granhe had left his Queen, whom with a
vast Treasure in Gold and Jewels, they conveyed to a place of safety, to the
great loss and sorrow of the Habassins.

It is said there was not one Portuguese killed or wounded in this Fight, which
they will have to have been a miracle, owing to the Standard they had bore ever
since Gamas's death, which was our Lady of mercy; whereas before, when they
lost men, they had fought under the Banner of the five Wounds of Christ, which
are the Arms of the King of Portugal.

Upon the news of this Victory all the Princes and Governors of Ethiopia, The
Emperor being restored to the quiet possession of his Kingdom, quarrels with
the Portugueses.
who had sided with Granhe, flocked to throw themselves at the Emperor's feet,
who by pardoning them all to a man, was immediately restored to the full and
quiet possession of his Empire.

The Emperor for some time after the Victory, caressed the Portugueses highly,
acknowledging on all occasions that he owed his Crown purely to their Valor:
But whether, it was that the Emperor, after the fashion of too many Princes,
looking upon the Services the Portugueses had done him, as too great to be
rewarded by him, did for that reason begin to hate them; as a reproach to him;
or that the Portugueses overvaluing their Services, which is likewise a common
fault on the other side, did grow troublesome and insolent thereupon, The chief
cause of this Quarrel was the Abund urging the Emperor to turn Roman Catholic
presently.
and demanded greater Rewards than were just, or than the Emperor could
conveniently give them; or whether it was the Patriarch's teizing the Emperor
instantly to declare himself a Roman Catholic; it is certain they came in a
short time to an open rupture, the Emperor accusing the Portugueses of
Impertinence and Insolence, and the Portugueses the Emperor of Ingratitude, and
breach of Faith, pretending he had promised the King of Portugal, that
whenever he should be restored to the peaceable possession of his Empire, he
would immediately declare himself a Roman Catholic, and give the third part of
his Dominions to the Portugueses.

But the Emperor, as he absolutely denied his having ever made any such
promise, so he conjured the Patriarch not to trouble him any more about his
Religion, being resolved never to change it for that of Popery, which he called
Nestorianism, and accused of worshipping Four Gods; The Emperor is resolved
never to turn Roman Catholic.
adding accused of worshipping Four Gods; adding, That he was the Pastor and
Prelate of all the Franks that were in Ethiopia, but had nothing to do with his
Subjects, who had a Prelate of their own, to wit the Patriarch of Alexandria,
in whose obedience, after the Example of his Ancestors, he was resolved to live
and die.

The Patriarch finding he was not to be persuaded to embrace Popery, was for
trying whether he could not terrify him into it, by obliging the Portugueses by
his Censures, not to serve him any longer until he made profession of it.

The Emperor is said at first to have laughed at this Excommunication, as the
effect of the impotent Passion of an angry old man, who would needs be
exercising jurisdiction where he had none; and it is more than probable,
considering his present Circumstances, and the small number the Pertugueses
were then reduced to, that he continued to do so to the last: Notwithstanding
it is reported, That when he found the Portugueses would serve him no longer,
unless he declared himself a Roman Catholic, that he submitted, abjuring the
Alexandrian Faith, and making profession of that of Rome in the hands of the
Patriarch.

But however that were, it is certain, that the Emperor at this time did not
only declare, That he would never submit himself and his Empire to the Pope,
who besides that he was a Nestorian Heretic, had nothing to do with a Church,
which from its very first foundation had been all along subject to the
Patriarch of Alexandria; but to show the World that he was in earnest, he writ
to the Patriarch of Alexandria to send an Abuna into Ethiopia, according to the
custom of his Predecessors.

The Patriarch and Portugueses, when they came to hear of this Message, did
storm and threaten at such a rate, that the Emperor began to consider how he
might rid his Country of Guests who would be satisfied with nothing less than
the extirpation of its Ancient Religion, and the establishment of Popery; the
toleration of their own Religion, which he reckoned a great favor, being what
they despised, and reckoned to be no kindness at all: Whereupon the Emperor is
said to have given secret Orders for 2000 Soldiers to be sent to disarm, if not
massacre all the Portugueses that were in Ethiopia, as a People not to be
endured any longer; but the Portugueses having had timely notice of this Plot
against their Lives, did by keeping still together in a body, prevent the
execution of it.

The Emperor having the news brought him of the Abuna he had sent for, being on
his Journey, to manifest his great Zeal for his Religion, went as far as
Deboroa on purpose to meet him: Where, when the Abuna, whose name was Joseph,
arrived, he was received by him with the greatest Festivities that had ever
been seen before in Ethiopia on the like occasion.

The Patriarch Bermudes, who could not endure to think of any Abuna in Ethiopia
besides himself, posted after the Emperor to try to prevent it; but the Emperor
hearing he was coming after him, and not caring to be schooled by him any
longer, ordered him to be apprehended, and carried Prisoner to one of his
strong Mountains, from whence, after some Months confinement, he was rescued by
his Countrymen, and carried by them into Tigre, where he lived under the
protection of Bahurnagays, the great Patron of the Portugueses, until he was
carried off to the Indies by the Jesuits to make room for a Successor of their
own Order, as we shall see hereafter.

The Emperor, now he had rid himself of the Popish Patriarch, who would never
let him be quiet day nor night with his Religion, began to express great
kindness again to all the Portugueses that remained, employing several of them
about his Person, and giving such Estates to the rest, that there was not one
of them but what kept his Horse or Mule, and lived with the Equipage of a
Gentleman; insomuch that there was but one hard thing whereof they could accuse
the Emperor, which was, That he would not suffer them, after he had told them
above an hundred times that he would never change his Religion, to trouble him
any more about it.

But while things stood thus as to Religion in Ethiopia, The King of Portugal
thinks of sending a new Patriarch into Ethiopia.
all the News in Portugal and Rome was, that the Portugueses had restored the
Emperor to all his Dominions, and had thereby obliged him to that degree, that
he was not contented with declaring that he would submit himself to the Roman
Church, but that he would make his whole Empire to do the same; which News, so
slow was their Intelligence from thence, continued to be believed by most
people in Europe as undoubtedly true, for at least three years after Claudius
had made a solemn declaration to the contrary, and that nothing in the world
should ever oblige him to change his Ancient Faith for that of Rome.

Ignatius Loyola being sensible that his new Order had everywhere a great many
Enemies, Ignatius Loyala labors to engross the Habassin Mission to his new
Order.
and especially among the other Orders of Friars, who were all grown jealous of
its over-topping them; was casting about to find some great work for them to
do, whereby they might for ever establish their Reputation in the Roman Church;
and believing all that was reported of the greatness of the Habassin Empire,
and of the good disposition it was in to submit it self to the Pope, he
labored day and night to obtain that Province for his Friars; and that he
might interest himself therein with the better grace, he begged leave solemnly
of the Pope to go into Ethiopia in person to promote the submission of that
Church to him; which being denied him to his great grief, he begged that since
he himself was not thought worthy of that honor, that a Mission of his Friars
might be sent thither, and this he plied so close, as to carry it: For besides
that he himself was indefatigable in the pursuit thereof, he commanded all the
Jesuits that were at Lisbon, to wait upon the King at least once a Month about
it, and one Lewis Goncalves da Camara, a Jesuit, who was of a Noble Family in
Portugal, not to fail to speak to the Portuguese Ambassador at the Court of
Rome once in three days concerning it; which that Father observed so
punctually, and teized the Ambassador so much about it, that the Embassador's
Servants when they saw him coming, used to say of him, Here comes our Lord's
Tertian Ague.

By these indefatigable diligences, Ignatius carried both his points, which
were, That a splendid Mission should be sent into Ethiopia to take the
submission of that Church to the Roman, and that none but his Friars should be
employed in it; and having the Nomination of them left to himself, A Patriarch,
two Bishops, Coadjutors, with 10 Friars all of the Jesuits order, are nominated
to go into Etniopia.
he named one John Nunes Baretto a Portuguese to go Patriarch, and Andrew
Oviedo a Spaniard, and Melchior Carneiro a Portuguese, who were to be both made
Bishops; the first of Hieropolis, and the second of Nice; and to be Coadjutors
to the Patriarch, and who in case they Survived him, were in their turns to
succeed him in that Dignity; to which he added ten Jesuits more, having, as he
told the Emperor in his Letter to him, pitched upon that number, that the
Patriarch and his twelve Companions might represent Christ and his twelve
Apostles: Upon Ignatius Nomination of these Missionaries, the Pope's Bulls for
Authorizing them were dispatched to Lisbon; the Bull of the Patriarch Elect was
as follows:

Julius Bishop, the Servant of the Servants of God, To my Beloved Son John
Elect of Ethiopia, and of all the Kingdoms subject to Precious John the
Illustrious Emperor of Ethiopia, Health and Apostolical Benediction.
WHEREAS we have been lately solicited in your Name, which to us and our
Brethren is very acceptable; The Pope's Bull for the Consecrating of the new
Habassin Patriarch.
we with the Council of our said Brethren have by our Apostolical Authority,
promoted you to the Patriarchal Church of Ethiopia, and of all the Kingdoms
belonging to our beloved Son in Christ, Precious John, the Illustrious Emperor
of the said Ethiopia, which is at this time in a manner destitute of the
Consolation of a Pastor; Making and Constituting you by the said Council and
Authority, Patriarch and Pastor thereof during your Life; or for so long as you
shall keep the Charge, Government, and Administration of all the Affairs
Spiritual and Temporal of the said Church; as we do also Constitute our Beloved
Son Andrew, Elect of Hieropolis, and Melchior Elect of Nice, your Coadjutors,
with full, free, and entire faculty, power and authority, to make, treat,
exercise, and procure all things in general, and every thing in particular,
which do of right and custom belong to such Coadjutors, from this time forward
in all matters of Jurisdiction, and after they are consecrated, in all matters
of Order likewise; and in case of accidents, we have provided that the said
Elects, Andrew and Melchior, shall after a certain form or manner be
successively Pastors and Patriarchs of the said Church; and we have sent you by
a certain Messenger your Pall, which is the Ensign of the perfect power of the
Pontifical Office, taken from the body of the blessed St. Peter, which was
desired of us in your behalf with that instance as is fitting, and as was
signified by you, after the manner and form as was therein declared, and as is
more amply contained in our Letters. And we having considered the great
distance of the said Church from the Court of Rome, and how difficult a thing
it is to come from thence hither, and how great and dangerous either by Sea or
Land the Voyage is; and being for that reason desirous, so far as we are able
with a good Conscience, to ease you and your Successors, the Patriarchs of
Ethiopia, and of all the Kingdoms belonging thereunto, of such a Journey; we do
grant to you, and the said Elects, Andrew and Melchior, upon their ceasing to
be Coadjutors, and to all your other Successors of the said Patriarchal Church
of Ethiopia, and the Kingdoms thereunto belonging for all times to come, the
privilege of wearing the foresaid Pall, within the Church of Ethiopia, and all
the Kingdoms thereof, upon the Festivities of Easter, Whitsuntide, and
Christmas; as also upon those of Circumcision, Epiphany, and Ascension of our
Lord; as also upon the Feast of Corpus Christi, St. Stephen, St. John,
Palm Sunday, the Thursday and Saturday in the holy Week, and of the invention
of the Cross, and of John the Baptist; and on all the days of the Apostles, and
on the Three Festivities of the Blessed Virgin, and on All-Saints-day, and on
the days of the Consecration of the Chief Churches under their jurisdiction,
and on the days whereon you ordain Priests, or Consecrate Bishops; and if it
should so happen, which God forbid, that the said Pall should either be lost by
the way, or be stolen, or should be any other way embezeled, you may in that
case make and bless such another Pall, which you and your Successors, by us
instituted, may use as is above prescribed; you shall likewise cause a Cross to
be carried before you in all places of your Province.

When the Archbishops and Bishops of the said Province shall be Elected by our
beloved Sons, the Chapters of Churches, or according to the custom of the
place, but so, that it shall always be in your power to supply all defects if
any should happen to be in the Forms of their Elections, and be approved of,
and Confirmed, and Instituted by you, they shall then be obliged with all
possible expedition to intimate their Election, Confirmation and Institution to
the Apostolical See, taking an Oath of due fidelity to it, in the form
hereafter prescribed; and having given the customary obedience, shall send the
said Oath likewise to the said See.

And you being assisted by the said Andrew and Melchior, Elects, if they are
present, The Pope allows of the Consecration of a Bishop, by one Bishop and two
Presbyters.
or otherwise you, they not being to be had, or they being out of the Office of
Coadjutor, may, being assisted by two lawful Priests ordained according to the
custom of the Church of Rome, until such time as you can have two Bishops
lawfully Consecrated, in which case you must be assisted by two Bishops, and
not by two Presbyters, Consecrate the said Archbishops and Bishops so Elected,
Confirmed and Instituted, they having first presented to you, or to others,
their Letters, certifying their Election, Confirmation and Institution, as also
the form of the Oath of obedience that they have taken: And the Archbbishops
thus Consecrated, after they have the Pall given them, may use all the Insignia
of Archbishops, as the Bishops so ordained may likewise all those of Bishops,
and may likewise consecrate the holy Oil, and confirm and confer holy Orders,
and perform all the other Offices appertaining to a Bishop, and may likewise
respectively exercise the ordinary power, and whatsoever is preper and
customary for Archbishops and Bishops to exercise; you may also give to
Archbishops thus Consecrated, the Pall, which is the sign of Pontifical
Perfection, which they shall use after the manner above prescribed; you may
likewise divide and distinguish the Provinces and Dioceses of the said
Archbishops and Bishops, which have not hitherto been divided; and may also
grant Licenses to all such as you shall judge fit to Preach and Declare the
word of God to the People; and if they are Priests, to administer all the
Sacraments, excepting those of Confirmation and holy Orders, and to Consecrate
Altars, with all their Ornaments, together with the Sacerdotal Vestments, and
all other things save Chalices and Patins; you may likewise absolve all persons
whatsoever within your Province, or that are any other way your Subjects, by a
Diocesan, as well as Patriarchal right, from all manner of Sins, and
Excommunications which they may have incurred, and from all Suspensions,
Interdicts, and other Censures and Ecclesiastical Penalties how great soever,
nay, tho of that number which are reserved by the Bulla Caena Domini, in
joining them healthful penances in all such cases in proportion to the nature
of their faults; you may likewise Communicate faculties to Bishops, to absolve
in all such cases as you or the Patriarchs of Ethiopia for the time being shall
judge convenient; and if it shall be thought fit, you may by your self or
others dispense with all persons as to any irregularities they have contracted
by Bigamy, provided it was not true; or Homicide, so it was not voluntary;
which when they are so, must never be dispensed withal but on great occasions,
and for the public good, and for want of Age also, and with any of the other
impediments to holy Orders, or the exercise thereof; as also as to the
Sacrament of Matrimony in whatsoever degree of Affinity or Consanguinity
Spiritual or Carnal, those only excepted which are prohibited by the Divine
Law; and Spiritual Affinity in Matrimony shall never be contracted betwixt the
Godfather and Godmother, and their Godchildren; you may also commute Vows into
any pious work, provided they be not the solemn Vows of Religion and Chastity.

At three times in the Year, to wit, Christmas, Easter and Whitsuntide, you may
grant plenary Indulgences to all People of the said Province, who being
contrite have voluntarily confessed their Sins, obliging them before you grant
them, to Fast, and devoutly to beseech God in behalf of all the faithful of the
Roman Church; and on any other days you may grant Temporary Indulgences and
Remission of Sins, which must never exceed the term of Ten years; you may
likewise give license to your Friars to read Heretical Books, and may at your
pleasure unite, annex, and incorporate Ecclesiastical Benefices into Churches
or other Pious and Religious places, for the Spiritual or Temporal advantage of
the Neighbors; and may erect and found general Universities and Colleges,
wherein People may take all Degrees of Master and Doctor; and likewise
Hospitals for the Poor, the Sick, and Strangers, Male and Female; as also
Monasteries and Colleges for Boys and Girls, and Orphans; in all which, works
of Piety and Charity may be exercised: You may either in your Person, or by
your Deputies, visit with a Plenary Jurisdiction all the said Universities,
Colleges, Hospitals, Monasteries, and all other Religious Houses of what Order
or Sex soever, and reform them as well in the Head as in the Members; and
Chastise, Correct, and Punish all that shall be found faulty, and may remove
them from one place to another. You may also, if you find it necessary, found
Religious Houses of both Sexes, and approve, disprove, or extinguish such as
are already founded, or may reduce diverse Religions to one, and reform their
Constitutions, by either adding to them, or taking from them, as you shall
think fit in the Lord. You may give License to the poor, Religious, or not
Religious, to beg and desire Alms in the name of any Saint. You shall
furthermore in our Name, and in that of the Holy See, declare to the people of
your Province, the Faith of the Roman Church, and which are the Canonical
Scriptures that they ought to hold and follow in every thing: You must likewise
condemn the writings which the Roman Church rejects and condemns; and must
determine and declare to them which Ecclesiastical precepts do oblige them
under the penalty of a mortal sin, and which do not. You may further by your
Authority, so that nothing be changed that is decreed by the Divine and Natural
Law, make Orders concerning all matters which are of positive right, even so
far as Excommunications, Suspensions, Interdicts, and other Ecclesiastical
Sentences, Censures, Penalties, and Irregularities, which any may have incurred
upon the account of such matters, declaring which are Obligatory, and which are
not, until such time as the Apostolical See shall otherwise order. You may also
grant Dispensations concerning all such matters, and may Legitimate Bastards,
and others that have any defect in their Birth. You must create a Notary, who
by the Apostolical Authority may see all the matters executed, which can be
done by any Legate de Laterre, or Nuncio of the said See. You may also make
Compositions with any People for Ecclesiastical Fruits or Revenues that have
been unjustly received, and employ the Money to some Pious use. Finally, you
may lawfully and freely do and execute all things in general, and every thing
in particular, that appertains to the Edification and Salvation of Souls, or
that are seasonable, until such time as you shall receive an answer concerning
them from the said See; and to you, our Son John Elect, in case the said
Andrew, and Melchior, or either of them should happen to die before you, we do
by these Presents, and the said Apostolical Authority, grant a Faculty, and a
Plenary and Free Power, freely and lawfully to Name and Elect one or more
Coadjutors, who shall succeed one another in the said Church of Ethiopia, and
the Kingdoms thereunto belonging, and to Institute and Consecrate them Bishops
and Successors, obliging them to intimate their Election, Institution, and
Consecration to the said See, in the manner aforesaid, and to take an Oath of
Fidelity and Obedience thereunto, as is above prescribed, and by Letters to
acquaint the said See therewith: All which must be done with the Approbation of
the Council that is to be erected for the handling of all weighty Affairs, and
which you shall hereafter Constitute. All Constitutions and Apostolical
Ordinances, and Reservatories, though of Cathedral Churches, or of this
Patriarchal Church, tho confirmed by Oath, or Apostolical Confirmation, or by
any Confirmation, Statutes, Customs, or any other way to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Given at St. Peter's in Rome, on the 17th. day of February, in the year of our
Lord 1554 in the 5th. year of our Pontificate.

The Bulls of the three Elects being come to Lisbon, the King looking upon it
as the greatest honor that had ever been done to Portugal to have a Patriarch
consecrated in it, The Patriarch, and one of his Coadjutors, are Consecrated at
Lisbon.
made great Preparations for that Ceremony; the Patriarch, and the Bishop of
Hieropolis, were both consecrated in the Church of the Trinity Friars by Don
Julian d'Abreu, Bishop of Portalegree, and Dom Gasper Bishop of the Island of
St. Thomas, and Dom Peter Bishop of Hippo; Melchior Elect of Nice, having
Sailed from Lisbon for the Indies four days before the arrival of the Bulls.

But notwithstanding the King and the whole Court honored this Consecration
with their presence, yet I do not find that any of the great Prelates of the
Kingdom were present at it; which, together with its not having been performed
in the Sea Church, but in the Chapel of a Convent, and that by two Titulars,
and the Poorest Bishop in Portugal, makes me suspect that the great Prelates
were not over-well pleased with this upstart Order leaping so soon into such
high Dignities.

For about the time of this Promotion, and which it is like enough might
contribute something toward it, there was a most terrible storm raised both in
Spain and France against the whole Order of the Jesuits.

Don John, Archbishop of Toledo, The Jesuits leaping so quickly into such high
dignities, contrary to their Vows, creates them Enemies.
who continued a mortal Enemy to it till his death, driving them out of the
University of Completum in the year 1555, and prohibiting all his Priests, upon
pain of Deprivation, to make use of any of their Exercises; and prohibiting all
others, upon pain of Excommunication, to confess themselves to any of them. The
Sorbon likewise declared about the same time, That the Society of Jesus was
dangerous to the Faith, a disturber of the Peace of the Church, pernicious to
Monastical Religion, and, in a word, was for Destruction, and not for
Edification.

There were two things, one would think, might have been some rubs in the way
of this promotion, though we do not find they were in the least.

The first was, That there was a Patriarch, and one of the Pope's own
Confirming, then living in Ethiopia, of whom we shall hear more hereafter.

The second was, the Vow that is taken by the Jesuits, never directly nor
indirectly to seek after any Ecclesiastical Promotion, either within or without
their Order; which they had violated with a witness, in seeking after a Mission
of this nature, which was not to be performed without some high Prelates.
Neither do we any where read, that Ignatius, when he labored so hard to get
his Friars employed therein, did desire only the Ministry of it for them,
leaving the Prelacy thereof to such as were under no Vows to the contrary.

But however the Clergy stood affected, the King was extremely pleased with
this Promotion, and presented the Patriarch with extraordinary rich Vestments,
and with a noble set of Plate for his own Altar; all which, upon this Mission
miscarrying, was afterward given by King Sebastian to the Jesuits College at
Goa, where the Patriarch had lodged it.

The Patriarch, by reason of his Bulls not having come till some days after the
India Fleet departed, was obliged to wait a year for the next Fleet; The King
of Portugal wisely suspecting that things were not so ripe in Ethiopia as they
were reported to be, sends an Envoy for true Intelligence.
during which time he lived for the most part at St. Rocks, the House of the
professed Jesuits at Lisbon, of whose Chapel he laid the first Stone.

But notwithstanding it was generally believed both at Rome and Lisbon, that
the Habassin Church and Empire were as good as reconciled to the Pope; yet
there did not want some sober Heads at Lisbon, who doubted whether all things
were so well in Ethiopia as they were reported to be, and as it is plain the
Pope and Ignatius thought they were; the former in his Bull, calling the
Emperor his Beloved Son, and the latter calling him his Lord in Christ, in his
long Letter that he writ to him, and in a style as if he had been a second Pope
of Rome. This Letter of Ignatius is set down at length by Maffeus, and all the
other Writers of his Life, in which there are but two things that are
remarkable; the one is, his quoting the First Council of Constantinople, and
the Council of Chalcedon for the Authoritative Supremacy of the Pope; whereas
those Councils do place the Pope's primacy of Order, which was all they allowed
him, on a bottom that quite destroys the Florentine Supremacy, founding it
purely upon the Secular consideration, of Old Rome being the first City in the
Roman Empire. And the second is, his proving from Pope Marcellus's Decretal
Epistle, which is acknowledged by all Learned Roman Catholics to have been a
Spurious Brat of the Eighth or Ninth Century, That God did expressly command St.
Peter to fix his See at Rome.

But to return to the thread of my Story.

The King having been made jealous by some of his Ministers, that Ethiopia
might not be altogether so well disposed to submit it self to the Pope, as was
commonly believed, gave Orders to Don Peter Mascarenhas, who Commanded the
Fleet that Sailed for the Indies four days before the coming of the Pope's
Bulls to Lisbon, so soon as he arrived at Goa, to dispatch an Envoy thither to
bring certain tidings of the present state of its Affairs; who accordingly so
soon as he was arrived at Goa, sent one James Dias Oprestes, joining Father
Gancalre Rodriguez, a Jesuit, with him, into Ethiopia, to bring Intelligence
how matters stood there; this Jesuits chief, if not only business in Ethiopia,
as we shall see hereafter, was, if he found the Patriarch Bermudes alive, to
fetch him off, to make a clear stage for his Successor; since it would not have
looked well to have had two Popish Patriarchs together in Ethiopia.

These Envoys sailed from Goa in February 1555, and in 30 days landed safe at
Arkiko, where having rested themselves for some time, they continued their
Journey by Land till they came to the place where their old Friend Bahurnagays
resided, who having received them with great kindness, sent them with a good
Convoy to the Court. But

The Jesuit Rodriguez having given the World a very particular relation of all
this Negotiation at the Habassin Court, I shall set it down word for word as he
reports it.

On the 26th. Rodriguez the Jesuit, who went with the Envoy into Ethiopra, his
account of their Voyage and Negotiation.
of May we came to the King of Ethiopia's Court, which is nothing but a Camp
full of Tents; the King was pleased to give us a public Audience the second
day after our Arrival, into whose presence when we were introduced, we found
him seated in a Chair hung round with Silk Curtains, as indeed the whole Tent
was, the Floor of the Room being covered with a rich Carpet. James Dias having
delivered our Letters to the King, he Commanded them to be Read in the hearing
of all the Portugueses that belonged the Court, who were all permitted to be
present at the Ceremony. In which Letters our Lord the King having acquainted
him with his intention of sending one of his Courtiers, with a certain number
of Friars of Good lives and found Doctrine next year to him; the King when he
heard that, was all of a sudden in a great disorder, and had his thoughts so
taken up with it, that when we spoke to him, he never returned us any answer
that was to the purpose, but dismissed us to return to our Tents. Within two or
three days after this Audience, the King took a Progress to visit his
Grandmother, who lived at a place that was Eight or Ten days Journey from the
Camp, in which he left us, without having given any order about our
Entertainment, and without sending us so much as any thing of a Complement: So
that I do not know what would have become of us, had not an honorable
Portuguese carried us to his House, which was Two or Three Leagues from the
Camp, and Entertained us there till the King returned, which he did not in a
Month.

During that time I composed a Treatise of the Errors of Ethiopia, and of the
Truth of our Holy Faith, with an intention to have presented it to the King;
who, as I was told by a Potuguese that was much in his Favor, had no kindness
for the Roman Pontiff, and had said openly, That he stood in no need of the
Friars the King of Portugal was so forward to send him, being fully resolved
never to submit himself to the Roman Church.

I was informed likewise by all the Portugueses of the Court, That several of
the Grandees had been heard to say, An expression of the greatness of the
Habassin Zeal against Popery.
That they would sooner put themselves under the Mahometans, than turn Papists:
This put me upon writing all that I could have Preached to them, if I could
have spoke their Language, that so I might by the answer the King returned to
it, clearly discover his thoughts which he had so long dissembled: when we
heard of the King's being returned to the Camp, we went presently to wait upon
him, and were told by several Portugueses that belonged to the Court, That the
King had not so much as once mentioned our Names since our Audience.

Now the Treatise I had composed being in Portuguese, it was necessary if I
would have the King to read it, to get it Translated into Chaldee; whereupon I
writ a Letter to the King himself, to desire him to let me have a couple of
Learned Monks to Translate the Truths of our Faith into Chaldee, I having put
them together on purpose to show how little reason his people had to call us of
the Roman Communion, Heretics; and to affirm that we were worse than
Mahometans; and being informed that the Habassins had a Book among them,
written by the Schismatics and Heretics of Alexandria, from whence they have
their Abuna's, having paid a Tribute to the Turk for that privilege,
Entitled, The Adultery of the Franks; wherein, among other things, the Council
of Calcedon is condemned, pretending that it taught that there were Four
Persons in the Holy Trinity; and we are likewise charged with diverse Errors, I
begged of the King that I might have a sight of that Book.

The King would not let me have the Book, and was very angry that I had been
told of it; but as to the Monks I had desired, he ordered a couple to come to
me, but they had not well begun the Translation, before either out of fear that
the King would be displeased with them if they went on with it, or because he
had privately Commanded them not to do it, they gave it over; so that I was
obliged to repair to a Portuguese Captain to speak to them to finish it; who
with much ado prevailed with them to go on: The Interpreter on my side was a
worthy Portuguese, who understood both the Languages well.

Having at last got my Treatise Translated, the next thing I had to do, was to
get it written out fair, and having desired an Amanuensis of the King to do it
for me, after having granted me one, he repented presently, and sent me word,
That if I would let him see my Treatise as it was, he would read it over, and
that otherwise he would never trouble himself with it; so I was obliged to
carry it to him as it was, having first dated it, and put my name to it; it
bore date the 20th. of August. When I delivered it to him, I was accompanied by
a Portuguese Captain, and Seven or Eight more of the same Nation: and after
having paid the customary Obeisances, I began a short speech concerning the
occasion of my coming into Ethiopia; but the King interrupted me, and began to
talk of other things, as one prepared to ward off the blows that I had designed
to have given him; when I had put my Treatise into his hand, he begun to read
in it, but had read but a little way, before he was put into such a passion by
it, as made him vomit out the poison he had so long concealed, telling me, I
had desired leave to set down the Truths of my own Faith, and to have some
Monks to Translate them into Chaldee, but instead of that, I had charged those
with Errors who had none; he told me further, That that was a work no ways
proper for a simple Priest, like me, but was the work of some Great Bishop, or
Prelate, like the Pope. I made answer, It was true I was but a mean man, but
the things I had set down were nevertheless the Truths of the Gospel, and of
the Holy Councils, whom, and not me, I desired his Highness to hear. He told
me, I had imposed several things upon them which they never held. I replied, I
knew very well that his Highness was in no Error of Faith, but that his
Subjects were; and that I had set down nothing but what was true, and what I
was ready to demonstrate to him. He said, He was no friend to Disputations, but
there was one thing he was certain of, which was that Ethiopia had always held
the same Faith that it did now, or at least that it had for above a Thousand
years; that Disputations were never to be used but with Heathens, and that his
Faith being thus Ancient, there was no body before me had ever presumed to say
it was Erroneous.

To this I answered, That God did sometimes for peoples Sins suffer such
things, and that his Highness had reason to thank God, for having in his time
visited Ethiopia with the truth of the Gospel: He said the Catholic Church was
divided into four Chairs, and that they had from the beginning been subject to
one of them: I replied, it was true, but so it was likewise, that all Churches
were Anciently subject to the Roman Bishop, who was above all the rest, as his
Highness was above his Subjects; insomuch that the three other Chairs for
having denied obedience to the Roman, were all become Schismatical, together
with all those who were subject to them; That his Highness if he would be
pleased to peruse my Treatise, would therein meet with full Answers to all his
Objections, exhorting him to take care not to make himself of that number of
People the Prophet speaks of, who would not understand, that they might do
well. The Emperor's defense of himself and his Faith.
After a great deal of arguing, I told him that my design in writing that
Paper, was to discover how his mind stood disposed toward the Pope, and the
Learned Friars which his Brother the King of Portugal was about to send to him;
for that if he was not willing that they should come, it would be to no purpose
for the King to send them so far; I did therefore beseech his Highness to
declare whether he intended to submit himself to the Pope as he had promised;
he said he had learned Friars enough in his Kingdom, and that it was needless
for the King of Portugal to trouble himself to send him any more; and as for
the Pope, That he had never yielded him any obedience; that Submission, that
was carried to him, by Gasper de Magalhaens, being what he had never made, and
was either a trick or mistake of the Monk who Translated his Letters to the
King of Portugal; concluding, That he was resolved never to yield Obedience to
any Patriarch, but the Patriarch of Alexandria, whom he would always obey, as
all his Ancestors had done before him. When I found the King thus absolutely
determined, I took my leave of him; who after I was gone, begun to extol me for
a mighty Scholar, saying, He wondered how it was possible for so young a man to
have attained to so great a stock of Learning: I was told likewise that he read
my Treatise over, and that after he had once read it, it was seldom out of his
Hand, and that he was still showing it to his Mother, and Brothers, and the
Grandees of the Court; and that upon the Abuna's having denounced an
Excommunication against all that should read it, the King had sent to him for
leave to read it again, and was put into such a Passion, by the Abuna's having
denied it to him, that he called him Mohammedan, and Heretic, saying, He would
read the Alcoran of Mahomet himself, and at the same time not give him leave to
read a godly Book; commanding him thereupon since he was their Abuna, to answer
a Book that was written by a poor Clerk who had no Dignity: To which the
Abuna's answer was, That he did not come into Ethiopia to dispute, but to
confer holy Orders.

The Court however being divided about this Affair, some seeming to favor the
Roman, but most, and especially the Queen Mother, and all her Creatures
stickling for the Alexandrian Faith; the King resolved to call together some of
the most Learned among his Monks, to have their Opinion in the matter; and in
order thereunto he commanded my Treatise to be Translated into Habassin,
leaving out those Passages he was displeased with when he first looked into it;
namely, that where I spoke of the Pope St. Leo, and of Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria, whom they reckon a Saint, as they do Leo, to be Excommunicated and
Accursed, and for whom they have such a detestation, that they cannot endure so
much as to have him named, rejecting the Council of Calcedon and its Decrees,
which they say erred in the Faith, in condemning St. Dioscorus as they unjustly
Style him: Since which time they have always been separated from the Roman
Church, having now for 1067 years been involved in the Heresy of Sergius,
Paulus, and Pyrhus, who were all condemned in the Sixth Council of
Constantinople; and in that of Eutyches likewise, which holds that there is but
one nature in Christ.

The time being come when I was to receive the King's Answer, I sent to know
when I should wait upon him; he sent me back word, his Father's Ambassador
waited Ten years in Portugal before he could be dispatched. I understood by
this the King was for entertaining me with delays, on purpose to keep me from
returning with the Fleet which waited for us, for fear least we might discover
the weakness of his Empire to them; and so when I went to have my Conge from
him, in order to my returning to Debora, he commanded one to tell me, That so
great a man as I was, and who had come so far, was not to be dismissed quickly:
Besides, that I could go no where, where I could do so much good, as where I
was, in confessing the Portugueses; nevertheless if I was resolved not to
remain in Ethiopia, he would then desire me only to wait a month longer for his
Answer; and if I did not receive it then, I might look upon my self as
dismissed. Presently after this he removed his Camp to a place that was two
days journey from the place where it was; we followed the Camp; and being in
the Field on Saturday and Sunday, we set up an Altar whereon we said Mass on
both those days, where I was visited by three Monks, who desired to have some
Discourse with me about Matters of Religion: One of them who was a Scholar,
told me, That all that we did, appeared well to him, excepting that of our not
observing Saturday, and that of our cating Hare and Swine's Flesh. Nevertheless
after this he disgorged several Errors in Faith, namely, That the Souls when
they leave the Body cannot presently behold the Divine Essence, but are placed
in a Terrestrial Paradise. That the Holy Spirit does not proceed from the Son,
but from the Father only. That the Son as to his Humanity was equal to the
Father. That none but Mahometans and Infidels were damned eternally in Hell. I
returned answers to all these Errors, and declared the contrary Truths to him,
both from Scripture and Reason; with which he was so fully satisfied, that
whispering me in the Ear, that the two other Monks who were illiterate might
not hear him, he said, What I had told him was the truth, and that he believed
it to be so in his heart.

The Month being expired, I went to wait upon the King for his Answer, and for
leave to return home; he bid me go in a good hour; and as for the Fathers the
King of Portugal designed to send to him, he said, He had appointed one to wait
at Matrua to receive them when they landed, being desirous to hear what they
had to say to him. With this I took my leave of him, and passing thorough the
Countries where diverse of the Portugueses lived, I confessed them and their
Families, and Married several of them to their Concubines, having first reduced
them to our holy Faith. There was one among them who was nearly related to the
King. And whereas the Churches of that Country, besides that they belong to
Schismatics, have no Altars accommodated to our Service, wherever we went, we
carried an Altar with us to celebrate on.

While I was in one of these places, I received a Complement from a Prelate of
a great Monastery of Monks of the Order of St. Anthony, and one likewise from
the Prelate of a Nunnery, which were two Leagues off. This Monastery of Monks
is one of the biggest in Ethiopia, it is called Debra Libanus, and is of such
Credit, that all the Faith of Ethiopia depends upon it in a manner; for which
reason the Prelate thereof is in high Esteem; I went to give him a Visit, being
attended by all the Portugueses of the place, but he happened to be from home;
we nevertheless took a view of the Monastery, which is no ways like ours,
neither as to Building, nor as to their way of living; every Monk having his
distinct Dwelling House and Land belonging to it, which he cultivates with his
own Hands; so that the Habassin Monasteries look like Villages, the Monks
having their Houses on one side of the Street, and the Nuns theirs on the
other; but not being kept asunder, the Nuns are frequently troubled with Great
Bellies.

These Monks are neither of the Order of St. Francis, No mention of Rodriguez
having seen the old Patriarch, tho his chief business in Ethiopia was to fetch
him from thence, if he found him alive.
nor St. Austin, but were founded by one Tecla Haymanot, that is, The Plant of
the Faith, who was of the Order of St. Anthony. This Haymanot is a great Saint
among them, and is said to have killed a prodigious Serpent that was worshipped
by the Heathens as a God, whom he converted by that means to the Faith that is
still taught in Ethiopia.

Thus much of Rodriguez's Relation the Jesuits have thought fit to make
public; in which, notwithstanding there is not one word of the Patriarch
Bermudes; yet that does not hinder it from having been Rodriguez's chief if not
only business in Ethiopia, to fetch him from thence. Rodriguez frights the old
Patriarch out of his Province, to make room for his Successor.


For in a Letter of that Patriarch's, printed at Lisbon in the year 1568, it is
said, That Father Rodriguez was with him several days before he went to Court;
and that when he returned from thence, he came to him again in a most desperate
fright, pretending he had narrowly escaped having been murdered for having
asserted the Roman Doctrines; adding, That it was a madness for any one to
think of reducing Ethiopia to the Roman Church, till the Heat they were in at
present against it, was over.

Now what can be the meaning of the Jesuits having so industriously suppressed
all this; Rodriguez's Relation, as they have printed it, beginning immediately
after his having left the Patriarch, and breaking off abruptly just before he
returned to him again; but that they were not willing that the world should
know that the first Prelate of their Order was an Usurper, The first Prelate of
the Jesuits Order was an Usutper.
and that they were forced to make use of art, to vacate a Province for him;
which, as it was no good beginning, so their Ethiopick Missions, as we shall
see hereafter, succeeded accordingly. Besides, what other design could
Rodriguez have in pretending to return to the Patriarch in such a mortal
fright, as if he had narrowly escaped having been murdered for defending the
Roman Church, which according to his own relation was false; and in
representing the Reduction of Ethiopia to him as a thing not to be thought of?
but only to fright him away, which it did. For by that means Rodriguez carried
him with him to Goa, The old Patriarch was lodged at the Jesuits College in Goa.
where he lodged him in the Jesuits College; a Civility, that Order seldom or
never pays to any Foreigner that they have not some design upon; where after
having kept him a Year, they embarked him for Lisbon, not taking any notice of
his ever having seen or spoke with his Successor, notwithstanding they were for
some Months together in the same College. But the poor old Patriarch, Sent home
and dropped in the Island of St. Helena.
the Jesuits know best by what accident, was dropped in the Voyage, in the
solitary Island of St. Helena; where after having done Penance a Year, which
was long enough, any one would have thought, to have sent such an old man into
the next world, he met with an opportunity of proceeding on his Voyage, and in
the year 1558, arrived safe at Lisbon, where he lived some years after, never
resigning his Patriarchate, but with his last breath.

Tellez the Jesuit apprehending that this Blot of their first Prelate's having
been an Usurper, might at some time or other come to be hit, has endeavored to
cover it, by affirming that Bermudes was never Patriarch of Ethiopia, but of
Alexandria; for which he quotes both a Treatise of his own, and his Tombstone
in the Church of St. Sebastian Pedreiro in Lisbon, in both which, says Tellez,
he is styled Patriarch of Alexandria: But if this be not to cut a knot that he
is not able to untye, nothing is so; for besides that all the Historians of his
time speak of him still as Patriarch of Ethiopia, all of them, the Jesuits not
excepted, agreeing that the Pope gave Bermudes no new Orders or Title, but only
confirmed those that had been conferred on him by the Abuna and Emperor of
Ethiopia; who it is certain did never pretend to make a Patriarch of
Alexandria. It is a Jest for any one to think that the Pope would bestow the
second Title in the Church upon an obscure Itinerant, and who was ordained per
saltum by a single Ethiopian Bishop.

As to Tellez's two Authorities for Bermudes having been Patriarch of
Alexandria, all that can be said to them is, That if there be any such things,
they must have been foisted into those Monuments, by those who were concerned
to have him pass for Patriarch of Alexandria, and not of Ethiopia: Tho by the
way, it is somewhat strange, that Tellez, who lived most of his time within a
Mile of the Church of St. Sebastian Pedreira, should not quote that Tombstone
upon his own knowledge, but upon the Authority of a Book. Farthermore,
supposing Bermudes to have had the Title of Alexandria given him by the Pope,
that does not hinder but that he might have been Abuna of Ethiopia too; it
being the Pope's common practice to confer the Oriental Patriarchates upon
Prelates that are possessed of other great Bishoprics: So Cardinal Boniface
was Bishop of Tusculum, and Patriarch of Constantinople; and Cardinal Cajetanus
was Archbishop of Capua, and Patriarch of Antioch: And I do not believe there
is one President for the Popes having ever conferred any of those high Titles
upon any Prelate that had not another Bishopric.

Finally, Pius the IVth, during the time Bermudes was Patriarch, treated with
Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria, about his Submission to him as Patriarch of
that See: The History of which Treaty, as not being foreign to my purpose, I
shall here set down.

As the Popes when they are in any straits, which they do always reckon
themselves to be in while there is any thing that looks like a General Council
sitting, are, after the example of Eugenius the IVth. for making a noise with
Eastern Submissions to them; which is done on purpose to make the Latin
Prelates ashamed to go about to lessen a Power to which Foreign Churches and
Patriarchs are for yielding Obedience: The Pope endeavors to hire the
Patriarch of Alexandria to submit himself and his Church to him.
Accordingly, Pius the IVth, in the year 1561, finding a Session of the Council
of Trent could not be put off much longer, dispatched a couple of Jesuits,
whose names were Rodriguez and Elianus, with Bills for a considerable Sum of
Money to Grand Cairo, there to treat with Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria,
about his submitting himself and his Church to the Roman See.

Gabriel till he had received all the Money of the Venetian Consul, entertained
the Jesuits with promises; but after he had fingered all that he was to expect,
he told them plainly, when they urged him to make his solemn Submission, and to
deliver them an Instrument thereof to carry to the Pope, That he would never do
it, nor in the least violate the Establishment of the Council of Calcedon,
which made all the Patriarchs Independent one of another, and the Heads of
their respective Churches; and that the Patriarch of Rome if he should fall
into any Errors was no less than the other Patriarchs to be judged by his
Brethren. Complements strained to promises.
The Jesuits, upon the Patriarch having changed his Note thus, alleged, That
he had already in a manner submitted himself to the Roman See, by having in his
Letters both to the present Pope, and to Paul the IVth. styled them the Pastor
of Pastors, and Father of Fathers, and Head of the whole Church: To which he
replied, That he gave the Pope those Titles only in Civility, and that it was
not fair to strain Complements that pass betwixt friends, to such purposes: and
if there was any thing in the Letters he sent to the Pope, that was not
agreeable with the Doctrine of the Church, that it was not to be laid at his
door, but at Abraham the bearer's, who to make his Court the better at Rome,
The Alexandrian after having taken the Pope's Money, denies to submit himself
to him.
had foisted several things into those Letters which he knew would be grateful
to the Pope. Abraham, who was present when the Patriarch made this Declaration,
did not deny his having done it, but smiling, told the Jesuits, That he
believed it was lawful on several occasions to dissemble as much as that came
to, that being no more than what St. Paul himself had done, who declared, That
he became all things to all men. He added further, A trick of an Alexandrian
Monk.
That he had a Book wherein it was said, That St. Paul when he was among the
Heathens did act as a Heathen; and to ingratiate himself with them the more, in
order to their Conversion at last, did worship their Idols. But notwithstanding
Pius was thus Defeated as to this Patriarchal Submission, he had a Sham-one of
a Mock-Patriarch of Babylon ready for the Council of Trent against it Sat next
Year.

Rodriguez as he was returning to the Indies, had the following Account sent
him by one Alfonso de Franca, a Portuguese Captain that belonged to the Court,
of a Conference he had with the Emperor about Religion.

His Highness, says Franca, intended to have caught me in the same trap he had
set for your Reverence; and having drawn his water over great flats to his
Mill, he charged me before all the Portugueses, and the whole Court, with
having called him and Dioscorus, Heretics; I made answer, That our Sacred
Writings of the holy Councils, and our other Histories of the Church for 1070
years, had still called them so, and that the Eastern Churches that were
separated from the Roman did the same: To this he replied, That tho our History
might call them so, A Conference betwixt the Emperor, and a Portuguese about
Religion.
yet God knew what his own Scriptures said of them. I rejoined, I was sensible
that the Habassins did look upon us as Nestorian Heretics, pretending that we
hold, that there are Two Persons in Christ, which is what I am told to my face
every day, and that the Treatise your Reverence Presented to his Highness, did
not prove the Truth of our Faith, by affirming that it was not credible that so
many Christian Kings being all united in one Faith and under one Pastor, should
be all in the Wrong, and the Emperor of Ethiopia only in the Right; He
Answered, I have hitherto lived in Peace and Amity with all Christian Kings,
and that it was I only that endeavored to bring him to be upon ill terms with
them.

I told him, the Pope, and my Lord the King of Portugal, had sent me to reveal
the secret of our Holy Faith to him, which was all that I endeavored; and for
which if his Highness was displeased with me, I had a Religion and a King I
would die for sooner than deny them: He told me further, That I had reported
among his Subjects, that their Abuna's were sent to them from the Turks. I
answered, that was a great truth, since none of them were ever consecrated at
Rome, or sent from thence. He then asked me, Why, since I was so great a
Romanist, and a Bigot for my Faith, I had desired to be Baptized in Ethiopia,
and to receive the Eucharist from them? As to Baptism, I said there was no such
thing, I having been Baptized when I was but Eight days old; but as to the
Eucharist, it was true, that being once dangerously stick, I had desired it,
which was a thing I thought I might lawfully do, in the extreme necessity I was
in at that time; and that I would do it again if there were the same occasion,
and could not have the opportunity of a Roman Priest. He told me, he would
order it not to be given to me; St. Paul having said, there is but one Faith
and one Baptism: To that I replied, If St. Paul says so, why is your Highness
Baptized once a year? This put him into a great Passion; and having given me a
great many hard words, he put his Hand to his Sword; which I having observed, I
said to him, Sir, I would not have your Highness defer punishing me; for, for
this Truth of the good Jesus, I do not fear all the Kings of the Earth, nor
none but him, whom we desire not to chasten us in his wrath: but for you, I
would have you to chasten me in your anger; for as there is nothing so
excellent as the Soul, so Iregard nothing that is not Infinite. I spoke all
this to him with an extraordinary courage; so that seeing me much more resolute
than he had ever done at any time before, he went away and left me in the
Field; so that by what I can perceive by him, he will sooner put himself under
the Turks, and so will his whole people too, who are all Dioscoreans, as are
the Alexandrians, than yield obedieace to the Holy Pope.

I did not care to acquaint you with this sooner, for fear of having
discouraged your Reverence from using your utmost diligence in your Office.

But while things were in this Posture in Ethiopia, at Rome and Lisbon they
still continued to reckon it as good as reduced to the Roman Obedience; and
that there was nothing wanting to perfect it but the new Patriarch's Presence
among them; who on the 15th of March 1556 set Sail from Lisbon upon the Ship
called the Graca, as Bishop Andrew did at the same time upon the St. Vincent,
and after a Tempestuous Voyage they arrived at Goa on the 13th of September of
the same Year.

It cannot be expressed how much the Patriarch was troubled at the News of the
present Posture of Affairs in Ethiopia, The new Patriarch arrives at Goa.
which were brought by Redriguez to Goa a few days before he landed, it being a
terrible disappointment to him, to find that a Work which he had thought would
have done it self, was next to impossible.

The Patriarch and Bishop, with all their Companions, were lodged in the
Jesuits Collage, where they found the old Patriarch, but not a word of what
passed betwixt them, or of their having ever so much as seen one another, though
undoubtedly they did, having been several Months together in the same House.
The new Patriarch having consecrated Melchior Elect of Nice, they begun to
consult with the Viceroy what course they were to take; He remains there, and
sends his Spanish Coadjutor into Ethiopia, with a promise of Portuguese Troops
to be sent after him.
the Patriarch notwithstanding Rodriguez melancholy Account of things, is said
to have been extremely zealous to have gone to his Province, saying, He should
either be able to effect there what he was sent to do, or should have the
Honor of dying a Martyr. Nevertheless, after several Consultations had been
held about it, it was at last resolved, That the Spaniard, Bishop Andrew,
should be first sent thither with some of the Fathers of the Mission; but that
the Patriarch, and the Portuguese Bishop, should remain at Goa till things were
more promising in Ethiopia than at present they were, of which, if it ever
happened, Bishop Andrew was to send them intelligence.

In pursuance of this Resolution, Bishop Andrew embarked in February, and
toward the latter end of March landed at Arkiko, where having made no stay, he
went on with a good Train of Portuguese to Deboraa, and was there received by
Bahurnagays, the Prince of the Country, with great kindness.

The Bishop so soon as he came to Debora, writ the following Letter to the
Emperor.

THE Heavenly Father, The Coadjutor's Letter to the Emperor.
with his Son Consubstantial and Eternal, and the Spirit the Comforter, one
only God and Three Persons, be always with your Highness, with an abundance of
his Divine Graces, that so you may in all things know and follow his most Holy
Will, according to what our Lord Christ has said in St. John 's Gospel, My
food is to do the will of him that sent me; teaching us likewise in St. Matthew
's Gospel to pray, Thy will be done. The Catholic and Illustrious Don John,
the Third King of Portugal, after he had prevailed with his Holiness to send a
Patriarch with some Associates into Ethiopia, being thereunto moved by no
worldly Interest, but purely by a Zeal for God, and the Love he has for your
Highness, has been at a vast Charge (the particulars whereof his Highness might
be acquainted with, if he pleased) to convey them to the Indies, where the
Patriarch now remains, waiting your Highness's Pleasure, that when he comes, he
may serve Christ here the more effectually. It was nevertheless thought
expedient, that I and some of the Fathers of the Society should be sent before,
the Patriarch having before I left Goa, invested me with full Authority, as his
Coadjutor, which I was ordained to by his Holiness; and accordingly we are come
as far as Deboraa, where we have been kindly entertained by Bahurnagays, and
have met with very good Company, namely, Francis Jacome, and diverse other
Portugueses. Our business here is to serve God, and your Highness, whose Royal
Person and Estate may God preserve for his greater Service and Honor. Amen.

Deboraa the 26th of March, 1557.

The Coadjutor after having staid three Weeks at Deboraa, He goes to Court.
intriguing with Bahurnagays about the Troops the Viceroy had promised to send
after him, begun his Journey to Court, being waited upon all the way by that
Prince, and being come within a days Journey of the Camp, he was commanded to
stop till he received further Orders, where having waited two days, he received
Orders to advance, and being come within Cannon-shot of the Camp, was commanded
to pitch his Tent there, where having staid a Day and a Night, about Noon a
great Troop of the Princes of the Blood, and chief Nobility, all well-mounted
and equipped, came to wait on him to his Audience, two of which having
alighted, went into the Coadjutor's Tent, and having complemented him in the
Name of the Emperor, told him, His Highness was ready to give him a public
Audience, and had sent the splendid Body of Men he saw, to wait upon him to it.
The Coadjutor having returned their Complement, he robed himself in his
Pontificalibus, and mounted a Horse that had been sent to him by the Emperor,
and (besides the Habassins, who paid their Respects to him one by one) he
advanced toward the Royal Tent, attended with a numerous Train of Portuguese,
who to do their Religion and their Country the greater Honor, had come from
all parts of Ethiopia to be present at this Solemnity.

The Emperor having, contrary to Custom, ordered the Coadjutor, with his whole
Train, to ride into the first Court of the Palace, had placed himself with his
Mother in a Window behind Curtains, to see the Cavalcade; and after having
waited a while in the first Court, they were all commanded to alight, and to
advance to the second, where they were not kept long before they were conducted
into the Tent, He is received with great Ceremony.
betwixt a Guard of Old Men of the first Quality, who with Batoons in their
Hands, stood all in good order, paying their Respects to the Coadjutor as he
passed by them with a profound Reverence and Silence; from the Antichamber,
where he did not wait long, he was introduced into the Emperor's Presence by
two of the Principal Ministers, whereof his Friend Bahurnagays was one; and
having paid the customary Obeisances, the Emperor received him with
extraordinary Civility, asking him several Questions about the King of
Portugal, and the present State of his Affairs; as also concerning himself, and
his Voyages, and Journeys: So soon as the Emperor gave over asking him
Questions, the Coadjutor presented the Pope's, Ignatius, and the King's Letters
to him, which the Emperor opened and looked into immediately; but he had not
read far, before the change that was observed in his Countenance, did clearly
discover that he was not at all satisfied with their Contents, and particularly
with their supposing him to be a Member of the Roman Church; a thing, says a
Jesuit who was present at the Ceremony, as far from his thoughts, as Rome is
from Ethiopia; nevertheless, being a Wise and Well-bred Prince, and if they
would have let him alone with his Religion, a great Friend to the Portugueses,
he so far dissembled his Resentments, as to dismiss the Coadjutor with great
demonstrations of Kindness, granting him leave to come to him as often as he
had any business with him.

The Coadjutor at all his following Audiences, He urges the Emperor to submit
himself to the Pope.
was at the Emperor continually to submit himself and his Kingdoms to the Pope,
assuring him, though he would not be so civil as to believe him, That the Pope
was Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor upon Earth, and that there was no
Salvation for any one out of his Obedience.

The Answer the Emperor returned still to all the Coadjutor's passionate
assurances was, The Emperor declares his resolution never to do it.
That the Ethiopick Church had from the beginning been subject to the Chair of
St. Mark at Alexandria, and that he was so fully satisfied of the Justice of
that Obedience, that nothing in the world should ever be able to make him throw
it off; and whereas he had been pleased to charge the Ethiopick Church with
holding diverse Errors in Faith, if he would be at the pains to read over a
Confession of Faith which he had Published lately, he would see how unjust that
Charge of Heresy was, there being nothing in that Confession that was not
taught by Christ and his Apostles.

The Emperor Claudius's Confession of Faith.
In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God.
THIS is my Faith, The Emperor's Confession of Faith.
and the Faith of my Fathers the Kings of Israel, and the Faith of my Flock,
which is within the bounds of my Empire.

We Believe in One God, and in his only Son Jesus Christ, who is his Word,
Power, Council, Wisdom, and who was with him before the World was Created; and
who in the last days visited us, and without leaving the Throne of his
Divinity, was made Man by the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary; and
who, when he was Thirty years of Age, was Baptized in Jordan; and being a
perfect Man, was in the days of Pontius Pilate Crucified, and was Dead and
Buried, and Rose again the Third Day; and on the Fortieth day after his
Resurrection, did Ascend with Glory into the Heavens; where he sits at the
right hand of the Father, and shall come again in Glory to Judge both the Quick
and the Dead, whose Kingdom shall have no End.

We Believe also in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds
from the Father. We Believe one Baptism for the Remission of Sins, and do hope
for the Resurrection of the Dead to the Life to come, Which is Everlasting.
Amen.

We do walk in the plain and true way, declining neither to the right nor to
the left from the Doctrine of our Fathers, the Twelve Apostles, and of Paul the
fountain of Wisdom, and of the Seventy two Disciples, and of the Three hundred
and eighteen Orthodox Assembled at Nice, and of the Hundred and fifty at
Constantinople, and of the Hundred at Ephesus.

Thus I Profess, and thus I Teach, I Claudius Emperor of Ethiopia, my Royal
Name being Atznaf Saghed, the Son of Uuanag Saghed, the Son of Naod.

As to our observing the day of the old Sabbath, we do not keep it after the
manner of the Jews, who Crucified Christ, saying, His Blood be upon us and our
Children: For whereas the Jews do neither draw water, nor light a fire, nor
boil meat, nor bake bread, nor go from one house to another on that day: We do
administer the holy Supper thereon; and, according to the Command of the
Apostles in their Book of Doctrines, do keep the Love Feasts. Neither do we
observe it after the same manner as we do the Sabbath of the First day, which
is a new day, and of which David said, This is the day that the Lord has made,
let us rejoice and be glad therein; For on this day our Lord Jesus Christ rose
from the Dead, the Holy Ghost likewise descended on this day upon the Apostles
in the Parlour of Sion; on this day Christ was also conceived in the womb of
the Holy and perpetual Virgin Mary, and will come thereon to Reward the
Righteous, and to Punish Sinners.

Neither do we Circumcise after the manner of the Jews; Paul the fountain of
Wisdom having told us, That to be circumcised profits nothing, nor to be
uncircumcised, but a new creation, which is Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: And
who told the Corinthians, That he that had received circumcision was not to be
uncircumcised; all the Books of St. Paul 's Doctrine concerning Circumcision
and Uncircumcision being in our hands: So that Circumcision is no otherwise in
use among us, than as the Custom of a Country, as Incision in the Face is in
some parts of Ethiopia and Nubia, and the Boring of the Ears in India; what we
do therein being in compliance with a human Custom, and not in Obedience to the
Mosaical Law.

And as to Swines Flesh, we do not abstain from that neither after the manner
of the Jews, nor in Obedience to the Law of Moses; neither do we abominate
those, or reckon them to be unclean that do eat it, as we do not force those to
eat it that have a mind to abstain from it; which is according to what our
Father Paul writ to the Romans, saying, He that eats, let him not despise him
that eats not, for the Lord accepts both; for the kingdom of God consists not
in meat and drink: and in another place he says, Every thing is clean to the
clean, but it is evil for a man to eat with offense. It is said likewise in
Matthew 's Gospel, That nothing defiles a man but what comes out of his Mouth,
all that goes into the Belly being thrown into the draught. This teaches us,
That all Flesh is clean, and destroys the whole Fabric of the Jewish Errors.

Wherefore my Religion, and the Religion of my Priests and Doctors who teach by
my Command within the bounds of my Empire, is such as declineth neither to the
right nor to the left, from the paths of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of Paul.

In the Book called Tarick, it is written, That the Emperor Constantine
commanded all the Jews to eat Swines flesh on the day of our Lord's
Resurrection; whereas with us people are at their liberty to abstain from it or
any other sort of flesh; there being some that love the flesh of Fish, others
of Hens, and some abstain from Mutton, every one as to such things following
his own appetite; there being no Law nor Canon of the New Testament concerning
eating the flesh of Terrestrial Creatures; all things, according to St. Paul,
being clean to the clean; and he that believes may if he please eat all
things. This is what I have writ, that you might know the Truth of my Religion.

Written at Damot on the 23d. of in the Year 1555.

The Emperor finding that no declarations he could make of his Resolution never
to forsake the Religion of his Country, The Emperor offers to lay the Debates
about Religion before his Council.
were able to make the Coadjutor give over teizing him, for quietness sake told
him one day, That notwithstanding he was fully satisfied with the Religion of
his Ancestors in every point, nevertheless since a Person of his Character and
Authority had come so far to persuade him to submit himself to the Pope, he was
willing to lay that whole matter before his Council, that he might have their
Opinion about it.

The Coadjutor being sensible that this was only to put him off with delays,
and at last to lay the blame of his not turning Roman Catholic on his
Counselors, whom, and especially the Queen Mother, and the Officers of her
Court, he knew to be mortal Enemies to Popery, he endeavored to divert him
from a course from which he expected no good, by the following Letter. The
Coadjutor endeavors to divert him from that course by the following Letter.


To the High and Powerful Emperor.
SUch as are in Office have two ways of speaking, the one is as in their own
Person, and the other as in the Post they are in. So that tho as to what
concerns their own Persons, they ought to be humble and patient when they are
contradicted, as our Lord himself was when he was upon earth both in his Life
and Death; nevertheless as to what concerns their Office and Embassy, they must
speak the truth, without respect of persons, as Christ did when he answered the
President in a matter wherein his Father's Honor was concerned. What I have to
tell your Highness as a Public Person, is to lay before you the business that
brought me into Ethiopia; with which notwithstanding your Highness has been
already acquainted both by Letter and by other ways, I do now tell you again,
That I come from Rome, being sent by the Pope to be Coadjutor to the Patriarch
who is now in the Indies, with whose Authority I am invested; that, as our case
is at present, being what his Holiness was pleased to bestow upon me, as
appears from a Bull that I have brought with me, and which your Highness may
see when you please; I do intend therefore at present to give an account of my
having been sent hither by the Pope, and of what moved his Holiness to send a
Patriarch, with two Episcopal Coadjutors, and several Jesuits of great Learning
and Piety, into Ethiopia. When the Pope sends a Legate or Patriarch to any
Kingdom, he does not pretend thereby to make it his own, neither can he sell
such Dignities, for that would be Simony; but he is always moved thereunto
merely by the prospect of doing good to their Souls, as Christ has commanded
him in the Gospel, bidding him Feed his Sheep: And it was thus in our present
case, wherein the Pope, without having any temporal view, but purely for the
service of Christ, and the spiritual good of these Kingdoms, has done your
Highness this Favor, being thereunto moved, both by the great love he has for
your Highness, and for all Christian Kings, who are many in number, and are all
much concerned for your Highness, and the Grandeur of your State, having a
great affection for you, and by the good desires and disposition he was
informed were in this Empire, and which he had a mind to improve. Now your
Highness is to take notice, that these motives are things of great moment, and
no slight matters betwixt such Eminent Persons. Your Father writ a Letter to
the Pope, a Copy whereof I my self have seen at Rome, wherein he did
acknowledge his Holiness to be Christ's Vicar, desiring him to send him some of
his Learned Men: And besides, the King of Portugal, who is a Prince of great
Truth, said in my hearing, That your Highness had writ to him, that your Father
had commanded you never to suffer any Abuna or Patriarch to come into Ethiopia,
but who should be sent from Rome; and that he was furthermore informed from
hence, That your Highness had publicly yielded Obedience to the Pope, which,
notwithstanding it was done during the War, He acknowledges Bermudes to have
been Patriarch of Ethiopia.
yet after the War was over, Dom John Bermudes continued Patriarch here for
three years, your Highness having bestowed all the Lands belonging to that
Dignity upon him. For which reason, notwithstanding his Holiness should have
demanded something of you, considering his good intentions, and what he has
done in order to the sending of this Mission, together with the Trouble and
Dangers whereunto we have exposed our Persons, your Highness would have had no
cause to have been displeased with him upon that account, how much less then
ought you to be so, when he desires nothing from you, and has without any
thing of self-interest sent into your Empire the largest Powers of Spiritual
Graces, that, so far as I know, were ever sent before into any Christian
Country; and has furthermore in his Bulls called your Highness, My Beloved
Son; giving you also the Title of, The Illustrious Emperor of Ethiopia.

Your Highness must therefore let me have your Answer to what I have desired of
you in his Holiness's Name, that I may take my measures accordingly: And in
case your Highness has any Scruples about Matters of Faith, you would then do
well to call a Convocation of your Learned Men, whose Objections I shall
endeavor to answer in the Name of Christ; for since the Faith of Christ is but
one, as St. Paul says in the 4th. Chapter to the Ephesians, one God, one
Faith, one Baptism, why should there be any differences among Christians? And
why should they not all agree in all Matters of Faith, so as to hold nothing
that is contrary to the Gospel of Christ? And if there is any thing wherein you
think we are mistaken, and will offer any reason for it either out of the
Gospel, or the General Councils of the Church, we shall be ready to follow the
Truth; as on the other side, if you should be made sensible of our being in no
Error, you ought then together with us to follow the Truth of the Faith,
according to what St. Paul says in his first Chapter of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, See that you all say the same things, that so there may be no
Schisms, and not to follow the customs of your forefathers, when they are
contrary to the Truth. So when the Doctrine of Truth was preached by our Lord
Christ to the Gentiles and Pagans, which he converted, ought not they to have
received his Doctrines, alleging they were contrary to the Customs of their
Ancestors, and so have never believed in Christ, to their utter Perdition;
neither is the known Truth to be forsaken for fear or shame of the World; for
our Lord Christ has said, He that is ashamed of me, and of my words, etc.
David likewise in the 94th Psalm says, To day, if you will hear his voice,
etc. Your Highness would do well, therefore, to consider how much it imports
you to take good Advice in an Affair of so high a nature, in which seeing all
your People do depend upon you, our Lord will call you to a strict Account for
their Souls. Consider how dangerous a thing evil Counselors are, as appears
from the Case of Rehoboam; and Jacob speaking of such, said of Simeon and
Judah, they were Vessels of Iniquity, my Soul enter not into their councils;
and David, They have taken evil Council against his People. And Isaiah says,
The wise counselors of Pharaoh have given foolish counsel; for which reason,
Solomon in the 6th. of Ecclesiasticus says, Be in peace with mrny:
nevertheless have but one counselor of a thousand. And in the first Psalm,
David says, Blessed is the man that enters not into the counsel of the
wicked: furthermore Parents and Relations are seldom good Counselors in
Spiritual Matters. As our Lord Christ told St. Peter in the 10th. of St.
Matthew, Flesh and blood, says he, has not revealed this unto thee. And the
Prophet Micah in the 9th. Chapter says, A man's enemies are those of his own
house. And in the 10th of St. Matthew, Christ says, Think not that I came to
bring peace on the earth: I tell you nay, but a sword; for I came to set a man
at variance with his Father, and the Daughter with the Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law with the Mother-in-law; and a man's enemies shall be those of
his own house; for he that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy
of me. And in the 12th. of St. Luke, he says again, Think you that I came to
bring peace upon the earth? And in the 14th. Chapter of the same Gospel, he
says, If any man come to me, and hate not Father and Mother, etc. From all
which we may learn, That Parents and Relations are commonly Spiritual Enemies.
Christ himself having said, A man's enemies are those of his own house, and
that he came to divide the one from the other, and that whosoever hates not
Father and Mother in such cases, cannot be his Disciple. And what he taught
others as to this matter, he confirmed by his own Example, when without asking
his Holy Mothers advice, who undoubtedly would never have counseled him to
have done any thing that was amiss; he remained disputing in the Temple; and
understanding his Mother had been in great Pain for him, and had been seeking
after him, he made her answer, when she told him of it, Wist you not that I
must be about my Father's business; intimating to us by this Carriage, That in
Matters appertaining to God, we are not bound to advise with our Friends and
Parents, and especially when they endeavor to hinder us from doing what is
good; for in such cases he commands us to hate them. May our Lord give your
Highness good and true Counsel in all things, and Grace always do his Will, and
hereafter to enjoy his Holy Glory. Amen.

The 22d. of June, in the Year 1557.

Now were ever a poor Empress, and Council of State libelled so out of
Scripture, or pelted out of a Concordance before? Or was the folly of a Peoples
being obliged to be of a Religion, because it was the Religion of their
Ancestors for several Ages, ever more severely exposed? Besides, there is one
thing remarkable in this Letter, which is the Bishop's affirming positively,
That Bermudes was, and did act for some years as Patriarch of Ethiopia, and as
such had the Lands belonging to that Dignity settled upon him by the Emperor.

After this Letter, Several Conferences about Religion.
the Emperor and the Bishop had diverse Conferences about Religion, but without
any effect, the Emperor growing daily more zealous for his Ancient Faith, and
averse to that of Rome. The Bishop being piqued with this ill success,
challenged all the Learning of Ethiopia to a public Disputation; which being
accepted, the Emperor himself bore a great part in it, defending the Habassin
Faith with that Dexterity and Learning, that the Jesuits themselves confess he
did sometimes put the Bishop hard to it to answer him. The Habassins were so
encouraged by having such a Champion on their side, that the Bishop was never
denied a public Disputation when he desired it; and tho he is said by his
Brethren to have still come off victorious, the Habassins did always triumph,
the Bishop being laughed at by them as the most baffled Man that ever pretended
to weild an Argument.

The Bishop growing weary of disputing, betook himself to his Pen again; and
having Composed a Treatise against all the Habassin Errors, he Presented it to
the Emperor, conjuring him to read it without Prejudice. The Emperor promised
to do so, but was so far from being converted by it, that if it were possible
he was settled in his Ancient Faith thereby more than he was before; The Emperor
answers the Coadjutor's Book; and writes one in defense of his own Faith.
Writing a Book not only in Answer to that of the Bishop's, but one also in
Defense of his own Church; declaring in them both, that he had seen nor heard
nothing to convince him, that as a Christian he was bound to submit himself and
his Empire to the Pope.

The Bishop finding his Writings were as Unsuccessful as his Conferences and
Disputations, left the Court in Wrath, retiring to a place called Decome, where
he had not been long before he thundered out the following Excommunication.

Andrew d' Oriedo, by the Grace of God, and the Apostolical See, Bishop of
Hieropolis, and Coadjutor to the most Reverend Father in Christ and Lord, John
Nunes Baretto, Patriarch of Ethiopia.

AS it is profitable to Publish and Praise such things as are Good, The
Coadjutor thunders out an Excommunication.
on purpose to engage People to follow them; so it is likewise necessary to
Declare and Censure public Evils, that People may avoid them. Wherefore, since
the People of Ethiopia, notwithstanding their having had all the Articles of
the Roman Faith preached to them in such a manner, that all that were disposed
to learn it, cannot but be thoroughly acquainted therewith, do with great
Obstinacy continue to deny Obedience thereunto, and not only so, but did on the
Ogge of the last Year, cause a Proclamation to be made at the Market-Cross,
prohibiting all Persons upon pain of Death to go into any of our Churches,
adhering still to the Customs of their Forefathers, and that as appears to us
not out of Ignorance, for that cannot be, considering how many things they hold
that are notoriously Evil, and contrary to the Service of our Lord.

We do therefore define, and by Sentence declare, That all the People of
Ethiopia, Great and Small, Learned and Unlearned, do deny to yield that
Obedience to the Holy Roman Church which they and all other Churches are in
Duty bound to yield, the Roman Church being the Head of all Churches, and the
Pope of Rome the Father, Pastor, and Superior of all Christians. They do
likewise on diverse Occasions repeat Baptism, which is contrary to the Faith.
And do also publicly observe Saturday, which they did not formerly in
Ethiopia. And do Circumcise themselves, and their Slaves, as also all the
Converts they do make at any time to Christanity, forcing many of them to
submit to it. They also hold it to be a Sin to eat Hare or Swines Flesh, or any
of the Meats prohibited by the Mosaical Law, which Law was abolished by the
Death of Christ, and is contrary to what he has commanded in his Gospel.
Several among them holding it likewise to be a Sin to go into a Church on the
day on which they have known their Wives, which is no where prohibited by
Christ or his Church. Their Learned Men do also with great Zeal maintain, That
there is but one Nature, and one Operation in Christ, and that Christ's
Humamanity is equal with his Divinity, which is contrary to the Faith of the
Gospel; and the Synods which do teach, That Christ has two Natures, and two
Operations, and two Wills in one Person, and that he is equal to the Father as
to his Divinity, but inferior to him as to his Humanity.

They do also keep a Festivity to Dioscorus, the Defender of the Heretic
Eutyches, who together with Eutyches stands condemned by the Church; for which
reason Dioscorus ought not to be esteemed a Saint in Ethiopia; holding diverse
other things that are contrary to the Roman Faith, which ought not to be, being
there is but one Faith, which is that of the Roman Church, which by reason of
Christ's promise to her can never err. We do therefore admonish all our
Spiritual Sons to separate themselves from these, and all other Errors of
Ethiopia, etc. so as not to fall into any of them.

And as for the Ethiopians, we do remit them to the Judgment of the Church, and
of the Prelates thereof, to Punish them in their Persons or Estates, publicly
or privately, or to use mercy with them in whole or in part, as they shall
think fit; and especially if they should be hereafter Converted; which God in
his Mercy give them Grace to be.

Made at Decome in Ethiopia, upon the 2d. of February, 1559. Gancalo Cardozo
Notary Apostolic; Andrew Bishop of Hieropolis.

This was published in our Church of Decome on the 2d. of February 1559.
Whatever ease the publication of this Censure might give the Coadjutor's mind,
which was strangely exulcerated by the Triumphs of the Habassins, it is certain
it had no more effect upon the Emperor, than his Conferences and Books had had;
Who the more he knew of Popery and its ways, the worse he liked it.

But while Claudius his thoughts were wholly employed in Disputing with, and
Writing against the Bishop, and Fathers, Nur the Son of Madi Ali Guasil, and
the King of Adel, having observed the present weakness of the Habassin Empire,
and how its Frontiers lay open, Invaded it with a great Army; and meeting with
little or no opposition, were got into the bowels of it before Claudius ever so
much as dreamed of an Invasion; nevertheless when the alarm of it came from all
quarters, Claudius laying aside his Pen and Books, called for his Sword, and
having sweeped together a confused rabble of an Army, he took the Field, and
being come within sight of the Enemy, was so ill advised as to give him Battle;
in which Claudius was not so successful, as he was said to have been in his
ergoteering Combats, his Army being totally Routed, and he himself Slain
fighting Manfully against the Infidels.

The Portugueses, though angry with Claudius, do him the Justice to acknowledge
that he was a Prince of admirable natural Parts, and for an Habassin, of very
good Learning; and as he was every way much a Gentleman, that he would also
have been extraordinary kind to the Portugueses that remained in Ethiopia for
the great Service they had done, had it not been for two things; the one was,
that they would never let him alone with his Religion, which he was extremely
Zealous for; and the other was, that under a pretense of introducing the Roman
Faith into Ethiopia, they had a design either to make themselves Masters of its
Seaports, or to have put them into the hands of a Creature of their own, as
they had done in several parts of India, after they had by some plausible
pretense or other got footing in them; and as the close Correspondence they
maintained with Bahurnagays, the Hereditary Governor of the Provinces on the
Seacoast, was sufficient to give Claudius some umbrage of this design, so if
he ever happened to intercept any of the Bishop's or Father's Letters, he must
have been abundantly satisfied of the truth of it; the sending of Missionary
Troops into Ethiopia, without which the Ecclesiastical Missionaries would be
able to do nothing there, being, as we shall see hereafter, the burden of all
their Letters.

So feeble a thing is Popery to make way for it self into any Country, without
the assistance of Apostolical Dragoons.

Nur, after having ravaged and plundered the greatest and richest Provinces in
Ethiopia, returned home laden with Spoils and Honor; but when he came near his
Metropolis, instead of making a Triumphant entry, as was expected, he mounted a
sorry Mule wretchedly Equipped, and rid thereon thorough all the Acclamations
of his People; and being asked the reason why he did so, his answer was, That
since it was God alone that won the late Victory, it was but just that he alone
should have the whole Glory of it.

Claudius having left no Sons, Adam succeeds Claudius.
was Succeeded by his Brother Adam, who had been a Captive several years in
Arabia, and who from the day he came to the Crown, Adam a fierce Enemy to
Popery.
declared himself an irreconcilable Enemy to the Church of Rome, and
accordingly as his first act of Government, was the prohibiting all Habassins
whatsoever, under severe Punishments, to go into the Latin Church; so his first
act of severity, was the ordering of a Habassin Woman for having turned Papist,
to be whipped thorough the streets: and among other reasons that he gave for
the greatness of this his Rage against Popery, one was, That the having
Tolerated it in Ethiopia, had cost his Brother his Life, and his Empire a vast
treasure both of Money and Blood: And in order to the extirpating so pernicious
an Inmate, as he reckoned it to be, he first took all the Lands which had been
given by his Brother to the Portugueses for their Service, from them; and
afterward their Children, committing them to the care of such as would be sure
to Educate them in the Alexandrian Faith. After this, he Commanded the
Coadjutor to be apprehended and thrown into Prison, threatening to Burn him and
his Jesuits alive, if they did not give over corrupting his People with their
false Doctrines: And having one day ordered the Coadjutor to be brought before
him, A Dialogue betwixt the Emperor and Coadjutor.
he fell upon him after a most barbarous manner, asking him, Whether it was not
sufficient that he suffered him to live in his Empire to look after his
Portugueses, but he must be corrupting his Monks and Subjects with his
Heresies? adding, let me advise you, as you love your Life, not to tamper any
more with my Subjects. The Coadjutor made answer, That he did nothing but what
his Office obliged him to, and that he would do, whatever it cost him. This
resolute Answer put Adam into such a fury, that after having called the
Coadjutor a great many hard Names, and asked him, How he durst come into
Ethiopia to Preach his Lies and Fopperies in it? He flew upon him, and tore his
Robes, the Courtiers having much ado to take him off; and having sent for him
another time, he told him after a great deal of foul Language, That if he would
not promise to give over Corrupting his Subjects, his head should pay for it.
The Coadjutor without answering a word, Crossed his Arms, and hung down his
Head, making a tender of his Neck to him; this put Adam in such a rage, That he
drew his Cimiter in great fury with an intention of gratifying the Coadjutor:
But behold a Miracle, say the Jesuits, When Adam 's Arm was lifted up to have
given the fatal blow, his Cimiter dropped out of his hand, to the great
mortification of the Coadjutor, who had flattered himself with the hopes of
dying a Martyr presently: But though Adam was hindered by that Miracle from
executing what he had designed, he was so far from being any ways softened by
it, that he told the Coadjutor with great disdain, What I warrant you, you are
ambitious of being made a Martyr by my hand; go get you gone out of my
presence, and let me hear no more of you and your false Doctrines; for if I do,
I shall find a baser hand somewhere that shall gratify you in making you a
Martyr, since you have a mind to be one.

But the chief cause of Adam treating the Coadjutor and Portugueses thus,
discovered it self in a sudden Rebellion that brake out against him at this
time, Bahurnagays takes up Arms against Adam.
of which their old friend Bahurnagays was one of the chief, who having retired
from Court to his Government, kept upon the Seacoast in expectation of the
Portuguese Succors which the Viceroy had promised to send after the Coadjutor
into Ethiopia; which not coming so soon as they were expected, the Coadjutor
had sent one Andrew Galdamas, a Spanish Jesuit, to the Indies to hasten them
over, by assuring the Viceroy, That there was no Conversion to be made in
Ethiopia without the assistance of some Catholic Troops. But Father Andrew
being discovered at Arkiko, as he was ready to have embarked on a Ship
belonging to the Baneans, was hewed in pieces by the Mahometans. Father Teller
after having pronounced Father Andrew a Martyr, justifies the cause of his
death, by affirming, Que esta sempre a pratica dosque tem experientia de
Ethiopia, que sem as armas namam que, defendam and Authorizem a os pregadores
Catholicos, nam poderam nunqua ter o Successo deseiado enter aquelles
Schismaticos; that is to say, It had always been the opinion of such as had any
experience in the Affairs of Ethiopia, that unless the Catholic Preachers were
defended and authorized by Dragoons, they would never have the success that was
desired among those Schismatics.

Adam being sensible of this, and dreading nothing so much as the coming of
Portuguese Troops into his Empire, notwithstanding the gross of the Rebellion
was in an Inland Province, where they had Proclaimed one Tascaro, a Son of
Adam's elder Brother, Emperor; He marched first against Bahurnagays, resolving
if it were possible, to break his Army before it received a Portuguese
Reinforcement. Adam had two Battles with Bahurnagays: In the first he is said
to have been worsted by him; but to have routed Bahurnagays to that degree in
the last, that he was forced to sculk about the Seacoast with a handful of
Portugueses, all of that Nation that were at liberty in Ethiopia, having run
into him when he first took up Arms.

Adam having thus quelled Bahurnagays, and being informed, that now the Mosons
were over, He is routed, and goes over to the Turks.
there was no fear of Ethiopia being troubled with any Portuguese Troops for
one six Months at jest. He marched back to find out his Nephew, who had been
Proclaimed Emperor, and being come up with him, he obliged him to come to a
Battle; the Fight continued obstinate for some hours, but in the conclusion the
Rebels were overthrown, and Tascaro being taken Prisoner, had his head chopped
off immediately by his Uncle's order.

Adam after these Victories thought to have taken some rest; when intelligence
was brought him, that Bahurnagays despairing of finding mercy at his hands, and
of the coming of the Portuguese which had been promised him, had with the
handful of Portugueses that stuck to him, taken Sanctuary among the Mahometans,
and was encouraging them to invade Ethiopia.

The honest Author of the Asia Portuguese, says, This trick of the Portugueses
going over with Bahurnagays to the Turks, was so ill taken by the Habassin
Emperors, that they could never after that endure to hear of having any
Soldiers of that Nation in their Country; but as we shall see hereafter, that
did not hinder the Missionaries, who desired to see such Troops in Ethiopia
above all things in the world, He brings the Turks into Ethiopia, and delivers
Matrua, and the other Seaport Towns to them.
from making bold to send for them in their Names.

The Mahometans having at Nagay's instigation Marched into Ethiopia with a
great Army, had Arkiko and Matzua the only Seaports of that Empire delivered
to them by Nagay's creatures; which places as they were of more importance to
them than the whole Country besides, by making them Masters of the whole Coast
of the Red Sea; so having once got them into their hands, they have taken care
to keep them, continuing Masters of them to this day.

Adam not being able to brook this loss, and the great devastations that were
made by the Infidels in the best Provinces of his Empire, resolved to venture
it all, or to recover what he had lost; and so tho he was sensible of his
Armies being in all respects inferior to that of the Enemy; yet being pushed on
by his rage, he determined to bid them Battle; Adam is slain in Battle.
which the Infidels having accepted of, did maul the Habassins so with their
Artillery, that they presently gave ground, Adam himself being overthrown upon
heaps of his slain Men, most of the rest that fled being either made Prisoners,
or put to the Sword. The whole Habassin Baggage having upon this total rout
fallen into the hands of the Mahometans, among it the Coadjutor and his
Jesuits, whom Adam had carried along with him as Hostages in all his Marches,
The Coadjutor and the Fathers are made Prisoners by the Turks.
were found, and were all stripped with the slain, before Bahurnagays and his
Portuguese could come to their Relief.

So that notwithstanding the Bishop and his Fathers had their full revenge of
Adam for having treated them so barbarously; yet I do not find that they much
bettered their condition by it. One of the Fathers in a Letter that was writ
after Adam was slain, telling his Brethren at Goa, that at the writing thereof,
they were in as lamentable an estate as it is almost possible for men to be, in
having neither Clothes, Bread, nor Credit; and that the poor Coadjutor was in
such a Garb, that it was enough to make a Christian's heart bleed to see him in
it.

Adam being slain, was succeeded by his Son Malac Saged, who was Crowned and
Anointed at Axun, and who tho he Reigned Thirty Years, was never one day out of
War either with his Neighbors or Subjects, and as to the main was Victorious
still; Adam is succeeded by his Son Malac Saged, who takes no notice of the
Missionaries.
and tho he hated the Roman Church no less than his Father; nevertheless having
his thoughts wholly taken up with War, he gave the Coadjutor and the Jesuits,
after they returned to Fremona, no manner of Molestation, unless they were
troubled at his taking no more notice of them than if there had been no such
persons in his Country: Neither did the Coadjutors declaring himself
Patriarch, upon his having received advice of the Patriarch Baretto's death,
who died at Goa on the Twentieth of December, 1562, engage the Emperor to have
ere the more regard for him; and as the Emperor gave the Patriarch no trouble
in his retirement, so neither did the Patriarch give him any, The Patriarch
dying at Goa, the Coadjutor becomes Patriarch.
who despairing of being able to do any good in Ethiopia, without the
assistance of the Portuguese-Troops, made the soliciting of them his whole
business. So in a Letter to the General of the Jesuits bearing date the 3d of
June, 1566. he tells him, There was one thing he and the Fathers were all
agreed in, which was, That nothing but a good body of Portuguese Soldiers would
ever be able to reduce Ethiopia to the Obedience of the Roman Church; and in
one of the same date to the Rector of the Jesuits College at Goa, he tells him,
There was one thing he might be certain of, The Patriarch sollicits hard for
Troops.
which was, that there was no other remedy for Ethiopia, but a good body of
Portuguese Troops, adding, that if they had but 5 or 600 stout Musketeers, he
would undertake for the reducing of Ethiopia to the Roman Church in a short
time: Concluding his Letter with a complaint, that more men were daily exposed
to greater dangers for things of much less Importance, even to the State,
Father Fermandes does the same.
and where the success was infinitely more doubtful. And Manuel Fernandes in a
Letter to the Provincial and Jesuits of Goa, chimes exactly with his Patriarch,
in this note. What shall I say, says Fernandes, my dearest Fathers and
Brethren! to blame your Reverences who are in India for the great neglect of
not having sent the Troops whereon the Reduction of this Empire depends
entirely, I know would be unjust; being certain, that if it had been in your
Reverence's power to have applied it, that we had had that remedy long before
this time: Nevertheless there is one thing I must beg of you, and that is, That
since your Reverences do heartily wish that we had those Soldiers, tho it is
not in your yower to send them to us, that you would pray earnestly to Christ
to put it into their hearts, in whose power it is to do it effectually. I am
likewise certain, that if your Reverences did but see what is lost here in
Ethiopia for want of a handful of men, who would also be able to protect those
who have already embraced our Faith, that you would run howling and lamenting
so great a loss thorough all the streets of the City: Your Reverences may think
of this what you please, but I do say and affirm, That the Order of Jesuits has
no where so noble and glorious an enterprise upon their hands as this of
Ethiopia, if they could but finish it: Neither ought it to seem strange to you,
that we should say, That a body of Soldiers is necessary to the reduction of
this Church, considering that there is nothing more certain, than that at the
same time you lose the favor of the King, the work of conversion goes on but
very dull; and no wonder, since even in Portugal, the Prelates, if they had not
the assistance of the Secular Arm, would not be able to do their duties; and
though it is true that we pretend to have no other business here but the
service of God, and the promotion of the good of peoples Souls; yet it is
certain, that those Troops, if they were once here, would quickly clear this
Empire of all its Foreign and Domestic Enemies, chiefly of the Turks and
Galls, by whom it is at this time so miserably harassed, and against whom the
unhappy Natives are not able to make head; who as they contradict our Lord, so
our Lord contradicts them in chastising them with flies, for the Galls are no
better: It being an unconceivable thing, how such a sorry naked People should
be able to do the things that they do against the Habassins, who have both Arms
and Horses, were it not that God makes, and will make Wur against them, until
such time as they shall give over making War against his Divine Majesty:
Wherefore since a good body of Soldiers would remedy all our wants, Spiritual
and Temporal, let me again beg it of your Reverences, to beseech God to send us
this necessary Succor.

I would have your Reverences likewise remember, with how great Zeal and
Charity our holy Father Ignatius commanded our Superiors in Portugal, nos to
fail to speak to the King, who is now with God, once a Month, at least,
concerning the Habassin Mission: But though my intent in putting you in mind of
this, should not be to engage you to do the same with the Viceroy; yet this I
will affirm, That since this is the Cause of God, and the Society, and so great
a Cause too, that you ought never to give over soliciting both God and Princes
about this affair: So that it may never be said of us, They begun to build, but
could not finish. Finally, I do assure you, That if we had but those Troops
once, that not only Ethiopia, but another Europe would be brought quickly to
the Knowledge of Christ, and the Obedience of the Roman Church.

The Jesuits of Goa, Lisbon, and Rome, were so inflamed by these passionate
Letters, that the Cardinal Don Henry, who during the Minority of his Nephew Don
Sebastian, governed Portugal, could not be quiet day nor night for them, his
not ordering so small a body of Men to be sent where they would infallibly do
both the Church and Crown so great service, being every where roared at by
them, as both the most ungodly and impolitick thing that any Government had
ever been guilty of.

The Cardinal and Council of State, The Cardinal of Portugal prevails with the
Pope to call the Patriarch our of Ethiopia.
who weighed things a little more soberly than the distressed Jesuits in
Ethiopia, finding they could not well spare so many Soldiers at that time, from
the more profitable Conquests they were going on with in the Indies, resolved,
since they could not comply with the loud clamours of the Jesuits, to remove
the cause of them, by writing to the Pope to recall the Patriarch and his
Friars, and to send them somewhere else, where they might do more good, and
make less noise; by representing the Conversion of the Habassins to him as a
thing not feisable.

The Pope, who at that time was Pius the Vth. believing what the Cardinal had
writ to him in the Name of the King of Portugal, dispatched the following
Letters of Revocation to the Patriarch, which the Cardinal took care to forward
with all possible expedition.

To our Venerable Brother, Andrew Oviedo, Patriarch of Ethiopia. Venerable
Brother, Health and Apostolical Benenediction, etc.
BY Letters from our Beloved Son Sebastian, The Pope's Letters of Revocation.
the Illustrious King of Portugal, his Ambassador resident at our Court, and by
other Persons of good Credit, we are informed, That you having been sent by
this Apostolical See into Ethiopia to reduce the People thereof to the
knowledge of the Orthodox Faith, have not, after having spent several years
therein, been able, by reason of the hardness of their hearts, and their
obstinacy in their ancient Errors, to reap that fruit which might justly have
been expected of your pious Labors, whereas if you were employed in the Island
of Japan, on the Province of China, Countries inhabited by Heathens, and who at
this time seem well disposed to receive the Faith of Christ, it is to be hoped
that with God's Assistance your Labors would be profitable in those parts
where the Harvest is great, and the Laborers are few.

We having been thus informed, and being moved by brotherly Charity, suffering
together with you, since there is no likelihood of your reaping that fruit
where you are, which might justly be expected from your great Labors, and so
long a Peregrination; and finding our selves placed, though without our Merits,
in this holy See, and being sensible of our being debtors to all, and by our
Office bound to promote the Glory and Honor of Almighty God, and the Salvation
of Souls, saluting you with the Charity of a Brother, and having received ample
testimonies of your Zeal and Affection to promote the Catholic Religion, we do
exhort you in the Lord, and in virtue of holy Obedience, and the remission of
all your Sins, Command you, by the first opportunity you shall have of Sailing
after the receipt of these our Letters, to depart forthwith to the Island of
Japan, or China, there to Preach the word of God according to the Doctrine of
the Holy Roman Church, who is the Mother and Mistress of all the Faithful, and
there to administer all the Sacraments which do properly belong to the
Episcopal Function, so as trusting in the Divine Mercy, to endeavor to gain
all the Souls you can to God; and in order to the enabling you thereunto, we do
by our Apostolical Authority give you free leave and full power to exercise all
Episcopal Offices in those parts, or any other, that have not a proper Bishop:
So as to moke use of all those Faculties and Indults which were granted to you
by Pope Julius the IIId. of happy Memory, or by any other Roman Bishop, our
Predecessors, with relation to the Kingdom of Ethiopia: And we do likewise by
the same Authority dispense with you so far, that you may without any scruple
of Conscience, live and remain in the aforesaid parts, unless there should
happen to be more hopes of reducing Ethiopia to the Union of the Catholic
Faith, than there is at present.

Dated at Rome in St. Peter's, and Signed with the Seal of the Fisherman, on
the 1st. of February 1560.

The Patriarch, though Sick of Ethiopia, The Patriarch is unwilling to return
to the Indies.
yet seems to have had no great stomach for the China or Japan Mission, which,
to speak the Truth, was a hard imposition upon one of his years: And so, though
in his Answer which is here subjoined, he assures the Pope of his readiness to
submit to all his Commands; yet he sufficiently intimates, that he was as
willing to resign his Dignity, and serve him or the Jesuits in their Kitchens,
as to keep it, and carry it to China or Japan; in which affair, it is to be
feared that the Patriarch's being a Spaniard, was of no advantage to him, it
being the custom of the Portugueses when they have got any Foreign Friars among
them in the Indies, to put them upon the forlorn of all dangerous Missions, as
they did Oviedo on this, and Father Peter, who was likewise a Spaniard, on that
of the Second Habassin Mission; as we shall see hereafter.

The Patriarch's Answer to the Pope. Andrew d'Oviedo to Pope Pius the Vth.
Most Blessed Father,
IN this present year 1567, His Answer to the Pope.
with some Letters from the College of St. Paul at Goa, a Copy of an
Apostolical Brief from your Holiness to me, came to my hands; wherein among
other pious, devout, and holy things, are these words; We do exhort you in the
Lord, and in virtue of holy Obedience, and Remission of your Sins, do command
you, by the first opportunity you shall have of sailing after the receipt of
these our Letters, to depart for the Island of Japan, or the Kingdom of China.
And a little lower there are these words, We do furthermore by the same
Apostolical Authority, dispense with you so, that in case there is no hopes of
reducing Ethiopia to the Church, you may go into those parts, and there remain
without any s^ple of Conscience.

To which Apostolical L^ no less than if I had received their original, I
prepared my self to yield obedience, as it is fit, just, and healthful, that we
should at all times, and in whole and in part obey your Holiness; for in
obeying you, Most Holy Father, we obey Christ the only begotten Son of God, in
whose place you are upon earth, our Head and Father, and the Master of all
faithful Christians; all the Indulgence, Order, and Power of the Church of
Christ being derived from you to all others: The holy Mother Church of Rome,
whose Faith never did nor never will fail, and who is the Mother and Mistress
of all the Churches in the world, and of all faithful Christians, being
continued in your Pontificate.

As to your having commanded me to go to the Island of Japan by the first
convenience, I have had no opportunity since I received your Commands, and so
am excused for not being gone; neither in truth can I embark here with any
safety, there being a thousand Turkish Ships, and not one Christian in the Port
of Matzua at this time. As to what is said of having any hopes of the reducing
of Ethiopia, I should quickly have such hopes, could we but have Five or Six
hundred Portugueses sent hither from the Indies, according to what was agreed
before I left Goa, upon the advice they had received there, of the obstinacy of
the King of Ethiopia, and which we have been now long expecting. Were this once
done, I should not only hope to see Ethiopia quickly reduced, but should be
infallibly certain of it: With which Troops we should not only be able to
convert all this Empire, but innumerable multitudes of Heathens also, into
whose Countries they might march from hence, without crossing any Sea: Which
Heathens being a simple sort of people, and not much addicted to Idolatry,
might be converted with great ease. We have been told that great numbers of
them have petitioned the King of Ethiopia to be made Christians, but have been
denied out of temporal respects, the Ethiopians reckoning that after they are
Christians it is not lawful to make them Slaves, as they do now in vast
numbers. The Heathens that desired this, were of Damut, a Country that abounds
with Pure Gold, and is said to reach to the King of Portugal 's Territories
which are about Mosambique and Sefalia. There are Heathens likewise in another
Country called Sinaxi, which is also full of Fine Gold, and who about three
years ago offered to a Prince who is nearly related to the King of Ethiopia, if
he would but desist from the War he had begun upon them, both to turn
Christians, and to pay him a Yearly Tribute. It is from among these Heathens,
but chiefly those of Dambut, that the Mohammedan Merchants, who are in great
numbers in these parts, do daily buy vast numbers of Slaves, which they sell to
the Moors and Turks: These Heathens would turn Christians with all their
hearts, for they cry and take on lamentably when they are carried to the Ships;
to which they are driven in such herds, that I am persuaded that the Turks have
had at least an Hundred thousand of them, who make them all Mahometans, and who
afterward are known by experience to become stout Soldiers, and to do the
Saracens great Service both by Sea and Land. All which mischiefs Five or Six
hundred Portuguese Soldiers, if we had them here, would remedy, and would do
extraordinary service to the state of India, and to all the Christians thereof;
for if the Turks should once make themselves Masters of Ethiopia, it would be
of fatal consequence to the Portuguese Interest in the Indies; there being
diverse things in this Country, that would be serviceable to them in reference
to their Galleys, as Slaves, Iron, and other Provisions.

The King that first began to persecute our Holy Faith, and all his Ministers,
are now in their Graves; and his Son, who now reigns, is not Absolute, the
Royal Authority having been much shaken and impaired of late, God in his
Justice having so ordered things, that he that refused to obey him, and submit
himself to the Roman Church, from which all that have separated themselves
obstinately have been destroyed, and have fallen under the yoke of Infidels,
should not be obeyed by his own Subjects. The people here are all in pieces,
and are so cowed by the devastations the Turks have made among them, that they
think of nothing, but how to live and keep their Estates. But tho the late King
and his Ministers were possessed with a strange Rage against the Catholic
Faith, and us Catholics, the common people and some others seemed to be well
enough disposed toward it. For our part we have not been sparing of our pains
to preach to them; and besides diverse Conferences and Disputations both private
and public that we have had with them, we have written diverse Treatises
against their Errors, and have got them translated into Habassin; so that all
the Doctrines of Faith have been sufficiently promulgated to them, if they
could but be persuaded to embrace them; not but that there are great numbers of
them who are satisfied of the truth of our Faith, but who either out of shame,
or fear of punishment, are afraid to profess it: For which reason there are
several that would be glad to see some Portuguese Troops here to defend them in
the Faith after they have professed it; out of which, by reason of their being
but weak therein, they are now easily terrified, as a great many have been; tho
there are some who notwithstanding all the contradiction they have met withal,
do continue steadfast therein.

It is a common Tradition here, That the Portugueses are to come among them to
make them of the same Faith with themselves; and they say further, and we
believe it to be true, That this distracted Empire will never be in peace or
any tolerable order, until they come; which though they should, and with an
intention of offering Violence, would give no offense to any body; not to
Catholics to be sure, there being no reason why they should be offended at it;
no nor the Habassins neither, for I am persuaded that if such a number of
Portuguese Troops were here, their name without striking a stroke would do the
work, so that they would look more like Friends than Enemies; and I am certain,
that if they had come when we expected them, this whole Empire had been in the
Obedience of the Roman Church before this time, and it will be the same thing
if they should come now.

Wherefore, most holy Father, since all these things do belong to your Office,
who are the Universal Pastor, feed these your sheep with wholesome food, and
provide a necessary remedy for them, by writing to the most Serene King of
Portugal for some Troops, and by acquainting his Ambassador at your Court, with
the necessity there is of sending them hither; for to tell your Holiness my
mind frankly, I am of opinion, That Ethiopia ought not to be deserted.

But after all, if there is no persuading the King of Portugal to send a body
of Soldiers hither, for which for the good of Ethiopia, let me beg it of your
Holiness a second time to write to him, he must then be desired to send a good
Fleet hither to carry off the Catholics; for should it be such a one as is
talked of, it would not be able to carry one of them to the Indies, the Turks
being very strong at present in Matzua and all these Seaports; and whatever is
done, let us not lose any of the Catholics that are here, by leaving them in
the hands of Heretics and Infidels; who after the Heads of their Families and
Priests, who are mortal as well as other men, are dead, will be in danger of
being lost.

Finally, I desire to be advised of what your Holiness would have done; and as
to what concerns my own Person, most holy Father, I am by God's Grace prepared
to Obey your Will, by either continuing where I am, or by going to Japan, or to
the Turks if your Holiness should Command me, or by laying down my Patriarchal
Dignity, to serve my Fathers the Jesuits, or your Holiness in your Kitchen, or
in any other post. And if it shall seem good to your Holiness, I do beg some
Indulgences of you for the remission of our Sins. Farewell great Father.

From Ethiopia the 15th. of June 1566. Andrew Patriarch of Ethiopia.

This Letter of the Patriarch's gives the Reader a clear view of the true
temper of the Roman Missionaries, and of the methods they are for making use of
in the Conversion of Heretical Kingdoms to the Roman Church; it discloseth
likewise the true secret of Bahurnagays's Rebellion, which was of such fatal
consequence to Ethiopia; it being said in this Letter, That the Coadjutor
before he left Goa, had a promise that a good Body of Portugueses should be
sent after him; as it is also, that if these Troops had arrived when they were
expected, which was when Bahurnagays was first in Arms, the Habassin Church had
been reduced to the Obedience of the Roman before the writing of that Letter.

Now what should it be that hindered the Portuguese Government, which still
pretended that the propagating of the Roman Faith, was its chief aim in all its
remote Conquests, and whose title to them all, was founded solely on that
pretense, from sending such a handful of Men, to do the Church so signal a
service as the Converting of another Europe to it?

It was not that they were fearful that the Number of Soldiers that was
desired, The reason why the Portugueses sent no Troops into Ethiopia, when so
strongly solicited to do it.
would not have been able to have done that great work, for that considering
what was done by Gama with a smaller number, and that it is not common with the
Portugueses to distrust their own strength in such cases; whatever was, this
could not be the cause of it; and if this was not, one may venture to say, it
was not that they reckoned it a scandalous thing to go about to Convert an
Heretical Kingdom by Dragoon Missionaries, that being a thing, as the Patriarch
truly observes in his Letter, That no true Roman Catholic could be offended at.

The true cause therefore of their denying so inconsiderable an aid to do so
great a work, though so vehemently solicited to do it, was, that though at
first they had promised themselves great matters from the reduction of Ethiopia
to the Obedience of the Roman Church, they found afterward that the doing of
it would be of little or no advantage to them, by reason of its lying quite out
of the way of their great Indian Trade, and its having no native Commodities to
countervail the great Charge, its remoteness, and the neighborhood of the
Turks, would necessarily put them too, to maintain an interest in it.

Neither were the Patriarch and Fathers such weak Men as not to know at what
their business stuck, who therefore took care in all their Letters to assure
the Government, that besides diverse other Commodities, there was abundance of
Fine Gold in some parts of Ethiopia; and that Damut, which might easily be
Converted by 600 Soldiers, and which was likewise full of Gold, did reach to
Mosambique and Sefala, the best Portuguese Plantation in the Indies; but the
Government, it seems, either did not believe these reports, or thought they
should Buy fine Gold there too dear to turn to any account.

So that the Spanish Minister had this among other Instances undoubtedly in his
eye, who told Philip the IVth. That it was a vain conceit the World had
entertained of the Zeal of the Portugueses upon the account of the Conversions
which had been made by them in the Indies; for it was Covetousness and not Zeal
that had engaged them to make all those Conquests; the Conversions that had
been made in those parts having been performed by the Divine Power, and the
Charity of a few particular Friars, the Crown and Government having had no
other aim therein, but the Robbing of Kingdoms and Cities; and there were still
the greatest Conversions where there was most to gratify their Covetousness;
but where there was nothing to be had, there the People were Obdurate and not
to be wrought upon. And so we see their Zeal expired quickly where it was not
animated by Covetousness; and how they who had nothing else to say, but Lord
open unto us, were not thought fit to enter into Heaven.

The Cardinal-Regent having prevailed with the Pope to recall the Patriarch, did
order Ruy Laurenco de Tavara, who went Viceroy to the Indies in the year 1567.
so soon as he arrived at Goa, to send some Ships to Ethiopia to fetch off the
Patriarch and the Fathers; but Tavara happening to die in the Voyage, those
Orders, whatever was the reason, were never executed; though if they had, so
soon as it was possible, the Ships would have come too late for the Patriarch,
who died at Fremona on the 9th. The Patriarch dies.
of July in the year 1567.

Thus ended the First great Habassin Mission, The unhappy issue of this Mission.
from which Ignatius had promised so much Honor to himself and his Order:
Which, as it was no happy thing for the Jesuits; so, excepting the Second
Mission, it was the worst thing that ever befell Ethiopia.

THE SECOND PART.
AT the time of the Patriarch's death, of the Five Jesuits that went with him
into Ethiopia, there were but Three left alive; they were Manuel Fernandez, the
most passionate Solicitor for Dragoons, who died at Fremona in the year 1583.
Antony Fernandez, who died at the same place 10 years after, and Francis Lopez,
who lived till the year 1597. after whose death there was not one Roman Priest
left alive in Ethiopia.

For Nine years after the Patriarch's decease, the Jesuits seemed to have given
the Habassin Mission quite over; none of that Order, that we read of, having,
during that time, attempted to go thither: But upon Philip the IId's. (who
pretended to a much greater Zeal than any of his Ancestors for the service of
the Roman Church) coming to the Crown of Portugal, they resumed the thoughts of
it again; and not knowing but that all the Fathers who were in Ethiopia might
be in the next world; that they might be found by Philip in possession of that
Mission, they sent Two Fathers thither in the Habit of Armenian Merchants,
hoping that under that disguise they might steal into it without being
discovered by the Turks, Two Jesuits are sent in a disguise to Ethiopia.
who having got all the Habassin Ports into their hands, were extremely
watchful to keep out Portugueses.

The Two Friars that were sent on this dangerous enterprise, were Antony de
Monserrato, and Peter Pays, who were both Spaniards; It being the Custom of the
Portuguese Superiors in the Indies, as has been observed before, when they have
any Foreigners under them, to be so kind to them, as to give them still the
most hazardous Posts: Which, by the way, is no great argument of the Friars
being always the most fond of the Missions in which their Lives are exposed to
the most danger, as in all their Histories they are still represented to be;
for if it were so, it is very strange that the Portugueses having their
Countrymen still the Superiors, should not have that Interest in them, as to
carry the most desirable Employments from Foreigners, and especially Spaniards,
of whose Honor they are naturally so jealous.

But however that were, in the year 1588. the Two Spaniards were sent from Goa
to Dio, where they waited some Months before any opportunity of a passage for
Ethiopia did offer; during which time they went but little abroad, and when
they did, it was always in a Turkish Habit; in which they had so disguised
themselves, that Monserrate was pelted with stones in the street by the Boys
for a Turk, and Father Peter had like to have been shot by a Sentinel for
walking too near the Ordnance. But at last a Mohammedan Pilot being spoke to by
the Governor of Mascate, whither the Fathers went from Dio, did undertake to
put them both ashore at the Port of Zeyla; whereupon they embarked on the 6th.
of December, and after a few days Sail meeting with a violent storm, They were
discovered and made Slaves in Arabia.
were driven ashore on the Coasts of Arabia, where being discovered to be
Christian Priests, they were both sent by the Governor of Defar to his Master
the King of Zeal, who keeps his Court in a City of Arabia Felix, called Tarim,
wherein they were both kept Slaves Seven years.

The Superiors at Goa having received advice of this, named one Abraham de
Georgys, a Maronite Jesuit, and James Gonsalves, A Maronite Jesuit is sent in
disguise to Ethiopia.
to go into Ethiopia; but Father Abraham when he came to Goa from Malabar,
instead of Father James, who was a Portuguese, had an Habassin Youth given him
for his Companion.

The Maronite and Habassin being arrived at Dio, found a Ship belonging to the
Baneans ready to set Sail for Matzua, whereon they embarked as Turks; and when
they landed at Matzua, were kindly received as true Musselmen by the Governor,
who himself was a Christian Renegado. These are the Inventions, as the Viceroy
Albuquerque told Father Abraham at Goa when he first saw him in his Turkish
Habit, wherewith the Jesuits seek to serve God, and to bring Souls to their
Creator.

The Governor not having the least suspicion of Father Abraham being a
Christian, and much less a Priest, gave him leave to go into Ethiopia at the
first word; but being told by the Skipper that brought him, He is discovered
and put to death for having professed himself a Mohammedan.
that he had some reason to think that he was a Portuguese Priest, he sent a
hue and cry after him, which having overtook him before he was got to Arkiko,
brought him back to Matzua; the Governor, when Abraham was brought before him,
being in a great rage at him for his having imposed upon him as he had done;
after he had given him a great many hard words, asked him, Whether he was a
Musselman or a Christian? Abraham not thinking fit to dissemble any longer,
told him boldly he was a Christian, Are you so, said the Governor, then by the
Great God if you do not turn Mohammedan immediately, you shall lose your head
for having pretended to be one: Abraham made answer, My Life, it is true, is in
your Power, but to make me turn Mohammedan is not, neither will I ever do it:
Whereupon the Governor, with a Renegado fury, commanded him to be tortured;
which being done, he ordered his head to be Chopped off; but without raising a
spring of fresh water, for that would have been a great benefit to the Island,
which is much incommoded for want of it; but instead thereof, a prodigious Fire
was seen for Forty Nights together over the place where his Body was Buried.

Gregory the XIIIth. having been informed of the great want the Portugueses
that were in Ethiopia were in of a Priest, did order one John Baptista, an
Italian, to be Consecrated a Bishop, The Pope sends an Italian Bishop to
Ethiopia.
with an intention of sending him to them. This John Baptista had been sent by
Gregory before, with Letters to Amba John, Patriarch of Alexandria, to persuade
him to submit himself to the Roman Church, as he was afterward by Sixtus the
Vth. to Gabriel, Patriarch of the said See, on the same errand; it is not said
whether Bishop Baptista returned to Rome with Gabriel's answer to Sixtus, or
having delivered his Letters at Cayr, and finding all the Avenues to Ethiopia
by Land stopped by the Turks, did go to Goa for a Passage; but certain it is
that he got thither, and that he had not been there long, before the Viceroy
Don Edward de Menezes embarked him upon a small Portuguese Vessel, which had
orders to put him ashore somewhere in Ethiopia; but the Ship he was upon
happening to touch at the Island of Camera, and it being discovered there that
Baptista was a Christian Bishop bound for Ethiopia, Who being discocovered was
Murdered by the Turks.
he was thereupon Murdered by the Turks. But though the Jesuits do not in any
of their Histories that I have seen, so much as mention this Bishop's Name, not
caring, it is like, that it should be known, that any that was not of their
Order was employed in this Mission; yet, I hope, his not having been a Jesuit,
nor sent by their Superiors, did no ways contribute to his end; his being sent
to Habassia at that time, The Archbishop of Goa sends one Sylva a Secular
Priest into Ethiopia.
and after such a manner, being a thing that does not look very well.

In the year 1597. Dom Alexo de Menezes, the most politic Prelate that ever
was in those parts, looking upon himself now there was no Patriarch of
Ethiopia, as the ordinary Prelate thereof, as he was Primate of the Indies, did
take the Habassin Affair into his own hands, and having cast about how to have
Intelligence from thence, and to supply the Portugueses that were there with a
Priest, he did at last fall upon the following expedient.

There was one Belchior de Sylva, a Converted Bramen, who was Vicar of the
Church of St. Ann in Goa; whom the Archbishop after he had determined to send
him into Ethiopia, ordered upon some Informations he pretended to have received
against him, to be thrown into Prison, threatening him with severe Censures if
what he was accused of should be proved; having at the same time so concerted
the matter with Sylva, that he was to break Jayl on a certain night, and come
to him in a disguise at a place called Bardez, which he was then going to
visit, being in the mean time to let his Hair and Beard grow, the better to
disguise himself. When the night agreed upon was come, Sylva having broke Jayl,
went directly to Bardez, where the Archbishop kept him private, and to blind
the matter the more, seemed to be very angry at his having made his escape, and
to use extraordinary diligence to catch him again.

Sylva having received his Instructions, Sylva under the disguise of a Banean
Sailor gets into Ethiopia.
and being put into a Turkish Habit with Pendants in his Ears, was sent
privately by the Archbishop to Dio; where he remained Incognito till a Ship
offered for Ethiopia, on board which he listed himself a Sailer; and during the
whole Voyage he behaved himself so among the Mariners as not to be in the least
suspected by any of them of being a Christian. The Ship being arrived at her
Port, Sylva the first time he went ashore, made the best of his way for
Ethiopia, and having got to Deboraa, was entertained there with great joy by
the Portugueses, who had been for some years without a Priest of their own
Religion.

The Jesuits, that nothing might seem to have been done toward the reduction
of Ethiopia without their having had some hand in it, will have the Archbishop
to have sent Sylva thither at their request: But this was not all that
Archbishop Menezes did in this matter; for having received advice of Sylva's
being arrived in Ethiopia, he thereupon writ a Letter, not only to the Roman
Catholics, but to the Abuna likewise, The Archbishop of Goa writes to the
Abuna to submit himself to the Pope after the example of the Patriarch of
Alexandria. The Alexandrian submission he refers to, was a mere trick.
exhorting him to submit himself and his Church to the Pope; and among other
Arguments he made use of to persuade him to such a submission, he sent him a
rich present, together with the solemn submission of the Alexandrian Patriarch
of himself and his whole Church to Pope Clement the VIIIth. as it is pompously
published by Baronius in an Appendix to the Sixth Tome of his Ecclesiastical
Annals; Conjuring him to follow the example of that great Prelate whom his
Church had so long owned for her Head.

But this Alexandrian submission, notwithstanding Baronius was in such haste to
make a flourish with it, that he clapped the History thereof to the end of the
Fifth Century, was a me^re imposture; for whereas it is said to have been made
by Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria, the Patriarch of Alexaandria 's Name at the
time when that submission is reported to have have been made, was not Gabriel,
but Mark. So little pains are the hungry Eastern Monks, who come to Rome with
their mock submissions, at, to make their Impostures look probable.

The Learned Father Simon speaking of Archbishop Menezes having made use of
this submission to persuade the Abuna of Ethiopia, after the example of his
Patriarch, to submit himself to the Pope, says, The Archbishop was not, it
seems, sensible that the Church of Rome had been imposed on in that matter, and
that Baronius was too credulous in publishing the acts of that submission under
the Name of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and of the Catholic Church.

And Thomas a Jesu, a Carmelite Friar, speaking of the same in his Sixth Book
de Conversione omnium Gentium procuranda, says, In the time of Clement the
VIIIth. a Fictitious Embassy of the Alexandrian Church, was brought to the
Roman Pontiff: Wherein Mark the Patriarch, and with him all the Provinces of
Egypt, and the parts adjoining to it, did acknowledge the Pope to be the Head
and Universal Pastor of the Church, as Baronius writes at large at the end of
his Sixth Tome; but the matter thereof coming afterward to be more diligently
looked into, it was found to be a lie, and the fiction of one Barton an
Impostor. And yet notwithstanding this discovery, the History of that
submission continues to vapor still in all the Editions of Baronius 's Annals
that have come out since.

The Archbishop sent the Abuna likewise a Confession of his own Faith, telling
him withal, That in case he would submit himself to the Pope, as he was in duty
bound, that affair would be managed much to his advantage by the Portugueses;
he writ also to Clement the VIIIth. desiring him to lay his Commands on the
Patriarch of Alexandria, who was now under his Obedience, to oblige the
Habassin Abuna to follow his Example: He writ also to Belchior da Sylva, to
send some Habassin Boys to Goa to be instructed in the Roman Faith and Rites.
And last of all, he writ to Philip the IId. for a yearly Pension for the
Portugueses that were in Ethiopia; of whom he obtained 1500 Cruzado's, which
were to be paid to them yearly out of the Royal Revenues of the Indies, to
which he himself added 300 Pardaos, and prevailed with the Misericordia at Goa
to give the same Sum: Of all which there is not one syllable to be met with in
any of the Jesuits Histories; whereas had this Archbishop been of their Order,
as he was of the Austin, the world would have had whole Volumes in Praise of
his great Zeal and Industry in this Affair.

The Jesuits being desirous to recover the Habassin Mission, which both the
Pope and the Archbishop seemed to have taken out of their hands, did in order
thereunto, labor hard to have a College for their Friars at Dio; and having
got some Benefactors to contribute toward the building and endowing thereof,
they sent Father Gasper Suares from Goa to Dio to begin the Work. But the
Baneans, The Jesuits erect a College at Dio.
of which Dio is full, knowing that the Jesuits, wherever they settled, did
turn Traders, did strongly oppose their having a College there; pretending,
That it would certainly ruin the Trade of the Port; by which Pretense, and
great Bribes, they so far influenced the Viceroy, that he put a full stop to
it; of which the Jesuits of Goa, Lisbon and Madrid, made such Tragical
Exclamations, that the King wrote a very angry Letter to the Viceroy about it,
Commanding him to shut his hands against the Bribes of the Baneans, and not to
be frighted from pious Works, by suggestions that they would tend to the ruin
of Trade, since the reason why he sent Viceroys into India, was not to increase
his Revenue, but to advance Christianity: The Viceroy and Baneans were so
mortified by this severe Letter, that they did not only give way to, but did
contribute largely toward the building of the said College, which by that
means was finished in a short time.

The King had writ likewise to the Viceroy, To furnish the Jesuits with six
Ships, to conveigh their Missionaries into Ethiopia; but they having but three
Friars to send thither, who were Father Peter, who had been ransomed a year or
two before; and Father Anthony de Angelis, a Neopolitan, and Father Anthony
Fernandes, a Portuguese; the Viceroy reckoning that two Ships were sufficient
to carry three Friars, and that six would not be enough to fight the Turks, if
they happened to meet with them, sent but two to them to Dio, where they were
now settled in their new College, one of which was forced back by a Storm to
Damon, the other getting to Dio, but much damaged both in her Hulk and Rigging.

Father Peter having, during his seven years Captivity in Arabia, made himself
a perfect Master of the Arabic Tongue, did converse much at Dio, where he
passed for an Armenian Christian with the Mahometans that came to trade there,
but chiefly with a Servant of the Bashaws of Suaqhem, whose name was Recuam
Aga, with whom he contracted an intimate familiarity. This Aga happening one
day in discourse to ask the Father, Why, after seven years captivity, he did
not think of returning home to his own Country, meaning Armenia; the Father
told him, That there was nothing that he was so desirous of as to see Armenia,
but that he was afraid to venture himself again in the Turkish Territories: Aga
thereupon did frankly undertake to put him in a way to get home with safety,
offering to carry him along with him to Matzua and Suaqhem, and from thence to
Cayr, from whence he promised to send him with a Pass to Jerusalem, from which
place he might return home without any danger. The Father having thanked Aga
for his kind offer, told him he would accept of it, provided he would give him
leave, when he was at Matzua, to make a step into Ethiopia, to negotiate a
little business he had to do there; desiring him withal not to let the Governor
of Dio know any thing of his design of returning home, for that he would
certainly stop him, if he came to hear of it. Aga, who did not know but that he
might have occasion to return to Dio again, and for that reason, being
unwilling to do any thing whereby he might disoblige the Governor, told the
Father, That though he should be very glad to serve him in taking him along
with him, yet unless he could obtain leave of the Governor to go, he must
pardon him for not doing it: The Father being well pleased with this scruple of
Aga's, did promise since he would not carry him without it, to try to obtain
leave of the Governor to go with him. And with such Engano's or Tricks, says
a Jesuit, Father Peter cheated the Devil.

The Father having communicated the whole Farce to the Governor, he was so
well pleased with it, that he helped to carry it on, by showing Aga
extraordinary Civilities for the kindness he intended to do to the good
Armenian.

On the 22d of March 1603. Aga and his Armenian set sail from Dio, and on the
26th of April they arrived safe at Matzua; where the Bashaw being in the
Country, the Father, upon Aga's recommendation, was treated very kindly by
Mustadem, the Lieutenant-Govournor, who at the first word granted him leave to
go for some time into Ethiopia to negotiate the business he pretended to have
there. Father Peter, notwithstanding his civil treatment, was in pain till he
was got from Matzua, and having notice of six Christians that were bound for
Ethiopia, he took the opportunity of their company, and having fixed his
Journey on the 5th of May, he went to take his leave of his Patron Aga, who
promised to wait two months for him at Matzua, by which time the Armenian
assured him he would be with him again.

In seven days the Father and his Company got to Deboran, where he was waited
on by Captain John Gabriel, Father Peter, a Spanish Jesuit, steals into
Ethiopia.
with several other Portugueses, who did all accompany him to Fremona, where
Father Sylva resided, and the Patriarch and most of his Companions had been
buried.

The first thing he did after his coming to Fremona, was to acquaint the
Emperor, whose name was Jacob, with his arrival, and to offer him his service;
the Emperor returned him a kind Answer, telling him, That after the Winter was
over, he should be glad to see him at his Court.

This Jacob was a Natural Son of the last Emperor Malac Sagued, Jacob the
Natural Son of Malac Sagued was then Emperor.
who having left no Male-Children by his Empress Mariam Cima, had named this
Jacob at his Death his Successor, in wrong to his Nephew Za Danguil, the Son of
his Brother Lepena Christo: For notwithstanding it is in the power of the
Habassin Emperor to name his Successor, he is by the Laws of the Land tied to
nominate a Male of the Royal Blood born in Wedlock.

Jacob was but an Infant when his Father died; which was perhaps the chief
reason why the Empress and Grandees of the Court were so zealous for his
nomination, hoping during his long Minority, to have the Government wholly in
their own hands. And so the first thing they did after the old Emperor's breath
was out of his body, was to secure Za Danguil, that he might give them no
molestation; which they reckoned they had done sufficiently, by making him a
close Prisoner in the Island of Deck, in the Lake of Dembea.

For Seven Years the Government was entirely in the hands of the Empress and
her Two Sons-in-law, Ras Athanateus, and Calfunde the Viceroy of Tigre, who had
been the chief Promoters of Jacob's Nomination to the Crown; and who having
tasted of the sweet of Sovereign Authority, were very unwilling to part with it
to Jacob, now he was of Age, according to the Custom of the Empire, to take it
upon himself; and to prevent that, they had given him an Education which they
reckoned would have rendered him both unfit to govern, and have disposed him to
have been satisfied with the easy and gaudy Title of Emperor, without troubling
himself with the exercise of its Authority. But they found themselves mistaken;
Jacob so soon as he was Fifteen, declaring, He was now of Age to govern both
Himself and the Empire; and that he would be no longer under Pupilage, nor be
kept a Minor all his days, out of gratitude to those who had helped him to the
Title of Emperor, but with a design of keeping the Sovereign Authority in
themselves.

The Empress and her two Sons resented this Treatment from a Creature of their
own making, so highly, that they resolved to try to unmake him again; and that
they might do it with the better grace, they pretended to be troubled in
Conscience for the Injury they had done to Za Danguil, in having persuaded the
late Emperor his Uncle to lay him aside, who was his true Heir: And having with
this and some other Popular Pretenses brought most of the Grandees of the Court
into a Conspiracy to depose Jacob, and advance Za Danguil to the Crown, they so
ordered the matter, Jacob is Deposed, and Za Danguil made Emperor.
that Za Danguil appeared in the Camp, and was proclaimed Emperor by them,
before Jacob ever so much as dreamt of their having any such design:
Nevertheless being advertised thereof by the Acclamations of the Camp, he put
himself on Horseback, not to fight, but to make his escape, which he did only
with eight of his Servants: But as he was posting toward the Mountains, the
Country rose upon him, and brought him back a Prisoner: The new Emperor,
though advised by several of his Counselors to cut off his Ears and Nose,
would not consent to it; the Habassins, as we shall see hereafter, until their
Princes came to be influenced by Jesuits, being very merciful in their
punishments; so he contented himself with sending him into the remote Province
of Narea, ordering the Governor thereof to keep him a close Prisoner.

This Revolution happening the Winter after Father Peter came to Fremona, he
continued there till the New Government was thoroughly settled; during which
time he employed himself in translating a Book of the Christian Doctrine,
composed by one Mark Jorge, a Jesuit; which is said to have been a Piece much
admired in Ethiopia.

The Emperor being naturally curious, The Emperor invites Father Peter to Court.
and hearing great things of Father Peter's Wisdom and Learning, from some of
the Grandees, who had a great mind to have him at Court, to cabal with him
about Portuguese Troops, he writ the following Letter to him, to invite him to
come to him.

THE Letter of the Emperor Asnaf Sagued comes to the Honorable Father and
Master of the Portugueses: How do you? Hear the good things God has done for
us: We were seven years a Prisoner, and did suffer innumerable Troubles; but
God taking compassion of our Misery, has delivered us out of Prison, and made
us the Head of All; according to that of David, The Stone which the Builders
rejected, is made the Head of the Corner. May the same God that has begun this
Work, bring it to a good Issue: Hear more; We are very desirous to see you
here, and would have you bring the Books of the Laws of the King of Portugal,
if you have them, along with you, for we should be glad to see them.

As the Father was preparing, upon the receipt of this Letter, to have gone to
the Court with the Viceroy of Tigre, he was stopped by the News of the Gauls
having invaded Ethiopia with Three Armies at once; having been encouraged to do
it by the unsettled Posture they expected to find the Affairs of that Empire
in, after so sudden a Revolution. But they quickly found themselves deceived;
for notwithstanding they defeated the Viceroy of Tigre, who had contrary to the
King's Order come to blows with them, their Two other Armies were both totally
routed by the Emperor.

The Emperor being returned victorious to his Camps, the Viceroy of Tigre sent
to Father Peter to come to him, that they might go to Court together; who
before he left Fremona, took care to pack the Secular Priest Belchior de Sylva
to the Indies; Father Peter sends the Secular Priest home before he went to
Court. Some Instances of the Jesuits sacrificing all other Interests to that of
their own Order.
which was somewhat strange, considering that when he was gone, there was not a
Roman Priest left at Fremona, to officiate to the Portugueses, the Father
himself being on the wing for the Court. But the truth of the matter is, the
Jesuits knowing that with the assistance of 4 or 500 Portugueses Soldiers, they
should be able at any time to reduce Ethiopia to the Roman Church, and not
despairing in some juncture or other of obtaining such a Succor, they studied
nothing so much as the engrossing the whole Honor of so great a reduction to
their own Order; and for that reason they did all they could to hinder
Foreigners from intruding themselves into it, which made Father Peter choose to
leave the Portugueses at Fremona without any Roman Priest, rather than with one
who was no Jesuit.

But however it were in those early days, Luis Sotelo, a Spanish Franciscan, in
his Letter written from Omura in Japan, where he was a Prisoner, to Pope Urban
the VIIIth. and James Collado, a Dominican of the same Nation, in a Memorial
presented by him in the year 1631. to the King of Spain, have proved beyond
contradiction, That the Souls of the Jesuits are wrapped up so entirely in
their own Order, that they will sacrifice all other Interests, that of
Converting Heretical and Infidel Kingdoms not excepted, to its Interest and
Honor. Which Letter and Memorial, tho extremely well worth the reading, being
too long to be here inserted, I shall only set down so much of them as is
sufficient to justify this Charge.

Sotelo about the middle of his Letter, delivers what follows:
IF a Friar of any other Order, do either out of a Zeal of Charity, or being
called by the Faithful, come into these Parts, to give Spiritual Consolation,
or to administer the Sacraments of the Church, after he has heard the
Confessions of great numbers of persons, who have not seen a Priest in Twenty
years, to Confess themselves to, and Confirmed such as were wavering in the
Faith, and restored such as had Apostatised from it; the Provincial of the
Jesuits shall no sooner hear thereof, let the Province be at never so great a
distance from him, and notwithstanding he had never set his foot in it before,
than he shall immediately fly thither to oppress so good a Minister: To whom he
will represent, That that Country being a Parish under his Jurisdiction, he
ought not to have administered the Sacraments therein; and upon pretense of the
Peoples being his Sheep, will hinder him from performing any more Religious
Offices to them. And if the Priest should happen to have the courage to ask
him, Why, if those People are under his care, he had abandoned them for so long
a time? And whether he thought that one who had so deserted his Flock, ought
any longer to be esteemed its Pastor? The Jesuit will answer him with, What
Authority have you to ask me any such question? Or to meddle with things that
do not belong to you? And having affirmed that he has a right to what he
pretends to, he will produce the Council of Trent, and read the Constitution to
him, Which prohibits Priests upon pain of Excommunication to administer the
Sacraments in any Parish without the Curate's leave: Neither will he content
himself with that, but will render that Constitution into Japan, and publish it
to all the People. And in case the said Father should reply, That the words of
the Council have no relation to the Countries of Infidels, or to places which
are newly Converted, or to Christians who are Novices in the Faith, but are to
be understood only of Countries which have been under Christian Princes for
diverse Ages, and of ancient Parishes where People have been long Christians;
The Jesuit shall, notwithstanding that, treat him publicly as a Transgressor
of the Council, and do all that is in his power to drive him away, forbidding
the People to take any notice of him, or to have any communication with him;
and if after that, any Christian should, either out of Compassion or Devotion,
receive him into his House, or should enter himself into the Brotherhood of the
Rosary, or of the Cord of St. Francis, he shall be reprimanded for it as
boisterously, and be treated by the Jesuit with as much contempt, as if he had
entirely renounced the Christian Faith.

And as to the places where the Jesuits are ordinarily resident, the Faithful
dare not so much as offer to entertain a Friar that is not of their Order, nor
have the least communication with such a one, unless it be privately; and if
the Jesuits come to hear of it, they will Chastise them severely for it; which
point they carry so far, as not to suffer any to be of their Congregations that
are of a Fraternity of any other Order. A few lines after Sotelo adds: If
Friars who are not of their Society do at any time address themselves to the
Governor, or Vicar General, to demand judicial Informations concerning the
Martyrdom of any of their Brethren, who have lost their lives for the Catholic
Faith, he will not so much as give them the hearing; whereas in the case of any
of their own Brethren, or of any that have been Baptized by them, extravagant
relations are presently exhibited, on purpose to set all the world a talking of
them.

If any thing that is great and illustrious is done by any other Friars, the
Jesuits do all that they can either totally to stifle it, or by artifices to
eclipse the glory and merit thereof; opposing all the undertakings of all other
Friars, and representing them as things of little or no benefit; either
accusing what they write of falsehood, or attributing it to envy, or some other
evil passion. And when they themselves have at any time been the cause of any
disasters, let it be never so notorious, they will throw the blame thereof off
their own Society, and attribute it to the indiscretion, imprudence, or bad
conduct of some other Friars.

Neither can they endure that any thing should be begun by People that are not
of their Society; and let it be never so visible, that their Order is not able
alone to support the burden of Converting a Country, yet there is no bringing
them to admit of others to help them to bear it. Finally he tells us, That at
the same time when the Jesuits did all they could to hinder all other Priests
and Friars from looking into Japan, that there were but Thirty of their Order
in it, which was a very small number for an Island consisting of Sixty six
Kingdoms, and more than Two hundred Princes.


I know, says Father Collado in the Preface of his Memorial, That the Jesuits
have in all these Kingdoms set themselves against all other Ecclesiastics,
having published things to the prejudice of all other Orders, and the Friars
thereof, that are notoriously false; and have unjustly endeavored to discredit
them, by charging them with things they were no ways guilty of, and for which
the Jesuits themselves only were to be blamed. And in the Body of the Memorial
he affirms, That at the same time when there were a Million of Christians
dispersed over Japan, and but 23 Jesuits who were Priests in it; that
notwithstanding that small number, they labored day and night both at Rome and
Madrid, to hinder any other Friars from being sent thither; and having advised
the settling of a free Trade betwixt Macao and the Philipins, as a thing of
great advantage to the Crown of Spain, he says, none but the Jesuits had ever
opposed it, and that they had done it for no other reason, but because there
are Friars of other Orders in the Philipins, among whom they would be afraid to
exercise Trade, and all the liberties thereof, as they did in China and Japan,
where there were no strange Friars to observe what they did.

Father Peter having Packed the Secular Priest away, went to wait on the
Viceroy, taking two Boys of Portuguese extraction along with him; who having
got a Roman Catechism, that had been translated into Habassin, perfectly by
heart, the Viceroy was so much delighted with their repeating it, that hearing
them do it one day, he said to those that stood next to him, Are you not amazed
to see in how short a time the Holy Father has taught these Children so many
Godly things? adding, but these wretched Monks of ours are just good for
nothing. The Father whenever they made any halt, went presently to visit the
Viceroy, who received him always with great Ceremony, obliging his own Monks
whenever the Father waited upon him, to withdraw. The Monks complained aloud of
this treatment of the Viceroy's, but they had their complaints, says a Jesuit,
and the Father his Honors; but without telling us what it was that made this
Ambitious Viceroy court the Father at such a high rate, unless we will believe
that it was only for his having taught two Boys to say their Catechism well.

The Emperor's Camp, or Court, for they are the same in Ethiopia, was at that
time at a place called Oudegere, upon the shore of the lake of Dembea, where
the Father was no sooner arrived, than the Viceroy procured him an audience;
and had possessed the Emperor with such a high conceit of his extraordinary
Abilities, that when the Father, after having kissed his hand, offered to have
retired, he commanded him to sit down by him, asking him several Questions
concerning the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Affairs of Europe, and the
Indies. To all which Questions, the Father returned such answers as he knew
would please the Emperor.

The Viceroy upon the Emperor's doing the Father such extraordinary Honors,
asked a Portuguese Captain that stood by him, what he thought the Monks, who
were so angry at the Civilities he had showed him on his Journey, would say now
of the greater honors done him by the Emperor himself?

The Emperor, after they had discoursed a considerable space of time together,
made a sign to the Father to withdraw, having first commanded his Officers to
entertain him splendidly, and according to his deserts; and having sent for him
betimes, the next morning, he entered into a long and serious dispute with him
concerning the Habassin and Roman Faith; which being ended, the Two Boys, upon
the Viceroy's having told the Emperor what an astonishing thing it was to hear
them, were called in to say their Catechism, which they did so much to the
satisfaction of the Emperor, that he asked the Father after they had done,
Whether he had not the Questions and Answers they had repeated to admiration,
in Writing: The Father having imagined, that the Emperor might be desirous to
see the Catechism, was provided with one, which he presented to him
immediately; and the Emperor having read it over before he stirred, extolled it
to the Skies as the Masterpiece of Ethiopia.

The Viceroy's Brother-in-Law, and Companion in the Government during Jacob's
Minority, Rays Athanates, Father Peter is highly Complemented by the King and
the whole Court.
entered likewise into a close Friendship with the Father, making his Court to
him, by sending every day almost for his Two Boys to come and say their
Catechism before him, and extolling their Performance and their Master's
dexterity beyond either the Emperor or the Viceroy: Now if Two Boys having been
taught to say their Catechism well, was the Foundation of the great favor the
Father was in at Court; it is the only instance in History perhaps of the
favor of a whole Court's having been obtained by so slight a business.

The Emperor having read the Catechism several times over, was so charmed with
it, that nothing would satisfy him, but the Father's Celebrating the Roman Mass
in his hearing; which he did, with all the Solemnity that a single Priest in
his circumstances could do it; and after Mass, gave him a Sermon of an hour
long; but happening as he was drawing to a conclusion, to say that he had a
great deal more to add, were it not that he was afraid of being tedious to his
Majesty; the Emperor sent him a Message to go on, for that he should take great
pleasure in hearing more from him: Whereupon the Father gave him half an hour
more. The Emperor was so well satisfied both with the Mass and the Sermon, that
he sent the Father his Dinner from his own Table; and having called him to him
in the Evening, he enquired of him, concerning the signification of every
particular Ceremony and Vestment that he had made use of in the Mass, appearing
to be extremely well pleased with all the Father's Answers: A little time after
the Empress Dowager, Mariam Zima, coming to Court, desired to hear the Father
say Mass and Preach; and having heard him, commended both the Mass and Sermon
extremely, declaring, That she could be content to live in a desert all her
days with so Godly a man as Father Peter: So that the Father had now got all
the Three late Governors at his Devotion; who, as is probable from the sequel
of the Story, had a great mind to be governing again, which they knew a few
Portuguese Troops would help them to with ease at any time.

As for the Emperor, he was either not sensible of this Plot, or else he
endeavored to countermine them, by caressing the Father as much as they could
do for their Lives: And so one day when the Father was to preach before him,
the Chair he used to sit in when he preached, happening to be out of the way,
the Emperor ordered his own Chair of State to be carried to him; and having
seated himself on the Ground, said, That it was not reasonable for the Preacher
and Master to stand, and the Hearer and Scholar to sit; and after having
thanked the Father for his good Discourse, he told him, That now his name was
high in Ethiopia, he would advise him as a friend, to be careful how be did any
thing whereby he might forfeit the opinion the world had of his Wisdom and
Holiness; For, said he, the flesh is always fighting against us, and overcomes
us many times before we are aware: for which good admonition the Father kissed
his hand, and having returned him many thanks, promised him always to remember
it.

The Emperor having sent for the Father one day, after having shut himself up
with him, and his Favorite Habitucum Laca Mariam, in his Closet, required him
to swear upon the Cross not to divulge the secret he was about to impart to
him; which the Father having done, he told him, That being now fully convinced
that the Pope was the Head and Universal Pastor of the Church, The Emperor
discovers his intention to Father Peter to turn Roman Catholic.
he was resolved to submit himself to him, and to desire him to send a
Patriarch with a competent number of Friars into Ethiopia to instruct his
People in the true Faith.

The Father, who was overjoyed to hear these words from the Emperor, threw
himself at his feet, wishing him a long life, that he might be able to
accomplish a design that would be so much to the benefit of his own Soul, and
the Souls of his People. In pursuance of which Resolution, the Emperor is said
to have prepared an Edict, prohibiting the observation of Saturday, and of
diverse other Habassin Rites, and to have been for running on so furiously, to
introduce Popery into his Empire, that Father Peter found himself obliged in
policy to give a check to his Zeal, by telling him, That it would be safer and
better to proceed more slowly, for fear of ruining his great design by
Precipitation. The Emperor asked him with heat, Why he was against his making
haste to introduce the true Faith into his Kingdom? What, did he think his
Subjects would murder him for attempting to do it? Adding, What if they
should, do you think I can lose my life for a beiter Cause? The Father made
answer, That though to lose his life on such an account, would be a great Mercy
and Honor to his Majesty; yet it would not be so, but an irreparable loss to
his Subjects in such a Juncture. Here Luca Mariam interposed, and told the
Emperor the Father loved him, and had given him good advice; but the Emperor
interrupting him, said, Come, come, we must lose no time, here are Letters I
have writ to the Pope and the King of Portugal concerning this Affair; and
having put them into the Father's hands, he desired him to translate them into
the Languages of those Courts; which Letters, tho they were never sent, the
Emperor having been slain in the Field before any opportunity offered, I shall
here set down.

THE Letters sent by Asnaf Segued, The Emperor's Letter to the Pope.
Empeperor of Ethiopia, do come to the much Honored Father and Humble Pastor
the Godly and Holy Clement, Pope of the Noble City of Rome. Peace be with your
Holiness, the Peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who did partake of Poverty with
the Poor, and of Honor with the Honorable; Preserve your Holinesse's Life and
Person as the apples of Eyes, Amen. How is your Holiness? Hear, Sir, what we
write.

After we had ascended the Throne, a certain Friar whose name is Peter Pays, of
the Society of Jesus, and who has the Yoke of the Law of Christ upon his neck,
did visit us; and has given us a ve^ryparticular account how your Holiness
labors even to the shedding of your blood to destroy Sin; may the Eternal God,
who has begun this work, bring it to an happy Issue: We being informed that
your Holiness does never walk out of the Paths of truth, we rejoiced much at
it; Praise be to God who has given us a good Pastor, who guards the folds with
his Holiness, and judges the poor with truth. He has likewise told us, that
you are always ready to assist Christians that are in necessity; and to afford
them Strength and Comfort, having learnt the Lesson of Saint Paul, who in his
Epistle to the Galatians says, While we have time, let us do good unto all,
but chiefly to those of the Household of Faith; for which reason your Holiness
assists Christian Kings chiefly, Wherefore since God has been pleased to
bestow on us the Empire of our Fathers, we are desirous of entering into a
strict Friendship with you, and with our Brother Philip King of Spain: And in
order to make it the closer and more lasting, we do wish that he would send his
Daughter hither to be married to our Son, and with her some Soldiers to help
us: For we have Infidel Enemies called Galls, who when we go against them, flee
before us; but so soon as our back is turned, are making inroads upon us again.
For the destruction of this Enemy it is that we desire to have some troops from
you, with Artificers of all Trades, and Fathers to instruct us, that we may be
of one heart and one body; and that the faith of Christ which is destroyed by
the hands of Infidels, may be established, and that there may be peace and love
among us.

This was formerly desired by our Ancestors, but it did not please God it
should be accomplished in their times; but the Turks, who then hindered it, may
now with ease be driven out of the Island of Matzua; for which reason we
entreat your Holiness to recommend this our request to our Brother, desiring
him to comply therewith, and to execute it speedily. We do not trouble your
Holiness with many words, being well assured of your readiness to grant what we
shall desire. See that the Fathers you send hither be learned and holy, that so
they may be able to instruct us in whatsoever is necessary to our Souls; I
shall add no more, a few words being enough to the wise.

The Emperor of Ethiopia's Letter to the King of Spain.
THE Letter writ by the Emperor Asnaf Segued, comes to our Brother Don Philip
King of the Kings of Spain. Peace be with your Majesty: The Peace and Love of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Sign of the Holy Cross, be always with your
Majesty. How is it with you? As I returned from the War to the place where I
was to reside all the Winter, a certain Father, whose Name is Peter Pays, of
whose Learning and Piety I had heard before, came to visit me; I was very glad
to hear the account he gave of the state of your Majesty's Health, and the
welfare of your Kingdoms, and did return Thanks to God for having given you
such Prosperity, that none of your Enemies are able to disturb it: May our Lord
increase the number of your Majesty's years, and bring what he has begun to an
happy issue.

Hear, Sir, your Majesty is not ignorant, that in the days of the Emperor Asnaf
Segued, when a certain Mohammedan, called Granhe, invaded Ethiopia, and
destroyed all our Churches, a Confederacy was concluded and confirmed by an
Oath betwixt our two Crowns; and that when my Ancestors sent to John King of
Portugal for some Succors, he sent us some which were Commanded by Don
Christopher de Gama, and which in conjunction with our Army, Conquered that
Mohammedan. The High and Mighty God, who exalts the humble, and throws down
the proud, being our helper: After which there was Peace and Quietness, the
force of the Mohammedan, who had not the fear of God before his Eyes, being
broken in pieces.

The Portugueses remained among us in great Honor, wanting for nothing till
the day of their Death, as their Posterity do not to this day.

Wherefore we being Christians no less than our Ancestors, and under the
obligation of the same Oath, we ought to have the same Enemies, that is, the
Galls, who destroy our Lands, and who when we go against them with our Armies,
do run away from us; but so soon as our back is turned, do, as Banditti, make
inroads into our Empire; for which reason we do desire your Majesty to send us
some Soldiers, and with them your Daughter to be Married to our Son, by which
means our Alliance will be firmer, and we shall be one Body, and of one Heart:
Our Son is Seven years Old, and your Daughter, as we are informed, is but
Three; so they shall be bred together with the milk of Wisdom, and shall be
taught the Holy Scriptures. I do also wish that your Majesty would with your
Troops send me Artificers of all Professions, and that you would do it
speedily; that so being united in the Faith of Christ, there may be Peace and
Love betwixt us; and that this Empire, which is the Land of our Lady, and of
Christ our Redeemer, may not be lost. The Mahometans are extremely Zealous for
their Sect, and do whenever there is occasion help one another; and ought not
your Majesty to do the same for your Faith, which is above all?

As to what we write to you concerning your sending your Daughter hither, you
are not to think that we desire her for any other end, than to establish an
Alliance between us, and that she may be a pledge of Peace for the future. May
God, who can do all things, fulfill our wishes.

Hear farther, Brother, in order to the establishment of our Affairs; Do you
send a Viceroy to the Island of Matzua, and my General shall be at the same
time at Arkiko on the Continent; by which means we shall bridle the Power of
the Turks; and being Masters of those parts, we will send our Merchants with
all sorts of Goods and Provisions into yoar Conquests, and will divide the
Customs between us; our Country is very Rich, and wants for nothing; and the
reason why we have not hitherto sent any Merchants to these parts with
Provisions of Honey, Gold, and Slaves, is because we have a mind to pinch the
Turks, for whom we have no kindness; but when your Viceroy is once come with
his Portugueses, we shall quickly send Merchants to them with all sorts of
Commodities. May our Lord God bring what we desire, and what is grateful to
your Majesty, to a happy issue, that so the Power of the Turk, which is a great
Stone of Scandal, may be utterly broke.


It does not appear by these Letters that the Emperor was in such a violent fit
of Zeal, when he wrote them, for a Roman Patriarch, and for submitting his
Church to the Pope immediately, as he is reported to have been in when he
delivered them to Father Peter; for though in both of them he writes very
earnestly to have the Infanta, and some Troops sent with all possible
expedition, he does not say one word of his Church's submission, or of a Roman
Patriarch: And in case Father Peter, when he acquainted the Emperor with the
Infanta's Age, did, to make his Court the better, feed him with hopes of
obtaining her for his black Prince, it was no more than what his Countreyman
Gundamore did here in England, either with the same Infanta, or her Sister, and
the restitution of the Palatinate.

It might have been expected, that Father Peter, now he had brought the Emperor
to be a Bigot for Popery, beyond what he desired, should have stuck close to
him till he had done the work, and that no small matter should have made him to
have left the Court, where his presence was so necessary; but whatever was the
true cause of it, the Father all of a sudden desires leave of the Emperor to go
to Nanina, a place two days journey from the Court, pretending to be called
thither by extraordinary business; and when the Emperor, Father Peter withdraws
from Court upon a slight pretense.
who was very unwilling to part with him, would needs know what this
extraordinary business was, he told him, There was a Portuguese or two Sick at
that place, and that he must needs go and hear their Confession before they
died: The Emperor finding the Father was not to be persuaded out of his
Journey, allowed him two Months, which he reckoned was time long enough for the
hearing of two Confessions, to be absent from Court. But the Father, who had
left the main body of the Portugueses not a year before without any Confessor,
to go to Court with the Viceroy of Tigre, had not left the Court above a Month,
when the true cause of his retiring broke out in a Rebellion, that was Headed
by his good Friend Raz Athanateus, the Habassin Earl of Warwick, who having
upon a disgust, taken the Crown off Jacob's Head and placed it on Za Danguil's,
was now for taking it from Za Danguil again, being displeased with him for
preferring Luca Mariam to him. A Rebellion breaks out presently after.
So hard a matter it is for Princes to please People, who either have, or think
they have been instrumental in helping them to their Crowns.

But whatever it was that had disposed the People for a new Revolution, whether
the Emperor's Maladministration of Affairs, or only an itch for the Festivity
of a new Acclamation, or a false compassion for the deposed Emperor; it is
certain Za Danguil was deserted by the main body both of the Grandees and
People; neither would they be satisfied unless they had Jacob restored to his
Throne again.

But Za Danguil being a Prince of great Courage, resolved they should not have
the Crown but with his Head; and having made up a small Army, marched directly
toward the Rebels, who, as he was informed, were encamped on the banks of the
Nile.

Nanina, where Father Peter continued still, confessing his two Portugueses,
happening to be in the Emperor's way as he marched, he sent for the Father to
come and speak with him; The Emperor marches against the Rebels.
and when he saw him, he cried out, Alas! your Reverence sees what they are
doing to me for endeavoring to show them the way of Truth, and because I will
not suffer the great to Oppress the small; What would you advise me to do in
this case? The Father is said to have been sorry to see him with so small an
Army; and having comforted him as well as he could, to have advised him to put
his trust in God, and to avoid coming to a Battle. It is said farther, that he
offered to have gone along with him; but having told him at the same time, That
his Spiritual Patients were not yet recovered, and that he was busy, repairing
the Chapel the Portugueses had in that Village; the Emperor bid him stay, and
go on with his good Works, but be sure to recommend him to God in his Prayers;
and after two Months were expired, not to fail, wherever he should be, to
come to him.

The Emperor hearing that Athanate^s, who must have left the Court much about
the same time with Father Peter, had not as yet joined his Troops with those of
Za Selasse; whose pretense for Rebelling was Religion being in danger;
endeavored to have got between them, so as to have hindered their conjunction;
but Athanateus having had notice of this design, defeated it, by passing the
River Nile sooner than otherwise he intended to have done: Upon this design
miscarrying, for want of having been kept secret, or by having been
communicated to some of Athanateus Friends that were about the Emperor; John
Gabriel, who commanded all the Portugueses that were in the Imperial Army,
advised the Emperor to delay coming to a Battle, and the rather because the
Heads of the Rebels were men of such different designs, that it was not likely
that they could hold long together; but the Emperor pushed on by his own
natural Courage, and provoked by the Insolency of the Rebels, was deaf to this
advice, and so did not only March directly toward them, but did offer them
Battle so soon as he came up with them; and notwithstanding Seventy of his best
Troopers, who, I doubt, were Portugueses, before a stroke was struck, went over
to the Enemy, that did not hinder the Emperor from engaging with them; the
fight was bloody for some time, the Victory continuing doubtful, till the
Emperor, as he was fighting in Person more like a Hero than a General, was
Slain; upon whose fall, The Emperor is Killed Fighting.
his Men reckoning that they had then nothing to Fight for, threw down their
Arms, and cried out for Quarter. Those of the Portuguese Blood on both sides,
are said to have done Miracles on this occasion; but we have had so many of
those Miracles in Gama's Expedition, that it would make the Reader sick to
trouble him with any more.

There are said to have been Two hundred of the Roman Catholic Profession in
the Two Armies; which if it was so, it ought to have obliged Father Peter to
have gone with the Emperor, to have Confessed those that were in his Army
before they engaged, rather than to have staid behind to do it to Two of that
Profession, and whom he had then been Confessing for above Six Weeks.

But as we know little of what the Jesuits did in Ethiopia, but from their own
reports; so if any thing be brought to light in the managing of these Missions
that does not make much for the honor of their Order, the discovery thereof
must be owing purely to the irresistible power of truth, which, though never so
artificially disguised, will still give some glimpses of it self.

The Emperor, though not actually reconciled to the Church of Rome when he was
slain, is said for his good inclinations to it, to have had a Miracle wrought
on his Body; it was not to bring him to life again; which the Emperor who took
it out of the Earth to give it a more honorable Enterment, would have been
very sorry should have been the effect of his Piety; but the Miracle was, That
his Body when taken out of the Ground Ten years after it had been lodged in it,
was found entire: A plain evidence, says a Jesuit, of the integrity of his
Faith, Death not being strong enough to exercise its tyranny on a body which
had been so incorrupt in all matters of Justice.

As to Father Peter's lamenting the Emperor's Death so much as he does in a
Letter, I do not take that to be any argument at all of his not having been
privy to the Conspiracy, but of the Conspirators having either carried things
farther than he would have had them, or perhaps than they themselves at first
intended, or of his having been too far engaged therein by his first Patron,
the Viceroy of Tigre, before he saw the Court, to go back with honor or safety.

Athanateus amidst the triumphs of his Victory, was not unmindful of his Friend
Father Peter, Father Peter repairs to the Victorious Rebels.
but writ to him to repair immediately to his Camp, promising to grant him
every thing that he should desire of him: The Father, his two Spiritual
Patients being either Dead or quite Recovered by this time, accepted readily of
the invitation, and being come to Athanateus's Camp, was received by him with
extraordinary Kindness and Respect.

But the Father after he had been some time among the Rebels, finding their
Heads strangely divided how they should dispose of the Crown now they had it in
their hands, Finding them divided, he retires, to wait to see where the Crown
would fix.
some of them being for restoring it to Jacob, and others for giving it to
Suseneus, a Bastard Son of Faciladas, the Third Son of the Emperor David; he
judged it his safest course to retire to Fremona, there to wait till he saw
where the Crown would fix; and having received advice of the arrival of some
Jesuits at Fremona, that furnished him with a fair pretense for leaving
Athanateus to go thither, to learn what news they brought from the Indies: And
having got Athanateus's promise, That the Portugueses who were in the Emperor's
Service should not be punished with the loss of their Estates, which they were
reckoned to have forfeited, he took his leave of him for some time.

The Father when he came to Fremona, found the Two Jesuits there, who were to
have come along with him from Dio; and within a few days after, Two Fathers
more came to him, who were Father Lawrence an Italian, and Father Luis a
Portuguese; so that the Jesuits were now as strong as ever in Ethiopia, only
they wanted a Patriarch.

Father Peter, during this his retirement, is said to have taken a great deal
of pains to little purpose, with an Habassin Monk to convert him to the Roman
Church; but what the Father could not do, was done one Night by a dream the
Monk had; which was, That he should certainly be damned if he did not go
presently and confess himself to the Father: Whom we shall leave confessing his
dreaming Convert, and return to see what the Rebels are doing.

The Grandees, The Grandees are divided, so me being for restoring Jacob,
others for Crowning Suseneus, and some for themselves.
tho they all agreed to pull down the late Emperor, yet when they came to fill
the Throne again, fell all in pieces, some being for restoring Jacob, and
others for proclaiming Suseneus, without so much as once mentioning the Son of
the late Emperor, being afraid, it is like, to put the Son in the Throne they
had dragged the Father out of.

This Suseneus, as has been observed, was a natural Son of Faciladas, the
Viceroy of Gojam, the Third Son of the Emperor David. He had been most of his
time in Arms, not against the Emperors, but their Ministers, who he pretended
had unjustly deprived him of the Lands that were left him by his Father; by
which course of life he was become the best Captain, and had got a small body
of the best Disciplined men in Ethiopia under his Command.

Upon the present Vacancy of the Throne, Suseneus proclaims himself Emperor.
Suseneus, looking upon his own title to it to be the same with that of
Jacob's, who was a bastard no less than he, sends his Confident Bella Christos,
to Rez Athanateus, to acquaint him with his intention of pretending to the
Crown, and to try if he could persuade him to declare for him, making vast
promises of what he would do for him if he would help him to it.

Athanateus, who upon some heats which had happened between them, had left Za
Selasse, who was altogether for restoring Jacob, received Suseneus's Message
but coldly, which makes it probable that he was for setting up himself, being
encouraged to do it by some promises that had been made him of Portuguese
Succors; but Suseneus apprehending that it would be so, followed the Messenger
he sent to Athanateus, in Person with his Army; and being come within a days
March of him, sent him word, that if he did not declare for him presently, he
would visit him next day, and did not doubt but to give him cause to repent of
his Irresolution. Athanateus being sensible that he could neither avoid coming
to blows with Suseneus, nor was strong enough to deal with him, submitted and
joined with him in proclaiming him Emperor: Upon which reinforcement, Suseneus
dispatched a Courier to Za Selasse, and his Confederates, to acquaint them with
his being now proclaimed Emperor of Ethiopia, commanding them upon their
Allegiance, and as they loved themselves and their Country, to lay down their
Arms, and submit themselves peaceably to him.

Za Selasse, who was a turbulent man, and cared for no Emperor that was not of
his own making, nor for them long neither, was much surprised at this brisk
Message; and having called a Council of War, to consider what was best to be
done in this juncture, it was unanimously agreed that they should send Suseneus
back word, that they had sent for the Emperor Jacob, and were every day
expecting him, to resume the Crown he had been so unjustly deprived of.
Suseneus, tho much troubled at this answer, sent them a Second Message
immediately, to acquaint them, That since God had been pleased to bestow the
Crown upon him, he was resolved never to part with it, but with his life,
neither to Jacob, nor to his Father Malac Sagued, if he should rise from the
Dead and pretend to it.

Za Selasse, detaining this Second Messenger Prisoner, went himself with his
Army to return an answer to Suseneus; who having received advice of his
advancing toward him, and knowing himself not to be strong enough to give him
Battle, retreated to the Mountains of Amara, leaving Athanateus to shift for
himself; and to make the best terms he could with the Confederates; who upon
his having pleaded, that he was constrained much against his will to give his
consent to Suseneus being proclaimed Emperor, was not only pardoned by them,
but was restored to his former Post in their Army; Upon Jacob's delaying to
come to the Army, he is chose Emperor by them.
which having waited some Months, and no Jacob appearing among them, the
Soldiers began to Mutiny, telling their Officers plainly, That they would wait
no longer for a Milksop, who had neither the wit to keep a Crown when he had
it, nor the courage to come to have it restored to him again. Za Selasse, not
knowing what to say for Jacob's not having come all that time, and fearing lest
the Soldiers and Officers might declare Suseneus Emperor without him, resolved
to be beforehand with them, and to have the thanks of doing it himself: And
accordingly he dispatched a Courier immediately to Suseneus, to invite him to
come and take the Empire upon him, promising to maintain him in the possession
thereof with the last drop of his blood. Suseneus, tho overjoyed at the News,
did not care to trust his person with the Army, without some farther assurance
of their good intentions, than Za Selasse's word; And for his farther
satisfaction in that matter, he sent an eminent Monk to the Army, with a
Commission to administer an Oath of Allegiance to them; and according to the
custom of Ethiopia, to Excommunicate all that should hereafter withdraw
themselves from his Obedience.

The whole Army having taken the Oath, A Message is sent to him by the Army.
the Monk after having pronounced an Excommunication upon it, returned to
Suseneus with the good news of his being unanimously Sworn Emperor with all the
usual Solemnities; and with the Monk there went Ten of the chief Officers from
the Army, to invite the Emperor to make all the haste he could to come to them.
The Ten Commissioners from the Army found Suseneus advanced to a place called
Begameder, where they delivered their Message to him, with this assurance, That
the Army now it had placed the Crown on his head, would maintain it there,
against all pretenders whatsoever, particularly Jacob.

But while the Commissioners were giving Suseneus these assurances of the good
Affection and Fidelity of the Army, The Army upon receiving a Letter from
Jaceb, changes its mind, and declare for him.
Za Selasse received a Letter from Jacob, acquainting him with his being come
as far as Dembea, and desiring him to March the Army that way to meet him; Za
Selasse was put into a great plunge by this Letter, not knowing what he had
best to do, whether continue firm to Suseneus, to whom he had so lately taken
an Oath of Allegiance, or to follow his inclinations in declaring for Jacob;
and having called all his Confidents together, and laid the whole matter before
them, they came to a resolution to declare themselves for Jacob, and did so,
commanding him to be proclaimed Emperor thorough the Army, and the Army to
march to meet him: The Officers and Soldiers, who had scarce done Swearing to
Suseneus, were no less than Selasse for laying him aside, and adhering to
Jacob, now they heard he was coming to them, as their rightful and undoubted
Emperor. Za Selasse having commanded the Army to March, sent a Courier in great
haste to the Commissiomers that were with Suseneus, to acquaint them with the
Army's having declared for Jacob: Upon which notice, Eight of them stole from
Begameder; but the other two being stopped, paid for all, being put to Death
publicly as Traitors.

Suseneus not finding himself strong enough to fight Selasse, retreated upon
this News to his former Fastness, not despairing but that ere long he might be
in a capacity of chastising those that had betrayed him thus.

Jacob was met by the Army near the Lake of Dembea, Jacob comes to the Army.
which together with the whole Country strived to atone for their former ill
usage of him by the extravagancy of their Joy, and Acclamations upon his
resuming the Crown. But among all the Grandees, Raz Athanateus, his old
Governor, was the most graciously received by him, being put immediately into
places of the greatest Trust and Honor about him; Who, as he was one day
discoursing with the Emperor, took occasion to recommend Father Peter to him,
as a Person of extraordinary Abilities; and who, if he would employ him, was
capable of doing him great Service; acquainting him likewise with Za Danguil's
having a little before his Death writ Letters to the Pope and King of Spain for
some Portuguese succors.

The Emperor upon Athanateus having recommended Father Peter to him so highly,
sent a Courier to Fremona, to invite him to Court. The Father taking two
Jesuits more with him, repaired thither immediately, and was very graciously
received by the Empress Mariam Cima, who was now likewise in great power again;
as he was by the Emperor also when he returned to the Camp, which he had been
absent from for some weeks.

The Emperor is said to have had several Conferences with the Fathers about
Religion; and to have been persuaded by them into the belief of the Roman
Church being the Head and Mistress of all other Churches; promising when he
returned from an Expedition he was then going upon, to submit himself to her;
and as an earnest of his Affections for the Portugueses, he bestowed better
Lands upon them than those they had before.

Jacob, Jacob makes Suseneus great offers, provided he would give over
pretending to the Crown.
being sensible of the sickleness of the Affections of his people, and of the
greatness of Suseneus 's Spirit, who still continued to look upon himself, and
act as Emperor, made him very honorable Propositions, upon condition that he
would give over pretending to the Crown; and would promise to live quietly as
became a good Subject; offering him by the Mediation of his Mother, the
Viceroyship of the Kingdoms of Amara, Olear, and Xoa; together with all the
Lands that his Father had dyed possessed of, which was all that he had
pretended to in the former Reigns.

But Suseneus having wore the Crown, found such charms in it, Suseneus will
have the Crown or nothing.
that nothing under it could now satisfy him; so his answer to Jacob's
Proposition was, That since it was God and not men that had bestowed the Crown
upon him, he only that gave it should take it from him; being resolved, so long
as he had a head to wear it, to keep it on it. Jacob finding by this bold
answer, that his Controversy with Suseneus must be decided by the Sword, and
not by Treaty, Marched against him with a great Army; but Suseneus hearing of
his advancing toward him with a power much Superior to his, both in Number and
Strength, retired again to the Mountains, where he knew there was no attacking
him, but upon such disadvantages, as would make their Forces to be equal.

Jacob being informed thereof, divided his Army, in order to cut Suseneus off
from all Communication with the low Countries from whence he was to be supplied
with all necessary Provisions; Jacob marches toward Suseneus.
hoping by that means either to starve him, or bring down his stomach. But
Suseneus finding that there was no remedy, but that he must either venture out,
and fight, or starve among the Mountains (to treat of submitting being a thing
he would never once suffer to enter into his thoughts) he resolved on the
former; and being advised of Za Selasse being posted with half of the Army near
Montadefer, he sallied out of his Fastnesses upon him, and like another
Scanderbeg, cut most of his troops in pieces, as they lay dispersed in their
Quarters; Za Selasse himself having narrowly escaped falling into his hands;
who having carried the bad News of his own defeat to the Empeperor, was so
coldly entertained by him, that he resolved to desert him, and go over to
Suseneus, as a person on whom he thought Providence would one day or other
certainly devolve the Crown. And in pursuance of this resolution, he dispatched
a Courier privately to Suseneus, with the terms whereon he was ready to declare
for him, and assist him in his pretentions to the Empire to the utmost of his
power. Suseneus was too sensible of how great advantage it would be to him, to
gain such a popular man as Selasse to his party, to deny him any thing that he
desired; and so notwithstanding his terms were extravagantly high, he granted
them all without making any words about them, knowing that whenever he should
come to be possessed of the Empire, Selasses's turbulent Spirit would
undoubtedly furnish him with pretenses to justify his not making good his
promises to him, in any particular that should not be for his honor or safety
to grant to him.

Za Selasses's Courier being returned to him with a full grant of all that he
had desired of Suseneus, and that not only under his own hand, Jacob's General
goes over to Suseneus.
but confirmed with the solemnity of an Oath, he withdrew himself privately
from the Emperor's Camp, and having got into the Kingdom of Gojam, of which he
had been made Viceroy a little before by Jacob, he there in a short time got
together a considerable body of Men, with which he Marched and joined Suseneus,
who received him with all possible demonstrations of joy and affection, as one
sent from Heaven to help him to the Empire, which he had set his heart so much
upon, that he did not care to outlive the hopes of attaining it.

Suseneus judging himself, with this Reinforcement, strong enough to fight
Jacob, Marched out of the Mountains to meet him, intending to decide their
Quarrel by a pitched Battle; but when he came near Jacob's Camp, finding him
much stronger than he thought he had been, he changed his measures, resolving
to act only upon the defense.

But Jacob having now got his Enemy out of his Fastnesses, and knowing himself
to be much superior to him in number, for he is said to have had Thirty to One,
determined to fall upon him in his Camp, and having got between him and the
Mountains, he commanded the Signal for a general Assault to be given; which
being observed by Suseneus, he called all his Officers together, and told them,
That since it was not now possible for them to avoid a Battle, they must either
resolve to make themselves Lords and Princes by fighting manfully, or be
content to be Slaves so long as they lived; That for his part he was resolved
either to Conquer, or not to survive the Battle, desiring them to Fight no
longer than they saw him facing the Enemy: That if they would Sally out of
their Trenches and fall upon the Enemy, which he took to be the best course, it
being what the Enemy did not expect, he would lead them on in Person. The
Officers and Soldiers being strangely animated by this brisk Speech, gave a
shout, Jacob and Suseneus come to a Battle.
and said, They were ready to follow him wheresoever he should lead them, or to
go wheresoever he would Command them. Suseneus glad to see his men in such a
heat, did not give them time to cool, but marched, or rather rushed like a
torrent upon the Enemy, disordering them so by the violence of the first shock
he gave them, that they dispersed immediately, so that it was much more like a
Slaughter than a Fight, the Conqueror having lost but Three Men in the Action;
for wherever Suseneus appeared, the Enemy, according as his Historian Timo
reports, fell before him as so many dry leaves off a fig tree before the wind,
or like a swarm of Locusts when they fall into the Sea.

Jacob not caring, it is like, Jacob is Killed fighting.
to live to be Deposed a second time, was killed fighting, as was also the
Abuna, whom Jacob had carried with him to fulminate his Excommunications
against his Enemies.

Raz Athanateus, who had stuck to Jacob to the last, having made his escape,
shut himself into the Monastery of Dina, where he continued till he had
obtained his Pardon, which was procured by the New Emperor's Brother, Raz Sela
Christos, the Hero, as we shall see hereafter, of the Jesuits Histories.

Suseneus, whom hereafter we are to call Seltem Saged, having Pardoned all that
were in Arms against him, excepting the Mohammedan, Mahurdin, who had killed the
Emperor Za Danguil with his own hand, had all the Grandees instantly at his
feet, and the acclamations of the common People as loud as his Predecessor.

The Fathers, during all the time of this broyl, kept close at Fremona,
expecting to see to whom the Crown would fall at last; and having received
certain advice of Seltem Saged's great Success, and of his being proclaimed
Emperor every where, they sent two of their number to wait upon him, and
Congratulate him upon his late Victory; Father Peter, who had been so very
intimate with Jacob, not being looked upon as so fit a Person for to carry this
Complement.

The Two Fathers, Two Fathers are sent from Fremona to Congratulate Suseneus,
who took the Name of Seltem Saged.
whose Names were Lawrence Romano, and Antony Fernandez, were graciously
received by the Emperor, who to do them the greater Honor commanded his
Purveyor to send their Supper to them; and was afterward so mindful of them,
as to ask him whether he had sent them any Wine; and being told, that by reason
of the Wines being distributed among the Nobles before he was ordered to send
them any thing, he had not; the Emperor was very angry, asking him, How he
durst be guilty of such an Error? commanding him to go presently and carry his
own portion of Wine to them, saying, I will drink Water rather than they shall.
When the Fathers judged it proper, they went to wait upon the Emperor a second
time; who after some Complements, asked them, Where they resided? And being
told by them, That they had no certain Habitation in Habassia; He thereupon
appointed them a Residence in a place near the Lake of Dembea: The Fathers
having thanked him for his kind offer, told him, That they would be better
satisfied if he would be pleased to order their former Residence at Gorgora,
which had been taken from them after they had built a Church there, to be
restored to them again; which he ordered to be done presently, commanding them
to write to Father Peter, The Emperor sends to Father Peter to come to him.
of whom he said he had heard great things, to come to him; but not being
satisfied with having bid them do it, he sent an express to him himself, to
come to Court immediately: The Father when he came was most graciously received
by the Emperor; who every time the Father waited upon him, which he did daily,
entered into a discourse with him about Religion.

Father Tellez, though he would not take upon him to decide who had the best
Title to the Crown, Jacob or Suseneus, sets down what was to be said on both
sides: Jacob, says he, was undoubtedly nighest to the Crown in the Royal Line,
in being the Son of Malac Saged, who was Emperor; he had besides been Emperor
himself for Seven years, and that with the Approbation of the People, who had
also restored him after he had been Deposed for some time; neither was his
being a Bastard any bar to him, since according to the Natural and Civil Law, a
Bastard may succeed his Father, as John the First of Portugal did his Fathor
Don Peter; besides, Suseneus was a Bastard no less than Jacob. On the other
side, says Tellez, it may be alleged, That Jacob having been deposed to make
room for Za Danguil, who was both the true Heir, and was chosen by the Grandees
and People, upon Danguil 's death the Throne became void, and the Election of
an Emperor out of the Royal Family, devolved to the Commonwealth; whereupon
Suseneus, who was the Grandson of an Infant, was chosen Emperor by the Army,
upon Jacob 's having delayed coming to them: Concluding, That whatever Princes
Titles or Pretenses in such cases may be in Speculation, according to the
Practice of the World, he has the best Title that ^^s the longest Sword. But to
return to the Fathers, who having staid at Court till Winter, obtained leave to
go to Gorgora to fix a Residence there; but they had not been gone a Month,
before the Emperor writ to them to come to Court again, declaring that he could
not be without their Company any longer: The Fathers obeyed the summons, and
repaired to Coga, a place near the Lake of Dembea, where the Emperor at that
time had his Camp. They were no sooner arrived, but the Emperor gave them an
Audience, and after that was over, ordered them to Dine with him, that is, in
the same Room, though not at the same Table.

The Portugueses give a tedious account of the particulars of this
Entertainment; the main of which are, That the Emperor does not feed himself,
but has his Meat put into his Mouth by his Pages; that his Diet was plain, and
without any thing of Cookery; and that he had neither Knife, Spoon,
Table-Cloth, nor Napkin, and had Bread for his Trencher; and never Drank till
he had done Eating.

Father Peter and his Companions never missed the Emperor's Levee, the Emperor
taking great delight to discourse with them about Religion, and the difference
that is between the Habassin and Roman Churches; which Conferences having
continued for some time, The Emperor offers to write to the King of Portugal
and the Pope, and is encouraged by Father Peter to do it.
the Emperor sent one day to Father Peter to come to him alone; and being come
he told him, That nowithstanding he was convinced that he ought to submit
himself and his Empire to the Pope, yet it would not be safe for him to attempt
it, before he had some assurance that the King of Portugal would assist him
against those who would oppose him in doing of it; That he intended therefore
to write a Letter to the Pope, and another to the King about it. The Father
having extolled his good intentions, encouraged him to write those Letters,
assuring him of as good an Answer to them as he could desire.

The Emperor Seltem Saged's Letter to the Pope.
THE Letter of the Emperor of Ethiopia, The Emperor's Letter to the Pope.
Malac Eguet, comes to the holy Pope of Rome, with the Peace of our Lord
Christ, who loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his blood, and has made
us a Kingdom and a Priesthood to God the Father: May this Peace be always with
your Holiness, and the Catholic Church of Christ. Amen.

We have for a long time had a great affection for the Christians of your
parts, upon the account of the benefits this Empire received from them when it
was formerly rescued by the Portugueses out of the hands of Mahometans, and
restored by them to its ancient estate and quiet; most of whose Race died in
our Father's Reign, who was willing they should enjoy what his Ancestors had
given them; whereupon so soon as, through God's Grace, I took the Government of
the Empire upon me, I determined to renew our Alliance with the Faithful People
of Christ, in order to remedy the manifest distractions our Empire of late
years has been put into by the Mahometans; for notwithstanding we have subdued
most of our Domestic Enemies, we have Enemies still that are much more
Powerful, that is, the Infidel Gauls, who have Conquered a great part of our
Empire, and destroyed many of our Churches, and which is worst of all, are
daily Invading us, and exercising unheard of Cruelties on Old Men, Widows, and
Children, whom we are not able to protect, without being assisted by our
Brother the Emperor of Portugal; We do therefore implore his aid, as our
Ancestors did that of his Predecessors formerly; and that there may be no
failure, we resolved to entreat your Holiness, who is the Father and Pastor of
all faithful Christians, to write to our Brother, to grant us what we desire of
him, before the Gauls grow stronger upon us.

As to the landing of the Succors he shall send, it will be done without any
danger, they that are the Masters of our Coast, being at this time very weak at
Sea; so being assured that your Holiness will assist us according to our
necessities, we will trouble you with no more words, but shall refer the
relation of the state of our Empire, and of the kindness wherewith we Treat
those of the Portuguese race, and of the care we take of the Fathers and their
Churches, to Father Peter Pays, to whom I have recommended the doing of it; and
to whose account I desire you to give the same credit as you do to this Letter.
We conclude, praying that our Lord Christ would preserve your Holiness for many
Years for the good of the Catholic Church.

Written in Ethiopia on the 14th of October, 1607.

The Emperor's Letter to the King of Spain.
THE Letter sent by the Emperor Malac Eguet, His Letters to the King of Spain.
comes to the Emperor of Spain, the Holy Land of St. Peter, the Prince of the
Doctors and of the Catholic Church of our Lord, of which the Apostle St. Paul
said, I have betrothed thee to one man, to present thee a chaste Virgin to
Christ, To whom be glory; and in imitation of the most pure Messenger St.
Gabriel, who saluting our Lady the Virgin, said, The Lord save thee; and of
Christ our Lord, who on the Evening of the Lord's Day after his Resurrection,
said to his Apostles, being assembled together, Peace be among you; and as St.
Paul writes in all his Epistles, The Peace of our Lord be with your Majesty,
our Brother in the Faith, that was preached by St. Peter, at the time when our
Lord Christ commanded his Apostles to go all over the world, and preach the
Gospel to all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. How is your Majesty, and how is your Empire? we are
in health thorough the Intercession of St. Peter, your and our Master. May
Christ our Lord, who is the beginning and end of all things, carry on that
Amity and Friendship which he has begun between us.

The principal cause of my writing to your Majesty at this time, is to renew
the Familiarity and Correspondence which was between our Ancestors; which
Friendship, together with the Adoption of the Holy Spirit, has much enobled us.
Wherefore we desire your Majesty, to send us some strong and stout Soldiers, to
help us to beat the Enemy out of our Ports; your Troops when they arrive will
find us provided with Arms, and all other necessary Provisions of War, and in a
readiness to assist them to the utmost: It being much fitter that those Ports
should be in your Majesty's hands, than in the hands of the greatest Enemies of
our holy Faith; your Majesty's Ancestors sent an Army of Gallant men into
Ethiopia at a time when the Enemy was ready to have destroyed our Faith, and
Empire. We might destroy all our Enemies with great ease, if we were assisted
by the powerful Kings that profess the Gospel; and who do comfort our hearts
with the Memory of heavenly things, we being all Sons of Heaven, as St. John
witnesses, saying, What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the
Spirit is Spirit. Furthermore we are at war with another Enemy, who are called
Gauls, and who do give us much trouble: Wherefore we beseech your Majesty to
send us some stout Troops, and such as are Zealous for our holy Apostolical
Faith, and that with all possible Expedition: We on our part have for some time
been ready to receive them; and if they were once come, it will quickly appear,
that all that we design is feasible. For why, since Christ our Lord is our
Common Head, and we are all his Members, and the Heavenly Father has begot us
all in one Womb of Baptism, and that not with corruptible seed, should we not
be all tied in one chain of love with one Soul and one Body.

If these Letters were writ by the Habassin Emperor, which I do very much
doubt, they plainly discover that the Fathers chief Argument to persuade him to
submit himself to the Pope, was the promise of Portuguese Troops; but the
reason why I suspect these Letters not to have been writ by the Emperor, but by
some Missionary in the Indies, and who had never so much as been in Ethiopia,
are, 1. That Seltam Saged, or Suseneus 's Father, was never Emperor, as he is
said in these Letters to have been. 2. Guerreiro, in his relation of Ethiopia,
printed at Lisbon in the Year 1611, sets them down under the name of the
Emperor Jacob, These Letters were probably forged by some Missionary.
or Malasequet. 3. Their Phraseology, excepting an affected sprinkling here and
there of uncouth Phrases, as also their Complements are so much Spanish, that
an Habassin has not less of the air of a Spaniard, than they have of the
Letters that were certainly known to have been writ by some of those Emperors.
Lastly, Pereira tells us, That the Habassin Emperors from the time that the
remains of Gama 's Troops went over to the Turks, and assisted them against
Ademas, dreaded nothing so much, as the coming of Portuguese Soldiers from the
Indies; but whatever the Emperors did, there being nothing that the Jesuits
desired so earnestly, it is to be feared, that they made bold with the
Emperor's name in the soliciting of them.

But there are more Letters behind, which whether genuine or suppositious, I
shall set down; leaving them to the censure of the judicious Reader.


The Letter of Raz Athanateus to the King of Portugal.
THE Letter of Peace and Love, Athanateus's Letter to the King of Portugal.
sent by Athanateus, comes to the High and Powerful Emperor of Portugal, with
the Peace of our Lord Christ, who was Crucified on the holy Cross for the
Redemption of the World; May this Peace be always with your Majesty. The cause
of my writing this Letter to you, is the earnest desire that the Emperor and I
both have to see some Portuguese Troops in this Country; We do therefore most
earnestly beseech your Majesty, to send us a Body of stout well-disciplin'd
men, in order to there covering of our Ports, which are at this time in the
hand of the Enemies of our Faith. When your Soldiers arrive, we will take care
that they shall be supplied with Arms, and all other Necessaries. Your
Majesty's Ancestors assisted us, when the Mahometans broke in upon us; and we
do to this day remember what great things Christ wrought for us by their means;
I must therefore a second time entreat your Majesty, to send us a Body of stout
Soldiers, whom when they arrive, I shall be ready to receive with open Arms;
and my mind gives me they will come at some time or other; concerning which
affair, Father Peter Pays will write more at large to your Majesty.

Written in Ethiopia the 13th of December, 1607.

The Letter of Raz Athenateus to the Viceroy of the Indies
THE Letter of Peace and Love, His Letter to the Viceroy of the Indias.
sent by Athenateus, comes to the great Viceroy of the Indies, with the peace
of our Lord Christ, who died on the holy Cross for our Redemption; may that
Peace be always with your Excellency, and your whole State. Amen.

Hear, Sir, My Father was always a great friend to the Portugueses that came
into these parts, having continually favored them in all things, as I have
done ever since his death, having on all occasions assisted them both with my
Interest and my Purse; and saved several of them when condemned to die, being
willing to preserve the remains of the first Portugueses that came among us,
until more should come to them for the good of this Empire.

I have had it for some years in my thoughts to write to you, but have still
been hindered by the Wars we have of late been so much embroiled in, out of
which God has been pleased to deliver us at last, and to give us an Emperor of
a Sound Judgment; and who governs all things with great prudence, who upon my
acquainting him with the great need we stand in of Portuguese Succors, was
pleased to write himself to the King of Portugal for some, commanding me to do
the same, and to acquaint him, how much we desire them, and how much their
coming will be for God's Service. I must therefore entreat your Excellency, to
lend us your helping-hand in this affair, that so it may be brought to a speedy
Issue; Let there be at least a Thousand Soldiers sent, and let it be done with
all possible Expedition, for which Service you will have honor in the sight of
God, who will undoubtedly reward you for it; and were there but once a way
opened for it, your Excellency shall want nothing that this Empire affords. I
shall say no more, since Father Peter Pays, who is acquainted with all my
secrets, can disclose my whole heart to you. May our Lord God bring all to an
happy Issue, and grant your Excellency many years of Life. Amen.


Had the Jesuits been so kind as to have published those Letters of Father
Peter, that these refer to, we might then probably have known the true cause of
that Father's having left Za Danguil's Court so abruptly as he did; but however
that were, it is plain from what Athenateus writes of the Father's being
acquainted with all his Secrets, so as to be able to disclose his whole heart
to the Viceroy, that they two had been plotting together; so that had the
Thousand Portugueses Athenateus wrote for so earnestly, come, it is more than
probable that he would have made use of them for his own Service; the getting
the Ports of Matzua and Arkiko into the hands of the Portugueses, and the
erecting of Tigre by their Assistance into a Kingdom Independent of that of
Ethiopia, being a thing the Fathers even when most in favor with the Emperors,
were continually laboring to bring about: For Athenateus was not only never in
favor with the Emperor, whose name he made use of in these Letters, but on the
contrary, as the Jesuits themselves confess, he was reduced by him to the
Miserable condition of a probre escudero, or poor Waiting-man: Neither is it
unlikely that it was Athenateus having ruined himself and his Family, by
intrieguing with the Fathers, that made him when he was upon his Deathbed
reject their Assistance when they offered themselves to him; and that with
indignation; not caring, it is like, to have any thing more to do with people
that had deceived him so often. Tho to do the Fathers Justice, it was none of
their fault that the Soldiers did not come by the first fair wind after they
had promised them.

But the Habassin Empire, notwithstanding all its late great bleedings, was too
full of bad humors to continue long quiet: A Mock Emperor set up and Murdered.
For Seltam Saged was not well warm in his Throne, when a Fellow of base
extraction was set up for the Emperor Jacob; and though he is said not to have
resembled him in the least, either in Face or Person, yet he acted him so well,
that he was followed by vast Multitudes. This Perkin, after having cost
Ethiopia a vast quantity of blood, was killed at last by some of the Grandees
of his own Party, being grown weary of maintaining a Mock Prince at so great a
charge.

Father Peter is said to have made himself very Popular on this occasion, by
having persuaded the Emperor to pardon all the Common People, and most of the
Nobles that had been engaged in this Rebellion; as likewise to Pardon a great
herd of Peasants, who had provoked him more by their Rudeness and Insolence,
than by their having taken up Arms against him.

The Emperor having thus rid his hands of his Sham-Rival, removed his Camp from
Coja, The Emperor and his Brother Ras Cella Christos convinced of Christ having
two Natures.
to a place called Deqhana, on the North-Side of the Lake of Dembea, which was
not far from Gorgora, the new Residence of the Jesuits; by which means the
Fathers had daily opportunities of waiting on him, and of Discoursing with him
about Matters of Religion. The argument of all others that persuaded the
Emperor the most effectually of the truth of Christ's having two Natures, was
the Fathers showing him a place in his own Hamanot Abea, a Book of the same
nature with the Bibliotheca Patrum, wherein it was affirmed, That that Doctrine
was believed by all the Ancient Doctors of the Church; and that Dioscorus, the
Patriarch of Alexandria, was the first Bishop that had ever denied it.

Raz Cella Christos, a Prince of great heat, and who was made Viceroy of Gojam
by his Brother the Emperor at this time, Cella Christos turns a Zealous Roman
Catholic thereupon.
was likewise convinced of the truth of that Doctrine by the same argument; and
being once convinced of it, nothing would serve him but he would publicly
declare himself a Roman Catholic upon it, reckoning that the Alexandrians who
had so grossly imposed upon him in one particular, had Mislead him in every
point wherein they differed from the Roman Church. He would gladly have made
his Abjuration and first Confession at the feet of Father Peter; but the Father
not happening to be in the way when he was called to go against the Gauls, who
had made a great inroad into his Provinces, he would defer the doing of it no
longer; and so made them at the feet of Father Francis, whom for that reason he
ever after called his Master. Nevertheless after the Expedition was over, he
made a general Confession of his whole Life to Father Peter, and with it a
Solemn and Public Declaration of his resolution to Live and Dye in the Roman
Faith: His Example is said to have been followed by most of his Officers, and
by several of the Grandees of the Court.

In the year 1607. Father Peter having writ a Letter to the K. of Spain, to
acquaint him with Seltem Saged being Established in the Throne of Ethiopia, and
to desire him to send to Congratulate his accession to it; and to thank him for
his kindness to the Fathers; that King complied so far with the Father's
request, as in the Year 1609 to write the following Letter to the Emperor.

MOST Powerful Emperor of Ethiopia, The King of Spain's Letter to Emperor of
Ethiopia.
I Don Philip, by the Grace of God King of Portugal and Algarves, Lord of
Guinea, and of the Conquest, Navigation and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia,
Persia and India, etc. Do send you much Health, as my Brother whom I love and
prize much: Now since there has always been a good Correspondence and Amity
between the Emperors your Ancestors, and the Kings of Portugal, to me it seemed
just and fitting to write this to you, to let you know how much I rejoice at
the News of your accession to the Empire, and shall always rejoice to hear of
your Prosperity, being ready as occasions shall offer to satisfy you in all
things; and accordingly I have recommended your affairs to these my Kingdoms,
and to my State of India, and the Viceroy thereof, that they knowing how
acceptable it will be to me, may be sure to comply with all your desires; and
that this our Amity may continue, I do most passionately desire you, to write
all your News to me, as I shall do mine to you. I do earnestly recommend the
Friars that are in your Kingdom to you, which is my chief Obligation, namely,
Father Peter Pays, desiring that they no less than the Portugueses may be
Treated as it is reasonable. Most Powerful Emperor, whom I love and prize as my
Brother, May our Lord have your Royal Person and State in his holy Protection.

Written at Madrid the 15th of March, 1609.

The Emperor is said to have been very proud of this Letter, and the more
because it was writ before the King had received the Letter he is said to have
sent to him in the year 1607. In the year 1611 the Emperor received the
following Letter from the Pope, in answer to that he is said to have writ to
him in the year 1607.

Paul the Vth 's Letter to the Emperor of Ethiopia.
To our most dear Son in Christ, Health ad Apostolical Benediction.
WE give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Pope's Letter
to the same Emperor.
for having been so merciful to you, as to restore you to your Royal Throne, as
you write he has done; We do Congratulate your success, and do commend you
mightily for your Zeal in Defense of the Christian Faith, for which as we
understand by your first and second Letters, you are very fervent: We have,
according, to your desires, recommended the necessity of your Kingdoms to our
most dear Son in Christ, Philip, the Catholic and Powerful King of Spain, who
we hope will be induced by his Magnanimity and Zeal for the Christian Faith, to
assist you powerfully; having ordered our Apostolical Nuncio that is with his
Catholic Majesty, to solicit what you have desired with great diligence. What
remains, dear Son, is to exhort you to persevere constantly and immoveably in
the fear of God, and Stoutly and Zealously to defend the Christian name; and to
continue always devoted to the holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, your
most loving Mother, as we in our Prayers which we make to God, before the Most
holy Bodies of the Apostles, for our Sons the Christian Kings and Catholic
Princes, shall always be sure to remember you, and to beg of him from whom all
good things do proceed, that he would so enlighten your Understanding with the
Light of his holy Spirit, that you may do his will; and from the inward Bowels
of our Charity we do most tenderly give our Blessing to your Majesty.

Written at Rome at St. Peter's, under the Ring of the Fisherman, on the 4th of
January, in the Year 1611, and in the Sixth year of our Pontificate.

It is plain from this Letter, that the Popes do not stand so much upon their
Punctilio's with remote Heretic Princes, The Popes are civiler to remote
Heretics than Domestic ones.
as they do with those in Europe they reckon to be Heretics. Paul in this
Letter calling a Prince who was a Professed Eu^ychian Heretic, his most dear
Son in Christ; a Title neither Urban would bestow upon King James, nor Gregory
the Fifteenth upon the Prince of Wales, in their answers to the unhappy
Letters, wherein those Princes had been so civil as to give them the title of
The most blessed Father.

The Emperor growing every day more and more inclinable to the Roman Church,
for which his Brother Cella Christos had declared himself openly a Champion,
suffering none to be about him, that were not either actually of her Communion,
or that appeared not to be well disposed for it; did upon the Receipt of this
kind Letter from the Pope, begin to think of Professing himself a Roman
Catholic too; but being sensible that that could not be done without raising
such a storm in his Empire, as it would not be possible for him to weather
without Portuguese Troops, Ambassadors are sent from Ethiopia to Partugel.
He is said to have resolved to send an Embassy to the King of Spain, to
Solicit that Affair by the way of Melinde and Goa. The persons named for this
Employment were Father Anthony Fernandes, and one Tecur Egzy, an Habassin of
Quality, by whom the following Letters were sent to the Pope.

The Emperor's Letter to the Pope.
The Letter of the Emperor Seltem Saged, comes with the Peace of the good
Pastor Jesus to the Holy Roman Pope, Paul the Vth. the Head and Pastor of the
Universal Church.
Holy and Loving Father,
WE have received your Letter of January 1611, The Emperor's Letter to the Pope.
which is full of that love wherewith a tender Father is inflamed when he
receives a penitent Prodigal Son; and not having been able by reason of the
sudden departure of the India Ships to return you an answer so soon as we
desired, we have now determined to do it by another way, which we hope God will
open unto us; and to that end we have sent Father Antonio Fernandes, of the
Society of Jesus, who has for some time resided at our Court, and with him our
Ambassador Tecur Egzy, desiring that your Holiness may have speedy notice of
our being brought by the preaching of the Fathers of the Society who are
resident in our Empire, to the Knowledge of the truth of the faith of the Chair
of the Blessed St. Peter, and of our being resolved to embrace the same, and to
yield obedience to your Holiness as the Head of the Universal Church, so as for
the future to be governed by a Patriarch of your sending; and that we may be
put into a condition of yielding this obedience publicly, it will be necessary
for us to have some Troops from Don Philip the Powerful King of Portugal,
without which we shall never be able to do it openly. We do therefore most
humbly beseech your Holiness, that since as you have writ to us, you have been
pleased to order your Apostolic Nuncio residing at his Catholic Majesty's
Court, to solicit this Affair with great diligence, that you will renew your
Orders to him, that so they may be both effectually and speedily executed, and
so good an occasion may not be lost; and that in our days, and during his happy
years, our Empire may find this necessary remedy. And since you are the Father
of all Catholic Kings, hold us in the number of such; and as you offer Prayers
to God for them, before the most holy Bodies of the Apostles, do the same for
us your humble Son.

Written at our Court of Dembea on the 13th of January, 1613.

But as the Emperor's Brother, Ras Cella Christos, was the chief promoter of
this Embassy, so he likewise writ a Letter to the Pope by it, which was as
follows:

The Letter of Cella Christos Viceroy of Gojam, comes with the Peace of the
Eternal Father, to the Holy Father Paul the Vth. the chief Pontiff, the
Successor of St. Peter, and Head of the Church.
Most Beloved Father,
IF according to the Holy Scriptures, Cella Christos's Letter to the Pope.
they who were far off are come near; I who was at a vast distance, am now
brought near by the Preaching of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus that
reside in this Empire; for I having been commanded by my Brother Seltem Saged,
my Lord the Emperor, to be present at several Conferences between the Fathers
and our Learned men, I came at last to the Knowledge of the Truth of the Faith
of the Chair of St. Peter, and of that Chair's being the Head of the Universal
Church; which faith I thereupon embraced, and obliged my Brother the Emperor to
do the same, and to yield obedience to your Holiness: But whereas it is not
possible for the Emperor to yield that obedience openly, until such time as he
shall have a Thousand Portugueses sent by Don Philip the most Powerful King of
Spain to be his Guards; and being informed that in the Letter your Holiness did
my Brother the honor to write to him, you signified that you had ordered your
Apostolic Nuncio residing at the Court of his Catholic Majesty, to solicit
that Affair with extraordinary diligence; I took the confidence humbly to
entreat your Holiness, to bring it speedily to a conclusion, that so that good
work may be done during my Brother the Emperor's Life, and so glorious an
occasion of saving a lost flock, and of restoring it to its true Pastor, may
not be lost.

Whenever the Soldiers come, they will find me prepared to die in my Saddle
with them for the faith, if there should be occasion. I shall also with all my
force labor to constrain others to embrace it, and to yield obedience
publicly to your Holiness; and in the mean time, I will do all I can to
dispose and incline our people to the faith which I am endeavoring at this
time by translating, with the assistance of the Fathers, the Commentaries of
John Maldonat upon the Gospels; with an intention of translating several other
Books after that is finished. Wherefore most blessed Father, let your Holiness
look upon me as your Servant, who am resolved to defend your Apostolic See
with my Sword, as well as with all the Learning I am Master of; to the doing
whereof I shall be much enabled, by the Prayers which your Holiness shall
command to be offered for me, your Humble Servant, before the most holy Bodies
of the Apostles.

Written at Dembea the 2d of February, 1613.

The way the Ambassadors were to take being settled, A particular account of the
Embassador's Journey.
they begun their Journey in the beginning of March 1613, going first to Gojam,
where they were kindly entertained for some time by the Viceroy; besides their
Habassin Retinue, they were attended by Ten Portugueses; Six whereof were to
accompany them only to the Kingdom of Narea, but the other Four were to go with
them to the Indies. On the Fifth of March they departed from Ombrana with a
strong Guard; and having Traveled Westward two days, they arrived at Sinasse,
the chief Town of Gongas; where having in the Viceroy's name, demanded a Guard
to conduct them to the Nile, it was denied them by the Infidels, the Natives of
that Country being all such: Whereupon they dispatched a Courier presently to
the Viceroy to acquaint them therewith, who immediately ordered three Companies
of Soldiers to March to Sinasse; and after having Conveyed the Ambassadors safe
to Nile, in their return to chastise the Gongazians for their Insolence; but
the Infidels having had Intelligence how much the Viceroy resented their
disobedience, in order to pacify him, gave the Ambassadors a Guard, which
waited upon them to Minascet, a Town that stands upon the winding which the
Nile makes toward Egypt.

The Ambassadors passed that River which was very high at that time, upon
Borachoes or hides full of Wind: After which they Traveled directly South till
they came to the Kingdom of Narea, whose Borders are about Fifty Leagues
distant from that River. The Cafres, who are the Natives, though subject to the
Habassin, disturbed them so much in their Journey, that they were forced to
purchase a passage through the Country with trifling Presents.

Being arrived at Gondas, they were kindly entertained by the Governor, to whom
the Viceroy had recommended them as his particular friends. They industriously
are sent out of their way.
Narea is the most Southern Country of Ethiopia, and is about Thirty or Forty
Leagues in compass; its Inhabitants are reckoned to be the best and honestest
sort of people in the whole Habassin Empire; they are well Shaped, and not very
Black, and have thin Lips and long Noses; the Country is Fertile and Populous,
and its chief Trade is in Slaves, in the Buying and Selling of whom its
Merchants are said to be wonderfully honest. They were first Converted to
Christianity by Malac Saged, to which they had always been well disposed.

From Gonda the Ambassadors went in Six days to the place where the Xuma or
Viceroy of the Kingdom of Narea has his residence, by whom they were received
very coldly, upon his being jealous that their business was to bring a
Portuguese Army into Ethiopia, to force them to turn Roman- Catholics; and
having called together all his Officers to consult how to Defeat this
pernicious design, it was agreed among them, that the best way to divert this
storm, was to persuade the Ambassadors to change their course, and to go to the
Indies by the way of Baly, and the Cape of Darfuy, which they represented to be
both the shorter and safer way than that the Court had Chaked out for them;
knowing at the same time, that it would be impossible for them to Travel
through the Countries which are in the road to Daffuy, several of them being
subject to Mohammedan Princes, who would not suffer any private Christian, and
much less Christian Ambassadors, to Travel through their Countries. Baly is a
Kingdom that belonged formerly to the Habassin, but was then in the Possession
of the Mahometans and Gauls; it borders upon Adel, lying to the East of Narea
so that the Ambassadors in going that way, went back again in a manner; neither
was the way that the Court had ordered them to take, much better, by reason of
the vast Deserts, and the unknown Nations they were to have passed through
before they got to Melinde.

The Viceroy having persuaded them to go his way, was very officious to furnish
them with a Guard to conduct them out of his Kingdom; and to blind his design
the more, sent an Envoy to the King of Gingiro, through whose territories they
were to pass to obtain a free and safe passage for them. Being arrived at the
Banks of Zebee, which is a much bigger River than the Nile, and which running
like a torrent amongst steep Rocks, makes a most hideous noise, they met with a
Bridge which was only a single Plank reaching from one Rock to another, and
which besides that it was at a prodigious height from the water; it was so weak
as to bend with the weight of one man; but there being no other Bridge, they
were constrained to make use of this, and in a days time they all passed over
it without losing a man.

Being now in the Kingdom of Gingiro, they halted at a Village not far from the
Bridge, sending the Viceroy's Envoy before, to acquaint the King of the
Country with their arrival; but the King, who was a Heathen, was at that time
so much employed in some extraordinary Conjurations, that it was a Week before
the Envoy was permitted to speak with him; but so soon as the Solemnity was
over, he gave him an audience, and sent word by him to the Ambassadors to come
immediately to Court, promising to show them all the kindness he was able.

The Ambassadors being come to Court, found the King sitting on the top of a
Building not unlike a Watchtower, it was Twenty five Palms in height, and
about Thirty in breadth, the Courtiers stand all on the ground about it.

When the Ambassadors offered to present the Emperor's Letters to the King,
They are kindly received by the Comical King of Gingiro.
he came down from his Throne, and having received them with great Ceremony, he
Skipped to the top of it again: For he is said in all his postures, features,
and motions, to have resembled a Baboon much more than a Man. After he had read
the Letters, he talked with the Ambassadors a considerable time by an
Interpreter, who repeated both the King's Questions, and the Embassador's
Answers with a most profound reverence, and at last dismissed them with
assurances of his being ready to do them all good Offices.

The Ambassadors having made the King a Present, obtained their Conge; and
departing next day, they came at night to a River, which they crossed on
Borachoes, that were pushed to the other side by men Swimming behind them, The
Ambassadors are stopped by the Prince of Combute upon an intimatiof their not
having been sent by the Emperor.
and directed by one that Swom before; when they had passed this River, they
were in the Province of Combute, the Prince whereof is Tributary to the
Habassin. They were kindly entertained by this Prince, till one Manquer came to
his Court, who though he pretended to have no other business there, but to
receive the tribute that Prince paid, yet he was really sent by the Grandees of
the Court; who having smelt out the secret of that Embassy, ordered him to
follow it, and to stop it if he could possibly. In pursuance whereof Manquer,
so soon as he had an opportunity whispered the King in the ear, That the
Ambassadors were not sent by the Emperor, who knew nothing of them, but by
another that was to be nameless; meaning no doubt Raz Cella, the Emperor's
Brother, and that he ought not therefore to give any Credit to their Letters of
Credence, which were all forged in the Emperor's name; That the business they
were going to the Indies and Portugal about, was to bring an Army from thenee
into Ethiopia, to compel the people thereof to turn Papists, which Army was to
be brought upon them through his Kingdom; so that he must expect to have the
storm they were going to raise, to fall first upon him. Amelinel, for that was
the King's name, believing all that Manquer had told him, sent presently to the
Ambassadors to come and speak with him; and having admitted them to his
Presence, he told them roundly, that having been credibly informed, That they
had no Commission from the Emperor, he could not do less than stop them, till
he had an answer from him whether they were his Ambassadors or not; and though
the Ambassadors endeavored to satisfy him presently, by showing him their
Credentials; yet that would not do, but wait they must until Amelinel had the
Emperor's Answer by a Courier he intended to send to him. The Ambassadors
finding there was no persuading of Amelinel to let them go, desired they might
have leave to send a Courier of their own, with his, to the Court, which was
granted them, but at the end of the third days Journey, the Couriers were both
stopped; and after having been detained there Six Months, were sent back
without having ever been near the Court.

But the Emperor, or his Brother, who I doubt was chiefly concerned in this
Embassy, happening to hear of the Embassador's being stopped, an angry Letter
was writ thereupon to Amelinel in the Emperor's Name, Commanding him not only
to permit the Ambassadors to proceed on their Journey, but to furnish them also
with such things as would be proper Presents for the Princes through whose
Countries they were to pass. Whereupon Amelinel having begged their
Excellencies Pardon for having detained them so long, and treated them so
rudely, upon a misinformation; They are suffered to proceed on their Journey.
and having furnished them with some fine Horses for Presents, he dismissed
them with a good guard, which he commanded not to leave them, till they saw
them safe in the Kingdom of Alaba, whose Prince was a Mohammedan, and had no
dependence on the Habassin.

The Ambassadors had not been Three days at that King's Court, whose Name was
Alico, before their old friend Manquer was up with them again, who having told
Alico the same story he had told Amelinel, the Mohammedan not troubling himself
to examine whose Ambassadors they were, ordered their Persons and Papers to be
seized on presently; but the Ambassadors having had notice that there was such
an Order preparing, had burnt all their Papers before the Officers came to
arrest them; They are thrown into Jayl by the King of Alaba, and afterward
sent home stripped.
and it was well for them they had; for had Alico had any other Evidence
besides Manquer's word, That their business in the Indies was to bring an Army
from thence through his Kingdom into Ethiopia, it would certainly have cost
them their lives; which though Alico spared for want of such Evidence as their
Papers would have furnished him withal, yet he stripped them of their
Equipage, and sent them back the way they came, in a very tattered condition.
Were but the true secret of this Embassy known, we might know, its like too
what it was that made the Emperor not long after this so jealous of his
Brother, as to turn him out of all his Offices.

But notwithstanding the Emperor did not as yet profess himself a Roman
Catholic, as his Brother did openly; yet it being observed by the Ambitious
Courtiers, The Courtiers finding that none but Papists were favored, turn
civil to the Fathers and their Religion.
That none were favored by him, or could pretend to any high post, but such as
had either turned, or appeared to be prepared to do it, whenever he should give
the word; they begun to Caress the Fathers extremely, making their court to
them, by undervaluing their own Clergy as a pack of Hypocrites and Dunces, and
by magnifying the Church of Rome as a Body, that it was an honor for any one
to be a Member of.

Upon Poperies growing thus fashionable at Court, The Country is much alarmed
there with.
the Country, which is seldom fond of Court-fashions, was so alarmed by it,
that it began to roar against the Emperor and his Brother at a most terrible
rate, as bigoted Papists, that were resolved to destroy the established
Religion by calling a Foreign Army in upon them; and the Fathers, as if the
Habassins had not roared loud enough, to provoke them to roar louder, gave out
a public Challenge at this time to all the Learned of the Alexandrian Faith,
if it had any such, to defend their Religion, if they were able, before the
Emperor. Which bold challenge being accepted, Several public Conferences about
Religion.
there were diverse public Conferences about Religion held thereupon before the
Emperor; In all which the Fathers, but by their own Brethren, are said to have
been Victorious, and by their great skill in School Divinity, to whose
subtleties the Habassins were utter strangers, to have baffled them shamefully
at every turn, to the admiration of the whole Court.

When the Monks and Fathers had done Disputing, the Emperor, with the advice of
his Cabinet Council, An Edict is published by the Emperor prohibiting any to
affirm that there is but one Nature in Christ. The Abuna comes to Court, and is
angry with the Conferences that had been held without his leave.
put forth a Proclamation prohibiting all his Subjects upon severe Penalties,
to affirm that there is but one Nature in Christ.

The Abuna, Simon, hearing of the Disputations that had been held at Court, and
of the Proclamation they had ended in, made all the speed he could thither, and
being come to Court, he threatened the Emperor with an Excommunication for
having held public Disputations about Religion without his leave. The Emperor
endeavored to pacify the angry Old Man, by telling him, That it was true that
he had permitted some Conferences, but for no other end, but to remove a Schism
that was in the Church; but now that be was come, he might, if he pleased, have
the Conferences renewed again.

The Abuna, though his talent is said not to have lain much that way, gave his
Consent to have the Disputations renewed; and Learned Men having been appointed
on both sides to manage the Debate, the Fathers in the Conferences did
demonstrate the Truth of Christ's having two Natures so evidently, The
Conferences are renewed before him.
from the Scriptures, Councils, and right Reason, that the Habassins had
nothing that was material to say against it, the Abuna himself not having
offered one word in defense of his Faith, when he saw his Monks most miserably
baffled.

It is remarkable, That it was the policy of the Jesuits to make the Doctrine
of Christ's having two Natures, and not that of the Pope's Supremacy, against
which, by what the Emperor Claudius did, we know the Habassins had enough to
say, the point that was debated in all their public Conferences, which was not
so proper, considering that the Habassins might have believed that Doctrine, as
the Reformed and Greek Churches do, without being the nearer to the Church of
Rome for it; for it does not at all follow, That because Christ had two
Natures, that the Pope must therefore he his Vicar upon Earth; and that all
Christian Churches must submit themselves to him: The very Fathers that
established that Doctrine in the Council of Calcedon, having denied that the
Pope had any Supremacy, but what he owed to Rome 's being the first City is the
Roman Empire; as I have observed elsewhere.

Upon the Habassins being thus baffled upon a point the Church of Rome was no
more concerned in than the Church of England, the Fathers in the heat of their
triumph, did drive on the Emperor at a most furious rate, persuading him to set
forth another Proclamation, making it death for any one to deny that there are
two Natures in Christ: But the Abuna, though he had little to say for his
Religion at the Conferences, The Abuna leaves the Court in wrath, and
Excommuicates the Emperor.
endeavored after he had left the Court, to make amends for his silence there,
by roaring the louder through the Country as he went home; and being sensible
that besides the whole body of the People, he had the Emperor's Mother, and his
half-brother Emana Christos, with several other Grandees on his side; he was no
sooner got home, then he thundered out an Excommunication against all, not
excepting the Emperor, that had, or should submit themselves to the Pope.

The Emperor was at first troubled at this Censure; The Emperor is provoked
thereby to publish a Proclamation Commanding all his Subjects to turn Roman
Catholics. The Agau's thereupon take up Arms. The Abuna promotes an
Association in desence of their Religion. Julius enters into it, and takes the
Field against the Emperor.
but being afterward satisfied by the Fathers of its Nullity, he was provoked
by it to set forth a Proclamation, desiring all his Subjects to embrace the
Roman Faith, Commanding that Proclamation to be published by the Judges
throughout the whole Empire; which most of them did, notwithstanding it was
contrary to their private Judgments. This Proclamation having put the whole
Empire into a flame, and provoked the Agau's to take up Arms; the Abuna, who
waited only for such an opportunity, so soon as he found the Emperor engaged in
that War, writ Circular Letters to all his Confidents, exhorting them and all
the Nobles and People, that were not weary of the Faith of their Forefathers,
to enter into an Association in Defense of it, against the Emperor and his
Brother, who had now both declared themselves open Enemies to it.

Julius, the Viceroy of Tigre, who had Married a Daughter of the Emperor's, so
soon as he had received the Abuna's Letter, did not only begin to Persecute the
Fathers that resided at Fremona, but seized likewise upon the Estates of all
the Habassins within his Province that had turned Roman Catholics, declaring
he would Defend his Religion against all the world, with the last drop of his
blood. The Emperor hearing of the Circular Letter, and the Association that was
going on, was very angry with the Abuna, wishing he had him in his hands to put
a stop to his enflaming his Subjects against him; but knowing that if he
discovered himself to be displeased with him, that he would either not come if
he sent for him, or come with such a Guard, that it would not be safe for him
to offer him any violence, he thought fit to dissemble his passion so far, as
to write a kind Letter to him, desiring him to repair to him with all possible
speed, to satisfy some scruples which gave him great disturbance; writing at
the same time to Father Peter to come likewise; which the Father did
immediately, bringing with him the news of the Persecution that was set on soot
in Tigre against the Fathers and their Converts.

The Queen and several Grandees of the Court seeing what a storm the Emperor
was like to raise by endeavoring to introduce Popery into his Empire, waited
upon him in a body, The Emperor is addressed to not to trouble his Subjects
about their Religion.
beseeching him as he loved his Crown and his people, to give over that design,
as a thing not feasible, since not only the Monks, but the whole body of the
Nation did openly declare, That they would Defend their Religion against him
and all the world with their Lives and Fortunes, and would dye a thousand
Deaths sooner than turn Papists. All which passionate Remonstances were so far
from shaking the Emperor's Zeal for the introducing of Popery, that they
inflamed it to that Degree, that he one day told Father Peter, That
notwithstanding he was sensible he had so far lost the hearts of his Subjects
by the favor he showed to the Roman Religion, that they were all ready to
rebel against him; nevertheless he was resolved either to lose his Crown, He is
deaf to all such addresses.
or to establish that Faith in Ethiopia. And as for his Brother, whenever he
was spoke to to renounce Popery, and return to his former Faith; his answer was
still, While I have breath in my body I will defend the Roman Faith with my
Sword, my Tongue, and my Pen.

The Abuna, that he might not seem to be wanting to his duty in such a critical
juncture, The Abuna being invited to Court, goes thither well guarded.
resolved to go and wait on the Emperor, but with such a Train, that it should
not be safe for him, if he had a mind to it, to meddle with him, the very Monks
that attended him being more in number than the Royal Army. The Abuna and his
Monks when they came within hearing of the Emperor's Tent, gave a general
shout, That they came all prepared to die for the faith of their Forefathers,
being resolved to hear no more arguments against it; making the whole Camp to
ring with Ajentent, Ajentent, that is to say, The Ancient, the Ancient, meaning
their Faith.

The Emperor being willing to put a stop to this fury, sent to the Abuna to
come to him; which the Abuna did; and having spoke their minds very freely to
one another, they agreed to summon a Convocation of the Clergy to meet on
Michaelmas-day, at which the Fathers were to be present, and to be heard.

The Convocation being met at the time appointed, it was so far from allaying
the heat of the Habassins, which was the end for which the Emperor had called
it, that it put them in a greater flame than they were in before; for the
Fathers knowing they had not one voice on their side in that whole body, were
not for having things put to the Vote, but for having them disputed, as if it
had not been a Convocation, but only a public Conference; but though the
Fathers offered several Arguments in defense of their Doctrines, which the
Habassins did not so much as pretend to Answer: Nevertheless the Habassin still
kept their Ground, declaring, That no Sophistry should ever persuade them out
of the faith of their Forefathers. The Convocation having wrangled, for that
was all the Jesuits would suffer to be done in it for five days; it broke up in
a great heat, leaving matters a great deal worse than it found them.

The Abuna and his Monks finding there was no good to be done upon the Emperor,
The Abuna and the Monks wait on the Emperor in a Body.
who seemed to be bewitched by the Jesuits, were for leaving the Camp
immediately without taking any farther notice of him; but having considered
on it a little better, they agreed to wait upon him in a body, to conjure him by
all that was sacred, and as he loved himself, his Posterity and People, not to
endeavor to bring a new Religion in among them; and which, he could not but be
sensible, was the Religion in the world that they the most hated; and so
without sending to him for an audience, which they had reason to believe would
have been denied them, they went and threw themselves at his feet, and instead
of speaking, raised a most lamentable howl, as if they had been so many Idiots,
say the Fathers; which howl, having continued a good space, they at last
recovered their speech, crying with one Voice, That his Highness must not think
that he was able to destroy a Religion which had been maintained in Ethiopia by
so many Emperors thorough so many Ages. Upon the Emperor slighting their
complaints, they leave the Camp in a rage.
The Emperor not appearing to be in the least moved either by their Complaints
or Threats, they all ris and went away in a great Rage, some of them being
said, by their Enemies, to have been so far provoked by the Emperor's carriage
toward them, as to have conspired to Murder him and his Brother, as they went
out of the Camp, for Recreation; but not having met with an opportunity of
executing that black design, they all returned home with their Abuna; but with
their Spirits so exasperated, that it was visible to every body that they would
not suffer the Emperor and his Jesuits to be long quiet.

Father Peter to divert the Emperor from thinking of the troubles that he was
like to bring upon himself and his Empire by his Zeal for Popery, Father Peter
Builds the Emperor a standing Palace.
put him upon building a standing Palace on a Peninsula in the Lake of Dembea.
and there being no such thing as a Mason in all Ethiopia, the Father undertook
the work himself, and in a short time run up a House which the Jesuits say
would have been a convenient Hunting Palace, for the best King in Europe; The
Emperor was extremely pleased with it; and the Habassins having never seen a
House with Stories before, called it Habet, Labet, that is, a House upon a
House. While Father Peter was employed in Building, the other Fathers were busy
Translating some Commentaries on the Scripture out of Latin into Habassin;
namely, Maldonate on the Gospel, Ribera on the Epistle to the Hebrews, Tolet on
St. Paul's Epistles, and Viegas on the Revelation, who were all Spanish
Jesuits, the Habassins not being to know that any in Europe that were not of
that Nation and Order could write Books.

While the Emperor was solacing himself in his new Palace, An attempt is made
upon the Emperor's life.
his Brother Amana Christos, Julius the Viceroy of Tigre, and one Calfe his
Chamberlain, and chief Eunuch, conspired to Murder him in it; and had done it,
had it not been for a Spring-Lock which shut a door behind him as he fled from
the Conspirators; of which Lock it is reported, that the Emperor when he first
saw it on the Door, would have had it taken off, as troublesome to open every
time he went into his Closet, had not Father Peter persuaded him to let it
alone, by telling him, That it might at some time or other do his Highness some
Service. The Conspirators having made their Escape, had no remedy after such a
black attempt, but to take the Field; and Julius being got into Tigre, he
immediately set forth a Proclamation, commanding all within that Kingdom who
were of the Roman Faith, Julius the Emperor's Son-in-Law takes up Arms for the
defense of their Religion.
to go to the Emperor and his Brother, who would make them welcome; and all that
were of the same faith with their Fathers to repair to him, he being resolved
to defend it with the last drop of his blood.

This Proclamation brought the whole Country in to Julius, out of which having
formed a numerous Croisade, he marched directly toward the Nile with an
intention to have fallen first upon Raz Cella, the great Champion of Popery; He
Marches with a great Croisade against the Emperor.
but happening in his March to come near the place where the Abuna resided, he
went to wait on him to have his Blessing; the Abuna, who was glad to see him,
was not satisfied with giving him a Thousand Blessings for being so valiant for
the truth; but though he was above a Hundred Years of Age he would go in person
in the Croisade, The Abuna goes against him in person.
telling Julius, That as he should partake of the benefits of that holy War, if
it had success; so he was resolved likewise to partake of its dangers. And
whereas Julius was for beginning with Raz. Cella, the Abuna diverted him from
it, by telling him, That since he was at the head of so great and zealous an
Army, he ought not to spend its first heats, which were always the strongest,
in lopping off Branches, but in striking at the Root, which being once
destroyed, the Branches would wither of themselves. He likewise encouraged the
Soldiers, by telling them, That they fought for the best Cause in the world,
that is, the true Religion, which the Emperor and his Brother, if let alone,
would certainly destroy; assuring them, That whosoever was slain in this holy
War, would die a Martyr, and go straight to Heaven; thundering out his
Excommunications at the same time against the Emperor and his Brother, and all
that adhered to them, as Apostates from the Faith.

The Emperor hearing that Julius was Marching toward him with a numerous and
Zealous Croisade, sent to his Brother to make all the haste he could to come
and join him with his Army; but fearing lest Julius, who made long Marches,
might be up with him before his Brother could join him; He encamped his Army
so, that the Enemy's Horse, in which their main strength consisted, if they
should attack him in his Camp, would be of little use to them.

When the Armies were within sight of one another, the Emperor sent his
Daughter, who was Wife to Julius, to try if she could persuade her Husband to
lay down his Arms, promising him not only a pardon for what he had done, but
every thing that a subject could reasonably desire of his Prince: And in case
she should not be able to bring him to submit, she was then to try if she could
obtain a Cessation of Arms of him for a few days; but Julius either reckoning
himself secure of a Victory, that would have the Crown for its reward; or being
fearful to take the Emperor's word after he had provoked him so much, would
hear of nothing but of Fighting; saying, He would either die a Martyr for his
Religion, or by Conquering its Enemies secure it from being ever destroyed: And
that he might lose no time, He fights the Emperor's Army and is killed.
he attacked the Emperor's Camp before his Princess was well got back to her
Father; and having put himself at the head of a brisk body of men, be advanced
toward his out-guards, who though they did not come in to him, would not
strike a stroke, telling their Officers flatly, That they would never draw
their Swords against a man, who was fighting in Defense of their Religion.
Julius observing this, asked aloud all the way he went, where the Emperor was,
that was resolved to destroy the Religion of their Forefathers, which he was
there with his Sword in his hand ready to defend against him and all Mankind;
with which, as if it had been the word of the Imperialists, he advanced within
sight of the Royal Tent without having met with the least opposition, until a
body of Tigrians, who were posted not far from it, put a full stop to his
Career, thorough whom as he was hacking his way, he was knocked off his Horse
with the blow of a stone under the left Eye; and as he lay on the ground, had
his head presently chopped off, which was carried to the Emperor by a private
Sentinel. The Body that advanced with Julius, having as it were lost their Soul
in their Commander, was presently hewed all in pieces; and the Tigrians
following their blow, The Croisaide is totally defeated, and the old Abuna
slain.
and the other Imperialists who would not strike a stroke before, joining with
them, now that Julius was slain, they put the whole Croisade immediately to the
rout; every man of them so soon as they heard of their General's being killed,
throwing down their Arms, and crying out for Quarter. The old Abuna was stunned
so with this sudden turn of things, that he was not able to stir from the place
where he had posted himself; but though several of the Imperialists knowing him
to be the Abuna, had out of Reverence to his character and great Age passed by
him without offering him any violence; yet a true Roman Catholic, say the
Jesuits, whose name was Za Michael, having found him out, gave him such a blow
in the neck with his Lance, that he laid his head at his foot; with whose, and
Julius's death, this great Croisade vanished, having had no other effect, than
to enrage the Emperor more than he was before against the Alexandrians, The
Emperor upon this Victory prohibits his Subjects to observe Saturday.
and their Religion, who immediately upon this Victory set forth a
Proclamation, prohibiting all his Subjects upon severe penalties to observe
Saturday any longer.

This Impious Proclamation, as the Habassins reckoned it, produced a bitter
Libel, directed by way of a Letter to the Emperor, wherein he was told, That
his Subjects were all amazed at his wickedness in commanding the violation of
that Sacred day; advising him not to be rid by the Jesuits, A severe Libel
comes out against the Emperor.
who were an Ignorant little sort of people; and who being of the race of
Pontius Pilate, and Uncircumcised, did teach, that there are Two Natures in
Christ: Adding, That they were men swallowed up in the Gulf of their own
Fopperies, and did run headlong like an unbridled Horse, without looking before
them; and did well deserve to have a Millstone tied about their Necks, and to be
thrown into the Sea, and to be made partakers of the Curse that befell Pope Leo
for having denied the Unity of Christ's Nature; and after a great huddle of
Texts of Scripture in favor of their Doctrines, it at last admonishes the
Emperor that in case he was not weary of his Crown, and the high Dignity he had
received from the Popes of Egypt, who wore the holy and new Ephod, and bore the
badge of the Cross, to give over trying such new Experiments: concluding thus;
Ah! We do here send this precious stone which enlightens the eyes of the blind;
May it be for an offering, but may the Swine never see it, that so they may not
trample it under their unclean feet; for it is written, You shall not throw
Jewels before Swine.

This Libel galled the Emperor so terribly, that to be revenged on its Authors,
he published a Second Proclamation, by which he commanded all his Subjects to
work on Saturdays, being to pay a Crown for the first fault, The Emperor by a
Second Proclamation commands all his Subjects to work upon Saturdays.
and to forfeit their whole Estate for the second; to which penalty the
Offenders were to continue liable Seven Years after the fault was committed, by
which time the Fathers hoped that Popery might have got strength enough in
Ethiopia to execute this Law as they should see occasion, being sensible that
there would be few or none of any Estate that would not be under its lash. This
rigorous Proclamation being sent to Joanel the Viceroy of Begameder, who waited
for such an opportunity to raise the people against the Emperor, to publish, he
commanded it to be done presently with great Solemnity, taking care at the same
time, to declare to all the World, that it was what he abominated from his
Soul: Neither was Joanel deceived in his thoughts of the effects of this
Proclamation; for the people no sooner heard of the Emperor's having commanded
them under severe Penalties for to work upon Saturdays, than they began to rail
at him, as one who had no Religion; and who, for that and other reasons was
become so intolerable to his Subjects, that they must be Beasts of Burden to
endure him any longer; and hearing that Joanel had declared himself openly in
all Companies against what the Emperor had commanded; A Rebellion breaks out
upon it.
they flocked to him from all Quarters, beseeching him as he had any love for
God and his Country, not to suffer their Religion to be thus trampled on;
promising to die by his side in the defense of it. Joanel having foreseen what
the Emperor by his Zeal for Popery would quickly bring things to, had obtained
a promise of considerable Succors from the Gauls whenever he should take the
Field; upon the strength of which, and the fury the Emperor's late Proclamation
had put the whole Empire into, he formed a great Army out of the people that
flocked in to him; assuring them, now he had taken up Arms, that he would never
lay them down until he had secured their Religion to them. When the news of
this second Croisade came to Court, great numbers of the first Quality of both
Sexes set upon the Emperor again, An address is made to the Emperor not to
trouble his people with Popery.
beseeching him as he loved himself and his Empire, to give over all thoughts
of introducing Popery into a Country, that of all things in the world could
not endure it.

The Emperor, though much troubled to find that Joanel and his Cause had so
many friends in his Court; yet not being willing to do any thing that might
intimmedate his Converts, The Addressers are punished.
he told the Grandees that had addressed to him, with an angry countenance,
That it was his Subjects duty to obey, and not to dispute his Commands; and
that he would teach them better manners than to fly thus in their Prince's
face, when he did any thing that displeased them; and hoping to have terrified
the Grandees from troubling him with any more Addresses, he commanded one of
the most forward Addressers to be put to death, banishing another of them for
his life to the Kingdom of Narea; which cruelty was so far from having the
effect that was expected from it, that it did but Exasperate peoples spirits,
and put them into a greater rage against Popery than they were in before.

The Emperor, though he could not but see the storm thicken upon him on all
sides, yet was so far from seeking to divert it by any Compliances, that having
called a full Assembly of the Grandees, Monks, and Military Officers together
in the great Hall of the Palace, he made the following Speech to them.

YOU Ris against the Emperor Jacob, and having Deposed him for several
Misdemeanors, The Emperor's Speech thereupon.
you advanced my Cousin Za Danguil to the Throne, whom for having forsaken your
Religion, and embraced that of the Portugueses, you afterward Murdered; and
after having conferred the Crown upon me, you made Jacob King a Second time;
but though you intended to have Deposed me, God was pleased to give me Victory;
from that day to this I have done wrong to no body, but on the contrary, have
pardoned great numbers, having been prodigal of my favors to a fault; but all
this has not been sufficient to keep you from Rebelling, upon a pretense that I
am endeavoring to destroy your Religion, when, in truth, I do only seek to
reform it; for as I do profess with you, That our Lord Christ is true God and
true Man; so I do moreover affirm, That as he cannot be perfect God without
having the Nature of God, so neither can he be perfect Man without a Human
Nature; now since it is evident by the light of reason, That the Divine and
Human Nature are really distinguished, it must follow therefore, that there are
two Natures in Christ; and since there can be no Confusion in the Godhead,
those two Natures must necessarily be united in one and the same Person of the
Eternal Word; so that what I am doing, is not to forsake the Faith, but to
profess it in truth. And I do further affirm, That the Divine Nature is
Superior to the Human. It is true, I have forbid you to observe Saturday any
longer; and it is an amazing thing that you who value your selves upon being
Christians, should be for keeping the Sabbath of the Jews; what is this, but,
as the Prophet Elias said, to go halting, etc.? As this is my Faith, so I do
not follow it because it is the Faith of the Portugueses, or of the Roman
Church, but because it is the Faith that was established by Six hundred Fathers
in the Council of Calcedon, which Condemned Dioscorus and Eutyches; and for
being a truth founded on the Scriptures, and derived from the Apostles, who
were the Teachers of the World. Undeceive your selves therefore; for for this
Faith I am ready to lay down my life if there should be occasion, though I must
tell you at the same time, it shall cost them their Lives first that shall dare
to contradict me therein.

How seasonable a Speech of this strain, was, in which Father Peter, who was
now become the first Minister, had a hand undoubtedly, for one in the Emperor's
Circumstances, let the world judge.

The Emperor having received an insolent Letter from Joanel, wherein he
insisted upon having the Jesuits all turned out of Ethiopia, and his being
declared Viceroy of Begameder for his Life, was so incensed, that he marched
against him in Person; but Joanel having advice thereof, The Emperor sends an
Army against the Rebels, and routs them.
and knowing himself not to be strong enough to deal with him, he Retreated to
the Mountains, where his Army's Zeal being allayed by the want of Provisions,
it moulder'd to nothing in a short time; so that he was obliged with a small
Party to take fanctuary among the Gauls, who having been hired to it by the
Emperor, put him to death.

The Emperor being returned to Doncaz, where he intended to spend the Winter,
was invited by the Fathers to come and visit the new Church they had built at
Gorgora, which he did with great Devotion, putting his Shoes off when he
entered into it; but the late Proclamation had bred too much ill blood in
Ethiopia for to let it be long quiet. The Damotes, a People inhabiting the
banks of Nile, being thrown into such a rage by Raz Cella, their Viceroy's
rigorous Execution thereof, that they all flew to their Arms as one Man, being
likewise instigated so to do by great droves of Hermits, who being alarmed by
the late Proclamation, flocked to them from all parts of the Deserts, railing
all the way they came at the Emperor and his Brother, as Apostates, and at the
Jesuits as the Authors of all their troubles; several of them running over the
Country as men distracted, and roaring as they went, That all People were
bound in Conscience to take up Arms against the Emperor and his Brother, in
defense of their Religion, which they seemed to be resolved to destroy.

The Viceroy hearing of the mad work the Hermits were making among the Damotes,
writ to some of his Friends in those parts, not to suffer themselves and the
People to be any longer abused by such a pack of Ignorant and Hypocritical
Rascals, who taught them nothing but Lies; but he could have no other answer
from them than, That unless he would burn all his Popish Books, and deliver up
all his Jesuits to them, The Damotes take up Arms for their Religion, and are
routed.
that they might hang them all upon one great Tree, for the mischiefs they had
done in Ethiopia, they would have nothing more to do with him, being all to a
man resolved to live and die in the Alexandrian Faith. The Viceroy not caring
to part with his Books and Jesu^^s so easily, advanced toward them with an
Army of Seven Thousand well-disciplin'd Men; the Damotes were near double the
Number, having Four hundred Hermits who had devoted their Lives to their
Religion, well Armed with Targets and Lances; this great inequality in numbers
did not hinder the Viceroy from offering them Battle so soon as he came up with
them, which they having accepted of, the two Armies quickly came to blows, but
the Damotes being raw men, and not well Armed, were at the first onset put to
the rout, and besides a great slaughter that was made among the Soldiers as
they fled toward the Mountains, there were One hundred and eighteen of the
Monks, with their famous Captain Batare, found slain upon the spot where the
Fight was; the Viceroy is said to have lost but One Man in the Action, and he
too, which made the loss the less, was a Heathen. A Miraculous Evidence, say
the Jesuits, of the Truth of the Roman, and of the falsehood of the Alexandrian
Faith.

The Emperor, when Father Peter Congratulated him upon this Victory, told him,
He had great reason to thank God for it, for that had the Damotes gained the
least advantage, he should have had the whole Empire presently in Arms against
him, whose Spirits he believed were now pretty well subdued, and that after
such a blow, it would not be so^e^^y for the Monks or Hermits to Roar them into
any more Rebellions; and whereas he had hitherto been withheld by his fear,
and his Wife's, The Emperor reconciles himself to the Church of Rome.
which he was very unwilling to have parted withal, from Reconciling himself
formally to the Church of Rome, he told the Father, he would delay to do it no
longer; the Father over-joyed to hear this, upon his having first Abjured all
the Alexandrian Errors, and made a Confession of his whole Life to him, gave
him Absolution, and Reconciled him to the Pope.

But the Father, overcome it is like by the Joy of this Conversion, outlived it
but a few days; his Death was much Lamented by the Emperor and his Brother, to
whom the Father was become a perfect Oracle, in all State, no less than
Church Matters.

Presently after Father Peter's death, there were Three Letters writ from
Ethiopia to the Provincial and Visitor of the Jesuits in the Indies, to send
them a Patriarch, with as many Fathers as they could spare: The first was writ
by the Emperor to the Provincial, the second and third to the Visitor, by
Father Luis de Azevedo, and Father Antony Fernandez. The Contents of which
Letters being much the same, I shall set down that of Father Antony's only,
which is the shortest of them.

Father Antony Fernandez Letter to the Father Visitor of the Indies.
I Write this with the good News of this Kingdom, to your Reverence, to engage
you to order Processions to be made, and to have Masses said, and the Te Deum
sung, to return Thanks to God for the favor he has showed us in the Conversion
of this Empire, the doing whereof will very much refresh the Fathers and
Brethren who labor here with me, and will sweeten the great hardships they
undergo.

The Emperor with his whole Court, and all the Grandees, and Princes
Ecclesiastical and Secular of this Empire, have abjured their Errors, and made
a public Profession of their Obedience to the holy See of Rome.

The general Administration of all Churches and Parishes being put into my
hands, I have Established Curates in them all, having made such new Laws as
were necessary; and abolished all the old ones that were contrary to the Roman
Church. I have had some thoughts of coming to you, and have been ready to begin
my Journey, but have been still hindered by the Glory of God, which obliges me
to keep close to the Emperor.

The thing we stand most in need of here at present, is a Patriarch, with a
good number of Fathers, to help us to carry on these good beginnings. Your
Reverence cannot but be sensible of this our want, without my enlarging upon
it. Our Fathers and Brethren ought to run thorough fire and water, Pikes and
Swords for to assist this Country; lest having the promised Land showed us, we
may be excluded it thorough our own fault. They ought to flock hither with all
possible speed; for notwithstanding the Heirs apparent of the Empire, and all
the Princes and Nobles thereof are at present true Catholics; Nevertheless
should we happen to be deprived of the Emperor and his Brother Zela Christos by
death, it is to be feared, that the Monks and Habassins might raise seditions
to the pulling down of all that we have built; and may persuade the people, who
are more changeable than the wind, to abandon what they have so lately embraced.

Wherefore your Reverence would do well to send us all the Fathers you can
spare; let them be at least Twenty, whom we shall endeavor to accommodate the
best we can, until it shall please God to raise up a Cardinal or Prince to have
compassion upon these poor people, and to succor those who labor in their
Conversion. No day passes wherein the Emperor does not speak to us to send for
Two hundred Fathers, saying, God will provide for them when they come. I am
sensible the Society cannot furnish us with so many, though if it could, the
Corn here is so ripe for the Harvest, that they would all find work enough. We
did at first accommodate our selves to the customs of the Country, that we
might with the more ease gain them to the Lord; having besides the Fasts that
are commanded, kept Wednesdays, and observed Lent, and Easter, and the other
principal Feasts, according to their style; according to which, Easter falls
sometimes a Month sooner than with us; reciting our Offices likewise after
their custom on the Evening of Fasting-days; but so soon as we found them
disposed for it, we proposed to them the Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies of the
Latin- Church, and the decrees of the Pope, which they have now universallly
agreed to; so that of late we have without any contradiction, kept Easter, and
the other Feasts, according to the Roman style. For the settlement whereof,
they have earnestly demanded the Tables of our Moveable Feasts, and the
Ecclesiastical Epact, to prevent their being mistaken. I have by Letter desired
our Provincial to send us such Tables, that any one of a common capacity may
accommodate the names that are in them, to the names of this Country. To which
end I have sent him a Table that was made here by a Catholic, who is very
expert in Arithmetic, that he may examine it, and alter it as he shall think
convenient. And I do earnestly beseech your Reverence, to get this affair
dispatched as soon as it is possible, and to order continual Prayers to be made
to God in our behalf, and in behalf of this Country: We have lost two good
Fathers here; God take us under his Protection; for this Mission has sustained
a great loss by their deaths; this Empire, which wants I do not know how many
Priests, at present has only, Father James Matos, and Father Anthony Bruno, who
have the sole charge of Gojam; and Father Lewis d' Azevedo, who is gone lately
to Ambra; and my self, who am fixed at Court. Praised be God we are all in
health at present; but Father Lewis 's ordinary distempers are such as demand a
writ of ease for him; but Charity and a Zeal for Souls overcomes all
difficulties; I do recommend my self to your Reverence's Prayers, and holy
Sacrifices.

March 3d. 1623.

How far Popery was from having got such footing in Ethiopia as this Letter
represents it to have had, will appear from the sequel of the Story.

Such Reports as these of the Conversion of Ethiopia, being transmitted to Rome.

Mutio Vitelesci, the General of the Jesuits, to secure the honor of that
Conversion to his own Order, waited upon the Pope; The General of the Jesuits,
makes the Emperor's submission from the Pope, without any commission from him
to do it.
and without any Commission or Order from the Emperor to do it, made a
submission to the Pope in his name with all the usual Solemnities; and not
being able to obtain leave no more than Ignatius, though he begged it of the
Pope with the same earnestness as his Patriarch had done, to go in person to
Ethiopia, to finish that great work, he contented himself with sending a Nuncio
to do it; the Jesuit he employed in this Embassy, was one Manuel d' Almeyda,
who at that time resided at Bacaim in the Indies; who with Three other Fathers
arrived at Fremona in Ethiopia, in the Year 1624. where having staid a Month
with his Brethren, to inform himself of the true state of Affairs, he begun his
Journey to Court; where when he arrived, he was received with great Ceremony by
the Emperor; who when the Nuncio at his first audience offered to have kissed
his hand, would not suffer him to do it; He sends a Nuncio to him to acquaint
him therewith.
but having commanded him to sit down by him, he asked him several Questions
concerning the Pope, and the King of Portugal, and the state of Affairs in
Europe; the Nuncio perceiving that he took no notice of his Master Vitellesci,
stood up, and told him, That his Reverend General Mutio Vitellesci, not having
to his great sorrow been able to obtain leave of the Pope to come in person to
wait upon his Highness, had sent him to kiss his hand in his name, and to
return his Highness his thanks for the favors he had showed to the Friars of
his Order; and to acquaint him furthermore, with his having made his Highness
submission to the Pope, who is the head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar on
Earth, by having kissed his Holinesse's feet in his name. The Emperor, though
surprised, did not seem to be displeased with the General for having been so
officious; but having commanded his Letters to be read presently by Father
Anthony, he was so well satisfied with them, that he ordered his
Historiographer, who was present at the reading of them, not to forget to
insert them into his life.

The Emperor reckoning he had so far subdued the Spirits of his Subjects, that
he might now do what he pleased with them; begun to make bolder steps toward
the introducing of Popery, than he had ventured to make before; and in order to
make the Alexandrian Faith odious to his People, he set forth the following
Manifesto, on purpose to blacken the Memories of their former Abuna's.

The Manifesto of the Emperor Saltem Saged comes to the whole world of his
Empire.
HEAR what we say and write in favor of the holy Faith (which is true, The
Emperor publishes a reproachful Manifesto against the Alexandrians.
and has no crookedness in it) of the great City of Rome, the Chair of St.
Peter, whom our Lord Jesus Christ Constituted the Prince of the saithful;
telling him from his own holy mouth, from whence no error could flow, Thou art
Peter, etc. as he did also when he was ready to be crucified for the Redemption
of the world. Simon, behold Satan has designed to winnow thee as Wheat, but I
have prayed that thy faith may not fail; commanding him likewise after his
Resurrection, and before his Ascension in the flesh into Heaven, to feed his
Rams, his Sheep and his Lambs, meaning by Rams, men, by Ews women, and by Lambs
children; and thus St. Peter had Authority given him over all Christians. This
venerable Prince of the Apostles, when he was about to leave the world, that he
might go to his Creator to receive his reward, bequeathed this privilege and
primacy to his Successors in the Chair of Rome, where it has continued and will
continue to the end of the world; so that it shall neither be in the power of
Moors nor Turks nor of any other Creature to destroy it; those words of our
Lord Jesus, the Gates of all shall not pervail against it being its sure
defense.

So when a Controversy arose in the Church, the first Council of Nice, which
consisted of Three hundred and eighteen Bishops, threw Arius out of the Church,
for affirming the Son of God to be a Creature; as the second Council,
consisting of One hundred and fifteen Patriarchs and Bishops, assembled in the
City of Constantinople, did Macedonius, for asserting the Holy Ghost to be a
Creature; and the third Council, consisting of Three hundred Bishops, did
Nestorius, for dividing Christ into Two Persons, the Divine and Human; and the
fourth, consisting of Six hundred and thirty Patriarchs and Bishops, assembled
in the City of Calcedon, Excommunicated the Rebellious Dioscorus, for joining
in Infidelity with Eutyches, in mixing the Humanity with the Divinity, so as to
make One only Nature; whereas it is most certain, That there are Two Natures in
Christ, the Divine and Human; on the account of which Divine Nature it was,
that the said Three hundred and eigheeen Fathers did put the following words
into the Creed, We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
the Father, and who was with him before the World was Created; as on the
account of his Human Nature, the following words were added, And was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, with the Consent of the
Father, and the Son, and of the said Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One only
God; the Father and the Son not being named on that occasion, being no argument
of those Fathers not believing they did not Cooperate therein with the Holy
Spirit, but it was done on purpose to teach us, That in the Most Blessed
Trinity, besides the operations ad Intra, there are operations ad Extra;
according to the holy Fathers; of those ad Extra, the Works of Power are
attributed to the Father; those of Wisdom to the Son, and those of Love to the
Holy Ghost: Wherefore since the Incarnation of the Son of God was for the sake
of the Sons of Men, and for that reason was a Work of Love: The Three hundred
and eighteen Fathers did attribute it to the Holy Spirit: Though in Virtue and
Power, and the Creation of things, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are One
only True God: The Virgin Mary was mentioned by them upon account of the Human
Nature, which in an instant united it self to the Eternal Person of the Son,
who is equal in Divinity to the Father; and that in our Lord Jesus Christ,
being only One Person, there are Two Natures, is written in diverse Books of the
Holy Spirit, St. Matthew in the beginning of it, calls his Gospel, The book
of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham; which
was said on the account of his Human Nature; as it was on the account of his
Divine Nature that St. John says, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and God was the Word; the Divine Nature having neither Beginning
nor End; whereas the Human Nature had a Beginning. All which Writings
notwithstanding, Eutyches, the Master of Mischief, did affirm, That there was
only One Nature in Christ, and so mixed the Humanity with the Divinity; now
this Rebel was followed by Dioscorus, who assisted him both in word and deed,
and having procured the Murder of Flavianius, Patriarch of Constantinople, for
having Excommunicated Eutyches, and some other obstinate Heretics that were
before him, namely, Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Sabellius; all which
matters having been submitted to the Holy Roman Church, the Head of all other
Churches, on the account of the Empire and Primacy that it has by inheriting
the Power of St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles.

It is certain the Patriarchs who succeeded Dioscorus in the Sea of Alexandria,
have not Preached the true Faith, in having taught that there is only One
Nature in Christ; and so being destitute of the true Faith, they have wandered
out of the paths of Patriarchs, Bishops, and Priests, in having had Wives and
Children, and GrandChildren, and have been entangled in diverse things not fit
to be named; they have also taken Money for Holy Orders; and having Consecrated
Salt Stones for Altar Stones, have afterward sold them; having likewise
tyrannized cruelly over those they Ordained, obliging several of them to serve
them a Year, or Six Months at least, in sawing Wood or Stone for their Palaces,
before they would Ordain them; for which Practice they were Excommunicated by
the Apostle, who said, He that buyeth or sells Orders, is excommunicated, and
has his portion with Simon Magus and Judas.

The Abuna Mark, was Convicted by the Emperor Malec Saged, of several carnal
Crimes which are not fit to be heard or Uttered, they being of that kind for
which God rained down fire from Heaven; and being Deposed for having been
guilty of them, he was Banished into the Island of Dek, where he dyed a strange
death, his Belly swelling as hard as a Drum. The Abuna Christos Dula kept
several Concubines, contrary to the custom of Patriarchs, as was well known by
all his Contemporaries, and by some that are still alive. His Successor Peter
kept a Malaquis Wife, and having been convicted of Adultery, he did Penance for
it, as may be testified by several living Witnesses, namely one Joseph, and one
Marino, who are both Strangers, and not Habassins; and who adding sin to sin,
did Excommunicate the Emperor Jacob, after he had Reigned Seven Years, as he
did all the People of Ethiopia likewise, in case they did not Depose him, and
Banish him to the Kingdom of Narea; and having placed Za Danguil in the Throne,
he afterward excited his Subjects to Murder him, by Excommunicating them if
they did not do it; and as if all this had not been enough, he took the Field
with the Emperor Jacob against us, and was killed with him in the Fight. The
Abuna Simon was guilty likewise of diverse enormous Grimes, who besides his
having taken one Mali an Egyptian 's Wife from him, and dishonored several
Virgins, he kept diverse Concubines, and happening to have a Child by one who
was not able to maintain it, to conceal his shame, he ordered it to be thrown
to the Wolves, by whom it was devoured; this every body knows to be true,
namely, the Azages; and who, when Julius Rebelled, instead of laboring,
according to the custom of Patriarchs and Monks, to make Peace, joined with him
in his Rebellion, and having called his Soldiers together, told them on the day
before the Battle, That he forgave them all, Young and Old, their Sins,
notwithstanding they had broke all the Commandmendments, upon condition they
would put all to the Sword that they found in Arms in the Emperor's Camp, and
that he would Canonize the Man that would kill the Emperor, assuring them that
all that should be slain sighting against him, would die Martyrs, and go
straightways to Heaven; encouraging Julius 's Soldiers, after the example of
Satan, to fight against us; but God was pleased to give us the Victory; and the
Divine Justice having laid its Military hands upon him, he died an ill death.
But to return to our chief intent, these Patriarchs in having, from the time of
Dioscorus, denied Obedience to the Popes of Rome, who are the Successors of St.
Peter, the foundation of the Faith, and the Head of the Holy Church; and in
having affirmed that there is only One Nature in Christ, and in having refused
the Ordinances and Canons of the Apostles of our Lord, and wrested all writings
to their own wicked purposes, have not lead the People in the paths of Truth:
Let us therefore give over yiedling Obedience any longer to the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, who are all Jacobites, walking in the ways of their Errors, and
treading in the steps of Arius, Macedonius, Sabellius, Eutyches, and Dioscorus,
and let us yield Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, who sits in the Chair of St.
Peter, which Chair cannot Err in any matter of Faith or good Manners. And do
you all in Peace follow the Holy Faith, which Christ our Lord built with his
Holy Blood on the Cross, which he shed for the Salvation of all that do believe
in him, for ever and ever. Amen.


This Manifesto, notwithstanding it is Orthodox as to what relates to the two
Natures in Christ, yet its throwng so much dirt, and in all probability
unjustly, on the Memories of the Habassin Abuna's, was a thing infinitely below
the Dignity, as well as Charity of a Christian Emperor, who let his Religion be
what it will, is not to write Libels, but to burn them rather, as Constantine
did. And as to the policy of such a Manifesto at this time, unless the
Emperor's Affairs were in such a condition, that it was safe for him to provoke
his Subjects to Rebel, that so by subduing them, he might destroy the
established Religion with the more case, it was certainly stark naught, there
being nothing that he could have done, that could have enraged his People more
against him, than the making of such lewd reflections on Prelates, for whose
Memories the Habassins had a most profound veneration; but such blunders as
these are to be expected in places where Princes Councils are governed by
People who have spent most of their days in a Cell, under the discipline of a
blind Obedience.

The Emperor about this time finding that notwithstanding he had enraged his
Subjects almost to a madness against him by his Manifesto's and Proclamations
in favor of Popery, The Emperor grows jealous of his Brother.
that his Brother Raz Cella was still courted by the whole Roman Party as their
Head, so that he was left, in a manner, without a Friend that he could confide
in; he resolved upon some pretense or other to strip his Brother, not only of
the Viceroyship of Gojam, but of all the Posts of Authority that he was
possessed of, judging it to be necessary to his safety, to keep him as low as
it was possible; and especially if the Portuguese Succors should come, which
had been desired. Raz Cella, who was a Prince of a violent and rash Temper,
having discovered his Brother's jealousies of him, together with the
resolutions they had made him take, did storm at such rate in all Companies, as
to make the Emperor much more jealous than ever; who though resolved to throw
him down, yet being willing to do it as gently as might be, he called him out
of Gojam to Command an Army he was sending against one Cabrael, who had raised
a Croisade against him.

Raz Cella, He sends him against Cabrael, who was at the head of a Croisade.
though he was not ignorant of what was his Brother's design in giving him this
Command, yet being sensible that the Roman Party in Ethiopia was but a handful,
and that the Alexandrians, who were a Thousand to One, would upon the Emperor's
abandoning all Popish Interests, which a rupture with him at that time would
have forced him to, not only have forgave him all that was past, but would as
one man have declared for him, and stood by him in defense of their Religion;
he judged it most advisable for him to obey the summons, and accordingly went
and took the Command of the Army upon him, and having made a Vow to Francis
Xavier to build a Church to him if he returned Victorious, he marched against
Cabrael, who finding himself too weak to resist the Royal Army, trussed up his
Baggage so soon as it approached him, retiring with what speed he could to the
Gauls, by whom, being hired to do it, he was Murdered; which success was so
far from reconciling the Emperor to his Brother, that it made him more afraid
of him than ever.

Now while things were thus in Ethiopia, at Rome and Madrid they thought it was
more than time that a Patriarch were sent thither with Two Coadjutors, A
Patriarch of Ethiopia is consecrated at Lisbon.
and with the same Power as the former; and accordingly one Alfonso Mendez
being named Patriarch, and James Seco and John da Rocha, Bishops of Nice and
Hieropolis, his Two Coadjutors by Philip the Fourth, they were approved by the
Pope, and having obtained their Dispensations, for they were all Three Jesuits,
and Bulls, the Patriarch and Bishop Elect of Nice, were Consecrated at Lisbon
by Prelates of a much higher Sphere than the former Patriarch, their Order by
this time having pretty well wore off the odium of Novelty; the Consecration of
the Bishop Elect of Hieropolis being prorogued to the Indies.

On the 28th. of May, The Patriarch arrives at Goa.
the Patriarch with the Elect of Hieropolis, the Bishop of Nice having died in
the Voyage, arrived at Goa, where he stayed till the 17th. of September, and
then embarked for Chaul, where he met with the following Letters from the
Emperor and his Brother.

The Emperor's Letter.
WITH the Peace of the good Pastor who gave his Life for his Sheep, The
Emperor's Letter to the Patriarch.
We do give many thanks to God our Lord, who has granted us our desires and
petitions; and has been pleased to fulfill the time, when your Lordship was to
come to be our Patriarch, with two Bishops Coadjutors, who will be all found
little enough to help these straying Sheep in a stormy day. May God bring your
Lordship to us in Peace and health, and give you such a passage, that we may
have you among us quickly, as the necessity of this Empire does require, with
the greatness of which the Fathers have, I presume, acquainted you at large; in
the mean time we do beseech God so to order matters, that they may all redound
to his Glory and Honor, and the good of so many Souls.

May 1624.

Raz Cella Christos's Letter to the Patriarch.
THE Peace of our Lord, Raz Cellas's Letter to the Patriarch.
the eternal word by whom all things were made, and al for his sake, who took
our humanity in the Womb of the entirely holy Virgin; and without grudging did
offer himself in the Temple of the Cross for our sake, Preserve your Lordships
person from all Temporal evils, shedding the dew of health so on the fleece of
your life, as to bring you in safety to that high Dignity to which he has
called you, and to which your Predecessor could never attain. Your Lordship's
Letter when I received it, threw me into such an Ecstasy of joy, as that the
Souls of the Fathers, when they were expecting the Advent of our Savior, were
thrown into, when that Ray of Divinity appeared to them, in so much that I may
safely say, that from my Childhood to this day, I never felt any exultation in
my heart equal to that, not being able in the balance of my heart to weigh the
gold of the joy I derived from your Lordship's Letter, which was purified by a
strong flame of love, on the arrival of your Lordship's Piety; what shall I
return to God, who is slow to anger, and of great mercy? and who does not look
upon the countenance of my wickedness with the eyes of a vigoaous Justice,
though he is a searcher out even of venial Sins; for having prolonged my life
to hear the joyful news which I have been many years expecting, the Nerve of my
thoughts having for a long time depended and hung on the Tree of your
Lordship's love; now as God who is entirely good, and of abundant kindness, has
made me worthy to hear the news of your Lordship, and has thereby unburdened me
of that load of trouble which had for several years lain so heavy upon me for
the sake of the holy faith; so he will, I hope, think me worthy to see your
Lordship's face, and to kiss your shoes, being brim full of Love and Charity.
I must beg your Lordship to make all the haste you can to us, and to bring
Multitudes of Fathers with you, that so this Land of Ethiopia, which is at
present in the way of corrupt Doctrine, and in the crooked Faith of Dioscorus,
and abounding with Errors, may be wafted into the secure harbor of the true
faith of St. Leo, the Pope of Rome, and Successor of St. Peter, and Pastor of
Pastors. This Country is very large, and has many Tribes of Heathens in it,
who do all desire to receive the Christian faith; and it is not long since I
destroyed a prodigious Idol, whose beginning was not known among them, nor the
time when it was first Worshipped; it was adored by a great many Tribes of
Heathens, called Agus, who since I burnt it to ashes, have flocked in great
numbers to Baptism; and it has been the same among the Caffres; neither do we
want any thing but Fathers to perfect these Conversions; for which reason I
beseech you a second time to bring great Numbers of them with you, etc.


What it should be that made the Jesuits et caetera such an Original of their
Beu-Clerks, if it was not, that in the suppressed part of it he writ as
vehemently for Portuguese Troops, which they thought would not look well in him
at a time when he was upon such ill terms with his Brother, as he did in the
part they have published, for Fathers, let the Reader discover if he can; but
however this were, it is certain, that when he was in disgrace with the Emperor
his Nephew, that he writ for such Troops at a more vehement rate than he does
here for Jesuits.

In May the Patriarch landed at Baylar, The Patriarch Lands at Baylar.
from whence he went disguised to the King of Dancalis Court: The Dancalians,
who attended him as his Guard, having heard that there was an Abuna or
Patriarch among the Fathers, were still enquiring, which was the Patriarch: We
told them, says the Patriarch himself, That he died at Sea; meaning the Bishop
of Nice.

The King entertained the Fathers, for the Patriarch was still incognito, very
courteously; and through ignorance refused a Noble Present they would have made
him, and accepted of a Trisle.

On the 21st. of June the Patriarch arrived at Fremona, having one morning by
the way seen a Prodigious Star in the Heavens: Some of the Fathers were of
opinion, that it was the Star which Conducted the Wisemen to Bethlehem; but the
Patriarch desented from them, and demonstrated it to be the Figure of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, who being the Star both of the Morning and the Sea,
appeared to them to promise them her light; which being agreed to by all, the
Hymn, Ave Maria Maris Stella, etc. and the Antiphona, Sub tuum praesidium, were
sung to it.

The Patriarch continued at Fremona till November; the Emperor having sent him
word, that so soon as he had made an end of chastising some Jews that were in
Arms against him in the Mountains of Cemen, he should have orders to come to
Court; but Raz Cella, who would always outdo his Brother in civility to the
Roman Catholics, with his Present and Complement, sent the Patriarch a strong
Guard, to wait upon him wherever he went. In December the Patriarch arrived at
Gorgora, where he ordained Twenty Priests, ordaining such of them as were in
Habassin Orders, with a Condition; and permitting such of them as were Married,
to live with their Wives. Not many days after, he received an Invitation from
the Emperor to come to Dancez, where the Court was at that time; and being come
within half a League of the Royal Camp, he was met by most of the Officers of
the Court in their best Clothes, and a body of Sixteen Thousand Soldiers; who
after having made him a profound reverence, opened to the Right and Left to
make a Lane for him. Among the Grandees that went out to meet him, were
Basilides, the Emperor's Eldest Son, and his sure Friend Raz Cella Christos.

In this State the Patriarch was Conducted to a Tent that was prepared for him
without the Camp; The Patriarch comes to Court.
where having put on his Pontificials, the Princes and Grandees all alighted
and kissed his hand. When that Ceremony was over, he Mounted again, and was
Conducted to a Tent within the Camp; where having put on his Mytre, he Mounted
a stately Horse richly equipped, that the Emperor had presented him with; and
riding under a sumptuous Canopy, that was supported by Six Viceroys, he
advanced to the Church Jan Jabet, having his Horse led all the way by Serca
Christos the Steward of the Household.

When the Patriarch entered into the Church, he found the Emperor there sitting
on his Throne with his Crown on his Head; who when the Patriarch drew near to
him, He is graciously received by the Emperor.
ris up and embraced him with great Affection, the Patriarch having paid his
Devoirs to the Emperor, went up to the Altar; where having spent some time in
Devotion, he seated himself in his Pontifical Chair, and begun a Sermon, taking
for his Text those words of the Psalmist, Behold how good and pleasant a thing
it is for brethren to live together in unity. His Discourse is said to have
been the more applauded, for its having been the first Sermon that was ever
preached in Ethiopia by an Abuna: Upon which, as if all Popes and Roman
Archbishops were constant and laborious Preachers, and mortal haters of Money;
the Jesuits triumphed, and made this reflection, That by this, if there had
been nothing else, the Habassins might have seen the difference there was
betwixt their Church and that of Rome, their former Abunas having come amongst
them for no other end, but to get money out of them; the Patriarch having given
the blessing, was told the Emperor staid for him in the great Hall of the
Palace; who when the Patriarch came near, ris up and made him sit down by him
in a Chair, that differed nothing from that he himself sat on; the Emperor
after they were both seated, enquired very kindly about the Patriarch's health,
The day is fixed for the Emperor's submitting himself and his Empire to the Pope.
and the length and fatigues of his Voyage; and some Complements and
Ejaculations having passed on both sides, they fixed the day whereon the
Emperor and all his Converts were publicly to swear obedience to the Pope in
the hands of the Patriarch.

The Eleventh of December, which was the day appointed for the Solemnity, being
come, the Emperor and all the Court-Converts repaired to the great Hall of the
Palace, in which there were two Chairs of State placed near the Throne, one on
the right side for the Emperor, and another on the left for the Patriarch; who
being seated with his Tiara on his head, and in a Cope of Asperges, he begun a
Sermon, taking for his Text, Thou art Peter, etc. I shall not trouble the
Reader with the Sermon, there being nothing in it but the common Roman
Mumpsimus upon these words, The Patriarch preaches before the Emperor.
and the gross fallacy of confounding, the Supremacy the Church of Rome now
pretends to, with that primacy of order that was anciently given to it purely
in consideration of Rome 's being the first City in the Empire; to which
purpose the Patriarch quoted a Canon of the Council of Nice, which he told the
Habassins they would find in their own Books, which run as follows:

There are four principal Chairs in the World which are as the four Rivers that
flow out of Paradise; or as the four universal Winds, or as the four Elements;
but above all the Chair of St. Peter has the Dignity and Primacy; and in the
second place that of St. Mark of Alexandria; in the third place that of St.
John; in the fourth that of Antioch, which was also St. Peter 's, from which
four all the other Bishops are derived. Now this Canon, besides that it is not
a Canon of the Council of Nice, which in its Constitution relating to the
Hierarchy, contradicts it in making Antioch and not Ephesus the third Chair,
and Jerusalem the fourth; it overthrows that very Supremacy to which the
Habassins were about to swear obedience, in giving no other Primacy to the
Roman, over the other three Patriarchs than it does to the Alexandrian over the
other two, which was undoubtedly a Primacy only of Order and not of
Jurisdiction; for had the Primacy that is here given to these Chairs, been
given out of respect to the Apostles who were their first Bishops, then Antioch
must have been the second if not the first, and Alexandria the last; but
notwithstanding it is not easy to imagine, that the patriarch should be
ignorant of these two great flaws in his Canon, he concluded it with this
flourish, See now to whom you ought to give most Credit, to a gross Falsary or
Cheat, or to a Decree of Three hundred and eighteen Catholic Fathers.

There was another thing he much insisted upon, which was, That there had been
Heretical Bishops in all the other Chairs, whereas no Bishop that had sat in
the Chair of Rome, had ever been so much as suspected of any Heresy; which to
say no worse of it, was a bold word, considering That Liberius stands accused
by all his Contemporaries of Arianism; and Honorius, Bishop of the same See,
was condemned by Name in Two General Councils, as a Heretic. But the Habassins
having little or no Knowledge in Church History, encouraged the Patriarch to
make so bold with them.

When the Patriarch had ended his Sermon, the Emperor Commanded the Viceroy of
Cemen, who was Lord High Chamberlain, to speak in his Name.

There is but one thing remarkable in the Chamberlain's Speech, that is, his
saying, The High Chamberlain's Speech.
That the People of Ethiopia did compel the Emperor much against his will, to
take the Crown upon him, and that if they would have let him alone, he would
have been much better contented to have lived and died in the Monastery they
found him in, than to have been made an Emperor. Now this is very different
from the History we have of him, which makes him, during Jacob and Za Danguil's
Reign, to have scoured about with a Body of Raperees, and to have fought his
way to the Throne.

When the Chamberlain had done speaking, the Emperor turned about to the
Patriarch, and told him, Your Lordship is not to think that what I am about to
do now is a new thing, I having some years ago yielded Obedience to the Pope,
in the hands of the Father Superior, who is here present; nevertheless being
willing to do it again with more Solemnity, he took the Book of the Gospels in
his hand, and Kneeling down before the Patriarch, made his Submission in the
form following:

WE Seltem Saged, The Emperor's Submission.
Emperor of Ethiopia, Do Believe and Confess, That St. Peter was Constituted
Prince of the Apostles by our Lord Jesus Christ, as also Head of the whole
Christian Church, Christ having given him a Principality and Dominion over the
whole World, when he said unto him, Thou art Peter; and when at another time he
Commanded him to feed his Sheep. We do also Believe and Confess, That the Pope
of Rome, being lawfully Elected, is the true Successor of the Apostle St. Peter
in that Government, having the same Power, Dignity, and Primacy over the whole
Christian Church. And to the Holy Father Urban the VIIIth. who is, by the Grace
of God, Pope at this time, and our Lord; and to his Successors in the
Government of the Church, We do Promise, Offer, and Swear, true Obedience and
Subjection, with all humility at his Feet, for our own Person and Empire. So
help us God, and this Holy Gospel.

Upon this Submission the Emperor was represented here in Europe, by the
Missionaries as one of the greatest Saints that had ever wore, a Crown: But
upon his returning to re-establish the Alexandrian Faith again, which he did,
not many years after, we have this great Character recanted, being represented
on that occasion, and that by the same Missionaries, as a wretch that had never
any thing in him that was good. So that Princes are Saints or Devils with some
people, as they are Friends or Foes to the Pope, of which Queen Elizabeth, and
Mary Queen of Scots, are a home instance.

After the Emperor, the Princes, Viceroys, The Submission of the Prince,
Grandees, and Ecclesiastics.
and Ecclesiastics of the Court made their Submissions, saying, I. N. do
Promise, Offer, and Swear the same. So help me God, and these Holy Gospels.
When the Solemnity of Swearing was ended, Raz Cella Christos began an harangue,
and having talked himself into an heat, he drew his Sword, and holding it up
naked, said, what is now is now, and what is past is past, but whosoever shall
not do his duty hereafter, this, shaking his Sword, shall be his Judge.

After this, all that were present took an Oath to Prince Basilides, as Heir
and Successor to his Father; which Oath, say the Jesuits, when the Great Raz
Cella Christos came to take, he, like a true Son of the Roman Church, took it
with a Condition, worthy of his Courage and Christianity, saying, I Swear to
the Prince as Heir to his Father in the Empire, and I do promise to Obey him as
a Loyal Subject, so long as he shall Hold, Defend, and Favor, the Holy
Catholic Faith, which whenever he shall cease to do, I will be both his
first and greatest Enemy: All his Officers and Servants taking the Oath to the
Prince with the same Condition.

The Solemnity was concluded with an Excommunication pronounced by the
Patriarch, aginst those who should at any time violate these Oaths; and with
two Proclamations, the one prohibiting all Habassin Priests to perform any
Ecclesiastical Office before they had presented themselves to the Patriarch;
and the other Commanding all the Subjects of the Empire, upon pain of Death, to
embrace Popery, and to discover all such as adhered to their Ancient Religion,
Commanding them likewise to observe Lent and Easter according to the Roman
Style.

The next thing to be done, A new revenue is settled on the Patriarch.
was to settle a Revenue on the Patriarch, suitable to the height of his
Dignity, to which the Lands and Perquisites of the former Abuna's were not
reckoned to be sufficient; the Emperor therefore bestowed a great Estate in
Land, lying upon the shore of the Lake of Dembea, upon him, giving him also the
Palace of the Empress Mariam Eima, and ordering another Palace to be Built for
him in Dancaz, where the Court resided for the most part.

The Patriarch having thus feathered his own Nest, begun to look abroad, and
having got the Emperor to found a College for Sixty Students at Dancaz, he
begun to send his Missionaries about, and not having Fathers enough for so
great an harvest, he was forced to make use of such Habassins as were observed
to have the most Zeal for the Roman Church.

And as it is common with some People to reckon a work done before it is well
begun, The Jesuits do reckon their work done before it was well begun.
so when the News of this solemn submission came to Lisbon, Ethiopia was
reckoned to be the Pope's, as sure as Portugal; for in a Book Printed there in
the year 1623. by one Vega a Jesuit, the World was told, That the fervor
wherewith the Habassins crowded into the bosom of Mother Church, was too great
to be either expressed or conceived, and that there was nothing to be heard all
over that vast Empire, but Praises of the Roman Faith; Old and Young, Rich and
Poor, declaring that there was nothing to be compared to it; and that whereas
hitherto they had been as blind as Bats, and miserably imposed upon, they do
now behold the Light, and are happily rescued from the Blindness and Cheats of
false Teachers, the Roman being the only Faith that deserved to be maintained;
and if there should be occasion, that is worth the dying for. Nay, the
Patriarch himself, as appears from a Letter of his sent to Portugal about this
time, was pretty sanguine too, having assured the Fathers of his Society, That
he spoke within compass when he said, an Hundred thousand had been Converted
within a Year to the Roman Church; which, considering that Ethiopia is no very
populous Country, was an extraordinary Harvest. And I do well remember, that
in the year 1685. he would have been looked upon at Lisbon as one of the
greatest liars in the World, that should have denied that in Eight Months time
above Six hundred thousand Protestants had been Christened, for that was the
word, in England.

There were likewise a great many pretty stories, Pretty stories sent from
Habassia.
either sent from Ethiopia or made at Lisbon, upon this occasion; I shall only
set down one of them, by which the Reader may judge of the rest.

The Emperor having one day commanded one of his Sons, who was but a Child, to
take up the Cudgels for the Roman Church, against one of the most Learned of
the Habassin Monks, Bellarmine, for so the Emperor used to call that Child,
took the Monk to task presently, asking him, without any premeditation, Whether
he Believed Christ to have been God before he was Born? The Monk made answer,
be did: Bellarmine then asked him, Whether he did not believe God's Nature to
be different from Man's Nature? The Monk answered, It was undoubtedly: Hold
your hand then, said Bellarmine, since you acknowledge he was God that took
Man's Nature upon him, How can you deny that there must be Two Natures in
Christ; with which argument the poor Monk was struck as mute as a Fish. It is
no great matter whether this story was true or not, it being enough that it was
pat for a Sermon upon the Text, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, etc.

But as all other Orders, as we have hinted before, do accuse the Jesuit
Missionaries of magnifying their own Labors and Successes thus, beyond all the
bounds of Credibility, so they do complain likewise of their disparaging the
Labors of all other Friars in their remote Missions.

Of which Proud and envious carriage, the Jesuits resident at Agra do, in their
Letters of this Year to their Superiors at Goa, furnish us with a notable
instance; where, speaking of some Friars, who, I suppose were Carmelites, being
come newly to that City, they say, They were so high-flown, as to pretend to
nothing under Raising the Dead; adding, they have begun to work, but we do not
as yet hear, that they have Raised any that were Dead to Life: We pray God they
may prove true Prophets.

But though the Roman Church was thus Triumphant at Court, the whole Body of
the Empire, notwithstanding the late bloody Proclamation, was extremely
prejudiced against it, and the whole Court, for its sake, so that the
Patriarch's Missionaries, wherever they went, met with but bad entertainment.

Two of them going into a Church in Tigre to say Mass, were Commanded, by a
Person of Honor that lived in the Neighborhood, to go and say their Masses
somewhere else, and not in the Church where his Father, who had lived and died
in the Alexandrian Faith, lay buried; but the Missionaries knowing they had the
Government on their side, made answer, That he must not think to terrify them
out of their Duties, for Mass they came to say there, and Mass they would say.
Two Mabassin Missionaries are Murdered for saying the Roman Mass.
The Gentleman finding they were not to be hindered by Threats, offered them
Money to forbear; and when he found that would not do neither, he threw himself
down upon his Father's grave, crying in a mighty Passion, that he would be
buried with his Father, rather than suffer a thing to be done there, which he
knew must be offensive to his Ghost. But the Missionaries taking no notice of
his words, performed their Masses, which provoked the Gentleman to that degree,
that he had them both Murdered next Night in their Beds.

The Emperor and the Court kept the Holy Week and Easter with the Patriarch at
the Church of Geneta Jesus, where Raz Cella, the Hero of the Jesuits
Histories, with his Captains, guarded the Sepulcher all Good Friday at night;
and in the procession there were several that whipped themselves, after the
fashion of Portugal, which was a strange sight in Ethiopia.

The Patriarch having published the Six first General Councils with a Catechism
in the Habassin Tongue, begun a Visitation; but finding himself not able to
endure the fatigue thereof, he cut it short, leaving it to the new Bishop, who
was expected daily from the Indies. The Emperor upon his having been told that
the Patriarch had demanded no Fees of the Clergy at his Visitation, is said to
have reflected upon the former Abuna's; who not having so great an Estate, as
he had bestowed upon the Patriarch, did use to take some; saying of them, That
they seemed to have held Visitations for no other end but to get Money, the
thing in the World the Roman Prelates and Jesuits hate the most.

In the Year 1627, the Gauls made a great Incursion into Ethiopia; and having
surprised the Viceroy Buco, who was a great Stickler for Popery, they put him
and his whole Army to the Sword, but they were afterward drive home by Raz
Cella, who does all the great things in the Jesuits Histories.

But the ill success of Julius, Joanel, and others who had taken up Arms in
defense of their Religion, had not so far cowed the Zeal of the Habassins, as
to make them submit quietly to the Establishment of Popery; and the
discontented Grandees, which are what no Government ever wanted, knowing the
people to be extremely angry with the Emperor and the Court, are said to have
made use of their Religious resentments for the carrying on of their own
private designs.

And accordingly Tecla Guergis, the Viceroy of Tigre, who was Married to a
Daughter of the Emperor's, Published a Proclamation on the Fifth of November;
wherein having declared himself of the Alexandrian Faith, and swore to Defend
it with the last drop of his Blood against all the world; A fifth Croisade
raised against the Emperor.
He ordered all that were of the same faith to bring in all the Crucifixes and
Relics which had been forced upon them by the Fathers; and having got great
numbers of them into his hands, he made a Bonfire of them all, telling the
Monks and Soldiers, who were rejoicing at the sight, That they might see by
this that he was in earnest; and not contented with having given them this
assurance of his having absolutely broke with his Father-in-Law and the
Jesuits; He Murdered his own Chaplain in the sight of the Camp, because he
refused to return to the Alexandrian Faith, giving his body afterward to the
Officers of his Army, who with their Cimiters cut it in a thousand pieces.

When the Emperor heard of this new Croisade, he sent Kebo Christus with an
Army to suppress it in the beginning; who having Marched day and night, was up
with Guergis sooner than he expected; It is routed, and the General of it, who
was the Emperor's Son-in-Law, is taken.
Guergis nevertheless trusting to the Zeal and Number of his Forces, accepted
of a Battle when it was offered him by Kebo; who having encouraged his men with
a short Speech, dispersed the Alexandrians with the first shock he gave them,
few of them having been killed fighting, besides Twelve Monks. Keb^, who was a
Bigoted Papist, made a great slaughter, sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child;
and Guergis, who had hid himself in a Cave, being taken three days after the
fight, was sent by him under a strong Guard to the Emperor, by whom he was
condemned to be burnt to Ashes, not for his Treason, but for his Apostasy, and
the Bonfire he had made; who having desired to speak with a Roman Priest before
he died, had Father Antonio sent to him by the Patriarch, with full powers to
absolve him from all censures in case he found him penitent. Guergis, hoping
that his turning Roman Catholic would have helped him to a pardon, told the
Father he was extremely sorry for what he had done, and desired nothing so much
as to be reconciled again to the Roman Church, being resolved to die in her
Faith. The Father having made him abjure the Alexandrian Faith, confessed and
absolved him from all the censures he had incurred; but Guergis perceiving that
all that he was like to get by having turned Papist, was only to be hanged in
the prison as a Rebel, and not burnt publicly alive as an Heretic; when he
was brought to the place of Execution, he declared openly, That he died in the
Alexandrian, and not in the Roman Faith. The Emperor when he heard of this,
sent an order to bring him immediately out of prison, to hang him on a Tree
that stood near the Palace.

When the Officers came to the prison, they found him hanging; and perceiving
that he was not quite dead, they cut him down; and carrying him to that Tree,
hanged him upon it. The Emperor carried all the Court-Ladies to entertain them
with this sad spectacle; and having commanded them to look on the Dead body, he
told them, That from that day forward, they would do well to look to themselves
and if they either rejected or forsook the Roman Faith; not to expect a pardon
for it, since he had denied one to his own Son-in-Law for having done it; and
to terrify the tender Sex the more, about fifteen days after, he commanded
Adivato, a Lady of great Quality, to be hanged before them upon the same Tree;
for whose pardon, when the Empress and all the Ladies of the Court had thrown
themselves at his feet, he shaked them off, says Father Anthony, with the
following Noble Fable.

There was upon a time a very ancient man, A Lady is put to death for her
Religion.
who being told that a Child was dead, made answer, Children are tender
Creatures, and a small matter carries them off; and being told afterward there
was a Young man dead, he said, Considering the rashness of Youth, that was no
wonder; but when be was told that an Old man was dead, he wrung his hands, and
cried as if the world had been at an end, imagining death stood ready to arrest
him; So, says the Emperor, you could see Guergis and his Companions suffer
without speaking a word in their behalf, but now one of your own Sex is to
suffer, you are all in an uproar to save her; but I will have you all know,
That this Shoestring of Aba Jacob 's, whom Guergis had Murdered for being a
Roman Priest, is strong enough to hang this Sow, and all such as she is. Father
Anthony, who was present at all these Executions, has in his Relation of them,
made so true a remark upon the change Popery had wrought on the Emperor's
temper, The wonderful change Popery had wrought on the tempers of its Converts.
and on the practice of the Habassins, who seldom or never used to put
Grandees, and much less Ladies, to death, for Treason, or indeed for any other
Crime, that I shall set it down in his own words; Whosoever, says he, shall
diligently read the History of Ethiopia, and shall observe the want of
Vindicative Justice that was therein, and the Clemency Seltem Saged had used
before with all that had Rebelled against him, must of necessity reckon his
Punishing of Tecla Guergis so severely, to have been one of the greatest
Miracles that had happened in many years in Ethiopia. For let the Church of
Rome be what She will, as to her working Miracles that are any ways beneficial
to Mankind, they must be very unjust to her that deny her the honor of working
such Miracles as these in the tempers of her Converts. But, as we shall see
hereafter, these Miracles of Cruelty did the Fathers no great kindness in
Ethiopia at long run. Neither were the Cruelties of an unprovoked Persecution
at this time in Ethiopia, less wonderful than those of War; the inhumanity of
the former being such, as to overtake those, An inhumane persecution is raised
against the Alexandrians.
who for Conscience sake had forsaken all that they had in the world, and had
Buried themselves in Cases and Dens of the Earth; out of which, when
discovered, they were either ferreted to be burnt, if they would not turn
Roman Catholics, or smoaked to death in them. The memory of which Barbarities
is to this day so fresh in the minds of the Habassins, that as they do still
continue to have a great Veneration for those Caves wherein their Brethren
suffered Martyrdom, so they cannot hear a Jesuit or a Roman Catholic so much
as mentioned, but with horror.

The Patriarch and Fathers reckoning themselves sure of the Emperor, after
these miraculous cruelties, for which they believed the Alexandrians would
never be reconciled to him, begun to make bolder steps than they had ventured
to make before; and so the Patriarch having been informed that an Ancient
Nobleman, who had been of the Council of State, and Chamberlain to the Emperor,
had some Lands which belonged to the Church in his hands, he first admonished
him to restore them to the Church immediately; which the Nobleman having
refused to do, the Patriarch seeing him afterward at Mass, The Patriarch
Excommunicates a great Man for keeping Church Lands.
ordered an Excommunication to be pronounced against him; the Nobleman having
never dreamt of any such Thunderclap, is said to have been so astonished by its
Curses and Maledictions, That he fell upon the ground, as if Datham and Abiram,
to whom the Excommunication had delivered him, had been coming upon him like
two furies to carry him quick down into Hell; but being come to himself again,
he beseeched the Emperor and the whole Congregation to intercede with the
Patriarch in his behalf, promising to restore the Lands to the Church
immediately; which being done, the Patriarch absolved him in forma Ecclesiae,
striking him with a road all the time the Miserere was Singing. At which
exercise of Discipline, though all the true Romanists, say the Jesuits,
rejoiced, they that were Heretics in their hearts were mad to see themselves
subjected to such reproachful punishments.

In this Year the Foundation of the Patriarichal Church was laid at Dancez; the
Emperor himself having laid the first stone, and promised to build it at his
own proper cost; and as an Earnest of his Devotion for our Lady, to whom it was
Dedicated, he took a Crown of pure Gold off his Head and gave it to be employed
in gilding the Seats in our Lady's Chapel; it was to have been a large Church
with three Naves, but Popery did not stay long enough in Ethiopia to see it
finished: For at the same time that its foundations were laid, the Emperor's
jealousies of his Brother revived again; one Melcha Christos, who was his first
Cousin having assured both the Emperor and the Prince, Raz Cella is accused of
plotting with the Portugueses to make himself Emperor.
that Raz Cella was continually plotting with the Patriarch and the Fathers, to
bring a Portuguese Army into Ethiopia, to make himself Emperor; in which charge
Melcha Christos was seconded by one Lessana Christos, who being an Officer of
the Army, was secured by Raz Cella, so soon as he heard of his being one of his
accusers, and condemned by him to be put to death immediately as an Apostate to
the Alexandrian Faith. Lessana, to prevent the Execution of this Sentence,
appealed to the Emperor; and fearing lest he might be dispatched out of the
way, before he could have an answer from Court, he broke prison; but being
taken before he could get to the Emperor, he had his head chopped off, not for
Heresy, nor for having accused his General, but for having broke Jayl. But Raz
Cella by stopping of Lessana' s mouth thus, did open a Thousand against him;
and did Confirm the Emperor and the Prince in their former jealousies; it being
in every body's mouth, One of the chief Witnesses against him is murdered by
his order.
that Raz Cella had murdered Lessana for no other reason, but because he was
privy to his plotting secretly with the Patriarch, and was ready to have proved
it upon him if he had been suffered to go to Court.

The discovery of this plot gave a fatal blow to Popery in Ethiopia; every
body, but especially the Prince, being satisfied, that considering how odious
Raz Cella had rendered himself to the Habassins, it could be nothing but his
having received some assurances of a Portuguese Army, that could have put such
fumes into his head; so that after this the Prince never gave over persecuting
the Patriarch and Fathers until he had rid Ethiopia of them, as we shall see
hereafter.

In the Year 1629, the Agau's of Begameder took up Arms for their Religion; and
having Massacred the Soldiers that were Quartered upon them, and drive their
Viceroy Za Mariam out of the Province, The Agus take up Arms in Defense of
their Religion.
they sent Envoys to a Prince of the Royal Family, who had taken sanctuary
among the Gauls, to come and take the Crown of Ethiopia, which belonged to him
of right, upon him; promising to stand by him in Defense of their Religion,
with their Lives and Fortunes. This Prince was probably Son either to the late
Emperor Jacob, or to Za Danguil, who are both said to have had Sons; though we
hear nothing of them after their Fathers were slain, unless we will believe
Zaga Christi, who died at Ruel near Paris in the Year 1629, to have been the
Son of Jacob, as he pretended; and who reported there, that it was with the
assistance of the Portugueses, that Suseneus had Conquered and Murdered his
Father, on the account of his being an Enemy to the Roman Faith.

But whosesoever Son this Prince was whom the Agau's had invited to take the
Crown upon him, he came to them with the Envoys they had sent to him; and
having accepted of the Crown, did swear to defend the Alexandrian Faith against
all the world: Upon which the Monks, who were enraged almost to madness, by the
Emperor's having commanded all his Subjects of what Degree or Quality soever,
immeditely to turn Roman- Catholics, flocked to their Alexandrian Emperor from
all Parts, declaring against the Emperor, as another Julian the Apostate; and
who was not content with having abandoned the Religion of his Fathers himself,
but he would force all the People of Ethiopia to follow his Example. By which
tragical Exclamations they raised the Country wherever they came, chiefly the
Peasants of Lasta, who have the reputation of being the stoutest Men in the
whole Empire. But the Emperor having got together an Army of Twenty five
thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, Marched toward the Peasants by the way
of Gojam, in the beginning of February, and having attacked the strong Mountain
of Lasta on all sides, he was beat back, having besides his General and several
Persons of the first Quality, Seven hundred Soldiers slain in the Action. The
Peasants flushed with this Success, followed their blow so close, that they
obliged the Emperor to Retreat; and had not Kebo Christos come in to him very
seasonably with a Body of old Troops, it was thought the Peasants would have
gone near to have hemmed him in among the Mountains, which if they had done,
they would have had him and his whole Army at their mercy.

The Emperor, The Emperor is obliged to employ his Brother against them.
though very unwilling to have employed his Brother any more, was forced by the
condition of his Affairs to do it, not having a Man, besides him, that knew how
to Command an Army; and accordingly he sent to him, to come and take that
Command upon him; Raz Cella, who since his Disgrace had retired into the
Country of the Agau's, having received this Message from the Emperor, yielded
Obedience to it; and having, after he had got into Gojam, placed Guards in all
the Passages the Agau's had into that Province, he repaired to Court, where he
was received with great appearances of Respect and Affection.

But the News, which came a few days after, of the Agau's being got into the
heart of Gojam, which they were plundering at a most unmerciful rate, the
Soldiers that had been left by Raz Cella to Guard the Passages, having all
either run home, or gone over to the Agau's so soon as they approached them,
revived Peoples former jealousies of Raz Cella, it being in every bodies mouth,
He is accused of treachery.
That he was in a Correspondence with the Agau 's, and had placed such Men in
the Passes, as he knew certainly would go over to them, or that at least would
not oppose them. Whereupon Raz Cella that he might clear himself of these
suspicions, Marched with all the speed he could toward the Agau's; who having
advice of his advancing toward them, withdrew, returning home full of the
Spoils of that rich Country; which the Alexandrians said considently, Raz
Cella might have prevented if he had had a mind to it. But notwithstanding all
these surmises, and that his having thus obliged the Agau's to leave Gojam, was
no argument at all of his having had no hand in letting them into it; the
Emperor was, it seems, so well satisfied with his Conduct, that he gave him the
Viceroyship of that Kingdom again, giving the Chief Command of the Army to the
Prince, The Prince abandons the Roman, and goes entirely into the Alexandrian
interest.
who was now become a mortal Enemy to the Patriarch and the Fathers.

The Alexandrians having thus got the Prince entirely in their Interest, begun
to contrive how to rid the Court of all that were Champions for Popery in it;
and having persuaded the Emperor to send his Brother into Gojam, they got him
likewise to send Kebo Christos, who was the second great stickler for Popery,
into Tigre, whereof he was Viceroy, pretending his presence there was
necessary, by reason of its neighborhood to the Peasants that were in Arms.

Kebo, though he was sensible upon what design he was Commanded to his
Government, yet not being in a condition to refuse, The Romanists lose ground
at Court daily.
he pretended to be very willing to leave the Court, giving this for his
reason, That he was not able to bear the coldness that increased in it daily
for Popery; declaring, That he had much rather be slain by the Peasants of
Lasta, Fighting for the Faith, than continue Chamberlain to the Emperor, and be
obliged to Persecute those Good Men who had instructed him therein, which he
saw plainly the Court would be brought to do in a short time. Thus Kebo full of
fears and discontents left the Court, and being arrived at Tigre, went
immediately to Fremona, where having spent some days with the Fathers, only
about Ghostly business, he advanced from thence with a small Body into the
Kingdom of Amahara, where the Prince had promised to join him with the Army;
but Kebo having been sent thither by the Alexandrians on purpose to be
Sacrificed, Their great Champion Kebo is sent into Tigre to be Sacrificed.
no Prince came near him; and having waited for him till his Provisions were
all spent, the Peasants, as he was retreating to Tigre, fell upon his Rear, and
having Slain him, as he was Fighting Manfully to have made good his Retreat,
his Soldiers, who were all in their hearts Alexandrians, so soon as they saw
their General fall, went over to the Peasants as to the Defenders of their
Faith.

The Patriarch, who performed a solemn Office for Kebo's Soul, was wonderfully
afflicted for the loss of such a Champion; and as Misfortunes do seldom come
single, his tears were not well dried up for this loss, before he received the
bad News of Tecur Egzi, the Grandee that was to have gone Ambassador to
Portugal, being killed by the Galls in an inrode they had made into the Kingdom
of Damotes.

Upon the fall of these Two Pillars of the Roman Church, the Alexandrians about
the Court grew bolder every day, and having observed the Emperor to be
Melancholy upon such a run of Losses, they all waited upon him in a Body, one
of them, in the Name of all the rest, asking him:

Sir, We desire to know how long we are to worry one another thus? The poor
Peasants that are in Arms have no Quarrel with your Highness, but only for
forcing them to be of the Roman Religion: That Religion may, perhaps, be true,
but it is what they do not understand, neither will they trouble themselves,
being well satisfied with their Old Religion, to study a New one; and so being
resolved never to be of any other Faith but that of their Forefathers, they
have set up an Emperor, who has promised to defend them in the Profession of
it, calling us Turks and Moors for having not only embraced a New Religion our
selves, but for Persecuting of them because they will not do it. The Emperor
tho he returned them no answer to these passionate Remonstrances, encouraged
them by his silence and attention to what they said, to ply him daily upon that
point; desiring him, at least, to leave his Subjects to their liberty of being
of which of the Two Religions they liked best.

But as when things are tumbling, The Patriarch hastens the downfall of Popery
by two indiscreet acts.
every small push hastens their fall; so there were Two Actions of the
Patriarch's which gave Popery a terrible shake, in the tottering condition it
was in at Court.

The first was, His having commanded the Corpse of an Eminent Monk, who had been
for several years General of the whole Order of Tecla Haymonot, to be taken out
of the Grave, where it lay Buried in a Church, and to be thrown into the open
Fields, for his having declared at his Death, That he died in the Alexandrian,
and not in the Roman Faith. It is not to be imagined, say the Jesuits, how
great a storm this act of Discipline put the whole Empire into; it being in
every Body's mouth, That the Romanists were not satisfied with Persecuting
People while they were alive, who would not turn to their Religion, but did
Persecute them beyond the Grave; which puts a stop to the Rage of all other
Nations and Sects of People, by Commanding their Bodies, contrary to the Laws
of Humanity, to be taken out of the Earth, and thrown for a Prey to Birds and
Wild Beasts.

The second was, the Patriarch having committed a Woman to Prison for being a
Witch, and, notwithstanding upon his having been informed that there was a Law
in Ethiopia which prohibited People to believe that there is any such thing as
Witches; the belief whereof, they say, is founded upon the Error of the
Manichees, That there are Two Independent Gods, a Good one, and a Bad one; he
commanded her presently to be set at Liberty; yet that was not sufficient to
stop the Clamor, or to keep the Alexandrians from accusing the Portugueses of
being Manichees, and who in defiance to the ancient Laws of the Empire, were
endeavoring to bring the belief of Two Eternal and Independent Principles in
among them.

There was another thing happened at this time too, which, though in it self
ridiculous, made a great noise, and did Popery some disservice.

A Man, who appeared to be Distracted, running into the great Hall of the
Palace, cried out, He had a Message from Heaven to deliver to the Emperor; the
Alexandrians, who were believed to have made the Farce, having persuaded the
Emperor to hear what he had to say, he told his Highness, That it was now Three
days since he was Raised from the Dead, and having since been carried up to
Paradise, was sent by God to deliver the following Message to him:

Hear, O Emperor, I have bore with you for some Years, expecting that you would
have Repented of the great Sin you have been guilty of, in forsaking the
Religion of your Forefathers; during all which time the Blessed Virgin has been
on her Knees before her Son to Intercede for you; but I am now to tell you,
That in case you do not Repent of that Sin, that God will Punish you with a
strange Judgment. But notwithstanding, the Emperor Commanded the Fellow to be
soundly Whipped for his News, the Alexandrians made great use of what he had
said, it being reported over the whole Empire, That an Angel from Heaven had
appeared to the Emperor with a Command to him from God to return to his Old
Religion. But among other things, the Emperor is said to have been displeased
with himself for having in the first heats of his new Religion settled so much
Land on the Patriarch, which he would gladly have had a pretense to have
resumed again, to settle it upon his Younger Sons; but whatever were the cause
of the Emperor growing every day less fond of Popery, the Alexandrians being at
him continually for a Toleration, he promised to speak to the Patriarch about
it, and accordingly having sent for him, he told him, He opposes a Toleration
when proposed to him by the Emperor.
He had done all that was in his power to have introduced the Roman Faith into
his Empire, but he was now satisfied that it was not to be done by force, it
being visible that his People hated it more than ever, since he Commanded them
to embrace it. Besides, there was an absolute necessity of his granting them a
Toleration, since if he did not, he would quickly have his whole Empire against
him; his Soldiers that he made use of against the Peasants, being in their
hearts no less Alexandrians than the Peasants themselves. The Patriarch, who
was extremely troubled to hear this from the Emperor, told him, That his
Highness was miserably misled by Evil Counselors, who under pretense of a
Toleration sought the utter Extirpation of the Roman Faith. But the Emperor
urging still, That something must be done to satisfy the minds of his Subjects,
the Patriarch was forced to promise the Toleration of all such Ancient Habassin
Customs as were not contrary to the Faith, but upon condition that such a
Toleration should not be Proclaimed; because if that were done, the Habassins,
he said, would Triumph so upon it, as to conclude that the Roman Church was
about to make Her Exit out of Ethiopia.

While Popery was in this declining state, Dom Apolinar D' Almeyda, the new
Bishop of Nice, arrived in Ethiopia, bringing a Jubilee with him, and Letters
from the Pope to the Emperor and the Prince; which Letters, though I have great
reason to believe they were writ in Ethiopia, in order to rekindle the
Emperor's Zeal for Popery, which was slackened so much of late; I shall
nevertheless set them down as they are published by the Jesuits, leaving them
to the censure of the judicious Reader.

Pope Urban the VIIIth. To Seltem Saged Emperor of Ethiopia. Health and
Apostolical Benediction.
MOST dear Son in Christ; The Stream of the River Nile does at this time make
glad the City of God; Fruits fit for the Banquets of Angels being brought from
the thirsty Land of Ethiopia to the Palace of St. Peter; there being nothing
that the Mother of Riches, or that Africa, which is so fruitful of Monsters,
can bring to Rome, the Mother of Christianity, that is so Precious and
wonderful, as your Majesty's Letters, addressed to Gregory the XVth of happy
Memory, to whose place, though unworthy of it, the Holy Spirit has been pleased
to call us; when we read them we could not forbear weeping for joy, to hear
that the vast Empire of Ethiopia had submitted it self to the Laws of the Roman
Pontificate. O happy Prince! who after having Conquered diverse Nations, and
triumphed over all your Enemies, have been able to exalt the Trophies of the
Cross of Christ upon the Towers of your Provinces: For you do really plant
Heaven in your Empire, so long as the favor of so great a King is sought after
by the making a profession of the Catholic truth. Go on, my Dear Son, since
God favors you, and Rome by its applauses exalts you to the Society of those
Princes, who for having propogated the Kingdom of Heaven, have an immortal
memory in the praises of Mankind; for notwithstanding your Majesty's Empire is
beyond the anciently known ways of the Sun, the Apostolical Senate which
comprehends all the Nations of the Christian Commonwealth beholds all your
Heroic Actions, giving manifold applauses on the Theater of the world to your
Majesty, and to all that are employed by you, in suppressing the rashness of
Rebels, and in breaking the horns of Fiends. We the Vicar of the Almighty
Majesty in this Throne, which all Christians do with bended knees adore, have
turned the eyes of our Apostolical solicitude toward your Majesty, praying
that the most exalted Arbiter of Princes, may send his Angels to be Soliders in
your Triumphant Armies; we are not ignorant of what some people drive at, for
we behold whole Legions of Devils fighting against the Scepter of Christ, which
is the strength of your Majesty's Right-arm; we know the Professors of false
Doctrines do likewise whet their Tongues as a Sword, that so they may with the
poison of their Impiety infect the Bread of Life. Assume a courage therefore
worthy of the Race of David, in whom the House of Ethiopia glories as in their
Ancestor; who when such people placed their Camps against him, did put his
trust in God, and so found by Experience, that the name of the Lord was the
Tower of David, guarded by a^ heavenly Host, and praised by a victorious Army.
My most dear Son, it is undoubtedly as you write, that the Pests of their
Country, and the Disturbers of the people shall not, God assisting you, be
suffered to reign. We do most affectionately impart our Apostolical Benediction
to your self, and your best Brother, and to all your Royal Family and faithful
People; and shall pray continually that you may always have the Arms of light
from the Sanctuary of the Divinity; and we do here with the keys of the Pontiff
open unto you the Treasure of the heavenly Indulgence; with whose healthful
riches we do at this time bless the Ethiopick Church; we shall likewise be
always mindful to solicit the most Powerful King of Spain, to grant you all
that you shall desire of the Austrian House. Most Dear Son, we do embrace you
in the arms of our Apostolical Charity; and carrying you in our hearts, we
shall always adorn you with the Patronage of our Pontificate; and while you do
with a Royal Piety venerate the Patriarch of Ethiopia, and his Coadjutors, you
give Examples to others to honor the Priesthood; and do whet the solicitude
of holy Prelates to labor in Ethiopia; we wish you joy of the obedience of
your people, who so long as a Religious King fights under the standard of
Christ, do never Desert him.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, under the Ring of the Fisherman, this First of
February, 1627. in the Fourth Year of our Pontificate.

Pope Urban the VIIIth's Letter to the Prince.
Our Most Beloved Son in Christ, Health and Apostolical Benediction.
THE Wealth of Nile flows to the glory of your Name; Urban's Letter to the
Prince.
and you the Son of the Ethiopick Empire, do grow up in the hopes of a most
powerful Principality; you do nevertheless understand, God having taught you,
how miserable you had been, had you not drank of the streams of the Gospel, out
of the Fountain of the Catholic Church; and if you had not by adoring St.
Peter in the Roman Pontificate, been made the Son of God, whose Possession and
Workmanship the whole frame of Heaven and Earth is in the Roman Church. The
holy Quire of Reigning Priests, and of Obedient Nations, do applaud the Heir
that is to rule in Ethiopia with Christian Virtue; rejoicing that a Kingdom is
prepared for you, out of which your triumphant Father, the Scepter of whose
Empire is the Rod of Direction, does thorough the Divine Assistance, extirpate
the Synagogue of Satan; you having been Educated in the Domestic imitation of
such splendid virtues; and being in a Post that draws the eyes of Heaven and
Earth upon you. Such Councils are expected from your Wisdom as are to be like
the lights of the Holy Spirit, and the Thunderbolts of the Divine Vengeance.
And being it is thus, beloved Son, you must not think of living at ease in your
Father's Palace, before you have made all Ethiopia throw it self at the feet of
St. Peter, that so they may find Heaven in the Vatican: For the Doctrines of
the Pope, will not be only the hope of Salvation to you, but they will be also
the Anchor of quietness, and the safety of your Dominions. We do embrace you,
most Dear Son, with the Arms of Apostolical Charity, and do wish you an
obedient people and favorable Angels amidst the Trophies of your Arms, and the
Joys of your Prosperity; and we do from the bottom of our heart impart our
fatherly Benediction to you.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, under the Ring of the Fisherman, the Twenty
Eighth of December, 1630. in the Seventh Year of our Pontificate.

Now besides that, the Phrase of these Letters do very much resemble that of
the Patriarch Mendez, who affected a Tinsil Oratory in every thing he writ:
That to the Prince bears Date the same Month of the same Year when it was
delivered.

This Jubilee, The Emperor's Zeal revived by this Letter, and a Jabilee.
notwithstanding it was Laughed at by the Habassins, who asked by what
Authority the Pope pretended to forgive Sins, is said to have warmed the
Emperor's Zeal so for Popery again, that the Discourse of a Toleration seemed
to be quite laid aside by him.

The new Viceroy of Gojam, Raz Cella having been quickly turned out of that
Government, was so enraged at this change in the Emperor's mind, that he was
for deposing him presently as an irreconcilable Enemy to their Religion, and
for declaring the Prince, who was a hearty Friend to it, Emperor in his room;
and being encouraged so to do, by the Monks and Alexandrians that were about
him, The Viceroy of Gojam thereupon proclaims the Prince Emperor.
he proclaimed the Prince Basilides Emperor of Ethiopia, at the head of his
Army; and having done it, dispatched a Courier to him to acquaint him
therewith, and to desire him to join the Army he had the command of, with his,
that they might be able to subdue all the Enemies of their Religion; but the
Prince was so far from being pleased with the Viceroy's having proclaimed him
Emperor, that to satisfy his Father of his having had no hand in it, The Prince
is displeased with the Viceroy for what he had done.
he sent the Courier that had brought him the first news of it to him in
chains, to punish him as he should think fit. The Fathers, whose Church of
Collela was but at a small distance from the Viceroy's Camp, were put into such
a terrible fright by this Proclamation, that they immediately shut their Gates;
and their Convent being built very strong, as indeed all their Houses in
Ethiopia were more like Castles than Monasteries; they resolved to defend
themselves until an Army should come from the Emperor to relieve them.

The Viceroy hearing how much the Fathers were alarmed, and of their having
taken all the Portugueses of the Neighborhood into their Garrison, he sent them
word, That they had no reason to be so affrighted, for seeing they did not come
into Ethiopia before they were sent for, no body could blame them for having
come, or for what the Emperor had done since their Arrival; and being extremely
desirous to have wheedled them out of their strong-hold, he bid the Messenger
whisper them in the Ear, That notwithstanding all he had done, he was still a
true Roman Catholic in his heart, having been forced to set forth he late
Proclamation, to quiet the Minds of the People if it were possible; desiring
them likewise to send him the Horses and Muskets that had been left in their
Convent by Raz Cella: but the Fathers not believing a syllable of what he said,
refused to open their Gates, or to deliver their Arms to the Messenger; which
provoked the Viceroy to that degree, that he changed his note, and sent them
word, That if they did not deliver the Arms and Horses to him presently, he
would come for them himself; and that if they did give him that trouble, he
would be at a little more for to teach them better manners than to disobey his
Commands. And he had certainly been as good as his word, had he not been
hindered by the news of a great Army advancing toward him apace.

The Monks, who were got in shoals about the Viceroy, advised him to do
something to satisfy the people, that he was in no Correspondence with the
Court, but was in earnest to defend their Faith; adding, that there was no such
way of doing that, as by making Examples of some of those, who to please the
Emperor, had changed their Religion; the Viceroy approving of their advice,
commanded a Monk who was his own first Cousin, to be put to death publicly for
having turned Roman Catholic.

The Prince, who Commanded his Father's Army, having received advice that the
Viceroy was Marching with all the speed he could to join the Peasants of Lasta,
crossed the Nile, He marches against him.
and by doing so, put himself betwixt him and them; and having brought him to
an Engagement, had an absolute Victory over him. After which, He routs the
Croisade and sends the Viceroy prisoner to his Father.
that he might fully satisfy his Father of the Viceroy's not having had the
least encouragement from him to proclaim him Emperor, he sent him with several
of his Chief Officers Prisoners to him, that if he would give himself the
trouble, he might examine that matter to the bottom. The Emperor, who could not
but take this extremely well of the Prince, having examined the Viceroy and his
Officers, commanded Seven of them to be presently put to death, Six of which
are said to have died Roman Catholics; which the Seventh was so far from
doing, that when one of the Fathers told him at the place of Execution, That he
would be Damned for him if he were not Damned if he died out of the Communion
of the Roman Church; he bid the Father look to himself, that he be not Damned
upon his own account, for he was resolved to venture his Soul with the
Alexandrian Faith, by dying in it. Behold a Miracle, say the Jesuits; the Seven
bodies being after they were Executed thrown to the Dogs, they all fell
presently upon the Alexandrian body, and eat it up bones and all, without so
much as offering to touch or smell at any of the Six Roman Catholics bodies
that lay before them. One of the Viceroy's Chief Servants continuing to rail
against Popery, and the Emperor for forcing it upon his Subjects, was hanged by
the thigh upon an Iron hook that was driven into a Tree; and after having hung
thereon for some time, for persisting in his railing, he had his Tongue cut
out; the Viceroy himself being secretly put to death a few days after. The
Emperor having none now to deal with but the Peasants of Lasta, advanced
toward them in person with a great Army; and having beat them out of three or
four of their strongest Mountains, was in hopes to have reduced them all to his
obedience in a short time; but the sturdy Peasants were so far from being
terrified into a submission by those ill successes, that they fell upon the
Viceroy of Begameder in his Quarters; and having made a great slaughter among
his men, The Emperor is defeated by the Peasants of Lasta.
obliged him to retreat in great disorder. The Emperor, who was grown old and
timorous, apprehending the Peasants to have been much stronger than they were,
and fearing lest he might be hemmed in by them among the Mountains, retired in
a great Consternation, his Rear being closely pursued by the Peasants for some
Leagues. The Alexandrians observing the Emperor's Spirits to be much dejected
by the disgrace of this Campaign, renewed their Remonstrances to him, some of
them asking him, He is passionately addressed to for a Toleration.
Whether he thought it made a Prince look great in History, to have been
continually fighting with his own Subjects, and especially his Peasants? Others
telling him plainly, That if he did not speedily grant his Subjects a
Toleration, that he would be Deserted by his whole Army, who would fight no
longer against their Countrymen, only for defending the Religion of their
Forefathers, and which they themselves were of, no less than the Peasants. The
Emperor promised them to speak to the Patriarch about it; and having
accordingly sent for him, he told him again, That he could not but be sensible
of his having done all that lay in his power for to have established the Roman
Faith in his Empire; He speaks to the Patriarch about it, and will not be
denied.
and that whereas he had endeavored to force his Subjects to embrace it, he
was now satisfied that there was no bringing them to it by that Method, it
being visible to every body that his having used it had had no other effect but
to increase his peoples aversion for that Religion. He told him farther, that
he had reason to fear, That if he did not quickly grant a Toleration, that he
should be Deserted by his whole Court and Army; but not being willing to do any
thing in that matter without his consent, he had therefore sent for him to
advise with him about the manner of it; adding, Something must be done, and
that speedily, to quiet the minds of the people. The Patriarch, who was
extremely troubled to hear the Emperor speak of a Toleration again, made
answer, That his Highness was miserably misled by evil Counselors, who under
pretense of a Toleration, designed the utter Extirpation of the Roman Faith;
but the Emperor urging still the necessity there was thereof, the Patriarch was
forced to promise to give way to the Toleration of all such Habassin Customs as
were not contrary to the Roman Faith; but upon condition that the said
Toleration should not be proclaimed, that so it might look more like a
Connivence than a Toleration: Whereupon it was concerted betwixt them, that the
Habassins should be Tolerated as to Three things, one was the observation of
Saturday; the Second, the Fasting on Wednesdays and not on Saturdays; and the
third was, that they might use their ancient Offices according to his
Emendations of them.

The Alexandrians being acquainted by the Emperor with what the Patriarch was
willing to grant them, seemed to accept of it very thankfully; only they told
him it must be proclaimed, for if that were not done, it would have no effect
at all on the minds of the people; which was the only end for which they had
desired it; and not for their own sakes, who pretended to be so abundantly
satisfied with the Doctrines and Customs of Popery, as to wish the people could
without disturbing the Peace of the Empire, be brought to embrace it. And so
having prevailed with the Emperor that it should be proclaimed; proclaimed it
was, and that with extraordinary Solemnities; first in the Camp, The Toleration
is proclaimed.
and afterward over the whole Empire, to the great Joy of the people; they
that understood how it truly was, reckoning it however a good beginning; but
for the generality they believed it to be a Toleration of the whole of their
Religion.

The Patriarch hearing of the Toleration having been proclaimed; The
Patriarch's protestation against it.
and of the people rejoicing at it, as a Toleration of their whole Religion, he
immediately drew up the following protestation against it, and sent it to the
Emperor.

NOtwithstanding I told your Highness, That your Subjects might be allowed to
fast on Wednesdays instead of Saturdays, and might use their Offices, as by me
amended; and excepting Easter and the Festivities depending thereon, that they
might observe their Holidays as formerly; nevertheless I declared to your
Highness at the same time, that it was not to be done by Proclamation, which as
he that publishes them, publishes them as he thinks fit; so all that hear
them, do understand and interpret them as they like best, as we see it has
happened in the present case; for though I am satisfied that your Highness
designed to grant no more by your Proclamation, but what was agreed on between
us; yet as I am told, all the news every where is, that your Highness has by a
Proclamation commanded all your Subjects to return to the Alexandrian Faith;
upon which conceit there have been extravagant rejoicings in your Highness's
own Camp, to the great Mortification of all true Catholics. Whatever it was
that induced your Highness to do this, know you certainly, that God will one
day call you to a strict account for it. And that I and the Bishop to whom the
Holy Ghost has committed the Government of this Church, which Christ purchased
with his blood, as it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, may not be partakers
of the same Condemnation, We do jointly declare to your Highness, That in this
Proclamation you have not observed that order that you ought to have done,
which being a business of an Ecclesiastical nature, the publication thereof did
not belong to your Highness, but to us.

Your Highness would do well to remember what the high Priest Azarias said to
King Ozias, in the Twenty Sixth Chapter of the second Book of Chronicles; O
Ozias, it is not your Office to offer Incense to the Lord, but it is the Office
of the Priests and the Sons of Aaron, who were Consecrated to that Ministry.
Therefore come forth of the Sanctuary, and despise not, for this thing will not
be for your Honor in the sight of God. Your Highness would do well likewise to
remember the punishment which immediately befell that King thereupon. And since
it was not thought sufficient to have these Proclamations published only in the
Church, but it must be done also in the Camp, your Highness before you ordered
that, ought to have consulted with some of the Fathers, or some other of your
Chaplains, or with some person authorized by us to that purpose, who would have
taken care to have prevented the offense that it has given; for we are informed
by some that were present at the Solemnity, that the people after the
Proclamation were heard to say openly, That now they were to have all their old
Offices again without our amendments of them; and were to observe all their old
Holidays, not excepting Easter and the Festivities that depend thereon; and
that they were not left to their liberty, but were commanded not to fast on
Saturdays, but on Wednesdays. Wherefore, that the last error may not be worse
than the first, your Highness must set forth a Second Proclamation with all
necessary Explanations of your mind, at the framing whereof I do appoint Father
James Mattos to be present in my place; and whereas it is not convenient that
it should be done without the concurrence of Abeto Basilides; I do in the name
of God require your Highness to acquaint him with it; and I do farther admonish
you to pray to the Father of Light for Light, that so you may not fix your eyes
so much on an Earthly Kingdom which is transitory, as to lose that of Heaven
which is Eternal, and that on Earth likewise.

The Emperor, though nettled with this Protestation, complied so far with the
Patriarch's desires, as, with the concurrence of Father James, to publish a
second Proclamation, wherein he declared, That there was nothing he desired so
much, as to have all his Subjects of the Roman Faith, and that his intention in
his former Proclamation, was only to Tolerate Three Customs that were not
contrary to that Faith, and that he would never have done that, had not the
Patriarch given his consent to it. Nevertheless, he reckoned he was bound in
Honor to return a sharp Answer to the Patriarch, for his having made so bold
with him in his Protestation, which he did in the following Letter.

The Letter of the Emperor Seltem Saged, comes to the Patriarch with the Peace
of God, who is Blessed for ever.
HEAR: The Emperor's answer to the Patriarch's Protestation.
We have received a Paper from Your Lordship, and do understand all that is
contained therein, relating to the matters your Lordship gave us leave to do,
in order to put a stop to Rebellions, and to quiet the minds of our People,
that they may no longer fight against the Faith: The particulars were, That
they might Fast on Wednesdays, and observe their Festivities as formerly, and
use their old Offices with your Corrections: And being at Dancas, we were
desired by our whole Camp, since your Lordship had been pleased to Dispense
with our People as to those Customs, to acquaint them therewith by our
Proclamation; which we consented to, the rather, that the Rebels might not
think that they had frighted us into such a compliance with them, which they
would have done had we delayed the publishing of it any longer; but being now
informed that their minds are pretty well quieted by what I have done, I have
published a second Proclamation, according to your Directions; neither in this
whole matter have we done any thing but what was concerted between us: As to
what your Lordship says, of their publishing what they please that publish
Proclamations; and of their understanding them as they please that hear them;
that can proceed from nothing, but from your Lordship's having been
misinformed; for, How dare they who publish our Proclamations, publish them any
otherways than as they are; or they that hear them, understand them otherwise?
So that I cannot imagine, that any body should have the impudence to say, That
Thad changed the Faith to the great mortification of Catholics; when it is so
plain that I have not made the least alteration therein; neither did the
Heretics rejoice so much as you speak of, they having been all told before,
that they were not to use their former Offices without your Emendations of
them: They must therefore have been People of Factious Spirits and of Ill
designs, that have put such stories in your head, since we have done nothing
but what your Lordship had agreed to; neither did they, who published our
Proclamation, either add or diminish any thing. Things being thus, your
Lordship might very well have spared your bidding us Remember Ozias, and
comparing us with one who was Punished by God with the Leprosy for having
taken the exercise of the Priestly Function upon himself; which as he ought not
to have done, so we have never offered to do it; having only published a
Proclamation, wherein there was nothing that you had not agreed to when the
Roman Faith first took footing in Ethiopia; The Jesuits never wrought any
Miracles in Ethiopia.
it was neither introduced into it by the Preaching of the Jesuits, nor by any
Miracles that were wrought by them, nor by no other means, but by our being
convinced, that your Faith agreed with our Books, and that the Church of
Ethiopia must therefore be in an Error; it was this induced us to Establish the
Roman Faith by our Commands and Proclamations, contrary to the Humor of our
People, because we believed it to be true; all which we did of our own accord,
despising a visible Kingdom in hopes of one that is invisible. As to your
Lordship's admonishing us to fix our Eyes not on a Temporal but on a Heavenly
Kingdom; How many Subjects have I had Slaughtered? And how many Provinces have
I lost for having done so? I need not tell you their Numbers, you know them as
well as I do my self; so that I cannot for my life see, wherein I have offended
God in this whole matter. Had we been forced to have embraced your Faith, you
might then have had some cause to be jealous that we have a mind to forsake it,
but having voluntarily embraced it, we cannot undo what we have done, nor
destroy what we have built. The Emperor declares his Resolution to continue a
Roman Catholic.
I would therefore advise your Lordship for the future, not to have your Ears
open to false and wicked men, that put such things into your head.


This Letter, though it gave the Patriarch several Reprimands, as it did also
his whole Order, in denying that any of them had ever wrought any Miracles in
Ethiopia; which is very strange, considering how many they pretend to work on
all such occasions: Yet for the notice it gave him of a second Proclamation,
and the assurance of the Empeperor's resolution to continue steadfast in the
Roman Faith, he was so well satisfied with it, that he judged all things to be
set pretty well to rights again; and resuming his ancient courage thereupon,
ventured to do a thing, which gave a terrible blow to his Patriarchal
Authority. The Patriarch is baffled in a great point of Jurisdiction.
The case was this; A certain Judge having turned Monk, denied to pay a yearly
Pension, which some Lands which he kept still in his hands were charged with,
to a certain Parish Priest; of which the Priest having complained to the
Patriarch, he presently commanded the Monk to pay the Priest his dues; but the
Monk, instead of obeying, denied that he had any Jurisdiction over him,
appealing from him to the General of his Order, as the proper Prelate in all
such cases; and the Cause coming to be Tried at Court, the Patriarch was cast,
the Judges having given their Opinion, That the Patriarch having no more Power
than their former Abuna 's, had no Authority over the Monks, which the
Patriarch had hitherto pretended to, and had constantly exercised; having in
this, and an hundred things besides, extended his Jurisdiction beyond what any
of the Abuna's had done.

The Country being put in a pretty good humor by the Toleration, which,
according to the Patriarch's fears, was every where extended beyond its
intention, the Emperor sets about raising a great Army to go against the
Peasants; who would not be satisfied with any thing under the Re-establishment
of their Old Religion, and the Banishing the Patriarch and the Fathers out of
Ethiopia, as the Causes of all the Blood that had been shed in it for several
Years. But the raising of such an Army as the Emperor designed, requiring time,
his Brother, by the advice of the Alexandrians, was sent before to streighten
them with a Flying Army. Raz Cella upon his being denied his Old Troops, which
were entirely at his devotion, would fain have been excused from going on this
Expedition; but the Emperor pressed him so hard, that he saw he must either
break with him, or do it; and as his heart misgave him all the way he went, so
his Success was answerable to his forebodings, for he was no sooner got among
the Mouniains, Raz Cella is routed by the Pesants.
than he was fallen upon by a Body of Twenty thousand Peasants; and being
Deserted by his own Men, most of which went over to the Enemy, he narrowly
escaped being made Prisoner. The Alexandrians, who it is probable had sent him
against the Peasants on purpose to be beat by them, could not conceal their joy
on the occasion of this Defeat; the blame whereof they laid wholly at his door,
which sunk him so low, that he was never able to rise again to do the Roman
Church any service. The Emperor fearing least the Peasants might upon this
advantage have advanced toward Dancas, retired from thence to Gojam, to be at
a greater distance from them; where having made up an Army, that consisted
chiefly of Gauls, being afraid to trust his own Subjects any longer, he went to
offer the Peasants a Battle; who since their late Victory over Raz Cella, had
ventured down into the Low Countries, reckoning themselves strong enough to
Fight any Army the Emperor could bring against them. The Two Armies having
looked each other in the face for some Hours, the Emperor, The Emperor marches
against them.
who had placed a stout Body of Gaulish Horse in the Front, ordered them to
fall on, which they did so furiously, that at the first Onset, which is
commonly the last too with the Habassin Armies, they broke through the Peasants
main body, which Dispersed immediately, and Throwing down their Arms, fled
toward the Mountains; the Gauls pursued them till night came on; He obtains a
great Victory.
so that though few or none of them were killed Fighting, there were Eight
thousand of them found dead next morning; whereas had they had the Courage to
have fought it out, they might, with half that loss, have had a Victory; for
had they but routed the Gauls, who charged them first, it is certain the
Imperial Habassins would either have gone over to them, or have thrown down
their Arms. The Court- Alexandrians, though they were extremely mortified by
this great blow, yet did so manage the matter, that they gained their point by
it; for having persuaded the Emperor to go next morning to view the Field,
which was covered all over with dead bodies, and observing him to be touched
with so direful a sight, they came about him, and with Tears in their eyes told
him, Six, You see how many dead bodies are lying here; Whose were all these?
Were they the Bodies of Mahometans or Heathens? No, not so much as one of them,
but they were all to a man your Highness's Natural-born Subjects, and our own
Blood and Kindred; we do therefore beg of your Highness to consider, That this
is a War in which, whether you Conquer or are Beat, you thrust a Sword into
your own Bowels. Neither were these poor wretches, you see lying here,
dissatisfied with your Highness for any thing, but for forcing a New Religion
upon them: How many Thousands have already lost their Lives in this Quarrel?
and how many Thousands more must be Massacred before Popery can be established
in Ethiopia? Wherefore, for God's sake, Sir, He is moved by the passionate
Remonstrances of the Grandees and others, to restore the Alexandrian Religion.
let your People alone with the Religion of their Fathers; which you must
either do, or resolve to destroy your Empire with your own hands. We must tell
your Highness farther, That the very Gauls and Heathens do condemn us for what
we are doing, calling us Apostates and Renegado's for having forsaken the
Religion of our Ancestors. And that they might clinch the matter, the Prince
and Amana Christos, had got the Gauls, as the Emperor passed by them, to cry
out, That they would serve him no longer, being quite weary of Cutting poor
Men's Throats for no other reason but because they would not leave the Religion
they had been Born and Bred in. The Empress interposed likewise, and desired
him for God's sake, and his own, and his Posterities, not to go on destroying
his Subjects at such a merciless rate; and to consider that in all his Wars
with them, he did, as it were, but cut off his left hand with his right; and
whether any thing could be more dishonorable, than for a Prince to employ
Foreigners and Heathens to Massacre his Christian Subjects; and all this to
introduce a Religion into Ethiopia, which it was plain to all the World, it
would never be reconciled to?

These passionate Remonstrances one upon the neck of another, together with the
sad sight of so many dead bodies, did affect the Emperor so much, that instead
of returning to Dancaz in triumph after so great a Victory, he returned thither
so extremely disconsolate, that he did not care to see or speak with any body.

The Patriarch, Bishops, and Fathers, hearing how things went, hastened to
Court, not to Congratulate the Emperor upon his late Victory, for that their
Friends had told them, he could not bear, but to see if they could get him out
of the hands of the Alexandrians, who at present were in full possession of
him, the Champions of the Roman Faith being all either Dead, or in Disgrace at
Court.

We are not told what passed betwixt the Emperor and the Patriarch at his first
Audience; but whatever it was, a great Council was called a few days after, to
consider the state of the Empire, and by what means the Peace thereof might be
restored; in which it was quickly agreed, That there was no other way of doing
it, but by restoring all the Alexandrian Rites and Customs, and by leaving
People to their Liberty to be of which of the two Religions they pleased. This
Resolution is said to have been opposed by one Abithaca Johanes, a Nephew of
the Empeperor's, who told the Council boldly, That all the Miseries of Ethiopia
were owing to their Sins, and not to Popery's having been Established in it. To
whom the Council gave no other answer, but that something must be done to
restore the Empire to its former peace; and that there was nothing would do it,
but what they had agreed to do. The Patriarch being alarmed with this
resolution of the Council, The Patriarch and Fathers wait upon him to divert
him from doing it.
sent immediately to demand an audience of the Emperor; and having obtained one
with some difficulty, he went on the Twentieth of June 1632, attended by the
Bishop of Nice, and Five Fathers, to wait upon him; to whom lying in Bed very
pensive, he delivered the following Speech, the Bishop and Five Fathers
standing behind him.

SIR, I thought we had had the Victory in the last Fight, but I now begin to
understand that we had the worst on it; for notwithstanding in reality the
design of the Rebels was to have taken your Crown from you, nevertheless what
they gave out was, that they fought only to have the Religion of their Fathers
restored; so that if they should gain that point, though they were beat, they
may be reckoned to have been Victorious; but as before the Engagement was the
proper time for the making of Vows and Promises, so now is the time for
fulfilling them. In order to Engage God to confer more such mercies upon you,
who by this last Victory has as it were set his seal to all the former, and
that for no other end but to oblige your Highness to advance his holy Faith,
under the banner whereof you obtained it. Besides, it was the Catholics that
are in your Army that did the work, and who are not so few as your Highness is
told they are. The reason why they do not appear to be numerous, is because
they have no favor showed them; whereas if your Highness would but be pleased
to call them about your Person, and bestow all Offices of Honor and Trust upon
them, you would quickly see how they would multiply, and how by that means both
your Empire and the faith would flourish; whereas of late they have been kept
from coming near you, none but Serpents having been admitted into your
Councils; a whole Nest of which Serpents did on Friday last assemble together
in the Hall of your Palace, where they treated no longer about the outworks of
Religion, but laid the ax to the root, consulting together how they might
destroy the Catholic Faith; which they agreed at last, to put to the Vote, by
leaving the People and Soldiers to be of which Religion they like best; who
whenever they are asked whether they will have Christ or Barabbas, will
certainly prefer Barabbas, for having been of their own Office and Profession.
Sir, Matters of Faith are not to be treated in such a manner, but are to be
settled by Councils consisting of great numbers of Bishops, where they may be
had, or else of Grave and Learned Priests and Friars: For though in Matters of
State, these very men do not think fit to consult with every body, but only
with persons of known Prudence and Experience; nevertheless in Matters of
Religion, the Otadores, Gauls, Mahometans and Heathens, are reckoned to be good
Counselors; and are all called in by them to determine which is the true, and
which is the false faith. I would have your Highness call to mind the many
mercies God has conferred on you since you embraced the Roman Faith; and
though it is true there have been many Rebellions, which is a Plague Ethiopia
never was, nor never will be free from, until the Faith is deeply rooted
therein; yet God has always been so kind to you, as to lay the Rebels at your
feet, and particularly in the last Fight, when your affairs were come to a
crisis; so that your Arm is not shortened, but extended. Remember likewise, that
you did not forsake the Faith of Ethiopia out of fear, the Fathers being in no
condition to oblige you to do it by force of Arms, but you did it purely upon
your being convinced of its falsehood, and of the truth of that of Rome: Neither
must you forget, that I did not come to you of my own head, but was sent by the
Roman Pontiff, and your Brother the King of Portugal, upon your having writ to
them several time to send you a Patriarch and some Bishops; in which affair if
there was any delay, it was occasioned by the jealousy they had of the
fickleness of the Habassins, which we now begin to experience; and which the
King of Portugal had formerly had experience of when he sent Don Christopher De
Gama hither with a stout body of Troops, by whom this Empire was rescued out of
the hands of the Mahometans (who had Conquered it) and that not with an
intention of keeping it to themselves, but of restoring it to your Ancestors,
as they did: Neither had the King of Portugal ever any other view, nor did he
expect any other reward for what he did for you, but only your Friendship, and
the union of this Empire with the Roman Church; to which end I and the Bishop
that is here behind me were sent by his Holiness and his Majesty to you:
Neither did we come among you as Beggars, but well stored with Books, and
Pontifical Vestments and Ornaments, they not being willing to charge your
Highness with so much as the Maintenance of our persons. Consider, Sir, how
just cause those Princes will have to be displeased with you; and though they
may be at too great a distance to have due satisfaction, God nevertheless, who
is every where, will not fail to require it of you: Consider likewise, what a
blot this will be in the Scutcheon of the Lion of Judah, and what an eternal
stain both to your own and your Empire's honor, and how many Souls you will
ruin by your Apostasy; which, that I may not live to see, nor the Divine
Judgments that will befall you thereupon, The Emperor continues immovable in
his resolution.
let me beg it of your Highness to command my head to be here struck off before
you.


At these words the Patriarch, Bishop, and Five Fathers, threw themselves at
the Emperor's Feet, to receive his answer. At which sight, notwithstanding the
Bystanders seemed to be all touched, the Emperor himself did not appear to be
in the least affected with it, in so much that the Patriarch says those Verses
of the Poet were very applicable to him.

Nec Magis incepto vultum Sermon Movetur.
Quam si Dura Silex vel stet Marpesia cautes.
Only making a sign with his hand that they should rise, he asked the Patriarch
with what face he could say that he had not showed favor to the Catholics,
since he had favored none else but such? but the Heretics, said he, are
numerous, and all that have rebelled against me, have given no other reason for
their doing it, but my having changed the Religion of my Country. How many
Thousands have I killed already in order to introduce Popery? And how many
Thousands more must I kill before I shall be able to do it? My People are all
weary of cutting one another's Throats, and are all upon the point of deserting
me; I can do no more than I have done. Besides, We are not meddling with the
Faith, but only with some Customs; or if any are about changing it, they have
not acquainted me with it; if you are told otherwise abroad, you must inquire
abroad whether it be so or not. For my own part, I do here Promise, That I will
never Decree any thing about Religion, without first Consulting with your
Lordship: The Emperor stopping here, The Patriarch Replied, That as to the
Customs of Fasting on Wednesdays, and of using their Old Offices as he had
mended them, and of Observing the Festivities as formerly, which were all that
his Highness had desired of him, he had granted them all already, and was ready
to grant them every thing that was in his Power, and not contrary to the Faith;
wherefore since his Highness did not intend that there should be any Alteration
made in Matters of Faith, he beseeched him to put forth a Proclamation,
declaring, That as he was of the Roman Faith himself, so it was his Will and
Pleasure, That all his Subjects should be of the same; and that as to matters
of Custom he was ready to comply with them therein, so far as the Faith would
permit him: In which request the Bishop and Five Fathers seconded him with
great earnestness, but to no purpose, the Emperor telling them plainly, That he
could do no more for Popery than he had done.

The Patriarch, who was for leaving no stone unturned, went from the Emperor to
wait upon the Prince, and having told him the same story he told his Father,
the Prince seemed to be surprised with the news, and returned such Answers as
would have imposed upon a weak Man; but the Patriarch knowing him to be Master
of a most profound Dissimulation, and an inveterate Enemy to the Roman Church,
gathered from his ambiguous Answers, That without a Miracle the Roman Faith
could not be much longer supported in Ethiopia. So they all returned to the
Patriarch's Palace desperately afflicted with the present sad prospect of their
Affairs.

The Alexandrians, that they might bring the Emperor under a necessity of
executing what had been agreed on in Council, had industriously spread a
report, That on St. John Baptist's day their Ancient Faith was to be restored
to them; which report having brought all the Country to the Camp to be present
at the Solemnity, they then told the Emperor, That there was no remedy but he
must either Restore to his People the Religion of their Fathers, or run a great
hazard of his Crown, since the Pecple, who were come in such vast multitudes in
hopes of having it done, if they were disappointed would be thrown into such a
Fury, that no body could tell where it might end: The Emperor made answer, That
he was willing his good Subjects should enjoy their Old Religion; but that he
might not be worse than his word to the Patriarch, he commanded some of his
Servants to go and wait upon him, and acquaint him with the necessity there was
of gratifying his People with a Toleration of the Alexandrian Faith.

Za Mariam, who was in the number of those that were commanded to carry this
Message to the Patriarch, being admitted to speak with him, told him in the
Emperor's Name and words, We have embraced your Faith, and have been at much
pains about it, but our People do not care for it; so, though it was really out
of hatred to Raz Cella, that Julius took up Arms, nevertheless the pretense
that helped him to an Army, was, that he would defend the Old Religion; who,
with vast multitudes of People that had flocked in to him, was destroyed:
Cabrael and Guergis used the same pretense, and had the same success: And Cerca
Christos, and the Peasants who are now in Arms, have no Quarrel with me, but
for having prohibited them the exercise of their Religion. The Faith of Rome is
not bad; but as I have told you formerly, my People do not understand it, and
are very well contented to live and die in the Religion they were brought up
in: I am resolved therefore, since they are so fond of it, to let them alone
with it; and if there are any that are inclinable to the Roman Faith, they
shall have free Liberty to Profess it, as the Portugueses, who have been among
us ever since the Reign of Asnaf Saged, have had. When Mariam had done
speaking, the Patriarch asked him, Whether it was by the Emperor's Express
Order that he had delivered him that Message? Mariam told him it was: The
Patriarch made no other reply, But that Ethiopia had never been without Wars
before the Roman Faith was known in it, and that he would return an Answer to
the Emperor after he had advised with his Brethren: Who having consulted
together, drew up the following Manifesto, which they sent to the Emperor by
Father Manuel.

YOUR Highness has sent me word, The Patriarch's manifesto against it.
That being upon the point of losing your Empire for your Zeal to establish the
Roman Religion, you are resolved to let your People alone with their Old Faith,
and that you will at the same time grant Liberty to all that shall have a mind
to embrace Popery.

Sir, My Affection for you is nothing inferior to that I have for the King of
Portugal; being as ready to condescend to every thing that is for the Interest
of your Kingdoms, as you can desire, provided it do not clash with the Purity
of the Faith; for as whatever is a Sin can never be for the good of any
Kingdom, so neither can I grant any such thing, neither ought your Highness to
desire it of me. There are two things to be observed in this great Affair; the
one concerns the Peasants, who having never embraced the Roman Faith, your
Highness may for some time wink at their living in the Heresy of their
Fathers; the other, concerns those who have embraced the Roman Faith, and
Communicated with that Church, and not only so, but have obliged themselves by
Oaths to be always Obedient to her: Now to these your Highness cannot say, You
may, if you please, live in the Faith of your Fathers, since it would be a
grievous Sin against God in you to do so, as it would be in me likewise if I
should either advife you to it, or consent to your doing it: And were it lawful
for one that is a Foreigner, to meddle with your Government, or to give advice
about it, I would tell you, that it is my Opinion, That your Highness will
certainly Ruin your Empire by granting Liberty of Conscience, which must
necessarily fill it with Dissentions and Civil Wars; For what but Blood and
Wars can follow, upon one part of your Subjects being for the Roman, and the
other part for the Alexandrian Faith? And must not the having of an Abuna for
one Party, and a Patriarch for the other, infallibly end in Two Kingdoms, and
Two Kings?

Whether the Patriarch believed the Popish Party to be so Numerous in Ethiopia
as to have made a considerable division therein upon a Toleration, or talked so
only to terrify the Emperor; it is certain, that the Toleration was no sooner
published, than the whole Body of the Court and Country returned to their Old
Religion; insomuch that Father Manuel happening, after he had delivered the
Patriarch's Manifesto to the Emperor, to tell him, That by granting Liberty of
Conscience he would undoubtedly Ruin his Kingdom; the Emperor taking him up
short, asked him, How that was possible, since he had no Empire left to Ruin?
And so dismissed him. And whereas formerly the Fathers, when they left the
Emperor, used to be conducted out of the Court with Ceremony, there was no body
now took the least notice of Father Manuel, unless it were to make Faces at him
as he passed through the Rooms; but the Father was not got out of the Court,
when the Drums beat for the Publishing of the Proclamation which he came to
have put a stop to; the Proclamation was as follows:

HEAR, The Proclamation for restoring the Alexandrian Religion.
Hear: We formerly gave you the Roman Faith, believing it to be true; but
innumerable multitudes of my People having been slain upon that account, under
the Command of Julius, Guergis, Cerca Christos, etc. as now also among the
Peasants; We do therefore Restore the Religion of your Fathers to you, so that
your Priests are to take Possession of their Churches again, and to officiate
therein as formerly. Never was any Proclamation received with greater
expressions of Joy than this was, there being nothing to be heard in or about
the Camp for some Hours for the noise of the Trumpets, Excessive Joy and
Festivities thereupon.
and of innumerable multitudes of People continually ecchoing each other from
all quarters of the Camp with acclamations and shouts of, God Bless the
Emperor, and let the Alexandrian Faith Flourish. At Night the whole Camp and
Country was Illuminated with Bonfires; into which most, if not all of the
Popish Converts threw the Beads and Relics that had been given them by the
Fathers; and that with so much Contempt and Indignation, as abundantly
manifested that they had never had any inward Respect for their New Religion,
but had only professed it out of fear.

The Patriarch and Fathers, though mortified to the last degree by this sudden
change of things, nevertheless since the public Exercise of the Roman Worship
was not prohibited, they went on faying their Masses as formerly; and on the
Sunday following the Proclamation, The Patriarch is advised by his friends to
give over preaching.
The Patriarch himself Preached in the Camp, with some Passages of whose
Sermon, (for he could not forbear reflecting severely upon what had been done)
the Alexandrians were so much enraged, that he was advised by his Friends to
forbear Preaching, till the storm the late Proclamation had raifed, was a
little abated, which, they said, it would be the sooner for its being so
extremely violent.

But the Alexandrians, who could not presently forget how hard they had been
rid by the Patriareh and Fathers when they were in the saddle, were never
satisfied till they had all their Churches and Lands taken from them; The
Romanists have all their Churches and Lands taken from them. The Emperor dies,
and is Succeeded by his Son, Basilides.
and had obtained a second Proclamation, which Commanded all the People of
Ethiopia to be of the Alexandrian, and of no other Faith. The Emperor did not
long survive this Revolution, dying the September following of an Hectic
Fever, in the Sixty first year of his Age. The Fathers will have him to have
died in the Communion of their Church. But however that were, it is certain, he
was buried by the Habassin Monks, and with their Offices, in the Church of
Ganeta Jesu, which they had taken from the Fathers.

The Prince Basilides being Proclaimed Emperor so soon as the breath was out of
his Father's Body, Raz Cella coming amongst the rest of the Grandees to Swear
Allegiance to him, was received by him with all the marks of Honor and
Affection that his near Relation to him could pretend to; the Emperor, among
other kind things, telling him, That hereafter he should look upon him, and
treat him as his Father, rather than as his Uncle.

But whatever was the matter, this kindness betwixt the Nephew and Uncle was
not long-lived; the Fathers pretend that Raz Cella's constant Zeal for their
Religion, was the cause of it; and particularly, his having acquainted the
Emperor with his Father's having appeared to him, and commanded him to tell
him, that it was a madness to lose an Eternal Kingdom, to secure one that was
Temporary: But what is certain is, that the Emperor giving no credit to his
Uncle's Vision, Basilides throws his Uncle Raz Cella into Prison.
had him arrested and committed to Prison as a Traitor, disarming the Patriarch
and Fathers at the same time, and commanding them from all parts of the Empire,
to Fremona in Tigre, the Viceroyship of which Kingdom he had bestowed upon one
who he was certain would enter into no Cabals with them. The Order run thus:

HEAR, He sends for the Patriarch and Fathers Arms, and Banisheth them all to
Fremona.
My Lords, what We say and write unto you; You cannot be ignorant of our being
engaged in a War with the Peasants of Lasta, and of our Empires not having had
one hours Rest since this War begun: You must therefore send us the Muskets and
Carabines, and all your other Arms; together with all the Powder and Bullets
that you have in your keeping: We have sent Daniel and Miserata Christos to
receive them, to whom you must not fail to deliver them; and when the War is
over, they shall all be restored to you again; or if you are willing to sell
them, they will give you your price for them. There is an Alexandrian Abuna
arrived here, he has been for some time Incognito in the Kingdom of Narea; and
who when I desired him to Confer holy Orders, made me answer, He could not do
it so long as there was a Roman Patriarch about us; for which reason we command
your Lordship to repair to Fremona, and to take all your Fathers, and Books,
and Goods with you; we shall take care to appoint a Captain to attend you
thither with a strong guard; with which Orders the Messengers carried a verbal
Instruction, which was, That if any opportunity for the Indies should offer,
the Patriarch, Bishop, and Fathers, had free leave to make use of it. The
Patriarch when he was served with this Order, complained the Emperor was very
hard upon them, and that he could not judge otherwise but that his design in
taking their Arms from them at the same time he banished them to Fremona, was,
that they should be all Murdered by the way; as to the Arms, he said, they
owed nothing to Ethiopia, and as he was resolved never to give them away, so he
was no Gunsmith to sell Arms. Nevertheless if they were resolved to have them
from him, they might find them in such a place, but that he would declare to
all the World that he was robbed of them; but having before the Messengers had
seized the Arms, received advice that Father James was likewise served with an
order, to deliver all the Cannon, Muskets and Armor for Man and Horse that
were in his Custody; He sent for the Messengers and told them, That he now saw
plainly what the Emperor's design was in demanding their Arms, and that he
would therefore write to his Highness about it before he parted with them; but
the Messengers being very urgent to have the Arms out of his Custody, he agreed
that they should be deposited in the hands of any person they would name, till
he had an answer from the Emperor.

The Patriarch's Letter to the Emperor.
DAniel Miserata Christos, The Patriarch's Letter to the Emperor thereupon.
and Danaceos, have by Virtue of an Order from your Highness demanded all my
Guns, Muskets, and other Arms; I presently showed them all the Arms I had, and
which are now deposited in safe hands, until I have an answer from your
Highness. On the same Ships with these Arms, there came several Cannons and
Muskets which were all carried back to the Indies; only for the guard of my
person, the King's Officers gave me Twenty four Muskets, and a few Carabines;
of the Carabines I have not one left, having parted with them all to your
Father, and some of the Grandees; and of the Muskets, I gave Fourteen to your
Father, Two to Raz Cella Christos, one to Caba Christos, and one to Guergis,
keeping Six only for the guard of my own House and Person; which, as they are
all I have, so they are all very much at your Highness's service; though at the
same time I cannot forbear telling your Highness, that your Father on several
occasions sent Catabines both to me and the Fathers, with which we never did
harm to any body, nor were they of any other use to us, but to affright
Robbers, and other ill-disposed people. And whereas your Highness is pleased to
Banish us to a place, to which we cannot go but thorough vast Deserts, we might
reasonably have expected that you would have done us the same favor; but
instead of that, to take the Six Muskets from me which are my whole guard, is
in effect to take away all my Church-Ornaments and Books, which are my whole
Treasure, if not my Life, this being to give the world to understand, that they
have free leave to Murder the Bishop and the Fathers: This I know very well is
the design of those that gave you this advice, though they will not let your
Highness know so much; for though I am sensible how pure an heart lodges in
your Highness's breast, and how like you are to your Father; yet you have
undoubtedly those about you, that are contriving how they may have us all
Murdered; and as there are several things, which they have Extorted from your
Highness by their Importunities; so this of banishing us to Fremona is one of
them, which is done by them with an Intention of having us all Murdered,
either by the way, or when we are there, of which your Highness is to know
nothing until it will be too late to remedy it. The Lion when his Teeth and
Claws are broke, becoming the sport of the Monkies; and notwithstanding the
guilt of our Blood may lie upon others, the disgrace thereof will fall upon
your Highness: For what can the world say but that you disarmed us on purpose
that we might be Robbed and Murdered; and that after having tied us hand and
foot, you threw us in the way of Soldiers and Robbers? I am informed likewise,
that your Highness has sent the same Orders to all the Fathers, which is really
to treat us as Rebels, none but such having their Arms taken from them by the
Government; so that with our Arms you take away our Honor and Lives. Now this
being our case, your Highness would do us a great favor if you would command
us all to be slain here, where our bodies will not be devoured by Wolves; or if
you would be so kind, as to command us to be put to death in the Camp; I do
promise to come in my richest Pontificals to undergo that Blow which would I
hope be precious in the Sight of God. May the same God preserve your Highness.

O. Patriarcha.


This Letter having had no effect upon the Emperor, whom the Patriarch for all
his giving him such sweet words, The Emperor renews his orders for banishing
and disarming them.
and throwing all the blame of things upon his Counselors, knew to be the most
inveterate Enemy the Roman Church had in Ethiopia; Miserata Christos was sent
back with a verbal Order, commanding the Patriarch immediately to surrender his
Arms, and to declare upon Oath that he had delivered all he had. The Patriarch
took this so heinously, that he told the Messenger, That he neither could nor
would take any such Oath, Bishops being prohibited by the Sacred Canons to
swear: adding, His Highness might venture to take his Muskets from him, who
being a Clerk was to make use of no other than spiritual Arms; but that it was
more than he durst do to a private Portuguese Sentinel, who do not use to part
with their Arms, but with their Lives. The Messenger perceiving the Patriarch
was not to be persuaded to Swear to the Delivery of the Arms, desired that Two
of the Fathers might do it; which being granted, the Fathers delivered all
their own and the Patriarchs Arms, declaring upon Oath that they had delivered
all they had; but when the Messenger urged the Patriarch after he had Disarmed
him, to begin his journey to Fremona; He made answer, That he would neither go,
nor promise to go thither, before he had an Answer to a Letter he designed to
write to his Highness.

The Patriarch's Letter to the Emperor.
DAniel Miserata Christos, and Danaceos, The Patriarch's second Letter to the
Emperor.
have in your Majesty's name commanded me and all the Fathers, to go
straightways into the Province of Tigre; and have given us the reason why your
Highness has thought fit to banish us to that Kingdom: My Answer to them was,
That I would neither go, nor promise to go thither before I had your Highness's
Answer to this Letter.

Sir, I did not come into Ethiopia of my own head, but was sent hither by the
Roman Pontiff, who is the Supreme Governor of the Church; and by your Brother
the King of Portugal, after your Father had entreated him by several Letters to
send a Patriarch; and as it was at your Father's request that I was sent, so
when I arrived here, I was received by him and the whole Empire as their Pastor
and Father, all of them Swearing in my hands to be always obedient to the Roman
Church.

I have served you all now these Seven Years, as Jacob kept the flock of Laban,
according to the Talents God has bestowed on me, by Preaching, Administering the
Sacraments, and visiting Churches, as is known to all the world by several
Books that have given an account thereof; and now all of a sudden you are for
removing me from the Post God and your self placed me in; and for banishing me
to Tigre, and from thencein a short time to the Indies or Portugal, there to be
affronted by every body that shall see me, since they cannot but think, that I
who was so kindly entertained in Ethiopia, must have done some very ill thing,
to deserve to be thus banished from thence. But supposing you should not send
me to the Indies, but should suffer me to have my grave at the foot of the
Patriarch Don Andrew D' Oviedo 's Tomb in Fremona; all the Indies and Europe,
any all the world, when they shall come to hear of my being banished thither,
will and must conclude that it is for some great Miscarriage that I have been
guilty of. Wherefore, that I may be able to give some account of my self to the
world, I do in the name of God and Truth beg and require it of your Highness,
and of all your Nobles, That you would be pleased to let me have the reasons in
writing why you have thought fit to banish me the Court; whether it be for my
having preached any false Doctrine, or for having been guilty of any scandalous
Crime; or for not having punctually compli'd with the obligations of my
Pastoral function, or for having been Insolent in my words, or too rigorous in
punishing, or for having been slothful or careless, or for what other cause.

Your Highness may remember, that when your Father desired that his Subjects
might be permitted to return to some of their ancient customs, that I gratified
him fully in that matter; and that he happening at the end of our Treaty, to
mention some other customs that he had not spoke of before; I told him, That I
was ready to yield to every thing that was not contrary to the Law of God, one
thing only excepted, which was the giving the Cup to the Laics; which, though
not contrary to the Law of God, the concession thereof being reserved to the
chief Roman Pontiff, the Successor of St. Peter, and Christ's Vicar upon Earth,
it was not in my power to grant it; I promised nevertheless, at the same time
to write to his Holiness about it, and to lay the whole matter before him with
great sincerity, that so he as a faithful and prudent Steward might Ordain what
was most profitable. What I did then offer to your Father, I do now again offer
to your Highness, and do declare, That if your Highness and your Empire will
but continue in the Obedience of the Roman Church, the head of all Churches,
and will but follow her faith, that I will grant you all that I can with a good
Conscience in the form aforesaid. Finally I do beseech your Highness before you
send me away, to assemble all your Learned men, to Treat and Dispute with me
about their doubts in Matters of Faith; for confiding in the Mercy of God and
their good Judgments, I do not in the least doubt but that I shall be able to
convince them of their being in several errors, and to oblige them to confess,
that the Chair of St. Petor is such, That the gates of hell can never prevail
against it. This in my opinion would be the best course you could take to quiet
the minds of your people; for that if this should not be yielded to, what can
the common people say, but that the Learned men of Ethiopia were afraid to
appear before the Light of the Roman Doctors; but having shut their eyes, do
throw themselves into utter darkness. What is offered in justification of their
not yielding to this, to wit, that they shall incur an Excommunication if they
do it, is intolerable; since the Patriarch of Alexandria, no nor the Pope
himself, has not power to lay an Excommunication upon his Subjects on that
account; and the reason is, because such an Excommunication would tend to the
Destruction of the Faith, which is known and made manifest by the Disputations
of Learned men. It is likewise contrary to the express command of God, and his
Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul; Christ having commanded his Disciples, and in
them his whole Church to go and teach all Nations, Jews, Gentiles and
Heretics; and again, to seek and they should find, knock, and it should be
opened unto them. And how is truth sought, or how are its gates knocked at, but
by Disputations? It is also contrary to what St. Peter ordered, who commands
all Christians to be always prepared to give satisfaction to all that should
desire a reason of the hope that is in them; and in the last place, it is a
contradiction to St. Paul, who told his Disciple Timothy, that a Bishop ought
to be a Doctor; and writing to Titus, he declares wherein that Doctorship
consists, and that it does, in being so powerful in sound Doctrine, as to be
able to convince Gainsayers. Wherefore if your Learned men do think that we
contradict the truth, why do they not endeavor to convince us of it, and not
seek to excuse their not endeavoring it, by pretending that by engaging in a
Disputation with us, they should fall under the Excommunication of Three
hundred and Eighteen Fathers; there being no manner of foundation for that
pretense, since Hosius, Victor, and Vincentius, the Presidens of that Council,
were all the Legates of Pope Sylvester, the Master of Constantine the Great;
who undoubtedly never drew the Sword of Excommunication against themselves to
thrust it into their own Bowels; wherefore to flee to Excommunication in such a
case, is to trust to a covering that cannot hide the ignorance of him that
seeks to cover himself with it.

Since your Highness has been pleased to take all my Arms from me, if I must go
to Fremona, I desire the favor of you, to let my Servants have the Muskets to
Guard me thither, and they sholl be sent back to you again; and if this should
be denied, I hope your Highness will appoint a strong Guard of Portuguese
Soldiers with Firearms, to see me out of danger.

O. Patriarcha.


Though one cannot but be touched to see a Person, who but a few Months before
was in so high a Post, treated thus rudely; yet at the same time one can scarce
forbear smiling to find a Roman Prelate advancing the Principle of the Seekers
so high, The Principle of the Seekers is advanced by the Patriarch.
as to make it to be destructive of Religion, and contrary to the Commands of
Christ and his Apostles, to forbid People under pain of Excommunication, to
dispute about Matters of Faith, denying it to be in the Pope's Power to rob
People of this Liberty; notwithstanding he could not but be sensible that it is
what the Pope does every where; and that there is no Doctrine whatsoever for
which the Inquisition would sooner Burn a man, than for maintaining such a
liberty of Inquiry into the truth of Doctrines of Faith, to be the undoubted
Privilege and Duty of every Christian. But this is not the only instance we
have of the Jesuits affirming, That the very same Doctrine may be true in one
Country, and false in another. The Patriarch's Letter having been read in the
Council, it was Debated therein, Whether they should gratify him with a
public Disputation; and though that was carried in the Negative, it was judged
convenient, however, that an Answer in the Emperor's Name should be returned to
it: Which was as follows.

The Letter of Seltem Saged, comes to the Patriarch, with the Peace of God.
My Lord,
HEAR what we say and write to you: The Emperor's answer to the Patriarch.
We have received your Letter, and do understand all that it contains: As to
your desiring to know why we have turned you out of the Post wherein God and
the Emperor had placed you: Your Lordship cannot but be sensible, that so long
as we were under our Father the Emperor, we never disobeyed him in any one
thing; nor did we ever so much as open our mouth against any thing that he did;
but were so submissive to him in all things, that we never said, I will have
this, or I will have that; or I like this, or dislike that; insomuch, that I do
not remember, that during his life, I ever did any thing of my own head, but
did still what he Commanded me. As to the business of your Religion, our Soul
never entered into its Councils, neither did we ever join with any Counselors
either to build it up, or destroy it. We need not be told that the Emperor sent
for your Lordship, and that the Fathers likewise came with his Consent; as we
need not, that ever since your coming he has been continually embroiled in Wars
for endeavoring to establish your Faith; Fighting sometimes with his Sons, and
at other times with his Slaves, whom he had raised from the dunghill to great
honors: Insomuch that from the first hour we were able to bear Arms, we have
never done any thing, but fight in obedience to our Father's Commands, which we
always obeyed. After the Battle I had in the beginning of this Winter with
Ognadega, our Learned Monks and People having assembled themselves together in
the Camp, took the confidence to tell my Father their thoughts freely in the
following words; Sir, How long are we to be plagued thus, and to tire our
selves about things that are good for nothing? We desire to know, When we are
to give over fighting with our Kinsfolk and Brethren; or cutting our right hand
off with our left? What great difference is there betwixt the Roman Faith and
ours? For do they of Rome teach, That there are Two Natures in Christ; and have
not we always believed and taught the same, in affirming that our Lord Christ
is perfect God and perfect Man; perfect Man as to his Humanity, and perfect God
as to his Divinity? But whereas those his Two Natures are not separated, his
Divinity being United to the Flesh, and not separated from it, and his Flesh to
the Divinity; we do not for that reason affirm them to be Two, but One; being
made so out of two Causes, and that not so as to Confound and Mix those Natures
in their Beings; but on the account of their being one and the same Principle,
we call them by the name of that Union; so that our Controversy with them in
this matter is of small importance: Neither was it the cause of our having had
so much fighting, but it was because they denied us the Blood in the Communion,
notwithstanding Christ has told us positively in his Gospel, that unless we eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not inherit eternal
Life. And notwithstanding that Christ himself, when he Instituted the
Sacrament, after having given his Body to his Disciples, and received it
himself, did not say, The blood is in my flesh which I have given you; but on
the contrary, he said, Take and drink, and divide it among you: His Disciples
doing as he Commanded them, and as he gave them to understand by saying, Do
this in remembrance of me. Neither was this the only thing that discontented
the People; but moreover the prohibiting them to Fast on Wednesdays; which St.
Peter and St. Paul, and no fewer than Eight Synods, had Commanded them to do,
upon pain of Excommunication. Neither was that all, but because they saw us Eat
and Drink in the first week of Lent; Eating on the Morning of Good Friday; from
which time till Easter they do never taste any thing: They heard likewise, that
we received the Sacrament in the Morning on Fasting-days; and that the Roman
Church permits People on Fasting-days to eat Milk and Butter, and to drink
Water; having changed all the Festivities of the Year, and suffering Men and
Women promiscuously to enter into the Church, without keeping any out for being
unclean. But the things of all others for which they abhorred us the most, was
for saying, That they Baptized themselves as if they were Heathens and
Publicans; whereas, in truth, there is no great difference betwixt the
Romanists and them as to that point: And because the Romanists treated their
Priests and Deacons, as if they had not been in Holy Orders, giving them
Priesthood upon Priesthood, and Diaconate upon Diaconate; and for burning some
of their Altars for no other reason, but because they were made of Wood, and
Consecrating those again that were made of Stone, as if they had been Profane
before; The Monks were also enraged against the Romanists for not living like
Monks, who are not to be left to their liberty whether they will Fast or not;
and because the Fathers took state upon them, and did not visit them according
to the Custom of Monks.

For these and diverse other reasons, the People far and near were much
discontented, and said to the Emperor, Hear what we have to say, and either
give us leave to live quietly, or knock us on the head, since the War does
thicken upon us daily. When the Emperor was told this by all his People, he,
without our joining with them in it, finding that there was no other way to
quiet their minds, and that he would not be able to punish them much longer,
commanded his Counselors to advise together what was best to be done; who
after a serious consult came to this Resolution, That they must all return to
their Ancient Religion and Customs.

Your Lordship in being acquainted with this, will know the reason why you are
turned out of your Place, which God and the Emperor had bestowed on you; and
that the very same Emperor that sent for your Lordship, and gave you your
Authority, was the Person that deprived you of it: Wherefore since an
Alexandrian Abuna is on his way hither, and he has sent us word, that he cannot
be in the same Country with a Roman Patriarch and Fathers; we have ordered you
to Repair to Fremona, and there to remain. As to what your Lordship now offers,
which is, That if the People of Ethiopia will but continue in the Obedience of
the Roman Church, that you will dispense with them as to all matters which are
not contrary to the Faith; that comes too late now; for how is it possible for
them to return to that which they have not only forsaken, but do abominate, now
they have had a taste of their Old Religion again? For can a grown Man be born
again, or enter a second time into his Mother's womb? Your Lordship further
desires, That we would assemble our Learned Men to Dispute with you before you
depart, about matters of Faith: This ought also to have been done in the
beginning; besides, Is that Cause like to be supported by Arguments, which has
been maintained hitherto only by Force and Violence? By taking Estates from
some, The Cruelty of the Persecutions raised by the Jesuits.
and throwing others into Prison, and Punishing others more severely; and that
for no other reason, but because they would not embrace your Faith? And as if
that had not been sufficient, you have dragged great multitudes out of the
Deserts, who would have been contented to have lived there upon Herbs, and
confined them to Prisons; nay, the poor People that would have been glad to
have Buried themselves in Caves, not having escaped your Persecution. Now what
a Barbarity would it be, to go and tease poor People with Arguments, who have
suffered so much in Deserts and Banishments? It would certainly be a very
unjust thing, both in the sight of God and Man. As to your Lordship's desiring
to have a Portuguese Guard to attend you, that cannot be; but we shall appoint
a very Honest Man, and who has a great train of Servants, to convey your
Lordship, and all your Goods in safety, to the place whither you are to go.


This Letter gives us a great deal of light into the Affairs of Ethiopia at
this time. For First; We see plainly thereby, that Popery, as to its
Persecuting spirit, is the same in all Climates; it having no sooner got the
Power of the Government of Ethiopia on its side, than it made the penalty of
not embracing it, the loss of Estate, Liberty, and Life; and Herbs were
reckoned too high a Diet, and Caves and Deserts too good a Dwelling for those
that left all, and fled to them, to preserve a good Conscience. Secondly, That
their denying the Cup in the Sacrament to the Laity, and the validity of the
Alexandrian Ordinations, and not their believing that there were Two Natures in
Christ, were among the chief causes of the Habassins having such an Aversion
for Popery. Lastly, That Popery owed all the footing that it ever had in
Ethiopia to Violence; so that it no sooner lost the assistance of the Secular
Arm, than it came to nothing. There are two passages likewise in this Letter,
which do seem to make it evident, That the Habassins do not believe
Transubstantiation; the one is, where they do absolutely deny our Savior's
Blood to be in the Element of Bread; and the other is, where they seem to
intimate, That our Savior made his Disciples understand what he meant, by
calling the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, his Body and Blood, by bidding
them Celebrate it in Memory of him.

The Patriarch finding that there was no remedy but that he must go to Fremona,
and that the Emperor would neither lend him his own Arms, nor appoint him a
Portuguese Guard, did thereupon desire him to charge some Responsible Man with
the Books and every thing else that belonged to the Church; declaring that if
that was not done, That he would not take them with him: The Answer the Emperor
returned to this petition was very short, which was, That for his part, he did
not know how to pack Goods, and that he must therefore even do it himself, and
having done it, be gone with them. And the Patriarch having desired to know who
it was that was to be his Convoy; he had word sent him on Holy Thursday, That
they were two Messengers, and two Nobles, who would go well attended with
Servants, and that he must begin his Journey next Morning; which being come,
the Patriarch made his Farewel-Sermon; and after that was ended, The Patriarch
begins his Journey to Fremona.
he took off his Shoes, and having shaked the Dust that was on them in the Air,
he put them on again, and begun his Journey; on the Second day whereof he
dispatched the following Memorial to the Emperor.

Now that your Highness's Counselors do reckon that the security of your
Empire dos consist in the Extirpation of the Roman Faith, His Memorial to the
Emperor.
which is the only true Catholic and Apostolic Faith; and in the Banishment
of the Patriarch, Bishop, and Fathers; I for my part, notwithstanding I know
your Highness is most miserably abused by those men, do say with Jonas, Take me
and throw me into the Sea, it being better that one man should die, than that a
whole Nation should perish. However your Highness must know that the Roman
Faith can never be destroyed, it not being founded on the mud wherewith the
Nile fills Egypt, but on the firm Rock of St. Peter 's Confession, to whom
Christ has promised, that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it;
having also said to him at another time, Peter, I have prayed to my Father for
thee, that thy faith may not fail. Wherefore being now banished for having
preached the Gospel, I can say with St. Paul, I labor even unto bonds,
nevertheless the Word of God is not bound.

Wherefore as Fathers when they come to die, or when they are to part with
their Children for any long time, do speak to them as Jacob did to his Twelve
Sons, or as old Tobit did to the young one, and as Christ when he ascended into
Heaven did to his Disciples; so upon my departure, I will speak to your
Highness and your whole Empire all the truths which it imports you to be
acquainted with.

In the First place, I do testify to your Highness, before God and Christ
Jesus, who is to Judge the quick and the dead, That the Church of Rome is the
Mother, Mistress, and Head of all Churches, Christ having commanded her in the
person of her Founder St. Peter, to confirm his brethren, and feed his sheep;
that is, all the faithful of the world, who are all the Sheep of Christ; so
that none can have God for their Father, but they who have this holy Church for
their Mother, out of which there is no Salvation, no more than there was out of
the Ark in the time of the Deluge; And I do farther declare, That your Highness
and all that are in your Empire, who have violated the Oath you made in my
hands, To live and die in the Faith and Obedience of the Roman Church, have
incurred thereby the Excommunication which was pronounced by me and diverse
Priests in the name of God at that time, and by the Authority of St. Peter and
the Roman Pontiff his Successor, from which you cannot be absolved before you
return to the Obedience and Union of holy Mother Church.

In the Second place I do declare, That I, so long as I do live, and am not
loosed from that bond of Spiritual Marriage, which I have Contracted with the
Church of Ethiopia, am the true Patriarch and Pastor, and Abuna thereof; and
that whosoever is or shall come from any part, is a stranger, and cannot enter
into it by the door, it not being opened to him by the faithful and prudent
Steward, to whom Christ has delivered the Keys of his House. Such a one
therefore must be an Adulterer, in taking another man's Wife while her lawful
Husband is living. I have been placed in this Chair by the true Successor of
St. Peter, and that with the same Authority as St. Peter placed his Disciple
St. Mark in the Chair of Alexandria; all that are in that Chair, and do deny
Obedience to the Pope and his Successors, being Patriarchs only in name, for
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self if it continues not in the vine.

In the Third place, I am to put your Highness and the whole Empire in mind of
those words of St. Paul, Be not deceived, for God, no nor men, will not be
Mocked by your pretending that you have not forsaken the Roman faith, but only
in some customs; for it is plain you have departed from her by diverse Heresies;
namely, the using of Circumcision together with Baptism, the repeating of
Baptism, the keeping Saturday, and the ceremonial Law about Legal
uncleanness, and distinctions of meat; and in dissolving Marriages, many of
you affirming that Christ is the Son of God by grace only: Others affirming
that there are Two persons in Christ; others that he has one person made of
Two, and that he has not two Wills nor two Operations; others that he died
without his Divinity, others that the Humanity is equal to the Divinity, and is
every where. You do affirm likewise, that water squeezed from dry grapes may be
Consecrated, and that the Souls of Children are derived from their Parents,
with a great many other things that are repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and
have been Condemned and Anathematized in diverse Councils.

In the Fourth place, I do beseech your Highness by the Precious Blood of
Christ, and by the Bowels of Our Lady the Virgin Mary; and I do in the name of
God, and by the Authority which he has given me by the Pontifical Oil that was
poured on my head, as upon that of Aaron, on the day of my Consecration,
command you neither by force nor promises to endeavor to oblige the
Portugueses that shall remain here to renounce the true Roman Faith: Nor to set
any Captain over them that is not a Catholic by Descent, and chosen by
Catholics. And I do pronounce the greater Excommunication to be Ipso facto
incurred, and do invocate the Indignation and Curse of Almighty God, and of the
holy Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, and of St. Thomas, the Patron of India,
and of St. James the Great, the Patron of Spain and Portugal, on all that shall
any ways offend in this matter, or who shall at any time forsake the Roman
Faith.

In the Fifth place, I do advertise your Highness, and all and every one in
your Empire, that there is no Nation under Heaven that has the like Obligations
to another, as Ethiopia has to Portugal. The Portugueses not having come among
you, as the Children of Israel went into Egypt with Asses, to have them laden
with Provisions to satisfy their hunger; but were moved to it purely out of
Charity and Zeal for the faith. It is not above an Hundred years since they
were sent by their King to his great cost laden with Arms and Muskets, and
accompanied with a train of Artillery which is at this time in your Camp, with
the Royal Arms of Portugal upon them, with their Pockets full of Money, and
that not to make themselves Masters of Ethiopia, nor to Conquer it for their
King, but to deliver the Habassins out of a Mohammedan Captivity, and to free
them from the Yoke which that cursed Sect had laid upon their necks; for which
great Service, they have been so ill rewarded, that their Children and
Grandchildren were reduced to that Penury, that the King of Portugal was
obliged to allow them a yearly Maintenance. Wherefore I do beseech your
Highness, to let them enjoy the Privileges which their Fathers purchased for
them with their Blood; and which have been granted them by former Kings for
their services.

In the Sixth place, I would have your Highness remember, that several of the
Fathers of the Society who are Eminent for their Piety and Learning, have come
into Ethiopia at diverse times, not to seek after Honors or Riches, but to
serve God and your people in much humility; and to teach them the true faith,
some of them having given the greatest Testimonies of love that are possible,
in having laid down their Lives for their Friends; which Three of them did, one
after having been several years a prisoner at Matzua, and the other two at
Adel; and those that are now alive have served your Father with all the
fidelity of Doctors, Servants, and Slaves, as he himself has many times told
me; all which notwithstanding, after they had built several Churches and
Houses, they are now turned out of them all; and that in the midst of Winter
their Churches and Goods being all given to the Enemies of the Roman Faith; the
Fathers that were at Gorgora having in little more than three Months time been
sent from three several places; they that were at Dembea and Gojam having been
likewise turned out of all; notwithstanding all which hard usage, they continue
to pray to God to Establish your Highness's Empire for ever; and that he would
give you a House that has the true faith for its Foundation, and Heaven for its
Roof. Furthermore I would have your Highness remember, That your Father desired
the Bishop of Rome to send a Patriarch and Bishops into Ethiopia; at whose
request he sent me and a Bishop; we were both Masters of Divinity, and Readers
of the holy Scriptures: Neither did the most Catholic Powerful and Munificient
King of Portugal, expect that your Father should have remitted Gold to him to
defray the charges of our Mission, or that he should have taxed his Nobles on
that account; but he took the whole charge thereof upon himself, which amounted
to several Thousand Oquea's giving us also many rich pieces to make Presents
of, some of which are at this time in your Royal Palace, and in several great
Houses in Ethiopia: Neither did he so much as charge your Father with the
Maintenance of our persons, having sent me yearly an Hundred Oquea's to support
my Dignity. Now all the return you have made to your Brother the King of
Portugal, and to the Bishop and me for all the charge and trouble that we have
been at, is to throw us out of all at a blow, and to entertain another without
knowing who he is, or from whence he comes; threatening us like Caterpillars,
against whom when they come, the whole Country is up in Arms; so that
according to the word of David, I am cast out like a locust; you, in what you
do, fulfilling what Christ said to the Jews, I came in my Father's name, and
you received me not; another will come in his own name, and him you will
receive; the Children of Israel when they went out of Egypt carried not only
their own goods, but the Egyptians also which they had borrowed; whereas we are
forced to leave a great part of our own goods behind us; but since we must
leave them all when we come to die, that gives us but little trouble; but what
afflicts us most is, that your Highness should send the same Message to us,
which another King delivered with his own Mouth to Moses and Aaron in the
Twelfth of Exodus; Arise and go from among my people; and that with the same
haste as he forced the Jews out of Egypt by night, it being said the Egyptians
pressed the Hebrews to depart suddenly, saying, if they do not depart this
night, we are all dead men; imputing the death of their Firstborn to the
presence and detention of the Children of Israel; whereas in Justice they
should have attributed it to the hatred they bore to the Hebrews, who had been
their deliverers, and to their own cruelty, in having thrown their Sons into
the Nile. After the same manner Ethiopia ought to impute the just punishments
they have received at the hand of God, to the unjust hatred they have for the
Portugueses their restorers; and to their Manifold public and scandalous Sins,
some whereof I shall just mention:

Most of their men are for having several Wives, and their Women are for
changing their Husbands. Their Monks care not to have any thing more of Monks
than the habit, choosing the Houses of the Court of Ladies for their
Monasteries. The Nobles are for making themselves Lords of the Church and her
Lands, indulging the flesh in all things, and would have their Pastors to be as
so many Statues, in having neither Eyes to see their Sins, nor Mouths to
reprove them, nor hands to chastise them.

N^w so long as these Sins continue in Ethiopia, the Sword will never depart
from it. Open your Eyes, Sir, and follow the truth according to your knowledge
thereof, and suffer not the good Nature and Understanding which God has given
you, to be ruined by evil Counselors; but do justice to your Subjects,
remembering what God has said by the Ecclesiasticus, That Kingdoms are
Translated from one to another, and from one Family to another, by reason of
Injustice. And since we are not to see one another again, before we meet at the
Tribunal of God's Justice, I must tell you plainly, That though I should not
accuse you there, you will accuse your self; your Empire, the Gospel, the
Councils, and the Books of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church which I
brought for your Instruction, and you have rejected, will all accuse you there.

Nevertheless, I, the Bishops and Fathers, imitating our Master Jesus Christ,
who when he was on the Cross prayed for his Murderers, not attending to the
hatred wherewith they persecuted him, but to the precept of his Father's and
his own willingness to die for them; do from our hearts pray, that God of his
great Mercy would pardon you and your whole Empire, and remove from you and it
the Scourges of his wrath, which the examples in holy Scripture threaten them
withal who will go on in their Sins. And whereas the Gauls since the time your
Ancestors broke the Oath they made to the Portugueses, That they would receive
the Roman Faith, have become Masters of the greatest part of your Empire; so I
pray God, that the remaining part thereof may not be lost on this occasion
wherein there have been so many Oaths and Excommunications, with such a clear
knowledge of the truth; insomuch that what Saint Stephen said of the Jews, ^ay
be truly applied to you; You do always resist the holy Spirit after the Example
of your Fathers. May that Divine Spirit, which is the Temple and Fortress of
Truth, enlighten and strengthen your Highness to know and love the Roman-
Catholic Faith, which is the true way and life.

Offonso Patriarch of Ethiopia, Banished for Jesus Christ.


The Patriarch having been rifled by the way by a company of Banditties,
arrived at Fremona on the 24th of April; and not being able to think of
returning to the Indies to live there as a Private Friar, and where he knew his
Conduct would be censured, if for no other reason for its having been
unsuccessful; he began to consider whether he might not, in case the Emperor
should command him to depart his Kingdoms, which he every day expected he would
do, find some Nobles that would undertake to protect him against him; but being
sensible that that was not to be done any other way, but by giving assurances,
that a Portuguese Army would come in a short time to succor them, he
immediately dispatched four Fathers to Goa, The Patriarch so soon as he arrived
at Fremona, sends Four Jesuits to the Indies to solicit for Troops.
to solicit the sending of an Army to them, as the greatest Service that could
be done either to God or the Crown of Portugal; and having done this, he
thought he might very well encourage some of the Grandees to take them under
their protection by promises of a Portuguese Army being ready to embark at Goa,
to come to their assistance; and being informed that Prince John Kay, the Heir
of their old friend Bahurnagays, was living, discontented, upon his own Lands
which were Mountainous, and not far from the Sea Coast, he sent two Fathers to
him, to try if they could persuade him to undertake their protection, by
promises of great things the Portuguese Army that was coming would do for him.
The Envoys managed matters so, that they brought O Kay to promise to protect
them, it being agreed betwixt him and them, He sues to O Kay a discontenred
Lord for protection against the Emperor.
That whenever the Emperor should command the Patriarch and Fathers to leave
Ethiopia, that he should send a Troop of Horse to fetch them from Fremona into
his own Lands; where, when he had them once, he promised to defend them till
the Portuguese Army arrived.

This O Kay you must know was one of the chief Leaders in Guergis's Croisade
for the extirpation of Popery; O Kay undertakes to protect him.
which, though the Patriarch knew well enough, yet being sensible that he was
discontented with the Emperor and the Court, and believing Ambition to be much
stronger in him than Religion, he thought he might be a man proper enough for
his purpose, the very Peasants of Lasta being made use of by the Fathers
against me Emperor, as we shall see hereafter. The Emperor, who was too jealous
of the Patriarch and the Portuguese, The Emperor hearing thereof, commands the
Patriarch and Fathers to leave Ethiopia.
not to have his Spies upon them, having received advice, That the Patriarch
was caballing with O Kay, sent an^ Express with a precise order to the
Patriarch and Fathers, immediately to depart his Empire, telling them if they
would go to Matzua, there to embark for the Indies, that he would write to the
Basham of that Port, to treat them civilly, and help them to a passage.

The Order they were served with, run thus: From the day that Popery came first
into Ethiopia, our Empire has never had one day of Peace, which was what it
always enjoyed before. Wherefore since our Empire is very near having been
ruined by you, we do strictly command you all to depart presently; which, if
you will do quietly, and go to Matzua, we will recommend you to the Bashaw of
that place. The Patriarch, whose business it was to gain as much time as
possible, writ thereupon a very submissive Letter to the Emperor, begging most
passionately of him, not to deliver him and the Fathers to the Turks, the most
inveterate Enemies both of their Religion and Nation, which he would do if he
forced them to go to Matzua, a Port which belonged to those Infidels. But the
Emperor was so far from being prevailed with to revoke his Order, that he
renewed it with greater rigor in the following Answer to the Patriarch.

The Letter of the Emperor Seltem Saged comes to the Patriarch, Bishop, Father
James, and the rest of the Fathers.
HEAR what we say and write: The Emperor's Letter to the Patriarch to depart.
Asma Guergis, Taca Christos, and Melch Christos, have acquainted us with all
that you have said, and with all your excuses when they commanded you in our
name to return to the place from whence you came. In the first place you say,
You did not come hither of your own accord, but were sent hither after you had
been invited by diverse Letters. What, have you forgot the reasons I gave you
formerly, why I was obliged to send you away? and I do much wonder that you
should offer to give me the trouble of repeating them to you again; I need not
tell you what has happened betwixt you and the people of Ethiopia, and what a
struggle you have had with them to oblige them to embrace your Religion; but
one thing I must tell you, That if you continue not to regard either the power
of God who is above, or of the Emperor here below, that you shall not live Two
and Twenty years, no nor one year, no nor half of one in Ethiopia. There is no
need of telling you what Infinite Multitudes of people have lost their lives
because they would not turn Papists, or how great Troubles and Persecutions my
Father endured for your sake, since you cannot but be sensible of them, as you
are also of his having given over your Religion, when he saw plainly he was not
able any longer to support it; so that as it was he that first introduced it,
so it was he that put an end to it. After which he returned to the Foundation
of his Fathers, which is the Rock of the Faith of Alexandria, and fortified it
so by his Proclamations, that it is never to be removed.

As to your putting us in mind of the valiant Portugueses, who came hither in
the time of Asnaf Saged to defend the Faith, it is what we very well know, and
we do confess that they did us very good service in helping us to peace; but as
they never offered to destroy the Religion of Ethiopia, which was delivered by
the Fathers and the Apostles; so our people never offered them any violence;
but as they deserved much for having delivered us out of the hands of the
Mahometans, so they were all well rewarded by the Emperor, having Lands given
them where they had no Inheritance; which Lands are enjoyed to this day by
their Posterity, none ever asking them the question, What do you make here?

As to what you say, of your having reserved the Absolution of the
Excommunication you have laid upon Ethiopia, so to your self, that none but you
can Absolve her of it; That is easily answered: For when the Fathers began to
Preach Popery in Ethiopa, By what means did they oblige the People to embrace
it? Was it by Excommunications, or by doing any thing that looked like a
Miracle? No, it was by neither of those methods, but it was purely by the force
of the Imperial Authority: And did not the same hand that threw them into
Prisons, set them at liberty again? Neither can you but be sensible, that there
was not so much as one Person in Ethiopia that embraced your Religion
voluntarily.

As to what you have said of Ethiopia being your Wife, it was no where ever
Written or Decreed, That a Woman shall be bound to a Husband contrary to her
own Consent, only because her Father and her Mother will have it so; for which
reason your Lordship cannot but be sensible that Ethiopia was never your
Spouse; since, as we have observed, There was not one Person that belonged to
her, that embraced your Faith voluntarily. As to the Vow you speak of, it
admits of several distinctions; some make a Vow to relinquish their Estates
without turning Monks; some Vow to live and die Virgins; and others, not being
Virgins, for the Love of God, to live Chastely: The force of all which Vows is
resolved into their having been voluntary; which, when they are, they Sin that
do not observe them; the faculties of the Will and Consent being so in the
nature of the Soul, as to Govern its animal Powers, which are the Flesh: This
is a true account of the nature of Vows. And as to your pretending that you
cannot leave Ethiopia, because you are under a Vow to her, that need not
trouble your Conscience, since you have not left her, but she has left you;
neither do you flee from her, but she flees from you, as a Coward does from a
Battle. We are ready to be your Lordship's Witnesses, that you Loved Ethiopia
very much; as we are ready to be her Witnesses too, that she could never endure
you, who have given her so many bitter Potions: Wherefore what we have to say
to you, is, in a word, Be gone all of you to your own Country in Peace: And we
do call God to witness of our having been no ways accessory to any injuries
that you may have sustained; for as it was the Emperor our Father who invited
you hither, so it was he that dismissed you, we having had no hand neither in
the one or other; on the contrary, we have hitherto Protected you, and are at
this time fighting with the Xague that Robbed you, with an intention of
restoring all your Goods to you that we can recover; and as you have no reason
to complain of us for your having been plundered, so that you may not be Robbed
a second time, we have appointed Za Mariam, and the Nobles of Sararoa and
Amestea, to convey you safe to Matzua; where, if you please, you may buy a Ship
to carry you home; having also writ to the Bashaw of that Port, in Arabic, to
use you kindly, and to suffer you to part in peace. As to the motion you have
made, of returning to the Indies by the way of Dancaly, and the Port of Bahur,
a way, which your self excepted, none ever yet came; the Fathers and all the
other Portugueses, having come continually by Matzua; we must tell you, that
now your Expulsion is determined, it is to no purpose to allege reasons why
you cannot go; and that if you should shuffle any longer with our Orders, that
it will be your Ruin. Have we taken any thing from you that you have got in
Ethiopia, that you should disobey us, and say you will not go? this is not
right. Be gone therefore, without making any further reply or excuse, your
Expulsion being determined, as you will understand by the Order you will
receive.


The Patriarch perceiving that if he staid any longer at Fremona, he must
either go voluntarily to Matzua, or be sent thither in Chains; the new Abuna
who was now got to Court, and who I reckon had the chief hand in all all these
severe Orders, having as little compassion for the Romanists, as they, when
they were in Power, had had for the Alexandrians; he dispatched a Messenger to
O Kay to acquaint him with the danger he was in, The Patriarch sends to O Kay
for a Guard.
and to desire him to send some Soldiers presently to help him to make his
escape; sending the Coadjutor and Six of the Fathers at the same time privately
to a discontented Nobleman in the Saroa, to try if they could persuade him to
join with O Kay in protecting them; but though that Grandee, like a Brutal Man
as he was, told the Bishop and his Companions, That he would have nothing to do
with them; O Kay, according to his promise, sent his Brother with a good Body
of Men to a passage within a few Leagues of Fremona, whither his Confederate
Tecla Mariam, who had been gained likewise by the Patriarch, had undertook to
convey them in safety. The manner of their escape being concerted, the
Patriarch and Fathers having put themselves in a disguise, so soon as it was
dark, stole out at their backdoor; and being come to the place where Tecla
waited for them, they were conducted by him to O Kay's Brother, who conveyed
them to O Kay, The Patriarch and Fathers are lodged safe in O Kay's Territories.
by whom they were received with all testimonies of kindness, and for their
security, were lodged by him in an impregnable Mountain in the Province of Bur,
where they had not been many days before the Coadjutor and his Six Companions
came to them, not having been able to bring any of the Nobles they had visited,
into an Association to Secure them.

The Emperor was much troubled when he heard of O Kay's having undertaken to
Protect the Patriarch and Fathers against him in Ethiopia, and being sensible
that nothing but an assurance from them of a Portuguese Army could have tempted
one of his Principles, who had on all occasions showed himself a Zealous
Alexandrian, The Emperor treats with O Kay to deliver them up to him.
to have done it; he resolved to send to O Kay, and to grant him every thing he
would desire, on condition he would surrender them to him, to dispose of them
as he should think fit. O Kay, though overcome by this Proposition when it was
made to him, yet had too much Honor to deliver People, who, upon his having
promised to Protect them, had put themselves into his hands, up to the
resentments of an enraged Prince; neither would he upon any terms yield to the
cutting off of Father Lobo 's Head, on which the Emperor insisted much, knowing
him to have been the most active promoter of an Association against him amongst
his Subjects: All the Court could bring O Kay to, O Kay will not yield to that,
but promises to carry them to Matzua.
was to carry the Patriarch, Bishop, and Fathers to Matzua, and there to leave
them to shift for themselves as well as they could, and to suffer them to be
notified in the Emperor's Name, to depart Ethiopia in two days upon pain of
Death.

The Patriarch, when the Messenger had notified him, and asked him, Whether he
thought he had not been the cause of bloodshed enough already in Ethiopia? Made
Answer, That he was under an higher obligation to the Emperor of Heaven not to
leave his Sheep; for whom he was ready to lay down his life among devouring
Wolves. And having obtained leave to speak with O Kay, he asked him, What he
intended to do with him and the Fathers now he had them in his hands? He made
Answer, Not to deliver you to the Emperor, but to convey you in safety to
Matzua, where you will not be long before you will meet with an opportunity of
returning to Dio, or some other Port belonging to the Portugueses in the
Indies. The Patriarch not at all satisfied with this Answer, after having told
him, That it was only to have avoided being sent thither by the Emperor, that
they had desired his Protection; and that he had promised them oftener than
once, to secure them in his Province until the Portuguese Fleet, which they
daily expected, arrived with Succors: Asked him again, Whether he had
determined to violate his Faith with them? To which O Kay returned this short
Answer, That there was no remedy for it, and that they must prepare themselves
to begin their Journey to Morrow. The Patriarch finding there was no good to be
done with O Kay, addressed himself to the Company, conjuring them in the Name
of God, To consider what a wicked thing it was to be the Executioners of the
expulsion of a true Pastor and Patriarch, and of the Preachers of the Gospel;
and that by having a hand therein, they would all incur the greater
Excommunication, from which the Pope only was able to Absolve them. But he
could have no other Answer from them, But that they would venture that, being
resolved whatever were the Consequence of it, to execute the Emperor's Orders.

In the Morning the Patriarch being spoke to, to begin his Journey, instead of
that begun an Harangue, which was heard quietly by the Company till he came to
inveigh bitterly against the Emperor and his Counselors for what they had done
to him. Whereupon the Habassins interrupted him, telling him, They would not
hear their Prince railed at so without a cause, and that he must come away
presently, for the Company waited for him to guard him to Matzua, and not to
hear him Preach, or rather Declaim against Ethiopia and its Prince. The
Patriarch finding there was no staying for him in Ethiopia, prevailed with O
Kay, who, it seems, had a mind to play a double Game before he began his
Journey, to wink at the Coadjutor and Father Jacinto stealing away to Cafla
Mariam, and Father Luis and Father Bruno to Cantibazard, who had both promised
to suffer them to abscond in their Lands till a Portuguese Army should come to
relieve them; and upon the Journey, he persuaded O Kay himself by the same
argument, to carry two of the Fathers back with him to abscond in his
Territories, promising so soon as he got to the Indies, to hasten the sending
of a Fleet that would make them all Princes quickly.

O Kay having conducted the Patriarch to the Gates of Arkice, The Patriarch and
most of the Fathers are put into the hands of the Turks at Matzua.
and delivered him to the Governor of that Port, returned home with the two
Fathers that were to abscond with him; and the Turk having been told that the
Patriarch had a vast Treasure with him, did, in hopes of a great Prey, not only
receive him at the Gate with Ceremony, but carried him home with him to his
House, where he treated him with a Respect that is not usually paid by Men of
his Nation and Religion to Christians of whatsoever Quality they are; but this
Complaisance was too unnatural to last long; for upon the Officers, whom he had
appointed to search the Baggage, returning and whispering him in the Ear, that
they had met with nothing of any value, besides two small Silver Chalices, he
dismissed his Guests very abruptly, commanding them to be carried straitways to
the Custom-house to be searched there; which having been done with less success
than the Baggage, there being nothing found upon them besides two small Silver
Crosses, and a few Reyals of Plate, the Governor was put into such a rage by
the disappointment, that he commanded them to be conveyed immediately to
Matzua, where having landed about Midnight, they were conducted by the Baneans,
the Friends of Mankind in general, to a house which they, upon having received
notice that they were coming, had provided for them; but they had not been many
hours in their Lodging, before the Governor, who was resolved to squeeze
something out of them before they went to Suaqhem, (the Bashaw whereof had,
upon the same Information of their having a great Treasure in Gold and Jewels,
sent an Order immediately to bring them before him) arrived in the Island; and
the Fathers very well knowing what it was that had brought him thither, went by
times in the Morning to wait upon him with a Present of Six hundred Pieces of
Eight, which they had borrowed of the Baneans; the Governor, though he took the
Present, did it after such a contemptuous manner, as sufficiently intimated
that he expected a great deal more from them before he parted with them. But
finding there was no more came, he, upon some pretense or other, ordered a Boy
that was in the Patriarch's Train, to be taken up, threatening to sell him to
the Arabians if he were not ransomed with Sixty pieces of Eight within half an
hour; which Sum was likewise borrowed of the Baneans, The Governor having
squeezed all that he could out of them, sends them to Squqhem.
and paid within the time. After a Months stay at Matzua, they were all
embarked for Suaqhem, where when they arrived, the stately Bashaw would not so
much as see them; but having ordered their Persons and Baggage to be searched,
he sent them word, That under Thirty thousand Crowns they were not to think of
having leave from him to go to the Indies. Nevertheless, after much Bartering,
the Baneans having brought him down to Four thousand, paid the Money; and
having provided a Ship to carry them all to Dio, as they were upon the shore
ready to have Embarked, word came from the Bashaw, That he had given leave only
to Seven to depart, of which number, the Patriarch was not to be one;
pretending to detain him till he had advice from Dio how matters stood there as
to their Commerce.

Seven of the Fathers, Seven of the Fathers purchase leave to go to Dio, but
the Patriarch is detained.
Two remaining behind with the Patriarch, embarked on the 6th. of August 1634.
and after a Voyage of Eight days, during which time they suffered a thousand
affronts from their fellow-Passengers, who were going Pilgrims to Mecha, and
who reckoned it to be meritorious to abuse Christian Priests, they were put
ashore at Dio; where two of the Fathers, who were sent by the Patriarch from
Fremona to solicit for Troops, were arrived but a few days before, the other
two having died in the Voyage, which had been extremely tedious. By the first
opportunity that offered, Father Manuel, and Father Jerome, embarked for Goa;
The Fathers being got to Goa, do solicit the the Viceroy hard to take Matzua
and Ark^co.
where being arrived, they were at the Viceroy Don Michael de Noronha, day and
night, for to send a Fleet with some Troops to Ethiopia; representing the
taking of the Ports of Suaqhem and Matzua, as a thing that Five hundred
Soldiers, with Two Men of War, would do with ease; and magnifying the
advantages the Crown, as well as the Church, would reap from the Portugueses
being Masters thereof. But though there was never any thing pressed with
greater heat and zeal than this Expedition was by the whole Clergy of Goa,
Secular and Regular, who were all possessed by the Two Fathers, That the
Reduction of another Europe to the Obedience of the Church of Rome, would
infallibly be the consequence of it; But can obtain nothing but fair promises.
Yet all they could obtain of the Viceroy, was only Commendations of their
Zeal, with a general promise of undertaking that work so soon as the posture of
his Affairs would allow him to do it. But the Fathers knowing where their
business stuck, endeavored to obviate all the Political Arguments that could
be brought against it, affirming with the greatest confidence, That the
conquest of those two Ports would open another Indies to the Portugueses; and
that the Customs of them alone would do much more than defray the Charges of
Conquering and Keeping them; and that there was no reason to think that the
Turks would not sit down quietly with the loss of two such important places,
since they had lately lost the whole Kingdom of Gemen, and the Ports of Moqha,
Odieda, and Cameran, which were all places of greater moment to them than
Suaqhem or Matzua, without ever so much as attempting to recover them again.

But tho the Viceroy had neither Ships nor Troops to spare at this time for an
Habassin Expedition, he no sooner heard of the loss of Momboca, a Port
belonging to the Portugueses upon the same Coast with Suaqhem, but which is
much nigher to Goa, and more in the way of Trade, than he found * The Viceroy,
who had no Ships nor Troops to spare for Ethiopia, finds both for Momboca upon
its having revolted.
Both to send thither; the History of which loss was, in short, as follows.

The Governor of the Citadel of Momboca, a place, says our Historian, that
seemed to have Tyrannical Governors entailed upon it, having upon some pretense
or other, in the year 1614. put the King of that Country, who was a Mohammedan,
to death, he sent the Prince, his eldest Son, who was but a Boy, with his
Father's Head to Goa, where being put into the hands of the Austin Friars, he
was Converted by them, and Christened by the Name of Hierom, and after Thirteen
years residence among them, was Married to a Portuguese Lady; and having
solemnly Submitted himself and his Kingdom to the Pope, was sent home with his
Queen, with a promise of having his Crown restored to him again. But the
Governor of Momboca, though he allowed Don Hierom the Title of King, treated
him much more like a Slave than a Prince, not suffering him to exercise the
least Authority, nor to have a hand in any public business. The Royal Title,
without any thing of Power, making Don Hierom uneasy; and having nothing else
to do, he stole frequently by night to the place where his Father's Corpse lay
buried; where, after having bitterly bewailed his unfortunate end, he still
performed some Mohammedan Ceremonies to his Ghost; which having been observed
one night by a Portuguese, he went presently, and acquainted the Governor
therewith; who concluding from thence, as well he might, that Don Hierom,
though he professed himself a Christian, was a Mohammedan in his heart, intended
to have him apprehended in order to send him to the Inquisition of Goa, as an
Apostate: But the King, having by some way or other had advice of what the
Governor intended, resolved to be beforehand with him, and either to send him
to the Inquisition of Heaven next morning to answer for his Tyranny, or to lose
his Life in the Attempt; which, knowing what the Inquisition of Goa was, he
reckoned to be preferable to being lodged in it; and having, in pursuance of
this resolution, by night with great secrecy got Three hundred of the stoutest
and faithfullest of the Caffrees together in a Body, he surprised the Citadel
betimes next Morning, where having Killed the Governor Peter Leytam de Gambaa
with his own hand, he put the whole Garrison, not sparing the Governor's Lady
and Daughter, to the Sword; and having done his work in the Citadel, he Marched
into the Town, and before night had not left one Portuguese, Ecclesiastic or
Laick, alive that he could lay his hands on. So soon as the Massacre was over,
he went to the Lady Church, where having mounted the Pulpit, and commanded all
the Natives who had turned Christians, to be brought before him, he made the
following Discourse to them.

The King of Momboca's Speech to his Subjects after he had Massacred all the
Portuguese that were in the City.
THE High Ala has for many years suffered the Insults of Men; but the time
appointed for their period being come, he would endure them no longer; having
now in one hour revenged the Crimes of several Ages. The Portugueses came from
the dark shades of the day, into this Country, where the true light shines;
who after having destroyed great numbers of African and Asiatick Kingdoms, and
having been Pirates in both Seas, had the impudence to pretend that they had no
other business with us, but to teach us Policy for the Earth, and to instruct
us in the way to Heaven. As if either Divine or Human Laws did direct the
destroying and robbing of men on purpose to bring them to embrace true
Doctrines; is not this wonderful Doctrine, to put a Cross into our Hands, that
they may take our Scepters out of them, and our Crowns from off our Heads, and
to rob us, as they have done all other Nations, of our Liberty?

Their coming at first into these Parts, though drawn hither by nothing else
but their unsatiable covetousness, and desiring to have a Trade with us, was
well enough; but to force us to it, whether we would or not; and instead of
helping us to Goods, and Honor, to encourage us to trade with them, to fleece
us to our very Souls if we did it, or refused it is, such an Heavenly or
earthly Law, as I must own I do not understand. Let us for once grant them,
That we are, as they say, without the Knowledge of the True God; What then? Can
there be any such God as shall command us to be Robbed of our Lands, Crowns,
Lives, and Liberties, and of our Wives, Children, Brethren, and Kinsfolk, that
so we may be brought to the Knowledge of him? No, most certain it is, that
there can be no such God; since to be God, is to be Just: So that the Robberies
which we of Africa and Asia do daily suffer at the hands of these enormous
Strangers, are Injustices which will infallibly be punished at his Divine
Tribunal; for the very Men that do plunder us, do at the same time teach us,
That when the Son of God sent his Ministers to Preach his new Law over the
World, that one of his Instructions to them was, that they should propose it to
the Gentiles, and if some refused to hear them, that they should go then and
tender it to others: For had this work been to have been done by Viclence,
their Master was sufficiently able to have done one of these two things for his
Ministers, either to have endued them with such a Divine Power as could not be
resisted, but must have obliged all People to have surrendered themselves to
them; or have given them Armies to have forced the World to a submission.
Whereas it is most certain, that those Ministers had no order to take any thing
from any body, or to compel any to receive their Doctrines: Which makes me
wonder how the Portugueses, who pretend to be such Singular Ministers of those
Doctrines, should first force us by War to embrace them, and after we have
embraced them, should Rob us: What shall I call such People as these? The
Preachers of the Divine Law, or the Doctors of Human Covetousness? Who call us
Barbarians before we hear them, and after we have heard them, make us their
Slaves? With what plausible pretenees did they first come ashore here? And how
did they afterward make themselves so far Masters of this City, as to oblige
my Ancestors to accept of their own Crown from their hands; and who, after they
had served them faithfully, were rewarded by them with Reproaches, Treachery,
Violence, and Death. But to pass over what is ancient, and to go no higher than
my Father; Who among you, though your Bowels were nests of Scorpions, or of
worse creatures, if there be any, do not lament the Memory of what he suffered
at their hands, even to the taking away of his life by barbarous and tyrannical
Methods? I have a thousand times, and a thousand to that, visited the Tomb of
my good, but unhappy Father; and I never did it once, but I heard his blood
crying to God for Justice, as also for vengeance upon my Soul; which made me
consider, how he had provoked the Portuguefes to Murder him as they did, or
what I had done to deserve the same treatment. As to my Father, he was easily
justified; and as to my self, I am not sensible that I ever did any thing to
offend them, unless it were by turning Christian; which, though it may seem
strange, yet lively Experience assures us, that it is their common practice to
Respect and Reverence us so long as we continue to profess our own Religion,
and to persecute and abominate us so soon as we are persuaded by them to
profess theirs. I need not tell you, that I was bred up among them at Goa,
where I saw so much of their Insolence, that I do much more wonder at their not
having committed greater here, than at their having committed those they have
at Goa. I saw the King of Ormus thrown into Jayl, and his Crown taken from him
and given to another, only upon a pretense that he was Mad; though all his
Madness was, his having refused to give them as much to let him keep his Crown,
as he to whom they gave it had offered for it; for with them we are Catholics,
or in our Wits, according as we give; If we give them much, though we are
Infidels, they reckon us Christians; and though we are Fools, they reckon us
Wise; on the contrary, if we give them but little, then let us be never so
Wise, we are reckoned Mad; and though Christians, are reckoned Infidels; so
that it must be our Purses, and not our Minds, that must justify us with this
Nation, which boasts so much of Politeness and Justice. If their Religion
teaches them these things, it cannot be a good Religion; but if it does not,
they then must be very Wicked to dishonor it as they do by their innumerable
Insolences; but however that is, I am certain, we have reason to seek to
secure our necks, and either to forsake their Religion as bad, or to abominate
them as the worst of men, which I will always be sure to do, but will at the
same time acknowledge, that were their Actions conformable to their Preaching,
that they would not be ill men. Nevertheless we have the Law of our own great
Prophet to save us, and which of all other Laws will do it the most
effectually: Neither shall I fail to take severe Vengeance on my self for
having forsaken it for their Law, and that without seeking to excuse my self,
by my having been converted by them at an age when I was not capable of
understanding their Cheat, or of foreseeing my own ruin thereby. But this I
must say in my own justification, That I discovered the error I had committed
at the same time I came to the use of my reason; and retracted it in my heart,
though till this day it was not possible for me to do it publicly; but though
I have been slow in doing it, I do hope the glorious achievements of this day
will abundantly compensate for that my slowness, being confident that our most
just Prophet will obtain a pardon for me from the sublime Ala for my having
delivered this his people from that shameful slavery they have been so long
held in by vile Portuguese Tyranny, called by its professors the Catholic
Church, whose mischiefs are now legible in their sufferings; it being God's
property to chastise horrible Insolences, and to favor regular proceedings;
so we see they are all fallen by the edge of our Swords, and the flight of our
Arrows; and being tied hand and foot by the enormity of their Crimes, none of
them have offered to make the least resistance, neither have any of them
escaped. Where was that Courage they so much boast of, and that Justice which
they pretend favors them? By this you may all see plainly, that we are
Superior to them, both as to a righteous Law, and in true Courage; as also that
you were cheated by their cunning persuasions, to leave the breasts of our true
Religion, wherein you had been Educated, in returning to which you shall have
me for an example. As to those who have never Apostatized, I have nothing to
say to them upon this point; but what I am now about to say, concerns you all
equally; which is, That you join together to recover your ancient Liberty, and
to defend your Ancient Kingdom, reviving the glory of your forgotten Cavalry,
which in former ages was famous all over the world. You now know by Experience
what the Portugueses are, who when they first Conquered this City, took
advantage of our unwariness; but wherever people are watchful, there they are
either beat, or depend on their craft for that, which we expect only from our
Arms. Let them come now when they will, and they shall find what their courage
or craft will signify to them; for as I am resolved to believe nothing that
they say, so having upon this happy day cleared this place of them, whenever
they come, I will defend it with more vigor than I attacked it; and how should
they be able to retake this City, who when they had it in their possession,
were not able to keep it? Wherefore do but observe my Orders, and you shall
live in honor and safety, and be freed from Tyranny in your Houses.


The Portuguese Historian, who relates this Speech, makes the following
reflections upon it; Thus this blasphemous man harangued his infamous Sect, in
which he was become learned, reviling our Religion, of which he was not
ignorant, but was spitefully set against it; but as to all other things
mentioned by him relating to the temper and government of the Portugueses, they
were, says he, spoke by him, and so much is the more pity, with more of truth
then passion: adding, Neither could this Prince be said to be Disloyal in
having made such an Insurrection; The King of Momboca justified in part by a
Portuguese Historian.
for wherever Tyrranny becomes Exorbitant, and is not to be curbed by gentle
Methods, it cancels all the Bonds of Allegiance; Self-Preservation, whether
Natural or Politic, being a thing that is indispensably necessary; for would
it not be a pleasant thing, that one should load another with insufferable
Insolences, trusting to this, That the injured person will not offer to defend
himself, for fear, forsooth, of being thought disloyal, though at the same time
he has no other way to remedy himself but by being so? For it is undoubtedly a
much less fault to be unfaithful to a Tyrant, than to establish a Succession of
Tyrants by a tame obedience.

But the Viceroy not having the same thoughts of the Revolution of Momboca as
our Historian, so soon as he heard of it, dispatched his Eldest Son with a
Fleet of Sixteen Ships and Five Hundred Soldiers, to recover it, and to
chastise the Renegado King and his Caffrees; but they defended themselves so
bravely, that after a close Siege both by Sea and Land for some Weeks, they
obliged the Portugueses, The Portugueses are baffled before Momboca.
after having lost most of their Soldiers, to return to Goa with disgrace.

The Habassin Solicitors, who had desired the same number of Ships and Men for
Matzua, having put down this loss in their Book of Judgments, and finding there
was nothing to be done for them at Goa, resolved to send Father Hierom to the
Courts of Lisbon, Madrid, and Rome, to see what could be done there; as also to
give such a Narrative of the Change in Ethiopia, as would vindicate the Jesuits
Conduct in that Empire, which they had reason to fear would be blamed for it in
Europe.

Father Hierom, Father Hierom is sent into Europe to solicit for Troops, and
to justify the Jesuits Conduct in Ethiopia.
after a tedious Voyage from Goa to Angola, and from Angola to Brasil, and from
Brasil to Cartbagena in the West Indies, and from Carthagena to Cales, arrived
at last at Lisbon on the Eighteenth of December, 1636; where having given in a
Memorial to the Infanta Dona Margaret, who was Governess of Portugal at that
time, and finding there was nothing to be had at that Court, on the Twentieth
of January he begun his Journey to Madrid, where the King and the Conde Duke
having given his long story the hearing, sent him back to Lisbon with some,
though small hopes of doing something for Ethiopia; but being returned to
Lisbon, he found a Letter from the Portuguese Assistant of the Jesuits at Rome,
commanding him to repair thither with all possible expedition; a true narrative
of the late Revolution in Ethiopia being a thing their Order stood in great
need of at that Court. The Father being got to Rome, gave his General Mutio
Vitelleschi a full account of that whole affair; and after that, was admitted
to kiss the Pope's foot, to whom he delivered a long Memorial of all that had
passed in Ethiopia, and of all that was to be done for the recovery of it; and
the Pope having laid that whole business before a Junto of Cardinals, the
Father solicited them continually to come to some effectual resolution about
it, but to little purpose, he being able to obtain nothing of them but good
wishes and blessings, of which the Pope himself too is said to have been very
liberal. But the Father, He obtains nothing at Rome but Blessings, and at
Madrid and Lisbon but fair promises.
who was a great Traveller, knowing that Matzua and Suaqhem, as weak as he had
represented them to be, were not to be taken by such Ordinance; and finding
that there was no other to be expected from that spiritual Court, trudged back
again to Madrid, where by his Incessant Solicitations he obtained a Letter to
the Viceroy, recommending the business of Ethiopia to him, so soon as the
affairs of the Government would permit; with which Letter, which signified just
nothing, the Father returned to Goa; upon whose illsuccess, Father Tellez makes
the following Exclamation; This was an occasion wherein all the precious Jewels
of Spain ought to have been sold, and all the sacred Treasures of Rome to have
been opened; but for our Sins, those fervors of Christianity which discovered
themselves in the Croisado's which were undertaken for the recovery of the Holy
Land, and the Zeal of Converting the world, and of reducing Ethiopia, are now
in a manner extingiushed. The Patriarch gets to Goa.


But what reflected the most on the Devotion of the State of the Indies, was
their taking no care to Ransom the poor Patriarch and Fathers, who remained
Slaves still at Suaqhem; and who finding they were forgot at home, were forced
at last to give Commission to the Baneans to treat with the Bashaw about their
Ransom; who having brought him down to Four thousand pieces of Eight, they
advanced the Money, and embarked the Patriarch and his two Companions on a Ship
that was bound for Dio; where being arrived after a months Voyage, and finding
a Ship ready to Sail for Goa, they went on Board, and being got thither,
revived the business of Ethiopia again, but with no better success than its
former Solicitors.

But to cast our Eye back upon Ethiopia, O Kay finding no Portuguese Succors
come, delivers the Bishop of Nice, and three Fathers, who by his connivence
remained behind in his Country, to the Emperor.
O Kay, in whose Lands the Bishops of Nice and the three Fathers had absconded
for near five Years, finding the Promises of a Portuguese Army he had been so
long fed withal, came to nothing, he treacherously delivered them all into the
hands of the Emperor, who having ordered them to be brought in Chains to the
Camp, they were all four tried and condemned to Death as Traitors. But it not
being the Custom of Ethiopia, say the Jesuits, to put People to Death, though
condemned to it, for Treason, (they should have excepted the time when they
governed the Court, for then no Body was spared that was convicted of it); that
Sentence was changed into Banishment, They are all four condemned as Traitors,
and executed by the Mob.
a Favor that was but of little use to them; for being sent into the Country
of the Agau's, the Mob ris upon them, and hanged them all four upon one Tree,
pelting them furiously with Stones as they hung.

But notwithstanding Father Hierom's Narrative of this Revolution, which was
undoubtedly favorable enough to his Order; The Congregation De propaganda
fide, being dissatisfied with the Conduct of the Portuguese Jesuits in
Ethiopia, takes the Mission thereof from them, and gives it to the Capuchins.
there did not want those at Rome, who imputed it chiefly to the rash and
furious Conduct of the Portuguese Jesuits, who they say by not following Father
Peter's Example of introducing Popery by degrees, but having got the Emperor
and his Brother on their side, were for doing it in a day, had ruined that
whole Design by their Precipitation. Neither was it only the Enemies of that
Order, of which it never yet wanted good store among the Clergy that talked
thus; the Cardinals De propaganda fide, having themselves declared, That they
had the same thoughts of it, by taking that Mission out of the hands of the
Portuguese Jesuits, and committing it to French and Italian Capuchins. Neither
were the Cardinals much mistaken in this matter; for in truth, the thing that
ruined the Interest of Popery in Ethiopia, was the Portuguese Fathers, even
when they were most in favor with the Emperor, caballing still with Princes
and Governors, who were their Converts, to Canton Ethiopia into several
Independent Kingdoms; together with their presuming, that with four or five
Hundred Portuguese Soldiers, they should be able at any time to reduce Ethiopia
to the Roman Church, which conceit made them the less fearful of committing
Errors, or of precipitating things. This design of breaking the Habassin Empire
into several Independent Principalities, however they might condemn it at Rome
for not having succeeded, they could not in general condemn it either as
impolitick or sinful; it being visible to all the World, that the great Fabric
of the Papacy was erected and established by the same course; that is, by its
having broke the Roman Empire into a great many Independent Kingdoms; for which
reason, the keeping of those Kingdoms from ever consolidating again into one
great Monarchy, is visibly the chief care of the Court of Rome; which, let the
most Catholic, or the most Christian, express never so much Zeal for their
Religion, immediately turns their Enemy, whenever they begin to think of being
Universal Monarch.

Now, though I cannot say, That the great Palafox, Archbishop of La Pueba de
los Angeles had the miscarriage of this Mission in his eye, when he called upon
Innocent the 10th in his second Letter to him, bearing date the 8th of January,
1649. to weigh the Services and Disservices the Jesuit Order had done the
Church in an equal Balance; nevertheless, considering how the Fathers by
caballing with Princes, and plunging themselves over head and ears into
Politics in Ethiopia, did, as it were, in one day destroy all the Effects of
their long and great Labors in that Empire, what that Learned and Pious
Prelate has said, is so very pat on this occasion, that I shall lay it before
the Reader.

As I do voluntary confess, says Palafox, about the middle of the Letter, That
the Jesuits have by their Virtues, no less than their Writings, and both by
their Words and Examples, done great Service and Honor to the Church of God;
so I do assure your Holiness, that by some troublesome Qualities, not to speak
of Defects which belong to them, they have done the Church more harm than good;
it is therefore your Holiness's business to weigh the one against the other in
your Apostolical Balance, to see which does preponderate. For, as a Prebend or
Benefice is unprofitable to him that injoys it, when its Charges exceed its
Revenue; so a Religious Order may be said to be prejudicial to the Church, when
it brings more damage than profit to it; and especially, when there are other
Orders and Ecclefiasticks, who may be as serviceable to the Church, without
being prejudicial to her.

Suppose all the Jesuits to labor hard in the Service of the Church, yet what
do all their labors signify, if they themselves destroy all the effects of
them, or make them groan under the feet of the Grandeur and Authority they have
usurped to themselves? What advantage can a Bishop derive from their
Assistance, if they dishonor and persecute him, whenever he does any thing
that they do not like? What fruit can the People reap by their Instructions, if
they raise Troubles and Commotions among them? Of what advantage is it to
Parents to have their Children taught by them, if they rob them of their sweet
Company by taking their Children from them, and afterward throwing them many
times off shamefully for trivial reasons? Furthermore, What advantage have
Ministers of State, Grandees and Princes, by being sometimes well-served by
them in their Courts, if the greater part of them are so far from being engaged
by necessity, in such Affairs, that they intrude themselves into them of their
own accord with a Presumption, which is prejudicial to the State, and does very
much diminish that esteem Spiritual Ministers ought to be had in, rendering
themselves thereby odious to the Laity, by entering into all the Intrigues and
Secrets of Families, which they pretend to govern no less than the Masters
thereof; and all this under the color of the Spiritual Government of their
Consciences, tumbling no less scandalously than perniciously from Spiritual to
Politic Matters, from Politic to Profane, and from Profane to Criminal.

What does it signify, that the Jesuit is more flourishing than any of the
other Orders, if out of a secret jealousy, it darkens and oppresses all its
Credit, and all its Power, Riches, Learning, and Pens, by publishing Books that
do it? And what is the Church profited by its Books, if at the same time she is
disturbed by the many dangerous Opinions introduced by its Friars, who have
transformed, if not destroyed the Wisdom which is truly Christian, and have
rendered the truth of Christianity it self doubtful. What the Apostle teaches
being certainly true, which is, That the Knowledge of those who will learn
things which do not belong to them, is destructive. Which lesson ought to teach
both them and us, not to seek after a Knowledge that will not be governed by
Charity. In a word, If it please your Holiness, what other Religious Order has
ever been so prejudicial as this to the Catholic Church, or has filled all
Christian Countries with so great Commotions?

The Cardinals De propaganda fide, being resolved, it seems, That neither the
Portuguse Jesuits nor Government should have any thing more to do with the
Conversion of Ethiopia, named six French Capuchins to go thither; Six French
Capuchins are sent by several ways into Ethiopia.
who having by their King's Interest at the Port, obtained Letters of Safe
Conduct from the Grand Signior to pass through Egypt; four of them repairied
thither, the other two being ordered to try if they could find a passage into
Ethiopia by the way of Magadaxo and Pale; but those two having, as the Jesuits
tell us, more Fervor than Experience, came short home, and were murdered by
the Caffrees so soon as they came among them; two of the four that went to
Egypt, Four of them are murdered, and the other two continue at Matzua.
having got into the Kingdom of Tigre, by the way of Matzua, in the Habit of
Merchants, upon their being discovered to be Popish Priests, were presently put
to Death; the Emperor having made a Law, requiring those that discovered any to
be Popish Priests or Friars, immediately to kill them, without troubling his
Court with them. The other two who had landed at Suaqhem, finding there was no
getting into Ethiopia, from thence returned to Matzua, where hearing of the
Death of their two Companions, they thought it was better to stay where they
were, than to go any further; so that the French Capuchins, as the Jesuits, who
I doubt were not over-well-pleased with their being employed, tell their story,
made a very short business of their Habassin Mission.

But though they would send no more Jesuits from Rome to Ethiopia; there were
two of the old Fathers remaining still in the Country, and who had ever since
the Patriarch's Departure absconded in the Lands of Za Mariam, the Prince of
Dembea, a Province in the Kingdom of Tigre; and who, now John O Kay had served
them such a dirty Trick, was to be King of Tigre, when the long-look'd for
Portuguese Fleet and Army came; they were Father Bruno an Italian, and Father
Luis Cardegra a Portuguese; the Court having had intelligence that Za Mariam
nothwithstanding he was in Arms in Confederacy with the Peasants of Lasta to
defend the Alexandrian Faith, The two remaining Jesuits in Ethiopia, are
protected by the Peasants of Lasta.
which they still pretended was in danger, had two Roman Priests concealed in
his Country; sent to Za Mariam, either to deliver them up to the Emperor, or to
put them to Death himself, hoping by this discovery to make the Peasants of
Lasta jealous of him, as a secret Friend to the Roman Church, notwithstanding
all his high Pretensions to the contrary; and upon Za Mariam having denied that
he had any such Priests in his Country; the Viceroy of Tigre to spoil the
Double Game he was playing, writes a Letter to the Monks, that were among the
Peasants, to let them know what a Champion for the Alexandrian Faith they had
in Za Mariam, who had for several years kept two Roman Priests concealed about
him, in hopes that a Portuguese Army would be sent to conquer Ethiopia; to
prove the truth of which, if they would not take his word for it, he offered to
send them two unquestionable Witnesses; the one an Habassin, who had been bred
among the Jesuits; and the other a Portuguese, whom he had intercepted, coming
with a Message from the Indies to Za Mariam: But as God would have it, say the
Jesuits, notwithstanding it was all true, that the Viceroy had writ to the
Monks; yet Za Mariam having lodged the two Fathers privately in the Mountain of
Amba Salama, did face it down so, as a Trick of the Viceroy's to break the
Confederacy; that the Peasants and Monks not believing a word of it, continued
still to look upon Za Mariam as a true Alexandrian, and on the Emperor and the
Court as still Popishly affected, for having attempted to create a
misunderstanding betwixt him and them: Now, this was a pleasant turn enough for
to bring the Peasants of Lasta, when they could get none else to do it, to
serve the ends of Popery, the thing in the World they hated the most, and which
they thought they were then fighting against.

The Emperor finding the Peasants were not to be undeceived, ordered the
Viceroy of Tigre to march against them with a numerous Army, who having brought
them to a Battle, routed them totally; and their Head, Za Mariam, being taken
the day after the Fight, was cut in pieces by the Soldiers, who were so enraged
by their General's being killed, The Peasant's General is killed, and the two
Fathers taken, and hanged.
that they gave no Quarters: In Za Mariam, say the Jesuits, the last Pillar of
the true Faith, and the Foundations of all our hopes in Ethiopia fell to the
ground.

The two Fathers having lost their Protector, were quickly discovered, and
being put into the hands of one Lessano, a violent Alexandrian, he carried them
to a great Fair that was in the Neighborhood, where he hanged them both in the
Marketplace, after whose Death there was not a Jesuit of any Nation left in
Ethiopia.

In the Year 1646. Two Italian Capuchins come to Suaqhem.
the Congregation De propaganda fide sent two Italian Capuchins to Ethiopia,
who having got to Suaqhem by the way of Grand Cair, they found one of the
French Friars of the former Mission there, and having consulted together, what
course they were to take, the wise Italians were for writing to the Emperor for
leave to come into his Country to preach the Gospel in it; which being agreed
to, they writ a Letter to him, wherein, contrary to the course that had been
taken by the Portuguese, who were still for making the difference betwixt the
Alexandrian and Roman Faith as wide as they could possibly; they were for
persuading the Emperor that he and they were of the same Faith, and that being
so, They write to the Emperor for leave to come into his Country.
they hoped his Highness would not be against their coming into Ethiopia to
preach the same Faith that his Highness professed.

But the Emperor was so far from being overcome by this Capuchin Complement,
which contradicted all the Jesuits had told him of their Heresies; that upon
reading the Letter, he roared out as if he had been mad, saying, What is it not
enough, that I have been persecuted for so many years for my Religion by
Portuguese from the East, but that I must have Italians come from the West to
persecute me for it afresh. And instead of returning any Answer to their
Letter, The Emperor writes to the Bashaw of Snaghem, to rid him of them.
he writ to the Bashaw of Suaqhem, who valued himself much upon his being a
Renegado Christian, To ease him of these, and all the Friars that should come
to his Port at any time, complaining that he could not have one days quiet for
them in his Kingdom; and that having rooted out the Portuguese, a new set of
People were come to disturb him with new pretenses.

The Bashaw being glad of the opportunity of at once gratifying the Emperor,
and his own Renegado Zeal, commanded the two Italians to be murdered in his
Presence, The Bashaw murders them all three, and sendstheir Heads to the
Emperor.
and the French Friar who had a Passport from the Grand Signior, to be
assassinated, sending their three Heads to the Emperor, who as a Reward, made
him a Present of three Bags of Gold Dust; promising him as many Bags of Gold
Dust, as he should at any time send him Heads of Roman Pryars. Upon which
Correspondence betwixt the Emperor and the Governor of Suaqhem, a report was
raised of Basilides having turned Mohammedan not long after he had banished the
Patriarch.

The Patriarch being extremely desirous to revive, if it were possible, the
Jesuits lost interest in the Habassin Mission, in the year 1646. sends and
Dedicates a Book he had writ on the Six First General Councils, and a Catechism
he had made in Ethiopia for the use of that Church, to the Congregation de
Propaganda fide; from whom, the year following he received the following Answer.

Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord:
THE Books composed by your Grace, with great diligence and study, (as appears
from the frequent testimonies of Scripture which are in them) together with
your most Elegant Epistle Dedicatory to this Holy Congregation de Propaganda
fide, have been received by the most Eminent Fathers of the said Congregation,
with a joyful mind; and who have ordered two things concerning them, the one
is, That the said Books be delivered to the Portuguese Assistant of the Jesuits
Order, that so all that is in them relating to the Habassin Errors, and all
that your Grace has writ in Confutation of them, may be noted, and being
digested into a Book, may be Printed in the Press of the said Holy
Congregation, for the use of the Missionaries of Ethiopia. The other is, That
some Persons, Secular or Regular, of which there is great plenty in this City,
be deputed to Examine them, and give in their Opinion of them.

All which, with their Thanks for having Dedicated those Books to them, the
said most Eminent Fathers have ordered to be imparted to your Grace: Which I
here do in their Name, and in their Presence, with great cheerfulness; as I do
also offer you my own Service, beseeching Christ to prosper you.

Your Grace's most Affectionate Brother, Aloysius, Cadinalis Caponias.
At Rome the 14th. of October, 1647.

This Letter, though very civil, did not answer the Patriarch's design in his
Present; for notwithstanding there is mention in it of an Habassin Mission,
there is not one syllable of restoring it to the Jesuits.

In the year 1648. Father Torquato is sent by the Patriarch to Suaqhem for to
bring him Intelligence.
the Patriarch, who continued still at Goa, sufficiently mortified by the
Congregation de Propaganda fide reflecting so much upon his Conduct, as to take
the business of his Church out of the hands both of his Order and Country,
notwithstanding he had complied so far with what was ordered at Rome, as not to
send a Portuguese; yet he ventured to send an Italian Jesuit to Suaqhem to try
if he could get into Ethiopia to send him intelligence how matters stood there.

Father Torquato, which was the Jesuit's name that was sent, having put himself
into the habit of a Merchant, embarked upon an English Ship at Surat that was
bound for Suaqhem, which having touched at Moqha; the Father, who was sent to
Ethiopia chiefly for Intelligence, pretended to meet with the News there, of
Basilides having declared himself a Mohammedan, and of his having sent into
Arabia for Priests of that Sect to come and instruct his people therein.

This News put Father Torquato into such a passion, that he resolved without
using any precautions, Father Torquate meets with the News at Moqua, of
Basilides being turned Mohammedan.
to run presently into Ethiopia to confound those Infidel Priests, before they
had time to spread their contagion there. But being on the wrong side of the
Sea, and fearing that he had not Faith enough to cross it upon his Coat, as
many a Friar had done a greater Sea, and when they had not half so much
business; he resolved when he came to Matzua, to be governed by Father Anthony,
the French Capuchin, whom he expected to have found there, as to his going on
that Errand. But whether there were any color at that time for this story of
Basilides being about to turn Mohammedan, if he was not turned already; it is no
news for Monks and Friars to throw such scandals on Princes that have any ways
vexed them; witness their stories of the Iconaclasts Emperors being sometime
turned Jews, and sometimes Mahometans; and of our King John having offered the
Emperor of Morocco, if he would assist him, to be of his Religion; and of
Charles Martel's Soul being some years after his Death seen in Hell for his
Sacrilege.

On the 6th. of May, the English Ship the Father was on Board, sailed from
Moqua, and on the 12th. touched at Dela, the biggest Island in the Red Sea, it
being Twelve Leagues in Length, from whence they sailed directly to Suaqhem;
where being come to an Anchor, the Master sent ashore for pratick, which he had
sent to him at first word, with a Present of fresh Provisions from the
Governor. The Father, who walked upon the Deck as if he had been the
Supercargo, having enquired of the Watermen that came aboard, How the
Christians that were in Suaqhem did? At Suaqhem he hears of the three Capuchins
having been Murdered.
They made Answer, That they knew of none that were there; some that were there
formerly being gone into Ethiopia. Next day the Father went ashore with the
Master to enquire farther about the Friars, but was not able to learn any thing
concerning them, only he was told by some of the Baneans, That the Fathers that
were there had been for some time dead: But the Master of the Ship having
observed that the Father was much troubled that he could learn nothing of his
Brethren, told him, He needed not enquire any farther after them, for he could
assure him they had been all Three Murdered by the Order of the Bashaw; which
was afterward confirmed to him by a Banean, who told him farther, That the
Bashaw had strictly forbid all People to speak of it.

The Father being now satisfied that the Friars were all Murdered, his next
business was to get their Bodies, or some part of them at least, to carry with
him to Goa; which, with the story of Basilides being turned Mohammedan, he
reckoned would make him welcome there; but here he was at a greater loss than
he was before, considering the hatred, say the Jesuits, that the English
Heretics have for all Sacred Relics; nevertheless, being resolved to carry
something home besides his Moqha News, for I do not find that it was confirmed
at Suaqhem, he ventured to speak to an English Sailer, the Master having forbid
him to go any more ashore, for fear of bringing the Ship into trouble, to go to
a certain Island, that lay but a little way off, and if he found any dead
bodies there, to bring them to him, promising to pay him well for his pains;
the honest Sailer told him he would do his best, and going ashore he picked up
Two Skulls and a Bone, and having brought them privately aboard, delivered them
to the Father; who, though he had never seen any of the Friars, knew the Skulls
at first sight to be the Heads of the Two Italians that came last; He is
fortunate in finding the Skulls of the two Italian Friars, and a Bone of the
French.
and which was altogether as difficult, he knew the Bone to be the Bone of
Father Antony's right Arm; which was as lucky as could be, for had it happened
to have belonged to either of the Skulls, which were both visibly Italian, he
must then have either sent his Sailer ashore again to have busked for more
Bones, which was not to be done without danger, or which would have been a sad
thing, he must have gone home without a Relick of the French Friar.

With this rich Treasure, and his Moqha News, Father Torquato returned well
satisfied to Goa, where he was made welcome by the Patriarch, and was reckoned
by all, but especially the Capuchins of that City, to have made a good coasting
Voyage. The Patriarch having paid his devotion to the Relics, did, contrary to
the custom of his Order, to encourage the Capuchins in their New Mission, part
with this noble Treasure to them, but upon condition, that if the Congregation
de Propaganda fide should at any time demand what Evidences they had of their
being true, The Patriarch is so kind as to give these Sacred Relics to the
Capuchins of Goa.
that they should remit an exact information thereof to it. The Patriarch
hoping, it is like, by this means to satisfy the Congregation, that the
Jesuits, for all their having represented the Capuchin Conduct in the Habassin
Mission to have been one continued blunder, were so far from their being
displeased with their being solely employed therein, that they hazarded their
lives to help them to the Relics of their Martyred Brethren.

I have not been able to learn, whether the abovenamed Congregation did ever
give it self the trouble of enquiring into the truth of these relics; but
most certain it is, that if it did, that their want of natural Evidences was
abundantly supplied by such as were Miraculous; for they having been, as all
newfound relics are, undoubtedly much prayed to, if Ten out of a Thousand
that prayed to them when they were sick did but happen to recover, there were
just so many substantial Witnesses of their having a Miraculous Virtue in them
to demonstrate them to be true; and for the faithless Nine hundred and ninety
that died, their unsuccessful Prayers were never heard of to confront the
Testimony of Ten living Witnesses; and being thus attested, the Congregation
could not have denied them its Approbation, such Testimonies as these being all
the Evidence the Church of Rome has for the greatest part of her Sacred
Relics: Neither would its having been afterward discovered, as it was, that
the Heads of those Three Friars were sent by the Bashaw who cut them off, as a
Present to the Emperor of Ethiopia, have been any argument at all against the
truth of those which were lodged at Goa, there being nothing more common in the
Church of Rome, than to have the same individual Relics, and especially
Heads, at the same time in several Countries, and all of them working Miracles
in Confirmation of their being genuin.

The Patriarch that he might not lie at Goa, doing nothing for his Title of
Illustrissimo, in the Year 1650, sent a Banean and an Habassin, The Patriarch
sends an Habassin and a Banean into Ethiopia with a Commission to a Priest to
be his Vicar General.
who were both Romanists, with a Commission to one Bernard Nogueiro an Habassin
Priest, but of Portuguese Extraction, to be his Vicar General in Ethiopia,
during the time of his absence from it.

The Banean and Habassin having got to Moqha, were detained there a whole Year
by the War that was broke out betwixt a King in Arabia, and the Bashaw of
Suaqhem; but the Envoys that they might do something for their Money, sent the
Patriarch some News, which notwithstanding it did not agree very well with that
Father Torquato, had picked up at the same place not long before, they knew
would be pleasing to him. The News was, That his Successor Mark had been
Deposed, for having been guilty of all the Crimes that they could think of;
namely, for having Danced frequently with his Gatar in his hand, thorough the
Streets with public Strumpets; and that a Monk, whose name was Michael, was
made Abuna in his place. In October 1651, the two Envoys having got to Matzua,
The Priest accepts of it, and writes for Portuguese Troops.
stole by night from thence to a place in Ethiopia called Engana, from whence
having sent an Express to Father Bernard, he was with them in a few days; and
having gladly accepted of the Commission they brought to him, he wrote by them
to the Patriarch, complaining that the Portugueses seemed to have forgot that
there was any such Country as Ethiopia; where they had been expecting succors
from them till they were weary, telling a lamentable Story of what Raz Cella
Christos had suffered because he would not turn Alexandrian, and how his Gout,
though extremely violent, did not torment him half so much, as the
disappointment of the Portuguese Troops he had been so long promised. But we
have that Prince telling his own Story in the following Letter, which came to
Goa about this time.

Most Illustrious Bishops and Governors of the Indies.
The Letter of Raz Cella Christos comes with Peace and Health in our Lord
Jesus Christ, To all most Christian Catholics, and to all the faithful of the
true Church of our Lord.
TO tell you the Truth, Raz Cella writes passionately for Troops.
I do not know with what Tongue or Words to begin to relate to you, the
Persecutions of our Mother which I am at this time lamenting. O Holy and most
Merciful Christ Jesus, nailed to the Cross, do Thou reckon them up, and make
them to be known to all the Friars, Rectors, Prelates, Bishops, Archbishops,
Viceroys, Kings, Princes and Governors, that Rule on the other side of the Sea;
I never in the least doubted, but that you would so far have concerned your
self for the Catholics that are here, as to have delivered them from the
Tyranny of this Perverse and Barbarous Nation, and that the doing thereof would
not have been so long delayed but for my Sins which are Infinite: You seem to
have been all dissemblers; formerly when there was not so much as the name of a
Church, or of a Catholic in Ethiopia, the Portuguese came to our Assistance,
and delivered us out of the hands of the Mahometans; but now notwithstanding
there is an Infinite number of faithful people in it, there is no body seems to
remember us, all our Brethren, and all those whom the Zeal of the House of the
Lord did eat up, seeming to be dead.

What, is the Pope, our true Pastor and most beloved Father, removed from the
immovable Foundation of the Roman Church? if he is not, Why does he not
stretch forth his Rod and Staff of Consolation to these his Sheep, before we
depart this Miserable Life, or before we are eat up by the Alexandrian
Heretics. Is it possible that there is not one Prince left in Portugal, that
has the Zeal of Don Christopher Da Gama for Christianity, no nor so much as one
Prelate left to procure some remedy for us either from Heaven or Earth; I can
say no more, but though my Mouth is stopped, my Tears are not; but being covered
with Sackcloth and Ashes, I do most humbly beg succor from all the Faithful,
and that with all Expedition, before all be lost. I am at this time in Chains
in a Prison, and am daily tempted with promises of liberty, if I will but
return to the Alexandrian Faith; the Heretics seeking in me to destroy all the
Catholics in Ethiopia, and to Extirpate the Roman Faith out of it.

Wherefore if there be any Christians left beyond Sea, or any that have a Zeal
for God, let them know and understand that we are their Brethren in Christ
Jesus; and that we shall then, and not before, believe that they have us in
their hearts, when they shall deliver us out of the hands of Heretics, and out
of this our Egyptian Bondage.


This Unfortunate Prince is said to have suffered Death not long after this,
Raz Cella is put to death.
for his Religion, or rather for holding a Correspondence with the Portugueses,
for whom the Emperor was possessed with so strong an Aversion, that he made it
Death for any of that Nation, or for any of the Roman Faith to come into
Ethiopia.

In the Year 1656, The Patriarch is named to the Archbishopric of Goa, but was
dead before his nomination arrived.
the Patriarch was nominated by the King of Portugal, to the Archbishopric of
Goa; which Dignity he did not live to take possession of, having departed this
life on the Twenty ninth of June before the arrival of the Fleet, by which the
nomination was sent. He died in the Seventy Seventh Year of his Age, having
been Sixty Three Years a Friar of the Society; of whom though his Brethren the
Jesuits have wrote great things, the poor Ethiopick Church might justly apply
to him what Moses's Ethiopick Wife said to him in a passion, Thou have been an
Husband of blood to me.

Basilides having by a total extirpation of Popery out of his Empire, Basilides
having extirpated Popery, recovers most of his lost Provinces.
quieted the minds of his Subjects, set about recovering the Provinces his
Infidel Neighbors had during the Habassin broils about Religion, tore from his
Predecessors; and was so prosperous in his Wars as to regain most of them,
having, if Morad the Habassin Ambassador at Batavia, did not stretch, extended
his Empire Northward to the confines of Nubia, and Southward to Hadea, the
people of which Kingdom were converted by him to the Christian Faith.

Basilides having Reigned Two and Thirty Years, After a happy Reign of Thirty
Two years is succeeded by his Son Aelaf Saged.
was after his Death succeeded by his Son Aelaf Saged, in the Year 1665. Aelaf
swayed the Ethiopick Scepter Fifteen Years, without doing any thing that was
Memorable, only having heard of the greatness of the Dutch power in the Indies,
he sent one Morad, an Armenian, his Ambassador, in the Year 1672, to the
Governor of Batavia.

Aelaf dying in the Year 1681, Aelaf is succeeded by his Son Adjam Saged, the
present Emperor of Ethiopia.
was succeeded by his Son Jaso Adian Saged, who sent Morad a Second time to the
Governor of Batavia in the Year 1689. The account Morad gave of his Master,
was, That he was exceeding tall of Stature, had a fierce Countenance, and was
very brave and wise, and of indefatigable application to business; and as to
his affairs both at home and abroad, he affirmed them to be in a most
flourishing condition. The Letters of those Embassies, together with the Dutch
Governors answers to them, are published by the great Mr. Ludolphus at the end
of his Commentaries, as are also the Answers which were given by the said
Ambassador, to the Questions which that Learned Person had sent some Years
before to the Indies, for which I refer the curious Reader to that Learned Book.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Dominican History of Ethiopia.
Composed by Father Lewis De Uuretta, a Dominican; and Printed at Valentia in
the Year 1610. IN the Year 1316, Eight Dominican Friars, with a Holy Sister,
Santer'd from Rome to Jerusalem, where having Visited the Holy Sepulcher,
taking Bethlehem in their way, they went down into Egypt, and from thence to
Ethiopia; and having there Learned the Language of the Country perfectly in a
few days, they begun to preach to the Astonishment of that whole Empire,
confirming the truth of all they taught by Miracles. Prester John the Emperor
hearing of those wonderful Preachers, sent to bid them welcome into his Empire,
and to let them know they had free liberty to build Convents enough therein to
hold all Europe, and to exercise their power of Inquisitors upon all his
Subjects; and that he would allow them all the same Privileges and Immunities
that they enjoy in the Latin Church. The Fathers overjoyed at this news, begun
presently to make use of the liberty that was granted them; and having
penetrated Six Hundred Leagues into Ethiopia, they came at last to the Lake of
Cafates, on the other side of the Equinoctial, where the head of the River Nile
rises, where upon the Mountains of the Moon, and in the Kingdom of Gojam, and
among the Caffres, and in the Provinces bordering on the Cape of Goodhope, they
built several Convents, filling them all presently with Friars of their own
Order, most of which came afterward to be as famous for their Learning and
Piety as they were for their Miracles; but the topping man of all those Novices
was one Tecla Haymonot, the only Child of King Sacasab, and Queen Sarah; who
having wrought diverse Miracles in his Infancy, when he came to be a Man
preferred the Dominican habit to a Crown, and came afterward to be the Chief
Glory of his Order, having had the Honor done him, whenever he said Mass, to
have the Wafer and the Wine brought down from Heaven to him by an Angel; and
whenever he went to any City to Preach, he was constantly attended by all the
Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Snakes, and Serpents in the Neighborhood, who never
left him till he dismissed them with the blessing; for which they all expressed
themselves very thankful; and who having founded a Monastery for Nine thousand
Dominican Friars, obliged the Devil to do all the servile work thereof for
Seven Years; which he did alone so exactly, that the Convent has never been so
well served since, which made an Emperor when he was told of it say, That Tecla
Hamonot was to blame, for not having made the Devil serve the Convent as long
as it stood. While the Friars were thus employed, the Holy Sister was not idle,
who as if she had intended to have taken the Emperor at his word, built a
Monastery, wherein she placed Five Hundred Dominican Benta's of the third Rule.
This great Nunnery was at first called Bado Nagh, but at this time Santa Clara;
the History of all which Convents is to this day curiously Painted in the
Cloisters of the Plurimanos, whither any, who are so unreasonable as to doubt
of the truth of them, may go and be satisfied.

The Monastery of Plurimanos, in which there are Nine thousand Dominican
Friars, was founded by Tecla Haymonot; It is four Leagues in Compass, and has
Eighty Dormitories, which have all the great Church at one end, and the
Refectory at the other. Some of these Dormitories have One hundred and twenty,
some One hundred and fifty, and some Two hundred Cells. Every Dormitory has a
particular Chapel and Library belonging to it. The great Church is Six hundred
paces long, and so it had need, since all the Friars repair to it together on
Sundays and Holidays. The Second great Dominican Convent in Ethiopia, is that
of the Allelujah, which was built by Bartholomew de Tiroli, a Dominican Friar,
who was Consecrated Bishop of the City of Dangola at Rome; it has but Seven
thousand Friars, who on high Days Dine all together in the Refectory.

From these two Convents, there are vast numbers of Missionaries sent once a
year to Arabia, Bengala, Siam, Pegu and China; as also to Congo, Monopatata,
and the Cape of Goodhope, by some of which Missionaries the King of Congo and
Angola, was Baptized in the Year 1580. These Missionaries do all return home at
Whitsuntide; and our Historian being sensible that that was more than flesh and
blood could well do, very discreetly prevents the objection, by telling us they
came back nothing but Skin and Bone.

These two Monasteries have been the greatest Seminaries of Martyrs that have
ever been in the world, above Three hundred thousand of their Friars having
suffered Martyrdom in several parts, which is more than any other Order besides
the Dominicans can boast of. For in the Empress Helena's time, who was her self
a Dominican Beata, Eight hundred Friars of the Alelujah alone suffered death in
several Provinces for preaching the Gospel; at which the good Beata was so much
troubled, that she sent to all the Mohammedan and Heathen Merchants that were
within her Empire, to let them know that they should Trade no longer in
Ethiopia, if they did not take more care to preserve her Friars lives in their
Missions.

The Priors of these two Convents are by the Pope's Letter Constituted the
chief Inquitors of Ethiopia, where the Inquisition is more rigorous than in
Spain; for it relaxeth all Heretics and Apostates to the Secular Arm for their
first fault, though never so penitent; who being relaxed, are always thrown,
without mercy, to the Lions.

But the wonder of the world is the Emperor's Library founded by Queen Saba,
upon the Mountain of Amara, where the Convent of the holy Cross stands; its
Foundress hand-selled it with Solomon's own Works, and the other Books he
Presented her withal, among which are the Books of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job,
etc. And the Emperors have been ever since buying all the Books they could hear
of to put into it; so that at present it contains above a Million of Books all
very fairly written, and richly Bound, an hundred and Thirteen thousand of
which are Hebrew and Arabic: Neither is there any Book whose loss is bewailed
here in Europe, but what is to be met with there; of which Gregory the
Thirteenth being informed, he sent Antonio Grico and Lorenco Cremones into
Ethiopia to see whether that Library was so great and rich as it was reported
to be; who having seen it, found it much greater than Fame had made it; and
returning home, brought the Talmud and Cabala with them to compare them with
those the Jews of Italy had in their hands. It is not very well stored with
Latin Ecclesiastical Authors, having none of the Ancients, beside St. Hierom
and Saint Ambrose, translated into Greek, and St. Austin translated into
Arabic; and of the Moderns, only Thomas Aquinas, St. Antonio, the Directory of
the Inquisitors, and Lewis de Granada, who were all Dominicans; and if our
Author sent them his History, the Librarians, who are Two hundred, if they did
not give it one of the best places in their Library, were very unjust to him;
since if it had not been for him, their Library, in all probability, had never
been heard of in Europe; the two unworthy men who had been sent to visit it by
Gregory the XIIIth. having made no noise at all of it when they returned. The
Key of this Library, as of the Richest Treasure in Ethiopia, is always put into
the Emperor's hand when he is Crowned, who delivers it to the Abbot of the
Monastery of Sancta Cruz, with a strict charge to look carefully after it as
the chief Jewel of his Empire.

The Emperor's Treasury, which may very well be reckoned the second, if not the
first Wonder of the World, is upon the same Mountain, into which ever since
Queen Sheba's time, they have been amassing vast quantities of Gold and Silver,
and Precious Stones, without having at any time taken one Farthing out; so that
if the whole world were to be sold, there is more Money in this Treasury than
would buy the Feesimple of it.

Ethiopia has but Twelve Archbishops and Seventy two Bishops; which small
number considering the vastness of the Empire, they cannot be persuaded to
increase, because it represents that of the Twelve Apostles, and Seventy two
Disciples; so in all their Cathedrals likewise, they have never more nor fewer
than a Dean and Twelve Canons, who do all live in Community with their Bishop,
who has the whole Tithes of his Diocese; when a Canon dies, he is succeeded by
the Eldest Priest of the Diocese, and the Bishop when he dies, by the Eldest
Canon, and the Archbishop by the Eldest Bishop of the Province; the Eldest
Archbishop is always the Pope's Legate, that Office having been annexed to that
Dignity by Clement the VIIth. Besides these they have a great number of Titular
Archbishops and Bishops, who are all named by the Emperor, Empow'red thereunto
by several Popes Briefs. The Archbishops and Bishops visit their whole
Provinces every Sixth year, whose Excommunications are so formidable, that none
can despise them longer than they can fast, such as are Excommunicated not
being suffered to eat or drink any thing before they have made their submission.

Their Churches, namely that of the Allelujah, which was built by Queen Sheba
in imitation of Solomon's Temple, in form of a Cross, and is now Dedicated to
St. Humphrey; and that which was built by Queen Candace mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles, and Dedicated by her to the Virgin Mary, are excessively Rich
and Magnificent, some of them having Three, some Five Naves, and all richly
adorned with various Pictures and precious Stones, but chiefly Granata's.

As to the Doctrine of the Habassin Church, in all matters of Faith they are
and were ever, or at least since the time that the Eight Dominican Friars went
among them, the very same with those of the Church of Rome; all that has been
reported within these Two hundred years by the Jesuits and Portugueses of their
being Heretics, being notoriously false.

The occasion of which false Reports was as follows:

Most of the Four hundred Portugueses who went into Ethiopia with Gama, being
Jews in their hearts, were not long there before imagining themselves to be out
of the reach of the Inquisition, they openly professed Judaism, to the great
scandal of the Portuguese Nation, but they quickly found themselves deceived;
for the Dominican Inquisitors having heard of this Apostasy, did with great
secrecy order them all to be apprehended by their Familiars; but the Jews
having their Familiars too, our Author upon this occasion affirming the whole
race of them to be all Magicians, and in Confederacy with the Devil, made their
escape before the Inquisition or its Familiars could lay their hands on them,
some of them running into the Kingdom of Berno; where notwithstanding they
taught the Natives how to make Gunpowder; it had been well that they had all
gone, for then there would have been none left to have run to Goa, to have
raised such lies of the Habassins, as those who went thither did, who purely to
justify themselves, and to be revenged on the Habassin Inquisitors, reported
that the Habassins were all Mortal Enemies to the Pope and his Supremacy, and
did hold several Heresies, which was the reason why they did not care to live
amongst them any longer. Here our Historian falls into a most violent fit of
Railing against those Portuguese Jews, and for their sake against their whole
Race, calling them an Impious, Cruel, Malicious, Pestilent, Contagious,
Infamous, Vile, Nasty, Loathsome Generation; and at last desires all the Devils
in Hell to fetch the whole Race of them, for having dared to report such
impudent lies of an Empire that was much more Catholic than France, in having
received both the Inquisition, and the Council of Trent, which was what France
could never yet be persuaded to do; he likewise blames the old Christians among
the Portuguese for having been so easy as to give Credit to such malicious and
groundless Reports; and as to what the Popes, and the Kings of Portugal have
said and done upon supposition of the Habassins being Enemies to the Roman
Church, he says, they had been miserably imposed upon by the stories which
were raised by those Villainous Jews; as they were also in the case of the
Patriarch Oviedo, who at the same time that he was revoked by the Pope, because
there was no hopes of his doing any good in Ethiopia, by reason of the Emperor
and the Peoples obstinacy in the Alexandrian Faith, was reverenced by all the
Habassins as a Saint, and beloved by them as a Father, and listened to as a wise
Man, and reckoned as an Apostle sent by God to them; and was so far from being
in Disgrace with the Emperor, that he was President of his Latin Council. It is
true, the Portuguese Patriarchs and Fathers having done several indiscreet
things, whereby they had disobliged the Habassin Clergy, grew sick of Ethiopia
quickly, and returned to the Indies. The Portuguese, says he, being a People
who cannot live long out of their own Country, or at least from among their
Countrymen; whereas Bishop Andre Oviedo being a Spaniard, and one who weighed
and considered things, would neither leave his Flock, nor quarrel with them
about Trifles, and so lived and died in Ethiopia with great Honor, his Memory
being precious amongst them to this day; of the truth of which the Pope was
quickly afterward fully satisfied; for the Habassins of St. Stephen's College
at Rome, understanding how their Church was misrepresented, sent one of their
Body immediately to acquaint the Emperor Menna, who succeeded Claudius,
therewith; who was put into such a Rage by the news of his being represented
not to be a Roman Catholic by the Portuguese Jews, that he presently made a
Law, prohibiting all Portuguese upon pain of Death to come into Ethiopia
without a Certificate of their being Old Christians, from the Inquisitions of
Lisbon and Goa: He writ also immediately to Goa, Lisbon, and Rome, to disabuse
those Courts, and to let them know, that none but rascally Jews would have had
the Impudence to have reported, That he and his Empire were not true Roman
Catholics: He writ also to the College of Cardinals, and particularly to the
Protector of his Empire, obliging his Council of State to do the same, with
passionate Declarations of their great Zeal for the Roman Faith; and to give
the Pope yet further satisfaction, he made a new Submission of himself and his
Empire to him. Alexander the Third, who succeeded Menna in the Empire,
reckoning that his Predecessor had not done enough in sending only one
Ambassador to the Pope, sent an Embassy to Rome, which consisted of Twenty four
Priests, and Two Gentlemen, to yield Obedience in his Name to the Holy See.

So much of the Dominican History of Ethiopia. In which, though it is an Octavo
of 1130 odd Pages, and a small Print, there is not one syllable of truth from
the beginning to the end; yet notwithstanding that, I do not know that I ever
saw an History in any Language that had more of the Magisterial Air of Truth in
it, the Author seeming every where to value himself extremely upon his
Fidelity, and his care of setting down nothing without being first well assured
of its Truth; appealing constantly to Authentic Records, though a great way
off, for such falsehoods as had the least of the Colors of Truth in them;
insomuch, that in the beginning of his Book, he says with the greatest
assurance imaginable, That none could doubt of the truth of any thing he had
reported in his History, but Scepticks, who called the truth of all things into
question; as in another place he reflects severely upon the Jesuits, Maffenis
and Mariana, accusing them both of not having had that sacred regard for Truth
in their Writings, which all who write Histories ought to have; and as if he
had a mind to impose his Fictions upon God, as well as Man, for Truths, he
concludes his Legend of the Lives of several Habassin Dominican Saints, some of
which we have reason to believe were never in Nature, or if they were, were
undoubtedly neither Dominicans, nor Papists, with the following Prayers to them.

MOST Glorious, Illustrious, and Holy Saints, who being now in the Caelestial
Palaces, clothed with Robes of Immortality, do enjoy the clear Vision of the
most Holy Trinity; and being disarmed of your bodily Weapons, wherewith you
fought so manfully in the World, are now seated under the Shades of the
Victorious Palms, and of the Triumphant Laurel, in the Pavillions and
Tabernacles of Glory; Pardon me all my Faults; pardon all my Errors; pardon my
weak Capacity; pardon the Injury I have done the height of your Triumph, worthy
of all Immortal Trophy, by my rude Pen; and pray for us, O most Glorious
Saints, who in Company of the Angelical Spirits, and in the Caelestial Quire of
God, do Sing the Sanctus of the Mass of the most Holy Trinity, and are
perpetually employed in the Praises of God; pardon the unpolishedness,
shortness, and grossness of my Tongue, your Prowesses being so Great, your
Works so Heroic, and your Victory so Glorious, that nothing but the Tongues of
Angels are fit to celebrate them. Pray for us, O high exalted Princes, who do
live as Grandees in the Palace of the King of Glory, and are as Cavaliers of
the Golden Key in the Cabinet of God, being always in his Presence. Pardon that
little that I have writ of your Feats, your Glories being so great that no Pen,
without it be taken from the Wings of Archangels, is fit to celebrate them.
Pray for us. Most Glorious Stars of Heaven, most Resplendent Meteors of the
Earth, Golden Artizans of the Church, and the bright Light of the Predicant
Order, who out of the Pulpits did astonish the World like Thunder, confounding
Heretics and Pagans, and converting Souls to God. Pardon me, if the brightness
of your Virtues is eclipsed by the little I have said of them, and pray for us.
Apostolical Preachers, who are in Glory about the Father of Light, pardon me if
your Travels, Missions, Peregrinations, Sermons, and Labors, Virtues and
Prodigies, or if the Glory of your Glory is not aggrandized as it ought to be.
And pray for us, Valiant Martyrs, who with your Blood confirmed the Truth of
the Gospel, conquered Tyrants, triumphed over Wild Beasts, and with your hands
full of Palms, and your Heads crowned with Laurels are entered into the Palaces
of Heaven; pardon my Ignorance, and pray for us.

Sacred Virgins, shining Religious, the Glory of the World, the Honor of
Heaven, the Beauty of Humane Nature, and the singular Ornaments of the Order of
St. Dominick, Pardon all the Defects of this Book, in relation to your Praises,
and pray for us. Amen.


After this studied Prayer, (which is a sufficient Indication of the Romantic
Genius of the Man) he, imagining I suppose, that Protestants, notwithstanding
all his Apologies, and begging of Pardons for having said so little of his
Heroes, would not be so civil as to believe one half of what he has said of
them, falls foul upon them, and thanks God that he did not write these things
to Luther and Calvin, or any other excommunicated Heretics, who do ignorantly,
brutally, rashly, and blasphemously deny the profitable Intercession of the
most glorious Saints with God; but to most Catholic Spaniards, whose Cridulity
having never been tainted with the Heresies of their Neighbors of France and
England, he hoped would swallow his Book of Prodigies without chewing; and
especially coming recommended to them by all its Licenses, as a Book of
wonderful Edification to all pious Souls, most of them vouching likewise for
the truth of it.

Its Licensers and Vouchers being no less Men, than Don Batasar de Boria,
Doctor of Law, Archdeacon of Xativa, Canon of the Church of Valentia, and
Vicar General and Official of the Archbishopric of Valentia. Juan Pasqual,
Rector of the Church of St. Martin, and Licenser of the Patriarch of Antioch,
and Archbishop of Valentia. Friar Raphael Riphez, Prior Provincial of the
Dominicans in the Kingdom of Arragon. Friar Lupero de Huette, and Friar
Jeronymo Mos, Licensers of the Tribunal of the Holy Office of the Inquisition;
who do all in their Licenses give great Commendations, both to this History and
its Author.

But this History having been written chiefly to blast the rising-Reputation of
the Jesuits, and the credit of all their Reports; its having so many, and so
great Vouchers for its Truth, and the Master of the Sacred Palace likewise, to
whom it is Dedicated, for its Patron, was not enough to hinder the Jesuits from
exposing it, so soon as ever it crept out of its cell, to the world in its true
colors; whole Battalions of them falling upon it at once at such an unmerciful
rate, that, as I have been told, they made the Dominicans so much ashamed of
this Romance, which they had endeavored to have obtruded upon the world for a
true History, that they have labored ever since to get all the Copies of it
into their hands to destroy them; for which reason I shall do all that I can to
preserve that which I have, by giving it to a Library, which, next to that of
the Emperor of Ethiopia 's, is the greatest in the World.

But this is not the only pious fraud the Dominicans have miscarried in after
having promised their Order great honor from them; History of the Lisbon Nun,
called Maria of the Annunciation.
but above all is that of the Nun at Lisbon, the History whereof I shall here
set down more at length, than I have seen it any where in one Book.

Maria, of the Annunciation, was Born at Lisbon, and at the age of Thirteen was
put into the Dominican Convent of the Annunciation in that City; in which, so
soon as she was of age to do it, she professed her self a Nun; which she had
not done long, before she begun to have Miraculous Visions, and to be daily
visited by Christ in Person; whom she still saluted with the Doxology thus,
Glory be to the Father, and to Thee, and to the Holy Spirit. Whenever she
received the Sacrament, her Soul was in a Rapture, and was honored with the
Vision of the Heavenly Coire of Angels; and when she embraced the Crucifix,
which she still called her Husband, it constantly darted out beams of Light
much brighter and stronger than those of the Sun.

One day as she was at her Devotion, Christ appeared to her, and made her a
promise to visit her again upon St. Thomas Aquinas's day, and thereon to do her
the greatest honor that any Creature was capable of.

Maria having acquainted Antonio de la Cerda, the Provincial of her Order, who
upon her Name being so high for Miracles, was become her Confessor, with the
Promise had been made her, she was directed by him how to prepare her self for
the reception of so great a favor; whose Directions she punctually observed,
for never was any creature more submissive to a Confessor.

Thomas Aquinas's day being come, and all the Nuns and Friars being assembled
to Mattins, while Maria was in a most profound fit of Devotion, Christ
Crucified appeared to her; and in the sight of the whole Congregation, printed
all the Wounds of his Head, Side, Hands, and Feet, upon the same parts of her
Body; she had Two and thirty Wounds (such as Thorns use to make) on her Head,
and in her Side a Gash that resembled a Wound made with a Spear, and on her
Hands and Feet the Wounds were of a Triangular Figure, as if made by a Nail;
and in order to excite the Devotion of the absent as well as present, the Rags
she laid to the Wounds on Thursdays, had always the Five Wounds of Christ
printed on them in the form of a Cross; and happy was the Roman Catholic
Prince or Princess who could obtain some of those Sacred Rags. The Pope he had
one, and the King of Spain, who was strangely devoted to her, had another; and
the Empress had one sent her against she lay in; neither was there a Roman
Catholic Prince or Princess in Europe, but what had obtained one of them by
some interest or other. Paramus, in his History of the Inquisition, says, That
he being at that time an Inquisitor in Sicily, saw one of them which had been
sent to the Viceroy Don Henrique de Gusman's Lady, who, he says, adored it as
the most Sacred Relick in the World. And Philip the IId. to satisfy the World
that he firmly believed all that was reported of the Sanctity and Miracles of
the Lisbon Nun, had the Royal Standard of the Armada, which came against
England in the year 1588. Blessed by her.

The Inquisition, whose business it is to enquire severely into the truth of
things which are reported to be Miracles, having summoned her Confessor, and
all the rest of the Friars who belonged to the Convent, to appear before them,
was fully satisfied by their Depositions and Oaths, as Eyewitnesses, of the
Truth of the whole matter, as it was reported. Whereupon Gregory the XIIIth.
writ her a very Godly Letter, exhorting her to Humility, Thankfulness, and
Perseverance in her Devotions; and as there was no Roman Catholic that did in
the least doubt of the truth of what was reported of her by her Confessor, who
published a large account of her Miracles; So the poor Protestants were
triumphed over strangely on that occasion, as the most perverse Heretics that
ever were in the World, for neither believing those reports, nor going to
Lisbon where their own eyes would convince them of the truth of them. So Petrus
Matheus in a Bullary he Printed in France at this time, and which I have now by
me, after a long encomium of the Lisbon Nun, adds, Nihil est quod possit hujus
Historiae veritati in ficiari, vivit enim beata Virgo vivunt Sorores testes,
locus visitur, and clarissimorum Theologorum Oculato testimonio probatur and
confirmatur: that is, Nothing can be offered in contradiction to this story,
for the blessed Virgin is still living, as are the Sisters also who are her
Witnesses; the Place is visited, and the whole is proved and confirmed by most
eminent Divines, who were Eyewitnesses to it. After all this, one would little
have expected that this fraud could have miscarried, or at least so far as to
have been Owned and Condemned as a mere Cheat, by the Inquisition it self: But
so it was; for the Lady Abbess (which for her greater Mortification the Nuns
and Friars had forced her to be) when she wanted nothing but to have Died to
have been Canonized a Saint for her extraordinary Piety and Miracles, finding
all that she said was received by every body as an Oracle; she begun to mutter,
That it was revealed to her that Philip the IId. had no Title to the Crown of
Portugal, but that the right thereof was in the Duchess of Braganza. The
consequence whereof being, That Philip must either resign that Crown, or the
Title of the Most Catholic, or look upon her, he had expressed so great a
veneration for, as an Impostor; he chose the latter; the Inquisition striking
the Oracle Dumb so soon as it began to Antiphilipise: For the Inquisition
having thereupon ordered her Wounds, and other Pretensions, The Impostor
discovered.
to be searched to the bottom, they were at it quickly; her Wounds being found
not to lie so deep as her Skin; and upon examination to be nothing else but
marks made thereon very artificially with Red Lead. Whereupon she was Condemned
by the Archbishop of Braga and Lisbon, the Bishop of Guarda, and the
Apostolical Inquisitors, of whom at that time the Cardinal Archduke of Austria
was the Chief, as an Hypocrite and Impostor, upon the Eighth day of December
1588. being in the Thirty second Year of her Age, to the following Penances.

1st. Her Penances assigned.
She was to be a Prisoner during her Life, in some Nunnery out of Lisbon, and
which must not be of the Dominican Order.

2d. For Five years after the day of her Sentence, she was not to have the
Sacrament Administered to her, excepting on the Feasts of Easter, Whitsuntide,
and Christmas, or unless the receiving thereof should happen to be necessary to
the partaking of the Benefits of a Jubilee.

3d. On every Wednesday and Friday of the Year she was to be brought into the
Chapter House of the Nunnery, and there to be Whipped publicly before all the
Nuns, all the time the Miserere Mei Deus was Reading.

4th. At Meals she was not to be suffered to sit at a Table, but must have her
Meat given her sitting on the Pavement of the Refectory; neither must any
Person eat what she leaves; and both before and after Meat she must lie across
the door of the Refectory, where the Nuns must tread upon her as they come in
and go out.

5th. She must, during her Life, keep the Ecclesiastical Fast, and must never
be chose Abbess, nor bear any Office in the Nunnery, but must always be the
Lowest in the Convent.

6th. She must not be suffered to speak with any Body within, nor without the
Convent, without the Abbess's Leave.

7th. All the Rags stained with Blood which had been distributed by her, and
all her false Relics, and all Pictures of her, must be brought into the
Inquisition; or where that cannot be done conveniently, must be carried to the
next Prelate.

Lastly, She must never be suffered to cover her Head with her Veil; and on all
Wednesdays and Fridays of the Year, must be Fed with nothing but Bread and
Water; and must every day in the Refectory make a public Confession of her
Crime before all the Nuns.

Unhappy Nun! had thou but let alone Princes Titles, and had made no
other use of thy Impostures, but to have confounded Protestants and their
Doctrines, thou might have died with the Honor of thy Wounds, and have been
Worshipped upon an Altar, and have wrought a Thousand Miracles before this
time; and that very Court which condemned thee to all these shameful
Punishments for pretending to them, would have Condemned all of Impiety and
Heresy who should have presumed to have called the Truth of any of them in
question!

I could never learn what was done to the Provincial her Confessor, and the
other Friars, among whom was the great Lewis de Granada, for having imposed
such a Cheat on the Pope, the Inquisition, and the whole Roman Catholic World;
however, it is plain from the first Penance mentioned in the Sentence, that the
King of Spain did not care to trust so dangerous a Tool any longer in the hands
of the Dominican Friars.

FINIS.

