A PROSPECT OF HEAVEN
GLORY



A PROSPECT OF HEAVEN: OR, A TREATISE OF THE Happiness of the Saints in Glory:
WHEREIN Is Described the Nature and Quality, the excellency and certainty of
it: together with the Circumstances, Substance and Adjuncts of that glory: the
unspeakable misery of those that lose it, and the right way to obtain it:
Showing also the disproportion between the Saints present Sufferings, and their
future Glory. Many weighty questions discussed, and diverse cases cleared.

By William Gearing, Rector of Christ-Church in Surrey, near Southwark.

In Regno Caelorum vocabimus and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus
and laudabimus id quod erit in fine sine fine: Et quis alius noster esset
finis, quam venire ad regnum cujus nullus est finis? August. London, Printed
for Tho. Passenger, and Benj. Hurlock at the three Bibles on London Bridge, and
over against St. Magnus Church, 1673.

To the much honored, Sr. WILLIAM TVRNER, Knight. and Alderman of the City of
LONDON, And to Sir JAMES LANGHAM of the same City, Knight; Grace and Peace be
multiplied.
Honored Sirs,
THe Heathen Philosophers discoursed much of true blessedness, yet never knew
they what it meant, nor wherein it consisted. Varro, Varro, lib. 19. August. de
Civ. Dei cap. 1. Cicer. de finib. lib. 1.
and out of him, S. Augustine says, they were divided into 288 opinions about
this one point, yet not one true among them all. They ran all of them toward
his mark, but not as they that run in a race; ^hey had several Goals, but none
of them obtained ^he Crown. Some of them would have it consist a pleasure; so
Epicurus thought variety of ^leasure was the only summum bonum, the only ^hief
good of man; but as the Orator said well ^f him; it was vox pecudis, non
hominis, the ^oice of a beast, not of a man: that this was the opinion of the
Epicureans, is no wonder; seeing they acknowledged not the immortality of the
soul, but thought that the soul died together with the body; therefore they
placed blessedness in bodily pleasures. But the Mahumetans acknowledge the
resurrection of the body, and after the resurrection the immortality of the
Soul, and a life that shall never end; therefore it is the more to be wondered
at, that they should place the chiefest good of the life to come in bodily
pleasure. The Turks in scorn are wont to call Christians dogs; but more truly
and more justly they may be called Dogs and Swine, whose God is their belly,
and whose chiefest good lies in eating and drinking, and in fleshly delights
and pleasures: but even Salust. In regno voluptatis virtuti non est locus.
Salust.
could say, that in the Kingdom of pleasure virtue has no place: and the
wisest Philosophers have called sensitive pleasures the poison of the mind; of
the which we must the more carefully beware, for that these pleasures are
accompanied with a certain sweetness, which flatters the Soul at its first
approach, surprizeth our judgment, and charmeth it in such sort, as it helps
to deceive it self. These pleasures put out the eye of reason, and smother all
the seeds of Wisdom and Virtue in man, the which they effect more powerfully,
when they are most violent: wherefore a wise man was wont to say, that he had
rather fall into frenzy, than suffer himself to be surprised with pleasures;
for, said he, Physicians may cure madness by purging the brain with Hellebore,
Coesset. tabu^. Human. passion.
whereas brutish pleasures do deprive man of his judgment without hope of
remedy for his infirmity. Some again have made blessedness to consist in
Honors, Dignities, Superiorities, popular Acclamations, and all sorts of
preferments; but happiness consists not in these things; these are all very
empty things: a bladder when it is blown, seems to be full, when it has
nothing in it but a little thin air, a small pin is sufficient to pierce it,
and empty it of all that is in it: so it is with those that love popularity and
the praise of men more than the praise of God, and receive honor from men,
themselves in the mean time being strangers to God: many of them seem to be
full, but they are but as bladders full of wind, full of vanity; a slight
occasion is enough to empty them of all their happiness.

Others would have it consist in wealth and riches: So Antisthenes said, that
he only was happy, that died in the affluence of worldly prosperity: but when
a man expects happiness and satisfaction from these things, he finds
nothing less. Solomon tells us, he made him great works, builded houses,
planted Vine-yards, got him Servants and Maidens, and had great possessions of
great and small Cattle, above all that were in Jerusalem before him, that he
gathered to him Silver and Gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings, and of the
Provinces, etc. so he became great, and increased more than all that were
before him, Eccles. 2. from v. 4. to 11. Now v. 11. he looks back on all the
work and labor of his hands, and behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit,
and ver. 17. he hated life it self, because the work that was wrought under the
Sun was grievous to him; and ver. 18. he hated all his labor which he had
taken under the Sun: therefore these things were far from giving him sound
contentment; they did rather increase the Disease, and make the Soul more
restless than before. Now if such a one as Solomon, that had interest in God,
did thus far lose that sweet content he had in God by an eager pursuit of these
perishing things, then much more impossible is it, that the soul that never had
interest in God, should find happiness and contentment in the creature: it is
impossible for those that neglect the fountain of living waters, to quench
their thirst at a broken cistern; nor can man be made happy by any thing
inferior to himself: now all earthly creatures are inferior to the reasonable
soul of man, and the substance and faculties thereof does far surpass all the
riches and honors of the world; and if man cannot find sound contentment and
true happiness in himself, it will be in vain to seek it in these things.

Others there were (that came nearest to the point) that would have blessedness
to consist in virtue; and yet alas! there were none, even of the wiser
Heathens, that ever knew what true virtue meant; and consequently what true
blessedness meant. They wrote much of some that were excellent among them, men
renowned and famous for virtue: it was said of Cato, that he was virtues true
image, Qui nunquam recte fecit, ut facere videretur, sed quia aliter facere non
potuit; who never did any thing well that he might seem to do it, but because
he could not do otherwise: it was also said of him, that he was suae fortunae
Faber; let him live in any time or commonwealth, he would make shift for one:
of Fabritius it is all spoken, that you might sooner have turned the Sun out of
his course, than him from his integrity and uprightness. Yet the best of them
were but gilded potsherds, and the fairest virtues they talked of were but
painted rags; they never knew what God or Christ was, what Heaven or Hell were.
Blessedness is a thing that every man has in his eye, it is the mark that
every one shoots at, a thing that every man desires: blessedness is that
estate that every man coveteth and boni and mali, both good and bad men, says
S. Augustine. August. in Psalm. 119. Sermon. 1.
Good men do therefore labor to be good, yet that is no wonder; but even
wicked men also do therefore labor to be wicked, that they may be happy; there
is some appearance of good in it unto them, they aim at a kind of blessedness
even in the pursuit of wickedness; and many there are that have Heaven and
happiness at their tongues end, that have the earth continually at their
fingers end.

O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane! Alas! Man's cares, how full of
pain?
Alas! Man's ways, how vile and vain?
But though blessedness be in every man's heart, yet many men are strangers to
it: Many things are subject to the eye; but of blessedness we may say, eye has
not seen it: other comforts and good things are taken in by the ear; but we may
say of blessedness, ear has not heard it, nor is it possible to enter into the
heart of man to conceive, how great that good is that is comprised in
blessedness.

The blessed man is defined by some to be one, Qui habet omnia quae vult, and
nihil patitur quae non vult; that has every thing he would have, and suffers
nothing he would not suffer: so that it is an estate to be considered
privatively and positively: Privatively, in respect of what must be wanting;
Positively, in respect of what must be had. 1. There must be an absence of all
that is evil, whatsoever is in any degree evil, or whatsoever a man in his own
understanding does apprehend to be evil, or conceit to be evil, that he must
want, and be without: for if there be any evil at all that he either feels or
fears, so long as he is in that estate he cannot be in a blessed estate; yea
though it be but an imaginary evil; his own fears, imaginations and
apprehensions are to him a kind of unhappiness: while man is under the
apprehension, fear or imagination of any evil, he is vexed, disquieted,
tormented, and cannot be truly happy. 2. On the other side as there must be an
absence of all that is evil, so there must be an affluence of whatsoever things
are good: every good thing the heart can wish, a man must enjoy: for look how
much of any good thing he wants, so much of his blessedness he wants.
Therefore the word in the Hebrew that signifies blessedness is a plural word,
(...)
and never found in the singular number: Some give this reason for it, because
it is not hoc aut illud, unum aut aliud; it is not this or that, one or the
other good thing that can make a man's estate blessed: but he that will be in a
blessed estate must omnibus bonis affluere, abound with all good things, and no
good that he can desire must be wanting to him. Blessedness is the enjoyment of
good correspondent to all the desires of a Christian, it is both the first and
last good of a Christian, the first and last of things to be desired; the first
for excellency, the last for enjoyment; it is the spring of all good; when
blessedness comes, all good comes along with it; it comprehends all good
whatsoever: Moreover, blessedness is the Crown and remuneration of all good;
though God does endue men with several gifts and graces, and albeit as there
are several gifts and employments of men, so there shall be several rewards;
yet the reward of all is but one blessedness. And hereunto I will add one thing
more, viz. that blessedness has ever perpetuity annexed to it; and that same
perpetuity of happiness adds all in all to the perfection of it; Non est ista
beatitudo, de cujus aeternitate dubitatur.
for there is no perfection of felicity, where there is no assurance of
perpetuity; which perpetuity does neither depend upon the nature of the thing
it self, nor proceed from any natural necessity, that our souls should so
exercise themselves for ever in beholding and loving God; but from the will of
God which does freely perfect our nature in so high a degree, and continue it
so perfected.

From hence this conclusion will follow, that the blessed estate being such an
estate as we have spoken of, it is not to be attained in this life. The
blessedness of man in this life is but like the girding on of the Sword before
the fighting of the Battle; till the battle be fought the victory cannot be
judged, nor the Crown given. Alas! in this life there are many good things
wanting to us that our Souls do desire, many evils present with us from which
we would fain be delivered: we have now health, and anon sickness; now plenty,
anon want; now peace, anon trouble; but in Heaven there is all joy and no
sorrow: in the world there are reciprocal vicissitudes of joy and sorrow: joy
and sorrow be as it were the interchanging sails of the worlds windmill, it is
therefore the hand of death that must open the door for us to an happy life,
according to that of the Poet.

-- ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini, dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet. Ov. M^^. lib. 3.

Our lives last day must be expected, when
By death we shall be happy; not till then.
Thus Epiphanius Epiphan. Haeres. 6^.
brings in Methodius disputing against Proclus the Originist, that God as the
true Physician, has appointed death as a Medicinable purgation for the utter
rooting out and putting away of sin, that we may be made happy and unblameable;
and that as a goodly golden Image, sightly and seemly in all parts; if it be
broken and defaced by any means, must be new cast, and framed again, for the
taking away the blemishes and disgraces of it: Even so Man (the Image of God)
being maimed and disgraced by sin, for the putting away these blemishes, and
the repairing his ruins and decays, must by death be dissolved into the
earth, thence to be raised up again in a state of perfection and blessedness.

How should the consideration hereof wean us from the love of this life? why
should our love be there set, where no blessedness is to be had? the things of
this life are of that nature, Quae possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa
cruciant; as Bernard speaks; things, which while we possess, they burden us;
while we love, they defile us; when we foregoe, they torment us; and therefore
better a great deal that we honorably contemn, what we cannot but sorrowfully
lose: blessedness is not to be attained on earth, but to be hoped for in
Heaven; and this should stir us up to the seeking after a better life, for that
condition where we may be blessed for ever.

The fruition of eternal glory is a future good, there is difficulty to attain
it; it is no easy entrance into Heaven; God has made viam lacteam in coelis,
not ad coelum; God has made a milky way in Heaven paved with stars, but not to
Heaven; no, the way to Heaven is paved with sundry difficulties; the way is
narrow, the gate is strait, many seek and cannot find it: Yet although Heaven
be difficult to obtain, there is a fair possibility for any man to win the
crown of eternal glory: There was never a Saint that lived and fought this
Christian warfare, but when they had finished their course, they received
Palms, the Ensign of triumph, and the Crown of righteousness which Christ the
righteous Judge has laid up for them. Laertius writes of one that had been
thirty and three years traveling to seek out the natures of Bees: indeed Bees
are excellent creatures, and there is excellent use of the honey that they
make; but here is that which is sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb: they
that take pains for temporal things, it is not bread that they labor for, it
is not that which will satisfy; now if it bring no satisfaction with it, it
can bring no blessedness with it; but everlasting glory and blessedness is the
bread that will satisfy; this will be as marrow and fatness to our souls; let
us labor for this, and our soul shall live.

Now much honored in the Lord!

I have written this Tract of the glory of Heaven and of eternal blessedness
(which I humbly dedicate to you) partly that I might feed my own mind with this
Heavenly contemplation, and partly that I might stir you up to the more serious
consideration of the same things: there is nothing will make us more contemn
the world, and kindle in us an earnest desire and longing after Heaven, than
the frequent and diligent meditation on the glory of Heaven, and the
blessedness of the Saints in the world to come will do: Oh did we frequently
consider what pure and unmixt de^ights lie for ever on those everlasting Hills
and Gardens of Spices, that are always green and flourishing, how should we
rouse up our selves, and say, what do we here? Oh why do we weary our selves
like the bird that toileth to gather a few sticks together to build a nest in
the spring time, which after a little time will be pulled down and forsaken?
Remember I beseech you, that blessedness is not to be had here, but in Heaven;
in Heaven where life eternal is, there, and there only, true and perfect
blessedness is; as this ensuing Treatise will fully demonstrate.

Therefore let no temptation of Satan at any time overcome you; let not the
love of any sin possess you, let no evil example of the world seduce you, let
no evil advantages or pleasures steal away your heart from you: go on still in
making you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, and great profit shall thereby
come unto you. You may not think (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. Homil. in Luc. 16.
) that God made the rich for the profit of the poor, but the poor for the
profit of the rich, when they make them friends of the riches of iniquity: as
if rich men should one day find that the poor were their best friends; for when
they come to be received into everlasting habitations, God seems to make his
poor Saints the Porters of Heaven. God will then remember all the kindnesses
you have showed to any of his distressed servants, and abundantly reward them;
yea he will recompense a cup of cold water given to a Disciple of Christ in the
name of a Disciple, with the whole fountain of the water of life; and two
mites, with the whole treasure in the Temple: there for Gold you shall have
Glory; for earthly Mannours, heavenly Mansions; for Silver that perishes,
solace without end; Mirth without measure, pleasure without pain; there you
shall be clothed in white, which is the innocence of the Saints; have palms in
your hands, in token of victory; and be Crowned with a Diadem of pure Gold,
which is immortality: your happiness then will be for God to make you of his
Court, though here you are not of his Council.

Finally, let me excite you to raise your thoughts and meditations beyond these
sublunary things, and lift them up to those that are above, settle your
affections upon them, exercise your study in them, feed your desires and hopes
with them; and ever think of one thing, that all the Kingdoms in the world are
not to be compared with the poorest Mansion in Heaven; there only is the
center and seat of blessedness, for there (as an Ancient says) Quicquid
amabitur, aderit, August. Medit.
nec desiderabitur quod non aderit: whatsoever is to be loved shall be there,
and there shall be nothing wanting that is to be desired; there shall be all
that good is, even our greatest God who is our greatest good: we shall have him
with us there, or rather he indeed shall have us there with him, in whom we
shall be perfectly blessed, and with whom our blessedness shall be perpetually
established. Now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified. The Lord deliver you from every evil work, and preserve you unto
his Heavenly Kingdom; So prays

Your affectionate Servant in the Gospel William Gearing.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
Chap. 1. THe Text Romans 8.18. Explained. Chap. 2. Many notes of instruction
raised. Chap. 3. Sect. 1. A general description of glory, and a particular
description of the glory of the Saints in Heaven. Sect. 2. Shows that God
will raise his Children to an higher pitch of glory than Adam was in Paradise,
and how they shall ^e like to Christ in glory.
Chap. 4. Sets down the reasons why God will glorify his Children both in
respect of Himself, and in respect of themselves. Chap. 5. Of the quality of
the Saints glory. Chap. 6. Shows that the perfect glory and happiness of the
Saints is invisible for the present; five reasons thereof. Chap. 7. Shows
that this glory in due time shall be revealed, viz. when Christ shall appear in
glory: diverse reasons thereof. Chap. 8. A threefold use to be made of it. Chap.
9. Shows, that the Creatures themselves do earnestly and continually expect
the manifestation of the glorious state of the Godly, wherein many weighty
points are discussed, and many doubts resolved. Chap. 10. Shows, that there
is no comparison or equality between a Believer's present sufferings, and his
future glory. Chap. 11. A twofold use made hereof. Chap. 12. Shows how the
creatures shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God, wherein many questions are propounded and answered.
Chap. 13. Of the time when the Saints shall be glorified. Chap. 14. Of the
place of the Saints happiness, how Heaven is the house of God, and shall be the
habitation of the Saints: that in this house are many mansions, and these
sufficient to receive many Inhabitants, showed in three Sections. Sect. 4.
Shows that Heaven is the Throne and Kingdom of God. Sect. 5. Shows that
Heaven is the place where the Saints inheritance lies. Sect. 6. Shows that
there they shall receive their reward, and what that reward is. Some Objections
resolved. Sect. 7. Shows, that Heaven is the place where God will give his
people a kind welcome, and loving entertainment.
Chap. 15. Of the Antecedent to the Saints glory, viz. the resurrection of
their Bodies: their resurrection proved by seven Arguments. Of the personal
types of our Savior's resurrection, and the proofs of his resurrection. That
the same bodies of the Saints shall be raised, proved by five arguments. An
Object. answered. Chap. 16. Of the glory of the Saints bodies in Heaven. Of the
clarity, agility, spirituality, impassibility, incorruptibility and immortality
of glorified bodies: and of their sensitive actions, and answerable passions,
which include not corruption. And what glorious things may be spoken of the
particular senses and parts of the body, and of their several objects, with the
uses that are to be made thereof. Chap. 17. Of the blessedness of the Soul
before the resurrection, when the soul shall remain separated from the body.
The opinion of the mortalists, that the soul dies, or sleeps with the body,
refuted. Chap. 18. Of the blessedness of the Soul in general, showed in two
things. Chap. 19. Of the more distinct blessedness of the Soul. Of the
perfection of the Saints apprehensions and judgments in glory. Chap. 20. A
description of what things shall be seen in God by the Saints in Heaven, and
how they shall fully see what God is to themselves: how they shall behold the
Lord Jesus Christ as God and Man, and as the Author and finisher of their
faith, and how they shall look into the great mystery of godliness. Chap. 21.
Of their knowledge of that innumerable company of Angels. Chap. 22. Of the
Saints mutual knowledge of each other in Heaven. Two Objections answered. Chap.
23. Of the purity and perfection of the wills of glorified Saints. Chap. 24.
Shows how their affections shall be enlarged, composed and rightly placed
there. Chap. 25. Of the joy of glorified Saints, what it is, and to what it
extends it self. Chap. 26. Shows, what affections shall have no place in
Heaven. Chap. 27. Of the adjuncts of the glory of Heaven: that the glorious
estate of God's children is a state of liberty showed in diverse respects. Chap.
28. Of the eternity of the glory of Heaven. Chap. 29. Of the certainty of the
Salvation of the Saints. Chap. 30. Shows, that no afflictions shall rob the
Saints of their crown of glory. Chap. 31. A cordial to them that are in
affliction, and a preparative to them that are not. Chap. 32. An exhortation to
Christians to believe the promise of God touching their Salvation, and so to
lay claim to it. Chap. 33. Shows, how a man may know whether he has a title
to Heaven. Chap. 34. Sets forth the danger of those that are in a state of
damnation. Chap. 35. An exhortation to offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven.
A PROSPECT OF HEAVEN.
Romans 8.18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.
CHAP. I.
THE Apostle having set forth the work and wages, the duty and the reward of
the Sons of God; showing that their work is to suffer with Christ, their reward
to reign with Christ in glory; in this Verse he preventeth an Objection, which
might arise in the mind of a Believer, that might discourage him from suffering
valiantly and patiently, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ: for it might be
objected, you tell us of glory; but that glory is dearly bought, that must cost
so many grievous trials and afflictions, as we are like to meet with: yet this
is satisfied, by setting forth the pettiness of the afflictions of this life,
in comparison of future glory. Be your afflictions never so many, be they as
great, as grievous as can be imagined and endured, yet the glory which shall be
revealed in you, is far greater then all your sufferings.

The words are a peremptory conclusion, in which we may observe,

1. The Person making the conclusion; I Paul.

2. The Things concerning which the conclusion is made; the Afflictions of this
life, and future Glory.

3. The Thing concluded; that there is no comparison between the one and the
other. Now for explication of the words.

I reckon.] I Paul, that have had great experience of the sufferings of this
life, (we may read a narrative of his sufferings 2 Cor. 11.23. ad verse. 31.) I
also that have had this high privilege, above all the Apostles, to be rapt up
into Paradise, and saw such glory, and heard such unspeakable words, or things,
which are impossible for a man to utter with his tongue: therefore St. Paul's
peremptory conclusion is to be credited. Rhem. Test.
[(...)] I reckon. This word imports not a probable conjecture of the
Apostle, as the old Translation Existimo, and the Rhemists would have it; which
Erasmus Erasm.
disliketh, because it does not fully express the sense of it; who interprets
the word reputo, I account, or resolve in my mind. But the word properly
signifies, to decree and determine a thing after much reasoning on both sides;
therefore many render it statuo, I do ordain, decree, or determine: and so it
notes a tried, weighed, and experienced conclusion, proceeding from an
infallible spirit and judgment; and is a Metaphor taken from such, as casting
an Account, do find what the Sum amounts unto. He does not say, I think, or it
is my opinion, but it is my reckoning. St. Paul did put afflictions in one
seal of the balance, and glory in the other; and this he determines, that
glory does by far weigh down all our present sufferings. This is the matter of
his account; he instanceth rather in the passive than in the active obedience
of the Saints; not because it is more excellent or difficult (for an ungodly
man may be brought to suffer, but cannot truly perform a gracious work) but
because it is more grievous and painful.

The Greek word (...), passiones, translated sufferings, includes all manner of
evils, which we do or can suffer, as reproaches, cruel mockings, scourgings,
revilings, troubles, pains, diseases, hunger, cold, nakedness, perils, loss of
liberty and life it self.

These afflictions are said in the Greek to be of the time which is now. (...).
By this may be understood either generally our lifetime, or else the whole
time of the Worlds continuance; as if he should say, were all the afflictions
that ever have been, are, or shall be inflicted upon us, were they all
collected together to fall upon one Christian, and were they (as an heavy and
intolerable burden) to lie upon him so long as the World shall last, yet
could they not consist with the Saints glory that shall be revealed hereafter:
Or more particularly, it may be taken for the times of the Apostles of the
Primitive Church, at what time there were the sorest and most raging
Persecutions, and then they yield us an argument a majori: if the sufferings of
those times were not worthy, then much less the sufferings of any other time.

Are not worthy to be compared.] (...). The Greek word (...), as Grammarians
note, does signify those things, which being put in the balance, are of equal
weight and poise one to the other; and from thence it is taken to signify
worth or worthiness; Non si^no equipolenti I^^l. Tr^nsl.

Non sunt pares. Erasm*

Minime esse pare^. Beza.


because there is a full correspondence of value, betwixt that which is said to
be worthy, and the thing it is worthy of; and according to this usual
signification of the word, do we translate here, not worthy of the glory, etc.
his meaning is, (according to the proper signification of the Greek word) they
are not of equal weight, they agree neither in quantity nor quality; were the
afflictions of this life weighed with the Saints glory hereafter, they would
hold no weight with them, there being no proportion, no equipollency between
them: it is a Metaphor taken from those that put things very light in one
scale, and things very ponderous in the other, which will hold no proportion;
were the sufferings of this life weighed with the glory to come, they would be
but light in comparison.

The vulgar Latin reads the words thus; the sufferings of this present time are
not condign to the glory to come; they say, Non sunt condignae passiones hujus
temporis ad futuram gloriam* Vulg.
we should not say, they are worthy of the glory, but they are not equal to the
glory, etc. now according to their Translation, what is condign, but equal or
comparable in worth? whence they take their meritum condigni, or ex condigno,
to be that in value or worth which is equivalent to the reward. Therefore Arias
Montanus, Non dignae passiones nunc temporis ad suturam g oriam. Ar. Mont.
ad verbum, reads it thus; the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy
to the glory to come: which, what is it but the same to say, they are not
comparable in worth to the glory to come? so that this Translation of ours is
approved even by the Papists themselves. St. Augustine Nullo modo superbiant
sancti Martyrs, tanquam dignum aliquod pro illius patrae participatione
fecerint, ubi ^^terna est and vera felicitas. Aug. de Civit. ^^i. lib. 5. cap.
18.
says, that the holy Martyrs are not to be proud, as if they did any worthy
matter for the participation of that Country, where is eternal and true
happiness; and alleges afterward for reason hereof these words, because, as
the Apostle says, the sufferings of this time are unworthy of the glory that
shall be revealed. St. Bernard Bernard. in Annunciat. sermon. 1.
affirming that the merits of men are not such, as that eternal life may be due
unto them of right; and asking, what are all merits to so great a glory? for
confirmation cites these very same words, and adds, no not if one man did
endure them all. And Fulgentius Fulgent. ad Momin. lib. 1.
having said, that the gift of God's reward does incomparably, and unspeakably
exceed all the merits of man's good will and works, brings for proof hereof
these words of St. Paul in my Text, That the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared, etc.

With the glory.] Musculus Muscul. ex Chrysostom. in loc.
out of Chrysostom observes, that because the Apostle could not find a word
expressing that happiness which the Saints shall enjoy, therefore he expresses
it by glory; which is that which every man affects, and does abhor shame and
confusion, which is contrary to glory: the excellency of the Saints future
happiness, is set forth by this word glory. Musculus gives another reason why
he mentions glory, viz. because the Cross of Christ is most ignominious, full
of shame in the world; and therefore that we may despise the shame, and endure
the cross with Christ, he mentions glory; to run the Race of shame is
nothing, if glory be at the Goal.

That shall be revealed.] Showing, that as yet it is invisible; and whatsoever
joy and comfort we meet with here, this is not the joy, the glory that shall be
revealed hereafter: glory may be revealed, and we not partakers of it;
therefore it is said, it shall be revealed (...), in us, or conferred upon us:
we shall shine as the Sun; our glory shall be revealed in the sight of the Sun,
in the open Air.

CHAP. II.
IN this Verse thus opened, many truths do concur.

1. That there is a State of Glory, provided, kept, and laid up for the Saints.

2. That this glory is yet unknown, not reveal-in us, nor fully apprehended by
us.

3. That there will a time come, when the glory of the Saints shall be
displaied and revealed.

4. That the time of Gods children in this world is a time of afflictions and
sufferings, that is their portion, Luke 16.25.

5. They have not some one cross, but many afflictions; it is [afflictions] in
the plural number: Many are the afflictions of the Righteous, Psalm. 34.19. We
must through manifold tribulations enter into Heaven, Act. 14.22.

6. The afflictions of Gods people are but short and momentary, they are but
the afflictions of this present time, Psalm. 30.5, 6. For a little season they
are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6. The time of their afflictions is but short, but
for the time of this life, and then all tears shall be wiped from their eyes.

7. That the ready way to know the transcendency of Heaven's Glory above the
afflictions of this present time, is to weigh both in the balance of right
reason.

8. That there is no proportion or comparison between a believers present
sufferings, and his future glory.

9. That a right sense of Heaven's Glory will make us to slight all the
sufferings of this present time, and to have mean thoughts of them in
comparison of the future recompense.

Now when it is said, that the afflictions of this present time, or the
afflictions of this life, are unworthy of the glory that shall be revealed; of
whose afflictions and sufferings is it spoken, but of the Saints who suffer by
the gift and grace of God, are members of Christ, and Temples of the holy
Ghost, even of those sufferings wherein they suffer with Christ; of which St.
Ambrose Ambrose Epist. 22.
says (to show the meaning of the words here in hand) he is altogether
glorified, who in suffering for him, suffers with him: and that the Apostle
may exhort us to sufferings, he adds, that all these things which we suffer
are too little and unworthy, that for the pains thereof so great reward of good
things to come should be returned to us.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. A description of Glory.
MY purpose from this Text (God assisting me) shall be to discourse at large of
the glory of Heaven; that glory which he has laid up for his Saints, and with
which he will Crown them hereafter; albeit in this world they are debased,
vilified, and put to shame, yet hereafter they shall be glorified.

Here in the first place, let us consider what glory is: Glory What glory is.
ta^^^ properly, does note unto us that high esteem which any have of some
special worth and excellency in others, or of some notable acts wrought by
others. So the glory of God, is that high esteem and account which men and
Angels do in their apprehensions entertain of the excellency, majesty,
goodness, power, perfection, and al-sufficiency of God; especially that which
the Saints and Angels do conceive of him, whose apprehension of Gods excellency
and infinite perfection is mixed with an entire love of God. When we discern a
special excellency in a person whom we entirely love, this will enlarge our
apprehensions in discerning the excellency of such a person. He that loves the
Lord sincerely, will see more glorious excellencies then another; yet even the
enemies of God cannot so shut their eyes, but that many of them, even against
their wills, shall have a glorious esteem of the Lords excellency. Exodus 9.27.
Pharaoh could not but discern a glorious excellency of power and Justice in
the Lord, when he saw his hand so heavy, and his strokes so multiplied upon
him and his people. The malignity of their Spirits against the Lord does
eclipse the brightness of the glory of God shining unto them, but yet it
cannot altogether darken it. The utter darkness that is in the bottomless pit^
cannot hinder, but that the glory of God's Power, Wisdom, and Justice, shall
appear to the Devil himself; and he shall be forced to entertain an high esteem
of his excellency and perfection, although there does not one glimps of his
love and favor shine there. So the glory of the Saints (properly) is that high
esteem which others have of the excellency which God has put upon them, and of
the graces of God shining in them.

But I take it, it is more often used in Scripture for such glorious
excellencies, as do deserve or cause such an high esteem of those in whom they
are. So of St. Stephen it is said, That he saw the glory of God, Act. 7.25.
That is, a glorious brightness, and representation of Gods presence, which
could not but cause an high and glorious esteem of so excellent a Majesty in
all beholders. There are glorious excellencies which God in this life has
begun in his children: in which sense glory is taken for the foundation of that
which is properly called glory, for that which produces glory, or causes an
high esteem in the hearts and minds of others: so that this is glory radically,
whereas an high esteem following hereupon is glory formally and properly.

Now then take glory in this sense for any glorious excellencies in any person,
we must distinguish a main and mighty difference between the fullness of
glorious excellency which is originally in the Creator, and that degree of
glorious excellency which is derived to the Creature. His glory is his own; the
glory of the Creatures is not their own, but borrowed, it is the glory of God
shining in them. Now this glory which the God of all glory has put upon the
Creatures is of diverse kinds, as we may learn from the Apostles words, 1 Cor.
15.40, 41. The glory of the Celestial is one, and the glory of the Terrestial
is another. There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and
another of the Stars; for one Star differs from another in glory. So there is
a glory in unreasonable, and a glory in reasonable and intellectual Creatures.

1. In unreasonable: there is a glorious excellency, splendour, and brightness
put upon the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as in that former place. The very Flowers of
the Field have some glimpse of glory put upon them. Behold the Lillies of the
Field, says our Savior, I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory,
was not clothed like one of them, Matthew. 6. There was more glory in the native
beauty of a Lilly, than in all the luster which art and cost was able to weave
into King Solomon's rich and royal Robes. So those passages, Job. 39.19, 20.
which the Lord uttered with his own mouth for Job's conviction and humiliation,
do serve to show some degrees of glory and excellency, wherewith the Lord had
adorned and beautified diverse of the bruit Creatures; as among others, the
Horse; where ye must conceive, that he speaks of a prime one for shape and
spirit. Have thou given the Horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with
Thunder? can thou make him afraid, as a Grasshopper? The glory of his nostrils
is terrible; he paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength: he goes on
to meet the armed men. He mocketh ^t fear, and is not affrighted, neither
turns back from the sword: The quiver ratleth against him, the glittering
spear and the shield, etc. Now as the Sun shining upon the Earth, or upon a
Wall, or the like, makes it shine and glister, and communicates its glory to
it, and yet it is the brightness of the Sun we know, and not of the Wall: so
these glorious excellencies, in any degree appearing in the Creatures, is the
glory of God, and not of the Creatures.

2. On the other side, there is a glory of reasonable, or intellectual
Creatures; and first, of Angels, who are full of glorious excellencies.
Secondly, of Men, who may have glorious excellencies in them of diverse kinds:
Natural, Civil, Spiritual.


Natural, viz. an eminency of endowments in body and mind. Civil, extraordinary
abilities for managing of public Affairs in Peace and War* and notable
achievements or performances of this kind. Such eminency was in Saul,
Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, and these things made them
glorious in a degree. But as the Apostle says in another case, the glory of
the Terrestrial is one, the glory of the Celestial is another; so all this is
but Terrestrial glory: it is Spiritual and Celestial glory which here we are to
speak of; a special eminency and glorious excellency in spiritual and heavenly
things bestowed upon the Children of God; and these are imperfect in this
world, and fully perfected and consummated in the world to come.

Glory (to speak properly of that which is to come) I rather conceive to be the
general, comprehending holiness it self, and all other excellencies of this
glorious estate and condition, then a part or member distinguished from it: for
that perfection of holiness which the Saints shall then enjoy, shall be
exceeding glorious: but thus I speak according to our usual manner of
expressing these things. The glory of the Saints in Heaven is that which
accomplisheth that which grace has begun, and sets a Seal upon the
fullness of all our felicities. Glory (as one well observes) implies some
great eminency and excellency, Dr. Sibs.
as the foundation of it, and then a manifestation of that excellency: Though
there be excellency, yet if there be not a manifestation thereof, it is not
Glory. Christ was inwardly glorious while he was upon earth, in the state of
abasement he had true glory as he was God and man, but there was not a
manifestation of it till he was received up into glory; therefore the glory of
the Saints is called the manifestation of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. Glory
also implies victory over all opposition: here God's children are subject to
abasement, to shame, to sufferings in diverse kinds: but glory will exempt them
from all baseness, and all that may diminish esteem and excellency, and in the
day of their glorification their excellency shall shine and break forth, and
all things shall be removed that might hinder their glory: so that glorified
souls shall be like that Egyptian Pyramid, which perpendicularly reflected on
by the Sun, did cast no shadow. When the Saints shall appear with Christ in
glory, they shall appear as so many glorious Conquerours over their enemies,
they shall see Sin and Satan their Spiritual enemies subdued, and they shall
appear Conquerours over wicked men, who did in this life trample upon them, and
they shall see them damned before their faces.

SECT. II.
ADam in Paradise was but a little inferior to the Angels, and crowned with
glory and honor, Psalm. 8. He discoursed familiarly with the Angels, and he
knew, that his Soul (though included in a body) was little inferior to those
blessed Spirits: but hereafter the Saints shall be made like or equal to the
Angels. The Lord will raise his Saints to a higher pitch of glory then Adam was
in Paradise, which may thus be illustrated.

1. Adam was made Lord of the inferior Creatures; in that happy State all was
submitted to his will, he was equally absolute in his Person and Dominion, he
was Lord of the Universe: but the Saints at the last day shall be raised to
such a degree of glory, that they shall have no need nor use of these inferior
Creatures: the Fowls of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, the Beasts of the Earth
were put under the feet of Adam before his fall, but then they shall be below
all the necessities of the Saints, who shall be raised far above these things,
enjoying all in, and from the fountain of life: God himself living and reigning
with his children, will be their everlasting inheritance, he will fill all
their desires, perfect all the powers of their Souls, and communicate himself
so surely and so abundantly to them, that as there is nothing they have cause
to fear, so there is nothing they need or can wish for.

2. Adam indeed was crowned with Glory, but yet left in a possibility to stain
his Glory. Man in Paradise could not raise himself up to God, nor defend
himself against the Devil without the assistance of grace, says St. August.
August. Epist. 109. ad Bonif.
he was therefore soon exiled from Paradise, and constrained to endure a
banishment as long as life; and here he undergoes all the miseries of an
exterminated person, he is deprived of his goods, and being driven out of
Paradise, is fallen from all those honors that equalled his condition to that
of Angels, and reduced to a deplorable estate, rendering his condition little
different from that of the beasts that perish. Job was more happy in his misery
(says the same Father) then Adam in his Innocence: August. in Psalm. 29.
he was victorious on the dunghill, this other was defeated on his Throne: He
gave no ear to the evil counsel of his wife; this other was cajoled b^ His: He
despised all the assaults of Satan; this other suffered himself to be worsted
at the first temptation: He preserved his righteousness in the midst of his
so^rows, this other lost his innocence in the midst of his pleasures. The first
man (says he in another place) received in Paradise a liberty void of all
servitude; God presented him with fire and water, and gave him leave to choose:
man took fire, and rejected the water: God who is just, let him grasp what he
had chosen; so that he was therefore unhappy, because he would be so: Man was
left in a possibility to stain his honor, and lose his glory: he did not long
abide in that honor. Adam fell (as is probable) the same day he was created:

1. Because Christ says of the Devil, he was a murderer from the beginning,
John 8.44. His malicious mind being such toward them that stood (himself being
fallen) that he could not endure to see them in that estate, no not for an
hour. 2. If he had continued one day or one night in his integrity, the
blessing of God upon his Marriage would have taken place, and so he would have
begotten children without sin, which since he did not, but begat Children in his
own Image, Genesis 5.3. It Is likely he fell the same day wherein he was Created.
3. See the Answer that Eve makes to the Devil, Genesis 3.2. We may eat of the
fruit of the trees in the Garden, i. e. Have free liberty to eat, signifying
that as yet they had not eaten, and therefore it could be no long time. But the
Saints at the last day shall be raised to such a state of glory and honor, as
shall never fade, their Crown and Garland shall never wither: fading glory is
very imperfect, it is like a flash of lightning. Adam was tempted and lost his
present Glory, his dignity was soon gone; but the Glory that God will put upon
his Saints shall be like the fixed Stars shining in the Kingdom of the Father;
they shall be like unto Christ, whose Glory is Eternal: this is the greatest
and last benefit they shall receive by Christ, far greater then Adam's in his
state of innocence.

St. John says, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.
that is, like him in glory. Now, when I say the Saints shall be like unto
Christ, you must consider, that there is a great difference between likeness
and equality. Things may be like each other, which may be very unequal; Water
in a Dish, is like the Water in the River, but very unequal to it: An Infant in
the day of his Birth, may be like the Parents, but not equal to them. Adam was
made in the likeness of his Maker, but when he sought to be his equal, it was
his ruin. So great is the difference between likeness and equality, that the
former the Lord gave him freely; but his affecting and seeking the latter, was
so displeasing to the Lord, that he deprived him of the former also: so that
whereas being like to God, he sought to be equal also; he became neither equal
to him, nor like him, but contrary to him. So in this case, the faithful shall
be like to Christ, but not his equals; as the Stars are in some degree like the
Sun, but not equal in glory and brightness. Now,

1. Christ being God and Man, having two Natures united into one Person, each
Nature has a peculiar glory. The Divine Nature being infinite,
incomprehensible, eternal, the glory of Christ is his very Nature; it is
infinite, incomprehensible, and eternal glory; it is called light inaccessible.
The Humane Nature of Christ being a finite being, the glory thereof is but
finite; this glory was given him by his Father; God raised him from the dead,
and gave him glory, 1 Pet. 1.21. Our Natures being the same with his Humane
Nature, we shall be like him in this glory, our Natures being capable of the
same glory.

2. Yet although the glory of Christ's Humane Nature be but (as his Nature)
finite, yet this glory does above all measure exceed all the glory of all the
Angels and glorified Saints. All the glory of Saints and Angels compared to
Christ's glory, is no more then all the light of the Stars compared to the
light of the Sun. The Moon exceeds the other Stars in light, but the Sun a
thousand times exceeds the Moon, and all the Stars; and if the Sun be wanting,
it will be night for all the Stars. So one Saint may excel another in glory,
and the Angels may excel the Saints, but yet the glory of the Humane Nature of
Christ does a thousand times exceed the glory of Angels and Saints. One reason
is, because the Humane Nature of Christ is more nearly united to the Divine,
then Angels and Men; the nearer union, the greater participation of glory; and
can there be a nearer union then a personal union? such an union is the union
between the Humane Nature and the Divine in Christ. If a Body that is capable
of the light, should be united into one substance with the Sun, that Body must
needs shine more glorious then the distant Stars. The Humane Nature is united
to the incomprehensible glorious Nature and Essence, and therefore far more
glorious then all other.

Moreover, that which is the measure of things, Quod est primum in unequoque
genere, est mensura reliquorum.
must needs be the chief of all those things of which it is the measure; that
which is the first and chief in every kind, is the measure of the rest. Now the
glory of the Humane Nature of Christ being the measure of our glory, must needs
excel in glory. The Sun being the measure of all the Starry light, and all the
Stars borrowing their light from him, must needs excel the lesser Stars in
light. Our glory is but a borrowed light: it is of his fullness, of his grace
and glory, that we receive grace and glory: his human Nature is a vast Cistern
full of glory, and our Natures are but the smaller vessels receiving glory
flowing from this vast Cistern.

3. Therefore when the Apostle says, we shall be like to Christ, it is meant,
secundum proportionem, non secundum aequalitatem: our glory shall be
proportionable to his, we shall not equal him in glory: it is meant, quoad
parts, non quoad gradus: we shall have the same glory for substance, though
not the same in degrees. Christ shall so far excel the biggest Vessel of glory,
as Job in his glorious estate did excel himself when he lay upon the Dunghill
full of nasty sores; as Solomon in all his glory did excel himself being in his
Mothers Womb.

4. Saints shall be like Christ in glory; yet notwithstanding one Saint will
exceed another in glory. God will cloth all his Children alike, yet their
garments shall be made proportionable for their stature. All the Saints shall
be vessels of Mercy, yet one Saint shall be a larger and more capacious vessel
then another. Christ in his answer to that curious request of Zebedees Wife,
Mat. 20.23. implies, that there shall be degrees of glory, and grants, that
some shall sit at his right hand, some at his left hand in his Kingdom. They
shall all have the same glory and happiness, ratione objecti faelicitatis and
gloriae, non ratione participationis, in respect of the object of glory and
blessedness, but not in respect of participation. God in Christ is the object
of happiness, but in regard of participation of the object, one may and shall
see more clearly then another. In my Father's house are many Mansions, says
our Savior, John 14.2. Patris domus, is put for one and the same object of
glory, says Aquinas: Pluralitas mansionum, the many Mansions shows, there
are diverse degrees of glory. And this is his comparison: there is but one
Center unto which all things tend, but some bodies are nearer to the Center
then other bodies are. So God in Christ is the Center of all our happiness:
Seneca calls God, Animae Centrum, the Center of the Soul: but one Saint
tends more near to God then another.

5. Yet notwithstanding, all the Saints shall be full of glory and happiness,
as Christ Jesus is. Christ will give to every Saint his measure of glory.
Danaeus says well, that there be two things that the blessed Saints want in
Heaven; Carent omni invidia, and carent omni rerum ad beatitudinem
necessariarum indigentia. They want envy: one Saint does not envy another
Saint's greater measure of glory, because they shall be all full of glory: and
then there is no want of any thing, for whatsoever pertains to make a
Creature happy, every Saint shall enjoy, and such fullness of happiness shall
he have, that nec plus quaerel quam habebit, nec minus habere doleit quam
habet: he that has the least measure of glory shall seek for no more, nor
grieve that he has so little.

CHAP. IV. Of the reasons why God will glorify his Children, in respect of the
Lord himself.
SECT. I.
The reasons hereof are as follow.

1. GOD has Predestined them unto glory, 2 These. 2.13, 14. We are bound
always to give thanks to God for you brethren, beloved of the Lord, because
God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation through Sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth. The Salvation of God's Children is built
upon a stronger Foundation then the very Heavens, even upon God's Counsel; his
hand has written their names in the Book of Life in Characters that cannot be
blotted out: his grace is the Fountain of their Salvation, and therefore they
may expect it from his mercy. God is unchangeable in his decrees: the design he
has laid touching the saving of his people from all eternity, is not changed
in time, nor can all the Powers on Earth hinder the execution of his will. It
is impossible that any should be Predestinate, and not saved, says Peter
Lombard. Lomb. sent. Lib 1. Dissin. 40.
Jesus Christ has said, That he knows all his Sheep, that he gives unto them
Eternal Life, that they shall never perish, that no man shall be able to pluck
them out of his hands, John 10.27, 28.

2. God has called them unto glory. Whom he has Predestined them has he
called: whom he has called, them has he Justified: and whom he has
Justified, them also has he Glorified, Romans 8.30. He speaks of it as of the
time past, as if it were already done: partly, because part of it is present,
as Peace, Joy, etc. and partly, because it is as sure as though it were in
present possession, we are called unto glory and virtue; we are called to the
obtaining the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ by the Gospel, 2 These. 2.14. And
S. Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to walk worthy of God, who had called them
to his Kingdom and Glory, 1 These. 2.12. God has called the Saints out of this
World; they are no sooner admitted into the School of Christ, but they learn
that the Earth is their banishment, and Heaven their Country: the end why God
calls his people out of the World, is that they might not seek for happiness
upon Earth, and that they may make no account of what the wicked do possess,
and thereby see that riches and honors are not the portion of the righteous,
because God bestows them chiefly upon his enemies: he leaves the fairest
part of the World to those that persecute him, to teach his Children that
Heaven is their patrimony and Inheritance.

3. God has prepared Heaven for them: Christ at the last day will say to the
Sheep whom he will place at his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World, Mat.
25.34. When Christ was leaving the World, he comfort the hearts of his
disconsolate Disciples thus, In my Fathers house are many Mansions, if it were
not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, John 14.2. The
glory must be incomparable which God has treasured up, and been preparing from
eternity. Neither does God only prepare Heaven for his Saints, but he also
prepares them for Heaven: he makes them meet partakers of the inheritance
among the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. For as wicked men are vessels of wrath
sitted for Destruction, so the Saints are vessels of glory prepared unto glory,
Romans 9.22, 23. The Saints do not presently pass from a corrupt to a glorious
estate, but there is a fitting and an holy preparation comes between: if a man
will wear a Garment, he fits it before he wears it; so God will have his
people cast into a new mould, that he may fit them for Heaven, before he puts
them into the possession of it.

4. God has promised to bestow Heaven upon his people: He will give grace and
glory, Psalm. 84.11. The Crown of life has he promised to them that love him,
Jam. 1.12. Heaven comes to us by deed, by good assurance: there is no better
deed then that which is written by the finger of God, and sealed by the blood
of Christ, as a judicious Divine well notes: Dr. Holdsworth Sermoon Jam. 1.12.
therefore though we cannot see the glory of Heaven in the thing, yet we may
see it in the Promise, Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God: he has chosen the poor of the World,
rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him, Jam. 2.5. Heaven is a Kingdom engaged to the Saints by promise, and
they are to look upon it as a promised Kingdom, and to judge him faithful that
has promised. St. Augustine Debtor factus est, non aliquid a nobis accipiendo,
sed quod ei placu^t promittendo. August.
says, God is become a debtour, not by receiving any thing from us, but by
promising all things to us what it pleased him: hereupon (says he) we say not
to God, repay that which thou receivedst, but pay that which, thou have
promised: let us hold him therefore a most faithful debtour, because we have
him a most merciful promiser: the promise was made in mercy, the performance
thereof depends upon the fidelity of the promiser. Yea, we have not the bare
word of God only, but also his oath, Heb. 17.18. God willing more abundantly to
show unto the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
with an Oath, that by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay
hold upon the hope set before us: Now he is Jehovah, and will give existence to
all his promises; and the making good his promises to his Children will tend to
the greater manifestation of God's Glory.

SECT. II.
Diverse reasons also may be given why the Lord will glorify his people, in
respect of themselves.

1. Glory is the great design of the Saints, therefore it shall be unto them.
St. Paul sets it down as a distinguishing Character of the Saints from other
men, Romans 2.7. And says, To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life, i. e. To them shall be
eternal Life: This is the main thing that the Saints aim at: some of them do
differ in some Opinions, but in this they all agree, viz. in aiming at
everlasting glory, the glory of the God of glory: therefore the Lord will not
suffer them to miss of the main end and aim of their Souls. The Spouse cries,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Their affections are set on things above, their
conversation is in Heaven, their treasure is in Heaven, and Heaven has their
hearts; they seldom look up to Heaven, but they sigh after it, and are
afflicted at their banishment: grief makes the Heaven-born Soul cry, Woe is me,
because my habitation is prolonged.

2. Glory is the expectation of the Saints, Phil. 3.20, 21. and they are said,
to rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2. Saving hope is a siducial and
undoubted expectation of eternal glory and happiness, promised to us in the
word, and purchased by Christ for us; or else a patient waiting for the
manifestation of the glory of the Sons of God, when Christ shall appear; this
is the hope that is meant, Romans 8.23, 24. there waiting, hope, and expectation
are the same, waiting for the adoption, (i. e.) for the inheritance of glory,
to which by our adoption we are interested: that look, as the creature is said
verse 19. earnesty to expect, they do as it were put forth their heads, to look
for the glorious appearing of the Sons of God; so all the Saints do earnestly
expect their future promised glory, says Parisiensis, Guilielm. Parisiens.
their hopes are altogether taken up with Heaven, they long for this eternal
habitation; the moments that stop them here below, seem ages; the diversions,
illusions; the pleasures of the world seem torments to them; the happiness of
the world a dangerous temptation. Now the Spirit of God inspires them with
strong desires of Heaven, points out the glory of the Blessed, fills them with
hope of the shortning of their exile; they live always in their desire after
Heaven, comfort themselves with the expectation, and by a certain hope taste
the happiness they shall one day be satisfied with in an everlasting enjoyment.
Now the hope of a Christian is sure, and being founded on the promises of God,
who cannot lie, never deludes the Believer that listens to them. Jesus Christ
has given to his People such favors, as whereby he strengthens their hope, for
what happiness they yet enjoy not; the death he suffered for us, is an
assurance of that life he prepares for us: neither can we doubt, says
Augustine, Aug.
that we shall not reign with him in glory, seeing he was willing to die for us
upon the Cross; for what good things may we not expect, when his death is a
pledge of his love, and an assurance of the happiness we look for: he that has
this hope, may boast himself happy before hand; for Philo Philo Jud.
the Jew calls it, the forerunner of joy, a harbinger pleasure preceding the
eternal one, an ante past of blessedness.

3. God has already given them the beginnings of glory; they are sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of their inheritance, until
the redemption of the purchased possession, etc. Ephesians. 1.13. Here indeed the
Saints are Sons, but they are not Heirs invested into that blessed estate they
have title to; God reserves not all their happiness for the world to come, but
gives them somewhat here to bear up their spirits, to mitigate and sweeten
their troubles in their absence from their Husband; and to render them happy in
the midst of their miseries, he sheds the graces of his Spirit into their
spirits with so much complacency, that conversing with men, they may relish the
bliss and happiness of Angels. He gives them the Holy Ghost as a pledge of that
glory which one day they shall receive with him: you know an earnest is for
security of a contract; so the Holy Ghost does secure us of that blessed estate
we shall have hereafter in Heaven. An earnest likewise is part of the bargain,
a part of the whole that is secured; though it be never so little, yet it is a
part: so it is in the operations of the Spirit upon us, in that peace and joy
that it works in the heart, it is a part of that peace and joy the Saints
shall for ever enjoy in Heaven. Moreover, an earnest is given rather for the
security of the party that receives it, then in regard of him that gives it: so
God by giving us this earnest of his Spirit, gives us assurance of salvation,
he makes us thereby to read our Names written in the Book of Life; he takes us
into that Privy Chamber where the definitive sentence of our eternal happiness
is pronounced; he applies to us the merits of Jesus Christ, and himself
interposeth the caution of his Promises; he blots out those mortal discontents
that labor to throw us into despair, advancing our hope by a prelibation of
glory; and handles us with so much tenderness, that he that has this
assurance, cannot be made to believe that he can be miserable in the other
world, that has been so happy in this.

The Saints also have glory here in primitiis, they are said to have received
the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. to assure them that they shall have
a rich harvest, and a good crop. Look as sometimes it falls out with wicked men
in their merry sports, God sends some horror of conscience into them, that like
an unwholesome damp, choaketh all their pleasure, which is the first fruits of
Hell, a taste of the cup of wrath which the damned drink of in Hell: so when a
godly man is in his sad dumps, when he is almost buried in the gulf of
troubles, then God's Spirit does, as Jonathan, take a little honey upon the top
of his rod, and gives it him to eat, which comfort his fainting spirit; the
Spirit of God then droppeth a little comfort upon an afflicted heart, gives him
a taste of the rivers of pleasures, and secretly assures him of the favor of
God in Christ, and that one day he shall enjoy communion with him to all
eternity; these are the very first fruits of Heaven.

The godly are already glorified in part, because that wherein eternal life and
glory do consist, they have now in part; they know God in part; they do here
enjoy God and Christ in part; they have now communion with God in Christ; and
Christ is said to live in them, and God is said to make his abode in them: that
Soul must needs be glorious, wherein God and Christ do make their abode. It is
true what a holy Man said, a Believer has Coelum in se, and Christum in illo
Coelo: A Christian has Heaven within him, and Christ in that Heaven. Where God
and Christ is, certainly there is Heaven.

4. Because Christ their Head is glorified, therefore must the Members also be
glorified; they are united to Christ; he is their Husband, they are his Spouse:
now where he is, they must also be, as he himself tells his Disciples, John 14.
Now is the time of contract only; the time of the Marriage solemnity shall be
at the appearing of Christ. Now we are the Sons of God, but it does not appear
what we shall be, 1 John 3.2. But when he who is our life shall appear, we
shall also appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.4. Christ in his own Person is
now glorious: Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and enter into his
glory, Luke 24.26. This glory is given him by God his Father, 1 Pet. 1.21. John
17.24. Now when it is said, God the Father gave him glory, it cannot be meant
of essential glory, because he had that from all eternity; but by glory is
meant, the glory of his Mediatorship, and the glory he had after his
Resurrection, wherein we shall be made like unto him, sitting at the right hand
of God. Now real glory is given to Christ in regard of his Humane Nature, so it
was manifest in time; but in respect of his Deity, he had it with his Father
before the world was, John 17.5. As the Sun, when there is a Cloud between us
and it, the Sun still keeps its splendour, but when the Cloud is gone, we see
it: So Christ in regard of his Deity had this glory always; it was hidden from
him in regard of the infirmities which he took upon him, as sufferings, death,
etc.

Now Christ our Head being glorified, all his Members that suffer with him
shall also be glorified together; they are now glorified in capite, and when
Christ has prepared places for all his Members, then he will take them home to
his Father's house: Christ is now preparing their glory, and fitting their
heavenly Mansions; he is decking their Crowns of Righteousness, he is trimming
their Robes. Christ is now in his own Person glorious, but Christ mystical is
not glorious, it is in a suffering condition; there are many of his Members
that are not yet brought home to God: Christ has a care of his mystical Body,
as of his natural Body; he gave his natural Body to redeem his mystical Body;
therefore as he is glorious in his natural Body, so he will be glorious in his
mystical Body; for St. Paul says, he shall come to be glorified in his Saints.
The Son of God rose gloriously out of his Tomb; and after he had given
assurance of it to his Apostles, he was taken up into Heaven, to reign there
eternally with his Father; the Angels made a part of his Triumph; his Body that
was pierced with the nails, rent with stripes, torn with thorns, was set at the
right hand of his Father on a Throne; whose Ornament was Justice, and the
Foundation Mercy, as one well notes. His mystical Body shall receive the like
glorious entertainment; the Saints shall be admitted into the Society of the
Blessed, and reign in Heaven with the Angels: Those Members that have suffered
in the quarrel of Jesus Christ, shall be freed from all miseries, and reign in
glory everlastingly with their Head, that the blessedness of Jesus Christ may
have its accomplishment, and he may be as happy in his Members, as in his
Person. Jesus Christ and his Members are united in their sufferings on earth,
and by a necessary consequence we may be assured, they shall be so one day in
their glory in Heaven: To this end Christ prayed for his Church to his Father,
when himself was upon earth; The glory which thou gave me, I have given them:
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me, John 17.22, 24. It is observable,
that in other things when Jesus Christ speaks to his Father, it is with so much
respect, that he seems rather a Servant then a Son; but when he asks that his
Members may reign with him in glory, it is with so much liberty of speech; that
his Request is rather a determination then a Prayer: Volo Pater, Father, I will
that where I am, there my Servants may be.

CHAP. V. Of the quality of the Saints glory.
NOw that I may set forth the nature of the Saints glory, you are to know, that
there is no specisical, or essential, difference between our gracious and
glorious estate, as there is no specifical or essential difference between the
Corn of the First Fruits, and that of the whole Harvest, only some accidental
differences: as there is no specifical difference between a Child, and a grown
Man; they have both the same essential parts and principles, there is only an
alteration of degrees, not of parts, and gradus non variat speciem: Now our
present estate is our Infancy, our future estate is our Manhood; for the
present the Children of God have glory given them; godly Men are for the
present glorious: the Scripture calls them nothing else but blessed; yea, even
then they are blessed, when the world looks upon them as most miserable; when
shame, reproach and trouble is cast upon them, then does the Spirit of glory
rest upon them; they having grace bestowed upon them, have glory. Glory is
nothing else but the splendor, the brightness of grace; Vita gratiae nihil est
aliud quam aetas infantilis gloriae: he that is gracious, is glorious. We shall
have the same individual Bodies and Souls after the Resurrection as we have in
this life, only some alteration in respect of some new qualities; as in our
first Resurrection from the death of Sin to the life of Righteousness, there is
no transmutation of the essence, but an alteration of the qualities, or a
super-introduction of new qualities, by which we are said to be new Creatures,
2 Cor. 5.17. not in quantity but in quality; so in Heaven we shall become new
Creatures in respect of what we are now, and those very qualities which do
principally concur to the constitution of our happiness in Heaven, are in some
measure communicated to us in our first regeneration; now we have drops, then
rivers of delights, Psalm. 36.8. both the same in nature.

This will be the more evident, if we examine wherein our happiness hereafter
does consist, and compa ing it with our present estate. Our spiritual and
supernatural blessedness consists in the fruition of such an object as is
perfectly, all-sufficiently, and principally good, which is only God; therefore
it stands in our perfect union to, and communion with God; the faculties of
the soul being by the Almighty power of God dilated, extended and enlarged so
far, as to be as it were capable of the fullness of God, and by the perfect
operations of the understanding, will and affections, united to God in all
their actions: and when these natural, weak and vile Bodies of ours, by the
same hand of Omnipotency are transfigured and transformed into spiritual,
powerful and glorious Bodies, and so united to the Soul, then are we come to
the perfection of our blessedness; the properties of which blessedness are,
First, That it is everlasting. Secondly, That we shall discern it so to be. And
thirdly, That as it fulfilleth the largest desires of our hearts, so we shall
be extraordinarily affected with it, and perpetually affected to it, and
incessantly desirous of it; our glory consists not in having what our weak
Souls can now wish for, but what they can desire when they are gloriously
corroborated and enlarged.

So that now you see there is no specifical or essential difference, but only a
gradual or circumstantial difference between the state of grace here, and the
state of glory hereafter; for Regnum coeleste est Dei contemplatio,
glorificatio, Gregor. Nazianz^n. Orat. contr. Arrian.
and celebratio cum Angelis communis, says one of the Fathers; who commonly
describes the state of the blessed to be nothing else; but the full and
perfect accomplishment of such spiritual blessings as are already begun in us,
and in part already communicated to us, when God shall (by a most perfect and
immediate irradiation of the understanding, and sanctification of the will and
affections to know, love and delight in God, and transformat^on of the Body
into the likeness of Christ's) effect the everlasting glorification of the
whole man.

Quest. But will not this diminish and lessen the excellency of our future
estate, and make it far less eminent then the Scripture describes it to be, 2
Cor. 4.17. and consequently less desirable, and the hope and assurance of it
less able to solace us against our present sufferings?

Sol. I answer, no; for besides the admirable alteration there shall be in our
Bodies, in respect of their present base condition, there shall be a far
greater alteration in our Souls, though it be not specifical and essential, as
may appear in comparing the First Fruits with the whole Harvest. What is an
handful to the whole Crop? what is a drop of Water to the whole Ocean? what is
the light of the Moon and Stars, and Candlelight, to that of the Sun? and yet
there is no essential difference between these, no more then between a mountain
and a molehill, both having the same common nature. God can raise qualities as
well as substances to a most eminent and glorious perfection; if we in the
state of renovation, find such comforts as are many times unspeakable and
glorious, even in this our day of small things, that they make us to glory in
tribulation, and to triumph over the greatest evils in this life, how absolute
and transcendently ravishing shall our contentment be, when we shall be above
the reach of all evils, and be filled with all perfection?

Hence we may learn how to conceive of the blessedness of our future estate,
viz. not to think of it after a carnal manner, as if it did consist in eating
and drinking, sleeping, marrying, possessing of Silver and Gold, and Houses
richly furnished and adorned, or in a Turkish Paradise, in sensual delights,
and following our sports and recreations; but rather in exercises of Holiness
and Righteousness, in a glorious and heavenly communion with the holy Trinity,
Saints and Angels, as Romans 14.17. in living a Celestial and Angelical kind of
life, as Luke 20.35. such as is described Isa. 6.2, 3. Psalm. 103.20. Matthew.
18.20. Luke 15.7. Luke 2.13, 14. A sincere Christian condition, and heavenly
conversation, is an obscure delineation and representation of the happy
condition of the glorified; and the Saints do even live as it were an Heaven
upon Earth; they begin to live eternally and blessedly, as soon as they begin
to be in Christ: and if Glory deserves such great admiration and estimation,
Grace, which is a spark and principle of it, can be no mean thing; therefore
let those that are sanctified in Christ, so far magnify themselves against the
insolences of ungodly men.

CHAP. VI. Shows, that the perfect Glory and Happiness of the Saints is
invisible for the present.
SECT. I.
IN the next place I shall show you, that the full dignity, glory, and
happiness of the Saints is not apparent: Now we are the Sons of God, but it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but when he shall appear we shall be like
him, etc. 1 John 3.2. Our Salvation is hid in this life, Our life of glory is
hid with Christ in God. Col. 3.3. All the flourishing beauty of the Wine, is
all the dead time of the Winter hidden in the root of the Vine; Christ our
Head, our Brother, our Ausband, our Savior, is keeper of the Crown of glory;
it is hid in Christ for the present, therefore it does not appear: and it is
hid with Christ in God; in God objective, because of our happiness principally
consists in the vision of God, or causaliter, because all our glory is
derived from God; or else in God, that is apud Deum, in the power of God to
bestow it at his pleasure; there is glory and happiness hidden in Christ for
us. Upon the meditation hereof the Psalmist cries out, Psalm. 31.19. O how great
is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? how great? it
is particula admirativa. Bruno Nimis supra quam dici potest, admirative cum
nimio pondere. Bruno.
interprets it thus. How great is thy goodness? it is so wonderful, that the
tongue of an Angel cannot express how great it is; but this goodness is laid
up, it is in the Hebrew (...) which thou have hidden, which thou have in secret
preserved; so that it is not as yet apparent what goodness it is. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive
what things God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. This St. Paul
spoke, who in that divine rapture into the Third Heaven saw a flash of the
Transcendent glory of the Saints. The glorious beauty of Heaven and Earth is
the object of the eye, yet no eye ever saw such glory: our ears hear more then
our eyes can see; we hear of glorious things done in all parts of the World,
and yet no ear ever heard of such glory: our hearts can conceive more then our
eyes can see, or ears can hear, or we can fancy greater things then can be
presented to the eye; yet we cannot conceive the glory of the Sons of God. Our
glory does not appear; we have treasures of happiness, but they are hidden in
the field: our Transcendent happiness is like a curious piece of Arras roled
up, not put down, and exposed to the view of men; we are glorious Stars, but
yet we do not appear above the Horizon, the Earth does interpose it self
between us and the set Sun, and hides his light from us; so these earthy bodies
of ours do interpose themselves between us and our glory, that it cannot be
seen. The happy and glorious estate of the Children of God does not now appear;

1. Not to the Wicked: the glory and beauty of the Saints in this life is
internal and spiritual; The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13.
They are full of riches of glory and strength, but it is in the inner man, Ephesians.
3.16. And so it is not obvious to carnal eyes, which if it were, it would turn
the most sensual Epicures into mortified Saints: but the wicked want a
spiritual eye to discern spiritual glory; Gods people are worth Millions of
men, but they are Gods hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. The world knows them not,
because they know not God, 1 John 3.1. And as Moses his face when it shone, had
a vail over it; so the glory of grace has a vail over it, that not a glimpse
of it appears to the wicked, much less does the life of endless glory appear
to them. These things do hide the glorious condition of the godly from the
wicked:

1. Their outward troubles, their outward mean and base condition obscureth
their glory, so that wicked men think godliness to be a contemptible thing:
What hid the Majesty of Christ from the eye of the Jews? why was he a man
rejected and despised among men? it was the baseness of his outward condition
that hid the glory of the only begotten Son of God: he came in the form of a
Servant among the Jews, who expected his coming in Princely pomp; it was also
the many troubles he endured for our sins, because he was Crowned with a Crown
of Thorns, and had not a Crown of Glory upon his Head, therefore his glory did
not appear: the carnal and blind Jews thought the promised Messiah when he
came, would not be thus miserable, and so generally hated as Christ was: thus
when the wicked see godly men almost overwhelmed with troubles, and even buried
in the Gulf of outward calamities, and look upon them as of all men the most
miserable and despicable, they presently think there is no glory in an holy
life. The miseries of the Saints are public, their advantages walk in the
dark; men see what they suffer, but doubt of what they hope for; and in the
judgment of Infidels their Religion passes for an imposture, because the good
things it promises are invisible, but the evils it threatens are sensible and
present. We are says August. August. Psalm. 36.
like those great Trees, which during the sharpness of the Winter, are naked of
all their leaves; their life is enclosed in their roots, their vigor is
retired into their Sap, and all their Soul and vegetation they have, is hid
from the eyes of the beholders; but their death is conspicuous, every branch
publishes; it and all the mischiefs the Winter has brought upon them, are so
many arguments to make us doubt of their life. Thus it is with God's Children;
they are dead, and they are alive, but their Life is in a Cloud, their Death
manifest; the persecutions they suffer, the temptations they encounter, the
conflicts they undergo, persuade wicked and unbelieving persons, that their
Life is but a languishing and doleful Death; but their vigor is over-shadowed,
their glory is hid with Christ in God: and as the Spring must needs return to
convince the ignorant, that a Tree that has lost its leaves in the Winter, is
not dead, so must the general Resurrection happen to assure the unbelieving
World, that the Life of a Christian persecuted by the World is hid with Christ
in God.

2. Because there is no outward excellency in grace, therefore their glory
cannot appear to wicked men; nothing pleases a carnal eye but external
excellency, and grace has little of that. St. James Jam. 2.
tells us, That gay clothes and a gold Ring is in more esteem then Faith; but
Christ goes contrary to the World. Cyrus, in his speech to his Soldiers, told
them that were Footmen, if they would follow him, he would make them Horsemen:
he told them that were Horsemen, if they would follow him, he would set them
over Chariots: if they were Rulers of Villages, he would give them Cities: if
of Cities, he would make them Rulers of Provinces. Christ Preached otherwise,
He that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross: let
him deny his honors, and become base for my sake: let him deny his riches, and
become poor for my sake: let him deny his life, and become miserable: what
happiness, what glory is there, will a wicked man say? I can see no excellency
in Piety, if this be the portion of God's Children. Grace indeed is like the
Ark, which within was over-laid with pure Gold, and a pot of Manna was in it,
but the outside was covered with Badgers-skins, and Sheepskins: so grace is
inwardly overlaid with pure Gold, clothed with glory, and within it there is a
pot of Manna, even joy unspeakable; Yet because the outside of grace is covered
with Badgers skins, and wicked men do judge according to the outward
appearance, therefore the inward excellency and glory thereof does not appear
to them.

3. Because wicked men think that holy men, because they are miserable in this
life, belong not to God, and that their miseries here are but the forerunners
of eternal sorrows. It is a good saying of Mercer, Hoc est ingenium Mundi, ut
quibus videt deum extrinsecus maledicere maledicit, and quibus extrinsecus
benedicere benedicit. Mercer.
This is the guise of the World, that it thinks those to be cursed of God, whom
he seems to cross with outward troubles; and to think that they are the only
blessed men, whom he seems to bless with outward things. Wicked men think that
the love and hatred of God appears in outward things, and that because all
things go well here, and every thing succeeds according to the desires of their
hearts, they verily presume, that God by these outward dispensations intends no
less then their eternal happiness: and because they see that very often trouble
upon trouble falls upon the godly, they think they are Hypocrites, and so God
will deal with them to all Eternity. Alas! the World is blind, the God of this
World has blinded their eyes, that the future glory of God's Children does not
appear to them: they little think that where the godly man's misery ends,
there the happines^ of the wicked ends; and where the wicked m^ (...) misery
begins, there the hap^^^ (...) the (...) ^^ginneth: It is Peter Martyr's
(...) ^icked are called the inhabitant^ (...) therefore are compared to (...)
^odly are called So journers and (...) ^^nderers in a strange land, and (...)
^^^ared to the Planets: the Pl^ (...) West to East in a contrary mo^^ (...)
^^rs do set where the Planets ri^e (...) ^icked and the godly that move i^
(...) the one rises where the o^^ (...) ^^th the glory and happiness (...)
then the glory of the (...) ^appiness does appear.

SECT. II.
.2 THE glory of the Saints does not yet appear to themselves, it is not yet
manifest what they shall be, the fullness and perfection of their glory and
happiness cannot be comprehended by them; they must enter into their Master's
Joy, before they can fully see what glory belongs to them: God must make them
perfectly glorious, before their glory will appear. Josua might have spies from
Canaan, that might bring with them a bunch of Grapes, but yet they could not
show him the abundance of Vineyards, the Rivers of honey and milk, till he came
into Canaan to possess it: so God's Spirit may bring joy and comfort from
Heaven, and make the Sons of God to taste of Heaven, as Josua did of the
delicacies of Canaan in the Wilderness: or the Spirit of God may open a cranny
that the Sons of God may peep through, and behold a glimpse of their future
glory; but their eyes can never be so fully opened while they are in the flesh,
as to behold the greatness of their glory, and the perfection of their
happiness. Gorran.
Our glory is like a candle held in our hands, covered with our fingers,
through which, but a little of the light can be seen. Indeed in some sort our
glory is revealed in the Gospel, in that we know that it shall be; but the
fullness of it is sealed up to the day of Redemption, then shall it appear what
the Saints are: Therefore in Jude ver. 6. the day of Judgment is called the
Great Day, (especially) because it shall be a day of great Light; now it is
Light that makes the day, and the more light the more day; now in this day of
Judgment there shall be abundance of light, a full discovery of things and
persons, then shall the happiness of the Saints be more fully manifest, and
things shall really then appear as they are; the greatest discoveries here are
imperfect to that which they shall be on that day; then God shall make it
appear to all the World who are, and who are not the Sons of God; then shall
all hidden things be made manifest, Luke 12. 2. That is the time for the
declaration of the righteous judgment of the Lord, Romans 2.5.

SECT. III.
THE excellent glory of the Saints is hidden from them, for these reasons:

Reas. 1. Because God would try his Children, whether they would trust him or
no. Whether they would believe his promises of happiness, and cast themselves
upon God for the accomplishment of his promises of eternal happiness. Where
were faith if God should make their future glory to appear to them otherwise
then by promise that they shall be glorious? Should God take his Children, and
carry them up upon a Mount, as he did Moses, and there show them their future
glory; or take them up into the Third Heaven, as he did Paul, and there let
them enjoy the beatifical vision; how should faith be the substance of things
hoped for, how should faith then be the evidence of things not seen? what are
the things the Saints hope for? is it not life everlasting? is it not
unspeakable glory? is it not their complete happiness? and are not these the
things that are not seen? if these things were in view already, if these things
did appear to them as the Sun, how could faith be the substance of things hoped
for? how could it be the evidence of things not seen? no, God will not here
suffer their glory to appear, but will have them live the life of faith in his
promises of glory and eternal happiness, before he will open Heaven to them,
and give them an actual possession of the heavenly Mansions, and set the
glorious Crown of Righteousness upon their heads.

Reas. 2. Because God would try whether we would be content to suffer for him,
and to do any thing for him; whether we would be willing to deny our selves, to
become the objects of scorn and contempt; whether we would walk in his ways,
though they are somewhat ruggid, and hedged in with sharp thorns; whether we
(as Moses) would choose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; whether we would prize the
reproaches of Christ above riches, more then the Treasures of Egypt, and be
content with his promise of future glory. If the future glory and unspeakable
happiness of God's Children should for the present be made manifest; if God
should open the windows of Heaven as he did to Stephen, when he was to be
stoped and let us see the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, having Crowns of glory in his hands, and Robes of honor, and Palms of
Victory in his hands, to bestow upon such as would endure reproach for his
Namesake, and suffer any thing whatsoever God calls them to, there is no
question but the sight of this glory would make us all ready to be stoned with
Stephen, to be sawn asunder with Isaias, to be imprisoned with Joseph, to
suffer with the people of God with Moses; then we should esteem every
reproachful contempt for Christ's sake more precious then the fairest Jewels:
but God does not suffer our future glory to appear, because he will try if men
will suffer for him, and do his will, and trust themselves for glory hereafter:
they that will sing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, in the next life, must
swim through the Sea of glass mingled with fire in this life, Rev. 15.2. Every
one that looks for glory in the next life, must make account of the Cross, more
or less in this life; the way to Heaven is strewed with Crosses, and we must
think it rather an honor then a labor to follow Christ our Master, as
Alexander's Soldiers followed him through Mountains of Snow.

Reas 3. Because a future manifestation of their glorious happiness, will make
more for the glory of Christ, then if it did now appear, 2 These. 1.10. When he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that do
believe, at the day of Judgment. That day of horror, that day of shame, is the
day of the manifestation of the glory of Christ, and of the glory of the Saints
of God; then Christ will be wonderfully glorified in the glorification of his
Saints; and then Christ shall be admired in all them that do believe. The
Angels, all the Saints, the Wicked, and the Devils themselves, will be filled
with admiration, and be astonished at the infinite love of Christ, in bestowing
such glory upon all Believers. Wicked men will be astonished at it, and admire
Christ in their glory, when they shall see those poor contemned men among them
to be so glorified above their expectation; what will wicked men say? what! is
yonder man in Heaven? I did scorn him, I did despise him upon the Earth: What
will another say? Is that man in Heaven? I saw him burnt at a Stake; I saw this
man imprisoned, that man banished; this man worried, that man cast out of all
that he had; and now, behold their glory! behold their happiness! They will see
and wonder at it, to see what glory and honor Christ has clothed them with;
then will they cry out, we never thought to see such poor despised wretches
(whom we accounted the offscouring of the world) to be in such glory: so
likewise, how will the Saints themselves admire Christ? how will they stand
wondering at themselves, that they should be so glorious, so happy? how will
they admire the love of Christ, that should freely bestow such unspeakable love
upon them? then will the Saints say to Christ, Lord, what am I, that thou
should thus honor me? what glory do thou cast upon such a worm as I am?
Lord, I have suffered but little for thee, I have done nothing for thee, that
thou should thus glorify me.

Reas. 4. Therefore their glory does not yet appear, because the Sons of God,
while they are in these earthly houses, are not fit for such glory; mortality
is no fit subject to have immortal glory to be put upon it; these mortal Bodies
of ours, are not fit to be invested with the Robes of incorruptible honor:
yea, these Bodies of ours, wherein sin lives, are not fit to enjoy communion
with God, who is of purer eyes then to behold any unclean thing; no, there must
be a dissolution of these earthly tabernacles; mortality must be swallowed up
of life; this corruptible, must put on incorruption; this mortal, must put on
immortality; then, and not before, shall the surpassing glory of the Saints
appear: as Christ says, we must not put new wine into old bottles, nor patch
an old garment with a piece of new cloth; thus Christ will not put the
soul-ravishing joys of Heaven into these old bottles; nor will he patch up
these fading perishing Bodies with the glory of Angels.

Reas. 5. That he might quicken their desires after their glory; that our
hearts may pant after those Waterbrooks, those Rivers of Pleasure; that we may
cry out with Monica, the Mother of St. Augustine, in her ravishing
contemplation of Heaven, volemus in Coelum, volemus in Coelum; let us fly, let
us fly into Heaven: or as Austin himse^f, fontem vitae, sitio, esurio; I
thirst, I greedily long after the fountain of life.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1.
ALbeit the unspeakable glory of Believers be for the present hidden, yet in
due time it shall be revealed. Colos. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. Before Christ shall appear
in the brightness of his glory, we shall not; but when the time of his
appearing in glory shall come, then shall all the Saints manifestly appear with
him.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, What is the glory that shall be revealed?

Resp. 1. The glory of God himself; God will manifest and display his glory
before them; we shall see God as fully and clearly as we are capable, by God's
immediate communication of himself to us without any external means, 1 Cor.
15.24. God will be all, and in all; that is, God the Father, Son, Holy Ghost,
will then reign immediately over his Church by himself, without any outward
means; and will fill his Church with his own light, life, love and glory. It is
a disputed case, whether we shall see God with our bodily eyes? it is answered,
that the Essence of God being purely spiritual, cannot be seen with bodily
eyes; and God is styled by the Apostle, absolutely invisible. Again, the Angels
behold the glory of God, and the Souls of the Saints now in Heaven see him, but
have not eyes; therefore the sight of God is rather an act of the mind, then of
the Body; intellectual knowledge, not corporeal light: But though we shall not
with our eyes see the Divine Essence, yet the Divine Essence will abundantly
manifest it self in the Humane Nature of Christ now glorified to our eyes; they
shall see him, God in him, his Attributes in him: in this life the Ordinances
are a Glass to give us the sight of God; in Heaven the Humane Nature of Christ
is a Glass to give our bodily eyes the sight of God.

2. The glory of Christ shall be revealed; his glory as Head of the Church, as
Savior of the Body to which he is united; his glory as Judge of the World
shall be revealed; it is said of him, that he shall appear in glory, Colos.
3.4. and that he shall come in his own glory, and in the glory of his Father,
and in the glory of his holy Angels, Luke 9.26. and his appearing to judge the
World, is called a glorious appearing, Tit. 2.13. His first appearing was mean,
the second shall be glorious.

SECT. II.
THe Reasons that the appearing of Christ shall be glorious, are these:

1. Because God has appointed Christ to judge the World; therefore Christ will
in the latter day appear gloriously: whom God appointed to be the Savior of
the World, him has God appointed to judge the World, John 5.22. Christ is
God's Delegate to judge the World; God will have his Judge to appear in glory.
Earthly Kings will have their itinerary Judges to appear in pomp, and to judge
Malefactors; they appear both in terror and honor; how do all the Gentry give
their attendance? how are they attended with Spear-men, and the Trumpets
sounding before them, and are invested with Robes of honor? Thus God will have
his Judge of all the World to appear in glory upon his Tribunal, and therefore
charge all the Angels of Heaven to attend his glorious Majesty; charge the
Archangels to sound the Trump to awaken the sleepy Prisoners in the Grave, the
dark Prison of Death: think ye what a glorious appearance it will be. If Peter
was amazed at Christ upon Mount Tabor, when he saw but a glimpse of his glory
at the Transfiguration; what appearance will that be, when Christ shall come in
the brightness of his glory, and all the Angels and Saints with him clothed in
brightness of glory?

2. Because Christ will be glorious before those that did dishonor him: Christ
did appear to men in the form of a Servant, then he was a despised, a rejected
Christ; then was he crowned with a Crown of Thorns, and had no better Scepter
then a Reed; then was he a reviled, a buffeted Christ; the malicious Jews did
most contumeliously spit on his face, and every Sinner would contradict, oppose
and persecute him; then was he a crucified Christ, a Man of sorrows and of
shame; every one looked upon him as a despised Man, none would own him for the
Son of God: yea, the Jews did accuse him for Blasphemy, for telling them that
he was the Son of God; therefore Christ will appear in glory one day, to the
horror and terror of these men that did thus blasphemously abuse him that was
King of Kings, that did reject him that came to save them, that so Christ might
be glorified before them, and upon them, in taking vengeance on their Souls and
Bodies; then those that did mock at him, put a Crown of Thorns on his head, a
Reed in his hand, shall see he was Heir of a better Crown then the Crowns of
the greatest Kings and Emperors; then they that did contumeliously spit upon,
and buffet him in scorn, shall see they did this to one whom the Angels
reverence: he will make Kings to throw down their Crowns and Scepters to his
feet; then those that scorned and despised him, shall see that verily he is the
Son of God.

3. Because glory is terrible: the more glorious Christ appears at the last
day, the more terror will be upon the wicked; therefore the glorious appearing
of Christ to judge the World, is called the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.11. If
the sight of one Angel in glory be terrible, what will the sight of Christ be,
who will appear ten thousand times more glorious then all the Angels be? if
godly men, that had good consciences, were so horribly affrighted at the
appearance of an Angel in lesser glory, how will wicked men, that have accusing
consciences, be afraid at the beholding Christ's glorious appearance? if holy
men were so amazed at good tidings, because brought to them by a glorious
Messenger, how will wicked men be amazed to hear the sentence of condemnation
pronounced against them by the Lord of glory? To see God in Christ, is the
unspeakable happiness of the Saints in Heaven; and to behold Christ as a Judge
sitting upon the Tribunal, will be one of the greatest tormenting punishments
of damned men and Devils. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with
his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance, etc. 2 These. 1.7, 8. He
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his holy Angels; there is the glorious
Majesty of Christ: and in flaming fire, taking vengeance, etc. there is the
amazing terror of his glorious appearing. Our Savior says, Matthew. 24.29, 30.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light; and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and
the powers of Heaven shall be shaken; and then shall appear the Sign of the Son
of Man in Heaven; and then shall all the Kinreds of the Earth mourn: and they
shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great
glory: And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four Winds, and from one end of the
Heavens to the other.

Consider here the Signs foregoing his coming, verse 29. the Sun, Moon, and
Stars shall lose their light in a strange and wonderful manner, as it were
hiding their faces at the coming of the Sun of Righteousness. The Stars shall
fall from Heaven, the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken.] The higher and more
glorious parts of the Creation shall suffer a wonderful alteration at his
coming. Then shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man.] Which Musculus and
Arelius take to be the Sign of the Cross, which should be gloriously displayed
in the eyes of the World, both for terror to all the Enemies of his Cross, and
for the joy of all that believe in Christ crucified. But others take it for
Christ himself, showing himself in the same Humane Nature wherein he suffered,
now gloriously appearing for the confusion of his Enemies, and full redemption
of his Servants. Then shall all the wicked of all Nations mourn, their guilty
consciences being surprised with unspeakable horror at the sight of their
Judge, whom they shall see coming, as in a Chariot of Clouds, armed with power,
and shining in glory, sending forth his Angels by sound of Trumpet, to summons
all the Elect that sleep in the dust in any part of the World, to come and give
their attendance upon Christ their glorious Redeemer.

In Matthew. 16.27. you have the coming of Christ expressed, and his acts to be
performed at his coming. His coming is magnified by the glorious Majesty of his
Father, wherein he shall appear, and those blessed Attendants which should
follow him: For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, etc.

Quest. But it may be doubted, why Christ should be said to come in the glory
of his Father, since it shall be his own glory wherein he shall appear?

Resp. It may be said to be the glory of his Father in three respects.

1. To show his unity in Essence with the Father; in that he comes in the
glory of his Father, he shall come in his own glory; according to that of our
Savior, I and the Father are one.

2. By comparing the Humiliation of his Person here in the flesh, with the
glory of the Divine Nature shining perfectly in the Father, even at that time
when it was Ecclipsed and veiled in him by the human Nature: so that in this
speech he compares the meaness of a Servant wherein he now appeared, with the
glory of his Father wherein then he should appear.

3. It was the glory of the Father, because the Father has committed all
Judgment to him; and after this his glorious coming he is to deliver up the
Kingdom to God the Father; and therefore in the mean time he is said to come in
the glory of the Father.

4. To which perhaps may be added a fourth: That the glory of the Father
shines in the Son, who is the Image of God, and the brightness of his Father's
glory. All the glory of the Sun, Moon, and Stars meeting together, are nothing
comparable to this glory of the Father, wherein Christ shall show himself at
his coming. The glory of all Earthly Kingdoms viewed at one Landscape (as the
Devil showed them our Savior) were nothing to that fullness of glory wherein
our Blessed Savior shall reveal himself. The glory of his abasement was
wonderful, when the Star lighted the way to his lodging, an Angel brought word
from Heaven of his Conception, and then of his Nativity; when the Devil left
him, and the Victory to him, and Angels came to Minister unto him, when Devils
roared, and left their Possessions at his call; when Winds and Waves were
silent at a Word of his mouth; when Loaves and dead Fishes, multiplied upon his
blessings upon the Table, or between the Teeth of the Eaters; when all sorts of
diseases gave place, and Death it self yielded up her dead at his command. And
yet beloved, that difference shall be between the glory of Christ at his
coming, and this of his abasement, which is between the glory of the Father,
and the despised meanness of a Servant. Moreover the glory of Christ shall be
magnified by the blessed attendants that shall follow him; and they are his
Angels: at that day they shall be employed as his special Instruments in
gathering the Wheat into his Barn, and binding up the Tares to be burnt with
fire unquenchable: O faithful Soul! how joyfully should thou expect this
blessed meeting! O how happy will that day be, when the holy Angels of Christ
shall come to meet thee rising from the Dead, and with abundance of joy shall
embrace and welcome thee to thine everlasting home! While thou art solitary,
forsaken, and despised in the World, comfort thy self in expectation of this
blessed society, with whom thou shall remain for ever, with whom thou shall
join in sweetest Hallelujahs and words of Praise, to him that sits upon the
Throne for evermore. Ear has not heard the sweetness of those Songs, wherein
the Saints shall join with those blessed Angels.

SECT. III.
THe glory of the Saints themselves shall be revealed, they shall appear with
Christ in glory.

1. Their appearance in glory with Christ in Judgment, will make the coming of
Christ more glorious and terrible. When Earthly Kings will show the glory of
their Kingdom, they will always have a pompous train to follow them: thus
Christ the greatest of Kings, delighting to manifest his glory, will come
attended with glorious Troops of Angels and Saints.

2. Because it will make much for the glorifying of the Saints, and that two
ways.

1. Because they shall come as Judges, and shall sit upon Thrones Judging the
Wicked; how will wicked men quake, when they shall appear before those godly
men, whom they hated and derided: now the Saints shall Judge the World, 1 Cor.
6.2.

1. Assistendo, they shall be as Assistants of Christ, they shall assist as so
many Justices with Christ, who is the Lord-chief-Justice of Heaven and Earth.

2. Approbando: They shall approve and applaud his judgment: they shall sit on
Thrones of Everlasting glory, and shall (as Gods Assessours) give their voices
and consents unto his just Judgment against the Wicked.

3. Testificative: They shall bring in evidence against the Wicked, so that all
their mouths shall be stopped. The godly shall then be heard to speak, and
shall say to Christ, Lord, this is the man that hated me, scoft at me,
persecuted and oppressed me.

2. It will make much for the Saints glory, that they shall appear glorious in
the open sight of the whole world. The Saints shall see the Damnation of the
Wicked, and the Wicked shall see the glorious Salvation of the Saints, and
their happiness; their appearing with Christ in glory will make much for their
glory, Quia unumquodque ex comparatione contrarii magis cognoscitur, Because
every thing is more known by comparing it with that which is contrary to it.
The misery of War shows us the happiness of Peace. The blackness of darkness
commends the comfort of Light: So the misery of Hell will make Heaven the
more glorious: Angels shall then admire at the glory of the Saints: He that
confesses me before men, him will I confess before the Angels: that is,
glorify him before them, Luke 12.8. says our Savior. Moreover, the godly
themselves shall mutually admire one another Glory, and admire Christ in one
another: Peter shall admire Christ in the glory conferred on Paul, and Paul
shall admire Christ in the glory conferred on Peter, they shall mutually
rejoice in each others glory; as here on Earth they do mourn and grieve for one
another in afflictions, in Heaven they shall rejoice in one another's glory,
Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. Sitting at Table shows
mutual delight in one another society.

Christ will have his Saints to behold the Damnation of the Wicked, that so
they might admire the free grace of God, and glorify his Name, that he should
deliver them from so great Damnation: Luke 13.28. And God will have the Wicked
to behold the glory of the Saints, that so the Wicked may in vain miserably
torment themselves with envy at the surpassing glory and happiness of the
Saints, and that they may also curse and torment themselves with inward grief,
that they should be such fools as to lose such glory, as the Saints do enjoy;
then will they cry out, Oh we might have had those Crowns as well as they, but
now we must have the vials of Wrath powered upon our heads, instead of having
Crowns of glory set upon them: we must now keep company with Devils and
Infernal Fiends in Hell, when we might have enjoyed communion with God and his
Angels in Heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
1. IS there unspeakable glory to be revealed in the Saints hereafter; then be
not troubled at your present state, whatever it is; O ye righteous, let not
your present mean, obscure, base condition in the World trouble your hearts,
but lift up your heads because of the glory which shall be revealed; be not
troubled at the shame of the Cross, be not terrified with the rage and cruelty
of ungodly men at any time, fear none of these things, because it is your
Fathers will to give you a Kingdom of glory. Bid afflictions welcome for
glories-sake, bid reproaches welcome for glories-sake; let this comfort thy
Soul in all abasements and pressures, yet I shall be glorified: the World is
pleased to reveal their malice in me, but my God will reveal glory in me: the
World reveals their hatred against me, but my God will reveal his love in me;
how despicable soever I am at this present, yet I shall appear in glory.

You know the glory of Christ was hidden for thirty three years; though he was
the Lord of glory, yet how despicable and contemptible was he? all men scorned
him, rejected him, mocked him, persecuted him; but now he is in glory, and will
one day appear in glory to the World: put case thou shall pass as many years in
reproaches, and afflictions, yet thou shall appear in glory together with
Christ, and thou do at present but drink of the same Cup the Lord of glory
drank of before thee. Ye that are afflicted for Righteousness sake, what cause
have ye to count it all joy, for if any have more abundantly revelations of
glory in them, undoubtedly they have who have abounded in sufferings for Christ.

This should work in us a blessed contempt of all the torments and cruelties
that Hell or Earth can invent, or execute; a few hours in Heaven will make
amends for all the tortures of this life, were every torture an Hell to us: Oh
the perfection, beauty, glory, and transcendent excellency of those joys which
shall be revealed in that day.

2. The consideration of the revelation of this glory may fortify our Spirits
against all fears and dangers; though the thing feared be not present, yet
fears are many times present with us; there is enough in this consideration to
raise our hearts above fears; the hope of this revelation heightens a
Christians courage, gives him the Almighty for his second, and makes him
Triumph over all his fears, and overcome all difficulties: this has so
fortified many Saints and Martyrs that they have even laughed at Tyrants and
Devils, the greatest cruelty being not able to ravish from them what they
loved: the hope of eternal glory will strengthen the heart against the worst of
fears and dangers which the worst of times and men can threaten: were this hope
well kept up, it would carry a believer through a whole Sea of trouble; and the
rougher the Sea proved, the nearer would the Soul be carried to the Haven.

3. This likewise may strengthen the hearts of God's Children against the
present snares, which Sin, Satan, or the World, can lay before them; since
there shall be a Revelation of glory in us, what Soul is there that is
prevented and engaged with the love of God, that may not see good ground to
disdain all the offers that a sinful world can make him to ensnare his Soul; as
Abraham did not only reject the offers of the King of Sodom, but did it with
disdain, Genesis 14.23. The most high God was Abraham's portion, therefore he
would not be beholden to a wicked King for any thing, no not so much as a
shoelatchet; he would not be so injurious to the possessour of Heaven and
Earth: so when a child of God is tempted to that which is evil, with present
honors, profits, and preferments in the world, this will make him with a holy
disdain to refuse these proffers that the World, and the God of the World make
unto him, because of the glory that shall be revealed in him: the promises of
the World are very false, and those imaginary contentments it allures us with,
gives us nothing but real torments in the end.

CHAP. IX. Shows that the Creatures themselves do earnestly and continually
expect the manifestation of the Glorious state of the Godly.
SECT. I.
MOreover, that there shall a time come when God shall make manifest and
illustrious the glory of his Children, is evident from that instinct that God
has put into the Creatures to wait for that time; for St. Paul tells us in the
nineteeth verse of this eighth Chapter to the Romans, That the earnest
expectaction of the Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God.
St. Peter in his Epist. 2.3.16. tells us, that there are some things in Paul's
Epistles which are hard to be understood; in the number of those Mysteries,
this Text of St. Paul is one. And Musculus Muscul. in loc.
conceives that St. Peter principally aims at this nineteenth verse, and the
three following verses. I am sure it is a most mysterious Mystery; The fervent
expectation of the Creature waits: (...), the expectation expects.] So it
is word for word: It is an Hebraism; the Hebrews when they would express the
greatness, or earnestness of a thing, do it by doubling the word, as thus, in
seeing, I see; in hearing, I hear; in flying, I fly: so here the Apostle, to
express the vehement expectation of the Creature, doubleth the word; the
expectation expects; the Creatures expect, they expect. The Apostle uses an
elegant word (...), which word signifies the gesture of such who earnestly
expect something with the head stretched out; or put forth the head, looking
every way to behold the thing expected, as Sisera's Mother put her head forth
the window, looking when Sisera would come: so the Creature does as it were put
forth the head, looking when the Sons of God shall appear in glory; crying as
it were, Why are they so long ere they come and appear?

Quest. What is here meant by the Creature?

Resp. Some understand by the Creature, the Heavens and the Earth, with all
their ornaments, the continens and the contentum: but Beza Beza in loc.
understands thereby, the World, or Universe, consisting of the visible
Heavens and Earth, which is said here to expect, not the Creatures in it: And
the truth of this will appear, by showing that it cannot be meant of Angels, of
the Church, of the new Creature, Men, etc.

I. By Creature, we cannot understand the Angels, that they do earnestly expect
this manifestation, as Origin Origin ad loc.
thinks;

1. Because the Apostle speaks of such a Creature as is made subject to vanity
for the sin of Man, so the Angels are not; there is no shadow of privative
vanity in any of the glorious Angels, they are perfectly holy, perfectly,
immutably happy.

2. Again, he speaks of the Creature which is subject to a bondage of
corruption; the Angels are not subject to any such bondage: every word in these
verses makes against this Opinion. Origin thinks, that because the Angels are
now ministering Spirits to the Sons of God, and because Angels are set over
Kingdoms and Provinces, and to manage Wars for and against Kingdoms, hence they
are subject to some vanity: I answer, though the Angels do minister to the
Saints, yet this is not vanity, neither is it against their wills thus to
minister; for seeing it is the will of God they should attend on his People,
they do it with all readiness of mind; their greatest delight is to please God.
Their Presidency over Kingdoms and Wars, is to restrain and direct them
according to God's command, without any vanity or corruption in them; it is
part of man's vanity and misery to be employed in Wars, it is a bondage of
corruption to him; but not to Angels, who are both Spectators and Actors
without corruption.

3. It cannot be denied, but that the Angels do earnestly desire the glory of
the Sons of God, but they do not groan together with us, and are not in pain
together with us: therefore it must be meant of other Creatures, not of Angels.

SECT. II.
II. IT cannot be understood of the new Creature in Man, the Image of God
renewed by the Spirit of Christ in righteousness and holiness, as some would
have it; for although grace begun tends to a glorious perfection, and it
desires its own perfection, yet,

1. It cannot be said to be subjected to vanity, to corruption.

2. The Apostle opposes the first Fruits of the Spirit, which is the new
Creature, or Grace in us, to this Creature which waits, expects, and
groaneth; when he says, not only they, [that is the Creature] but we also who
have the first Fruits of the Spirit.

3. Because in Scripture, the word [Creature] is never singly added to Grace;
but ever with an addition, the new Creature.

III. It cannot be meant of the Church; for so the Socinians understand by
Creatures, the Church of God; and by them who have the first Fruits of the
Spirit, the Apostles; and make this sense, for the godly, or Church of the
godly, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God; and not only the
godly, but we also [the Apostles] who have the first Fruits of the Spirit. How
absurd this sense is, these Arguments will evince us.

1. Because the Creature is opposed to the Sons of God; if by Creature be meant
the Godly, then this should be the sense, the Godly do wait for the
manifestation of the Godly; the Sons of God wait for the manifestation of the
Sons of God.

2. This sense utterly subverts the scope of the Apostle, who proves that the
Sons of God shall be manifested, from the Creatures expectation; therefore some
other Creature must be understood.

3. The Apostle tells us afterward, the godly do groan, wait, and hope for this
manifestation; for, says he, not only they, but we also.

Object. They object by [we] in this place, is meant the Apostles.

Sol. It cannot be so; because whatsoever is here said, pertains to all the
Sons of God.

1. Because all the Godly, as well as the Apostles, have the first Fruits of
the Spirit, verse 23.

2. Because all the Godly, as well as the Apostles, are saved by hope, verse 24.

3. Because all the Godly, as well as the Apostles, with patience wait for it,
verse 25.

4. Because all the Godly, as well as the Apostles, have the Spirit to help
their infirmities, verse 26. It cannot therefore be meant of the Apostles in
opposition to the Godly, but it is to be understood promiscuously of Apostles,
and all the Godly.

SECT. III.
IV. BY Creature cannot be understood. Mankind, as Augustine and Cajetan think,
who (from Mark 16. Go, preach the Gospel to every Creature) say, by Creature,
must necessarily there be understood Mankind, preach the Gospel to every Man;
and think that in this place also man is meant, and so make the sense thus; for
the earnest expectation of every Man waits, etc. Now for answer to this:

1. It must be granted, that in this word [Creature] Man is included; but it is
not to be meant only of Man, yea, not to be meant of Man, but of all the
Creatures made for Man's use.

2. Because if by Creature Man be understood, then either it is meant of godly
Men, or of wicked Men, or of Man in general.

1. It cannot be understood that by Creature godly Men are meant, for the
Reasons above mentioned; the Creatures and they are opposed; not only they, but
we also.

2. It cannot be meant of wicked Men, for they shall not be partakers of this
glory; they desire not the day of this manifestation, they wish in their hearts
it may never come; they are in pain because of the thoughts of such a day; they
groan for fear of the day of the manifestation of the Sons of God; if they
might have their wish, they would live for ever here in this World, wallowing
in sin and sensual delights, and take Heavens glory who will for them.

3. The Greek words (...); una suspirat, una parturit; groaneth together, and
is in travel together] must be meant of other Creatures besides Man; with whom
do they groan and travel together, but with us Men, with us Sons of God?

SECT. IV.
HEnce it is clear, that by Creature we must understand the World or Universe.

Quest. But here a Question will arise, Whether it be meant only of the Heavens
and the Earth, or together with them all Creatures within the visible Heavens
and Earth? whether the continens, and not the contentum, or both Mundus
continens and contentus?

Resp. It is hard to determine; some eminent Divines do conceive, that only
Mundus continens, the visible Heavens and Earth do expect and groan for this
manifestation, and not the Mundus contentus, the Creatures within them, thus
Beza; Beza in loc.
and so he interprets the word, Mundus conditus, the World which is made
expects the manifestation of the Sons of God; but why (...) should thus be
restrained, he gives no reason. Others conceive that all the Creatures with
them do expect, the Sun, Moon, the Stars, the Elements, the Beasts of the
Field, the Fowls of the Air, Trees and Plants of the Earth, all Creatures which
God at first made for the use and service of Man, and for the perfect ornament
of the World; for these Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because all creatures which God made for man, and the perfection of
the World, are for man's sin subjected to vanity and corruption under the same
curse; therefore all do expect and groan to be delivered from this bondage of
corruption; because it is said, that the creature which is under bondage does
groan; all creatures are in bondage, therefore they do groan.

2. Because it is said, verse 22. (...), omnis creatura: What these words
signify, Cameron Comeron in loc.
is positive; Profecto nihil aliud quam totum Vniversum significat; truly it
signifies nothing else but the whole Universe. Why the Heavens and the Earth,
without the ornaments and creatures in them, should be called the whole
Creation, to me it is irrational.

SECT. V.
Quest. 2. WE are in the next place to enquire, What is meant by the
manifestation of the Sons of God?

Resp. Erasmus gives this sense, that the Sons of God may be made public; Beza
and Calvin think it rather relates to their glory, that the glory of the Sons
of God may be made manifest; that it may appear how desirable and blessed the
state and condition of the godly is, when they shall have put off corruption,
and put on incorruptible glory.

Quest. 3. How the Creature is here said to wait and expect, some question;
because the words [expectation and hope, etc.] are here attributed to the
Creature, there are some that think it cannot be meant inanimate creatures void
of sense, and of animate creatures who are void of reason.

Resp. 1. In answer to this, you are to know, it is usual in Scripture to
attribute sense and reason both to senseless and sensitive creatures, by a
figure called Prosopopeia, feigning them to be Persons: as when God calls to
the Heavens and Earth, Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth: Be astonished, O
ye Heavens; All such phrases are but figurative speeches: so here, when it is
said, the Creature groaneth, hops, expects, labors, they are but
figurative speeches; the Holy Ghost feigning the whole Creation as a Person
expecting and groaning for this glory: he makes whole Nature to speak and
groan, when affording words unto her sorrow, he makes her wish our change, and
her deliverance.

2. The Creature may be said earnestly to expect this glorious manifestation in
two respects.

1. In respect of that natural instinct which is in every creature, forcibly
inclining them to their first created perfection, of which for the sin of man
they are deprived, which makes the creature restless till it does attain to it:
This natural tendency to a better state, is that which the Apostle calls hope,
and expectation, groaning, etc. A learned man expresses it by this similitude;
As the Needle in the Mariner's Compass, has a natural inclination to the North
Pole, from which if it be removed, it shakes, trembles, and is in continual
motion, never resting, till it comes and be settled toward the North again: So
it is with the Creature, Sin has put the whole Creation out of order, it
cannot do that good for which God at first made the creatures; therefore they
hope, wait, groan, are in pain and t^avel, till they be set in order again, and
attain to their primitive and more glorious state and condition.

2. They may be said to wait for this glorious Manifestation, because the whole
Creation continues in that State and order, wherein now it is by reason of
Sin, though subject to such infinite variations, alterations, corruptions and
decays: when the Apostle says, The Creature was made subject to vanity, not
willingly, he thereby insinuates, that they are corrupted by Sin; and when he
adds, that the Creature it self shall also be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, he makes it evident, that Jesus Christ will satisfy their desires,
and that he will restore to them what we by reason of our Sins have unjustly
bereft them of; for the corruption which they complain of, is not that which
they have received from nature, but that which they have attracted from our
Sin. Musculus Muscul. in Loc.
on this place says, If we would but seriously consider and observe, under
what vanity and corruption the whole Creation labors, we would admire that
ever the World should continue.

Now the reason why they do so earnestly expect, is because they would be fully
serviceable to their Creator, they would be in such a state, as may render
them perfectly conducible to the glory of their Creator: it is their
unhappiness and misery that Sin has rendered them so much unserviceable to him;
it is against their will says the Apostle; it is against their very natural
instinct and inclination that they must be slaves and drudges to sinful
Rebels: Moreover, the Creatures by a natural instinct do naturally tend to
their own highest and ultimate perfection: Sin spoiled them of it, and keeps
them from this perfection, but this natural inclination is still in the
Creature; perfection and duration is the desire of all Creatures: But this
perfection shall not, and cannot be enjoyed by the Creature, till there be a
manifestation of the Sons of God: hence it is said, they earnestly expect that
manifestation: the Saints expect Christ's manifestation in glory, for till he
appear, they shall not appear in glory: The Creatures expect their appearance,
for till the Sons of God appear, they shall not be delivered from their vanity
and corruption.

SECT. VI.
NOW if the Creature who shall not have any answerable measure of glory (but be
only brought into glorious liberty, not into glory it self, as Calvin Calvin in
Loc.
notes) does thus wait for this glorious manifestation, how much more should
we whom it mainly concerns, and for whose sakes that day was created and
ordained, and who shall enjoy a fullness of glory in comparison of them, how
should we wait all the days of our appointed time, till our change shall come?
This expectation of the Creature should teach the godly (whose duty it is to
expect) to long for, to hasten to the manifestation of this glory: Solomon
sends the Sluggard to the Pismire, and bids him learn of him diligence and
industry; the same may be said to the godly man; Go to the Creature thou dull
and sloathful man, and learn of the Creature to look for, and to be more and
more in expectation of the manifestation of thine own glory.

The Creatures expect when you shall be manifested in glory: is it not a shame
then to those who are Sons and Heirs of glory, not to expect their own glory?
the Creatures lift up their eyes to Heaven, crying, How long Lord! is it not a
shame then to the Sons of God, that they should cast their eyes down to the
Earth, on the glory of it which passes away like a Flower of the Field? The
creatures put forth their heads, and cry, why are the wheels of the Chariot so
long in coming? is it not a shame then for the Sons of God to hang their heads
down? is it not a shame to us, that senceless creatures should be earnest, and
we slack in our expectation? shall senceless creatures outstrip those who are
endued with reason and grace? shall their hope outstrip our hope? If you
believe there shall be such a manifestation, and that you in particular shall
be manifested to be the Sons of God, show me your faith by your earnest
expectation; you have but poor desires of Christ's coming, and your own glory,
whose expectation is so cold and faint: if the creatures were to be partakers
of that very glory that you shall be, how much more earnest would they be in
expecting the manifestation of it? the very cause why we do not more earnestly
expect our glorious manifestation, is our earthlymindedness; we mind Earth so
much, therefore do we expect Heaven so little.

CHAP. X. Shows there is no comparison, or equality, between a Believer's
present sufferings, and his future glory.
SECT. I.
THe next Proposition I shall lay down from this Text, is, that there is no
comparison, proportion, or equality, between the present sufferings of the
Saints, and their glory that shall be revealed; their present afflictions are
not worthy to be laid in the balance with glory; comparisons between them are
odious: we should not speak of our afflictions on that day we speak of glory.
That there is no comparison, or proportion between them, will appear, if we
consider the ensuing particulars.

I. If you look at the things themselves which you suffer for the present, and
what you shall enjoy hereafter, there is no more comparison between them, then
there is between a Molehill and the Sun; a drop, and the sea of Water; a
little pibble, and a rock of Diamonds.

1. You suffer perhaps the loss of goods; you shall enjoy God who is all
goodness; what comparison is there betwixt the Creature and the Creator? all
the Nations of the World are but as a drop of a Bucket before him; what then
are thy goods, thy riches to God himself?

2. Suppose you suffer the loss of Houses and Lands, you shall possess a great
Kingdom; fear not, little flock, it is your Father's pleasure to give you a
Kingdom: what comparison is there between thy earthly possessions and that
heavenly Kingdom? the whole Earth in comparison of the Heavens is but a point;
what are thy Houses and Lands to that heavenly Kingdom?

3. Do you suffer mockings, revilings, evil speakings, reproaches before men,
and from men? Christ will confess you before his Father, and before his holy
Angels: what are men's revilings and defamations, to the confession of Christ
before an innumerable company of glorious Angels?

4. Perhaps you suffer imprisonment, you may lie in nasty dungeons, your feet
may be in the stocks, your hands manacled, what are these things to the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God which they shall enjoy, when you shall walk
at large in Heaven, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes? here ye are men's
Prisoners, there ye shall be the Lord's Freemen; here ye are fettered
Captives, there you shall be crowned Kings.

5. You may suffer present banishment from your Country, from your Wives,
Children, Parents, Kindred, Friends; in Heaven you shall enjoy communion and
fellowship with God, with Christ, with an innumerable Company of Angels, with
the general Assembly of the Firstborn, and live among all glorious Saints.

6. For the present you may suffer much sorrow, tears may be your meat and
drink continually; but what is your present sorrow to the joy of the Lord, to
the comforts of Heaven, one drop of which falling down from Heaven on the Soul
of a Believer, makes him for the present to rejoice with glorious and
unspeakable joy? what are your dropping tears to the rivers of pleasure which
are at God's right hand.

7. At present you may be put to shame and confusion; men may set crowns of
paper upon your heads, having Devils painted on them, as they did upon John
Huss; or you may have crowns of straw put upon your heads in derision, as some
other Martyrs; or crowns of thorns, as Christ had; but what is this to the
Crown of Glory, the Crown of Righteousness, the Crown of Immortality, which
Christ the righteous Judge will set upon your heads?

8. Put case you suffer death for Christ, of which cup many millions of Heavens
Worthies have drunk; put case it be a shameful tormenting death, a burning, a
sawing asunder, ye are stoned, or buried alive, or starved to death, or torn in
pieces by Lions, whatsoever the death be, it is the worst of evils you can
suffer for Christ; yet what comparison is there between this death, and that
life which you shall live in Heaven? Had you as many lives as hairs on your
heads, (as a Martyr wished he had) had you millions of lives to lose for
Christ, yet the loss of all these are not worthy to be compared to the life
which suffering Christians shall live in Heaven; put all together, and you
shall see there is no comparison between your present sufferings, and your
future enjoyments of good: See what Christ says Mark 10.29, 30. There is no
man that has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundredfold now in this time, etc. There is no comparison between your
present losses and present gains, your present sufferings and present reward;
your present reward is an hundredfold more then all you can lose; the grace of
God is present, the savor of God is present; the right to Heaven which
Believers have for the present, is far above all their present sufferings: Now
if the reward which suffering Christians have in this life be an hundredfold
better then their sufferings, then doubtless their glory in Heaven shall be a
thousand-fold more transcendent.

SECT. II.
II. THere is no proportion or comparison, if you respect the properties of our
present sufferings, and our future glory.

1. There is no comparison between earthly and heavenly things; your present
sufferings are earthly; the goods of which you are spoiled are earthly; your
liberty, your houses, your lives, your joys, your ease, are earthly things, but
your glory is heavenly; every part, every degree of your future glory is
heavenly.

2. There is no proportion between that which is transient, passing away, and
cannot endure, and that which is permanent, enduring; your present sufferings
are transient, they pass away, they endure not. Athanasius said of persecution,
Nubecula est, quae cito transiret. There is nothing more transient and swift
then time; your sufferings pass away together with time, they cannot endure
always; all you which are the subject of them shall not endure always; now your
glory is permanent, it shall abide and endure when time shall be no more.

3. There is no proportion or comparison between a moment and eternity; a
moment, a minute, and for ever and ever: your present sufferings are but for a
moment, a short space of time, your glory is eternal, for ever and for ever;
your pain and torment is but for a moment, your ease and rest is for ever and
ever; your suffering imprisonment is but for a moment, your glorious liberty is
eternal; you suffer death but for a moment, your life is eternal; what
comparison is there between the twinkling of an eye and eternity? You say you
have suffered long, as Asaph, you are plagued every morning; you have been in
bitterness all your days, ever since you began to look after Heaven, you have
been afflicted from your youth up to your age, even to the day of your death:
Grant all this to be true, yet thy whole life is but a moment compared to
eternity, the sufferings of a thousand years is but a moment to eternity; yea,
millions of years are but a moment compared to eternity; nor will they pass for
so much, if we did but consider what eternity is.

4. There is no comparison between light things and heavy; between a feather
and a rock, between chaff and a mountain of lead; your present afflictions are
light, your future glory is ponderous and weighty, 2 Cor. 4.17. observe what a
most elegant opposition the Apostle makes, he opposes glory to afflictions; he
opposes eternal to momentany; he opposes weight to light: and he adds a
most transcendent expression, (...): we translate it, A far more exceeding
weight of glory. Some, by adding some other words, do give this sense, Our
afflictions are out of measure moment any, our glory is out of measure eternal;
our afflictions are out of measure light, our glory is out of measure weighty.
Whatsoever your afflictions are, and how grievous soever they are in
themselves, and how long soever, yet they are but light being compared with the
glory of Heaven, and with the weight of it: If you look only on your
sufferings, and judge of them according to your sense, so they are not light;
but judge of them as opposed to future glory, and so they are out of measure
nothing.

5. Afflictions do not seize on us at all times; Christians have their lucida
intervalla, their moments of ease, as well as their moments of trouble, their
present times of rejoicing, as well as their present times and Now Is of
sorrowing; they, even they have their times to sing and dance, as their times
to weep and mourn: Paul had his raptures as well as his pressures: David had
his time to play on the Harp, as times to hang it up, and there is no Christian
that is afflicted at all times, they have their sad Eclipses but now and then:
but now their glory shall be at all and every moment during eternity; they
shall have perpetual glory without one moment of shame, perpetual joy without
one moment of sorrow; God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, they shall
continually sing for superabundant joy of Soul and Body, their eyes shall ever
see God, they shall not see sorrow any more, they shall be as the Angels of
God, who never felt sorrow since their Creation; they shall be as very
strangers to sorrow, as the Damned shall be to joy: this present time shall be
no more, then the afflictions of this present time shall be no more. That was
an arrogant and false self-deceiving speech of Babylon: Lo, I sit as a Queen,
and shall see no more sorrow. The godly, when taken up into glory, shall say it
truly; now we sit as Kings, and shall not see any sorrow, no not for a moment
whilst eternity lasts: Eternity is nothing else but a perpetual moment of
unspeakable and glorious joy and happiness.

6. There is no proportion, because afflictions are justly due: are ye hated of
all men? ye deserve it, and more, ye deserve to be hated of God, of his Angels
for ever: Are ye cast by men into Prison, into Dungeons? ye deserve it and
more, even to be cast into Hell fire: are ye banished from your Country,
friends, and acquaintance? you deserve that and more, ye deserve to be banished
from Heaven, from your God, from your Savior to Eternity. Are ye spoiled of
your goods? ye deserve it, and more, even to be spoiled of eternal mercies, of
eternal Salvation. Are your bodies condemned to be burnt, or to be cast to
Lions and wild Beasts to tear them to pieces? you deserve this and more, even
to have both body and Soul condemned to Hell fire, to be cast to Devils to be
devoured: ye that sin daily, deserve to suffer daily; ye that have sin in you,
you do deserve that all plagues, miseries, curses, deaths, should make a prey
on your Souls and bodies; but glory is altogether undue, the mere and free gift
of God in Christ: your Title to it is of mere grace, so shall be your
Possession of it, mere grace: you were Elected to glory, Redeemed to glory,
Called to glory, engrafted into Christ by faith, and so become heirs of glory,
before you suffered any thing for Christ. True it is! God has made our
sufferings a condition of the Promise of glory; it is of his own mere pleasure
to ordain our sufferings to be the condition of glory: I may say of this
condition, as Naaman's servant said to him, murmuring at the Prophet, bidding
him go wash in Jordan and be clean; My Lord! if the Prophet had bid thee do a
greater thing, would thou not have done it; how much more, seeing he says,
wash and be clean? so had God required of us harder conditions, Go suffer Hell
torments for Millions of years, and afterward you shall be glorified; should
not we do it? but now when he requires and commands us to suffer afflictions
but for this present time, but for a moment, but for a short life in the World,
shall not we courageously and cheerfully suffer with Christ for this present
time?

7. There is no comparison between afflictions and future glory, if we consider
the subject of both; the subject of afflictions is either our bodies or our
estates, liberties, only outward things; not the Soul: Caesar himself has no
power over that, said the Martyr to his Persecutors: So says our Savior, Fear
not them that can kill the Body; they can (when God permits) kill thy Body,
imprison thy Body, spoil thee of thy goods, expose thy Body to hunger, cold,
nakedness, and such like outward evils, but as for thy Soul, the wrath, the
malice of men cannot reach it: But now the subject of glory is both Soul and
Body; unspeakable glory shall be revealed in your Souls and in your Bodies; God
kills the Souls and Bodies of the Wicked, and he will save the Souls and Bodies
of his People; God will fill the Souls of Believers with knowledge, pureness,
and joy, and their Bodies with immortality and incorruptibility, and Sun-like
splendor; so that they suffer but in part, but shall be glorified in the
whole; they suffer but in these vile Bodies, which are by nature mortal, and
because of sin subject to misery, but both Soul and Body must partake in glory.

8. There is no comparison between them, if we regard the measure and degrees
of our sufferings, and the degrees and measure of future glory: no Christian
suffers in the highest degree, God is pleased to mitigate their sufferings,
and to restrain the rage of their Enemies, that they cannot, they shall not act
according to their wills; he that suffers most may suffer more; but future
glory shall be in the highest degree, to the utmost, as far as our natures are
capable. The measure of our sufferings is not full, pressed down, and running
over, but the measure of glory shall be full, pressed down, and running over;
therefore the Apostle in the same forecited place, 2 Cor. 4.17. says, that
our glory shall be far more exceeding weighty: Observe the gradation.

1. It shall be weighty, when as afflictions in the highest degree are but
light.

2. Glory shall be exceeding weighty, beyond the weight of our afflictions.

3. As if this were too little, he adds [shall be more exceeding weighty.

4. As if this were too little, he adds the word [far] shall be far more
exceeding weighty. The Apostle uses these words, because he could not express
the ultimate degrees of that glory which shall be revealed in suffering
Christians; the future happiness of Believers passes all utterance and
understanding.

9. There is no comparison, if we consider how that we suffer but some one, or
some few evils, but in Heaven we shall receive all kinds of goods, all kinds
and degrees; God gives out sufferings by parcels, but glory in the gross, or
lump; some he permits to be tortured, others to be mocked, others to be
imprisoned, Heb 11.35, 36, 37, 38.
others to be stoned; some to be sawn in sunder, others to wander hither and
thither, to be destitute of necessaries; some suffer one kind of evil, others
another, one does not suffer all; but now their future glory is made up of all
that goodness which God in his wisdom knows conducible to make them eternally
blessed: Oh how great is that goodness which thou have laid up for them that
love thee! cries David, Psalm. 31.19. He gives them drops of sorrow, seas of joy
and comfort; he gives them sparks of torment, and gives them a Sun full of
glory: what goodness is in Heaven, is for their happiness. God placed in
Paradise trees of all sorts for Adam's delight: Heaven is God's own Paradise,
there is nothing wanting there for delight and blessedness: In a word, God
himself will be their glory, he will be all in all to them; his own joy, his
own glory, his own comfort and goodness shall be theirs, they shall then need
nothing.

10. Consider this one thing, and you will see there is no comparison between
them; the afflictions of this present time are common to wicked and godly; they
suffer the same evils from men, but for different causes; the wicked suffer as
evil doers, the godly suffer for doing well. The community of afflictions St.
Paul brings as an argument to persuade Christians to bear the burden
patiently; 1 Cor. 10.13. There is no temptation has taken you, but such as is
common to man. Look over your afflictions under which you groan, and you shall
see other men under the same burden with you: But now this future glory is a
Believers peculiar portion; wicked men may drink of the cup of their
sufferings, but shall not have one drop of their joys; they may endure cruel
mockings, but shall never share with them in honor; that glory is peculiar to
the Saints, reserved only for Believers, makes it the more invaluable: Put case
the light of the Sun were but for some men, and all the rest lived and walked
in darkness, we should judge the state of such men incomparably comfortable
above others; the glory of Heaven is peculiar to Believers, the darkness of
affliction is common to Unbelievers with them, in this respect there is no
comparison.

CHAP. XI.
Use. THis may inform us, what cause Christians have to rejoice, according to
the Apostle's exhortation, when they suffer, and fall into affliction after
affliction; James 1.2. My Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations: Do not only count it joy, but count it all joy; joy in nothing
more then in this, joy only in this, when ye fall into temptations] that is,
afflictions. A strange exhortation to a carnal heart! what! is it all joy to be
mocked, reviled, persecuted, hated, imprisoned, tortured, to have our Bodies
bound at stakes? should it not rather be said, Count this a cause of weeping,
sighing, wringing of hands? No, says the Apostle, count it all joy, when
trouble comes upon trouble, wave upon wave, storm upon storm; when the winds
blow, and the rain falls, and the waves beat upon you, then count it all joy;
call upon your souls to rejoice, call upon your hearts to Magnify God, clap
your hands, leap for joy.

2. It informs us that they are the happy ones of the Earth, who are the
greatest sufferers for Righteousness sake: thus St. James Chap. 1.2. Blessed is
the man that endures temptation, or tribulation. James 5.11. Behold, we count
them happy which endure, says the same Apostle. What a paradox is this to a
man that minds earthly things! Call you him blessed that is imprisoned, in
fetters, in a dungeon, reviled, mocked, tortured, persecuted, hated of all?
count you him an happy man that is spoiled of his goods, destitute of friends,
who is ready to perish through famine? count you a man in misery an happy man?
Yes, says the Apostle, he is a blessed man: we count him happy whom all men
hate, who suffer hunger, cold, nakedness, imprisonment, death, banishment for
the name of Christ; we count him happy who endures most misery with and for
Christ; we count him, and him only a miserable man, that can laugh and sing
away care and sorrow, who sits like a Queen and sees no sorrow, who fares
deliciously every day, who can eat, drink, and play, and so pass his time of
life away, he is a miserable man: For it is not what a man is for the present,
which makes him happy or miserable, but what a man shall be to eternity; he
that is miserable for the present, but shall be happy to eternity, we count him
happy; and he that is happy for the present time, but shall be miserable to
eternity, we count him a cursed man. Lazarus in the depth of his misery was an
happy man, because he is glorious to all eternity; the rich Glutton was a
miserable wretch in the height of his jollity, because he is miserable to
eternity.

Hence I conclude, that the glory that shall be revealed in us, will make us
perfectly blessed; but our present sufferings cannot make us miserable, for the
Saints are happy in the thickest of them, Math. 5.11, 12. Then does the Spirit
of God and of glory rest upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. Our present miseries at the
uttermost can but rob us of a temporal life, which will (come they or come they
not) fail us at length; but glory bestows upon us, and crowns us with an
everlasting blissful life. He that has an interest in Christ, may cry out with
that great Apostle, What shall separate us from the love of Christ? and may
say, I am persuaded, that neither Death with its terrors, nor life with its
charms, neither Angels with their beauties, nor Devils with their deformities,
things present with their allurements, things future with their promises or
threatenings, nor Hell with its torments, can ever separate me from the love of
God in Christ: and indeed how should they, says St. Augustine; because death
(though never so hideous) leads us to him; life is found in his possession;
Angels and Devils are the Ministers of his justice or his mercy; things present
are false, things to come uncertain: Hell with God would be our happiness, and
Heaven without him would be our torment: or we may say again with the same
Father: that nothing can separate a Christian from Jesus Christ, and make him
miserable: Not death, because there is no Christian can be brought into so
dismal an estate as to be deprived of his love: not the Angels, because being
united to Christ, we are stronger then all Spirits combined together against
us: not the vexations of life, because they are sweet, when undergone for his
honor, and serve only to give us a nearer conjunction to his person: Not
things to come, because nothing can be bestowed, nor promised which can
countervail him: Not Heaven, because it is the recompense of them that serve
him: Not Hell, because it is made for none but those that forsake him: by all
which we see, that a man firmly united to Christ, cannot by these outward
things be removed from him.

Oh the solidity, perspicuity, and self-sufficiency of that Paradise and place
of delights, of that Celestial company, and Crowned society! who is able to
express the comfort and contentment of that estate and condition, where we
shall have all blessedness Internal, External, and Eternal? what can be done or
suffered to answer so great a reward? the diseased will endure the cutting and
searing of their Members for the enjoyment of a short tedious life: Heathens
have suffered great things for a little vain glory: if they prize the shadow so
much, at what rate should we value the substance? what are a few drops of blood
for the Kingdom of Heaven? how may this comfort us under afflictions,
considering that the afflictions of this life are but small showers, at the
most but some short storms, which are followed with an Eternal calm, Isa. 54.8.

CHAP. XII.
Sect. I.
I shall now in the next place (by Divine assistance) adventure to speak
something of the excellency of Heavens glory, though some there be that think
silence and astonishment to be the best commendations we can give it: I confess
our understandings are too shallow to comprehend the greatness of it: When the
great Voice says, Come up hither, come and see, then we shall be best resolved
concerning it. If the Queen of Sheba confessed that the one half was not told
her of the Wisdom, Prosperity, and Glory of Solomon (which she had heard
reported in her own Country) when she came in person to his Court; how much
more shall the Saints confess when they come to Heaven, that the Thousandth
part was not told them of all the honor, glory, and blessedness, which they
shall find in that heavenly Jerusalem. Here then let us consider The
Circumstances of this glory. The Substance of this glory. The Adjuncts of this
glory.


The Circumstances are two; Time and Place: as for the Time it shall be,

1. In the day of the Creatures Restoration: we read, Act. 3.21. That the
Heavens must conlain Christ until the time of the restitution of all things:
And St. Paul tells us, That the Creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans
8.21. Here diverse questions are to be propounded.

Quest. 1. What Creatures are to be delivered into this glorious liberty?

Resp. 1. Under this word [Creature] we are not to comprise the Elect Angels,
because never subject to vanity; nor the reprobate Angels and Men, because they
are destroyed with an everlasting destruction from the presence of God.

2. Neither are we to comprise the godly Elect men under this Word [Creature]
in this place; for although it be most true, that all the godly shall be
perfectly delivered from all manner of bondage into perfect liberty; yet, St.
Paul opposes the Creatures to the Elect, in those words [Not only they, but we
also.] And the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, is the State into which the
Creatures are to be delivered, according to their capacity, the future glory of
the Sons of God being the exemplar of the Creatures glory; the Elect are to be
delivered primarily, the Creatures secondarily; the Elect are not meant.

3. By Creature, we are not to understand those Creatures which are bred of
dung and corruption, the excrements of Nature: neither are we to understand
those Creatures which are the effects of God's Curse upon the Creature, as a
penalty of man's Transgression, as Thorns, Thistles, Briars, and such like,
these shall be turned into nothing: but,

4. By Creatures we are to understand the Heavens and the Earth, and Elements,
and all the Works of God, which he made at first very good in themselves,
wherein his glory did much appear, and were for the great delight, content, and
necessary use of man, as living Creatures; the Fowls which are the Host and
ornament of Heaven; the Beasts, and all Plants, which are the Host and ornament
of the Earth: These reasons may be given for this opinion.

Reas. 1. Because the Apostle ver. 19. speaks indefinitely [the Creature.]
Likewise in ver. 20.21. But ver. 22. as if he would put all out of doubt, he
says, (...), the whole Creation, or omnis Creatura, as it is in the margin of
your Bibles: this is a known rule of interpreting Scripture, when there are
many words of one and the same thing, the latter are the Interpretation of the
former.

2. Because all the Creatures which in the day of Creation were very good, are
all equally subject to bondage, to vanity and corruption, and all the Creatures
do desire their own perfection and preservation as well as some Creatures;
there is no reason why some should be frustrated of these their natural
desires, and others should not.

3. Because they who hold that only the Heavens and the Earth shall be renewed,
and not other Creatures, cannot without reason conceive, that the Heavens,
Earth, and Elements can be without their ornaments; if so, then the Earth would
be under greater bondage of vanity then now it is, it should then be void of
all form and beauty: now the reasons which they give for their opinion is,
because these, and not other parts of the World, are only capable of
immortality: But to this I answer, that no Creature is in its own nature
capable of Immortality; the Heavens and the Earth are not: Immortality is the
mere gift of God, and depends not on any thing in Nature; therefore if the
Heavens, Earth, Elements, shall be restored to an Immortal State, as the
Schoolmen think, God who gives them Immo tallity, may allow the same benefit to
the other parts of the World for his own glory, as unto them; all being capable
of the gift of Immortality, if God bestow it.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. SEcondly, we are to enquire what is meant by the Creatures
deliverance from the bondage of corruption?

Resp. Touching this I find two contrary Opinions, both grounded on Scripture,
and both have learned and godly men for their Patrons.

1. Some conceive that the deliverance of the Creation from this bondage is by
a total abolition and destruction of the whole Creation: the Creature being
made for man quatenus viator, non comprehensor; V.d. Dr Ha kwel's Apologvof the
power of God for the government of the World.
when the Creature cease to be (say they) then it cease to be subject to
vanity: and for this their opinion they allege Job 14.12. where it is said,
Man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more. Isai. 51.6. The
Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like a
garment, but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be
abolished. Matthew. 24.35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away. 2 Pet. 3.10. The day
of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat;
the Earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Which they
expound of the substance and qualities of the present Heavens and Earth, and
all the works in them, saying, that all shall be burnt to ashes; so Piscator.
Piscat. in Loc.
From these and the like places they affirm, that the substances of Heaven and
Earth shall be reduced to ashes, to nothing, because ^^^s said, they shall
perish, they shall pass away ^hey shall be burnt up, which imports
annihilation.

Diverse Arguments are brought for the confirmation hereof, chiefly from the
uselessness of the Creature in that estate; when Man shall have no more need of
the Creatures, why should they be any more? what use will there be of the Sun
or Stars to enlighten him? The Scripture says, in Heaven there shall be no
night, and those that are there need no Candle, neither light of the Sun; for
the Lord gives them light, etc. Revel. 22.5. There shall be no need (say they)
of Earth or Water for the refreshment and use of Man, of no Beasts or Fowls to
feed on, of none of the Creatures to serve him; when Man shall have a spiritual
Body, and be raised to an incorruptible state, he will be far above the use of
these things; therefore (say they) why should these things be, that will be of
no use at all? Moreover, the opinion of these men is, that after God has by
fire destroyed this present World, then will he either out of nothing, or out
of the ashes, create new Heavens and new Earth; according to that promise in 2
Pet. 3.13. which is expressed in Isa. 66.22.

2. There are sundry others that hold, that these present Heavens and Earth
shall not be destroyed in respect of their substance and being, but only in
respect of their present state, qualities, and uses; and these have founded
their opinion upon Scripture, as that of Psalm 102.26. where the Psalmist
speaking of the Heavens, says, They shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc.
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. He says, they
shall perish, but here he interprets how they shall perish, viz. by mutation,
or alteration, not by destruction; alteration of qualities, not of substances:
and the Hebrew word in Piel, (...)
signifies to innovate, alter and restore.

2. So St. Paul expounds how this present World shall pass away, 1 Cor. 7.31.
the fashion, (...), the external figure, the state of this present World shall
pass away; not the substance, but the outward shape of the World shall be done
away.

3. So that of 2 Pet. 3.6. where he compares the last destruction of the World
by Fire, to the destruction of the World by Water in Noah's days; the Flood did
not destroy the substance of the World, but the (then) present state of it, the
substance remained after the Flood; so the substance shall remain after God
has burnt it with Fire: if the World should be wholly destroyed by Fire, then
the Apostle's comparison were in vain. Though the Apostle uses the word
[perished] he is to be understood of the qualities, not of the substance; as
when Silver and Gold is cast into the fire, the dross only perishes, but the
substance remains; so when God shall cast the Heavens and the Earth into the
fire, only the dross of the Heaven and Earth shall perish by fire, not the
substance: and therefore the Apostle uses a word in the Greek, which signifies
dissolving, (...).
and melting, as of Metals: Now we know when the Metals are melted, they are
not consumed, but only refined and cleansed from their drossiness. Learned Mr.
Mede Joseph Mede in 2 Pet. 3.10.
on, this place conceives, that this fire shall not reach to the starry
Heavens, but he understands only the Air, (which is in Scripture called the
Heavens) that shall together with the Earth be burnt; and he gives a very
probable Reason from the comparison of the destruction of the World by Water,
and of this last destruction by Fire; the Flood did not by many thousand miles
reach the starry Heavens, only the lower Region of the Air perished in the
Water; for we plainly read, that the Waters did swell but fifteen cubits above
the tops of the Mountains.

4. St. Paul in that place ( Romans 8.) tells us, that this present Creature (
viz. the World) expects, hops, groaneth to be delivered from its bondage of
corruption and vanity: If God shall destroy these Heavens and Earth to nothing,
then it is not these Creatures which shall be delivered into the glorious
liberty, but another which is not created, which was never subject to vanity,
which did therefore never groan, never did expect and hope for deliverance,
because yet not created; and these present Heavens and Earth should only expect
their destruction, not their perfection.

Object. But then it may be demanded, Why does the Apostle call it new Heavens,
and a new Earth? St. Peter says, We according to his promise look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, etc. 2 Pet. 3.13.

Resp. 1. They are said to be new in respect of the outward form and state.

2. New in respect of qualities and properties; there shall be a change of
qualities, not an annihilation of substance.

3. New in respect of use to which they then shall serve; new, not in respect
of substance, but in respect of their new refining: Silver, Gold, or any Metal
cast into a melting Furnace, may be called new in respect of its purifying, not
in respect of substance; as the godly after their regeneration are called new
Creatures, not in respect of their substance, but of their qualities; sin is
taken away, Totus hic Mundus vi^^^^i^is p^r ignem folverdus, Eque^aci^ ^^lus,
etc. Theolog. Leyders.
and grace is infused: So the learned Professors of Leyden reconcile these
opinions; This whole visible World shall so be burnt up by the last fire, as
that it shall be wholly purged from all vanity which sin has brought upon it,
as Metals of diverse kinds, when melted in the furnace, are purged each from
their dross: And of the World, and the parts of it thus purified by fire, God
will make up a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. And
in this their determination, I for my own part will acquiess, without lording
ove^ the faith of any man in these particulars. But p^^ case these Heavens and
Earth be burnt to ashes by the last fire, and out of them God raises a new
Earth and Heaven, yet it may be said to be the same for substance with this
present, as well as our Bodies which must be turned into dust (which yet shall
be raised again out of the dust) are the same bodies for substance which they
were before, only a change of qualities. Now as to the manner how God will
deliver the Creature from the bondage of corruption, we may safely doubt and be
ignorant, and the godly may be of diverse opinions about it without any
violation of the Law of Love.

SECT. III.
Quest. 3. BUT what is that glory whereof the Creatures shall be partakers, or
into which they shall be delivered?

Resp. 1. This we may with confidence assert, that the whole Creation shall be
reduced to a most happy state, beyond what they were in the day of their
Creation: they were seen very good, very pleasing, beautiful, useful, all
filled with so much goodness, as that man could have drawn much contentment
from them; but now shall be made better, more beautiful, more excellent.

2. They shall have as much goodness restored to them, as shall fully fit and
accommodate them for the state of glorious liberty, and for glorious persons:
what that goodness shall be it is safest to say we know not: it will then appear
when God shall effect their deliverance.

3. The glory with which God will cloathe the whole Creation shall be to the
capacity of each Creatures nature.

4. No Creature shall partake of that glory which is proper to the Children of
God, neither are they capable of that glory whereof the godly are.

Quest. 4. To what use shall the Creatures decked with glory serve? This
question is the stone of stumbling at which many Divines stumble, and so fall
into a flat denial of his glorious Renovation of the Creatures.

Resp. They shall not be for such uses as now they are: this present World of
Creatures are principally for these two ends.

1. For the sustentation of these our bodies, and the preservation of this
Animal life we now live: they are for Food, for Raiment, for Physic, for
bodily delights.

2. Their other use and end is, that the minds of men may take their rise from
the Creatures excellencies, to mount up into an holy contemplation of God: the
visible Creatures teach man some knowledge of the invisible God, Romans 1.20.
Their excellencies do make known to us the infinite Wisdom, Power, and goodness
of God; but the Creatures, when thus delivered into a State of glory shall not
be for these ends; for,

1. Then our lives shall not be Animal, and our bodies shall not be subject to
hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and such like natural infirmities, our bodies shall
be spiritualized, and shall no more need these things to preserve them then the
Angels: as in the Resurrection we shall neither marry, nor be given in
marriage; so neither shall we eat, drink, or feel the pinching cold, or faint
with scorching heat; therefore the Creature shall not serve for this use.

2. Again, the Creatures shall no more teach man the knowledge of God, because
then we shall see him face to face, without looking through the glass of the
Creatures; God will then immediately communicate himself to us, that we shall
know him as we are known.

Object. But even in the state of glory we cannot see God with our bodily eyes;
therefore lest our bodily eyes should be destitute of an apt delightsome
object, the glory which God will put on the Creature will be the delight of
glorified eyes, then we shall be ravished with the infinite Wisdom and Power of
God in investing the whole Creation with such glory.

Sol. Though this is probably true, that the glorified Saints shall delight in
beholding the glory of the Creatures, and shall admire God in their glory, yet
if there should be no Renovation of the Creature, there would be most admirable
objects for the glorified Saints to behold, as namely,

1. Christ's glorified Body, the brightness whereof will obscure the brightness
of Sun, Moon, and Stars, as the brightness of the Sun puts out the light of the
Fire; and in this respect it is said, there shall be no need neither of the
Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in heaven, Rev. 21.23.

2. As Christ's body, so likewise the glorious bodies of all the Elect shall be
the delight of their eyes, which shall shine more bright then the Sun: What
delight then can the Creatures clothed with glory bring? and in beholding the
bodies of the Saints in glory, we may behold the infinite Wisdom, Power, Love,
Grace of God, in making handfuls of Dust and Earth such glorious Creatures, as
our bodies then shall be. Yet we may rationally assert,

1. That God will ordain the Creature to some use; it is not to be imagined
that the Creatures shall continue after the day of Judgment, and yet not serve
to some use: if you ask to what use, Lombard Lombard sentent.
makes this answer, Ego nescio, I know not: the same answer, Peter Martyr Pet.
Mert. in Romans 8.21.
gives to the same question: though it be contrary to nature and common reason,
that the Creature after its Renovation shall be idle, yet if you ask how they
shall be employed, facile nos fateamur ignorare, we may easily be brought to
confess our ignorance.

2. Doubtless God will adapt and fit the Creature to the use of the glorified
state of his Children (as was hinted before) which they shall then fully and
perfectly know when they shall be actual possessors of the new Heavens and new
Earth.

3. Learned Bain gives this answer,

1. It may be God will have the whole Creation to stand as a Monument of his
former Power, Wisdom, and Goodness to his people in the day of their Pilgrimage
on Earth.

2. Or God will have them stand for the honor of his Majesty, merely for
greater State; as we see it is a State belonging to Earthly Princes to have
sumptuous Houses here and there, which yet they do not once visit in all their
Reigns.

3. God will have them stand as appurtenances to the glory of his own Children;
the Creatures shall be kept as additions to their honor, says Calvin.
Chrysostom Calvin in loc. Chrysostom. homil.
speaking of this, uses this comparison: it is no wonder that the Creature
shall be decked with glory; for as Kings in that day wherein they do solemnly
Crown their Sons with some Crown of Principality, they will not only take care
that their Sons appear in great Pomp and State, but also the Palace and all
the Courteours shall and must appear in the bravest attire: so God setting the
Crown of Immortallity and Blessedness, on the heads of all his Children, and
placing them on their prepared Thrones, will have the Heavens and Earth, and
all his Creatures appear in glory in that day. These things being considered,
how should this cause the Saints to be willing to leave the World, and to die
cheerfully, since in due time they shall find the World in a more glorious
estate then they left it, but the wicked shall be thrust naked out of all.

CHAP. XIII.
II. THis glory of the Saints shall be when all the drossie part of the Earth,
and all the works that are therein shall be burnt up; when all the heaps and
mines of Gold and Silver shall be consumed to the last dram; when all Cities,
Towns and stately Edifices shall be destroyed; when all the outward pomp and
glory of the World shall be burnt to ashes; when the high Mountains shall melt
under the feet of the Lord, and the Valleys shall be cleft as wax before the
sire, and as the Waters that are powered down a steep place, Mich. 1.4. Then
shall all the dwellers on earth be disseized, and turned out of their
Possessions, then must Kings for ever part with their Thrones, Crowns and
Scepters, and the greatest Rulers on Earth lay down their Authority at the feet
of Christ: then shall the high and lofty ones be brought low; and many great
Captains shall call to the hills and mountains to fall upon them, and hide them
from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, Rev. 6.10. Then shall all Trades and Occupations in the World cease every
where, and all desire and study of purchasing and gaining shall be at an end:
then shall the Sea at that time show the greatest rage and fury, and the Waves
thereof be so high and furious, that it shall seem as if they would utterly
overwhelm the whole Earth: now at such a dreadful time as this, when they that
had their portion in the things of this life must be stripped of all, and leave
all for ever, then shall God's Children take full and everlasting Possession of
the House of their heavenly Father, in which are many Mansions; and this highly
advances the felicity of the Saints, because it comes so seasonably to them.
Give a man an house well furnished, when his own is plundered and burnt, and the
whole neighborhood is undone, and all the Country round about is laid waste,
and made desolate, how pleasant is it! and when the whole World shall be in a
flame, and all things in it are consuming to ashes, then to be put into the
possession of the World to come; when our earthly habitations are burnt, then
to have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens, what an inconceiveable happiness is it! A word in season, says
Solomon, Oh how good is it! Heaven is sweet at any time, but Heaven at such a
time as this, Oh how good, how unspeakably good is it! St Paul 2. Tim. 4.7.
says, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, finished my Course,
henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
Righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day: on that day when the veriest
Earth-worm that now creeps upon the ground shall be convinced that there is
nothing in the World worth the having: the^ to be put into the heavenly
Mansions in the day of the Worlds funerals, and to enjoy an enduring substance
in the day of the Worlds conflagration, no tongue of Men or Angels is able
sufficiently to set forth the height of this blessedness.

III. It shall be at such a time, when the Devil and all his Instruments, the
Enemies of God and his People, shall be cast into outer Darkness, and swallowed
up of everlasting Destruction, when their day shall wholly end, their glory be
finished, and their prosperity be utterly extinguished and overthrown, when
they shall be for ever separated from God the fountain of all blessedness; of
which Separation, Chrysostom thus speaks; That if a thousand fires of Hell
were joined together in one, they should never be so great a pain to the Soul,
as it is for the Soul to be separated (in this wise) for ever from Almighty
God. We read Isa. 14.9, 10. That the Kings and Potentates of the Earth seem to
be brought into rejoicing at the fall of Lucifer, viz. the King of Babylon,
when he was brought low: it was matter of triumph to the Children of Israel,
that the Lord saved them from the hand of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians that
pursued them to the red Sea; and that Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the Sea
shore, the Waters covering the Chariots, the Horsemen, and all the Host of
Pharaoh that came into the Sea after them, that there remained not so much as
one of them; the Children of Israel walking upon dry Land in the midst of the
Sea, the Waters being a wall to them on the right hand, and on the left: Exodus
14.28, 29. Was it not a great privilege for Noah to sit secure in the Ark above
the Waters, that covered the tops of the highest Mountains, at the same time
when the whole World of the Ungodly were drowned, and buried in the Flood? what
then may we conceive the happiness of the Saints will be, when they shall be
advanced to the height of heavenly glory, when their Enemies shall be
overwhelmed with the depths of shame and misery? what encouragement may this be
to us to raise our hearts Heavenward, and to have our affections set on things
above, while the hearts of Worldlings are rooted in the Earth, that at the same
time when their end shall be destruction, we may be put into the possession of
eternal glory? should not we be as unwilling now to have fellowship with them
in their unfruitful works of darkness, as we are desirous to be in Heaven when
they shall be cast into Hell fire?

IV. It shall be at a time when all the labors, sorrows, and sufferings of the
Saints shall be at an end: Write, says a Voice from Heaven to St. John,
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their Works do follow them,
Rev. 14.13. They shall then be eased from the toilesome and troublesome travels
of this Life, being translated from this worlds vanity into Heavens felicity,
where shall be neither labor in action, nor pain in passion, where they shall
be neither annoyed with pinching cold, nor parching heat: and as sleep is a
resting and refreshing to our weak frail and weary bodies, so our bodies being
laid down in the bed of our Graves, they shall rest and be free from all
sickness and sorrow, weakness, weariness, and all work, and whatsoever else are
fruits and effects, yea punishments of sin, and attendants of this life: yea
the Saints, after they have wearied themselves in striving against sin, in
subduing corruption, after they have spent themselves in the work of the Lord,
and after the Enemies to piety have tired out themselves with malice, scoffs,
reproaches slanders, persecutions; they shall rest from all their labors and
sufferings in perfect peace and blessedness, and the fruit, comfort, and reward
of their works shall follow them, and abide with them for ever: They shall then
arrive at a safe harbor, after a dangerous passage through Shelves, Storms,
Rocks, and Pirates, which then shall be so much the more welcome to them: Read
St. Paul's Catalogue, 2 Cor. 11.23. And think how sweet Heaven will be to one
that has had such a hard passage thither: Through labors more abundant,
stripes above measure, many prisons, chains, fetters, whippings, scourgings,
shipwracks, deaths, journeyings, perils of Waters, Robberies by his own
Contrymen, by the Heathen. True it is, he gives in a large bill of his
charges, as it were; but when he comes to speak of his wages, he makes nothing
of his labors and sufferings in comparison of the reward, 2 Cor. 4.17. For
these light and momentany afflictions do work out for us an exceeding eternal
weight of glory. The highest Mountain in the World is very light in comparison
of the whole Earth; even so are the greatest afflictions of the greatest
sufferers in comparison of the glory of Heaven. It is said of Isachar, Genesis
49.15. That he saw that rest was good, and that the Land was pleasant,
therefore he put his shoulders to labor, and became servant to Tribute: So I
may say, the rest and glory of the Saints is good, but the Land that brings
forth this rest, will be best and most pleasant to them after all their labors
and sufferings are fully ended; then to receive this glorious rest, will be
most sweet unto them, and most seasonable.

Were Heaven nothing else but an Haven of rest we know how welcome the one is
to a Sea sick weather-beaten Traveller: and by that we may conceive how welcome
the other will be to a Soul that has been long tossed in the Waves of this
troublesome World, sick of its own sinful imaginations, and tired out with
outward temptations: the happiest Soul that ever has sailed over this Euripus,
in the best Ship, in the most healthful body that ever was, never had so calm a
passage (says a good Divine) but that it has had cause enough often to wish
it self on shore. Sa. Ward on the life of faith in death.
Is there any Palace or Tower here so high or strong, that can keep diseases
from the body, or cares, sorrows, fears, or Satan's assaults from the Soul?
were there but such an Island (as some have dreamed of) here on earth, that
might free men's bodies or minds from disquiet but for the time of this life,
how would people strive to dwell there? Certainly, in this heavenly Country
there shall be perfect tranquillity to all the Inhabitants thereof. Oh how will
it ravish the hearts of the Saints when they have finished their course, and
are come to the end of their race; oh how sweet will Heaven, and how glorious
will the Crown of Immortality be to them in the end? If Seamen when they have
been many months upon the Sea, where they have encountered with many dreadful
storms and boystrous tempests, and have been often in danger of drowning and
shipwracks, when they shall at last descry but a Creek of Land, do leap for
joy, and cry out, Oh Land, land, we are nigh to such a Coast where we would be;
then much more those that have run the Christian race, and have run over
Mountains of difficulties, and encountered with many trials and tentations, and
at last have run them all down, and are come in sight of the Promised Land, of
the Heavenly Canaan, how will their hearts then leap for joy? crying out, Oh,
here is the Land of promise; here is Heaven that blessed place; here is the
Kingdom we have so often prayed for, Lord, let thy Kingdom come; here is the
Crown we have run for: then will a Christian say, had this race that I have run
been much longer, and more tedious then it was, and should I have met with a
thousand dangers and difficulties more then I have done, they had been nothing
to this glorious Crown. Brethren, a few moments in Heaven will make you amends
enough for all your watchings, praying, fasting, for all your labors of love,
for all the time you have spent in the service of God; be therefore faithful to
the death; he that endures to the end shall be saved.

CHAP. XIV.
SECT. I.
HAving spoken of the circumstance of time, I shall now consider the other
circumstance, sc. of the place of the Saints happiness: This also is very
considerable. When man was created holy and happy, Heylin. Geograph. Willet.
Synops. Papismi.
the Spirit of God vouchsafes to give us an exact description of the very
place where God set him, showing in what coast of the World Paradise was
situate, sc. in Eden (which the Learned say, was part of Mesopotamia) with
what goodly and beautiful Plants that Garden was furnished, Paradisum vocant
Graeci locum irriguum, and an oenum, omni florum varietate distinctum, and
sempiternis arboribus consitum, aprissimum ad aetatem feliciter degendam.
Ossor. Lusitam. de Nobilit. Christiana. lib. 1.
with what Rivers it was watered, Genes. 2.8, 9. this being a great addition to
man's happiness in that condition: and St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. calls the third
Heaven Paradise; as if this Garden of Eden had been a shadow of Heaven, the
place of the Blessed. When the Lord chose Israel out of all the Nations of the
World, and planted them in Canaan, (a figure of Heaven) you may see what an
exact Geographical description is given of it in the Book of Josua, Chap. 15,
16, 17. and elsewhere the fertility and pleasantness of the Country is
frequently commended: How incomparable then is the pleasantness of the heavenly
Paradise, and the beauty of the Celestial Canaan?

I. It is called in Scripture the house of God, and the habitation of the
Saints. Melchizedeck called God the Possessor of Heaven and Earth, Genesis 14. The
whole created World is his possession, but the Heaven is his glorious Palace;
as a Prince that has a whole Kingdom under him, keeps his Court in the
principal place of his Dominions.

1. As a Man's House is, or should be situated in the best and most convenient
part of his possessions; so of all things created, Heaven is the goodliest and
most glorious part. The Earth is beautiful, especially in the prime of the
Spring and Summer, when the face of it is renewed; but yet when it is in its
greatest glory, it is but a dunghill in comparison of the Heavens. That glory of
the Heavens which we see on the outside, and afar off, is incomparably beyond
the beauty of the things below; but that which we cannot see, does far surmount
that which we do see; I mean that most glorious habitation of the Angels and
Saints; though that which we behold has incomparably more beauty and glory in
it, then our weak sight can discern at such a distance: and therefore the
Heavens, for their surpassing beauty and glory, are called the House of God.

2. As a Man is commonly to be seen at his own house, more then at another
place besides; so does the Lord in Heaven more especially show forth his glory.
The Lord has been but seldom manifested on the Earth, as when he gave so many
visible signs of his glorious presence upon Mount Sinai; and then when Moses
was admitted to see his back parts; and when he spoke from Heaven at the
Baptism of our blessed Savior, This is my beloved Son, etc. but in Heaven his
presence is more notably manifested continually; our Savior shows, that in
Heaven the holy Angels do always behold the face of God, Matthew. 18.10. his
glorious presence is always manifested there.

3. In a Man's dwelling house, usually his Children and Servants are abiding;
and although Kings and Princes have more Servants and Officers then an house
can hold, yet their principal Attendants are commonly with them in the Court:
so Heaven is the place appointed for the Lord's Servants, though all of them
are not yet there; not for want of room, but because the Lord has appointed
them other work to do elsewhere for a time; yet thither shall they be gathered,
and in the mean time there are his principal Attendants, there are the glorious
Angels, who are called the Angels of Heaven, Matthew. 24.36. there also are the
blessed Saints of God departed.

4. As a Man's house wherein he dwells is furnished for the most part, so
that his riches appear (in some sort) in his house; so Heaven is the place
which is most royally furnished; the Earth is but a Country Farm-house in
comparison of it: Heaven is richly adorned and furnished with perfect Holiness;
all the Vessels of that House are of pure Gold; there is neither dross in them,
nor any uncleanness cleaving to them; all the Saints and Angels there are free
from all impurity; no unclean thing has entrance into this house of God:
Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord for ever, Psalm. 93.5. it is full of all
holiness and happiness. It is said Rev. 21.25. that the Gates of Heaven shall
not be shut at all. Heaven Gates shall always stand open, yet no unclean thing
shall enter in. The Streets of that City are of pure Gold, the walls built of
precious Stones, there are twelve Gates of twelve Pearls. A good Expositor
observes, that all those precious Stones there mentioned, have a contrary
virtue against uncleanness, to show unto us, that Heaven will not admit of any
impure and defiled thing; God will not suffer the dirty feet of impure Sinners
to tread upon his pure Pavement of Gold. When God drove sinful Adam out of
Paradise, he caused a Cherubim to stand before the Gates of Paradise, with a
flaming sword in his hand, to keep him out of Paradise if he should attempt to
come in again. Sin is like the sword of the flaming Cherubim, to keep out all
wicked men from entering into Heaven.

Heaven is also a place of holy Exercises. Here our best services are stained
with sin, and tainted with corruption; but there all the services of the Saints
do bear a lively impression of the fountain of holiness upon them; there they
must warble forth the Song of the Seraphims, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, Isai. 6.3. It is said of the Saints of God in glory, that they shall
be Priests of God and Christ, Rev. 20.6. As they are all made spiritual Kings
and Priests to God on Earth, Rev. 1.6. so they shall be Priests to God in
Heaven, and reign with him for ever and ever. They shall be Priests to God two
ways in Heaven. First, As soon as they leave this life, in the interim, before
the second coming of Christ, they shall perform the offices of Priests in Soul
only, offering to God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, that themselves
are already delivered out of the miseries of this World, and praying for their
Brethren upon the Earth, that they may shortly be delivered: For so St. John
tells us, that he saw under the Altar the Souls of those that were slain for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, crying out with a loud
voice, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do not thou avenge our blood upon
them that dwell on the Earth? Romans 6.9, 10. And secondly, at Christ's second
coming, both they that are deceased already, and they that shall then be found
alive, shall jointly and joyfully sing, Hallelujah, salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his
judgments, Rev. 19.1, 2. and v. 6. St. John says, he heard as it were the
voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice
of mighty thunderings, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns; let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. The high praises of
God shall then be in the mouths of all his Saints; being now made perfect in
holiness, and freed from all frailties, they shall never mourn, but ever sing
and laud their Redeemer without defatigation or satiety.

But to pass by this, it is needful in few words to show, how the Heavens
cannot properly be said to be the house of God, as those buildings wherein men
dwell, are called their houses, least any should be so ignorant as to entertain
any vain thoughts not beseeming the infinite Majesty of God.

1. Heaven cannot contain and hold the infinite being of the Divine Nature, as
the house holds him that dwells in it: Behold, the Heavens and the Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain thee.

2. God has no need of Heaven, either for rest or safety, as a man has of his
house; he is not subject to weariness, no work is toilsome to him; he
slumbereth not, sleeps not, he is above all dangers; one word of his mouth is
enough to crush all Enemies to powder; he needs not this House as a Castle of
defense unto him.

3. He is not more essentially present there then in any other place, nor more
absent from any other place then from it, but every where alike essentially
present, though there he gives forth more glorious demonstrations of his
presence then in any other place.

SECT. II.
SEeing Heaven is God's house, then there should our hearts be, even at home
with our Father; how can we sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land? how can we
please our selves so well in this house of our pilgrimage, when we are from
home, thus far absent from our Father's house? why are our minds so knit unto
the earth, that nothing ^ut leath will part it and us, as if not Heaven, but
this lower sinful part of the World were the Lord's dwelling place? with what
face can we call him, our Father which is in Heaven, and in the mean time our
strongest and most hearty affections are deeply buried in the Earth? St. Paul
was of another temper, I desire to be dissolved (says he) and to be with
Christ, which is best of all. -- Best of all] so the blessed Apostle found and
felt it; he spoke out of a true discerning spirit, he spoke as he found; he
desired Heaven for love of Christ, and not so much for love of his own ease and
happiness (though he could not but long for that also) but principally for love
of Christ; therefore he longed to leave the Earth, and go to Heaven, because
that was the house of Christ, the house where God the Father shows his
glorious presence; the house where Christ sits at the right hand of the
Majesty on high. Oh that I were there, says that holy Apostle, let me go
through poverty, through persecution, fire, sword, stripes, imprisonment, and a
thousand deaths and dangers, so that I can but get unto my Savior; it is best
of all to be with him -- what shall I say? better then to be with sinful men;
better then to be with a multitude of unruly corruptions cleaving to me: shall
I say, better then to be in the midst of heaps of Gold, or all manner of
earthly abundance? I will not for the honor of my Savior once bring him in
comparison with these dunghils and heaps of dross; but it is best of all to be
with him. It is better to be with him, then simply to be in Heaven it self; it
were better to be with him out of Heaven, then to be in Heaven without him, if
that were possible: yea, if being with Christ were not salvation it self, I
would say, that to be with Christ were better then salvation, it is best of all.

Now then, when Heaven is thus glorious, when our dearest Savior, the King of
glory, is entered within those everlasting doors, when it is the very house of
God, how should we long after it, that we might be with the Lord? what shame
should it cast upon our faces, who have the First Fruits of the Spirit? Is our
Gaol now become more pleasing to us then our Father's house? do we grow more
and more earthly minded? Oh that we had more of Heaven in us to raise and draw
our hearts thither, and less Earth to sink us downward: let us pray and labor
for more supernatural and heavenly affections; then we shall find our hearts
rising and lifted upwards.

Moreover, if Heaven be the house of God, and the place of his special
presence, this should move us all to labor to be such as may be fit for the
presence of God. Do we not all desire to be in Heaven? alas, many of us do
little consider what Heaven is, or what it is to be in Heaven. It is true, that
none (even those that are most heavenly minded) can consider of it according to
its excellent glory; yet some there are, who though they cannot conceive it for
the height of its excellency, yet they conceive the nature of it, though not
the measure; they conceive of what kind, of what temper that glory and
happiness is which they shall receive, by that earnest of the Spirit which they
have received; as a man knows in what coin he shall be paid, by that money
which he has received in earnest already. But many others know not what Heaven
means; how many are there that cannot now endure the presence of God, and yet
would fain be in Heaven? that hate this house of God, and yet long to be in
that heavenly house of God? Assure thy self, that unless thou could delight
in God's presence here, thou can have no delight in his presence there: The
happiness of that house is heavenly and spiritual; there is nothing to please
the covetous heart, nothing to fill the wanton eye, nothing to satisfy the
Drunkard's and Glutton's appetite; no wanton dancing, no idle sports, nothing
but holiness, and holy exercises, and that glory which is the ornament of
holiness, and arises from it: There is not a word, nor a thought, but what
becomes the presence of God, such as abide his pure eyes. Now then, do thou (O
Christian) bend thy heart and soul toward this house and presence of God, so
shall thou be a pillar in the house of God, and shall go out of it no more, but
shall possess fullness of joy in his presence for evermore.

SECT. III.
NOw in this House of God are many Mansions: In my Father's House are many
Mansions, says our Savior, John 14.2. Heaven is sufficient to receive many
Inhabitants; I mean not, that it is like some great Houses that have no
Inhabitants, but that it is appointed of God to be a dwelling place for many --
Many, I say, not in comparison of those multitudes which shall be shut out of
doors, but many in an absolute consideration taken by themselves; yet these
many shall be very few, in comparison of the droves of men that throng together
in the broad way of destruction. Of the largeness of this House of God, Solomon
speaks, when he compares it with that Temple which he had built, 1 Kings
8.27. Will God indeed dwell upon the Earth? behold, the Heaven, and the Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this House which I have built?
What do I speak of the Lord's dwelling in this little House which I have built?
then he puts in a special note of attention and admiration, Behold, even those
large and spacious Heavens which himself has builded, and spread out like a
glorious curtain over the whole Earth, and all things between the Earth and it,
cannot contain him; how much less this House which I have made? As if he had
said, the Heavens are incompa^^bly greater then this House which I have built,
but he is infinitely greater then the Heavens: Yea, our eyes may teach us, that
it is of wonderful greatness, although we cannot see how large it is; if we
consider that the Earth is of a wonderful compass, and yet that it is but as a
spot, or little Ball hanging in the midst of the Heavens, and encompassed round
with those goodly Spheres and Orbs. Yea, even a Child may learn thus much from
the light of Reason, with a little help, that seeing the Sun is big enough to
give light to half the Earth at once, and yet seems so little to our eye, it
must needs be at a wonderful distance from us, perhaps many thousand miles: Now
then, of what wonderful bigness is the Heaven it self, being so far above the
Earth, and yet compassing all those huge spaces round about the Earth, that are
between the Earth and Heaven. Neither may we think, but that this Heaven of
Heavens (the House of God) is yet far above the Chamber of the Sun, out of
which the Psalmist says, he comes at his rising. Consider then, Christian
Reader, what did ever any man find in the Earth, that should make him so
willing to sell Heaven for it? if a man could have it all, it were not
comparable to the lowest Mansion in Heaven, if any be lower then other. All is
vanity (says the Preacher) speaking of all things under the Sun, especially
when they be compared with those large, spacious, and glorious Mansions above
the Sun. Who then can sufficiently detest that folly, which prefers the
least part of the earth, which the Lord treads under foot as his footstool,
above the glorious Heaven, the large extent whereof surroundeth and
encompasseth the whole World?

How should this comfort Christians, that though they be pent up and straightened
here, yet in Heaven they shall have room enough, there shall be Rehoboth, there
the Lord will make room for us. Here is comfort against those engrossing
oppressors, which join house to house, and leave no room for the poor; if thou
labor to be rich in faith, thou shall find that they cannot shoulder thee out
from an happy and large possession in that heavenly Kingdom: May thou not
take comfort in a smoaky Cottage, assuring thy self of thy part in a most
glorious Palace? what if thou have but little of the Earth, or none at all, is
it not abundantly sufficient that thou shall enjoy so much of Heaven as thy
Soul can desire? yea, that there shall be no enclosures there, but all that
glorious Inheritance shall lie common to all the Heirs of promise. Look not
with a longing eye upon a fairer or more convenient House then thine own, upon
wider Fields and greater Possessions then any that thou art owner of upon
Earth; but overlook all these, and say, to the praise of God's grace, with an
heart rejoicing in the Lord, yet I have more then all the World is worth.

Moreover, none of the Faithful need to fear that he should be shut out for
want of room in this heavenly Palace; here is many Mansions; here is a place
appointed for every true Believer; the poorest Christian shall not miss of an
happy habitation in this House of our Father. Lazarus though he lie full of
sores and rags without doors there on Earth, yet there he shall have a sweet
repose in Abraham's bosom.

Let this comfort a Believer against all solitariness, and want of company in
this life; in the House of thy heavenly Father are many Mansions, and these
shall not stand empty for want of Inhabitants: Oh what Troops of glorious
Angels and Saints shall live together in those heavenly Mansions! how shall
they flock together from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and
from the South, there sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom! It is a strange weakness to be discontented for want of company; but a
greater, and worthy of all reproof, to go out of the narrow way, because it is
so solitary, and to turn into the common road, because of company. Oh the folly
and infidelity of our hearts! can we not with patience stay for so much good
Company as we shall find and for ever enjoy in our Father's House?

For although the number that shall be saved, shall be but a very small number
in comparison of the numberless multitude that are already lost, and do hasten
to destruction; although when the Church was greatest upon Earth, as in the
Apostles times, the number of the wicked did much exceed it; yet take those
many thousands of holy Angels which keep their first estate, and join to these
multitudes of holy men and women of all sorts, that lived before the flood,
after the flood, before the law, after the law, before Christ's coming in the
flesh, after his incarnation, until this day, and from this day that shall live
to the end of the world, of all Nations under heaven; then who can tell the
dust of Jacob, or number the fourth part (the four hundredth part) of this
Israel of God? the remnant and gleanings of those that have lived in so many
thousand years will arise to an unspeakable multitude. After the sealing of the
hundred and forty four thousand of the twelve Tribes, St. John says, I beheld,
and lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and
Kindred, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb,
clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands.

How should this rejoice every faithful Soul, resting in hope of this sweetest
and most blessed Society. Though in the mean time thou see many frown upon
thee, and slight thee to thy face, yea, even shun thy company, yet labor thou
for an assured part in thy Father's House, and then rejoice in assured hope
there to find many dwelling places, and in those places many Dwellers, many
sweet Companions. Though a man were constrained to live like an Eremite, or
Anchoret, all his time from the company of men on Earth, yet the assured hope
of this Society to be enjoyed for ever in our Father's House, were sufficient
to refresh him.

Ascend my Soul, mount up on Eagles wings,
And get above these Sublunary things:
Make haste, and fly unto that lofty Hill,
Where God abides with Saints and Angels still.
Oh how should every Christian so love the Lord, as to long after his House and
Kingdom, and a more near and full enjoying of his presence. Laban noted in
Jacob an earnest longing after his Father's house, Genes. 31.30. says he to
him, Thou would needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy Father's
house. Jacob had such a love to his Father Isaac, though very old and blind,
that he sore longed to be gone from Laban to his Father's house; how much more
should we labor for such love to our heavenly Father, who is infinite in all
excellency and glory, as should make us weary of being here, and exceedingly to
long after our heavenly Father's House? It was a good change for Jacob to go
from Laban, an unkind Father-in-law, unto Isaac a loving and tenderhearted
Father; but what a blessed change is it for the Children of God, to go from the
World, a cruel Stepmother, yea, a dangerous Enemy, unto God their heavenly and
most gracious Father! to go from among Swearers, Worldlings, Drunkards,
Profane Persons, Scorners of Religion, Persecutors, to go from Snares and
Temptations, to go from Sin, and the danger of Sin, to go from the lower
Region, which is (as it were) under the feet of Satan, who is (as it were) over
our heads, being the Prince of the power of the Air; I say, to go from all
these, and to go into the arms of the Lord our most gracious Father, should not
a Child of God long after this exceedingly? It shows want of love in a Child,
and an ungracious disposition, when he secretly longs for his Father's Lands
or Goods, because he cannot enjoy them unless his Father die, whose life should
be much dearer to a Child then all his Goods or Lands; but it argues the truth
of our love to our heavenly Father, when we have an earnest longing after that
glorious Inheritance of his, because we shall live with him in the everlasting
Habitations. And to this end let us labor to get our Souls fully assured that
the Lord is our Father in Jesus Christ, and that we are his Children, that so
we may long after our Father's House. If we saw our Father's House, we would
cry to be over the Water, and to be carried in Christ's arms out of this
borrowed Prison. The Earth is the Lord's lower House; while we are lodged here,
we have no assurance to lie ever in one Chamber, but must be content sometimes
to remove from one corner of our Lord's nether House to another, resting in
hope, that when we come up to the Lord's upper House, we shall remove no more,
because then we shall be at home. We now see and hear at home and abroad
nothing but matter of grief and discouragement, which indeed makes our life
bitter; but let this comfort all faithful Christians, that Christ is coming to
fetch them to his Father's House; his Father will make them welcome, and give
them house-room; and though they change dwelling places, yet they shall not
change their Master, nor their services: His Servants shall serve him, Revel.
22.3.

SECT. IV.
MOreover, you are to understand that Heaven is the Throne and Kingdom of God:
Thus says the Lord, Heaven is my Throne, Isai. 66.7. Here is the height of a
Christians glory and exaltation, to be taken up into the Throne of God;
according to that speech of our Savior, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will
I give to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and sat down with
my Father in his Throne. Christ at the last day will say to the Sheep on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the World: You that have followed me in the regeneration,
to you I have appointed a Kingdom. Luke 22.29. Fear not little Flock, it is
your Father's will to give you a Kingdom. Rev. 2.10. Be faithful to the death,
and I will give thee the Crown of life. In one place it is called a Crown of
righteousness, in another a Crown of glory, in a third a Crown of incorruption,
and elsewhere a Crown of life.

Now Crowns you know are given either as Ensigns of Majesty, or Rewards of
Virtue.

1. As Ensigns of Majesty; therefore we see they are worn on the heads of
Emperors and Princes, when at times of highest solemnity they will show their
greatest magnificence.

2. As Rewards of Virtue; therefore by ancient stories it appears, that
almost all Nations, such as excelled in Valor or in Learning, they were
Crowned with one thing or another; some with Roses, some with Laurel, or Bays,
some with Olives, some with Gold, that so they might cherish the profession and
exercise of Arts and Virtues: to these the Scripture alluding, it promises
Crowns, and a Kingdom, as the goodliest rewards we can either desire or
receive, to such as through faith and patience overcome either the affections
of their sinful Nature, or the afflictions of this wretched World. Hence I
infer, how abject soever the condition of the Saints be upon Earth, it shall be
most glorious in Heaven; glory shall follow their sufferings, as the day
follows the night; there is no glory upon Earth you know greater then the
glory of Kings: it is true, Popes of late days have striven to out-climb them;
so the Bramble in Jotham's Parable would have out-climbed the Cedar; they would
persuade the World, that they were created as the Sun to rule the Day, that is,
over the Clergy; and that Kings are but as the Moon, to rule over the Night,
that is (say they) over the Laity: But Popes are no Creatures of God's making;
Kings are the anointed of the Lord; God himself has given testimony sufficient
of their magnificence, in that it has pleased him to change Names with them,
and taken their Name to himself; he is called a King, and gives them his own
Name in exchange, for therefore he has said, they are Gods.

I urge it the rather, because of the inference that follows; for the greater
Kings are, the greater Christians are; for Christians are said to be Kings,
Rev. 1.6. He has made us all Kings and Priests unto God. And to the meanest
and most abject Christian a Crown shall be given, infinitely far more excellent
and glorious then the Crowns of all earthly Kings.

1. In respect of the Sovereignty that belongs to it: Crowns are Ensigns of
Sovereignty, as I hinted before; and Sovereignty is a thing much accounted of:
to be but as the Centurion was, would put a spirit of ambition into us, that we
might have those under us, to whom when we say, Go, they should go; when Come,
they should come; when Do this, they should do it. If we could have not only
Persons, but Provinces under our subjection, and could make our selves
Commanders and Rulers over Countries and Kingdoms, so that People should serve
us, and Nations should bow before us, this would kindle a great fire of
ambition in us; it would make one that had the aspiring mind of Absalom to
snatch the Crown from his Father's head. If we could climb higher yet, and get
to be not only Sovereigns over diverse Provinces, as Ahasuerus was, but also be
Monarchs of the whole World, as it is said Alexander was, so that the Princes
of all Nations should pay Tribute to our Coffers, Si jus violandum, regni causa
violandum. Caesar ex Euripide.
and the People of all Countries bow their knees before our footstool; this
(if any thing) would inflame our ambition; and if at all, for a Kingdom one
would violate the bonds of Nature, or Justice (as one long ago was wont to say)
for such a Kingdom as this, he would be provoked to the doing of it.

Alas, Beloved, all this is nothing in comparison of the Sovereignty belonging
to the heavenly Crown and Kingdom; the poorest Saint in Heaven shall be more
glorious in Sovereignty then ever Ahasuerus or Alexander were, or then ever
Adam was when he was Lord of the whole World; for look what was said of our
Savior, Heb. 2.8. All things shall be subdued, all things shall be brought in
subjection to him; and when it is said, all things shall be subdued, there is
nothing left out that shall not be subdued: the same may be said of every
faithful Member of Christ, they shall every one have a share in this Rule and
Dominion; even all things shall be brought under their subjection; the very
Angels shall then be made subject to them: where Christ sits, they shall sit;
whom Christ judges, they shall judge; and as Christ reigns, they shall reign
also.

2. In respect of the safety that belongs to it: there is no Crown so settled
upon the head of any earthly Prince, as that he can promise to himself
perpetual safety under it; either safety from sickness and diseases, or safety
from Adversaries and Enemies, either domestical or foreign, but that he is in
danger of both. Kings are as much in danger of sickness as other men; for
Chairs of State are not Castles of health, nor can their Crowns keep their
heads from aching; they are as much in danger of Enemies as other men, nay they
more then others: every railing Shimei has a tongue to bark at them; every
traitorous Sheba will be blowing trumpets of rebellion against them; but the
Crown of glory shall sit sure upon the heads of the faithful, even with as much
safety as majesty; no sickness shall be able to blast it, no Enemy to endanger
it. St. Paul says, that all our Enemies shall be put under our feet, 1 Cor.
15.27. And the Prophet says, All tears shall be wiped from our faces, Isai.
25.8.

3. In respect of the peace and tranquillity of it: the Princes of the Earth,
though they have a great many more honors, yet they have a great many more
burdens then other men; their Crowns are thicker stuck with cares then with
gems: That made one of the Emperors say, when the Imperial Robe was brought
him to put on, Oh nobilem magis quam faelicem pannum: Oh here is a Robe, says
he, fuller of bravery then felicity. It Is otherwise with the Crown of glory,
this Crown is as free from troubles as from dangers; they that are crowned with
it, are crowned with peace as well as with honor; it shall not disquiet them
with cares, but give them rest from their labors; rest and peace shall ever
wait upon them, whom God shall vouchsafe so to dignifie, as to let their
Temples be empall'd with this glorious Crown.

4. In respect of perpetuity: therefore the Apostle calls it a Crown of Life,
James 1.12. because they that are crowned with it shall never taste more of
death. Herein again it differs from all earthly Crowns, and excells as much as
it differs; earthly Kingdoms and Crowns are subject to alteration, to
dissipation: Job tells us, that God sometimes loses the collars of Kings, Job
12.13. It was told Saul, when he had been a while King over Israel, that God
had rent his Kingdom from him, and given it to his Neighbor, 1 Samuel 15.28. But
howsoever, though the Crown be not translated, yet he that wears the Crown must
be translated; Death will translate the greatest Princes to another place,
though while they live their Crowns be not translated to other Persons, but sit
fast upon their own heads; but it is otherwise with this Crown of life, there
shall be no alteration nor removal at all, either from it to us, or from us to
it, when once we shall have it conferred upon us: Were the Kingdoms of the Earth
never so full of glory and happiness, yet what they want of perpetuity, they
want of perfect felicity; there can be no perfection of blessedness, but where
there is perpetuity of continuance: so there shall be here: St. Paul calls it
an immarcessible Crown. St. Peter calls it an immortal inheritance that shall
never fade away, 1 Pet. 1.4. It is said of the Bread of life, John 6. that he
that eats of it, shall hunger no more; and of the Water of life, John 4. he
that drinks thereof, shall thirst no more: so I may say of this Crown of
life, whosoever is crowned with it, he shall die no more. How should the
consideration hereof make us to labor for this glorious Crown? what a shame is
it to see what pains men will take for a little honor, that comes short of a
Kingdom? what pains to satisfy their lusts, and to get a little of the World,
and that we should take so little pains for the Kingdom of Heaven? So run,
says the Apostle, that you may obtain; not a corruptible, 1 Cor. 9.24, 25.
but an incorruptible Crown: Those that run for a corruptible Crown, they are
temperate in all things; they eat and drink very little, they diet their
bodies; they neither cumber their bodies with superfluous garments, nor their
stomachs with superfluous meats and drinks, because these things would hinder
them in their contention, and make them lose the Crown and Garland they run
for. Now if there be so much striving for a fading Crown, how should Christians
deny themselves, striving for that Crown of glory which is in Heaven? a Crown
not made of Ivory and Laurel, but made out of the Tree of Life, such as is not
of a withering and fading nature: Here is not jus violandum, but only jugum
tolerandum; no law of obedience that we are to break, but a yoke of patience
that we must learn to bear, to make us capable of this Crown.

How should this also stir up every Christian to walk worthy of God, who has
called him to his Kingdom and glory? 1 These. 2.11, 12. Remember it is a Kingdom
we look after, let us labor to have kingly affections; it is an heavenly
Kingdom, let us learn to lead heavenly conversations. When one urged Alexander
to run at the Olympian games, he answered, Do Kings run there? So when the
Devil, or the World, do tempt us to sin, let us answer, Do the Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven do so? The Egyptians had a pretty Hieroglyphick, Plerij
Hieroglyph.
by which they described a great man that was unworthily given, they described
him by an Elephant hunting for Flies; you may imagine what an unseemly sight
that would be, for so huge a creature as an Elephant, to hunt so poor a prey as
a Fly. Nothing is so unseemly, or unworthy, as for one that professes
Christianity to be vainly or vitiously given; to be an earthworm, a wanton, a
belly-god, this is neither Christianly, nor becoming spiritual Kings: show your
selves more heavenly disposed, if you look for an heavenly Kingdom; heavenly
thoughts, heavenly desires, heavenly speeches, and heavenly actions do best
become those that look for heavenly Crowns. Finally, let the thoughts of your
high dignity comfort you, O Christians, under all your sorrows: So the Roman
Emperor said to Galba in his minority, taking him up by the chin, Tu Galba
quandoque imperium degustabis: Thou, O Galba, shall one day be an Emperor,
therefore be not sad. So I may say to thee, Cheer up, O disconsolate Christian,
thou shall one day be a King, and wear a Crown of glory; think often of your
Crown and Kingdom, and drive away the sadness of your hearts, for ere long ye
shall be raised from a dunghill of miseries to an heavenly Kingdom; and the
greater your sufferings are, so much the more bright and glorious will your
Crown be.

SECT. V.
FUrthermore, Heaven is the place where the Saints inheritance lies; they are
now Heirs of a Kingdom, but not Inheritors; but there is a time when they shall
enjoy that inheritance. The Scripture sets forth what manner of inheritance
Heaven shall be to the Saints.

1. It is a rich and glorious inheritance; some inheritances on Earth are so
charged and clogged, that though the inheritance be rich, yet the Heir is poor,
and can hardly get a living out of it, because though he receive much, yet he
pays much out of it again; but here is no charge nor burden in any kind, but
this inheritance that is above is absolutely free, a rich and glorious
inheritance. He that is an Heir of Heaven, never needs to trouble himself to
grow rich in this World, if his Ancestors have left him no possessions, says
St. Augustine; the man that loves earthly riches, has but little mind to the
true riches, to the heavenly inheritance, and he that is besotted with the
delights of this present World, never dreameth of the everlasting pleasures of
the World to come: but he that has God for his portion, may say with David,
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly inheritage,
Psalm. 16.6. God comprehends all imaginable perfections; nothing is dispersed in
the creature, which is not recollected in the Creator; in Heaven we shall enjoy
all things in God; and nothing can be wanting to him that enjoys all things;
for in him is a conservation of all things that are truly and solidly good: in
Heaven God himself shall be our rich and glorious inheritance; and one of the
chiefest advantages we shall reap in glory, is, that God will be to us instead
of all things; and that finding in him the accomplishment of all our desires,
we shall there meet with our perfect happiness.

2. It is an inheritance of inconceivable excellency: our inheritance is so
excellent, that we cannot so much as form an Idea of it, we want words to
express its excellencies; and indeed this might impose silence upon us, if the
liberty we have to speak of God (though incomprehensible) did not permit us to
speak and write of this glorious inheritance, the blessedness whereof is
unconceivable: and as when treating of God's perfections, when we follow the
light of the holy Scriptures, we cannot fail; so if we sail by the same Star,
we cannot wander in this vast Ocean of glory; and this is sure, we need not
fear shipwreck on a Sea, where all that are drowned may boast themselves happy.

3. It is an incorruptible inheritance, an inheritance that never fades away,
1 Pet. 1.4. in regard of the beauty and glory of it; it is a metaphor taken
from flowers; the grass withers, the flower fades, but this inheritance
never fades. All creatures that were made for the use of man, were subject to
vanity for the sin of man; but this Heaven at the first was not made for the
use of man, but for God himself, therefore it is incorruptible. What a shame is
it that we can ride and run for a lease of two or three years, but the
inheritance that fades not away is not esteemed by us? and as this inheritance
is incorruptible, so likewise it is undefiled, in regard it is not subject to
any abuse of the creatures; no unclean thing enters into it.

4. It is an immortal inheritance: though a Christian's life be subject to
change, and his days upon earth must have an end, yet his inheritance abides
for ever; yea, God himself is the everlasting inheritance of his people, who
fills their desires, perfecteth all the powers of their souls, and
communicates himself so freely and so fully to his Children, that they are
abundantly satisfied: God is the inheritance of his People to eternity, and it
is no presumption to style him so, August. in Psalm. 32.
says St. Augustine, though he be our Creator, and our Sovereign, because it
is the fervency of our desire, and the sweetness of our hope, that puts this
name into our mouths.

5. It is a sure and safe inheritance; it is reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet.
1.4. A Christian's tenure is the fairest, firmest, and surest, therefore it is
great wisdom to lay hold on this heavenly inheritance, 1 Timothy 6.12. We know it
is worldly wisdom to lay up our treasures in safe places; and shall not we be
so wise in spiritual matters, where our treasure far surpasses all earthly
things?

Now here let us see the differences between temporal inheritances, and the
heavenly inheritance.

I. Some earthly Parents are very poor, and can leave their children no
inheritance to make them Heirs, only they inherit their corruptions, and
punishments due to them; but all God's Children are rich Heirs, they are all
fellow Citizens of the New Jerusalem, of the Household of God, inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Ephesians. 2.19. they are all made meet partakers of the
inheritance among the Saints in light, Colos. 1.12. Christ is the great Heir of
all things; and all the Saints, be they never so poor outwardly, yet are they
Coheirs with Christ, Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, James 2.5.

II. Fathers that have inheritances, do often leave them but to one of their
Children; as Abraham left the inheritance to Isaac, and gave gifts only to the
Sons of the Concubines, Genesis 25.5, 6. but here all God's Children have the
heavenly inheritance. Upon Earth, if all do inherit the Father's substance,
then it is divided, and every one has the less; but Heaven is not divided by
lot, as Canaan was, which was a type of it; there the inheritance of the one
does not diminish the inheritance of the other; their inheritance is so large,
that the number of Heirs cannot diminish it; the good that they hope for, has
two properties that secure it from envy; it is one, and cannot be divided; it
is infinite, and suffices many thousands: it is unity is the cause that every
one possesses it entire; it is infinity, that none are afraid of a lessening;
they are all rich of the same inheritance, they are all happy by the same
felicity: For, as Gregory says, That heavenly inheritance unto all is one, and
unto one is all; for as much as every one of the blessed Saints rejoices as
much at the joys and felicities of all others, as if he were in possession of
the same. Heaven becomes all to all, and all to every one; as all enjoy the
light of the Sun when it shines; every one in Heaven is well pleased with
another happiness, and with his own; and the charity that reigns among the
Saints there, does so intimately unite their hearts, that the diversity of
particulars disturbeth not the blessedness of the whole.

III. On Earth Parents leave their inheritances to their Children, because they
die, and can keep them no longer; but God lives for ever, and bestows the
inheritance upon us: in the World Parents die before their Children may
inherit; but God is immortal, and Death never seperates the Children from the
Father; he has Heirs, but no Successors; he despoils not himself to enrich
them, but living and reigning with them, he confers his inheritance upon them
without loosing it.

IV. In this World all Sons and Heirs do not live to take possession of their
inheritance; but all God's Heirs shall be infallibly possessed of their
heavenly inheritance; the possession thereof shall be given them by Jesus
Christ himself, the Heir of all things; he shall come from Heaven to conduct
them to Heaven, and put them into the possession of their inheritance in the
view of the whole World; and it shall be given to them in their best state,
when they are most fitted and qualified to that condition which is suitable to
their state; for in the state that now we are, we are not in a capacity to be
put into possession of that heavenly inheritance.

V. Some Heirs, if they live to be of age, yet they are often kept from their
inheritance, defrauded of it, or unjustly turned out of it, that either they
come not into actual possession, or cannot long keep it; but none shall keep
God's Children out of their inheritance, or defraud them of it.

Now this inheritance comes to us by the right of Sonship only; If Sons, then
Heirs, says St. Paul, Romans 8.17. Only the Children of God are Heirs of Heaven:
the Wicked have no portion in this inheritance, it is for Sons; the Son of
Hagar must have no inheritance with the Son of Sarah; the Bondwoman and her
Son must be cast out. The Wicked are like Slaves, who labor not but for their
Master; they till the Ground, but reap not the Fruit; they plant Vine-yards,
but drink not of the Wine; they suffer much pain and another tastes the
pleasure: they are not as Wives, called into a community of goods; they are not
as Children, admitted to share in the inheritance; but the Servants of God find
riches in their poorest outward estate; their Master adopting them for his
Children, makes them his Heirs; and before he gives them his glory for their
portion, he gives them the earnest of the Spirit for their assurance of this
inheritance.

Then cast away all carking cares, O Christian, since thy inheritance is in
Heaven; and be not disquieted, though happily God deal no better with thee for
the present then with a Servant, for that is a discipline fit to prepare thee
for thine inheritance: God may bring some great and sharp affliction upon thee,
he may beat thee, buffet thee, scourge thee, yet thou can not loose thine
inheritance, for it is entailed, and God has made it sure to thee by his
promise, Romans 9.8. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Heb. 6.17. Oh do not grudge at the
happiness of the wicked; do they prosper? have they all things at will? thou
art not inferior to them, for thou also have an inheritance reserved for thee;
and this inheritance is not bought by thee, but fitted and prepared for thee;
and thou shall have no ruinous Cottage, but that which is fit for thy purpose
when thou come to Heaven; and whatsoever losses thou meetest with in this
World, loss of Wife, Children, Goods, Friends, Life, yet thou can not lose
thine Inheritance: This caused the Hebrews with joy to endure the spoiling of
their goods, knowing that in Heaven they had a more enduring substance, Hebr.
10.34.

Let us all therefore labor to become the Sons of God; and that we may be so,
let us labor for faith to believe in Christ, and labor after all the graces
of God's Spirit, hereby we shall be made meet partakers of the inheritance
among the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. The inheritance is given to the
sanctified, Acts 26.18. to such as are in Christ, and of Christ, by faith
unfeigned, Gal. 3.29. Let us all labor to make God our inheritance; as God
has right and title to us, so let us labor by faith to challenge the same in
him; and not be like a foolish child, who would buy his father's inheritance,
when he was born to it, and it is his right: Like the Papists, who think by
their own merits to purchase to themselves the Kingdom of Heaven, to which
(were they God's Children, and belonged to him) they would be Heirs apparent.
Reader, clear up thy right to this inheritance, and keep thy indentures safe,
and let Satan come with the offer of Kingdoms to thee, as he did to Christ,
then will thou not, with profane Esau, sell thine inheritance: Oh take heed of
that profane speech of his, in saying, What is this Birthright to me? Genesis
25.32. but say with Naboth, God forbid that I should sell the Inheritance of my
Fathers unto thee, 1 Reg. 21.3. St. Augustine speaking to his Auditors, uttered
these notable words; Let us be grieved to see men distracted with the diversity
of their desires; let us see their different conditions, which arise from the
difference of their designs; let some take Arms, and seek for glory in the
mouth of danger; hazard their lives to get themselves a name, and place their
happiness in killing and slaying; let others more harmless, but less ambitious,
plead at the Bar, gain reputation in defending innocence, and aspire to the
glory of Orators, being not able to purchase that of Conquerors; let others
more humble, but not less interessed, hold commerce and traffic with
Strangers, pass the Seas to content their avarice, descend into the bowels of
the Earth to dig out treasures; let others more innocent, but not less
miserable, till the ground, master barrenness by their laborious improvement,
and at the years end reap a rich and plentiful Harvest; let all these different
conditions divide the heap of perishable goods between them, but let Believers,
instructed in a better School, protest that God and Heaven are their portion,
and that now and for ever they will have no other inheritance. Finally, this
consideration, that Heaven is a Christian's inheritance, may comfort thee
against the death of thy godly Friend: Though thy Friend be gone to another
City, yet grieve not overmuch, he is gone but to his Lordship, to his own
inheritance; and let all true Believers resolve to let the movables go, since
the inheritance is theirs.

SECT. VI. Shows that Heaven is the place where the Saints shall receive
their reward.
IN the next place, I shall show you that Heaven is that blessed place where
the Saints shall receive their great and glorious reward. The Scripture tells
us, that Verily there is a reward for the righteous, Psalm. 58.11. and this
reward shall be a great reward; and the place where they shall receive this
reward is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.12. There is a twofold reward: Praemium
Vincentium;
Merces Laborantium.
The Reward of Conquerors;
The Wages of Laborers.


1. The Reward of Conquerors: Blessed is the man that endures tribulation; for
when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, James 1.12. A Crown is
the honor of those that strive, of those that were put into the Lists; and St.
Gregory says well, The Crown is the reward of Victory. True it is, all the
Saints have the promise of a glorious Crown and reward, but they have a special
promise thereunto that endure tribulation, because they are brought to the
strife of faith, and have fought the good fight, and kept the faith, as St.
Paul speaks of himself, and upon this he challenges his reward, 2 Timothy 4.8. It
pleases God many times to show his great power and mercy in the strengthening
of those that suffer for the truth, when they come to seal the profession of it
with their blood, with invincible courage he enableth them to endure the pains
of Martyrdom, even to the admiration of the beholders, and many times to the
astonishment of the tormentors themselves; they go to be martyred, as if they
were going to be married; they embrace the Cross, they kiss the Stake, they
sing Psalms to God in the midst of the Fire; they are filled with such Divine
raptures, as you would rather think them in their Transfiguration, then at
their Execution; this is praemium ante praemium, a reward beforehand: But that
which heightens their courage, and makes them to glory in tribulation, is the
consideration of that great reward that is laid up for them in Heaven: this is
like the opening of the Heavens to Stephen, that encouraged him to resist unto
the loss of his blood.

2. There is the reward of Laborers, the wages of them that work and labor in
the Vineyard; the Labourer labors all the day, but at night he receives his
penny, Matthew. 20. The Laborers in the Vineyard were called in at night, and
received every one his penny, that is, his proper reward; the Lord would have
his work well done, and he will spare for no cost; the diligent shall not lose
their labor; the justice of God requires it, that he should pay his Servants
their wages when they have done their work; their labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Object. But it may be said, if eternal life be a reward, or wages, then the
labors of his Children are meritorious.

Sol. 1. By way of relation to merit: there is wages of grace, not of merit;
though the Greek and Latin words (...), and merces, rather signify hire, or
wages, then gift, or reward: Yet St. Paul teaches us to distinguish, that
(...), wages, may be reckoned to a man by favor, not by debt, Romans 4.4. This
appears in them who being called into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, yet
received a penny for wages by favor, not by debt, as much as they who were
first called, and had born the burden and heat of the day.

2. It is wages in regard of the promise of God, for he has promised to give
eternal life to them that believe and obey him; the performance whereof they
may lawfully expect, though they cannot deserve it: Promise is a debt, and God
has made himself a Debtor to his People by promise. If a Subject, or Servant
to a King, does him any remarkable service, it is but his duty; yet such is the
usual bounty of Princes, as they will abundantly reward it, as is manifest
Esther 6.3.

3. It is called wages, because God recompenseth the obedience of his Children
of free mercy through the obedience of Christ; it is not such a wages as a
Master gives his Servant for his labor, but as a Father gives his Child; of
love, not of merit. Therefore says St. Paul, Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily,
as to the Lord, and not to men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance, Colos. 3.23, 24. for ye serve the Lord Christ,
Ephesians. 2.9. We are saved by grace, not of works, lest any man should boast.

4. It is called wages, not in regard of merit, but in regard of order; because
as wages is usually given at the end of the labor, so this reward is given at
the end of our days. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee the
Crown of life, Rev. 2.10.

5. In regard of faith, that looks at salvation as the end and wages of all her
labors. St. Peter writing to those of the dispersion, speaks of their
receiving the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Object. But it may be said, this reward is conditional, Romans 8.17. that if we
suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him; where merits seem not to be
excluded.

Sol. I answer, the condition notes out there the order, not the cause of
reigning; which may serve to comfort us in afflictions, Luke 17.7, 8.

Now I shall make it evident, that this reward is a reward of mercy, not out of
merit. For

1. In a merit there must be relatio muneris and remunerati; a relation between
our giving to God, and his giving to us; and it is not possible for the
infinite God to receive any thing from us: we can give nothing to him, but what
at first came from him, as David speaks 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 14. Who has first
given to God, and it shall be recompensed to him again? Romans 11.35.

2. The obedience performed must be materia indebita, to make it meritorious;
but we are every way bound to God; we are bound by the bond of Creation to be
serviceable to him: By Nature we owe him our service, from whom we receive our
being. We are also bound by the bond of Redemption; we are none of our own, but
his that has ransomed us, and therefore wholly incapable of meriting any thing
at the hands of God. Every meritorious work must be free, proceeding from our
own mere good pleasure, it must not be a duty which we are bound to do: now all
that we do or suffer, is but duty commanded by God, and we stand bound under
many obligations to do them; works of duty cannot merit.

3. Every meritorious work, must be a man's own proper work: now the good we
do, is not of our selves, but of God that gives us the ability of performing
it; it is by the grace of God we are enabled to do and suffer. To you it is
given to believe, and to suffer for Christ, Phil. 1.29. It is God that works
in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. It is God that works all our works
in us, and for us, Isai. 26.12. We are infinitely indebted to God for enabling
us to do any thing for God; and the giving of one gift, is an obligation that
therefore one should give another ex condigno.

4. In a merit, the work done must bear proportion with the reward; now what is
the giving of a mite, or penny, to the purchase of a Kingdom? what proportion
is there between an infinite reward, and a finite work? an eternal reward, and
a temporary work? such is our work, such is God's reward. So Christ to his
Disciples, Luke 17.10. When you have done all those things which are commanded
you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to
do.

5. There is so much defect in our best works, that it is impossible they
should merit any thing out of justice; for who can think they should deserve
punishment out of justice, and merit a reward out of justice too? That work
which meriteth must be perfectly perfect, there must be no flaw, not a shadow
of privative imperfection in it; if God should be extreme to mark what we have
done amiss, Hell would be the reward ^our best works. Now though glory be
called a ^eward, yet it is a mere gift of grace: Eternal life is the gift of
God, says the Apostle, Romans 6.23. Christ says of his Sheep, I give unto them
eternal life, John 10.28. It is called both a gift, and a reward, secundum
quid, and in respect it is called a reward but simply and absolutely, Abbot de
Meriti^.
it is only a gift; compare eternal life to the work, and look no further, so
the Scripture calls it a reward; but consider the original from whence the work
it self also proceeds, and all is merely and wholly gift, says learned
Bishop Abbot.

6. Hereby the merits of Christ would be made of no validity; Christ has
merited for us to the uttermost, and nothing can be contributed by us, because
he has done it alone: so then eternal life follows upon an holy life; not as
remunerated from any merit of ours, but as conferred in much mercy by God for
the merits of Christ. I shall now show that the reward in Heaven is a great
reward. Aquinas on Matthew. 5.11. Aquin. Suppl. 3. portis. quaest. ^6.
assigns to three Orders of glorified Saints (namely, to Virgins, Doctors,
and Martyrs) a special Crown of glory, excelling in glory the Crowns of other
Saints. I should spend time, but to little purpose, should I tell you the idle
figments of the Schoolmen about these Crowns, as that the Virgins shall have a
white Crown, the Doctors a green Crown, the Martyrs a red Crown; such hay,
straw, and stubble have the overcurious heads of the Schoolmen laid upon this
foundation. I shall wave this, and show you how the reward in Heaven is called
a great reward.

I. It is great absolutely in it self considered; the great God himself is the
reward of his Saints, the Kingdom of Heaven is their reward; we should count an
earthly Kingdom a great reward, much more all the Kingdoms in the World, that
is a vast reward indeed; but what is all the World, and the Kingdoms thereof,
in comparison of Heaven? it is but as a drop of a Bucket compared to the Sea,
the dust in the Balance compared to the Earth, and a spark of Fire compared to
the Sun; there is some comparison in these, for both are finite; but there is
no proportion between God and the whole World; perfection of holiness,
perfection of glory, perfection of joy, perfection of pleasure is this great
reward.

II. Consider the properties of this reward, and you will see it is a great
reward.

1. It is an infinite reward, far above the sight of the eye, it cannot
comprehensively behold it; the ear cannot hear the greatness of it; the heart
cannot conceive it: Were the Sea ink, and the Heavens parchment, and all Angels
and Men set on work to delineate the greatness of it, they could not describe
it; the reward is great, according as God is, and who knows how great he is?

2. It is an all-sufficient, and all-satisfying reward: why does the holy Ghost
call it after so many names, sometimes calling it the Kingdom of Heaven, the
sight of God, a Crown, a Crown of life, joy, Rivers of pleasures, sometimes a
Supper, the Marriage of the Lamb, white Robes, Paradise? the reason is, because
it is so great, that one expression is not enough to describe it; it is an
all-sufficient, and an all-satisfying reward. When the great day of recompense
shall come, wherein God will bestow his reward upon his Saints, all Heaven
shall cry out, Lord, I have enough, I need no more, I desire no more: this
reward is common to millions of glorified Saints, and all are satisfied with
it. Christ himself is a most satisfying object; the beauty of his face, the
smell of his garments, the Sea and Rivers of Salvation, that capacious and wide
Heaven, where God, his Angels and Saints are, are intrinsecally, and of
themselves most ravishing, and soul-satisfying objects; there the Soul
drinks, and drinks abundantly, and is fully satisfied, so that the vessel
can hold no more; there the Soul is always quietly reposing it self in the arms
and embraces of the glorious Prince Immanuel, always sucking the breasts of his
eternal consolations, and delighting it self with the abundance of glory.

3. It is called a great reward comparate, compared to the active and passive
obedience of Saints in this World: For as learned Spanhemius observes on
Matthew. 5.11. Spanhem. dub. Evangel.
our Savior does not make comparison between reward, and reward of Saints, the
greater and the lesser, between Crowns of glory, one more illustrious then
another, but between our service on Earth, and God's reward in Heaven; it is
then a great or much reward in order to our sufferings: let the measure of our
persecutions be full, pressed down, and running over, yet our reward shall be
infinitely more full, pressed down, and running over; the joy of the Saints in
Heaven shall infinitely exceed the smart of all their sufferings, as has
before been largely declared.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, Whether we may have an eye to the reward in
our obedience? The Papists cry out upon us, as if we did deny that the godly
ought to have respect unto the promised reward to quicken them to duty: And it
is true, that some mistaking Divines have subscribed to this opinion, that in
no case a godly man is to eye the glory promised to quicken him to duty;
because, say they, in so doing we show forth mercenary, not filial duty; and we
do not do and suffer for God's sake, but for the reward.

Resp. There is no doubt but we may have an eye to the glorious reward, else
why does our Savior here, and in other places, propose the reward to us, and
promise a reward? And it is said of Moses, that he had an eye to the recompense
of the reward, Heb. 11.26. Yea, it is said of Christ, Heb. 12.2. that for the
glory set before him, he endured the cross, and despised the shame. Although we
may not chiefly aim at our own profit, but the performance of God's pleasure;
yet surely we may be moved to the doing our duties for hope of reward, as also
restrained from sin, though not principally, yet partly for fear of punishment;
else why would God use threatenings and promises in the Scripture? says Peter
Martyr. Pet. Mart. loc. com.
Here let us observe these Rules.

1. The glory of God must be the primary mark at which we must chiefly aim; as
he made all things primarily for his glory, so must we do all to the same end:
did our lives stand in competition with God's glory, we ought to choose rather
to seek the advancing of God's glory, then to seek to preserve our lives; nay,
if our very salvation stood in competition with the glory of God, we ought to
choose rather the advancement of God's glory, then to seek for our own
salvation: yet God's mercy is so great to us, that his glory and our salvation
are so compacted together, that we cannot seek the one, but we shall infallibly
obtain the other.

2. Our own duty must next to the glory of God, have the uppermost room in our
hearts; the duty which we owe to God in doing and suffering, must be respected
before the reward which God will give us; his holy commands must be a stronger
incitement to duty, then his gifts. It was a notable act of a Woman, reported
by Gregory Nazianzen, who carried fire in one hand, and water in another,
saying, Bellarmine says, Magis honorificum est, habere aliquid ex merito, quam
ex sola donatione.

Tapper says, Absit, ut justi vitam aeternam expectent sicut pauper
cleemosynam, multo honorificentius est, ipsos quasi victores, and triumphatores
came possidere, tanquam palmam suis sudoribus debitam. Tapper Tom. 2. Act. 9.


With fire she would burn the Heavens, with water she would drown the World,
that she might know her own heart, whether she loved God for God's sake, or for
his rewards.

3. We must not eye the reward, qua merces, as it is a reward due, but as it is
a gift of free grace; not as it is a remunerating act of God's justice, but as
a crowning act and fruit of free mercy. Then see the pride of Papists, who say,
it were not for their honor to have eternal life gratis.

4. We may look on the reward as God's favor, and as an encouragement he
proposes to us, to move us the more swiftly to run the race that is set before
us. Every one propounds this to himself in any undertaking, Quid habebo? What
shall I have if I do or suffer? And St. Peter proves the question, Lord, we
have left all and followed thee, and what shall we receive? It was a custom
among great Princes, when they set upon any notable work, they would encourage
the undertakers to come to the work by the propounding of wages, prizes, and
rewards: but we must have an eye to the reward, non tam ut utile nobis, quam ut
bonum in se; not so much as it is profitable to us, and looking to our own
advantage, as to the goodness of the reward it self.

5. We may look on the recompense of the reward, as an incitation to patience
under sufferings; we need encouragement to move us to patience under all those
miseries and discouragements that attend our following Christ: Hence it was
that Christ, to allay the sharpness of suffering, propounds the greatness of
the reward; this caused Moses to choose rather to suffer afflictions with God's
people, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season;
esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches, then all the treasures of
Egypt; for, or because he had an eye to the recompense of the reward, Heb.
11.25, 26. Now how should the consideration of this great reward in Heaven,
which a Christian shall receive for his poor labors and sufferings in this
World, make him willing to die, that he may receive his reward: for as a weary
Traveller, having even almost tired himself with heavy labor, or hard
journying, is willing to go to receive his wages of his Master, and afterward
to betake himself to his rest; so should a good Christian, that has fought a
good fight, kept the faith, and almost finished his course, be willing to die,
to go to receive his reward. With this consideration Hilarion speaks to his
trembling Soul upon his Deathbed, Hieron. in vit. Hilar.
Egredere Anima, cur times egredi; go forth my Soul, go forth; depart out of
this prison of pain into a place of pleasure: have thou served Christ these
seventy years, and do thou fear to take thy wages now thou have done thy
work? Let this therefore be matter of shame to us, that we have done so little
work, considering the greatness of the reward; as a holy dying Martyr said, I
am exceedingly grieved, that being now to receive so great a reward, I have
done so little work. Truly, O Lord, thou art great above all gods, and great is
thy reward; for thou art not great, August. in Soliloq.
and thy reward little; thou art the rewarder, and the reward of eternal
happiness it self, says St. Augustine.

SECT. VII. Shows that Heaven is the place where God shall give his People a
kind welcome, and loving entertainment.
HEaven is also the place where God will most affectionately receive all his
Children to himself; with much love and tenderness of affection at the last
day, they shall be received into the arms of his embraces. Thou shall guide me
with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory, Psalm. 73.24. that is, thou
shall receive me with a most vehement and ardent affection. When the prodigal
Son was but coming toward his Father, when he was yet afar off, his Father ran
toward him, and fell upon his neck and kissed him; now this is but a shadow of
that full and glorious reception of the Saints to himself, when God shall make
them all glorious, and receive them without spot or wrinkle: if this Prodigal
returning from his Harlots, and coming in his rags, was thus acceptable and
welcome to his Father, Oh what abundance of love will God then express to his
Saints at the last day, when they shall be all clothed in long white robes,
and be received into the perfection of glory! Mark what is said to the faithful
Servant, Well done thou good and faithful Servant; thou have been faithful over
a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord, Matthew. 25.23. Then will the Lord Jesus most affectionately say to
all his Servants, Enter my dear Friends, and receive your consolation; enter
Servants, and receive your wages; enter my Children, and take possession of
your patrimony and inheritance; enter my Brethren, and receive your portion:
and all ye that have fought the good fight, and kept the faith, and offered
violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, enter ye, and take your Crowns. He does not
say, Come toward it, and look upon it with a greedy desire, and earnest longing
after your happiness, but (...), come into the joy of thy Lord, take part and
possession of it with abundance of delight and satisfaction. The soul of man in
this World is capable of more pleasure then the eye or ear, yea then all the
senses can bring in to her; our soul can drink up all the pleasures at one
draught, it can presently swallow them up; but the joys of Heaven do exceed the
desires of our souls; therefore says Christ, Enter thou into thy Master's joy;
he does not say, let the joy of thy Master enter into thee: it is to show, that
the joy of our glorious condition does infinitely surpass the largest capacity
of our souls, though they be stretched to the uttermost. So at the last day
Christ will say to the Sheep on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World, Matthew.
25.34. The first word is Venite, Come; it is the voice of the Bridegroom that
says, Come; Come to me my Spouse; that where the Husband is, there the Bride,
the Lamb's Wife may be; that where the Head is, there the Members may be; where
the Father is, there the Children may be; where the Master is, there the
Servants may be; where the Prince and Captain of our Salvation is, there his
Fellow Soldiers may be. When Christ was going out of the World, he chears up
the hearts of his Disciples with these consolatory words; Let not your hearts
be troubled; in my Father's House are many Mansions, I go to prepare a place
for you; and if I go, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where
I am, there you may be also, John 14.1, 2. See how much affection Christ
expresses in these words; if Christ said when he was upon Earth, Come to me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you; take my yoke upon
you, and you shall find rest to your souls, Matthew. 11.28, 29. then much more
will he retain the same sweetness of affection, when he comes to sit down in
his Judgment Seat. Christ is as it were a Servant among his People; Luke 22.27.
I am among you as he that serves. He condescendeth to serve his People; he
went to Heaven in Person to prepare a place for them, and he will come again in
Person to receive them thither: True it is, he will do it with a glorious Train
of Angels, yet he will come himself, and take them home to his Father's House,
that where he is, they may be also; and then will he receive them with much
affection. Come my Love, my Dove, my Spouse, my Undefiled, where have thou been
so long all this while out of my presence; come ye into my bosom, which is now
wide open ready to receive you. If Jacob's and Joseph's meeting were so
unexpressibly comfortable, when they had thought never to have seen the faces
of each other after so long a distance, Oh what shall the joy of that last day
be? and how shall those noble souls rejoice, yea, leap for joy, to whom these
soul-ravishing words are spoken, Come ye blessed of my Father? all the Music
in Heaven and Earth will not so ravish them, as this voice will do: Now, though
they were the outcasts of the World, Heaven gates shall be set wide open for
their reception; the King of glory will bid them come, and welcome; the Spirit
and the Bride say, come, etc. Come ye blessed of my Father; the World has
cursed you, but God has blessed you, yea, and you shall be blessed: Come ye
and inherit a Kingdom. I have heretofore told you of a Kingdom promised you, a
Kingdom you have often prayed for, Lord, let thy Kingdom come; come now, my
dear Friends, I am come to put you into the possession of that Kingdom; I will
make you all Kings, and you shall reign with me for ever.

Great reason there is for us to think, that God will take home all his People
to himself, with abundance of affection, at the last day; they are the Sons and
Daughters of the Lord God Almighty: and will not our heavenly Father receive
all his Sons and Daughters to glory with a most vehement affection, and take
them home to his own House, after a tedious pilgrimage in the World, wherein
they have met with harsh unkind usage? How did Jacob tender Benjamin, that he
would not let him go from him till he was forced to it, and saw the necessity
of it? but his joy is not expressed upon his return, because he heard that his
beloved Joseph was alive, and when he saw the Wagons and Charets that Joseph
had sent to fetch him and his family into Egypt. Oh then it is inconceivable
and inexpressible, with what affections our heavenly Father will take home his
Children to his everlasting habitations, when they are of full age, and ready
to receive their inheritance. Moreover, they are the temples of the holy Ghost;
and with what abundance of love (think you) will God receive the Saints, when
they are perfumed all over with sweet odours from Heaven, with all the graces
of God's Spirit. The Spirit here is the source of all Divine gifts, for being
the prime radical donation of our heavenly Father, there is no grace he confers
upon us, which bears not the image of this first and prime gratuity; the Spirit
is the pandora through which all other blessings are bestowed upon us: Now the
Spirit is given to sanctify those whom Christ has redeemed, and to preserve
them to God's heavenly Kingdom, whom Christ had purchased and delivered from
everlasting destruction. God manifested much love to his People on Earth, in
that his Spirit dwelling in his Saints, when it was often grieved by them, yet
would not leave nor quit his old habitation; what abundance of love then will
he express to them, when he shall find nothing in them that is contrary or
displeasing to him? Besides, the Saints are espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ;
and that great day wherein they are to be received to glory, shall be the full
consummation of the Marriage; Oh what abundance of love will the Lord Jesus
express to his Bride, when she shall be brought home to him after a long time
of separation one from another? With gladness and rejoicing shall they be
brought unto the King, and enter into the Kings Palace, Psalm. 45.15. Though the
Church sigh here below, she knows her Beloved will keep his word, that having
had a part in his sorrows, she shall have a share in his heavenly triumphs: Oh
how shall the countenance of the glorious Son of righteousness cheer the hearts
of God's People at the last day with abundance of joy, when he that is an
universal Friend shall supply the place of a gracious Lord, of a loving Father,
and act the part of a loving Brother, Tu mihi qui conjux, pariter scaterque
paterque.

Tu Dominus, tu Vir, tu mihi Prater eris. Ovid.

(...). Arrian in Epictet.


of a Head, of a Husband, of a Root, and be every thing to us. Methinks the
serious consideration hereof should be a forcible attractive to draw Sinners to
Christ, and to cause them to receive him into their hearts by faith; whatsoever
offers the Devil can make them, or whatsoever entertainments they may have from
the World, they are not worth a naming, to the magnificent and sumptuous
entertainment that the Lord Jesus will give to his Spouse at the last day; Oh
what a Feast will Christ make for all his Children, when he shall bring them
all together into the House of his Father; and if that word be too strait, into
the City of the great King; and if that be too strait, into the World to come,
where there shall be room enough for them all?

What comfort may the meditation hereof afford to you that are poor Christians,
that are now the outcasts of the World? know ye, though the World exclude you,
yet Heaven will receive you; though the World afford you no house-room, but
shut you out of doors, yet the everlasting Gates shall be opened to you, and
God shall take you into his own House, yea into his own Bosom; ye have a
Father in Heaven, his House is richly furnished, and there you shall be
sumptuously and royally entertained; though the World refuse to feed you with
the crumbs that fall from their tables, yet you shall eat and drink with Christ
at his table in his Kingdom; yea, he shall be your meat and drink, who is the
bread of life, and the wellspring of Salvation: the Lord will think nothing he
has too dear for you, but you shall have part with Jesus Christ, and share
with him in all his enjoyments. I have read of Cyrus, who never liked any dish
of meat, but he sent a part of it from his table to his Friends he loved most;
yea, sometimes the very bread and meat he had upon his own trencher, with this
kind and friendly salutation; Cyrus tibi ista quod ipsi fuerint jucundissima.
King Cyrus sends you this, because he likes it best himself, and holds it to be
most choice and dainty. So the Lord will entertain his People with his own
glory and felicity; whereupon St. Bernard has this expression, Non aurum
pollicetur Dominus; the Lord does not promise gold nor silver, nor precious
stones, but himself; he will be their substantial joy, and everlasting comfort.
What tongue or pen is able to set forth that large and kind entertainment that
God will give to his Children on that day, when they shall see the Lord Jesus,
like a faithful Shepherd, conducting all his Flock to the Fold, which was
ordained for them before the foundations of the World were laid; when they
shall see him like a valiant General, and triumphant Conqueror, riding in the
Heavens in the head of his troops and glorious train, who shall follow him with
Crowns on their heads, and Palm branches in their hands? Oh the shoutings, oh
the songs of joy, and vollies of praises and Hallelujahs that shall fill the
World in that great and glorious day, when Jesus Christ shall come in his own
glory, and in the glory of his Father, and of the holy Angels, Luke 9.26.

CHAP. XV.
SECT. I. Of the substance of the Saints glory.
HAving spoken of the circumstances, let us now consider more particularly the
substance of that glory and blessedness, which the glorified Saints shall
possess in their souls and bodies: and first in their bodies; but before I
speak of that glory which God will put upon the bodies of the Saints, I shall
speak of that which goes before it, and leads unto it, viz. the resurrection of
their bodies: However God's Children are subject to death as well as others,
yet they shall be raised again to a state of blessedness, and their bodies
shall be reunited to their souls. For,

1. God has decreed it, and it shall certainly come to pass. John 6.39, 40.
Christ says, This is the Father's will which has sent me, that of all which
he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the
last day; and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees
the Son, and believes in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up at the last day.

2. Christ has promised it. Hosea 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of
the grave, I will redeem them from death: O Death, I will be thy plagues; O
grave; I will be thy destruction. John 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day:
Yea, Christ has considered it by his last will and testament, John 17.22, 24.

3. It is evident by the Saints profession. Job confesses thus much plainly,
Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my flesh worms destroy this body,
yet shall I see God in my flesh; whom I myself shall see, mine eyes shall
behold, and no other for me, though my reins be consumed within me. Our
Savior, who called himself the resurrection and the life, refutes the
Sadduces, and confirms the doctrine of the Pharisees, as to that opinion,
producing a place out of the Law of Moses, and using it as an argument for the
proof thereof: As touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that
which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living,
Matthew. 22.32. with the weight of which argument he astonished the multitude,
and silenced the Sadduces. And St. Paul also asserteth the doctrine of the
resurrection, being brought before the Council, the one part whereof were
Sadduces, the other Pharisees, one denying, the other asserting the
resurrection, Acts 23.6.

SECT. II.
I Shall now prove the resurrection of the Saints bodies by arguments:

1. Else why should the Saints in all ages crucify themselves to the World,
suffer afflictions for faith in and hope of the resurrection? 1 Cor. 15.19. If
in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable; for
the wicked esteem the godly as the most miserable men in the World; and had
they only hope of the things of this life, they were then most miserable,
forasmuch as these temporal pleasures are not a sufficient reward of temporal
afflictions.

2. The bodies of the just are instruments and companions in the work of
holiness, therefore also in the reward of them in glory: now if we be dead with
Christ, we also believe that we shall live with him, Romans 6.8. without this the
bodies of the just were of all men's most miserable.

3. If the bodies of the wicked shall rise again to receive the reward of
condemnation, then by the same rule must the bodies of the Saints rise to
receive the reward of life and salvation. Christ says, that the hour is coming
when all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth,
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of damnation, John 5.28, 29. if it were not so, then
God should delight or exceed in justice, more then in mercy.

4. Because God is able to raise them out of their graves again. As the Lord by
the resurrection of dry bones revived the dead hope of Israel, Ezekiel. 37.10, 11,
12.
and made them to know, that he would open their graves, and cause them to come
out of their graves, and bring them into the Land of Israel: so when the bodies
of the Saints go down to the dust, and their bones are dried there, and their
hope seems to be lost, yet then does their flesh rest in hope, for God will not
leave them in the grave, nor suffer his holy ones always to see corruption,
Psalm. 16.9, 10.

5. Otherwise the second Adam could not repair the loss of the first Adam, and
Christ were not so strong to save as Adam was to destroy: for as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Adam was the
Author of Death's strength, and Christ of Death's resurrection.

6. Christ is an eternal King, and has an everlasting Kingdom, which cannot be
unless his Subjects also be eternal, for these are relatives, and do sese mutuo
ponere and tollere: Also his covenant is everlasting, and that not with the
dead, but with the living, sc. such as live in soul, Matthew. 22.32.
and shall at the end of the World live eternally both in soul and body; and
unless we make Christ's body a monster, we must not separate the head from the
members, which we shall do if we deny the resurrection of the just, Luke 14.14.

7. If we deny the resurrection of the Saints bodies, we deny Christ to be
risen; upon which many absurdities, gross heresies, and all manner of impieties
will ensue. 1 Cor. 15. from 13. ad 19. verse. If there be no resurrection of
the dead, then is Christ not risen; and if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain; yea and we are found false
witnesses of God, because we have testified of God, that he raised up Christ;
whom he raised not up, if the dead rise not.

SECT. III.
BUt Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. let us therefore consider the personal types or figures of
our Savior's resurrection.

1. Adam was a type of Christ, among other things in this, viz. that as he
slept in the Garden, so Christ died on the Cross, and was buried in a Garden.
When Adam descended into a sleep, there was a resurrection of his Rib, which
awaked into a Woman. Adam's sleeping was a type of Christ's suffering and
dying; and his awaking, of Christ's rising again: yea, this resurrection of the
second Adam, does well resemble the nativity of the first Adam; for in Genesis,
Chap. 2. you shall find Adam taken out of the ground, and fashioned out of the
dust of the earth; so was it with our blessed Savior at his resurrection; he
was (as I may speak) born again of the earth, rose out of the dust of death;
the grave was in travail with him, and Death it self was compelled to bring
forth the Lord of life, and so he is the firstborn of the dead, Colos. 1.18.
But see here the malice of the Jews toward our blessed Savior, which ended
not upon the Cross; but as they began with him in his cradle, so they persecute
him to his grave; where (as though they had not laid him up safe enough) they
invent bonds beyond death, they watch and seal him up in the grave, as if they
could have held in him who had the keys of Hell and death; but for all the
great stone which they had brought (with much heaving no doubt) to lay upon the
mouth of the grave, for all their seal set upon the stone, and a diligent watch
set to attend the Sepulcher, yet notwithstanding, our Savior, who had wrought
many miracles upon others, has wrought a greater upon himself; the sealed
stone i^ removed, the watchmen are deceived, and a d^ad car^cass revived.

2. The Ancients mak^ Isaac a type of Christ's passion and resurrection; as
namely Abraham's taking, B^^a in Ge^es. 22. Isidor. d^ ^cc^es. offic. lib. 1.
cap. 29.
binding, and laying his Son upon the Altar was a type of Christ's death and
passion; and as Isaac carried wood for himself, so did Christ Jesus carry the
wooden Cross: Now will ye see a rising without death or sleep; behold Isaac as
near the stroke as the hand of his Father arising from the funeral pile; he had
taken the knife in his hand, stretched out his hand to slay his Son, and then
between the sacrificing knife and Isaac's throat, God shows favor to
Abraham, bidding him to stay his hand; and a Ram was brought, by the power and
providence of God, to rescue and redeem Isaac from death; here was a sacrifice
offered, yet not slain; and though not slain, yet accepted, Heb. 11.8. Thus
Abraham received his Son Isaac from the dead in a figure, verse 19. being a
type of the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; who by the power of his
Divinity raised his Humanity from death to life.

3. But perhaps it will more gratefully affright you, to see a man taught to be
buried alive, and (more yet) to outlive his funeral: behold, then Joseph, a
most excellent type of Christ; Joseph is basely betrayed, and sold by his
Brethren into Egypt; is falsely accused by his Mistress, and cast into prison,
and after three years imprisonment is delivered; so Jesus is betrayed to the
Jews by Judas, his own Apostle, Friend and Follower, and falsely accused before
Pilate by the Jews, and is put to death; but on the third day Christ is raised
up from the dead: and as Joseph after his deliverance out of prison is advanced
in the Kingdom of Egypt, so Christ after his resurrection is glorified in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Behold then Joseph from the Tombstone of his Prison rising
into a triumph as eminent as innocence, which before had conquered his passion,
and now his affliction; behold in Joseph the mystical Body of our Savior, a
Body admirably mortal and incorruptible; a Body that suffered rather the Grave
then Death.

4. Sampson was also a type of Christ, as in many things, so in these two
especially, of his his death and resurrection; for after he had slept at Gaza
(when the Gazites compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate
of the City, that they might kill him in the morning) he arose at midnight, and
carried away the gates of the City upon his back, carrying them up to the top
of an Hill that is before Hebron, carrying away the doors of the gates of the
City, and the two posts, bar and all, upon his shoulders: So maugre the watch
that the Jews set to keep Christ's Sepulcher, Vide Ferum. in Matthew. p. 292.
Christ arose with the mystical Gates of Hell and Death upon his back (no
marvel Hell-gates cannot prevail against his Church) together with the Posts
and Pillars thereof: and as Sampson by pulling down the House upon the heads of
the Philistines, was avenged of his Enemies; so Christ by opening the sealed
Sepulcher, has subdued Death, yea conquered him in his own Den and Cabin.

5. But what more proper type can there be then Christ makes of himself? and
that is Jonas, Matthew. 12.40. which is thus fitted and paralleled: Jonah's
casting into the Sea was a sign of Christ's Death; his being taken by the Fish,
and received into his Belly, a sign of his Burial; and his casting on shore
again, a sign of his Resurrection: Three days he lay in his new night of
astonishment, as if he had found an Egypt in the belly of the Whale, and did
acknowledge the watery Purgatory; at last the grave of the Prophet casts up the
living; he had surely died, had he not been buried: here is a resurrection of
this rare Anchorite, though not a reviving, for he and his Tomb were both
alive: But the Tomb of our Savior was as desperate as his Death, yet was it
not possible that he should be holden of it, Acts 2.24. for he arose on the
third day from the Grave; the Humane Soul of Christ did not of it self return
and quicken his Body, but his Divinity which rested, raised his Humanity that
suffered; that is, by the virtue and omnipotent power of his Godhead, whereby
he is able to do all things; he reduced and brought back his reasonable Soul,
and reunited it to his organical Body; and this Body that arose was altogether
glorious, being void of all infirmities and weakness whatsoever, being now no
more subject to hunger, thirst, cold, weariness, or the like. True it is, he
called for meat after his resurrection, Luke 24.41, 42. and did eat it truly,
but not that he needed any meat, or nourishment, his Body being then immortal,
Edebat Christus, non ut necessitati satisfaceret, sed ut veritatem humanae
naturae ostenderet. Pet. Mart.
and impassible, but he does it to prove himself to be really risen again; for
as when he had restored others to life, (as Jairus's Daughter, Lazarus, and
others) to prove that they were truly restored to life, he caused meat to be
set before them; so to manifest and declare the truth of his own resurrection,
he calls for meat, and eats it before them; and that it might appear there
was no falsehood, nor forgery in the business, he brought not his meat with him,
but he takes such things as he found them furnished with, and which they had
provided; and although he eats, he does it not for his own sake by reason of
the necessity of nature, or the infirmity of the flesh, but for the sake of his
Disciples; for the strengthening of their faith, and not for the nourishing and
cherishing his own flesh. Though the necessity of eating and drinking in
glorified bodies be taken away, says Augustine, yet it was free, and in his
power to eat if he would. Peter Martyr tells us, he did sometimes after his
resurrection, ad testandam veritatem humani Corporis, to testify the truth of
his humane Body; as namely, his affording himself to be seen and felt of Thomas
and others, and his eating and drinking with his Disciples. And some again, ad
suam gloriam demonstrandam, to show forth his glory; of which sort was his
conveying himself from them they knew not how, and his coming in among them
clausis januis, the doors being shut. If you demand, what became of the meat
that Christ did thus eat? I answer, it was a most easy matter for him that
made all things of nothing, to cause a little meat and drink to consume and
vanish to nothing. Stell. Enarrat. in Luc. 24.
Stella out of Chrysostom says, that Christ laid aside all accidental
properties in his Body after his resurrection, but retained the essential, as
longitude, latitude, circumscription, etc.

SECT. IV.
BUt will you see the manifold proofs of Christ's resurrection? if you will
turn over the notes of time, you may believe that Pharaoh, as about that time
of the year when Christ rose from the dead, was invaded by an host of waves,
which conquering his Charets, made him without wheels to hurry faster into
Hell, while Moses led his Israel through the Wilderness of the Sea, passing
through the shadow of death in the monument of Waters: Did not our Lord also
leave his Tomb without an equal and contrary wonder? then the Waters seemed to
be firm, rising into Alps, as now the Earth was made to quake like the Waters;
and well might the Earth tremble, when the Lord conquered it, and forsook it.
The Angel too made a little Earthquake in the Grave, when he removed the mighty
Stone with which the senseless Jew tried to oppress our Savior after death, as
if he would have sealed him up to an utter impossibility of rising again; the
Earth now moves and danceth for his exaltation, and the Stones give place to
his omnipotency. The Angel having opened the Tomb, shall we look into the place
whence Christ is risen? but behold, he is not there to be found, an Angel
supplieth his place, which he had conquered to obedience, as if he had meant to
rest himself in triumph after the conflict of his miracle; his raiment white as
snow, which he did imitate in purity; his countenance was like lightning, but
more wonderful; for that is of so instant a terror, that it is rather the object
of our memory then our eye: but this with a courteous Majesty was patient to be
beheld: the terrified Women quickly behold this sight, being encouraged by the
Angel, but first by their innocence: the Soldiers beheld it too, but with such
guilty faintness, that they seemed as much to disgrace their sex as their
profession, disarming themselves at once both of their weapons and souls
together, they became as breathless carcasses, and were rather the Captives,
then the Keepers of the Grave.

But now the Women being comforted, they receive a commission from the Angel to
preach the Resurrection of our Savior; and out of the Tomb they hasten with
the confused speed of fear and joy; and while they seek the Disciples, they
find their Savior himself, who comfort them with his presence and speech,
and again sends them to teach his own Disciples; and to show their obedience
to be as quick as their love, they depart from Christ to their duty, and
speedily find Peter and John for their Auditors; who no sooner hear the news of
Christ's resurrection, but they run as fast to the Tomb as the Women ran from
it; where no sooner are they entered, but they perceive Christ's victory over
Death acknowledged by the Linen clothes; his spoils of Death, and these
spoils too had been divided, the Napkin off his head being laid up by it self.
It seems the Angel at our Savior's resurrection attended to be a Witness of it
to the Women, and to leave a testimony of it to the Disciples. Thus that he was
not stolen away (as was given out) appears by the inconvenience and leisure of
his undressing, and by the method of the Linen, which the affrighted policy of
the Soldiers did no more touch then observe, and they no more observed it then
the Women, who after the sight of the Angel had their eyes as much amazed as
their minds; the Soldiers too did more tremble then watch; but the Disciples
had less fear, and more time: Besides, they learnt somewhat which they were not
taught, and could now teach the Women this news of the Grave, Lo here the Lion
of the Tribe of Juda, whose Almighty strength vouchsafed to couch under the
power of the Grave; and lo the greatness of his love has raised him up from
the sloth of the Grave.

Will ye behold how he was raised? behold how the Potter works upon the
wheel, he takes clay, he makes it a vessel; and this vessel being made in the
hands of the Potter, he makes it again as he best pleases. Christ was immortal
Clay and Earth, purer then Heaven, when by the wonder of Omnipotency, the
Creator and Creature were made into one, and of one matter did consist both the
Potter and his Pot; from this broken Clay there did arise the same and a
renewed Christ. Could any man in this point be yet an Infidel? if any could,
see how he converts them; he lets Thomas disgrace himself to a belief, and by
his distrust mercifully and miraculously increases his faith. Can any body
doubt he was renewed in a Body of glory, when he was full of God? had he not a
glorious Body, whom the doors that were shut (when he entered to his Disciples)
did obediently acknowledge to be the King of Glory? and though he were patient
under Death three days, yet since the first part of the first was spent before
he died, and the last part of the last after he revived, there was the number,
but not the length of three days; and thus he made so short a change, as seemed
rather a sleep then death: He rose not sooner, lest he might have been thought
not to b^ f^lly dead; he lay no longer, lest he might have been thought to have
seen corruption.

This resurrection of Christ proved him to be true God, as his birth, life,
death, burial, proved him to be true Man: It was his own Argument against the
Jews, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, John
2.19. And St. Paul among other things tells us, He was declared mightily to be
the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. Methinks this might
have stopped the black mouths of the blasphemous Jews, who at the time of his
execution, bade him come down from the Cross and save himself, and they will
believe on him, Matthew. 27.42. which though he would not do, yet here he does a
greater matter; Plus fuit ex Sepulchro resurgere, quam de Cruce descendere.
Gregor.
to rise was more, says Gregory, to rise again out of his Grave, then to
descend from the Cross. This likewise declares his dominion over Sin, Death,
Hell, and all Enemies; Christ therefore died, rose again, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living; if he had died, and not risen again,
then had he (at least) seemed not to have conquered and overcome death, but to
have been foiled in the Field, and overcome of Death; and then how could he
have been the death of Death, and the destruction of the Grave, and have
delivered us from the power of Hell, Hosea 13.14. This likewise shows us the
sufficiency of his satisfaction, and him to be an absolute and all-sufficient
Savior, whereof we might have doubted, had he only died; for we think not a
man's debts then paid, when he or his Surety goes to prison for them, and there
abides, but when he comes out again with a general discharge, so that he
dares bid defiance to all Bailiffs and Sergeants whatsoever, or whosoever can
pretend any thing to say to him; thus much Christ declared to the World by his
rising from the dead, for though he discharged our debt by dying, yet we have
our acquittance by his rising again, 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 4.25.

SECT. V.
WIll ye consider the wonder of the resurrection, as well as the change? do but
imagine, that in the dawning birth of the morning, you saw the revelation of a
grave emulating the morning; a Coarse rising with more comfort and glory then
the Sun; a winding sheet falling away like an empty cloud; the feet and the
hands striving which shall first recover motion; the hands helping to raise the
body, and the feet helping to bear the body and the hands; the tongue so
eloquent, that it can tell you it can speak again; the ears so pure, that they
can perceive the dull silence of the grave; the eyes looking forth of their
tombs, as if they were glad to see their own resurrection: Would you not be
affrighted, as well as instructed, at the Divine power? would you not be turned
into very Coarses to see this living Coarse? would you not be struck as pale as
the very winding sheet you looked upon? But when all this shall be done, as well
in mercy as in majesty; as well to raise thee to an hope of eternal life, as to
strike thee with a remembrance of a temporal death; as well to make thee like
unto God, as to make thee know that thou art not like him; how then will thou
dissolve into compassion, as if thou would hasten to the like resurrection?
how will thou then kiss those hands which before thou fearedst, and then
steadfastly examine and adore the resurrection of that Body, which is the hope
and cause of the resurrection of our Bodies? for therefore did he raise
himself, that he might raise us. Christ rose not as a private, but as a public
Person; as a Burgess in a Parliament represents the whole Body of the
Incorporation for which he is chosen, so Christ as our Head, represents the
Persons of all them that are Heirs of Salvation, Ephesians. 2.6. Christ (as in his
Passion, so) in his Resurrection sustained the Persons of the Elect; and so we
in him, as in Capite, rise with him. St. Paul tells us, that Christ standing in
our stead, represents our persons, Romans 5.18, 19. this appears, in that he
rose not alone, but many bodies of the Saints rose with him, and attended him,
Matthew. 27.52, 53. to show that the virtue of him our Head, diffused and
extended it self unto all the Members of the Church his Body; and his rising
first, showed him to be the first fruits of them that slept: Christ rose by his
own power, and not (as we) by a borrowed power from Christ; I have power to lay
down my life, (says he) and power to take it up again, John 10.^8. it was
prophesied of him, Psalm. 110. ult. therefore shall he lift up the head. As in
his Passion, when he suffered, he bowed down his head, and gave up the ghost
with a loud voice, to note that his sufferings were voluntary, John 19.30. so
in his Resurrection he is said to lift up the head himself, to note that he had
life in himself, and that it was impossible he should be holden under death,
who was the Lord of life.

SECT. VI.
NOw he that could raise up his own Body by his Divine power, can much more
raise up our Bodies also; he it is that shall quicken our mortal Bodies, Romans
8.11. a privatione ad habitum non datur regressus; and therefore however the
Angels are instruments in respect of some antecedent and consequent cause of
the Resurrection, Matthew. 24.31. yet the immediate cause is God alone, Christ
himself in respect of his Humane nature being excluded; for howbeit the
Resurrection is ascribed to his Person, yet only according to his Divine
nature; yet in the communion of both natures we acknowledge, Christum agere quod
suum est, verbo operante quod verbi est, and carne exequente quod carnis est.
Yet I grant, as in the raising up Lazarus, and the Widows Son of Naim, Luke
7.14. so in the general resurrection, Christ's Humane nature shall perform what
belongs to it; that is, give some evident sign of his coming to Judgment; which
shall be as an instrument of his Divine power for the raising up of the dead,
which shall have its instrumental force, as that voice in raising the Widows
Son of Naim, Luke 7.14. and that voice in raising Lazarus, John 11.43, 44. And
this sign is expressed diversely in Scripture, John 5.28. it is said, all that are
in the graves shall hear his voice. In Matthew. 24.31. He shall send his Angels
with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from
the four winds, from the one end of Heaven to the other. And St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 15.52. The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. And the same Apostle says, 1 These.
4.16. The Lord shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
By all which places, I suppose, may be gathered, that the voice of Christ shall
be used at that day, as an instrument to awake all that sleep in the dust.

But what shall we rise too? and shall this dust be taken up and breathed on?
shall every man by this second Adam be made as wonderful as the first Adam?
Beloved, shall we want faith, when God wants not power? or shall we think it
harder to unite the Body, then to make it? he that made us etantillo semine,
shall he not be able to raise us etantillo pulvere? It were an impious
discourtesie to deny that to God, which God denied not to his own Servant: Did
not the Widow of Sareptah thus receive a Son by Elias, who was neither the
Father nor the God? nay, did not his Servant do more for the Shunamite, to whom
he promised a Son before he was conceived, and restored him after he was dead?
nay, did not the bones of this Elias give life to one that was as dead as
themselves, teaching him to confess the mercy of a grave? It is an high act of
mercy of the living God to give life to the dead; yet by a greater mercy he
makes it an act of justice, freely binding himself to admit our boldness, not
so much to request, as to claim a resurrection: for shall the Bodies of the
Saints be more remembered by their tombs then their labors? or shall they be
worse oppressed by death, then they were by their torments? shall those eyes
that did still watch or mourn, for ever want respect as much as sight? shall
those hands that have been exercised in extending themselves, and mercy to the
poor, be for ever bound by the ingratitude of death? shall those knees which
have bowed with such willing reverence, be so held down by the violence of
mortality, that they can never rise up again? Where are then thy tears, O
David, if thine eyes shall not enjoy the happiness of their own sorrow? What
then, O Job, is become of thy faith and patience, if thy body be now as much
without hope, as before it was without rest? Where are then, O Esaias, thy
victorious sufferings, if after the ignorant fury of the saw and schism of thy
body, thy body suffer a wider disordation from thy soul for tedious eternity?
Where are thy travels then, O Paul, if after thy Christian Geography and
Conquest of Paganism, thou art for ever confined to the dull peace of a Grave?
No, the Almighty, which has made man with wisdom of Art, will neither lose his
glory nor his work; but as he made the greater Heaven for his Angels, so made
he the less and mortal Heaven of Man's Body (as I may so speak) for his Soul,
and will have it eternal as his Soul.

SECT. VII.
THere is more excellency of workmanship in the Soul, but more variety in the
Body; the Soul does more truly express God, the Body more easily; the Soul
judges best, but the Body first: and though the eyes of the Soul do behold the
work of God more clearly, yet does the eye of the Body most properly. Nay,
should not the Body be raised to life and Heaven, how great a part of Heaven
and that life would be lost, whiles not enjoyed, and be as unnecessary as it is
wonderful? God has prepared joys for the Saints which the eyes have not seen,
nor the ears heard, but which the eye shall see, and the ear shall hear, and
without the pleasure of a trance for ever possess, as much without error, as
without measure; such honor will the Creator of our Bodies do to the Bodies of
all his Saints: They shall acknowledge Corruption, yet overcome it; they may in
their journey be the Guests of the Grave, but at last they shall be the
Inhabitants of Heaven. Yet the Lord cannot hereafter honor Humane flesh by
raising it, as he has already by assuming it; it was before his Servant, now
his Companion; that was a resurrection of the flesh, when it was raised unto
God, but the only resurrection of our flesh is when it is raised unto the Soul.
At the last day of Judgment though there be no Marriage of sexes, yet there
shall be of parts; when Souls shall be united to Bodies in so entire and so
inexorable a Matrimony, that it shall admit no hope nor fear of a divorce: nor
need we fear in the jealousy of this Match the Ignoble Parentage of the flesh,
since what it wants by Birth is supplied by Dowry; and flesh now is become
such refined earth, being made wonderful in shape and office, that the Soul may
be thought scarce more noble, but that it seems more reserved by being
invisible; this mortal body, shall put on immortality; this Body sown in
corruption, shall be raised in incorruption; it shall not only be freed from
death, but also from corruption, yea, and whatsoever savoureth of mortality, or
the least decay.

And notwithstanding these principles of earth fall into such an heap of dust,
that they are with as much difficulty to be seen as numbered; yet thus divided
among themselves, retaining still (though not an appetite, yet) an obedience to
a resurrection: Nature has not lost this, and God will supply that, and as
easily unite as distinguish each dust; to yield to this is the Creed of the
Creed. If any man's faith in the assent to this mystery be as weak as his
reason, he may help both his faith and his reason by sense; by which he shall
be either convinced or persuaded. If you will be but as hardy as Antiquity, you
may propose to your selves the solemn Poetry of the Phoenix, a Creature rarer
then the Resurrection, though not so admirable, in whose ashes you may find the
fire of life, expecting but to be fanned to the resurrection of a flame; as if
this Creature by a riddle of Fate, would by a fire both perish and revive: But
without the courtesy of supposition, you may in earnest behold the Eagle shoot
forth new quills, wherewith may be written and testified his endeavor of
immortality: thus does God teach Nature how to teach us mysteries, and without
the magical learning of the language of Birds, to understand without their
voice their secret instruction. But perhaps you will think that to discern this
truth in the nature of Eagles, would require a sight as sharp as the Eagles.
Remove then your eyes from the Fowls of the Air, but to the Trees whereon they
nest, and with a negligent view you may observe, how after the nakedness and
death of Winter, they bud forth afresh into life and beauty; yet why should we
in the sloth of this easy contemplation, study so broad an object? let our eye
with more grateful industry confine it self with the small seed of corn, and
(at least) take the pains to see the pains of the Husbandman; and shall we not
admire at his delightful Arithmatick of nature, to behold a seed, whose hope
seems as small as it self, by being cast away, to be found by destruction to
receive increase, from the same furrow to take both a Burial and a Birth? He
that shall now see a little drop of man's seed in a glass, and a lump of earth
together, would think the one as unlikely to become a man as the other; and yet
we see how miraculous and curious a work the Lord makes every day of the
principle of seed; which made David cry out, I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, Psalm. 139. and he can easily restore our Bodies out of a praeexistent
something, which may confute the erroneous opinion of the Sadduces, who denied
the resurrection, Matthew. 22.23. of the Athenian Philosophers, who derided it,
Acts 17.18. holding the Pythagorean transmigration; of Himeneus and Philetus,
who said the resurrection was past, 2 Timothy 2.18. and lastly, of all those
Atheists and Epicures, Isai. 22.13. that cry out and say, Mors ultima linea
rerum.

SECT. VIII.
BUt now the Soul will have its old Companion again; for should the Soul for
ever want the Body, it should want both perfection and wonder: Is not the Soul
most perfect when it is most noble? is it not most noble when it is most
bountiful? and is it not most bountiful when it gives life to the dead? Is it
not likewise most full of wonder, when it is thus perfect in that which is
imperfect? when it mixeth with corruption, and yet is incorruptible? when it is
most burdened, and yet is most variously active? Thus by this necessary
inclination of the Soul, the Resurrection is as natural in respect of the
union, as it is above Nature in respect of the manner.

But now see the curious zeal of the Soul; it will not only have a Body again,
but, in a precise society, it will have only its own again: not any other new
created Bodies, but the same numerical and substantial Bodies shall rise again,
and be reunited to their proper Souls. 1 Cor. 15.53, 54. Phil. 3.21. Job
19.26, 27. St. Paul says, [This] corruptible shall put on incorruption; and
Christ shall change [our] vile Bodies: And Job says, in his flesh he should
see God; whom I shall see for my self; and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me. There may be some general
alteration in respect of their stature, deformities, superfluities, etc. to a
glorified perfection; but still it shall remain the same essential Body, and
good reason there is for it.

1. The justice of God requires, that the same Body which has been
instrumental in the actions of righteousness, or unrighteousness, should be
rewarded, or punished: The Godly must receive their rewards according to what
good they have done in these Bodies, 2 Cor. 5.10. It were injustice that this
flesh should be killed, and that should be crowned; that the same Body in which
we served God, wherein God was glorified, Absurdum and Deo indignum ut haec
caro lanietur, illa vero coronetur, ut corpora quae in via sacta fuerint membra
Christi, in patria aliis suffectis in eorum locum arcerentur. Tertul. de
Resurrect. cap. 56.
which suffered for God, and was for Christ exposed to all the injuries,
indignities, and torments of wicked Persecutors, should be eternally laid up in
the dust, and another Body should be created to receive the reward due to the
Body in the grave.

2. Because if God should not raise the very same Bodies of his People, in
which they lived and served God in their generation, then God shall not deal so
honorably with the dead Saints, as with those that shall be found alive at
Christ's coming; for their very same Bodies shall be delivered from the bondage
of mortality and corruption, into incorruption and immortality.

3. Because Christ, who is the pattern of the resurrection, did not rise in
another Body, but in that in which he was fastened to the Cross; in which also
after his death appeared the prints of the nails in his hands, and the holes in
his side, John 20.27. Therefore Christ after his resurrection, for the cure of
Thomas his unbelief, (whose faith lay in his fingers) bids him put his finger
into his hands and side, and not be faithless, but believing. It seems those
scars remained in Christ's Body after his resurrection, Vulnerum signa,
virtutum insignia. Aquinas.
else how could Thomas see and feel them as he is willed to do? But these scars
were no blemishes in his Body then; they were no signs of defect, but ensigns
of Victory: For as that worthy and renowned Captain Caius Marius, being on a
time accused of Treason in the Senate, tore his clothes, and showed his wounds
and scars, and slashes he had received in the Wars, in the service and for the
safety of his Country, saying, Quid opus est Verbis, Vulnera clamant? What need
is there of my Words, my Wounds cry loud enough? So Christ might show his
pierced Side, goared Hands and Feet, not only to show that it was the very same
organical Body of his that was crucified on the Cross, but also to show his
love to his People, and what he did and suffered for them. And when the eleven
Disciples were gathered together at Jerusalem, Jesus appeared to them; and they
being affrighted, supposing they had seen a Spirit, he said unto them, Why are
ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my
feet; it is I my self: a Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me to have,
Luke 24.39, 40. A Spirit has not parts, members, and dimensions, as I have;
therefore you may be sure, being infallibly taught by your sense, that it is my
very Body which you see, in which I long conversed with you, suffered, and was
buried, which is now truly risen again: Whence, as Theodoret says, he proves
it was his true Body that was crucified on the Cross, that was now raised from
the dead.

4. Should not the Saints rise with the same Bodies, it were no resurrection,
but a new creation: Moreover, the same Souls do rise unto Grace; from the death
of Sin, to the life of Righteousness; which is called in Scripture, the first
Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. therefore the same Body shall rise unto Glory in the
second Resurrection.

5, Consider that Death in Scripture is called a Sleep, a Dream; and the
Resurrection, an awaking from Sleep, Psalm 17. ult. therefore as the same Body
that lies down to sleep at night awaketh in the morning, so the same Body that
lies down to sleep in the dust, shall awake and rise again in the morning of
the Resurrection.

Hence we see that the Soul will have its own numerical Body again, for the
preserving of such numerical identity; there shall be wonderfully restored the
substantial union, which is but formally distinguished from the parts united;
there shall be restored a personality, and lastly the native temperament, which
does contain the individuating dispositions, whereby such a matter has a
peculiar appetite to such a form; which matter, by virtue of such inclination,
remains (as formerly) the same, though it may be varied by extension; as when
the Infant shall be raised into a Man, the person shall be enlarged, but not
multiplied.

Object. But that of the Apostle may be objected, who says, That flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.

Resp. St. Paul speaks of corruptible qualities of flesh and blood, not of the
substance of it, Identitas formae in quacunque materia consistit, q. ex
identitate formae consequitur identitas materiae, cum materia nullam per se
habeat actualitatem, sed esse suum accipit a forma. Numerica identitas non
continetur in sola identitate primae materiae nudae, sed etiam identitate
corporis humani. Durand. sent. 4. distinct. 44. plura de resurrectione. Vide
Synops. purior. theol. disput. de resurrect.
as is manifest in the last clause of the verse; neither does corruption
inherit incorruption. But flesh and blood by the Almighty power of God may be
without corruption, as the Body of Christ was after his Resurrection
incorruptible, immortal and spiritual; not converted into a spirit, but to the
distinction of a living body that must be maintained by food, Luke 24.39.

This then may confute those that deny the identical resurrection of the Body,
and affirm, that our Bodies at the resurrection must be aerial, of a more
subtle nature, not consisting of flesh and members; such were diverse of the
Anabaptists of Germany, and Socinus, with his Followers, who call into question
this Article of our Creed, Credo resurrectionem carnis, I believe the
resurrection of the flesh, or body.

SECT. IX.
SEe here the sacred eagerness of the Soul, it will neither lose nor change a
dust; nor will it only possess, but adorn the Body: In the day of the
resurrection, mankind shall feel and express a youthful spring; the
walking-staff and the wrinckle, shall be no more the help and distinction of
age; and Death it self shall suffer climacterical fates. Oh how the wonder will
almost out-act faith! when the Infant and the Dwarf shall be made a proper man!
when the limbs exhaled with famine, shall be replenished with as much miracle
as faith! when the Child that left its own Soul before it left the Womb, shall
in an instant, without growth, be as big as the Mother! when sleep shall be
commanded from the eyelids no more by care, but by immortality! which shall
chase Death out of Nature, and with importunate triumph cry out, O Earth,
Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord; Thy dead men shall live; with their
primitive Bodies shall they arise: Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust;
for your dew is as the dew of Herbs.

The Bodies of the Saints shall then have nothing cleaving to them, that may in
the least degree impair their blessedness, darken or blemish their glory. St.
Paul says, Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
cleanse and sanctify it by the washing of water through the word, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish both in Soul and
Body, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. First it is said, He gave himself to it, that he
might cleanse and sanctify it by the washing of water through the word; and
that he might not only cloathe it with his own righteousness, made over and
imputed to it, but also that he might really purify it by the water of
sanctification, that he might present it a glorious Church to himself, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. It is one thing to present his
Church, and each Member of it, to his Father, a glorious Church in himself as a
Mediator, clothed with his righteousness, as with a spotless robe of glory;
but it is another thing to present the Church a glorious Church to himself,
which he does without a Mediator; for although there be a Mediator between God
the Father and his Church, even the Man Christ Jesus, yet there is no Mediator
between Christ and his Church: God the Father looks on his Church mediante
Christo, but Christ looks on the Church immediately; and therefore when he
presents the Church to himself a glorious Church, without spot, etc. it is
evident, that the Church shall then be glorious and spotless, not only in way
of imputation, in God the Father's acceptance through Jesus Christ his
Beloved, but also really and in it self, although it shall receive all this
from the overflowing fountain of Christ's fullness, through the freeness of
God's love, and the riches of his grace; and for the greater consolation of the
Saints, the Apostle says, when Christ shall present his Church to himself as
glorious, it shall be without spot or wrinkle; no spot of defilement, or
wrinkle of deformity shall be in it, nor the least imperfection; for what are
wrinkles, but signs or effects of natural defect, when the moisture of the Body
is exhausted or consumed, Nature beginning to decay, and wanting matter to fill
up the Body: but then there shall be no wrinkle in the Body, or defect in the
Soul, for both shall have their full measure of glory: And to this the Apostle
adds those general terms, [nor any such thing] that he might cut off all
conceits of any defect imaginable; as if he had said, Imagine what you can that
may in the least degree impair or lessen the glory of the Church, I assure you
there shall not be any such thing.

SECT. X.
ANd we may most easily remember by whom we rise, by remembering him by whom we
fell; yet if we behold the original of their humanity, we shall find they were
both without sin; and that the first Adam had his best Paradise within himself,
but when he was fallen by the weakness of the Woman, that was made for his
help; never did Woman prove a strong help to Man, before the Virgin Mother of
Christ, God and Man: then though the first Adam had eaten up the fatal Apple,
the second Adam swallowed up Death; he had before made the poor Man take up the
Bed of his sickness and walk, but he himself was the first that ever took up
Death's Bed and walked. Yet some before our Savior borrowed a fantastical
resurrection, as Readiness equivocal Samuel; and some rose again in earnest, but
to die again in earnest, as supererrogating Lazarus, that paid to nature one
death more then he owed: but our Lord Jesus is risen with as much perfection as
power, and with as much power as love and glory.

The Poetical Chymick tells us plainly of an Alchymistical man at the Earth's
center, who by a spherical diffusion of his virtue, does, like a subterranean
Sun, improve Metals to a metamorphosis; which as it is bold in the Fable, so
by a devout mithology may be modest in the moral: this secret Workman shall be
our Savior, whose virtue was dispersed into the bowels of the Grave, that at
his resurrection he improved Carcasses into Saints, who rose with him, went
into the holy City, and appeared unto many, as the Witnesses and Attendants of
his power, of which something has been already spoken: Indeed to advance the
head without the members were so unnatural, that it were rather like an
execution then preferment; and it were stranger to see a Captain, or Leader,
without his Soldiers, then without his Arms: Besides, were it fit, when the
Master is risen, the Servant should lie still? thus then they were raised, as
much to holiness as to life; it was not only a resurrection, but a
consecration, and Christ was the first fruits of them that rose; he had the
precedence both in order and virtue.

The first fruits under the Law were the first handful, as acceptible as ripe,
by a bountiful mediation obtaining holiness and entertainment for the rest:
this first offering did commend it self to the Lord, rather by the speed then
the quantity; the Jew offered this at his own home, and it was as domestic as
his thoughts; being a present of eloquent simplicity, which at the same time
did honor and overcome the Almighty. Oh how our Savior made this figure
solid, when at once he conquered for us Death and Heaven, as I may so speak: He
was but the first handful of Corn, and yet as powerful as small, making all the
rest of a like holiness, though not of an equal.

But there were greater first fruits which the Jews went to pay at Jerusalem;
and as the first were an offering of humility, so those of pomp: Those did more
set forth the thankfulness of the Labourer, and these the magnificence of the
Lord. If you will take the words of the Rabbis, (whom in story of custom we
have no more cause to distrust then to feign) they will tell you, when the
Husbandman carried up those Fruits to the holy City, he had a Bull went before
him, whose horns were gilded, and an Olive-garland upon his head; this was the
picture of his Master's affection and state: as if by the impetuous Beast, he
would express the courage of his joy; by gilded horns, the riches of his
plenty; and by the Olive-garland, the Crown of peace: Behold the displayed
Herauldry of his happiness! and that it might be increased by applauses, a Pipe
played before him, to charge all to take notice of it, until they came to the
Mountain of the Lord. Shall not these first fruits be likewise paid at our
great resurrection? shall they not be brought to our heavenly Jerusalem, the
City of the great King? shall they not have Angels go before them? shall there
not likewise be Crowns? and shall they not likewise be ushered by the voice of
a Trumpet? It was the sound that the Jews used at their braver Funerals, and
may it not then fitly be used, when they shall be awaked from their Tombs?

Till Christ was risen, those that were buried were dead; but if we once but
name him the first fruits of them that rise, let us no more say, that they are
dead, but that they sleep: yet all before the resurrection shall not sleep;
some instead of rising, shall be only new dressed, by being clothed with
incorruption, and so have rather a change of raiment, then of life; they shall
not put off their bodies, but their mortality; and be made like unto Christ,
both in the truth of the resurrection, and of glory. The Eutychian shall then
confess, that the two natures in Christ are not mixed, though joined; and that
his Humanity (though exalted) is not changed: the Pythagorean shall then
recover the possession and acquaintance of his vagabond Soul; the Sadduce shall
then rise in that body, in which he denied the resurrection of the body; and
with the eyes of his body see the error of his Soul; the Vbiquitary shall then
see that Christ's body may be seen, and it shall certainly prove that it is not
everywhere, by being not in the same grave whence it was risen; that is, in
respect of his corporal presence, for otherwise (as he is God) he was there,
and in all other places of the World.

CHAP. XVI.
SECT. I. Of the glory of the Bodies of the Saints in Heaven, and first of the
beauty and clarity of glorified Bodies.
BUt now to speak more particularly of the glory of the Body: the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 15.43. the Body is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: that
which is here called glory, is by Divines generally termed clarity; and this no
way varying from the sense of the Apostle; for verse. 41, 42. he says, that the
glories of the Saints Bodies in Heaven, at the general resurrection, shall be
different and diverse; one exceeding another in clarity, as one Star differs
from another in glory; so shall the resurrection of the dead be. St. Paul says
in Phil. 3.21. Christ shall change our vile bodies, and fashion them like unto
his glorious body. This is very admirable, that a poor sinful Creature should
be so changed, transformed, exalted, as to be like the Son of God in glory: Our
Bodies now are but as loathsome Carcasses; what a vile Body had Job when he
sat upon the Dunghill? what a vile Body had Lazarus when he lay at the Rich
Man's gate full of sores? When Children are young, break out in the face, in
hands and body, there is no beauty in them; so sin breaks out in these mortal
Bodies, and makes them ugly in God's eyes; there are many corporal
imperfections in men's Bodies now, but when Christ shall appear, then our Bodies
shall be as his Body, beautiful and glorious. Tradition upheld by reason
teaches us, that he was beautiful without art; that the Holy Ghost who formed
his Body in the Virgins Womb, would have it adorned with comeliness; he
consecrated beauty in his Person, when he took our nature upon him; though he
assumed the pain of sin, he would not assume the ugliness thereof; and as there
was no ignorance in his Soul, so was there no deformity in his Body. His very
types in the Old Testament were all comely: David and Solomon, the one of which
represented his Victories, the other his Triumphs, were both of them famous for
their beauty; the Angels took upon them his visage when they treated with the
Prophets; while they spoke in his name, they would appear in his form. Jacob
had the honor to see him, when he wrestled with him before the break of day;
the three Children that were thrown into the fiery Furnace saw him in the midst
of the flames: But how gloriously did the face of Christ shine at his
Transfiguration? Christ's face did shine upon Earth, and now in Heaven does
shine like the Sun. And our Savior intimates, that the Righteous shall shine
as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. Lazarus his Body shall
be a beautiful Body, he shall have no imperfection; Sampson shall then have his
eyes which the Philistines pulled out; Mephibosheth shall not be lame in
Heaven; there shall be no imperfection in a glorified Body. The Scripture
mentions some Persons eminent for beauty, as David, Joseph, and especially
Absalom, who (though he had a deformed Soul, yet) for his outside, was without
blemish, and had no peer among those many thousands of Israel: There was none
to be so much praised for beauty as Absalom, for from the soles of his feet to
the crown of his head, there was no blemish in him, 2 Samuel 14.25. But the most
exquisite earthly beauty is but skin-deep, and but like the painting of a
rotten post; it is but a fresh color laid on mortality; the foundation of it
is weak and crasie, and therefore it soon fades: but he that is like to Christ
in holiness, shall be like to him in heavenly beauty and glory; the beauty of
glorified Bodies shall be a shining beauty. The expression of Divines is thus;
As Iron when it is heated in the Fire, we cannot see the Iron for the Fire, it
appears nothing else but fiery; so in Heaven we shall not be able to see the
Body for the glory thereof: and as the Air is now fully possessed with the
light, so shall our Bodies be fully possessed with glory; and the Soul full of
the light of glory shall be diffused through the whole Body, Lessius de summo
bono, lib. 3. cap 5.
and all the parts of it, according to the opinion of the Learned; therefore it
behooveth, that the whole Body be resplendent, according to the dignity of the
Soul inhabiting it. Yea, it is conceived that the glory of the Soul shall be
seen through the Body, in such a sort as the life of the Soul is seen and
observed in and by the vivacity and liveliness which it imparts by action and
motion to the outward visible parts of the Body: Dr. Rich. Sheldon of man's last
end.
and not only did the face of Christ shine as the Sun at his Transfiguration on
Mount Tabor, but also his raiment was white as the light, Matthew. 17.2. St. Mark
adds, that his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow, so as no
Fuller on earth can white them, Mark 9.3. Now his garments did cover his Body;
yet such was the glory and clarity of his Body, that his raiment became white
as snow; for it became not Christ or the Angels to appear in naked Bodies.
Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18.
Cyril of Jerusalem, speaking of this point, says, The Just shall shine as the
Sun, and as the Moon, and as the brightness of the Firmament. And God
foreseeing the incredulity of Men, Ut Anima ista dum exercet functiones sua^ in
corpore impertit ei colorem, and totam hanc externam Corporis gloriam: ita tum
cum Deus erit omnia in omnibus, spiritus Christi in nobis habitam, induet
Corpora nostra gloriosissima quibusque qualitatibus. Rolloc. in Johan. cap. 5.
has given unto little Worms (called Glowworms) a shining Body, that they
might shine therewith, that from those things which do appear, we might believe
what we do expect; he that has made a Worm so to glister, will make the Bodies
of the Saints much more bright and shining.

SECT. II. Of the agility of glorified Bodies.
THe Bodies of the Saints in Heaven shall also have a wonderful agility,
whereby they shall be able to move from place to place with incredible
swiftness; this agility is a glorious quality, whereby the Bodies of the
glorified are totally subject to the Souls, as to most powerful movers, to be
moved by them without the least reluctance or resistance; for the Soul shall
then (as some Learned men say) have a most absolute dominion over the Body, and
by a redundancy and emanation, impart to it a glorious quickening and vivacity,
far beyond that which any mortal Creatures in their bodily heavy parts can
have; for glorified Souls shall then be made perfect, and glorified Bodies
shall have more perfect instruments for motion, then those which corruptible
Bodies usually have, and the weight of their Bodies shall not in the least
hinder their motion. And albeit the same Father says, Certe ubi volet
Spiritus, ibi protinus erit Corpus; that the Body will presently be there where
the Soul would have it: Yet may we not grant unto the same Bodies any
instantanean motion, so that in an imagined instant of time, they may make any
true real corporal motion; for time in a proper speech has no true or real
instant, either as part, or period, or end of it self; for then a glorified
Body must pass through the beginning, middle, and end of a space at once, if it
move from place to place in an instant, which were more then utterly
impossible, involving a contradiction, and would be destructive to the nature
of a true Body.

Yet the motion of glorified Bodies may be very sudden, and in so short a time
(as it were) imperceptible. Augustine compares it to the Sunbeams, August.
Epist. 4^.
the which as it were in an imperceptible moment of time, do fill this whole
Hemisphere with their glorious luster. The Author of the Book of Wisdom says,
The Righteous shall shine, and as sparks among the stubble they shall run too
and fro: Sap. 3.7.
Whereby some think the agility of the Saints Bodies in Heaven, and their
facility for motion is figured. One says, that its agility will be so great,
that it will outpass the winds and lightning, it will fly without wings
through the spacious Regions of the Air; it will walk upon the water and not
sink, and in a very short time passing from one end of the World to the other,
will be no longer a clog and torment to the Soul. Moreover, which way soever
they shall move, they shall have the glorious presence of God with them: in
Heaven the Saints live, move, and have their glorious being in him; they live
of him, by partaking of his glorious life; move before him, like the holy
Angels, by a most prompt and ready obedience; and are in him, being entered
into the joy of their Lord.

SECT. III. Of the spirituality of glorified Bodies.
A Farther degree of the happiness of a glorified Body is, that it shall be
spiritual: It is sown a natural Body, but it rises a spiritual Body, 1 Cor.
15.44. It is called a spiritual Body, not as though the Body were changed into
the Soul and Spirit; for so, that which is raised should not be Man, consisting
of a Soul and Body, but a third distinct thing differing from Man: it shall not
then cease to be a Body; it shall change condition, but not change nature; were
its nature changed, the mystery of the resurrection of the flesh should be
quite taken away, and so the same thing that fell should not be raised again:
Neither is it called a spiritual Body, as though the Body after the
resurrection were rarefied like the Air and Wind, as the Eutychians of old
affirmed, denying glorified Bodies to be palpable: but I call it spiritual,

1. Because as the Body shall be reunited to the Soul, so it shall be
perfectly submitted to it; as the Spirit serving the Flesh, may not unfitly be
called carnal, so the Body obedient to the Soul, is rightly termed spiritual:
The Soul shall have a more powerful influence upon, and dominion over the Body
after the resurrection, then it ever had, or could have, in the time of her
mortality; it shall no longer be the Prison, but the Temple of the Soul; then
the Body shall readily yield to every motion of the Spirit.

2. The Body shall be endued with spiritual properties; the Bodies of the
Saints shall be even as the Angels are now in Heaven, they shall be able to
live without sleep, without eating and drinking, without marriage; they shall
need none of such things as these natural Bodies in this mortal condition do:
Our Bodies now are but so many clogs to our Souls, subject to toil and
weariness; but then the Body will have such advantages, as will free and clear
it from all such corporal imperfections and defections, as bodily and corporal
substances are obnoxious to; the corruptible Body overladeth and oppresses the
Soul, and this earthly tabernacle presses down the mind meditating on heavenly
things; but in Heaven, when the Souls of the Blessed shall see the glory of
God, and be for ever in the contemplation of him, they shall then be freed from
all clogs and hindrances, that so they may bend themselves with all their
might to the contemplation, love, and fruition of God, whose goodness will then
be most clearly and fully presented to them.

But as for subtilty, which properly signifies a property, whereby such things
as are spiritual have a penetrative virtue to pass through the corpulent parts
of any thing that has a Body, having parts and dimensions, I cannot see how it
can be attributed to glorified Bodies, which after the resurrection shall have
the same extensive and bodily parts for quantity and material substance as they
had before, and can no more pierce through any true bodily substance which has
the dimensions of quantity (as length, breadth, thickness) then they could
before their resurrection, during the time of their mortality and corruption.
Although diverse of the Ancients affirm, that Christ after his resurrection,
entered into the room where his Disciples were, the doors being shut, John
20.26. by passing through the door; yet if it were so, we may not attribute the
same as a thing natural to his glorified Body, it having the same dimensions of
quantity for fullness of matter it had before, but must rather be attributed to
the power of his Godhead, to whom nothing is impossible: but I suppose, though
the doors were shut presently before and after his passage, yet they opened of
their own accord, or by his Divine power at the instant of his passage, as Acts
12.10. the Creature giving place to the Creator; otherwise we must hold the
Body of Christ made a penetration through the doors, and then there must be two
solid Bodies in one place at the same time, which were impossible. And St.
Augustine says, even of glorified Bodies, Toll spatia corporibus, and corpora
non erunt; take away spaces from the Bodies, and they will cease to be bodies.

SECT. IV. Of the impassibility of glorified Bodies.
MOreover the Bodies of the Saints in glory shall be made impassible; in this
life we are subject to many infirmities, to thousands of miseries; our Bodies
are Butts, against which miseries and afflictions (which are the Arrows of the
Almighty) are shot; but glorified Bodies are subject to none of these, they
suffer no pain, Christ will wipe away all tears from their eyes; sorrow and
mourning shall flee away, and be sent packing to Hell among the Devils and
damned Wretches, their afflictions are their portion: Heaven and the blessed
state of the Saints in Heaven, is as free from misery as from sin; this World
to the godly, is as the Prison to Joseph, as Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace to the
three Children, as the Lions Den to Daniel: this World to the godly is like an
House of Correction, wherein is much toil and labor, and very much scourging
besides: We are born to be miserable, we shall do nothing else but suffer; but
we shall be taken out of Prison, our Bodies shall be drawn out of the Furnace,
freed from the House of Correction, and no grief nor misery shall evermore
touch our glorified Bodies. Their impassibility will then free them from all
the injuries of the Elements; the natural heat which now wastes them, shall no
more consume the natural moisture; the contraries that compose man will then
agree; and the Body being no longer tormented with hunger and thirst, will
stand in need neither of meat nor drink, he will be in a state of consistency,
wherein he will have his just proportion. The Apostle tells us, that what is
sown in weakness, shall be raised in power and virtue; so that the Body shall
not need that propping up, as the weak pillars thereof do now need support in
this state of mortality. But this power is no supernatural virtue, making the
elementary parts and qualities to be of another nature then now they are, for
there must be no change nor destruction, but only a perfection of Nature;
neither shall these elementary qualities, by the power of God, be limited or
obstructed in their operations, that they shall not fight against each other to
their mutual destruction; for then the impassibility of glorified Bodies should
not be an internal virtue, as abiding in the Body (which is against the
Apostle's intent) but only an external assistance of God. Aquinas says, Aquin.
supplem. qu. 82. art. 1.
that this virtue and power of impassibility flows immediately from the Soul
her self, which informing the Body, does so fully and perfectly subdue all the
powers and qualities of the same unto her self, that no contrary Agent can be
able to make any violent impression upon, or act violently against the Body,
either to corrupt or destroy it, or in the least to be able to draw it from
that quiet and peaceable state wherein it rests.

SECT. V. Of the incorruptibility and immortality of glorified Bodies.
FInally, the glory of the Body shall be so firm and stable, that it can never
wither or decay, it shall be incorruptible: The Body is sown in corruption, it
is raised in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42. This corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, verse 53. The Bodies of
the beatified shall then be embalmed with the Spirit, that shall cause them for
ever to be incorruptible; their Bodies shall be made incorruptible and
immortal, like the glorious Body of Christ; these earthly Tabernacles, or
demicilia Animae, must be taken down, and then these Bodies of dust must return
to dust; we must say to Corruption, thou art our Mother, and to the Worm, thou
art our Sister; and the Soul must suffer a divorce from the Body: But when
Christ shall appear, our mortality shall be swallowed up of life, then our
corruption shall put on incorruption; these vile dusty Bodies of ours shall be
made glorious Mansions for our Souls, and our Souls shall be for ever united to
our Bodies again, so that they shall never suffer a divorce from the Body, and
the Body shall never see corruption any more. We shall then enjoy an eternal
spring of years which shall never wither; our days will pass on, yet shall we
never feel any decay or declension in our selves; our budding verdure will fear
no Winter, the Lillies and Roses of our Countenances will keep their freshness;
and as original Righteousness served to Man as a Garment in the state of
Innocence, so Glory will be instead of a Robe to the Blessed. God has made the
Soul of so powerful a nature, August. Epist. 66. ad Dioscor.
(says one of the Ancients) that from her glorious happiness there redounds to
the Body the vigor of incorruption; and so long as the glorified Soul shall be
subject to God, and the glorified Body be subject to the Soul, so long it shall
be impossible for any bodily agent whatsoever to have any transient action or
impression, which may any way change or hurt the same. But as St. Paul says,
Romans 6.10. In that Christ died, he died unto sin once; but in that he lives,
he lives unto God: so we shall then live with God, and unto God, as Christ,
for ever.

SECT. VI.
ALbeit glorified Bodies shall be impassible, and incorruptible, so that they
shall not be subject to any contrary or violent impressions, yet may we not
deny, but that there shall be such sensitive actions of seeing, hearing, etc.
and consequently answerable passions which include not corruption, as may be
fitting for that glorious place; each sense shall there have its own proper
delight and glory: doubtless the Bodies of the Saints shall not be destitute of
their senses, but be completely furnished with most perfect organs and spirits
fit for their use, and therefore shall have the most perfect use of their
senses; and verily in vain should the Body be resumed, if there might not be
the use and delight of the senses, seeing the Body of man is not necessary or
useful to the Soul, but for the use of the senses; neither shall there be
wanting objects which may be perceived, and may delight and refresh the senses.

1. Because the Soul is not only rational, but also sensitive, and in both
parts is capable of taking its delights; therefore it must not only be made
happy in the rational part (which shall be done by the vision and fruition of
God) but also in the sensitive part, which shall be brought to pass by the
perception of the most excellent sensible objects fitted to every sense.

2. The Saints in this life had many grievous afflictions and mortifications,
for Christ's sake, in their senses; for the greatest part of the torments which
the holy Martyrs endured, was in their senses: They were tortured; they had
trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea moreover, of bonds and
impr^sonments: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with
the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, Heb. 11.36, 37. And the greatest part of the work of
mortification lies in the mortification of the senses; there is by nature an
inordinateness in all our outward and inward senses: thence we read in
Scripture of a wanton eye, 2 Pet. 2.14. Genes. 21.7. of itching ears, 2 Timothy
4.11. the lust of the palate, Numb. 11.4, 5. of the lust of the nose, Prove.
7.18. so of the touch, Prove. 7.13. so that we cannot with safety trust them
without Job's covenant, Job 31.1. or the Prophet Hosea's hedge, Hos. 2.6. or
Solomon's knife, Prove. 23.7. or David's bridle, Psalm 39.1. Not only the
rational and intellectual, but also the whole sensitive part of man is subject
to lust, and much of the work of mortification lies in subduing the
inordinateness of the bodily senses; so in Heaven likewise, the sensitive parts
and faculties which have been instruments of the Soul in the exercises of
righteousness, and in suffering for righteousness sake, shall also receive
their appointed rewards and consolations, which shall be accommodated to every
one of the senses.

3. This is confirmed by the contrary, for the damned in Hell shall be greatly
tormented in all their senses; the wanton eyes shall always be terrified with
the sight of ugly Devils which should they behold here when they are alone,
would almost scare them out of their wits; the delicate ears shall be
affrighted with the horrid noise of damned Ghosts, crying and roaring out with
doleful shriekings, cursing the day that ever they were born; they shall famish
and pine away for ever, without one bit of bread to stanch their hunger, and
without one drop of water to cool their tongues, tormented in the infernal
flames: your dainty delicate persons, that now cannot brook the least unsavory
smell, shall lie down in a stinking dungeon, in a loathsome lake, that burns
with fire and brimstone for ever. Now if the Damned in Hell shall be so
grievously tormented in their senses, then shall the senses of the glorified
Saints be exceedingly refreshed; for God is not more severe in punishing, then
bountiful in rewarding.

SECT. VII.
HEre let us consider some of the particular Senses, and parts of the Body, and
take notice what notable things might be spoken of them.

1. The Eyes, those windows in the upper story, how lightsome shall they be?
and what high and glorious objects shall they behold? the Eyes shall then be
renewed, and made more bright and clear then the light of the Sun; the very act
of seeing shall be most clear and perfect, they shall be freed from all
darkness, dimness, obscurity and defect; no glorious object shall dazzle the
eyes of the Inhabitants in Heaven, for the brightness of the heavenly Bodies
shall not trouble the spirits of the eyes, (as the light of the Sun troubles
them now) but shall most sweetly strengthen them.

We may conceive that those that are in this place of blessedness, at one
single aspect may perfectly see from one end of the Heaven to the other, there
being no defect in the objects, medium or organ, or any thing to intercept the
sight, the objects being so transparent and glorious; here we may see a Star in
a dark night at many thousand miles distance: but as the objects in Heaven
shall be most glorious, so the eyes of the Saints shall be enabled perfectly to
behold them. Again, the medium shall no way be defective; here the thickness or
darkness of the Air often dulls our sight, but in Heaven there shall be nothing
but a perfect serenity round about them: as in Hell is utter darkness, so in
Heaven there shall be most perfect light. The organ also, the instrument of
sight, [the eye] shall be wholly free from all dimness, and be able to discern
any glorious object presented to it; it shall be free from weakness, able to
bear the brightest splendour; nor shall it be any way offended with the glory of
any visible thing, though never so transcendently glorious. I shall now speak
of the glorious objects which the bodily eye shall behold in Heaven.

I. It shall behold the glory of God himself, in a most glorious manifestation
of himself to it. It is a question whether we shall see God with our bodily
eyes: But I will not burden you with variety of opinions, but take these things
in answer to the question.

The sight of God in Heaven is to be referred to the understanding; to the eye
of the mind, not to the eye of the body. The Reasons of it are these:

Reas. 1. Because the Divine Essence is most spiritual, therefore it altogether
exceeds the power of bodily eyes, though glorified, and raised to a far more
admirable ability to discern far above what now it possibly can see: Potentia
organica ultra corpora non potest extendi; by the sight of sense, with our
bodily eyes we can only see corporal things, and materially bodily objects; and
so we cannot see our own Souls, much less the Essence and Substance of God.

Reas. 2. Because the Apostle says of God, that he is absolutely invisible, 1 Timothy 6.16. whom no eye has seen, nor can see; namely, with bodily eyes. And
though it be said of Jacob, that he saw God face to face, Genes. 32. and that
God talked with Moses mouth to mouth, as a man talks with his friend, Numb.
13. yet they saw not God in his nature, essence, and substance, wherein he is
invisible, but in some visible created form which it pleased him to assume, and
wherein he appeared to them. Athanasius says, that they saw God in some
manifestations of himself, but not in his own nature: so it is conceived that
the Servants of God, even after this life, when they be perfectly sanctified
and glorified, shall not see God the Father and the Holy Ghost in their
essence, for they shall still have their true bodies, and true eyes, and
therefore they shall see but their proper objects.

Reas. 3. Because the Angels, who have no bodily eyes, and stand continually
before the Lord, and the blessed Souls of Saints in Heaven do now see God, and
yet have no bodily eyes; wherefore their sight of God is only mental, not
ocular.

Reas. 4. Because the Apostle expresses the seeing God face to face by perfect
knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known: where
to know God as he knows us, is to see him face to face.

II. Although we shall not see God with our bodily eyes, yet notwithstanding
the glorified organ of a glorified body, informed by a glorified Soul, shall
have most glorious objects to look upon in Heaven; as

1. Heaven it self is a most glorious sight for our glorified eyes; what a
glorious sight is the outside of Heaven, bedeckt with the Sun, Moon, and
innumerable Stars? if the outside be so glorious, what is the inside, wherein
the glory of God is displayed? if the porch and pavement of this Palace be so
glorious, what then is the Presence Chamber? It was Chrysostom's wish, that he
could see Christ in the flesh, Paul in the pulpit, Rome in her glory: In Heaven
you shall see Christ, not in his state of humiliation, but in the highest
degree of glory; not Paul in the Pulpit, but Paul sitting on a Throne of glory;
not Rome, but Heaven it self, the heavenly Jerusalem, in its fullness of glory.

2. These eyes of our bodies shall see the glorious man Christ Jesus, in whose
Humane nature (as in a glass) God will in an ineffable manner manifest the
glory of his Divine essence; hence the Apostle calls him the brightness of his
person; the beam, the splendor of his person: In Rev. 21.23. it is said, The
City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory
of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof: that is, Christ
himself is the light by which we shall see God. Oh what a glorious ravishing
object will Christ's body be to the eye? A Philosopher was so ravished with the
Sun, that he thought himself made for no other end but to look upon the Sun.
Christ's Body in Heaven is a thousand times more bright then the Sun; Non in
forma servi, sed in forma.
the Sun is blackness of darkness in comparison of it: here we see Christ as he
will manifest himself to us otherwise, but there we shall see him as he is, 1
John 3.2. Ferus expounds the words thus [we shall know him as he is] that is,
Ferus in 1 Joan. 3.2.
says he, we shall know Christ no more under the notion of a Servant; we shall
not know Christ as the Son of Man, but then we shall know him as God, as he is
the Son of God, the King of glorious state, the Lord of glory. Cajetan Cajetan.
in loc.
says, that this particle [sicut] as he is, excludit omnem visionem per
representans, excludes our knowledge of Christ from any thing that represents
him sed sicuti est, sicut ipse seipsum offert: (i. e.) we shall know him by
himself, and not by the creature, or any thing whatsoever. Much of Christ is
discovered here in the Word, in the the Gospel, and in the Ordinances; and
great manifestations of Christ are made to the Souls of his People by the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation; but all comes short of this, when they shall
see him as he is in himself, see him face to face; as Friends talking together
do look one another in the face, so shall Christ and godly Men see one another
face.

There Is a great difference between the sight of a Picture (though it be a true
Picture) of a dear Friend, when he is many hundred miles distant from us, and
the sight of his own face; far more blessed shall the Children of God be, when
they shall see Christ as he is, then now they can discern him while they are in
the body, and absent from him, and can see him only by representations. If old
Simeon, when he saw Christ as he was in his infancy, embraced him in his arms,
and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, Luke 2.29. How then shall the sight of him as he is,
transport the Souls of the Saints with unspeakable joy and admiration? if it
were so delightful to see Christ in his infancy, in his swaddling clothes, what
joy will it be to see him in Heaven all glorious? if the fight of Christ in the
types and promises, which were but prefigurations of him, were so sweet to the
Saints of old, what will the sight of Christ himself, the Antitype, be? Abraham
foresaw by the eye of faith, the first coming of Christ in the flesh; he saw my
day afar off (says Christ) and was glad, Qui bona egerint, fulgebunt sicut Sol
cum Angelis in vitam aeternam, cum Domino nostro Jesu Christo; videntes eum
semper, and ab eo visi, and incessabili laetitia, quae apiso provenient
perfruentes. Damascen. lib. 4. de Fide.
John 8.56. Much more glad would he have been, with old Simeon, to have seen
Christ himself: If John Baptist leaped in the Womb for joy, at the presence of
Mary the Mother of our Lord, how will our hearts dance for joy, when we shall
see the Lord Jesus himself in his great Majesty and glory? if it be sweet to
behold him in his Image, and in his People, who are but shadows of Christ; if
sometimes an heavenly vision of Christ has driven a man into an ecstasy, and
has ravished him out of himself; Oh then what shall it be to see him as he is?
if the inward sight of him, by a few beams darted upon us by this glorious Son
of righteousness, does transform us from glory to glory, Oh how will it then
ravish our hearts, when we shall have both an ocular and intellectual sight of
the Lord Jesus?

Oh what running, thronging, and posting was there to see Christ when he was
upon earth, in his state of abasement? Zacheus being a man of a low stature,
climbed up a Sycamore-tree, that he might see Jesus passing by, Luke 19. what
then will the sight of Jesus be, when you shall see the Son of man coming in
power and great glory? when you shall see him with trumpets sounding before
him, and see him with his glorious train, with all his glorious Angels, as
himself speaks, Matthew. 16.27. to see him sitting upon his Throne of Majesty,
and the World round about him; his Friends (the Sheep) on his right hand, the
Goats (his Enemies) on his left hand: what a sight will this be, especially if
you have then so much interest in Christ, as to be placed among the Sheep at
his right hand? how will it affect you, when he shall be always in your eye,
and never out of your sight?

If the Queen of Sheba was so stricken with amazement when she beheld the glory
of Solomon, that there was no more spirit in her, 1 Kings 10.5. how will all
the Saints be filled with admiration when they shall behold the glory of
Christ? how did that astonished Queen bless the Attendants of Solomon! Happy
are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants that stand continually before thee,
and hear thy wisdom. Alas, what happiness is this in regard of the Angels and
Saints who stand continually in the presence of Christ, in whose presence there
is fullness of joy, fullness of glory! was it such an happiness to hear the
wisdom of Solomon? what a transcendent happiness is it then to hear the wisdom
of Christ, who is greater then Solomon? I conceive that the glory which three
of Christ's Disciples saw upon the holy Mount was but a glimpse of that fullness
of glory, wherewith he is now silled in Heaven: yet that little drop was so
affecting, that Peter cried out, Master, it is good for us to be here: He was
so ravished with extraordinary joy conceived at the heavenly vision, that he
even lost and forgot himself, and wist not what they said, Luke 9.33, 34. but
being overjoyed, it appears his wish was inconsiderate, and his counsel rash
and unadvised, ( Let us build three Tabernacles, one for Thee, another for
Moses, another for Elias) for these Reasons.

1. Because he thought earthly Tabernacles fit habitations for heavenly Bodies.

2. Because he conceived not aright of the end of the vision, viz. to comfort
them; in letting them to see (as in a glass) what Christ's glory and their
glory should be; which he would have had continued, when it must of necessity
be intermitted; for had Christ continued in this estate he could not have
suffered, and so our salvation had not been accomplished. But while Peter was
thus speaking, behold a bright Cloud overshadowed them, and they feared when
they were entering into the Cloud; had not this Cloud somewhat abated the glory
of the Apparition, it had not been possible for these Disciples, in the state
of mortality, to have beheld the countenance of their Master. Now if Christ in
his Transfiguration, while he was on Mount Tabor, was so delightful to behold,
when his Humanity appeared in a glorious form only but for a short time, how
pleasant will the sight of him be to the godly, when they shall see him by
perfect vision, and enjoy him by full fruition? With abundant satisfaction
shall the Saints behold the face of Christ in fullness of glory! Oh how will it
ravish their hearts, when they shall see him who gave himself for them? who
loved them, and washed their sins in his blood? who being the Prince and
Captain of our salvation, was content to be perfected by sufferings, that he
might bring them into glory? when they shall see him who died for them, and
rose again for their justification; ascended up into Heaven, took possession
thereof, and prepared a place for them, and came again and took them to
himself? they shall then be even transported with joy to behold their Savior,
whom they loved so dearly all their lives, but never had the happiness to see
before; for whose appearance they longed, thirsted, sighed, prayed, Come Lord
Jesus. Oh how will their hearts melt toward him (think you) when they shall see
him! Oh this is he that died for me, that shed his precious blood for me: they
will then look through him, if it were possible; and then to think they shall
always see him and enjoy him, and never be divided from him any more, they will
then be even ravished into an ecstasy of joy; their sight of him shall be
laeta, familiaris, and perpetua, joyful, familiar, and perpetual; which is a
special part of the beatitude peculiar to the Saints, from which the Wicked are
excluded. Oh happy, yea thrice happy are those eyes which shall see the face of
Christ, whom they shall love perfectly, and of whom they are infinitely and
eternally beloved! What a ravishing sight will it be to behold that Body, which
was so foully disfigured upon the Cross for our sakes! It shall be undoubtedly
(as St. Bernard says) a thing full of all sweetness and delight, when men
shall there see and behold a Man, the Creator of men, and Lord of all things
created. We are wont to esteem it a singular great honor to our Family, to see
one of our Kindred advanced to a Crown, or dignified with some Princely honor;
but how far greater honor shall this be to us, to see that Lord, who is our
God, our near Kinsman, of our flesh and blood, sitting at the right hand of God
the Father, and made King both of Heaven and Earth? And if the Members do
account that an honor to them which is done to their Head, by reason of that
strict union that is between the Head and its Members, what else shall it be,
but that every faithful Christian shall account the glory of Jesus Christ their
Head as their peculiar glory? How should the consideration hereof make every
one of us cry out, O my dearest Savior, and blessed Redeemer, when shall this
joyful day come? Oh when shall I appear before thy face, and be ravished by
beholding thy excellent beauty? when shall I see that countenance of thine
which the Angels are desirous to behold? How true concerning the things of the
World is that which Solomon says, the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
Eccles. 1.8. and it is as true, that in Heaven the eye shall be fully
satisfied, but not satiated at all with seeing; they shall see such glory, that
they shall desire no greater: If Philip on Earth said to Christ, Show us the
Father, and it shall suffice; how much more when we shall see the King of Kings
in his glory, shall glorified Saints say, We have enough? Satis, Domine satis.
they shall desire no greater glory, yet never be weary of seeing.

SECT. VIII.
3. HEreunto I may also add that blessed and glorious spectacle of the general
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven; those
many thousands of Patriarchs and Saints of the old and new World; Prophets of
the Old Testament, Apostles of the New; Martyrs, faithful Preachers, and
sincere Professors of the Gospel: Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
Samuel, David, Daniel, Joh; Peter, Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and
the rest. What a ravishing sight will it be to see the glorious company of the
Apostles? to behold the goodly fellowship of the Prophets? to set your eyes on
that noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, that have shed their blood for the
cause of Christ? What a joyful sight will it be to see those holy Prophets,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the rest, above the reach of their cruel
Persecutors, clothed with long white garments, with Palms in their hands, and
with the glorious ensigns of their victorious triumphs? Will it not be a goodly
sight to behold that glorious forerunner of Christ, who chose rather to lose
his head, then to dissemble the filthiness of an incestuous King? and no less
delightful will it be to see St. Stephen, who was stoned to death for Christ;
and that holy Apostle St. James, who was slain with the sword of Herod, that
cruel Tyrant, now reigning with Christ in glory. What an excellent sight shall
it be to see those famous Lights of the Church of Christ, Peter and Paul,
shining there very gloriously, with the Trophies of their Martyrdom wherewith
they were Crowned? and this shall add to the perfection of this sight, that the
Saints shall all enjoy the glories of each other, as if they were properly
their own.

If the sight of the Saints in communion here be so sweet, even an Heaven upon
Earth, what will it be when all the blessed Souls that have been from the
beginning of the World, and shall be to the end, shall meet all together, and
they wholly freed from all corruptions and imperfections, what a blessed sight
will that be? If there be such great pleasure in the sight of Flowers and
Jewels, what great delight will there be in the sight of the innumerable
company of the Blessed, who shall all shine as the Sun, especially when all
shall be dearer to their Parents, Children, Relations, then now they are? to
behold multitude, the beauty and excellency of the inhabitants of Heaven, and
their sweet familiarity with one another, will be a most pleasant spectacle:
Their multitude will be innumerable; God has many Sons and Daughters that must
be brought to glory, Heb. 2.10. there are a numberless number that are to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Rev. 14.1. there shall be no empty places
in Heaven, nor any void of inhabitants. Likewise the beauty of all shall be
admirable; they shall be like unto the Angels of God, and be the most excellent
images of their heavenly Father; and how pleasant a thing will this be to
behold? In dignity all shall be the Citizens of Heaven, and the Children of
God; all shall be triumphant Kings, having had the victory over the World, the
Flesh and the Devil. We count it an admirable sight, if we could see one King
among an hundred thousand persons in his glory; Oh then what a sight shall this
be, when we shall see millions of glorious Kings, and Christ, the King of
infinite glory, in the midst of them? -- All shall be Priests unto God,
offering the sacrifice of praise perpetually to him. In brief, the least Saint
in Heaven shall be greater in dignity and glory, then all the Kings of this
World: Moreover, they shall be most delighted to behold that sweet converse
they shall have together. If it be a delightful thing in the Court of some
great Prince to obtain the favor and good will of all, what pleasure will it
be to enjoy the friendship and familiarity of such an innumerable company of
noble Persons? Oh what a royal Feast, and most magnificent Banquet, will the
Lord make for his Children, when they shall all meet together in his holy
Mountain? let Worldlings get them to their gluttonous and carnal feasts, let
them even burst themselves with their superfluous excesses, such a Feast as
this (where the choicest dainties are served in by the holy Angels, where even
Christ himself, the Master and maker of the Feast, will as it were g^rd himself
and serve) is convenient only for God and his chosen People.

SECT. IX.
ANd as the eyes shall be freed from all dimness, so the ears shall be freed
from all defects of deafness: the ears shall always hear that ravishing Music
sounding forth from the heavenly Quire, where a consort of innumerable Angels
and glorified Saints are singing Hallelujahs to their God, and magnifying their
glorious Redeemer for ever; for the high praises of God shall be in the mouths
of all his Saints, Psalm. 149.6. by reason of their ardent love to God, who has
heaped so many good things upon them, they shall break forth into praises and
thanksgivings: They shall praise him out of all his works and benefits; from
his works of Creation and Providence, from his works of Redemption and
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification; from his works of Mercy and
Justice; from the Rewards he bestows on the Righteous, and the Punishments he
inflicteth on the Wicked; and from all his secret and revealed Judgments. They
shall have all these things before the eyes of their minds, and shall clearly
understand the counsel of God in them all, and shall be filled with incredible
consolation, and by reason of the greatness of their joy shall praise him for
all, peculiarly blessing him, and giving him immortal thanks; they shall not
want matter for everlasting praise: and they shall not only praise him with
their heart, but also in their body with their tongues; there shall be a most
excellent harmony of voices, incomparably surpassing the music in the World;
this will be exceeding sweet and pleasant, that one only sound of it were able
to bring the whole World asleep.

Now as the Saints shall incessantly, with vocal praises, magnify the Lord; so
without doubt their vocal Hallelujahs shall be heard and understood of one
another: what ravishing expressions of love shall they then hear from Christ,
and from each other? what Songs of joy and triumph? Upon the consideration
whereof devout St. Augustine breaks forth into this meditation; Omne opus
sanct^rum leus Dei sine fi^e, sine defectione, sine labor. faelix ergo and
vero in perpe tuum faelix, si post resolutionem hujus corpusculi audivero iila
cantica caelestis enelodiae, quae cantantur ad laudem Regis aeterni, ab illis
super^ae petriae civibus, beatorumque spirituum agminibus, etc. August. med^t.
cap. 25.
The whole work of the Saints in Heaven shall be to praise God without end,
without failing, without labor: happy therefore, and truly happy am I for
ever, if after the resolution of my body, I shall be counted worthy to hear
those Songs of heavenly melody, which are sung in praising the everlasting
King, by those Citizens of the Country that is above, and by the Troops of
those blessed Spirits which are there: Oh how happy shall I account my self to
be, if I may be admitted to sing those songs, and stand by my King, my God; the
Captain of my salvation, and behold him in his glory. Now as it was said of the
eye in respect of things seen, so it is said of the ear in respect of things
heard; Neither is the ear silled with hearing, Eccles. 1.8. it is spoken in
respect of things heard here below, all the things in the World which are most
delightful to it, cannot fill it; they may tire the ear, but cannot satisfy
it; but in Heaven the ear shall be filled, but never cloyed with hearing; it
shall hear whatsoever is pleasing to it, and nothing that is distasteful. How
should this consideration make us to think the time long till we be out of
Egypt, and freed from those chains which link us to such shameful services, and
so unworthy of a Soul ransomed with the blood of the Son of God? Alas, when
will the time come that we shall hear the Canticles of glory? when shall we go
to the Daughters of Zion, to our Country, crying out with a loud voice, that
the spiritual Pharaoh is swallowed up under the Abysses, and that all those
Troops of Enemies which now pursue us, have suffered a dismal shipwreck, not
under the Waves of the red Sea, but under the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and
everlasting malediction? Oh then let us not suffer the noise and tumult of this
World to strike our ears with so many unprofitable, extravagant, and dangerous
discourses, but rather let us seal up our ears against wicked words, filthy
speeches, profane and rotten communications, idle and foolish jestings, and
inure them to such as are suitable to those they shall hear in Heaven.

SECT. X.
AS for the sense of feeling we may not deny it to be in Heaven, for that
includes not any corruption; and if congruous to sense, it is a perfection, not
a defect of nature; and that glorified Bodies be palpable, and may be felt,
that speech of our Savior after his resurrection makes it clear, Handle me and
see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me to have, Luke 24.39.
The sense of touching will receive its delights, both from the heavenly Air,
and the soft touch of heavenly Bodies, as also from the most inward sense of
the best temperament; for man being perfectly sound, has a pleasant sense and
feeling of the good constitution of the Body.

As for the smell and taste, some think as they are inferior senses, so they
are subservient to this mortal state, and that there shall be no use of them in
a state of glory; the taste is for the trying of meats and drinks; and it shall
be one great part of the Saints happiness, not to hunger and thirst any more,
but to be far above these things, being like to the Angels of God, to be so
replenished with the love and influences of the presence of God, as to live
immediately upon him, in him, and by him, and not to lead such a weak and frail
life as now they do, that lean upon the staff of bread, and must be
underpropped by the creatures. But if there be any use of these senses in
Heaven, it shall be after another manner then now it is; the sense of smelling
shall then be refreshed with most sweet and pleasant savours; not of such
vaporous things as we have here, but of such as be proportionable to the glory
of Heaven.

In like manner the taste shall be satisfied with incredible sweetness and
delights, Ludovic. Granat. Medit.
not for the sustentation of life, but for the accomplishment of all glory, as
one notes: And albeit touching the sense of taste some difficulty may arise;
yet though there be no delicious taste, by eating or drinking delicious
dainties (such as the sensual Epicures of these times make their God)
notwithstanding, it is not absurd to think, ^r. Rich Sheldon of Man's last end.
that glorified Bodies (by God's appointment) shall have some delicious and
pleasant moisture resting upon the palate, or place of taste, that so by such a
means that sensible part may have her full content. And Lessius says, Lessius
de summo bono.
if the Damned in Hell are most sharply punished in these senses, (as the rich
Glutton, that in Hell torments was tormented in his tongue) why should not the
Saints, who have suffered so many things so grievous to the senses in this
life, receive delight and refreshing in them?

Concerning all which Laurence Justinian writes thus: The flesh of man made
spiritual, Laurent. Justinian. lib. de Dicipl. Monach. cap. ^3.
shall abound with delights of diverse sorts in all the senses; the eye shall be
delighted in the lovely sight of the Redeemer, when it shall see the King of
glory decked with his own comeliness; the melodious songs of the Citizens that
are above, shall not a little delight their ears; likewise the fragrant
pleasantness of the Celestial odours shall embrew the smelling with a wonderful
liquefaction; and an unspeakable sweetness of all delectable things shall as it
were cram the palate of the mouth; and the touch shall abound with delights
suitable to it: it is requisite that all the members of the Body should extol
their Creator in their own way, that as they took their beginning from him, so
also they may bring down the end of their blessedness toward him, that God may
be all in all. And Anselm, when he had said, that the Damned shall have the
greatest pains in all their senses and members, adds in like manner, but in a
contrary consideration, in that life that is to come, a certain unspeakable
delight shall inebriate good men, and abundantly satisfy them with its
invaluable sweetness: The eyes, the ears, the nostrils, the mouth, the throat,
the hands, the liver, the lungs, the bones, the marrow, the bowels, and every
particular member of the Body shall be replenished with such a wonderful sense
of delight and sweetness, that truly we shall drink large draughts of it in the
torrents of delight; and instead of the dew of Manna, wherewith the Israelites
were refreshed, we shall be satiated in an Ocean of Nectar and Ambrosia, that
is, without bounds, limits, measure, or bottom. O happiness, not so much to be
spoken of, as to be wished and desired, and to be purchased (if it were
possible) with a thousand lives, had we so many to give for the same.

SECT. XI.
Use 1. THe first Use that I shall make of this, is to commend unto you that of
the Apostle, 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. That ye should abstain from fornication, that
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and in
honor, (as men that seek for glory, honor, and immortality) not in the lust
of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: as those who have
hope only in this life, who have no entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Flee fornication; every sin that a man does
is without the body, but he that commiteth fornication sins against his own
body, 1 Cor. 6.18. Other sins are without doors in comparison of this, but this
is within; it is a sin so inward to the Body, that it diffuseth it self through
the whole Body, and makes it wholly a slave and instrument to its lust; yea,
the Body is as it were the object of these sinful lusts; they do in a peculiar
manner defile the Body. What greater indecorum can there be for one that hops
to have his Body glorified in Heaven, then thus to debase and vilify it upon
the Earth? Take heed likewise of intemperance in meats and drinks, of gluttony
and drunkenness, for this also dishonors the Body, takes away the heart, and
makes it to stick fast in the mire of sensuality, and makes a man a stranger to
heavenly-mindedness; it sets a man below a rational man, much more below a
spiritual man, whose heart, whose hope, whose conversation is in Heaven. St.
Paul says, Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy
both it and them. If you expect to have your Bodies lifted up to heavenly
glory, be not ye S^rvants to the belly and to meats and drinks, both which are
appointed to destruction. Miserable then is the condition of those persons now,
whose god is their belly; whose greatest delight is to pamper their bodies, and
please their palates; that have not the least savor of heavenly things: The
more heavenly minded any man is, the more he raises his heart far above these
things, and denies himself in them; and it shall be no little ground of
comfort to a glorified Saint, when after the mortification and diligent looking
to the senses, (which continued so short a time) he finds himself so wholly
immersed in that deep fountain of glory, without finding any bottom or end of
so many, and such exceeding great joys. Oh then let us make it our meat and
drink to do the will of our Father which is in Heaven, using these outward
blessings as not abusing them; as furtherances, and not as hindrances in the
service of God, eating and drinking for Heaven, and (whatsoever we do) doing
all for Heaven; that this among other may be one good evidence to our Souls,
that we are Vessels of Honor prepared for glory, fitted for Heaven, where we
shall be full of God, and have no need nor desire to fill our selves with meats
and drinks.

Use 2. This may exhort us to a patient bearing of all afflictions and present
evils, be they many, be they grievous: Suppose your Bodies are as full of
diseases, as the Body of Lazarus was full of sores; they are sick, weak, crazy,
deformed, blind, maimed, ulcerous, leprous; if all these, or any of these be
upon thy Body, bear it patiently, for Christ will one day redeem thy Body from
all these, and make it glorious like to his own Body.

Use 3. Be hence encouraged to give up your Bodies to suffer for Christ what
evil soever cruel Tormentors through God's permission shall inflict upon your
Carcasses; if they judge thee to the loss of ears, of eyes, of tongue, of
hands, yea the whole Body to be burned at a stake, or to be devoured by wild
Beasts, (such torments Martyrs have endured) willingly submit to all; Christ
will restore those eyes, ears, tongues, hands, or any other member whatsoever,
which your Adversaries shall pull from you.

Use 4. Be not afraid of dying; neither let the thoughts of the dissolution of
thy Body into dust, and the long abode of thy Body in the dark prison of the
grave be a trouble to thee; God will redeem this Body of thine from the grave,
saying, Give up the dead which are in thee, give up my Saints; and he will make
thy Body to outshine in glory. The Grave is God's Refining-pot, where he
refineth our vile Bodies; it is the mould in which he casts our glorious
Bodies to new mould them; it is his Workhouse, wherein he shows his power
and wisdom in transforming our Bodies. Death causes the Saints to put off
these vile Bodies, that they may put on more glorious. Finally, be exhorted to
glorify God in your Bodies, since he will one day make them glorious Bodies, 1
Cor. 6.20.

CHAP. XVII.
I Have spoken somewhat largely of the substance of that happiness which Christ
has purchased for the Saints, so far as concerns the Body; in the next place
I shall speak somewhat of that unconceivable blessedness to which the Soul (the
principal part of man) shall be advanced: and here is something peculiar in
that glory prepared for the Soul above that of the Body; not only that the Soul
in its own nature is capable of a greater perfection and excellency then the
Body, but also in respect of the time; for whereas the Body shall remain under
the power of Death and corruption, until the general Resurrection, the Soul in
the mean time shall be triumphing in glory; so that the Souls of the Saints
will come under a double consideration.

1. Before the Resurrection. 2. After the Resurrection.
1. Before the Resurrection, when the Soul shall remain separated from the
Body; of which I shall speak somewhat briefly, because among other wretched
Doctrines hatched of old, and lately revived, this is found to be one, viz.
that the Soul dies or sleeps with the Body, and so abides till the great
day of the general Resurrection, when it shall be raised again with the Body:
But two clear Scriptures may be opposed against this Opinion; the first is in
Heb. 12.23. where the Apostle speaking of the privilege which the Saints have
while they are upon Earth, said, they were come to the spirits of just men made
perfect: not the Souls of any of the Saints living on the face of the Earth,
for they are imperfect: for we know in part, and prophecy in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. Hence
then it remains, that the spirits of just men made perfect, must be no other
then the Souls of the Saints separated from the Body, and translated unto
glory: Now if the spirits of just men separated from their Bodies are made
perfect, they are not dead, for death is the destruction of perfection; the
Body is never so imperfect as when it is dead; a diseased Body is much more
perfect then a dead Corpse: so then if the Souls of the Saints were dead with
their Bodies, they should be so far from being made perfect, that they should
utterly lose those beginnings of perfection which they had while they were in
the Body; their graces would be extinguished, and there would be a loss to them
of that enjoyment of God, and communion with him, which they had here upon the
Earth.

The second place of Scripture I shall produce against this Opinion of the
Mortalists, is in 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8. Therefore we are always confident, knowing
that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; (for we
walk by faith, not by sight) we are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. Here you may see, that
while the Souls of the Saints are present in the Body, (as they are during this
life) they are absent from the Lord; albeit Jesus Christ dwells in them by
his Spirit, and they are spiritually united to him; yet in regard of local
distance, they are absent from Christ in respect of his Humane nature, not
seeing him face to face; they walk by faith, not by sight. Moreover, when their
Souls are absent, and separated from the Body by death, they shall be present
with the Lord; not walking by faith at a distance from Christ, but resting in
his presence, immediately beholding him. The Souls of the Saints then do not
die with the Body, but live in the presence of their Savior at the very same
time when they are absent and separated from the Body by death. This must needs
be meant of the state of the Soul, not after the resurrection, but between
death and the resurrection, for that is the only time when the Soul is absent
from the Body; and during that time the Apostle says, it shall be present with
the Lord.

To these may be added that gracious answer of Christ to the penitent
Malefactor; Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise,
Luke 27.43. viz. the very same day wherein he died; Now the heavenly Paradise
is no burying place for dead Souls, but a glorious habitation for the living
spirits of just men made perfect. Observe likewise that argument of Christ,
grounded upon the speech of God to Moses at the bush, which strongly proves
both the resurrection of the Body, and the immortality of the Soul, as well
before as after the resurrection, Matthew. 22.31, 32. Have you not read what is
spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. This was
spoken long after the natural death of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and so the
Argument stands thus: Those who have God for their God by Covenant, are not
dead but living; but Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, have God for their God by
Covenant: Ergo they are not dead, but living.

So then they live in their principal parts, their Souls, while they are absent
from the Body, whereunto their Bodies are to be reunited at the great day,
that their whole persons may fully enjoy their God, and perfectly possess the
fruit and benefit of God's covenant. verse 34. this argument silenced the
Sadduces. Finally, consider what meant Stephen's prayer at his death, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit, or Soul, Acts 7.59. If his Spirit, or Soul, had died
with his Body, why should he call upon Christ more for the receiving his Soul,
but because he knew his Spirit, or Soul, was immortal, and must live and
subsist when it was separated from the Body? he prayed Christ to give present
entertainment to his Soul, that he might rest in the bosom of his love, until
his Body should be raised and reunited to it. Now as this may stop the mouth of
this lying Spirit, which of late is crept forth into the World again, so it may
demonstrate (according to the point in hand) that the Souls of the Faithful,
after their separation from the Body, are instated into blessedness. By which
places forementioned, and such like, is refuted their Heresy, who either
directly deny the immortality of the Soul, or imply it as the Socinians, who
say, that Mori est penitus extingui, V.d. Gens. in Confess. remonstrant. p. 254,
256.
and resurgere est ex non ente iterum existere. And this Opinion some others
have seemed to favor, in the Declaration of their Opinions about the Articles
of Religion, in that they are altogether silent in the point that concerns
the blessed rest of the Saints Souls after this life.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the blessedness of the Soul in general.
MUch more might have been spoken of the blessedness of the Soul in glory, when
it is absent from the Body; but because these things belong as well to the Soul
reunited to the Body, when it has full possession of salvation, I choose to
treat of them under that consideration.

1. This shall be the wonderful felicity of the Soul, in that it shall have a
Body every way suitable to it self, immortal, spiritual, incorruptible,
glorious, as its habitation for a pure, immortal, glorious Spirit to dwell in;
in this respect the glorified Souls now in Heaven (all the time of their
separation) do even vehemently desire and wait for the redemption of their
Bodies, who were their yoke-fellows in the day of their pilgrimage upon Earth.
Though the Soul of a Believer reign with Angels, yet has she a passion for her
Body; and all the good she does possess, cannot take her from the desire and
memory thereof; though she has made trial of its revolts, though this friendly
Enemy has oftentimes persecuted her, and that she has desired death to be
freed from the tyranny thereof, yet does she languish as it were, and
vehemently long after it. Though the Body be reduced to dust, though it cause
pity in its Enemies, and though it cause horror in those to whom it was lovely,
yet she forbears not to desire it, and to expect the resurrection with a kind
of impatience, that her Body may partake of the bliss which she enjoys. The
Souls of the Saints departed this life do not account their glory, their
blessedness complete, till their Bodies be reunted; hence they do naturally
desire their reunion; and as they cry under the Altar, How long, Lord, how long
will it be ere thou avenge our blood? so all the Souls of just men made
perfect, with one voice cry out, How long, Lord, how long will it be ere thou
redeem our Bodies, that we may be perfectly blessed in the full fruition of thy
self? Oh then how shall the glorified Soul rejoice in its glorified Body,
raised from among worms, dust and rottenness, rescued from its captivity, from
under the power of death and corruption, and now again made one with the Soul,
no longer to be a snare or burden to it, but a companion meet for it, taking in
no object by the senses that may in the least degree endanger the polluting of
the Soul, and having nothing in it that may stupifie the affections, or any way
discompose the eternal rest, disturb the peace, eclipse the joy of the Soul,
interrupt its enjoyment of God, or any way diminish its complete happiness.

2. There shall be a perfect harmony between the Body with all its parts, and
the Soul with all its powers; and both Soul and Body shall be fully conformed
to Christ, and so shall most sweetly comply each with other: and I conceive the
very remembrance of that dullness, sottishness, earthiness, and drossiness,
(which in the state of mortality is in the Body) shall be matter of great joy
to the Soul, now that it finds such a wonderful change in the Body
transformed unto such a glorious perfection; even as it is a great refreshment
to the mind of a man after a perfect cure to find the Body lightsome, full of
spirits, and in perfect health after a lethargy, or some other dulling disease
that has debilitated nature, exhausted the spirits, and indisposed it for
action.

Then shall the happiness of man be perfect, when a glorified Soul shall be
united to an immortal Body; and mutually communicating all their advantages,
the Soul shall be happy in the felicity of the Body, and the Body happy in that
of the Soul; all their differences shall then be composed in this general
peace: the Soul shall then forget all the revolts of the Body, nor shall the
Body any more complain of the severities of the Soul; but both of them
remembering only the good they have done each other, they shall reign in Heaven
in a community of glory.

CHAP. XIX. Of the more distinct blessedness of the Soul.
SECT. I. Of the perfection of the apprehensions of the Saints in glory.
LEt us now more distinctly consider of the blessedness of the Soul; first
laying this general rule, that it shall be perfect: for the Apostle plainly
shows, that the Spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12. Now the
perfection of the Soul principally consists in the knowledge of God. Now there
is Scientia directa and intuitiva, a direct knowledge of God upon view and
sight: Now this is either perfect, or imperfect.

A full and perfect knowledge of God himself, none has but God himself; no
creatures, no man, no Angel is capable of it; God himself fully and perfectly
sees himself, which no other can do; for a full and perfect knowledge of an
infinite Being is infinite, as that Being is. He that has a full and perfect
knowledge of any thing whatsoever it be, has the full measure of that thing in
his understanding, which he fully and perfectly knows. Now what is the
shallow and narrow capacity of any created understanding of Man or Angel, that
it should measure the infinite essence and excellency of the Godhead? it is
not so much as a spoon to the Ocean; and there is less disproportion between
the water of the Sea, and the capacity of a spoon, then the understanding of
Man or Angels, and the infinite majesty and excellency of God.

Now God knows himself fully and perfectly in himself. If the Sunbeams were
animated, and living creatures endued with reason, how clearly and perfectly
would they know and see through themselves, every way being altogether light
and transparent? God is the light of lights, a most pure, bright, and glorious
Being; and he is of infinite wisdom, and so fully and perfectly knows
himself.

On the other side, there is a knowledge of God direct and intuitive, or upon
view, which is not perfect, and this is of those blessed Creatures already
possessed of glory: such knowledge have the Angels, who see God face to face, as
our Savior says, Matthew. 18.10. The Angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in Heaven. They do not only see his back-parts, as Moses did,
but his face, by an immediate view, beholding the beauty and glory of the Lord.
Whether the Saints departed, before the resurrection of the Body, do thus see
the face of God, I determine not; doubtless they do already enjoy a great
degree of blessedness, the fruition whereof is more sweet for one day, then the
enjoying of all the World for a man's life: howsoever, after the resurrection,
when they shall be fully possessed of glory, they shall see the face of God as
the Angels do, Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God; whom I shall see for my
self, and not another, etc. So David compares the temporal prosperity of
Worldlings, which they enjoy in this life, with the blessed estate which he
expected after the resurrection of the Body; he calls them, Psalm. 17.14, 15.
Men of the World, which have their portion in this life, and whose belly the
Lord fills with his hid treasures; which are full of Children, and leave the
rest of their substance to their Babes. This was their seeming happiness, all
worldly and temporary. Now on the other side he speaks of his own condition:
As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when
I awake, with thy likeness. He cared not for those hidden treasures locked up
in the mines and bowels of the earth, nor for a portion in this life, nor for
large portions for his Posterity, etc. but to behold the face of God in
righteousness; to see him face to face, (which he was assured of by faith) and
so to be satisfied with his Image.

Object. But why is this knowledge said to be imperfect, since the Apostle,
speaking of this glorious condition of the Saints, says, That then that which
is perfect shall come, and that which is imperfect shall be done away?

Sol. I answer, this knowledge of God which the Angels have, and the Saints
shall have in God himself, is

Perfect, in regard of the Subject in which it is.

Imperfect, in regard of the Object of whom it is.

Perfect in regard of the Subject, and that in two respects.

1. Because it fills the understanding, and satisfies the spirit with a
fullness of light resulting from so glorious an object; so that the Soul has a
beatifical vision of God, so far as it is capable. And as the eye is refreshed
by an object fitly proportioned, and hurt or dimmed by a disproportionable
eminency, or excellency, in the object surpassing its strength and ability; so
the Soul, perfected and glorified, and the Angelical Spirits, have such a
knowledge of God in himself, as fills them, not such as confounds them; and
this is perfect in regard of them, because it is such a perfection as they are
capable of, and can contain.

2. It is perfect in respect of the subject in which it is, in that it is as
much as is due and requisite to make their happiness complete and perfect
without any defect; it is so perfect, that they need no more knowledge of God
then that which they have: and who can deny but that this is a perfection of
knowledge in respect of the subjects? they are as blessed every way, and so
especially in regard of the knowledge of God, as such creatures can be; and that
is a perfection, though relative, and (...) (as they say) in relation to the
subjects in whom it is.

Secondly, on the other side, this knowledge which these glorified spirits have,
and shall have of God in himself, is imperfect in respect of the Object of whom
it is, viz. God, whom they know in himself; that is, it is not a knowledge
matchable to the infinite essence and excellency of the Godhead: This cannot
be comprehended by any of the creatures.

Yet let me tell you, the understanding shall then be more perfect, In its
apprehension, In its judgment.


I. In its apprehension; that shall be most quick and acute; the Soul shall
have a most sharp and piercing eyesight, readily apprehending and conceiving;
it shall not see through a glass, it shall not have its knowledge at second hand.

1. It shall not apprehend God by the Creature, by the light of Nature; the
Creatures are the darkest representations of God, there are but some of his
foot-prints in the Creatures, they are no glasses wherein we shall behold the
face of God: At the best, the Creatures are but Jacob's Ladder to us, by which
we may ascend from Earth to the knowledge of God in Heaven; the Creatures can
but take us by the hand and lead us to God, and lift up our minds to Heaven;
the sight of God is more then all the Creatures can afford, because God's face
cannot be seen in the Creature: and yet this we may grant, that the Saints
shall see God in the Creatures then, but with this difference, as Dionysius
well observes, Dionys. Ercop.
the Creatures will be specula clara in statu integro, clear glasses in a
perfect state; but now in statu corrupto, in a corrupt state they be specula
aenigmatica, obscure glasses.

2. The glorified Soul shall apprehend God after another manner then now it can
know him from his Word, or understand him in his Word. The knowledge of the Word
is by the Schools called cognitio Fidei, the knowledge of Faith; it is a far
greater knowledge then the knowledge of God from the Creatures; Faith is of an
higher reach then Reason, or the light of Nature; the Word of God speaks of God
more, then the eye of Reason ever can by the eye of Nature kenne; things which
Reason could almost deny, (at least dispute against) the Word reveals of God.
The Creatures show but the footsteps of God, the Word shows his back-parts,
his glorious attributes, his gracious goodness: but yet the Word cannot show us
the face of God; therefore the Beatifick Vision is more then the knowledge of
God we have from the Word.

3. The knowledge of God in Heaven is more then that which the Saints have of
him by the light of grace in this life; by the light of grace the Saints do
behold the light of God's countenance in this life: David often prays, Lord,
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us; but yet the light of grace cannot
show the very countenance of God himself, it must be the light of glory that
must discover that to us. Indeed to know God by the light of grace, (which more
properly is termed the knowledge of Faith) is called life eternal, John 17.3. It
is called eternal life, because to believe in God, and in Christ, is the
medium, a way and means to life eternal; and then again, it is vita eterna
inchoata, saving Faith in Christ is the beginning of eternal life: but the eye
of Faith is too weak to look God in the face: yet this we may grant, that what
the Creature, what the Word reveals of God, what we know by the light of grace,
we shall have a more clear, more full, and more manifest sight of it in Heaven.

We shall then see God as he is, (i.) know himself by himself; we shall know
him by himself without the Creature, know him by himself without the external
preaching of the Word, know him without the Sacraments; the Word and Sacraments
being glasses wherein we behold the glory of God, but in Heaven there shall be
no need of these glasses, we shall see his face without these glasses by
himself. Look as God does manifest himself to the Angels, so he will manifest
himself to us; they see God in himself, and by himself, therefore they are said
always to behold the face of God, and so shall glorified Saints do.

Here the bodily eye may be dim, either by reason of the weakness of the eye, a
defect of strength in the organ or instrument of sight, or because of scales or
films growing over it; so it is with the understanding, or eye of the Soul, its
sight may be dim and imperfect, either by reason of its natural weakness, or by
the scales of lusts or sinful corruptions overgrowing it; these do exceedingly
blind the understanding, and dull the apprehension, while we are in this state
of mortality: Now both these shall be done away in that state of glory; the
organ, or eye of the Soul, shall then be strengthened with perfection, there
shall be no weakness remaining in it, it shall be most strong and vigorous; the
Soul shall then be elevated and raised to that strength, that it shall be able
to gaze upon the glory of God for ever, and so see him, as never to lose the
sight of him: then likewise all the scales shall be removed, there shall not be
the least mote of lust to dim the eye of the Soul, it shall see clearly and
perfectly; and ignorance, which is here a brand of sin, shall be quite defaced
by the brightness that shall enlighten the Soul. Tunc nec falli, nec peccare
possunt homines, veritate illuminati, and in bono confirmati; then men
illightened with the truth, and confirmed in good, can neither deceive, nor be
deceived, nor sin, says St. Augustine.

How quick was Adam's apprehension in the state of innocence? how did the
acuteness of his understanding penetrate into the insides of the Creatures, as
is manifest by his giving them names suitable to their natures? Now as Christ
(the second Adam) is incomparably more excellent then the first Adam, and
Believers are the spiritual seed of Christ, as Men and Women are the natural
seed of Adam, so far more transcendent shall that perfection of apprehension
and understanding be, which Christ shall illighten the Souls of his Saints
withal (as his seed) in that state of blessedness, even far surpassing that
which Adam had, and which should have been propagated from him to his natural
issue, had he persevered in the integrity of his nature wherein he was created.

SECT. II. Of the perfection of the judgments of the Saints in glory.
II. AS the apprehensions, so likewise the judgments of the Saints shall be
perfected in Heaven: Here sometimes quick apprehensions are accompanied with
shallow judgments, as on the other side solid judgments are joined with slow
apprehensions; but in glory, the soundness of the judgment shall be
correspondent with the clearness and quickness of the apprehension, it shall
not be subject to the least mistake, nor obnoxious to any error; here we are
full of levity, and wavering in matters of Religion, taking up opinions
lightly, without due examination; and for want of strength of judgment, we are
ready upon every slight occasion to receive another Doctrine; and likewise
presuming upon the strength of and subtilty of our own wits, not limited by
grace, we are shamefully foiled. Love and affection to our own vain opinions,
is a great impediment to sound judgment; it breeds prejudice against the truth,
making men resolute in defending their opinions, if by any way of wresting the
Scripture to their purpose it be possible. But in Heaven the soundness of the
Saints judgments shall be answerable to the acuteness of their apprehensions,
they shall be no longer accompanied with doubts and darkness; as they learn
without labor, so they shall not fear forgetfulness, drawing light and wisdom
from the very fountain; they shall know all things in their principles; their
Souls shall then be penetrated by the Spirit of God, and their judgments
clarified with the light of glory; the Saints shall then be able not only to
view the superficies, or surface of things, but also to dive into the bottom of
them, to comprehend the breadth and length, the height and depth of them; they
shall then see that God is ever like himself, and that all things in him do
most exactly consent and agree together. Sicut terra respectu coeli est
insensibilis quantitatis, sic honitas aliarum scientiarum respectu Scipturarum.
Durand.
Durandus says of the knowledge of the Scriptures, that the knowledge of all
humane Sciences is no more to be compared to the knowledge of the Scriptures,
then the Earth to the Heavens for bigness; the Earth is but a small insensible
point in regard of the Heavens: I am sure the knowledge of God which we have
from the Scripture, from the Creatures, is no more to be compared to the
knowledge of God, which the blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven have, it is
nothing to be compared with it; all Solomon's wisdom and knowledge is nothing.

It is said, that God gave to Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much,
1 Reg. 4.29. and largeness of heart, even as the sand on the Seashore; and
this was to admiration in this state of mortality: but I believe, that he that
is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, shall far surpass Solomon in understanding
and judgment. If John Baptist (according to our Savior's testimony) were
greater then any of the Prophets, because he saw Christ already come in the
flesh, whereas they only foresaw Christ to come; and yet the least in the
Kingdom of God (that is, in the Church of the New Testament) be greater in this
respect then John Baptist, because they see into the Mystery of Christ, not
only as already come, but as having actually performed the work of our
redemption, died, overcome death, risen from the dead, ascended into Heaven,
given forth his Spirit, and spread his Gospel over the World; how far then
shall the understandings of the Faithful in Heaven (seeing Christ face to face)
excel the knowledge which all the Prophets, Solomon, John Baptist, and all
Believers under the New Testament, had here upon the face of the Earth? and as
the perfection of these faculties, so the excellency and perfection of the
objects which they shall thus clearly apprehend and perfectly know, shall
wonderfully advance the blessedness of the Saints.

CHAP. XX.
SECT. I. A description of what things shall be seen in God by the Saints in
Heaven.
HE that sees a wise and mighty man, although he sees his outside, yet his
inside he sees not, viz. the beauty and perfections of his mind; but in
Heaven the Saints shall see the Divine beauty and excellency with the eye of
the inner man; they shall see the brightness of his glory and majesty; they
shall behold him, not by a reflex, as a man may see the image of the Sun in a
Looking-glass, but they shall as it were look upon him in a direct line.

1. They shall with admiration behold him as the first eternal Being, as the
Ancient of days, comprehending all the Centuries of years, all the ages and
generations, all the hundreds and thousands of years, all the changes and
periods of times, all of them making up but a moment, and being no more then
the twinkling of an eye to his eternity.

2. They shall see him as he is in himself, that he is glorious in himself, in
his being; that he is infinitely glorious in all his Attributes; that he is
eternally glorious in all his works; they shall see him to be such a God as he
proclaimed himself to be, that he is the Lord God, the Lord God of Gods; they
shall know the immensity of his being, the infiniteness of his greatness; that
he is infinite in grace, infinite in mercy, infinite in glory; they shall then
see the unlimitedness of his essence, filling them with himself, with his
presence and fullness filling all things, and with his infinite being enclosing
all things that are.

3. They shall clearly see him as an unchangeable God, who has wrought all the
wonderful changes that have happened in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Seas,
yet that himself has remained still immutable; they shall look upon him as the
first universal mover, who sets all things in motion, in whom and by whom
all things move, himself remaining immovable.

4. They shall not only be convinced of his Almighty power, but shall see it
clearly, and manifestly discern his infinite strength; it is one thing to read
of the great strength of Sampson, and to believe it as a certain truth; it had
been another thing, and a matter of far greater satisfaction, to have seen him
smiting the Philistines hip and thigh with a great slaughter, killing a
thousand of God's Enemies with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, carrying away the gates
and posts of a City upon his shoulders, pulling down with his hands the house
wherein thousands of the Philistines were sitting: so it is one thing to read
and believe the Almighty power of God, but another thing, and a matter of
greater satisfaction to the Soul, to have a clear view of it; to see God
forming Heaven and Earth of nothing, and changing times and seasons; to see him
raising some out of the dust, and lifting them out of the dunghill, and setting
them with Princes, and throwing down the mighty from their seats, that were
exalted to places of great eminency and dignity, overturning Nations and
Kingdoms, and working great wonders. These things (though past) it is
conceived, they shall be as clearly seen in God, when we shall see him face to
face, as if they were but then in doing. With great delight also shall they see
his Almighty power, that shall bring up all the Potentates of the Earth, all
men, high and low, rich and poor, young and old, before his tribunal; in
translating all his Children into everlasting glory, and throwing the Wicked
into everlasting burnings. They shall also see God exercising his power in
dissolving the frame of this visible World, rolling the Heavens together as a
scroll, and folding them up as a garment; melting the Elements with fervent
heat, and burning up the Earth with the works that are therein. Moreover, they
shall see what God shall do for ever, they shall see God in all his workings to
eternity: What a ravishing thing would it have been, Burr. in Beatitud.
if any of us should have been admitted into the presence of God, and there to
have seen what God has done from the beginning of the World to this day? but
when this World shall be at an end (as it will shortly be) God and his Saints
will then remain everlastingly, and they shall be for ever with the Lord, and
they shall be there where they shall see what God will do for ever.

5. They shall see the infinite love of the infinite God, of which now they
have but a taste; they shall then clearly understand that love of God, which is
the spring of all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, out of which they
were elected to holiness, eternal life and glory; that love out of which Christ
himself (as a Mediator and Redeemer) issued, and out of which all things were
given them that appertain to life, and godliness; that love which prevented
them in their lost condition, which turned the eye of God's compassion toward
them when they lay in their blood; that love which issued out a pardon of all
their sins from the Court of mercy, which lengthened out the patience of God
toward them when they lingered in their sins. Then shall they know fully where
this love was bred, and that none but the eternal love and delight of the
Father could have outed so much love; then shall they see themselves over head
and ears drowned in many obligations to his infinite love.

6. They shall see him as the Fountain of light and wisdom, as the only wise
God, as the Father of lights, in whose light themselves see light, from whose
face all those beams do shine, whereby their Souls are filled with heavenly
wisdom; they shall see clearly that God is light, filling Heaven with his
brightness and glory, and fixing the eyes of all the Angels and Saints upon
him, as an object infinite, altogether lightsome and lovely. They shall behold
that infinite wisdom of God which created Heaven and Earth, which great piece
of workmanship had nothing but nothing for its materia, how all the different
parts whereof it is composed had the same original, and how this vacuum, by the
word of God, brought forth the Heavens with their Constellations, the Earth
with all its Fields, the Sea with all its Rocks; how the Heavens and Earth were
created in an instant, though there went six days to their disposal. The Saints
in Heaven shall also understand that wisdom of God which in all ages has
governed the World, and directed all creatures to their courses and motions;
how this admirable work has endured numberless ages, contrary to the Laws of
Nature, which suffers that soon to perish which she is not long in forming.
Then shall the mysteries of Providence be fully opened, and we shall see the
Births in the Womb of Providence, which on Earth are invisible to us; then
shall we understand all the ways, circuits, lines, turnings of Providence, and
see how Christ has steered the helm of Heaven and Earth when means have
failed, and men and times have changed. They shall likewise know that wisdom
that has ordered the sins of Men and Devils to holy ends, never intended by
the Actors, which has overreached the craftiest devices of the Serpent and
his Seed -- They shall likewise behold that manifold wisdom of God, that
contrived the whole method of man's Redemption and Salvation, the very
Masterpiece of Divine wisdom; that wisdom that has given light to the blind,
wisdom to the foolish, and abundance of light to those that sat in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, and which made those that were darkness to become
light in the Lord. This shall be matter of admiration to Men and Angels, that
the great God should condescend to look on such vile Sinners, so far below the
free love and majesty of the most High. Then shall the Saints understand all
the counsels of God concerning themselves from all eternity; when they shall be
admitted into the House of God, they shall not only see what God himself is,
but they shall see his heart, his will, and all his ways, and glorious
contrivances for their salvation.

7. They shall see him as that God who is truth it self; they shall exactly
discern how every promise of his, every prophecy delivered by his spirit to
the Churches, and recorded in his word, is fully accomplished, not one failing
or falling to the ground; and that whatsoever God promised, or bound himself by
covenant to perform, though it seemed difficult, or long, before it was
fulfilled, yet it came to pass at last in its appointed time: Oh the sweet
satisfaction which the Saints in Heaven shall find in the full contemplation of
the truth of God every way manifested, and so gloriously verified in and upon
themselves, in keeping them by his power unto salvation, in preserving them to
his heavenly Kingdom, in guiding them by his counsel, and bringing them to
glory; when they shall see that all the art, malice, skill and power of Men and
Devils, could never frustrate nor make void the least tittle of God's sacred
truth.

8. They shall see him as a God infinite in holiness, of perfect purity; they
shall with great delight look directly into that overflowing fountain of
holiness, which has streamed into so many thousand Souls, which has washed so
many unclean hearts from their filthiness, which fills all the Saints and
Angels in Heaven with perfect holiness; then shall they behold those fair hands
(as I may speak) that stooped to wash such black-skinned and defiled Sinners,
and purged away the filth of the Daughter of Sion -- If the Egyptians for many
ages have had a great desire to find out the fountain of that River Nilus,
which by his yearly inundations waters the Land in that hot climate, (having
no showers of rain) and makes it abundantly fruitful: Oh then how shall
glorified Souls rejoice to be brought to the Springhead of holiness, which
has watered so many barren Souls, and made them bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit.

9. They shall clearly see him as an all-sufficient God; they shall see that
rich treasury opened, out of which all that good was given, which was received
by any, or all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth. The Lord by many notable
instances of his own glorious works, Job 38.22. convinced Job of ignorance, and
posed him by a multitude of interrogations; among the rest says he, Have thou
entered into the treasures of snow? or have thou seen the treasures of hail?
But in that state of glory, not only this holy man, but every one of the Saints
shall be admitted to view the treasures of God's all sufficiency, out of which
all good things concerning this life and the life to come, have been and shall
be dispensed and distributed among the Creatures, life, breath, all things,
grace and glory; grace of justification, grace of sanctification, preventing
grace, subsequent grace, exciting grace, confirming grace, strength against
temptation, support under afflictions, help in extremities, relief against
seeming impossibilities, faith, repentance, love, hope, etc. they shall see the
Spring of that River of God's pleasures, and of those living Waters, which have
refreshed so many thirsty Souls when they seemed ready to perish. Oh how would
it tickle the vain curiosity of many men, to be admitted to the sight of the
rich treasures of great Princes, and to have their Cabinets (filled with the
rarest and most sumptuous Jewels) unlocked before their eyes? Alas, they are
not so much as common stones of the street, in comparison of the treasures of
God's all sufficiency which the Saints shall behold in Heaven.

SECT. II.
FUrthermore, as the Saints in Heaven shall see what God is in himself, so they
shall perfectly and fully see what God is to themselves; here is the happiness
of the beatifical vision, not only to know that God is infinitely gracious in
himself, but that he is also infinitely gracious to us; not only to know that
God is goodness it self, bonum summum, the chiefest good, but also to know God
is our chiefest good, our happiness. Then the Saints will all say to God as Job
did, when he had that familiar conference with God, Job 42.5. I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee. So when we come to
Heaven, every one of us will say, Lord, I have heard thy Ministers say, that
thou art a merciful, a gracious God; I have heard thy Word to proclaim thee to
be a Lord, a Lord God gracious and merciful, a God pardoning sin, and forgiving
iniquity, and now mine eyes see thee; now I plainly see that thou art such a
God as indeed thou art. I tell you this is one main part of the beatifical
Vision, not only to see what God is in himself, but to see clearly what a good
God he is to us; this is the happiness of all the Saints, this is the fullness
of joy which is in the presence of God, this is the rivers of pleasure which
are at God's right hand. Suppose the Devils and damned Spirits should know what
God is in himself, that he is the God of grace, the God of mercy, the God of
glory, alas, they would but little bless themselves in the knowledge of God,
because God is not thus to them; it is their woe of woes, because they know
that God is to them a consuming fire, devouring burnings, and an angry Judge:
To know a thing, and not to possess that thing, is no happiness at all; to know
there are riches in the bottom of the Sea, does nothing rejoice a man, but to
possess those riches; to know there are rich treasures of all good things, and
not to have any part in that treasure, what comfort has a poor man in the
knowledge of that? It is true what Chrysologus says of the rich Man in Hell,
Dives magis uritur Lazari gloria quam proprio incendio. Chrysolog.
The glory of Lazarus does more torment him, then the fire of Hell. It is no
comfort to him to see Heaven, and Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and himself to
be thrust into Hell. This brings joy to the heart of man, when he knows a
thing, and sees it to be his own. There are three things that make a man glad:
1. When a man has that which he loves. 2. When that which he has and loves
is the best thing. 3. When a man knows that he has, and that he loves, is
the best thing. All these things are in the beatifical Vision.

The Saints enjoy that which they love, viz. God; then God is the best thing:
among all the treasures of good things, nothing to be compared to God. Likewise
the Saints do know that they do enjoy God, that God is their God; and what God
is in himself, that he is to them: this is that which will satisfy all the
Saints when they shall awake out of the dust.

They also shall see all things in God: it is a true Theorem among the Schools,
Videntes Deum omnia vident in ipso; those that see God, shall see all other
things in him. And the reason that they give is this, because the Divine
essence is the representative object of all things. Fulgentius makes this
comparison, Fulgentius his comparison.
God (says he) may not unfitly be compared to a glass; look as in a glass we
see three things, we see the glass it self, then we see our own self in the
glass, then we see other things in the glass too; so in God we shall see
Deitatem, nosmetipsos, caeteraque; see God, see our selves, see all other
things besides.

Now this knowledge will not be a comprehensive knowledge of God; we may be
studying God to all eternity, and yet we shall never be able to comprehend him:
God is infinite, and our understandings are finite; it is impossible for an
infinite object, to be confined within the limits of a finite being. Aquinas
gives this good rule; Divina essentia tota videtur, quia est simplicissima
partibus carens, sed non totaliter. Aquinas.
We shall see the whole essence, but as most simply void of all composition,
but we shall not see him wholly; we shall have large and clear apprehensions of
God, but no comprehension: As Cardan told them that asked of him, What God was?
Tunc Deus essem; if I were able to tell you what God is, I my self should be a
God. We should all be Gods, if we could comprehend God.

SECT. III.
THe Saints in Heaven shall also behold the Lord Jesus as he is God, the same
God with the Father and the Holy Ghost. More particularly,

1. They shall have a perfect knowledge of him as God and Man, as Mediator
between God and Man; they shall not only see the Lord Jesus with their bodily
eyes, but they shall also discern his incomparable excellency with the eye of
their inner man; they shall then understand the mystery of the incarnation of
the Son of God; they shall clearly see into the mystery of the hypostatical, or
personal union of God and Man, which is now so little understood by us; they
shall then see the Godhead filling the Manhood with glory and majesty,
dwelling in it substantially; they shall behold how the nature of man was
raised unto an infinite height above all created nature, and joined to the
Deity in the word hypostatically and substantially; they shall see how God is
truly and properly Man, and how Man is truly and properly God, which naturally
no created understanding can comprehend; they shall then clearly behold that
wonderful conjunction of the Son of God, and of the Seed of Abraham in one
Person, and shall see the Manhood exalted far above all Principalities and
Powers.

2. They shall behold him as the Author and Finisher of their Faith, as the
Sacrifice for their Sins, as him who was their wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption -- They shall know him as their Pledge and
Surety, as one that satisfied the justice of his Father, and bore all the pains
and torments their sins deserved: they shall know him as their Head, that gave
them life and motion; they shall know him as their Tutor and Guide, that has
led them through their Pilgrimage in this World to the heavenly Canaan; they
shall then know how he carried a world of Saints over the same Seas they are
now sailing in; how Christ paid the fare of the ship himself, and that not one
of them was found dead on the shore -- They shall know him as a Father that was
more tenderly affected with the sorrows and sufferings of his Children then of
his own; they shall then know how Christ's eye and heart was upon his Spouse,
making their salvation his end, and the measure of his love; his rising early,
his night watching, his toyling, his sweating, his sore and hard travel, and
all that he might have a redeemed People. Then shall they know him as their
King, Priest and Prophet, who offered up himself for them; they shall look upon
him as one who presented all their prayers to his Father, and procured
acceptance; who taught them the mind of God, who came out of the bosom of God,
and revealed the Father to them, who governed them and protected them all their
days; they shall look upon him as one that brought them through fair and foul
ways to his Fathers House. The perfect knowledge of these things, and the like,
will abundantly satisfy the Saints in Heaven. Then Jesus Christ shall be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all that believe, 2 These. 1.10.

I. He shall be glorified in his Saints; which glory shall result to Christ two
ways.

1. By putting glory on his Saints; in glorifying them, he glorifieth himself;
he manifests what a King of glorious state he is, what treasures of glory are
in him, that he can put so much glory on innumerable Saints, without any
diminution of his own glory; all that glory which the Saints enjoy, is Christ's
originally; he is the Fountain, they the Cisterns; he infinitely full, though
they are filled with it also; they receive grace for grace from Christ, and
they receive glory for glory, happiness for happiness, joy for joy from him.
Christ shows the riches of his glory, as a King shows the riches of his
treasury, when he can make many rich, and he not wax poor: but what King can do
so excepting Christ the King of Kings?

2. He shall be glorified in his Saints] that is, as Chrysostom expounds it,
(...), by his Saints. Chrysostom. in 2 These. 2.10.
All his Saints shall with one heart and mouth ascribe to him all the glory of
their glory, and for their glory, Revel. 4.10. Then all the Saints will take
their Crowns of glory from off their heads, and cast them down before the
Throne of Christ, saying, Thou art worthy to receive honor, and glory, and
power. He is infinitely worthy in himself, because he is God over all; but he
is also relatively worthy in respect of the Saints, because all the glory they
have, they received from him; he purchased their glory, he has brought them to
glory, he has glorified his power in making them glorious, and he counts them
worthy of this glory.

II. Christ shall be admired in all that believe.] Wonder and astonishment
arises ex magnitudine and novitate rerum; the greatness and strangeness of a
thing causes admiration in all beholders. The glory which Christ will put on
his Saints shall be exceeding great, and exceeding strange, beyond all conceit
and imagination; the heart of man cannot now perceive it; but when the eye
shall see this glory, and the heart shall perceive it, Christ will be
wonderfully admired in them and by them. The glory of his power will be
admired, in that such poor dust and ashes should be advanced to such an height
of glory, that he can make his Creatures so glorious. They will admire his love
toward them in communicating such glory to them; they will admire his grace in
bringing such worthless Creatures to such glory, even from the Dunghill to the
highest Throne of glory. Moreover, they shall clearly understand that great
mystery of the Trinity, of the Persons in the unity of one Godhead and Divine
essence, which is now so far above the understanding of the sincerest
Christian; they shall see how the Son is begotten of the Father, as the word
and wisdom of the Father, and abides in the Father; how the Holy Ghost
proceeds from both, and abides in both; they shall see how these three are
distinguished by a personal propriety, so that they are three Persons
subsisting in themselves, and yet together in number are one essence, or simple
Deity, one power, one wisdom, one goodness, one majesty, one immensity, one
eternity; then shall they see how the Father is in the Son, how the Son is in
the Father, and the Holy Ghost in both; how all are in each, and each in all.
This is a mystery which here no heart can conceive, or tongue express; it is,
as Hilary says, Extra sermonis significationem, extra sensus intentionem, and
extra intelligentiae conceptionem: no speech can set it forth, no sense can
sound the depth of it, no reason reach the reason of it; but in Heaven the
Saints shall perfectly understand this great mystery. This is the Heaven (says
Gregory Nazianzen) that I look for, Nazian. orat. contra Arrian.
that I may have a view of the glorious Trinity, and understand that great
mystery. This truth that has met with so much contradiction from many
blasphemous Heretics in former ages, such as Nestorians, Arrians, Sabellians,
Macedonians, they shall then most clearly understand.

SECT. IV.
GLorified Saints shall also look into the great mystery of godliness; with
great delight shall they read the Book of Life, the eternal Decree of God
electing them to Salvation; how shall it fill their hearts with joy, to look
into the original Records of eternity, to see into that depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, at which the Apostle made a stand. The
Apostle was at a stand, as one whose stature in that condition of mortality was
too low to wade any further into that great deep; therefore he cries out, Romans
11. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! The
waters are too deep, I can find no bottom; for who has known the mind of the
Lord, or been his Counselor? But in Heaven the Saints shall fully understand
this unsearchable depth, viz. how God should so carry on the great designs of
the declaration of his pardoning mercy to some, and his punishing justice to
others; and that in both these God was free in his grace, and just in his
judgments, though he neither chose nor called according to works; that the
damned Creature was most guilty, and that God was both severe and graciously
merciful, and that none has cause to complain of God; and that the fundamental
cause of this various administration with Nations and Persons, is the holy and
sovereign will of God, who has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. This is the depth without a bottom that St. Paul speaks of. But in
Heaven the Saints shall be filled with the knowledge of these mysteries, the
bosom of God being opened to their understandings. What are the events that
have happened in the World, or in the Church, but the effects or consequents of
those decrees which have been everlastingly in the mind of God? Now if the
Saints in Heaven shall perfectly see God, then nothing of God shall be hid from
them, which may make up their complete happiness: they shall then clearly
understand the mysteries of justification and glorification, and all the deep
things of God, all the mysteries of the holy Scriptures, all the Prophecies,
all the Figures, Types, and Symbolical shadows, all the mystical Senses; all
these things they believed here, either expressly or implicitly, but the reward
of faith is vision and clear knowledge. The same does St. Augustine insinuate,
saying, August. de Civit. Dei, cap. 21.
What shall we see in Heaven but God, and all those things which now believing
we see not?

CHAP. XXI.
MOreover, the Saints shall see and know that innumerable company of Angels,
their natures, each of their persons in particular. As the Angels know every
Elect person, because it is their work to gather the Elect from all the corners
of the Earth, and to separate them from the wicked, Matthew. 13.41. so the
glorified Saints shall know the holy Angels, whom the Lord sent forth to
minister for them, whom the Lord appointed for their guard while they were upon
Earth, who encamped round about them while they were encompassed with so many
dangers. Some Divines are of opinion, that the number of the Angels is so
great, that they exceed without comparison all corporal and material things in
the Earth; and like as the greatness of the Heavens exceeds the greatness of
the Earth without any proportion, even so does the multitude of the glorious
Spirits, exceed the multitude of all corporal and material things that are in
the World, with the like advantage and proportion. Now what thing can be
imagined more wonderful then this? Again, if every one of the Angels (yea
though it be the least Angel among them all) be more beautiful and goodly to
behold then all this visible World; what a glorious sight shall it be then to
see such a number of beautiful Angels, to see the perfections and offices that
every one has in that high and glorious City? there do the Angels go as it
were in Embassages, are exercised in their Ministry, there the Principalities
and Thrones triumph, there do the Cherubims give light, and the Seraphims burn
with fervent love: All of that heavenly Court are perpetually singing Praises
and Hallelujahs to God Almighty, and to the Lamb that sits on the Throne for
ever. Oh what honor is this which God will do to his Children hereafter, when
he shall exalt them to so high a dignity, as to place them among the Angels in
Heaven, and make them like unto the Angels of God?

CHAP. XXII.
SECT. I. Of the Saints mutual knowledge of each other in Heaven.
FInally, the Saints shall know each other, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and People of God in all Ages and Nations; the Saints shall behold
numberless hosts and troops of glorified Pieces, redeemed Saints, in that
highest Orb and Region of glory; there they shall behold the general Assembly
and Church of the firstborn, whose names are now written in Heaven, Heb.
12.23. immediately illuminated, studying, preaching, and praising Christ for
evermore. There you shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets,
in the Kingdom of God, says our Savior, Luke 13.28.

It was propounded as a doubt to Martin Luther, Chemnit. harmon. evang. cap. 87.
a little before his Deathbed, Whether glorified Saints should have mutual
knowledge of each other? he thus resolved his Friends, that as Adam knew his
Wife in Paradise, when she was first presented to him; and as St. Peter,
ravished with a heavenly vision at the Transfiguration of Christ, Matthew. 17.4.
took notice of Moses and Elias, when (as Tertullian says) he never saw so much
as any of their Pictures, Tertul. contr. Marcion. lib. 4.
the Law prohibiting such things to the Jews; if in this short taste of glory,
he and the other two Disciples with him, had a knowledge of these glorified
Saints, then doubtless when the Saints shall enjoy fullness of glory, they shall
have a clearer knowledge of each other.

As we think it reasonable to conclude the Soul to be immortal, because it
desires to be so, before it be enflamed by any studied notions and
apprehensions of eternity; so with equal probability, we may prefigure and
delineate some parts or shadows of our future happiness, being guided by those
innate and universal propensions which incline every Soul to desire and wish
the same thing. Among those transcendent desires which issue from our natures,
this is one, that those acquaintances which were virtuously begun on Earth, may
be renewed and perfected in Heaven. This desire was once of so great authority,
that former ages had respect unto it; for when they found it easier to overcome
all other terrors of death, then that one of an everlasting absence from a
Friend, they were careful to cheer a departing Soul, by assuring it, that the
happiness of the other World, next to the contemplation of the Divine nature,
consisted in the gaining of new, and the indissoluble recovery of old
acquaintance. What they made a part of their happiness, we admit but as an
appendix to ours; and as we think it not safe to join any Creature unto God, to
make up the object of our happiness, so we believe it would derogate from the
glory of his goodness, if particular Souls, like so many divided channels,
should have their own banks full, but yet be debarred from all commerce, and
mutual knowledge of each others blessedness.

Our Creed moreover calls upon us to believe a communion of Saints; which if it
be a matter of our faith here, it must be an object of our knowledge hereafter;
if we must believe that there are some who sincerely communicate with us in the
faith in this life, then we shall hereafter clearly know who were our
fellow members in that communion; and as faith it self shall be done away by
evidence, so shall that communion which is here by faith, be hereafter
perfected by that communion which shall be by vision.

Those who have labored to find out the most intimate and peculiar properties
of the humane nature, do affirm, that it was made and fashioned for Society.
Now as Divines use to say, That Christ came not to abolish, but to perfect the
Law; so may we pronounce of our blessedness in Heaven, that it shall not
extinguish, but establish, confirm and perfect those desires which are
appropriated to the Soul, as reasonable and immortal. If the Soul may carry
with it a sociable inclination, then may it for the use and exercise of this
desire be admitted to the knowledge of other Souls, and of those especially with
whom it had sojourned on Earth, that like fellow-travellers, who have been
equally afflicted with the difficulties of the way, they may thenceforth
interchangeably communicate their joys, springing from their present rest and
peace.

Object. But it may be said, that in our union unto God shall be supplied all
imaginable contents; and that the Souls of the blessed shall be held in so
great admiration, as that they cannot admit the mixture of any second or less
joy.

Resp. Though this opinion seem specious, and agreeable to reason, yet we must
consider, that as in the Divine nature we admit no useless Attributes, (such as
the Divine justice and mercy would be, if there were not a Creature to exercise
them on) so likewise in the Humane, we must either say it has no aptness
eternally to desire or rejoice in the good of another, (which a sociable nature
inwardly abhors) or else we must allow it an object whereon to practice its
endless love and joy. This love we conceive shall be the perfection of that
desire which was begun on Earth, but always mixed with fear and jealousy (being
subject to those common infirmities, which attend both the powers and acts of
the Soul in this life) and this joy we believe shall succeed in the place of
that condolency and compassion, which on Earth we sustained one for another.
This love therefore, and this joy, must have such an object, as was once the
subject of our fear and compassion, which cannot be either God or Angels, but a
Creature only, of the same nature and condition with us. These are perhaps but
wild and ranging conceits, which assert that there is no nature, but it is
capable of happiness; no happiness without society, no society without a
plurality of individuals of the same kind. Yet by the power of these
imaginations, did that Disputer in Plutarch create a plurality of Worlds for
society sake; and by them was Hortensius in Tully puzzelled, and made to doubt,
how God may be said to be blessed, if alone. And I think that those rude and
untaught ages, measuring the blessedness of God by what themselves most
delighted in, did easily admit a multitude of gods to prevent a solitude, which
in their belief overthrows all happiness. Though these opinions relish of the
blindness of the age that brought them forth; yet as the darkest Bodies by
collision may send forth some light, so out of these assertions some sparks and
glimmerings of truth may be produced; for though in God there be an infinite
fullness to satisfy an infinite desire, and so he alone may suffice to make
himself happy, yet is he pleased not so precisely to love himself, as not also
to be delighted with the blessedness of his Creature: and if God (who is
essentially blessed, and has all blessedness in himself) be notwithstanding by
his own goodness, inclined to delight in the glory of a poor Creature, it must
needs be, that Man, who is the image of this goodness, has imprinted and
stamped upon his nature, a proneness to delight in the blessedness of his
fellow creature, as well as a desire to see himself happy.

SECT. II.
Object. But it may be feared that our knowledge of one another, and our mutual
delight in each other, may beget some interruptions in our union with God,
taking the Soul aside from the contemplation of its Maker, to gaze on and
delight in the beauty of a Creature; therefore those acts of the Soul, love and
joy, seem not to be admitted, being but digressions of the Soul, and an allay
to our blessedness.

Sol. This fear, I think, will vanish, so soon as we consider, that it is the
same beauty which we behold in God, and love in the Creature, though of a
different splendour; and as the Stars, the Air and Water, by their borrowed
lights do raise us to behold the Sun, the fountain of all that light; so
wheresoever the rays of glory are cast, (whether on Angels or Men) we cannot
but behold God shining on each nature, and confess him to be all in all.
Moreover, it is not a glance, but a fixing on the Creature (which in that state
is not to be feared) can endanger our happiness, otherwise neither God nor
Angels are truly blessed; for the Divinity of former ages would persuade us,
that God as it were comes daily out of himself to behold his own image in the
Angels, and the Angels look upon the same resemblance as cast from them, and
reflected by the Soul; but neither God nor Angels are so ravished with those
dimmer beauties, as to dwell upon them, but do suddenly return back to the
Fountain, God to himself, and the Angels unto God.

But to let pass these excusable conjectures, let us remember upon what ground
we are solicited to believe, how the Angels are daily conversant about us in
acts of knowledge and love in their ministerial employments, in fulfilling the
Divine justice and mercy; yet notwithstanding these seeming interruptions of
their vision, they continue blessed. And we believe also that Christ himself
(though in perfect glory) continues his intercession for us, which being an
act of mediation between diverse parties, cannot be performed without a knowledge
and love of those for whom he interceedeth. And though it may be conceived,
that in God there can be no intermission in the contemplation of himself,
because by the same single act, he at once beholds himself, and all things
else; yet we must not imagine such an infinite comprehensiveness in the
creature, as to be able within the same Act to involve and circumscribe all
that may be known or desired in every object, for this were to extol the
Creature above it self, making it equal with God. The Angels therefore, and
Christ himself as man, have their actions bounded; and those acts by which they
immediately behold and love the Creature, are not the same by which they
immediately contemplate, and necessarily love the Creator. Wherefore I think we
may without rashness believe, that our blessedness, which is a clear and
everlasting contemplation of the Godhead, may consist with such inferior acts
in the soul, as are requisite to constitute a blessed society among the Saints.

SECT. III.
IT was no small contentment and satisfaction to S. Paul, that he should meet
his beloved Thessalonians in the presence of Christ: for thus much seems to
be intimated by that his exulting demand: What is our hope, or joy, or Crown of
rejoicing, are not ye even in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? And the same Apostle, when he would set bounds and limits to a
Christians sorrowing for the dead, tells us, that we must not sorrow, as those
that have no hope (such as are all that are imbued with those Epicurean
principles of the Soul's Mortality, and it is resolution into nothing) such men's
sorrow finds no case, because that good whose absence they bemoan, in their
opinion is irrecoverably lost: and to shake hands with a dying friend, is with
them as much as to bid them everlastingly farewell: But a Christian's tears
(like drops from a cloud) may sometimes fall; they must not, like a River, be
always running. He may sorrow because he is parted from some good (suppose
from a loving friend) bur this sorrow must be tempered with this hope, that he
shall see his friend again, and that good which as yet continues the object of
his sorrow (while considered as stolen and taken from him) must after a while
become the subject of his hope and comfort, being put in mind, that God who for
a time laid it out of his sight, will restore it back again unto him. This the
Apostle allows to be his meaning, by bidding us, comfort one another with
these words: for if otherwise, it would fully answer the Apostle's meaning, to
say it is enough, that God raise those that sleep to glory, though he exile
them from a mutual knowledge of each other. Then let us see what comfort this
interpretation can afford to a pensive and lamenting Soul, which may suggest
unto it self on this wise; God will restore my friend unto himself, but not to
me; he will bring back the Jewel into the Cabinet, but will lock it up from my
sight; he will restore the thing, but not repair my loss: and it seems all
one to me to lose him in an eternal nothing, and not to be allowed to know that
he is a glorious something; now what comfort can we place in such a meditation?

This persuasion of a restoration to a mutual knowledge of each other,
contains also some advantages and motives to a Godly life; for the fear of
being eternally divided from those I sincerely love on earth, will draw me to
an imitation of their sanctity, if herein they be exemplary: or give me the
courage to lead them into the way, if their course be irregular and exorbitant:
for those who unfeignedly desire to meet at the journeys end, will study to
preserve each other in the way: and they who would wear the same crown of
rejoicing in the presence of Christ, will assist each other here, that they
perish not in the agony and conflict: it gives an edge and sharpness to those
affections which are employed for each others good, when we consider that that
heat and fervency, which they spent in desire and travel for one another, shall
be turned into an excess and extremity of delight in each other.

The Egyptians embalmed the Carcasses of the dead, to preserve them, if it were
possible, through all the parts of time; being guided by an opinion, that so
long as the body continued undissolved, the soul would not forsake the earth,
but continue hovering about the place where the bodies lay: in like manner the
Souls of men, which by many kinds of association may be united into one mass
and heap, and as it were become parts of one another, will continue the more
vigilant and active for each others everlasting welfare, so long as they are
persuaded against an eternal divorce and dissolution, and do contrarily believe
they shall be rewarded by a sense of each others happiness; and that that union
which is among themselves (as of one member to another) shall not be dissolved,
but perfected by that union which shall unite them to Christ as to their Head,
and through him unto God.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the perfection and purity of the wills of glorified Saints.
IN the next place I will show how the wills and affections of glorified Saints
shall be raised to a fullness of glorious perfection: now it is evident, God
must be first gloriously united to the Soul and her powers, before she can by
her understanding see, and by her will and affections love and embrace God: in
Heaven God shall be immediately united to the very nature of the Soul her self,
which is chief in man, yea formally man, which can be no otherwise done than by
a glorious change and immutation made in the Soul it self, by communicating to
her by grace, a glorious and perfect estate of participated eternity, which is
the root and foundation of all that most glorious exercise about which the
Saints in Heaven are conversant.

This being so; the wills and affections of glorified Saints shall be perfectly
pure and holy, without the least tincture of defilement; they shall be holy as
God is holy; not infinitely holy, but perfectly holy, without mixture of any
thing contrary to holiness: their wills shall suit and meet exactly in every
thing, with the pure and holy will of God; they shall will what he wills, and
nothing but what he wills; their wills shall give full consent to the will of
God in all things: There shall be complete holiness in the will: our wills
(like to the will of Christ) shall be altogether conformable to the will of
God; we shall fulfill the will of God: the conformity of our wills to God, is
the glory of our wills, which in this life are like Nebuchadnezzar's Image,
partly clay, partly gold; here we are partly regenerate, partly unregenerate,
but in Heaven we shall be all gold, all holy: glorified Saints shall never find
any grudgings of their old diseases (sin and corruption in them) in the least
degree; they shall see themselves perfectly cured of all the sicknesses and
distempers of their Souls: they are no longer constrained to resist the motions
of the flesh, because this Rebel is subdued, and losing in the resurrection
what ever they drew from Adam in their birth; they have now none but just and
holy inclinations: the Spirit of a glorified Saint is now no longer busied to
maintain a war against sin, because this monster cannot set its foot within the
gates of Heaven; he groaneth not now under the revolt of his passions, his will
cleaves to God as strongly as he can desire.

CHAP. XXIV.
SECT. I.
MOreover, the affections of the Saints in glory are much enlarged, and are
most quick and lively; our affections in this life are subject to distractions,
but then they shall be composed and rightly placed.

1. In Special; the Saints shall love God with all their hearts, Sicut magnes
impetum quendam imprimit ferro, quo illud ad magnetem trahitur, and ei se arcte
jungit; ita Deus clare conspectus, impetum quendam imprimit animae, quo ipsa
potentissime in illum trahitur. Lessius de summo bono. Ca. 11.
with all their souls, with all their strength: from the clear contemplation of
God presently there arises in the blessed a love, which most powerfully draws
them unto God: and the greater any good is that is propounded, so much the more
strongly does it draw the affection to it, especially if it be clearly
discerned. But God is a good of infinite excellency, containing all things
which the Saints can desire, and is clearly discerned by them, therefore he
most strongly draws their affections to himself. They shall in Heaven see so
much excellency in God, and be so filled with his love, that their hearts shall
be full of holy flames of love toward him: there shall be nothing either within
them or without them to draw away their love from God, or lessen or cool their
affections toward him: all things that they shall see or hear, or understand,
shall serve to fill them with his love, and keep up and confirm their love in
the height of it for ever: they shall be so fully like to God, that it shall be
impossible for them not to love him perfectly: God shall dwell in them, and
they shall wholly possess him; and they shall dwell in God, and he shall wholly
possess them: they shall be knit to each other in mutual love to all eternity.
The principal employment of the Saints in Heaven is to love God; and all the
virtues in Heaven are useless, except charity, and enjoyment, which is the rest
of love, and is also its recompense, says S. Augustine; for as desires do
disquiet lovers, when they possess not what they long for, so being now in the
possession of him whom they love, they are satisfied.

The love of the Saints in Heaven is much perfecter than ours upon the earth:
whatever pains we take to love God on earth, our love is never without some
notable defect to enfeeble it* i^ is blind, because faith that enlightens it,
is (as one says) a candle whose lamp is always surrounded with a cloud or
smoke: it is faint and drooping, because we possess not the supreme good we
passionately affect, and being separated from him, we are as well his Martyrs,
as his Lovers. Here our love is also divided, because self-love is not yet
extinguished; and the greatest Saints, if they manage not their intentions
well, do rob God of all the love wherewith they indulge themselves. In brief!
it is almost ever interested: we love not God so purely, as not to seek our own
pleasure with it, when we seek his glory; and we are more earnest with God for
riches and honors than for heavenly graces: but the Saints in glory have not
one of these imperfections in their love; their love is not blind, because they
love him whom they see; and the brightness of glory that illuminates them, is a
ray dispelling all the darkness of their understandings: it languisheth not as
ours does, nor spends it self in its longings, because they possess what they
love, and being intimately united to God, are eternally inseparable from him:
their love is not divided, because self-love enters not into the celestial
Jerusalem, but is quenched by the flames of true charity; finally it is not
interested, because God's glory is the end of their desires, yea in Heaven it
self they seek not so much their own happiness as his glory.

SECT. II.
11. AS the Saints shall love God entirely, so they shall love each other in
the Lord: they shall see the Image of God shining clearly and gloriously in
each other, and so shall love God in each other, and each other in God: Peter
shall admire Christ in the glory conferred on Paul, and Paul shall admire
Christ in the glory conferred on Peter: The Saints shall find themselves all
agreeing in God; and so among themselves, they shall see nothing in any of
their brethren, but what shall be most lovely, nothing to estrange their
hearts, or damp their affections: they shall not be capable of any touch of
envy, for every one of them shall be full of glory and blessedness: And albeit
some have higher degrees of glory than others, yet this causes no emulation or
jealousy among them. The variety of the world (as one observes) is one of its
rarest ornaments; the flowers which checker a walk, do embellish it: the Stars
which make an hundred several figures in the firmament, do set a luster upon
its beauty; neither does any thing make a Country more pleasant, than the
diversity of the parts that compose it: the riches and glory of a state
depends upon its diversity: if all subjects were of the same condition, there
would neither be diversion for strangers, nor accommodation for the naturals.
The ornament and profit of the body politic appears in this agreeable
mixture of rich and poor, Artists and Husbandmen, Soldiers and Merchants,
Magistrates and Ministers; but here is the mischief that attends it, that this
variety of conditions which begets its beauty, breeds envy and jealousy among
the subjects: for as their goods are not common, because their conditions are
different, one is jealous of what another possesses. Great men are apt to be
proud, and to despise their inferiors: Men of low degree are envious, and
murmr at those that are above them. But in Heaven the difference of degrees
produces their beauty, and gives no occasion of envy or jealousy; the Crowns
of glorified Saints are proportionable to their labors and sufferings for
Christ. They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Sun, Dan. 12.
Peace bears rule among all the Inhabitants of Heaven: love which uniteth them
renders their contentment common, though the justice that rewards them,
makes their condition gradually different. Every one is glad of another
happiness; and without interesting in any one, they find that the felicity of
particulars contributeth to that of the public. In Heaven love is in its full
perfection, Ludovic granat. Meditat.
the property whereof is to cause all things to be common: there all the elect
shall be more straightly united to one another, than the Members of one and the
same Body, because all shall participate of the same spirit, which gives unto
all one and the same being, one and the same blessed life. What is the cause
why the members of one and the same body have so great an unity and love one to
another, is it not because they are all partakers of one and the same form? one
and the same Soul gives the same being and life to them all. Now if the spirit
of a man has power to cause so great an unity between the members that are so
different in Offices and Natures: is it any wonder, if the Spirit of God
Almighty, by whom all the Elect do live (which Spirit is as it were the common
soul to them all) should cause a greater and more perfect unity among them,
especially considering that the Spirit of God is a more noble cause, and of a
more excellent virtue and power, and gives also a more noble being: now if this
manner of unity and love do cause all things to be common, as we see in the
members of one body, who rejoice every one at each others felicity as its own:
what delight then shall each one of the Elect take in the glory of all the
rest, considering that he shall entirely love every one of them as well as
himself?

CHAP. XXV.
SECT. I. Of the joy of glorified Saints, what it is, and to what it extends
it self.
OUt of love flows joy, which opens and enlarges the heart upon the
enjoyment of God and Glory: the beatifick joy is as sublime, supernatural and
wonderful, as the beatisick Vision of God, and Love it self is; for these are
altogether equal and commensurate among themselves, as well by intensive
perfection, as by eminency of nature or specifical perfection: so much do the
Saints love as they see, and so much do they rejoice as they love. The chief
object which delights the Saints is of infinite goodness, beauty and
sweetness, comprehending in it self the goodness, beauty and sweetness of all
things: and this joy of the Saints does so far surpass all worldly joys, which
are taken in, either by the sense or understanding, as the Vision of God in
Heaven does excel all the knowledge we have here upon earth, and as much as an
infinite good does exceed a finite good: for that joy is infinitely greater and
sweeter than all the joys of this life. I say infinitely, so that although all
the joys of the world, and all the delights of the senses (which may be had in
this life) should be gathered together in one, and should be augmented never so
much, yet could they never be equalled with the joys of glorified Saints,
because this joy is of an higher kind, viz. Divine, and the sweetness of it is
of a far other nature than the sweetness of earthly joys. This will the more
evidently appear, if we consider the eminency, variety, and stability of the
good things in which the Saints in glory do rejoice.

1. First, and above all things they do rejoice in the intrinsecal good things
of God, which are infinitely abundant in him, viz. because they see him to be
of infinite power wisdom and goodness, they see him to be eternal and
incomprehensible, they see him to be the Author of all things, the end of all
things, the preserver of all things: they see all good, sweetness and
blessedness most abundantly contained in him; and their joy is the greater,
because they see him possess all these things after a most eminent manner; for
as they love God incomparably more than themselves, so do they rejoice more in
those eminencies that are in him, than in all their own blessedness. If the
joys that the Saints have here in this vale of tears be many times
unspeakable, and far greater than all worldly joys, how incomparably greater
then shall their joy be, when it shall be said to every faithful Soul, Enter
thou into thy Masters joy, Math. 25. Then they shall as it were enter into an
ocean and abyss of joys, and therewith shall be compassed about on every
side, and dwell eternally in it.

2. They shall rejoice in all the extrinsecal good things of God: They shall
rejoice in that glory which God has from the perpetual praises, benedictions,
and thanksgivings of all his Saints; they shall rejoice in that glory which
accrueth to him from the salvation of his elect Children, and from the torments
of the wicked, which they do and shall suffer in the Prison of Divine Justice
to all eternity: and all this joy of theirs arises from their love to God: as
when a Kings Son rejoices in the wisdom, power, riches and glory of his
Father, without having any respect at all to his own profit or honor, but
merely out of love to his Father, and for his Father's sake: Of this joy Anselm
thus speaks: so much as any one loves another, Quoniam quantum quisque
diligit alterum, tantum de bono ejus gaudet. Anselm Proso log. Ca. 25.
so much he rejoices in his good: and as in Heaven, every one will
incomparably love God more than himself, and all others with himself; so he
will rejoice more in the blessedness of God, than in his own happiness, and of
all others with him.

As for their joy, it shall be most full and abound, a perpetual feast of
marrow and fatness; in God's presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand
pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.11. S. John says, That which we have seen and
heard, that we declare unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us, and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; and
these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full, 1 John 1.3, 4. This
seems to assure us, that Christians in this life may have a fullness of joy
through communion and fellowship with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, viz. a fullness of eminency, not of perfection; such a fullness of joy as
surpasses all sinful and worldly joys, such as overcomes all worldly losses
and sorrows: how much more in the life to come shall their full enjoyment of
God cause in them an absolute and most perfect fullness of joy, as much joy as
their hearts can hold? their hearts also being enlarged, and made capable of
abundance of joy unspeakable and full of glory: they shall have joy then, not
that shall overcome all sorrow only, but they shall be altogether free from
all mixtures of sorrow; never a cloud of sadness or discontent shall ever in
the least measure eclipse or darken their joy: what are all our terrene joys?
they are but as a dream to this fullness of joy that is in the presence of God
in Heaven.

SECT. II.
MOreover, besides this, which is also unspeakable, although inferior to those
beforementioned.

1. They do rejoice in their own happiness, which (as it is very great) so
shall their joys be multiplied accordingly: and first of all and above all,
they shall rejoice in this, that they are come to the sight and possession of
God, and are made partakers of his glory and blessedness: for if mortal men in
this life having found a great treasure, or coming to possess a rich
inheritance, or having obtained a Kingdom they looked not for, or some earthly
and frail good (which yet draws a thousand cares with it, and lasts but a
short time) are so exceedingly affected with joy, that they are not able to
contain themselves, and are even transported beyond themselves with an ecstasy
of joy; with what joy then (think you) shall the Saints be affected, when they
shall come to the possession of an infinite good, which excludes all
solicitude, and wherein all riches, all honors, all dignities, all beauty,
all sweetness (and whatsoever the mind of man can desire) is most abundantly
contained: and that which adds to this joy is, that they shall see the
possession of this good to be most firm and sure, and to abide for ever,
without any change or alteration: therefore upon a double account their joy
shall be incomparably greater than all the joys of this world, viz. because
the good which they shall possess, shall be infinitely greater and more
sublime, than all the good things of this life, and they shall also have an
everlasting enjoyment thereof.

2. They shall likewise rejoice in the good things of the mind, and chiefly in
the perfection of all their graces, and that clear knowledge they shall have of
all things, which shall wonderfully delight them. They shall also be much
affected with joy from the consideration of the evils and dangers (as well
temporal as eternal) which they shall then perceive themselves to have escaped,
from the danger whereof they shall see themselves to be secure for ever: and
beholding the horrible fire of Hell, and the numberless multitudes of those
that are cast into everlasting burnings, and the danger to which themselves
were exposed, how shall their hearts be filled with joy, upon the meditation of
God's infinite mercy, by which they were saved from everlasting destruction,
and carried in safety into the Port of eternal blessedness?

3. They shall likewise rejoice in the glory of their bodies, when they shall
perceive their bodies to shine as the Sun, to be swift as it were like
lightening, to be like a Spirit immortal, incorruptible, impassible.

4. They shall rejoice in the amiableness of their habitation, seeing
themselves now translated from Earth to Heaven, into the glorious Kingdom of
Heaven, into the Paradise of all delights, into the Region of light, into the
Vision of peace, into the Land of the living, into the celestial Jerusalem,
into the place of the Blessed, a place abounding with all delights, and with
all good things, and void of all discommodity, grief and sorrow: out of every
one of these good things of their own arises to them unspeakable joy.

SECT. III.
FUrthermore, they shall rejoice every one in the good things of each other,
and in the felicity of all their companions; for they shall most ardently love
all as the Sons of God, and their own Brethren and Sisters, and fellow Heirs,
and withal they shall rejoice in their splendor, glory, excellency, wisdom,
virtues, blessedness, as in their own, and that much more than any Parent in
this life can rejoice in the felicity of his Children, or one Friend in the
prosperity of another.

Quest. But with what affection shall the Parent and the Child, the Husband and
Wife, and one Friend greet another in Heaven?

Sol. We must not surely imagine, that any of these conjugal or paternal
affections, which had their consummation on Earth, can be of any use in Heaven,
nor that there shall be any return of bypast and mortal affections toward
Friends, Kindred and Children: but as the body must put on incorruption and
immortality, e're it can be a fit companion for the Soul; so must the soul
likewise be divested of all such desires, as are apt again to wed it to earthly
and transitory delights, before it can be received into the blessed communion
of the Saints: and as the Soul shall assume the hand, the eye, and every member
of the body unto a participation of glory, without soliciting them again to
undergo the fore-past drudgeries in the flesh; so the Father and the Child, and
one Friend may behold another without the intimation of such duties, or any
resultance of such mortal desires as are implied in those relations.

But as the Soul is permitted to resume its own body, rather than another, and
reason exacts it should gratify that flesh, whose inmate it had been, rather
than another: so likewise those persons whom some nearer relations had formerly
united, may be conceived to retain so much partiality, in the dispensation of
their joy, as in the first place to rejoice, that they are again united in the
participation of glory, excluding none from being an argument of their joy, but
preferring some in the order of their rejoicing: but it may be that this
affection must comply with the justice of the divine bounty, and that we shall
there bestow a greater measure of our joy, where he has been pleased to confer
a greater portion of his glory. It would seem unreasonable that the Soul alone
should inherit that glory which was procured perhaps by the torments and
sufferings of the body, as in holy Confessors and Martyrs; and the same reason
which makes the Soul and Body sharers of the same happiness, begets a mutual
claim among the Saints to each others joy; for one man may be a powerful
Instrument of another's blessedness; the Father's care may preserve the Child,
and the piety of the Son may inflame the Father; the Mothers tears may reduce
the perverted Son, the believing Husband may save the unbelieving Wife; and one
Friend may with happy success, instruct, admonish, rebuke, and pray for
another. Now is it more reasonable to think that these immortal benefits and
obligations shall be promiscuously and undiscernably swallowed up in the Sea of
glory, or to say that these parties whom it may concern, shall see each other
face to face; some gratefully rejoicing that the Instruments of their
Salvation, like Stars of a greater magnitude are more eminently glorious:
others always rejoicing in beholding their labors so highly blessed, as to
have procured the endless bliss of their fellow creatures. Our Savior tells
us, what joy there shall be for the conversion of a Sinner, in the presence of
the Angels, who by reason of their nature are strangers to us: if Angels, who
are in the presence of God, and but of a remote alliance to us, be as it were
turned aside from the contemplation of the chiefest good, to behold with joy a
repenting Sinner, shall not men who are of the same stock and lineage, be much
more allowed some expressions of joy (suitable to the greatness of the wonder)
when they behold one another, no longer repenting Sinners, but glorious Saints.

In those parts of the world near the Line, where the Sun is near them all the
year, they are said to have no Winter, the Earth and Trees being always green,
as in a perpetual Spring: so the Saints in glory, upon whom the face of God and
Christ shall shine for ever, shall never see one cloudy day, one winters night,
nor feel any sorrow or discomfort, but shall enjoy a constant plenitude or
fullness of joy, as a perpetual Spring for ever. To conclude! the frame of their
bodies and spirits, the place of their abode, their company, the objects which
they shall see and hear, all things within them and without them shall concur
to make their joy complete, and to cause their hearts to rest in everlasting
peace.

CHAP. XXVI.
SECT. I.
AS for the affection of desire, it shall have no place in Heaven: the infinite
sweetness which the Saints shall taste in God and Christ, and in the love of God
and Christ, shall abundantly satisfy them, and leave no place for desire:
their perfect enjoyment of God shall admit no hungring or thirsting after
further delights: they shall find it is enough, they shall be fully satisfied,
but never cloyed, nor satiated. Whence S. August. says, August. Tract. 3. in
Jo^n.
such shall that delight of beauty in Heaven be, that it shall be always
present with thee, and yet thou never satiated: for if I shall say, Thou shall
not be satisfied, there shall be an hunger and thirst: if I shall say, Thou
shall be satiated, thou will fear a cloying there, where shall be neither
famine, hunger, nor thirst, nor any tedious cloying: to the same purpose
Cyprian says, Cyprian de laud Martyrii.
the Saints shall not only taste how sweet God is, but they shall be filled
with a wonderful sweetness, nothing shall be wanting to them. In Heaven there
is no more desire for Christ as a thing absent, the thirst being swallowed up
in Christ, the Soul thirsts no more; Christ being present, their desires are
satisfied: God shall be all in all, his presence shall fill and satisfy all
the powers and faculties of their Souls.

Holy David having here tasted of God's sweetness, cries out, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee? Psalm.
73.25. intimating to us, that he that has God, has enough in God: The Soul
that possesses God in this life, has recovered that great loss that fell upon
Adam, and all Mankind by fin: Man by sin lost God, now he that has God in
Christ, has recovered this great loss: Man in his first estate had enough by
enjoying God; now he that recovereth this loss, wants nothing, for he finds
enough in God. And although Adam in innocence enjoyed many other things besides
God, as perfect health, possession of the Garden of Eden, and full authority
over the Creatures, and albeit these things were comfortable in a degree in
their kind, yet man's happiness in that state did not consist in possessing
these things, but in enjoying God: and all the glory and sweetness, and any
thing that was desirable in all these things, was derived merely and wholly
from God. Now whatever God does here give to man by the Creature, he will
supply in Heaven without the Creature, viz. immediately by himself: if the
streams be sweet, how much better is water in the Spring, and purer there? In
Heaven the Saints shall want nothing, yet shall they enjoy nothing there but
God; he will be all to them, their drink, their food, their rest, their joy,
their pleasure, the height of all their honor, he will be all, and more than
all unto them. Which consideration made a devout man meditating hereupon to cry
out, Deus meus and omnia, ah! one refreshing of thine, Drexel. Consider. de
Aeternit.
one enjoyment of thee is a sweet refreshing indeed; for to enjoy thee is to
enjoy the quintessence of all good. Thou art unto me, O my good God, goodness
it self, rest in my labors, pleasure in my grief, security in my cares, and
the only true riches in my poverty; thou art my strong Bulwark, against all the
furious assaults of men; thou art my refuge whatsoever evil does oppress me;
and finally, Thou art all unto me, whatsoever I can wish for, or desire:
wherefore then when we come to Heaven, we shall not need to seek to quench our
thirst with any stream, when we have so crystal a Springhead or fountain as
this, where we may lie down and drink our fills: in having and enjoying God, we
shall have whatsoever we can desire: then the Lord will wholly frame the hearts
of his Children according to his own mind, that whatsoever is pleasing to him
shall be delightful to them; the heart shall then be kept in from wandering any
more after vain and sensual delights; and the Soul being wholly conformed to
God, it has whatever it can desire.

SECT. II.
ANd as for the affections of fear and sorrow, and anger, they shall have no
place in Heaven: for then they shall be set far above the fear of all evil; the
Saints being possessed of an infinite good, which is God himself, for their
portion, they shall have no cause then to fear any evil; there is no evil can
hurt them, for no evil shall be able to reach them that are in possession of
him that is an infinite good: they are also possessed of God (the infinite
good) in perpetuity; they have him in everlasting possession: for otherwise,
although they need not fear any evil while they are possessed of him, yet they
might fear the loss of him, and their woeful separation from him, and then they
should lie open to all sorts of evils; therefore to prevent this fear, the Lord
has betrothed them to himself for ever, and has given himself to them in
Marriage, and that in an everlasting covenant, and will never be divorced from
them, but be theirs for ever and ever.

The graces of Repentance, Mortification, Self-denial shall have no place in
Heaven, which are of great use here in the way to Heaven: there shall be no
sense of evil to be sorrowed for, nor sin to be repented of, nothing
distasteful to provoke their anger, or to discompose those blessed Spirits that
are above; there shall be a perfect harmony between God and them.

Neither shall there be any use of those graces of Faith and Hope in Heaven. S.
Paul tells us, Now abides faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is charity: why greater than the other, but because this
abides immortal for ever? In Heaven instead of believing we shall see; here
the object of faith is things not seen; the thing promised, but not yet
performed; now in the life to come, when all things that are promised are fully
performed to us, and possessed by us, there is no use of faith, in relation to
these things. -- So for Hope, when all the glory of Heaven is fully enjoyed,
that the Saints hope for, there is an end of Hope in reference to the same
things: the affection of Hope cease not, until the good that is desired and
hoped for, be obtained, and made present; but that good thing being had and
attained unto, then the affection of Hope cease, for what we have and enjoy
we hope not for, Visibile non est objectum Spei.
Romans 8.24, 25. Therefore, says August. Hope is a Child of Faith, by which man
hops (from him whom he knows) for that which yet he has not: Now when the
good that we hoped for is obtained, Hope does end and cease. Yet
notwithstanding, although Faith, Hope, and Patience, shall cease in respect of
their objects, yet they are eternal in respect of their fruits, Heb. 6.12. The
Apostle stirring up the Hebrews to walk after the examples of those that are
now in glory, speaks thus; Be ye followers of them who through faith and
patience have inherited the promises. Those things that heretofore were not
seen by them but by an eye of Faith, they are now in full possession of, they
do inherit the promises: on the other side, they have no more sufferings to
endure, therefore there is no more use of patience; but the fruit of those
graces which they sought for, that they now inherit and enjoy. S. Paul tells
us, Gal. 6. that he that sows to the Spirit shall reap life everlasting. When
the Husbandman sows his seed in the Earth, the seed dies, and is dissolved
in the ground, there it lies hid, he sees no more seed till the harvest comes,
but then he reapeth many Bushels for one: so he that sows to the spirit,
works in the strength of those graces, shall reap life everlasting: he shall
have no use of those graces in the life to come, but reap the fruit of it, even
life eternal: when the Saints come to possess Heaven as a portion cast out by
God's own lot for them from all eternity, they shall for ever enjoy the fruit
of their piety, and the end of their Faith and Hope: Oh how sweet shall the
remembrance of their work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of Hope be
to all eternity?

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Adjuncts of the glory of Heaven.
HAving spoken of the Circumstances and substance of the glory of the Saints in
Heaven, in the next place I shall treat of the adjuncts thereof.

1. The glorious state of the Sons of God is a state of liberty, Romans 8.21. I
will show in what respects it is a state of liberty.

I. A liberty from all subjection, Natural, Servile, Magistratical; in this
state of liberty all yokes shall be broken to pieces; Fathers shall no more
exercise their paternal authority, and Sons shall not be under their command;
men shall be no more servants to men, the highest Potentates shall no more
exercise authority over men: as it is said of Marriage, They shall neither
marry nor be given in marriage; so I may say of subjection, they shall neither
command nor obey in the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.24. He shall put down all rule,
and all authority and power. Christ will put down all the authority which
Fathers have over their Children, which Masters have over their Servants, which
Princes have over their Subjects and Vassals, all the authority which both the
Enemies and Persecutors have over the Church; then it shall have no more
nursing Fathers and Mothers; all Crowns and Scepters shall be cast down at the
feet of Christ, he will put them down, the Greek word is, (...), enervabit, he
will at the last day put them down, not only that they shall not prevail, but
that they shall be utterly abolished.

II. They shall be delivered even from that sweet and gracious subjection to
Christ as King and Mediator; Christ shall rule over his body, not as Mediator,
but as God; he himself will lay down the Crown of his Mediatorship, and deliver
up his whole government into the hands of God, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. And when all
things shall be subdued unto him, then etc. When Christ has levelled all
authority with the ground, and shall have trodden down all his Enemies, then he
will rule no more as Mediator, but give up the Kingdom to God the Father, and
God will be all in all, he will immediately govern all his Saints.

III. A liberty from all spiritual Tyranny in diverse respects.

1. It is a liberty from the Tyranny of Sin: Sin though it does not rule in the
Godly as a King, yet as a Tyrant: though the Saints do not, and never will sell
themselves to work evil, yet while they are in this body they are sold under
sin: no slavery is more intolerable to a Holy man, than this slavery to sin;
it is a Godly man's hell to be under the Tyrannical power of any lust: Slavery
to Pharaoh is liberty, compared to slavery to pride, to worldly-mindedness, or
to any lust whatsoever. It was the doom of a Godly Martyr to have a dead man
chained to him, his eyes to the dead man's eyes, his breast to the dead man's
breast, that he might perish by the stench of the dead Carcass. Such is a Godly
man's present condition to be tied to the body of sin, which is a very death to
him in whom is the life of grace. Now the state of glory will set all the
Children of God at liberty from this thraldom: sin will then be put off, when
glory is put on: when the new man is perfectly renewed in respect of degrees
and parts, the old man which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, shall be
perfectly destroyed in respect of presence and operation: in the state of glory
they will not be afraid of sinning, such will their liberty be from sin; they
shall be as free from all sin as the Sun from the least shadow.

2. It is a state of liberty from all tokens, effects, yea fears of the wrath
and displeasure of God: Now and then God writes bitter things against his
people in this life, and makes them his mark, to shoot the arrows of his
displeasure into their very Consciences. What doleful complaints have the Godly
made, and still do make of God's dealings with them? some of them live in
Bondage to the fear of God's wrath all the days of their lives: Now there is
no liberty from the fears of God's displeasure in this life, so long as there
is the remnant of sins within them; while we have a body of sin within us, we
shall have a miserable body: now in the state of glory they shall enjoy a
perfect liberty from wrath, and all their chains of fears shall be knocked off;
the glorified shall no more fear wrath, than the glorified shall hope for
favor; they shall no more dread Hell, than the damned truly desire Heaven;
their perfect sense of God's love toward them, and their perfect love of God
will cast out all these fears: the state of glory is a fearless estate; as far
above fear as Heaven above earth; the mountain of glory cannot be removed with
the greatest tempest of the fears of any evil.

3. It is a state of freedom from all afflictions: now afflictions are compared
in Scripture to Bonds, Fetters, Chains, Yokes, and such Engines and Instruments
of miserable bondage. The evil of sin and afflictions are twins born together,
and shall cease and dye together: when the Soul takes her flight to the
mountain of glory, she casts off the mantle of suffering: Glory and misery
are as inconsistent together, as the most contrarious extremes; sooner shall
East and West meet in one point, noon and midnight in one moment, than
perfection and glory, and the least affliction; Lazarus is now as great a
stranger to afflictions, as Dives to pleasures.

4. It is a freedom from all temptations and rage of Satan, it is impossible
for the Devil to tempt a man in glory. When man was in a perfect state of
grace, he tempted him to sin; but when man is in a perfect state of glory, he
cannot tempt him; the Devils are cast out of Heaven, never to appear there to
tempt any who have made their entrance into it: the Church has a promise that
Satan shall be bound up a thousand years; but then he is bound to eternity: the
Devils are now in chains of utter darkness, but through God's permission,
Satan's chain is sometimes lengthened; but then no more lengthening: now he
walks up and down assaying to devour, and seeking whom he may devour, but
then he shall walk no longer; the Saints shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes, and shall not in all their walks meet with a Devil to tempt them to any
sin whatsoever.

5. The state of glory is liberty from death, from the fears of it, and from
all things tending to mortality; bondage to death will be swallowed up of this
life of liberty; glory is triumphant over Death, Hell and the Grave, bidding
defiance to them: O Grave where art thou! O Hell where art thou! O Death where
art thou! 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire,
Rev. 20.14. By Hell (there) we must understand the Grave: Death and the Grave
shall be damned as well as the wicked.

6. The state of glory is a liberty from the rage, wrath, and persecution of
all the wicked men in the world: their rage and persecution is a bondage and
captivity to the Saints, hindering them from serving God with desired freedom:
they cannot put forth their godliness, but they expose themselves to the
scoffs, hatred, rage, and persecutions of the world; now the state of glory
will put a great gulf between the Godly and the Wicked, which will hinder them
from all intercourse: for know, that if the damned could again be in company,
or in the place where the godly are, they would persecute them again to the
uttermost, though they know they must be damned, and therefore the Devils now
hate and tempt them, though they aggravate their own torments.

7. It is a liberty from all imperfections of graces, and weakness in their
serving God.

1. From all imperfections of their graces, which in this present life are very
imperfect: we know but in part, says the Apostle: so we believe but in part,
we love God but in part, we are Holy but in part, we are zealous for God but in
part: there is more doubts and ignorance than knowledge, more unbelief than
faith, more want of love than love, there is more sin than grace and holiness:
now the state of glory is a state of perfection; we shall know as we are known,
our understandings will be enlarged, that we shall know God fully and
perfectly, our faith will be turned into sight, our hope into possession: we
shall then love God with all our hearts, with all our souls, etc. The Angels
are called Seraphims, because (as some say) they burn in love and zeal toward
God; so shall all the Saints be filled with this Seraphical love, we shall be
as holy as our natures are capable. The Church and people of God in this life
are compared to the Moon, because of those spots in her, which are
imperfections; but in the state of glory they are compared to the Sun which
has no spots in it; and as the Prophet speaks of the Sun and Moon, that the
light of the Sun shall be sevenfold more resplendent than now: so the graces,
the holiness of the Saints shall be sevenfold more holy than now they are.

2. It shall be a liberty from all weaknesses and infirmities in serving God,
this is the necessary consequent of the former; for the more glorious and holy
a man is, the more able he is to serve God, if perfectly sanctified; then he
serves God perfectly: the Angels fulfill the whole will of God, because they
are filled with grace; they run, yea, they fly in the ways of his
commandments: this liberty and enlargement shall all the Saints have in the
state of glory: while they are here, they are in bondage to much spiritual
deadness, and slothfulness, they pray, they praise God acceptably, though they
cannot pray nor praise him perfectly; they may pray and purpose to run the
ways of God's Commandments, but cannot because they are too weak, and are
fettered with spiritual slothfulness and deadness: glory will do away all this,
and make us as ready and able to do the whole will of God, as Angels do.

8. It is a liberty from all natural clogs which the body in this state of
union fastens upon the soul, insomuch that the body is animae ergastulum, the
prison of the soul; it is pondus, or onus animae, the burden or weight of the
soul; the regenerate soul cannot act vigorously, because the body is so
unweildy; the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: but when the soul and
body shall be reunited, and meet in a state of glory, the body will be a nimble
handmaid, and pliable to all the motions and commands of the soul: the body
then (which is now the souls prison) will be the souls paradise: and both soul
and body will act most vigorously; the soul will never tire out the body, nor
will the body clog the soul; they will both be unwearied in their glorious
services; the body then will be spiritual, though not a spirit, and become
immortal, incorruptible, as the soul is.

9. It is a liberty from many duties and services, and spiritual exercises,
which are now required of us; the Saints work shall be lessened in Heaven. The
Service of the Church and people of God under the Gospel, is much less than it
was under the Law: hence the state of the Church under the pedagogy of the Law
is by the Apostle called a state of bondage, a state of subjection, but the
state of the Church under the Gospel is called a state of liberty: but when the
Church shall be taken up into glory, then their services shall be far less than
now they are; many duties and graces shall be done away in Heaven; we shall
pray no more for any mercy for our selves; all praying shall be turned into
praising of God; we shall not hear the Word, nor receive the Sacraments any
more; nor fast and afflict our souls any more; we shall no longer mourn for
sin; repentance will be done away, yea faith it self (as many Divines conceive)
shall be done away: Pray we shall not, because then we shall never be in want:
our souls shall be so abundantly satisfied with the fullness of God's house: we
shall mourn and repent no more, because we shall sin no more. Our service in
the state of glory will be taken up in praising God, in admiring God, in loving
God, rejoicing in God, giving him praise and glory for the riches of his grace
toward us in Christ Jesus.

10. In respect of the place, it is a state of liberty indeed: the vast Heaven
of Heavens, O ye Saints, shall be the place of your habitation and delight:
what is the whole world compared to it, it is but a narrow prison, an house of
correction, an house of bondage to a gracious spirit, it is but as a Cage to a
bird, so is the world to the soul of a Godly man.

11. It is a liberty from all fears or dangers of everlosing their glory and
blessedness, which then they shall enjoy; they shall never be afraid of losing
God, Christ, Heaven, Happiness, but shall be secured to all eternity, which is
the Crown of this glorious liberty of the Children of God. It is a sore
thraldom to be perplexed with fears of losing our enjoyments, it imbittereth
all our joys, it is death to a worldling to think he must die, and leave all
his riches, honors, friends, delights; much more will it be a very Hell to the
afflicted, if they should be afflicted with the fears of losing Heaven: but no
such fears or thoughts shall at any time (during eternity) perplex the hearts
of the Godly, it casts out all such fears: they shall see it is impossible
for them to lose what they do possess. Notable is that phrase, Luke 16.26.
Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: that if the glorified would get
out of Heaven, they cannot come to the damned; and the damned cannot come out
of Hell to Heaven; God has fast bolted the gates of Heaven and Hell with an
everlasting decree.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the eternity of the glory of Heaven.
II. THe second adjunct of this glory is the perpetuity of it, it shall be
everlasting: this is abundantly witnessed in the Scriptures; I give to them
eternal life (says Christ) and they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28. He that
hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, Joh.
5.24. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honor,
and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2.7. it is called eternal life, eternal
glory, eternal salvation, 2 Timothy 2.10. Hebr. 5.9. Hebr. 9.15. The Hebrews when
they did speak of eternal life, they would speak in the plural number (...) not
(...) vitae not vita, lives, not life, implying eternity.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, how the blessedness of the Saints is made
perpetual, endless, everlasting? Adam was made perfect, after the Image of God,
perfectly blessed, perfectly holy, and yet he fell both from holiness and
happiness: this blessed estate of his seemed to have been of very short
continuance; yea, many of the Angels, which were more excellent and glorious
than man, and had none to tempt them, yet left their habitation, and fell from
this blessed estate; how then comes it to pass that the happiness of man shall
be everlasting?

Resp. For answer hereunto, if I should say, that they shall see God face to
face, and so shall be filled with God, and so all occasions of sin, and
revolting from God shall be prevented; and they shall be so abundantly
satisfied in God, and so invincibly strengthened and confirmed by God dwelling
in them, that nothing shall so far prevail over them, as in the least degree to
withdraw their affections from God. I see not how this might suffice: for
doubtless the Angels that kept not their first estate, did thus see and enjoy
God, yet they fell totally and finally. -- Therefore the sole reason is the
will of Almighty God, his infinite goodness, his eternal love toward them,
according to which he has made a covenant of grace with them in his Son, by
his promise and oath, assuring them of eternal life: and this immutable will
and love of God declared in the infallible truth of his gracious promise and
covenant, is a better and firmer assurance than the highest perfections and
excellencies, that any mere creature is capable of: yea a child of God here on
earth, having the least measure of true grace mixed with many corruptions,
almost stifled with the body of death, opposed, discouraged, discountenanced by
a wicked and ungodly world, assaulted by all the powers of darkness, and with
numberless temptations, is in a safer condition for perseverance, and is better
assured to hold out to eternal life, because of the verity of God's promise,
and the firmness of his covenant grounded upon the rock Christ-Jesus, than one
that were by creation perfectly upright and happy, if his holiness and
happiness were only in his own keeping, and not established upon this
everlasting foundation, the will of God, and the infallibility of his promise.
This being the cause, we may also conceive diverse holy ends, for which as he
does preserve every child of his by his effectual working power unto salvation,
so having brought them thither, he will for ever preserve them in his Heavenly
Kingdom. As,

I. That he may have some of the lost seed of Adam to be everlasting Monuments
of his rich grace, who to all eternity shall be real demonstrations of his
infinite love, and unspeakable mercy and goodness, in redeeming, justifying,
sanctifying, cleansing, and preserving them.

II. That he may be to eternity praised for his glorious victories over all his
enemies, that when the Devil and his Angels have used the utmost of their
craft, might and malice, when the hands of the world have been hot and smoking
with the blood of the Saints, and their hearts sick with blasphemy and malice
against Christ and his followers, when sin has thrown out its most deadly
poison, or when death has been devouring Mankind so many ages, yet shall the
Almighty power of God be so prevalent over all, as to make, and everlastingly
to keep his elect in a blessed state; and he in them, and they with him shall
celebrate an eternal and most glorious triumph in the Kingdom of Heaven,

III. That Jesus Christ may be eternally honored as a Redeemer: God the Father
will have the fruit of his Son's purchase to be perpetual and everlasting; he
will magnify the infinite value of that price which Christ has paid, the
infinite virtue of that blood which Christ shed for the redemption of lost
souls, by establishing his ransomed ones in everlasting happiness: therefore it
is said, He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them
that do believe, 2 These. 1.10. Christ is now very admirable and glorious in the
hearts of his redeemed ones, who are illightened with saving knowledge, who
have an experimental taste in themselves of the efficacy of his blood, and the
fruit of that redemption which he has wrought: But oh how admirable and
glorious shall he then appear, when they shall enjoy the fullness of his
redemption in an unchangeable state of blessedness for evermore?

IV. That he may have everlasting objects of his love, to whom he may
communicate his goodness, sweetness, fullness; whom he may enrich with the
treasures of his Kingdom, feast with his love, beautify with his salvation,
and adorn with the brightness of his glory for ever: and this is that wherein
the infinite goodness of God delights, even to give forth and to communicate
it self: such is his blessedness and perfection that it is beyond all
possibility of addition; he can receive nothing from any, but delights to
give and communicate: and as he is an everlasting fountain of blessedness, so
he will have everlasting vessels of honor into whom fullness of blessedness may
stream and flow from himself for ever; that we may see our debt of love to
Christ is eternal. O how many thousand talents are we owing to Christ, and the
longer the Saints enjoy the glory of Heaven through millions of ages, their
debt to the Lamb that sits on the throne will be the greater: eternal
praises can take down nothing of it.

V. God will have some everlastingly to praise and glorify his name, a consort
of Saints, his redeemed ones to join with his elect Angels in magnifying his
name, exalting his praise, and doing him honor to all eternity. Ransomed ones
shall sing the Gospel-Song, Worthy is the Lamb, etc. The Gospel-Tune of the
Song of free grace shall be for ever sung in that blessed Assembly of the first
born, whose names are now written in Heaven.

VI. He will make his Saints everlastingly blessed, even for the Angels sake,
who persevered in their integrity and obedience from the first moment of their
creation until now, that their joy may be full. This may be collected by way of
analogy and proportion from that speech of Christ. I say unto you, that joy
shall be in Heaven over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.7, 10. and again,
there is joy in the presence of the Angels over one sinner that repents. If
the Angels do now rejoice to see their loss in part repaired, and that (instead
of their fellow Angels that fell, revolting from God and forsaking them, and
now fighting against God, and opposing them in that Ministry wherein they
serve him) some of man kind are turned unto God by unfeigned repentance, and
joined in communion with them (according to that of Hebr. 12.22. which is
spoken to the faithful: ye are come to an innumerable company of Angels) I say,
if the Angels rejoice in this, how shall their joy be filled up, to see many
thousands of the children of Adam translated to Heaven, and confirmed in the
full possession of everlasting glory and happiness?

This being a principal adjunct and qualification of that blessedness and
salvation, which Christ has purchased for his people, it may serve to rouse up
those, whose hearts and thoughts are chiefly taken up with such temporal things
as are perishing, and of a very short continuance. S. Paul's practice was quite
contrary, 2 Cor. 4.18. We look not (says he) at the things which are seen,
which are temporal, but at the things which are not seen, which are eternal. Oh
that we could be sensible of this extreme folly, and learn seriously to
consider, what it is for an immortal soul, that must have an everlasting being
and subsistence, chiefly to mind, take care for, and strive for things that
last but a short time, when it has the offer of things eternal; to surfeit on
momentany delights, and neglect eternal fullness of joy; to seek greedily after
uncertain and perishing riches, and to neglect the treasures of eternity; to
affect vain applause from the short breath of dying men, and never labor to
make sure of everlasting glory; to strive to get the friendship of great men,
carnal persons, and neglect to have the eternal love of God assured to them,
not laboring to enjoy God for ever. This may be much aggravated, if we take in
consideration, viz. that the loss of everlasting salvation for the gaining of
temporal things, is accompanied with everlasting misery and destruction. Is not
this then extreme folly to forfeit Heaven for Earth, and not only to lose
everlasting salvation for earthly things, but also to bring upon themselves
everlasting misery and destruction?

CHAP. XXIX. Of the certainty of the salvation of the Saints.
Use 1. HAving spoken of the Circumstances, substance, and adjuncts of the
Saints glory, it will now be necessary that I make some use and improvement of
what has been spoken.

Will God crown his people with glory, and is there such a blessed estate
reserved in Heaven for them, as I have showed at large? This then in the first
place may inform us concerning the certainty of the salvation of the Saints.
The salvation of God's Children is so certain, that the Scripture speaks not of
it as if it were to come, but as if it were already past or present, even as if
it were now done, and not as of a thing to be done: it is usual in Scripture to
describe those things which God has certainly determined, in such a manner as
if they were certainly accomplished: So S. Paul speaking of the salvation of
the Saints, says, Tit. 3.5. according to his mercy he has saved us: not he
will do it, but he has done it. By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. not ye shall
be, but ye are; whom he has called, them has he justified; and whom he has
justified, them also has he glorified, Romans 8.30. Blessed is the man that
endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life,
Jam. 1.12. From the certainty of future happiness, the Apostle infers and
concludes present blessedness; he shall be blessed, therefore he is blessed.

1. The salvation of the Saints is certain if they look to God, or to
themselves; to God both in respect of his own purpose, and of Christ's
performance. God has purposed it, therefore it shall inevitably come to pass;
all the powers on Earth or Hell shall never be able to divert it: Man's
purposes are subject to alteration, God's are not. Balaam himself could say,
where he blesses, none can curse, Numb. 23.23. if God has said it, he will do
it; if he has spoken it, he will certainly perform it -- Certain it is also in
respect of Christ's performance, Christ has performed all that is necessary
and sufficient for our salvation; he has been both our ransom and our
purchase; ransomed us from Hell, and procured for us an inheritance in Heaven.
He is called the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. for, if
ye look to the decree and purpose of God, he was so; or if ye look to the merit
and efficacy of his sufferings, he was so: To all the faithful that have lived,
from the beginning of the world, the suffering and sacrifice of Christ is
meritorious, and available, even to them that lived before Christ came into the
flesh, as well as to us that live after it: as many as are saved, are saved by
it, as S. Bernard wittily speaks, Mors Christi prosuit, antequam fuit: the
death of Christ was profitable, before it was.

2. The salvation of the Saints is certain also if they look to themselves, if
they look to what they are, aut re, aut spe, either indeed, or in hope; that
is, either to their present estate, or their future.

As to their present estate, God has already so far given it them, as he has
certainly given the seal and earnest of it to them; they have his Spirit
already, that is the seal of their adoption, the earnest of their salvation;
and having this, they are sure of the other, as when a man has his earnest, he
is sure of his bargain; and God never takes this earnest back again, because it
is so the earnest of our inheritance, Praesentia and quae j^m assecutus es, de
futuris tibi fidem faciunt. Chrysostom. in Romans Homil. 9.
until the redemption of the purchased possession, as that it is an earnest
also, that in the mean time God establishes us in Christ, and that he has
created us even for this very thing, namely to cloth us with immortality and
eternal life: Moreover, God in giving earnest to assure the end unto us, does
thereby undertake against all lets and impediments, that should hinder the
atchieving of that which is earnested thereby; and therefore as Chrysostom
says, the things present which thou have already attained, do assure unto thee
those things which are yet to come: But of this I have spoken before, Chap. 4.
And as in respect of their present estate, so in respect of their future hope,
as well as their present earnest: Futura sperant, quicunque sperant. August.
their hope of salvation confirms their certainty of it, Romans 8.24. Ye are
saved by hope, says the Apostle: though hope be properly of future things, yet
he speaks of salvation as of a thing present. Indeed it is not with this hope
as with worldly hope: worldly hope does many times fail a man, but this does
never; therefore it is called an anchor, Hebr. 6.19. which hope we have, says
the Apostle, as an anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast. Non dixit
fundamentum, sed anchoram; he did not say a foundation, but an anchor, says
Chrysostom: foundations are many times so firm, as that they are without any
shaking or tottering at all, but it is not with a Ship lying at anchor, as with
an house built upon a foundation: a Ship when it lies at anchor in the Sea,
and movetur, and non movetur, it is moved, and not moved; it is moved as the
winds stir it, but not moved from the place where the anchor holds it. Thus it
is with the Christian that lies floating in the Sea of this world, and yet has
cast anchor in Heaven, and movetur, and non movetur, he may be both moved and
not moved; for he stands not like a foundation that cannot be moved: the
streams of temptation and trouble will agitate and toss him ( O thou afflicted,
and tossed with tempests, Isa. 54.11.) yet not moved, that he comes in danger
of being utterly overwhelmed, for hope is an anchor sure and steadfast, that
fixes and setleth him. Where there is stedfastness of hope, there is
assuredness of salvation: and that hope may be the anchor of the Soul, says
must go before to sound the ground, or hope cannot do its office; for what more
absurd, than that hope should have any certainty at all without faith, any more
than an anchor should have any stay without ground to fasten upon? this hope
(as Hilary notes) is not a presuming of things uncertain, but an expectation
of things known to us: for that cause it is, that S. Paul says, Hope makes
not ashamed. They that hope, says Theodoret, and are deceived of their hope,
do blush, and are ashamed thereof; now says S. August. we are certain of our
hope, for our hope is not uncertain, that we should doubt thereof; yea, we are
so certain thereof, that S. Paul says, We rejoice under the hope of the glory
of God, Romans 5.2. which confidence and rejoicing of hope grows from that
which the Holy Ghost terms (...), full assurance of faith: that which the
Saints hope for, it cannot but come to pass, the Spirit of God would never work
this undoubted persuasion in their hearts, if he did not intend their eternal
good; the promises of God are sure grounds to cast the anchor of our hope upon,
they are the pillars of hope. David says often in Psalm. 119. that he hoped in
God's Word.

CHAP. XXX. Shows, that no afflictions or sufferings shall rob the Saints of
their crown of glory.
Use 2. HEnce we may be informed, that no afflictions shall deprive the Saints
of their crown of glory, no temptations, no trials that we suffer here, shall
be able to deprive us, or to dis-inherit us of the Kingdom of Heaven! what
though through the malice of Satan, the injustice and cruelty of our
adversaries, we may be put to endure much, to suffer much, yet when they have
all done, they shall not shut up Heaven against us, we shall have our reward
there for all that; there we shall receive the crown of glory: there are two
reasons why they cannot deprive us of that crown.

1. That which cannot animam laedere, cannot caelo privare, that which cannot
hurt the soul, cannot deprive him of Heaven; I have Heaven sure as long as I
have my soul safe: but no afflictions can do that; they cannot prejudice or
hurt the soul, not endanger the safety of it, nor come near the life of it; all
the hurt they can do, is but to the body only, so far they can reach and no
farther. Our Savior gives us that comfort, Luke 12.4. Be not afraid of them,
says he, that can kill the body; and when they have done so, there is no more
that they can do: indeed that is a comfort worth a thinking on, that whosoever
our Enemies be, or whatever our afflictions be, they can only reach to the
hurting of the body, but there is no more that they can do: it is a strange
barbarousness of nature that some Tyrants will show, when they have killed and
Martyred the poor Saints of God, as if that were too little to satisfy their
rage, and that the fire of it could not be sufficiently quenched with their
blood; they will take pleasure to exercise fury upon their dead bodies, mangle
them, hew them, and tread them under their feet; yea, sometimes take them out
of their graves, when they have been buried, as in the time of Queen Mary,
those merciless Popish persecutors of the Protestant Religion did by Martin
Bucer, and Paul Fagius, when they had long lain sleeping in their graves. Alas!
it only showed the barbarous fury of the bloody Papists, it did no harm at all
to the innocent bodies of the dead Saints; when the body is once dead there is
no more to be done, as our Savior says. The Heathen themselves apprehended
this, and cast it out as a Shield of defiance to all their Persecutors and
Tormentors: as Laertius writes of Anaxarchus, when he was condemned to be
pounded to death in a Mortar with Pestles of Iron, (...). L^ert. lib. 1. ca. 10.
he returned the Tyrant this answer. Do it, (says he) pound and break in
pieces this case and vessel that holds Anaxarchus (meaning his body) but
Anaxarchus thou shall not touch; he knew his soul was out of the Tyrants reach.
Afflictions and tortures hurt not the soul then; it is only sin hurts that; let
not sin destroy it, nothing shall destroy it: and if sufferings and torments
have not power to destroy our souls, they can never have power to deprive us of
Heaven.

2. That which can never separate us from God, can never shut us out of Heaven:
let us be sure that God is ours, and we may be sure that Heaven is ours: our
sins may separate us from God. Isa. 59.2. but our sufferings, our afflictions
shall never separate us from him: you may remember that heroical challenge of
S. Paul, Romans 8.35. What shall separate us from the love of Christ? There be
three things to be noted in that challenge. 1. That the godly are subject to
all those evils that the Apostle there reckons up; he reckons up seven in all;
and still that which comes after, aggravateth that which went before.
Tribulation or trouble, that is the first: but to be in trouble and in anguish
too; in anguish to be driven into persecution and banishment; in banishment to
suffer hunger and nakedness; with these to be in continual peril and danger:
after all, to dye violently by the sword: these are great evils all of them,
and all of them exceeding one another, and yet it is certain, the godly are
subject to all of them. 2. That in these evils the main end that the Devil aims
at, is to separate God from us, and us from God; as may plainly be seen in
Job's case, where the Devil laid all the load he could upon him, and all to set
God and him at variance, to make him to blaspheme God, and God to forsake him.
3. That yet the anchor of our safety is so firmly cast, as that no such
tempests as these shall ever cause such a Shipwreck: in vain shall the Devil
ever labor by any of these cords to pull God and us asunder; they shall not
make the faithful for their parts to shrink any whit from him; nay they will
rather stick the closer to him: as wind puts not out the fire, but rather
kindles it; so that same wind of affliction which is sent out to blow upon
them, it shall not be a means to put out, but rather to kindle the fire of
their love. God on the other side for his part will never the sooner forsake
them; nay, he is so far from forsaking his Children in afflictions, as he does
then draw the nearer to them. Perhaps they are not always so sensible of his
presence, but afraid that he hides his face away; yet certain it is, he is
then ever at hand, and near unto them, ready to do by them, as Christ did by
Peter in the storm; as soon as they begin to sink, to put his hand under them,
and to save them from drowning. David says, God has compassion on us as a
Father has compassion on his Children; now Fathers have most compassion on
their Children when they see them in most trouble and distress; if natural
Fathers have so, God our Heavenly Father cannot then be void of the bowels of
affection, when he sees us in affliction and distress; God does then pity us,
and those are infallible arguments of his love toward us: now if troubles and
afflictions cannot separate God's love from us, sure they cannot shut up God's
Kingdom against us, but notwithstanding all the hardships they make us to
suffer for the time, yet when we have been tried, we shall receive the crown of
life.

CHAP. XXXI. Sets down a cordial to them that are in affliction, and a
Preparative to them that are not.
A Twofold use may be made of what was laid down in the precedent Chapter; and
it concerns them that are in affliction, and them that are not: for them that
are in affliction, a cordial of unspeakable comfort: for what can more comfort
an afflicted soul when he sees how all earthly joys have forsaken him, and
that he is every day fain to eat the bread of sorrow, and to mingle his drink
with tears, what can more comfort him than to know and to be assured, that yet
for all this, he is never the farther from God, never the farther from Heaven:
the world powers contempt upon him, but God has not cast him out of his
favor: his outward man peradventure is weakened and decayed, but his inner man
is safe and untouched: Earth has denied him peace and comfort, but in Heaven
there is laid up for him a crown of blessedness.

This was it that gave Job comfort, and made him Victor in stercore, made him
sing Songs of Triumph, even when he was sitting on the dunghill; his substance
was gone, his Children were slain, his Wife tempted him, his Servants scorned
him, his enemies insulted on him, his Friends forsook him, the Devil was a
scourge to him, God himself seemed to hide his face from him, yet for all this,
says he, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him at the last
day: there is no comfort in the world comparable to this; so we may be sure to
come to Heaven at the last, no matter though we go thither in a a whirlwind and
a fire; no matter whether a smooth way or a rugged: Better go a fowl way to a
Banquet, than a fair way to a Gibbet. The reward we look for in Heaven is
sometime compared to a reaping, to a harvest; now you know when the corn is
sown once, before we come to reap it, it suffers a great deal of hard weather;
many dashing rains, many nipping frosts, many biting winds, yet none of all
these do hinder the harvest, they make the corn never the worse either for
ripening or reaping: in due season we shall reap, as the Apostle says,
notwithstanding all these. Afflictions are to us while we are living in the
world, as hard weather to the corn while it is growing in the field: they nip
us, they pinch us, they blow cold, they beat hard upon us, yet they shall not
spoil us of the harvest we look for, they shall not bereave us of the least of
those sheaves of joy that lie a ripening for us, but in due season we shall
reap the full crop into our garners: let this then be a cordial to all that are
in affliction.

Let it be also a preparative for those that are not: prepare your selves O
Christians for the patient bearing of all trials that God shall send upon you,
by laying up before hand this comfort and assurance, that no trials shall rob
you of your crown.

Object. Peradventure you will object, that yet they have done so by some --
extremity of affliction has driven them into extremity of despair; so instead
of receiving the Crown of life, they have caused their portion in the second
death.

Resp. Affliction has not caused this, but the ill use that has been made of
affliction: we are to judge of affliction as we are to judge of prosperity:
they are either of them good or evil according to the good or evil use that is
made of them: it is certain, that some that are in prosperity shall come to
Heaven, yet their prosperity is not the cause of it; and so for some that are
in affliction, it is possible for them to miss of Heaven, yet it is not their
affliction that deprives them of it: the good or evil use of either, is that
which makes all of us in either to be happy or unhappy.

Let it therefore prepare us for the constant and patient bearing of
afflictions, whenever they shall come upon us, especially if they shall come
upon us for the testimony of the Gospel, and for righteousness sake; for if the
crown of glory belong to any that suffer, then certainly to those sufferers
that our Savior speaks of, Matthew. 5.10. Those that suffer for righteousness
sake, they of all other are blessed, and to them belongs the Kingdom of
Heaven: yea, if in Heaven there be degrees of glory (as we may persuade our
selves there be) we may withal persuade our selves that the chiefest mansions
are for such: they that most partake with Christ in his sufferings, they shall
most share with him in glory; the faire^^ crowns of glory that Heaven has to
give, shall be set upon the Heads of Martyrs; first the Crown of Martyrdom, and
then a Crown of Glory: as God has called them to their sufferings, so
doubtless he will strengthen them in their sufferings, and crown them for their
sufferings: may they therefore stand fast unto the end, and bear all their
troubles and tribulations patiently, constantly, joyfully: Patienter propter
Deum, confidenter propter auxilium, gaudenter propter praemium; patiently, for
God's sake, because he has called them to it; constantly, for his assistance
sake, because he will aid them in it; joyfully, for the rewards sake, because
he will crown them for it. Upon this account it was, that the Apostle
commends the Hebrews, that they passed through all manner of afflictions, and
cleaved fast to the Gospel, and therefore bids them call to remembrance the
former days, in which after they were illuminated, they endured a great fight
of afflictions; partly (says he) while ye were made a gazing-stock both by
reproaches and afflictions, and partly while ye became companions of them that
were so used: for ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the
spoilin^ of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye ha^ in heaven a better,
and an enduring substance, Hebr. 10.32, 33, 34. Have any of us then received
the beginning, the earnest, the first fruits of eternal life, then let it be
far from us to think of leaving all these rich hopes of eternity, for fear of
the sharpest temporary sufferings; and let me add, that afflictions are so far
from keeping us from Heaven, as they be rather a way to bring us to Heaven. We
must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22.
Certainly, many persons had never come to Heaven, if God had not brought them
to his Kingdom this way.

CHAP. XXXII. An Exhortation to Christians to believe the promise of God
touching their salvation, and so to lay claim to it.
1. NOw seeing God will hereafter crown his people with glory, then labor, O
Christian Reader, in the first place to believe the promise of God touching the
salvation of thy soul; labor to have a full assurance of faith, and a full
affiance in God that he will save thee. A man takes it ill if he be not
believed on his Word and promise, and so does the faithful God, who is truth it
self, and cannot lie. The sum of that which every faithful soul professes to
believe in the Creed, is as much as if he should say, I believe that God is my
God and Father by the mediation of Jesus Christ, through the sanctification of
the Holy Ghost, whereby he has made me a member of his Catholic Church, which
is the Communion and Society of his Saints, to which and to all the members
thereof, and so namely to me, he will give remission of sins, and an happy
resurrection of the body, to be partaker with the soul of life eternal. This
was David's faith; I believed to see the goodness of God in the Land of the
living, Psalm. 27.13. And Fulgentius says, it was not proper only to David to
say so; for says he, the just man living by faith, says boldly, I believe to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. S. August. speaks well
to this purpose; God has promised thee, O man, that thou shall live for ever,
do thou not believe it? that which he has already done for thee, is a
greater matter than that which he has promised thee.

Therefore let us labor to get an assured trust in God and his promise, that
when he that is our life shall appear, we also may appear with him in glory:
which glory though we know it not, yet we know that God has given us the
interest and title of it already, and by faith do stand assured through the
Spirit, that he will in due time give us the full sight and fruition of it,
which none can know but they that have it revealed to them from God? but God
reveals it by the Holy Ghost to every one that believes in his promise, and
hops for his salvation: therefore let no faithful soul whom God has called
into Communion with himself, and to the hope of everlastingly life, stand any
longer in doubt of that salvation which God has promised him.

2. When once thou do believe the promise of God touching the salvation of
thy soul, then may thou claim Heaven as thine own by a due debt: God has
made himself a debtor to his people by promise; faithful promise makes due
debt; the debt in that case arises not from any desert of him to whom the
promise is made, but only the word of him that promises. We must therefore
distinguish between debt of desert, and debt of promise; for debt of desert
arises out of the nature and condition of the work it self, which obliges him
to whose use and service it is done; but debt of promise arises not from the
thing that is done, or yielded to another, but only from the promise it self,
whereby a man has bound himself. As August. well observes, that it is one
thing to say to a man, Thou art a debtor to me, because I have given to thee;
another thing to say, Thou art a debtor to me, because thou have promised me:
debt of promise moves the promiser for his own sake, though there be nothing
in the party to whom he has made promise, that may excite or cause him to
perform his promise. Now it is an act of justice in God to perform his promise
made to his Children to bring them to Heaven, and to bestow eternal life upon
them, for it is the justice of God that what is promised be paid or performed:
hereupon says August. we say not unto God, Repay that which thou have
received, but pay that which thou have promised: let us hold him therefore a
most faithful debtor, because we have him a most merciful promiser: the promise
was made in mercy, the performance thereof depends upon the fidelity of the
promiser, not upon the merit of the worker; the promise is sure, not according
to our merits, but according to his mercy: therefore go to God and say, Lord
thou have promised to bestow the Crown of glory upon all that come unto thee,
Lord we have thy word, there is a promise wherein thou have caused me to hope;
Be it to thy servant according to thy Word.

CHAP. XXXIII.
SECT. I. Shows, how a man may know whether he has a title to Heaven.
Quest. But here peradventure thou may demand, how shall I know whether the
promise of eternal life belongs to me or not?

Sol. I answer first, do thou love God; the promise of giving the crown of
life is made to them that love him, Jam. 1.12. He that is the best lover, is
the best and most accomplished Christian; it is not so much what thou do, or
what thou suffer, what thy actions or what thy sufferings are, as what thy
love to God is: so then the greatest Saint is not barely he that has done
most, or suffered most, but he that loves most, as it was said of Mary
Magdalen, Luk 7.47.
that many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much. If thou have true
says, it will be the fountain of thy love to God, who believing God to be
such, and so merciful to to thee, it swalloweth up thy affections, and draws
out thy love and devotion toward him; which is not unfelt in us; but by the
feeling thereof in our selves, we gather a further confirmation and assurance
to our selves, that we are beloved of God; both which S. Bernard well
declares, saying, that the love of God breeds in the soul love toward God;
and by feeling it self to love, it is also out of doubt that it self is
beloved: now if thou art one that love God, thou may conclude thou art
beloved of him (for we love him because he loved us first) and therefore thou
have an interest in the crown of life which God has promised to them that love
him.

True it is, sometimes it is said, it shall be given to such as the Lord
loves; his love to us, that is it that shall set this glorious crown upon our
heads. The Apostle, Ephesians. 2.4. speaking both of our Sanctification and
Salvation, makes God the Author of them both: and in God, the cause of both,
the riches of his mercy, and the greatness of his love. God who is rich in
mercy, through his great love wherewith he has loved us, has raised us up
together, and made us to fit together in Heavenly places. So S. John says, it
was God's love to us, that he sent his only Son to us, in him to give us life
and salvation: herein was the great love of God manifested toward us, in that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him,
1 John 4.9. Yet S. James tells us, the crown of life shall be given to them
that love the Lord: as if it were not so much his love to us as did graciously
vouchsafe it, as our love to him that did deservedly merit it. But these may
both stand together; the promise of eternal life may be said to belong both to
those whom the Lord loves, and to those that love the Lord: for first, this
love of God to us and our love to him, do always go together, like fountain
and stream, seed and fruit, fire and light, cause and effect: whenever his
love takes hold upon us, it generates and begets in us love toward him again.
We read of Solomon, that he was named Jedidjah, because he was the beloved of
the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.25. and we likewise read of him, 1 Kings 3.3. that he loved
the Lord: he was the beloved of the Lord, and he loved the Lord: God's love
working upon him, it wrought in him again love toward God: now they that are
beloved of God, and they that love God, they have both of them the promise of
eternal life. God's love to them is properly the cause of it; their love to
him, that is only the Seal of it. What S. John says of the love of our
Brethren, the same may we say of the love of God. We know by it, that we are
translated from death to life, 1 John 3.14.
which life is a token of assurance by which we know we shall be saved. The
cause of our salvation is in God's loving us; our loving of God is a token
only, by which we know we are sealed up unto salvation.

SECT. II.
2. ARt thou Holy? thou have hence good ground and reason to expect whatsoever
reward God has promised unto holiness. Being made free from sin, and become
servants unto God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life, Romans 6.22. Are ye pure in heart? they only shall see God, Math. 5.8. Are
ye holy in life? then shall you see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14. Beware how thou do
go on in any sin; answer thy lusts, thy temptations, thy wicked company that
seduce and entice thee to sin, as Solomon answered Bathsheba, when she desired
Abishag for Adonijah, let him take my Kingdom too; so say thou to thy lusts, to
thy temptations, to thy wicked company; if you beg my company, then take away
my Kingdom too, take away my glory, take away my happiness too; take heed of
laying down thy head in the lap of any lust, as Sampson did in the lap of
Dalilah. What said she to him? The Philistines be upon thee Sampson: So if thou
suffer thy self to be deceived by thy lusts, by thy sinful pleasures; I will
not say, the Philistines be upon thee, but all the Devils in Hell be upon thee:
it may be thou expectest Angels to carry thee like Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom, and the evil Angels will take thee and hurry thee into Belzebub's
bosom; nothing but sin will make thee incapable of glory: it is only Christ
and interest in Christ by saving faith, and grace and holiness, that can fit
thee for glory, that can make thee capable of glory and happiness; we must be
gracious here, otherwise we shall never be glorious hereafter: consider the
nature of this glory which God will communicate to his Saints, it is pure
glory, therefore it is necessary that the subjects which must receive it be
pure also; God will put pure glory into pure vessels. What ado had Queen Esther
before she was brought to the King? Est. 2.12. She was to purify her self a
whole year before she could attain to be Queen, six months with oil of Myrrh,
and six months with sweet Odours, then she was brought to the King: shall an
earthly Prince expect such exact purification, before he will bestow his
honors? and shall not God expect our purifying our selves, before we come and
sit upon thrones of glory? can we think that God will cloth our Bodies of sin
with Robes of glory, and that God will put the pure white linen of the Saints
upon the stinking lousy rags of the old Adam? Zech. 3. Jehoshua was a Type of
such whom God will glorify; he was clothed with filthy garments, when he
stood before the Angel; he was to put off those filthy garments, and then God
caused a Mitre to be put upon his head, and change of raiment for his clothing;
so God will have you to put off your filthy conversations, before he will set a
crown of pure gold upon your heads, and put on you the white linen of his
Saints.

Go to now Brethren! ye that hope to be glorified with Christ; consider with
your selves, whether the old man be put off, whether your earthly members be
mortified, or do you walk still in the vanity of your minds, do you still keep
your former conversations? are your lusts your Centurions still? do you obey
them? then let me tell you, you have no part in Christ, you are not the Sons of
God, your hopes of Heaven are but presumptions, you are never like to see God
in glory. See what you must expect, Coloss. 3.16. For which things sake comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Tremble at it, ye that hope
for glory, and yet go on in your sins; your sins will bring the wrath of God
upon your souls, and not the glory of God; you are the children of
disobedience, and not the children of God: if you will maintain your hopes of
glory and title to Heaven, show it forth by purifying your selves as Christ is
pure. Suppose a leper in times of legal pollutions should have pronounced
himself clean, while the leprousie was upon him, yet he should not be admitted
into the Camp, unless the Priest did pronounce him clean: so may you say that
you are clean, and that you shall be glorified, yet you shall never possess
glory, unless Christ the High Priest pronounce you clean.

CHAP. XXXIV. Sets forth the danger of those that are in a state of
Damnation.
THis in the next place may serve to awaken all slumbring spirits, and to
startle all those that sleep securely in sin, that are far from God, and nigh
to destruction, and yet are well pleased with their condition, and are
insensible of the danger they are in: if the Lord would now open their eyes as
he did the eyes of the Host of the King of Syria, they would see they were in
the midst of Samaria, in the midst of Enemies, in the way to destruction, that
their judgment lingers not, their damnation slumbers not; on the one side they
are hastening toward destruction, and on the other side destruction is hastening
toward them: Oh how woeful is the condition of such men! who can dwell with the
devouring fire? who can endure everlasting burnings? Secure Sinners! ye are
almost in the mouth of Death, and in the gate of Hell; and the longer you
continue in the way you are in, the farther you are from God, and the nearer to
ruin; you are very near to hell and condemnation, upon the very brink and
border of the land of darkness: it is said of the watered ground that brings
forth nothing but briars and thorns, that is rejected, that it is nigh to
cursing, whose end is to be burnt, Hebr. 6.8. Salvation is far from the wicked,
and destruction is near them, Psalm. 119.150. If a man had a dwelling near the
gate of hell, within the hearing of the hideous cry and noise of those lost
souls and damned spirits, could he sleep quietly, could he take any content in
meat or drink, or any thing else? they that are far from God are near to the
pit of destruction, and this is their misery that they know it not. Is it not a
madness for a man to be at his sports and pastimes, when his house is on fire,
and all that he has is burning to ashes? and is it not a far greater madness
for you O sinners to sport your selves with sin, while the flames of Hell fire
are ready to seize upon you? Oh have pity and compassion on your own souls; you
would pity a Beast if you should see him ready to break his neck down a rock,
and will you have no pity on your own souls that are now ready to be swallowed
up in the gulf of hell?

Consider, I pray you, that to enjoy the Word of Christ, and to hear it
powerfully Preached, and yet not to be effectually converted by it, it brings
not a man one step nearer Heaven, and puts him not an inch farther from hell
than he was before. It is said, Jude verse. 5. that the Lord having saved the
people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that
believed not: there was a land of Canaan, a land of promise, and of rest
offered to them, and the Lord had made way for them to enter in and possess it;
he had saved them out of the land of Egypt, and brought them near the borders
of Canaan; but this did no whit avail those among them that were unbelieving
and disobedient; they were destroyed, their Carcasses fell in the wilderness,
they perished in their sins: this I take to be a Type of the condition of
secure, unbelieving, impenitent persons under the Gospel: there is salvation
wrought; Jesus Christ came into the world to save; a way is open to the
Heavenly Canaan, to that eternal rest prepared for the people of God: the fiery
pillar, the light of the Gospel is in sight, showing the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven; but when men and women do carelessly neglect it, this their condition is
worse than if there had never been any possibility of salvation; Better it had
been they had died in Egypt, than at the borders of Canaan: better, never in
any degree to be saved, than to be once saved, and afterward to be destroyed;
utter destruction after some beginnings of salvation, is worse than no kind of
salvation at all; therefore in the 12 verse of that same Epistle of Jude, it is
said, they are trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked
up by the roots. I entreat you seriously to consider the woeful estate of a soul
twice dead, twice lost, twice condemned; once condemned by the Law, and then
again condemned by the Gospel; Oh tremble and beware of this double
condemnation. If the river of brimstone enkindled by the Law be so dreadful,
Isa. 33.14. Oh how dreadful then shall those flames of wrath be, if they shall
be fed and increased with the oil of the Gospel, for the neglect and contempt
of salvation wrought by Christ?

Oh how do multitudes of men that are now under the sound of the Gospel, and
have the means of salvation afforded them, put away the word of life from them,
and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life! such will one day (when it
is too late) see their folly, and wish they had never had a Christ nor a
Gospel, nor a Heaven, nor an immortal soul to lose. The Turkish History
reports of Bajazet the Fourth, King of the Turks, who hearing that Tamerlane
had taken his City Sebastia, and there slain his eldest Son Orthobules, Knoll's
Turkish History on Bajazet 4th.
he was so much grieved at it, that marching with his great Army against
Tamerlane, and by the way hearing a Country Shepherd merrily reposing himself
with his homely Pipe, as he sat upon the side of a mountain feeding his poor
flock, standing still a great while listening unto him, to the admiration of
many, at last fetching a deep sigh brake forth into these words, O happy
Shepherd, which had neither Orthobules nor Sebastia to lose! This will be
all the comfort that the despisers of the Word, and the rejecters of
everlasting life, so freely tendered in the Gospel, shall have at the last day,
when in the anguish and bitterness of their souls they shall cry out; happy are
ye dark mountains on whom the Sun of righteousness never shined, happy ye dry
and barren deserts that were never refreshed with spiritual dew, nor watered
with the rain of Heavenly doctrine, who had never any Moses to drop doctrine
upon you, no Paul to plant, no Apollo to water you with the word; happy ye
benighted Gentiles who never had any Gospel, nor a Christ, nor a Kingdom of
Heaven to lose by your Rebellion against Christ: this will be all the comfort
such souls will have for all the privileges they have had beyond others, and
all the opportunities they have lost: it is an honor here to enjoy God's
Oracles, and to be under the call of the Gospel: but to have the word of Grace
and means of Salvation, and not to bring forth fruit thereby to everlasting
life, it will turn to their greater confusion in another world.

CHAP. XXXV. An exhortation to offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven.
THese things being so; how should the consideration hereof stir up to labor
after eternal life and blessedness: eternal life is the stipend of our warfare,
the hire and wages of our works; God has not appointed Heaven for idle Droans
and Loiterers, but for such as labor for it; Heaven is a Crown or Garland, win
it and wear it; it is an Harvest, labor for it, if thou will enjoy it; it is a
Field of Treasure, thou must purchase it, if thou will possess it: it is a
strong City, and must be taken by force and violence. S. Bernard has this
division, Alii mercantur, alii furantur, etc. Some do Merchandise for Heaven,
and they are such as make friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness; others do
steal Heaven, and they are like the Woman that was healed by the secret touch
of our Saviors garment: many invade Heaven, and take it by force, (for indeed
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence) and they may be compared to Jacob
that strove with God, wrestled with the Angel and prevailed; but none of these
shall merit eternal life hereby: but life eternal shall be the consequent of a
Holy life, and the reward of their labor that strive to enter in at the strait
gate; God having so ordained the one to be the way whereby he will bring us to
the other.

S. Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 4.8. I have fought the good fight, I have
kept the faith, I have finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown
of righteousness, etc. where observe, 1. He acted like a mighty man of war,
fighting valiantly against all the enemies of his Salvation, both within and
without, that went about to hinder him from getting the crown. 2. He finished
his course, he ran with all his might, he put forth himself to the uttermost,
that so he might finish his course. 3. He kept the faith, he would not suffer
men or Devils to rob him of this precious jewel; and he was sure to speed, here
was his confidence, henceforth, says he, is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness. Iren. lib. 4. c. 27.
Now says Irenaeus, the good combatant exhorts us to the combat of
immortality, that we may be crowned, and may think the crown precious, as being
obtained by sight, and not of it self accrewing to us: and by how much the more
it comes by fight, so much the more precious it is; and the more precious it
is, so much the more we may love it, and ought so much the more to labor after
it. So run that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. He that runs for a prize runs with
all his might, he runs himself all over in a sweat: I run, says Paul, not as
uncertainly; so fight I, not as beating the air; he ran, but not as some do, in
a cold and negligent way, not knowing whether he should come to the end of the
race or not, but with all earnestness, as one that was resolved to finish his
course. A Soldier that fights in the Wars, fights with violence, he
fights for life and honor both; so much more one that fights the good
fight, even for eternal life and glory: a Soldier that fights in the War,
fights to save his own life, and for glory besides; so a Soldier of Jesus
Christ fights to save his life from eternal ruin, and to gain eternal glory.
Some of God's Children are so violent, that the world looks upon them as mad
men; they may think them out of their wits, but, they may answer with Paul, If
we are beside our selves it is for God and Christ, it is for Heaven and
everlasting Salvation. The Apostle thus exhorts the Philippians, Work out your
own salvation, Phil. 2.12. (...), break out through all difficulties, work out,
work through all, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. What manner of persons ought ye to be in all
holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of
the day of God? as if he had said, I am not able to express, what manner of
persons such ought to be, what exactness is required of those that will be
saved, how they ought to walk in all holy conversation and godliness, as
persons that are in have to meet with Christ, and have no leisure to turn out
of the way of holiness, into crooked paths with the workers of iniquity.

Things of the greatest worth are usually accompanied with the greatest
difficulty, and are hardest to be gained; so it is in the things of the world;
the greater worldly designs men do pursue, the more pains it costs them to
attain their end; high honor, and a great estate is not gotten without much
sweat, and great endeavors; much more when a soul will get an incorruptible
crown, what holy contention is required in this case? Though it be most true,
that the Prince and Captain of our salvation has already overcome the greatest
difficulty of all, without which it had not been possible for any of the
Children of Adam to have come to glory, yet he will have his children conformed
to himself in going through many difficulties unto glory. Moreover, powerful
enemies do beset the way unto, and entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven;
Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and
spiritual wickednesses in high (or heavenly) places, Ephesians. 6.12. now small
forces in a narrow way are able to keep back a great Army for a long time; now
these strong and mighty enemies must be removed by violence, or else there is
no passing: Oh what necessity is there now required to break through all these,
and in the power of Christ to tread the Devil and all his Angels under our
feet, if we will enter in at the strait gate; to march on, though never so many
forces of the world, and Legions of Hell should stand in the way; to contend
mightily, as knowing there is no middle condition between everlasting death and
victory, that we must overcome or perish.

How vigorously and vehemently does the Apostle press this, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch
ye, stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like men, (...).
be strong. Where in most pithy and sinewy expressions, he gives a fourfold
exhortation of this kind, and every one in the Original is delivered in one
word, except the second: the first is, (...), watch you, be not secure, but
very vigilant: the second is (...), Stand fast in the faith, keep your ground,
do not give back: the third is, (...), play the men, quit your selves like men
of Heroic spirits: the fourth is, (...), be strong and of a good courage: in
these quick expressions, the Apostle, as a wise Master Builder, sought out
choice words, that he might fasten them as Nails and Goads, peircing the hearts
of men, and quickening their dull spirits to more vehemence and holy violence
in the great business of their salvation: now where these mighty strivings
after the Kingdom of Heaven are, they are effects of God's eternal counsel and
purpose, in those whom he has ordained to everlasting life and glory: These
are fruits of God's election; because God has chosen them, therefore he has
stirred them up to act violently for the Kingdom of Heaven: Occuliae
praedestination^ indicia, futurae faelicitatis p^ae^agia, via regni, non caus^
regnandi. Bernard de g^at. and lib. arbitr.
they are no causes, but the evidences of their election; their works are not
the proper cause for which the Kingdom of Heaven is given to them, but as signs
and tokens that they are the persons for whom Heaven is prepared; they are
tokens of our occult praedestination, foretokens of our future happiness; the
way to the Kingdom, not the cause of our obtaining it, says devout Bernard.

FINIS.

