THE RELIGION OF A Physician: OR, DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON The Grand and Lesser
FESTIVALS, Commanded to be observed in the Church of England by Act of
Parliament.

By EDMUND GAYTON, Bachelor of Physic, And Captain Lieutenant of Foot to His
Illustrious Highness JAMES Duke of York.

Whom God preserve.

LONDON: Printed by I. G. for the Author. 1663.

PErlegi hunc librum, cui titulus [Divine Meditations upon the Great and Lesser
Festivals, etc.] in quo nihil reperio Sacris literis contrarium; ideoque
Imprimatur.

Guil. Brabourn, S. T. D. Reverendiss. in Christo Patri ac D. D. Archiep. Cant.
Sacellan. Domestic.

To His Royal and Illustrious HIGHNESS, JAMES, DUKE OF YORK.
May it please Your Highness,
TO admit a Centurion of yours into Your Presence, without his Sword by his
side, of which he is most joyfully disarmed by this blessed change of Peace;
which he hopes no threats of murmuring Malcontents will be ever able to
interrupt. It is long since I waited upon your Highness after the Surrender of
Oxford, unto the Town of Uxbridge, where I took my leave of as much Happiness
as could be left.

Your Royal Father of ever Blessed Memory, was then alive, a Confessor Royal,
and soon after Martyr, for the Protestant Religion, the Privilege of
Parliaments, the Liberty of the Subject, and the Laws of the Land. All which
no man ever defended so unto Blood as Himself, nor indeed could any man: For He
was butteressed up by especial Grace, high Undestanding, the Pen of a ready
Writer and invincible Patience.

Not long after His bloody Exit off the Stage of this World, with the general
Plaudit of good Men and Angels, your Highness made an happy escape from St.
James's, where you now are at more Liberty (God be thanked) then before. I have
loved the Play of Hide and Seek ever since, and with just regard honor those
Gentlemen, who from the Royal Bo-peep were grand Instruments to metamorphize
the Pyrocles of their Land into a Philoclea.

Who would not take this History for a Romance, were it not that the truth
thereof is undeniable? How did the Red Rose blush, adorned in a Silk Gown and
Satin Petticoat? with what Art and cover of Handkerchiefs or Gloves did you
imitate Virgin smiles, even to the beguiling those who knew of your disguise?
the Pilot and Master of the Ship never carried such a noble Freight, which was
his Barques protection and tutelary power: Not a Tar-paulin but would have
thrown his cap at you, while the enamored winds followed your Ship with all
speed, more to salute the Royal Passenger, then to forward the sails.

Credentne posteri? Posterity will stagger in belief of the future Annals, and
Credulity it self will stand awhile dubious, when it shall be wrote, That two
such High descended Brothers, should be preserved, the one in standing, the
other in swimming Oak. Properly from hence shall our Ships be called The walls
of this Nation, which kept safe such a Royal Depositum and Charge. Sacra Iovi
Quercus.
The Oak is a Tree dedicate to Jupiter, and no doubt it was never more divine
then in those two Services. The Oak, as it is in it self free from
Thunder-stroaks, so it proved to all in its protection, and loyally secured
your Royal Persons from the roarings and thunderings of our late Bull-Rampant,
who raged like Hercules furens in his poisoned shirt at your Highness his
Escape, and never recovered his spirits after His Majesty's Deliverance from
him and his Bloodhounds. For though he died not presently upon the effugium,
yet, as Queen Mary said of the loss of Callice, you might find the sad
impressions of that miscarriage imprinted in her heart. Let a new Dodona's
Grove be revived upon this Royal Tree, which crushed the spreading growth of
that luxuriant Bramble, which had like to have overspred all the lesser Trees
of the Forest, which has over-topped the neighbor Vine, and the remoter
Olive, and brought the Willow to a just subjection.

Sacred be that Oak, whereby we Shrubs of the Myrtle and the Laurel Grove do
shoot up again, more then cropped and brouz'd by the Vermin of those days. For
all that while your Captain was in a Brown study in the City, and at many a
dangerous Forage in the Country. In which solitudes these ensuing Meditations
were wrote, and did visit some friends abroad, when the Author durst not. Now
as Gentlemen who keep Hounds, send a couple to some friend, and a couple to
another, until there be a free time for game: So I (the liberty of Studies
being restored in Caesar only) have called home these dispersed Poems, and
brought them to hunt in a narrow compass. I am sure they do not run Counter,
nor are at a fault, but all follow upon the right scent, and open in good
music, and go along in harmony (pardon the Metaphor) with the Uniforme Pack.

I humbly present these Fancies (Royal Sir) to Your Highness protection, which
is a Goord too good for their shelter; yet the amplitude of your extended
favor may shroud at once a Captain, a Physician, and a small Poet. In all or
any of which Capacities, it is my desire to be ever esteemed (though at a most
mannerly distance)

SIR, Your Royal Highness his most obedient Captain and Servant, EDM. GAYTON.

To the Favorable READER.
QUod feliciter vortat Academici, etc. That it may prove happy to my Mother the
Church, and our Civil Father the King, and his Ward or Pupil (for that is all
the Wards is left him) the Commonwealth. I have wrote these sollowing
Meditations in a time, when it was not a sin, but punishment to observe them. I
remember very well, that those two famous Prelates of our Church, the Bishop of
Londonderry, and the eminent Scholar Dr. Gunning, with many others, were
questioned for celebrating the Nativity of our Savior, when the third of
September was kept most religiously for the routing of a King. But, Crescit sub
pondere virtus.


The Dog barks, but the Moon goes on: It Is not the threats of men, nor their
unjust oppressions must scare us from doing our duty. I have heard a learned
Prelate say, That Nemo, moritur in officio, a Vicechancelour has not leisure
to be sick: and it has obtained this Faith de facto, that even those
spiritual adventurers I before named, have triumphed over their persecutions,
and they live in honor and high esteem, when the Remora's and Sword-fish of
those days, the Thorns and Briars of their sides are crackling, as under a
pot, in their abhorred Nonconformity. If ever there may be a boast of
visibility, or of infalibility of a single Church, then modestly we of our
Church may lay some small claim to it; which from the scoffs of our neighbors,
and the deplored opinion of most of her own spurious children is raised (Deo
Gratias) like Job from the dunghill, more nich, more honored, more conspicuous
then ever: so that I may say of my restored Mother and King, as it was said of
Marius returning from the Lake of Minturnum, where he was forced to skulk from
the proscriptions of Scylla, Catenae, fuga, exilium honorificaverunt
dignitatem, that is, their Exilements, Imprisonments, Scorns, Miseries, did
imblazon their dignities, and set a varnish upon that Gold, which the evil
tongues of those and these days had labored to rust, and with Calumnies
Canker-eat and deface; Victrix causa malis placuit, sed victa Gatono, I loved
the Church when she was unlovely, when she was blackest then was she comely. A
dis-figured Parthenia is the loved Mistress of a constant Argalus. Bright
Cynthia with all he spots is amiable, and our Ladies in smaller volumes imitate
the pale Lady of the skies. In my Mother the Church her spots are not black
Foyles but red, the Red-letter days being the Ornament of her Year: her
Festivals (my present subject) so many pillars as in Solomon 's Porch, the
beauty and flourish of the building. I do acknowledge that learneder Pens have
labored in this Argument, and I come forth burdened with their just Fames,
and must needs incur the censure of an impertinent and superfluous Scribler.
Scribendi Cacoethes is a Disease incurable, for which there is no dose in our
Pharmacopaea. I can make no other Apology then this, that, Nil est dictum,
quod non est dictum prius: the Mode perchance, the Fashion may be new, but the
groundwork is old. If I prove Scinctillula de Scinctilla, a Sparkle of a Spark
is honor enough. Long sequor and vestigia semper adoro.
The many little Stars in the firmament make a very rare Via lactea, which the
greater Luminaries do neither envy nor obscure: Let my vantage Candle I pray
be taken into the pound, to make weight at least, while your Christmas Tapers
carry the glory of the day. These Apologetick complements premised, I proceed
to prove the Antiquity and Legality of these Festivals, wherein also I am
prevented by the learned Dr. Gunning, after whom to glean is too much honor
for me, unworthy to carry his Books. And first of the Antiquity of Easter, what
can be more reverend for its Age, more holy for its Subject? it was instituted
by the Apostles themselves, kept by them, and is indeed the leading Sabbath, or
rather Holiday of the year; Dies Dominicus non Sabbatum creationis, the Lords
Day, a Commemoration of the Resurrection of our Savior, which was the
complement and perfection of the Redemption of the World. This is the Lords
day, in which his Arm brought mighty things to pass. And for the Antiquity of
Lent, it is derived by Dr. Gunning very far, to whose more authentic authority
I refer you. According to Helvicus and the Cronologer upon him, we find it
instituted by that good Prince Sigisbert, amongst us Englishmen (having first
restored Christian Religion) in the year of our Lord, 640. but at Rome it
obtained sooner observance in Telesphorus his Episcopacy of that See: For then
the name of Pope was not appropriate to the Bishop of Rome only, but was
shared among the rest of his Brethren; but in Phocas the Emperor's days
Boniface the third usurped the title of Universal Bishop, and did affix the
name of Papa to the Roman See only, though S. Gregory before him plainly said,
That whoever did assume that title, was the forerunner of Antichrist: What
need the Geneva Gloss? is not S. Gregory enough to state the Question? And in
142 Lent was instituted at Rome, the forementioned Telesphorus, being Pontifex
Maximus: but as for the business it self, the Antiquity makes no great matter,
no more then our long contentions for the Superiority of Oxford and Cambridge,
though in this present Parliament my Mother has got the right hand side; and
to show my thankfulness for that Vote, I shall tell the noble Suffragators of a
piece of Petrarch (a Poet too, yet of good authority) wherein speaking of the
ancientness of the Disputative, Ergo -- he says, Vetustum illud ergo hoc
Oxoniense, illud Parisciense.
Which does intimate, that Cambridge had no name then, or no ergo, or ergo
fallor; let these Universities be for ever styled (as my Father Ben calls them
most politickly in his Dedication before Volpone) most equal Sisters. It is not
the oldness of any thing, unless it be also very good, makes it praiseworthy;
Stand in the old way, that was the first covenant of the Decalogue, was a holy
Precept; but fight for the Good old Cause, which was a covenant for Mischief
and Treason, was an abominable invitation, and a call to Rebellion. Curse ye
Meroz was a very good commination against those backward Israelites, which kept
their Tents, and would not rise with the Lord against the mighty: but to your
Tents, O Israel, and the new Curse you Meroz of our times was the decoy to
Sedition, Tumults and War, and a spur to England to ruin themselves, to cut
off the best King that ever Christianity knew. The Jews at this day attribute
their long abandoning and dispersion to their rebellion against the house of
Judah; Shall a Jew repent of that sin of Witchcraft, and shall the Godly Party
wipe their mouths like the Harlot, and say it is a sweet thing, and persist in
impenitency, and provide for future Risings? Pudet haec approbria vobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
Countrymen, I am ashamed of your obstinacy, and beseech you to undeceive your
selves. These Meditations, if read with impartial eyes, will befriend you into
the true way, that way which your King upon his Theater of Martyrdom told you,
you had forsaken. Remember the words of your dying Father, of a true Jonathan,
though not the son of Rhacab, but a sober Prince, a chaste Prince, a pious
Prince, and for his sake, who prayed for your Pardon, who purchased your Act of
Indemnity with his own Blood of his Merciful Son; for his Son's sake, for his
Christ's sake, yet in this your day leave off murmuring, repining, speaking
evil of Dignities, and every high thought of heart, and come with old
Barsillai, you and your sons and families, bring the King to Jerusalem, settle
him in his Royal City with joy, and make one Festival more then I write of,
make one Iubilee to the universal rejoicing of this yet distracted Nation. At
this Repentance Heaven will dance, the Angels will be pleasant, and your own
hearts will be enlarged with everlasting comforts. Which is the hearty vote of a
true Son of the Church of England, and a Religious Physician.

That word makes me reflect upon my self, and commands me to show some reason
why I entitle this Book The Religion of a Physician, since that has been used
by Doctor Brown, an able Artist in that Faculty: To whom, for that and his
Vulgar Errors, the world stands still engaged and obliged. I do not do it for
this end and purpose, that either in Physic, wherein he was admirable, or in
Theology, wherein he was curious, I should match my self with him, or labor
to outvie him. A poor Dwarf upon that Giant's shoulders dares not undervalue
his Supporters, or stalk proudly and forget the Stilts and Props are under him.
This Frontispiece humbly shows, that the Author did not totally in these late
years either neglect his Body or his Soul; Ut sit
Men's sana in corpore sano,
ought to be the care of every man, much more of a Christian. It Is true, that
Sir Jeffrey Chaucer had but an ill opinon of my Faculty, when he says of a
Doctor of Physic, His meat was good and digestible,
But not a word he had o'th'Bible.
To wipe off that stain and aspersion from our Botanick Tribe, I wrote these
Meditations, to show the World, that it is possible for a Physician of the
Lower Form to be Theologue, at leastwise to seem to seem to be one: S. Luke was
a Physician, an Apostle and Evangelist; and we own one of the best stories in
the world, The Acts of the Apostles, and the compleatest Gospel: so S. Paul
esteems it to that Physician. It Is certain, according to practice, our Art does
not so much intend the amendment of the soul as the body, especially* if Doctor
Butler be judge, whose advice to a salacious Patient a little intrencht against
the seventh Commandment: But yet that Cure might have been wrought without
infringement of the Precept, if the party would have pleased to have taken a
wife; and then Hippocrates and S. Paul might have been reconciled with a
circumfer sorore^ conjugem, and without Goclenius the cure had been effected:
But to say precisely and peremptorily, that the Physician has nothing to do in
respect of the soul, is more then can be justified: for the Physic of the body
is but a preparative for the bettering of the soul, which is highly eased and
fitted for Divine contemplation, by emptying a Plethorick cask: how sprightful
is the whole man after the succesful workings of a Vomit, moderat Phlebotomy,
or a dose of Pills, or a Purge? it is true, we may be Canes ad vomitum, and Sues
in coeno volutantes, but no man sanae mentis will dedignifie his body after a
noble Wash, but will rather look out clean places, good air, good company,
and endeavor to keep his house neat and gent after its happy evacuations: but
if he does contrary, and take 7. unclean spirits into him after defecation, let
him look to it, lest his latter end be not worse then his beginning, and so let
him be condemned to the Physician, who shall lose his honor by him, plagued by
incurable diseases, and only fitted by long, and tedious, and unprofitable
Physic for a journey into the Conutrey, and so to the Sexton.

A Physician therefore and a Divine you see are not inconsistent, the late
Times made many Preachers Physicians, and these Sovereign days have made many
a Physician Preachers: Cum fortuna volet fies de Rhetore Consul,
Cum volet haec eade^ fies de Consule Rhetor.
You know not what a causer of Metamorphoses and changes one Oliver may prove;
and one good Augustus may prove as successful (and God grant it) to the
repeopling the houses of the Prophets, and rebuilding the Universities and
Churches, as ever that Usurper was fruitful to their ruin. The restored
Revenue of the Church invites and excites to the study of Divinity; without
which endowments and encouragements Arts would be chilled, and Learning
frostbit, and look like the year in October, all snow, barren and uncomely.

Many able Physicians, my very good friends, are already Reverend Divines, and
fit for Prebendaries, Deaneries and Bishoprics; the Urinall is cast quite
away, and Thomas of watering is in the place of it. The round Cap is turned
square, and I commend the dance of so rare changes, which can make of a Galen
and Hippocrates, Van Helmont and Paracelsus, Dr. Prideaux's, Hooker's, Dr.
Andrew's and Bishop Laud's. Proceed in that, or any Faculty, so your Degrees
and Honors prove worthily taken; Ad gloriam D. O. M. honorem Regis C. 2. and
beneficium Reipubl. and studii: or as it is more solemnly spoken at the
creation of a Doctor or Master of Art, Ad honorem D. nostri Jesu Christi, ad
profectum Matris Ecclesiae and studii, etc. these may very well become the
breast-plates of every Orthodox Divine.

And now I crave pardon for this tedious and overlong Epistle, and give you a
welcome entrance into our Manual of Divine Meditations, which I hope you will
favor ably accept, especially from one who does constantly employ his time on
some Scholastic Work or other, whereby he may, at leastwise in wish, appear to
be,

Gentlemen, Your most humble and obsequious Servant, E. G.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON The Grand and Lesser Festivals, etc.
Upon the Nativity of our Savior.
GIve place all Birth-dayes unto this: and oh!
That I could write as Virgil.
He of Pollio,
Or of Marcellus fate, that Kings and Queens
Unto this Babe might come a gossipping:
They are too mean to stand for this High Child,
Who the Magnum Iovis Incrementum.)
Increment of God is indeed styled.
Angels are Harbingers, Wonders precede,
A Barren Womb must teem, before a Creed
For a Virgin Mother; first then a John Luke 1. v. 36.

Of a dry Elizabeth; Mary anon
Conceives, brings forth, and all without a Man,
The Womb conceives more then her small Brains can:
When Angels sound it, there is no place for doubt,
To question it, will strike a Prophet mute:
Old Luke 1. v. 22.
Zachary, how faithless had thou stood,
Had not the Angel Gabriel thought it good
To tell thee of thy Cousins woundrous birth;
Mary, the Blessing and the Gaze of the Earth.
Such Salutation never Princess saw,
Never Ambassador of so much joy,
And yet this glorious Legate is not sent
To the Court, or to the Jewish Parliament,
(The Sanedrim) nor the sharp Synagogue,
(Who read according to the Sicut Septuaginta interpretum glossa.
Seaventy's Vogue)
But to some simple Shepherds this news flies,
Who are acquainted with the work of the skies,
By their Nocturnal Offices, and see,
As if some Stars had shot, the Angels ply
About the Sheep-folds, and then make them glad,
With news of a Lamb born, more then they had.
Whose should it be? where yean'd? in this cold night,
(The hope of the Flock!) alas, will be killed outright.
Be unamuz'd, sweet Innocents, your Crook
And Calendar will both be now mistook.
No Jacobs Staff can reach the height of this
Star, and yet this from Jacob did arise.
The Holy Lamb, which amongst the Beasts does lie,
Was slain; before his birth, designed to die,
So that the Martyrdom of Saints e're since,
Have their Nativities been styled from thence.
But listen, Shepherds, and your pipes lay by,
Attend to the Quire, and Music from on High.
The imaginary motions of the Spheres,
Did never strike such sounds in any ears;
The Voices most harmonious, Persons rare,
A Royal Ditty of Caelestial Air;
A singing Army, without Drumms, or Fife,
The Lords Artillery (but not for strife.)
What a blessed Anthem chaunts this Heavenly Host?
These Soldiers were inspired by the Holy Ghost;
As by the joyful matter you may guess,
Glory to God, good will to men, to Earth peace.
When such a Song shall ever more be heard?
Or when such Choristers? it is to be feared
The Saints are black, and of another tone,
Hatred to men, War and Destruction
Upon the Sons of the Earth; and yet they cry,
All Is done to the glory of God on High.
Away then Sheepherds, to the humble place,
And kiss his feet, view your sweet Saviors face.
What Glory shines about the Babe? the Hay
And Straw all on a fire, make no such day.
The Beasts affrighted with such flames, here gaze,
And run about the Infant as it blaze.
What need we care where us our Mothers lay?
A Manger is Gods Cradle.
Incunabula.
Mary incircled with a glorious Light,
Is in a cloud her self, her thoughts in night:
Delivered of a Son, but not of Doubt,
Luke 2. 35*
Her heart was joy'd, but yet was pierced throughout.
Certain it is hers, uncertain how it is hers,
She does believe, before Reason Faith preferrs:
The births of all men do depend upon
Their Mothers, here the Mother trusts the Son,
Whose Incarnation to himself was known,
And Mary Mothers it, Father there is none.
Upon S. Stephen the Proto-martyr.
HOw shall I write thy Legend? who am all
Extremely bad, as bad as The King and Apostle.
either Saul.
What though I threw no stones, as Saul? I had
A hand in thy Lords Lords death, and that is as bad.
The Sins preceding, present, and to come,
Are all upon account, the cursed sum
And handwriting against us, which stood good,
Until Christ had expunged it with his Blood.
The Jews cried Crucify, their voice prevails,
But every Sin of mine was Goad and Nails.
Mount Calvary the Stage, the World the Cause,
And He condemned for our not keeping Laws;
And every one that does profess that name,
Has for his Badge, Death, Poverty and Shame,
While devout Stephen preaches him, and spoke
A Poniard-Sermon Act. 7. 4, 5.
made the heart to ache
(Like the smart penned Philippicks Ciceronis Orot. contra M. Anton. and
Catilinam.
word and blow,
The eternal Life and Death of Cicero.)
What is contrived? his fate, a Sermon (friend)
Of truth does the utterer to the Scaffold send.
But what should anger them? Stephen you know
Was no Apostle, that is no Bishop, no,
He was a fervent Deacon, had he been
Of The higher Form, he would been the Man of Sin:
No Order scapes their malice, no Degree
Exempts the Clergy from their Tyranny.
If he speak truth, and boldly reprehend,
Bishop, or Deacon, it shall be his end.
It Is not thy Miracles, or Wisdom, Saint,
Though it convince them, shall obtain a Grant; (...)

They are overcome, convicted, Guilt proves Rage,
Not only then, but now, in this our Age.
Look what a crew and crowd of Enemies
Are raised against apparent Verities,
Which Libertines convene, they will dispute,
And Sense and Wonders shall not a man confute; Acts 6. 9.

Just like the enemies to David's Throne,
A line of wicked Combination,
Edom and Ishm'el, Moab, Hagarens,
Gebal and Ammon, Tire and Philistines,
Conspire against Judah all; so here a Nest
Of Sectaries oppose the Truth professed,
And all in vain: then to the old Design,
Make a Malignant of the best Divine,
Blasphemer, Innovator, one that does
Act against God in words, and the State both.
This will prevail, if that the people cry
Justice aloud, good Stephen thou must die.
Thus do false cryers up of the Temple, kill
The truest Props, and Churches Pillars still.
Upon S. John Evangelist and Apostle.
Beloved Disciple, pillow'd on the breast
Of Christ (which was a favor 'bove the rest)
From whence thou suck'dst sublime Divinity, (a) Hensius in Oratione Natalitia.

And soarst aloft, with Eagles piercing eye,
Into the Mysteries of Faith: To thee
We owe the profound arguments, whereby
The Ebionites, and Arrian Heretics,
Socinians, and their late invented tricks,
Are all confounded, and whosoever do fight
Against Christ's Incarnation, or his Right
In the Blessed Trinity, the (c) Eternal Word (b) Joh. 1. ver. 10.

(As in a scabbard is enclosed a sword)
Couched in the Flesh, shown through that shadowing veyle,
And 'bove the Hood the Glory did prevail.
It was not possible to shroud him so, Verse 14.

But by his works his Father he must know;
He proved his Father by his wondrous Deeds,
Than those his Acts, there need no other Creeds.
Believe me for my Works (they are his own words)
These speak me God, these speak me only Lord.
To make men eyes and legs were blind and lame,
It is as to create the very same,
To raise the dead to life, redeem, restore,
To raise himself from death, what would you more?
More if he would have done, his own self says,
Could not (if what he did would not) gain Faith.
The reason of this Unbelief? it is this;
Men hated Light for its discoveries.
Mischiefs in Lanthorns lodge, in Mists and Honesta publico gaudent, scelera
secreta sunt. Minutius Felix.
clouds,
And fly whatsoever their dark designs inshrowds.
Deluding Oracles are dumb, when Truth
Does speak, the Devil himself has never a mouth:
When that the Word Essential is in place,
Darkness and Light cannot join Malice and Grace;
Forced and extort confessions may come
From Devils themselves (who would, like men, be dumb;)
But when the Effective Word exerts its powers,
Both Devils and Men must then be Confessors;
But in his Umbrage of Divinity,
These combined parties dare affront him high,
Call him a VVine-bibber, companion
With Publicans and Sinners, any one,
Harlots, Samaritans, he made no choice,
Rather with Poor, then Pharisees rejoice.
Christ was no Seperatist, only from Sin,
He lived up Love, and preached Communion in.
So did his loved Apostle, whose works show
The Fountain whence those streams of love did flow:
How sweet his Three Epistles of Saint John.
Trias of Epistles run,
And to his last he sang as he begun,
(...). Verba novissima emorientis Apostoli.
Love one another, when his aged eyes
By guides came to his Pulpit-offices.
Love one another, his last text, so prove
Your selves to be of God, to be in love.
So ended this Saints life, for he alone
Escaped the Cross, the Fire, the Sword, the Stone
Of all the Twelve, yet was the Caldron heat.
And the amanded Fires did straight retreat,
And could not hurt his Sacred Person, for
Long life was promised by his Savior,
Not a No Death, as was mistook, so he
In Patmos was an Exile; then did die:
Where lies the Body of this Sacred Man,
Banished to the Isle by proud Irenaeus 1. lib. adversus* Heret.
Domitian.
Upon the death of the Innocents.
Lo, here a company of sucking Saints
(Suffering before the knowledge of their wants)
Their Saviors Proxies, Vicar-Sacrifice,
Whilst He by Angels guide to Egypt flies.
Egypt, the succor now of Israel,
Which did to its own cost them once expel.
Away false gods, and Garden Deities,
No Superstition near this cradle lies.
The Land is Goshen all, and Light by thee,
And cursed Cham a greater Child does see
Then Moses, or that famed Joseph.
Interpreter,
Made the chief Ruler from a prisonar:
Not so in Israel, where the cruel Herod.
King
Slayes without mercy, every sucking thing;
Nor spares his own young Infants, but lets Rage
Arm it self keen against that Innocent Age,
As if the Land were all one Leprosy,
And Infant-blood prescribed the remedy.
O horrid sight! see Troopers on their spears,
Carrying like spoils, Babes had not seen two years!
Snatc'd from their mothers breasts, and sprawling, yet
Take the spears point instead of sucking Teat.
Was ever such a Monster? to enjoin
Murder on Babes, and Mercy unto Swine?
What will not Superstition spare, or kill?
A sucking child must dye, and a Mallem Horodis esse Porcus quam Filius.
Hog swill.
Brave mighty men of War! stout Curasiers!
How well your Victory in Story hears?
Your Countrey's Parricides, for pay do this;
Were ever such bloody Mercenaries?
Usurping Herod, a false King, half Jew,
Can make you murder the right King, the true.
You are the instruments of all this evil,
And for your pay do serve this bloody Devil.
Take heed, deceived Soldiers, or your pay
Will be a little higher in one day:
Pay-day will come for this, nor will it be good
To plead you had commission to shed blood.
Saint John the Baptist gives you other sense;
You must not do to any one offense:
How can we fight then? you will straight reply,
Soldiers of Fortune serve for salery.
Examine not the Justice, nor the Grounds
Of The Quarrel, made to give and receive Wounds.
It Is argued well, and you may justly fight,
And in some cases question not the Right,
Where Lawful Power does muster you; yet then
They are two things, To fight, and murder men.
Just War is lawful, but in your cool Blood
To kill a child commanded, Think y' it is good?
Remember that brave Slave, and gallant Man,
Redeemed from the Oar by Dioclesian;
When that the subtle Emperor did ask,
What desperate service, or what rugged task
He Would undergo, to gain his Liberty?
Bid him propose unto extremity;
Courted the worst of dangers, any dress
Of Death made not his valor spiritless:
But when the business was to act a Rape,
Upon a Dorotha^ Virgo, Martyr.
Virgin of Angelick shape;
Do It thy self, Tyrant, said the Moral Slave,
Return me to the Moans, or to my Grave;
I will not taint my soul with such a crime,
To gain the glory of thy Diadem.
Take heed then, at no Generals command
Act what with honest Justice will not stand:
Murder no Innocents, enjoin who will,
Say like the Slave, do you, Sir, such things kill.
Christians are such in God Almighty's eyes,
Be tender then of such a Sacrifice:
For as that Rachel Lugens.
Rachel wept for children there,
So the Church-Rachel Ecclesia plorans suos per universum Orbem discerptos.
wailes hers every where.
On the Circumcision.
THe Eighth day Ceremony calls, a Rite
Of long observance, a Covenant plight
'Twixt God and Abraham, when his Faith gained
That promised Blessing that this day's obtained;
And Circumcision was the Seal, whereby
That Grant was past to his Posterity;
And not to his alone, but the whole Earth
Was to be blessed in the product of that Birth.
Here it is tendered, in the Temple done,
Legal throughout, as 'twere 'twixt Sun and Sun.
And now the Covenant-maker does submit
To his own Law, which is fulfilled in it:
A Passion but continued his whole life,
How will he end that enters on the The Sacerdotal Knife of Circumcision.
Knife?
Here the first stroke, the last upon the Cross,
Thy Agony then both a greater loss
Of blood: entered in discipline severe,
This Knife is but praeludium to thy Spear:
Here suffering under Law, and there against,
Lamb-like from sheering thou to the Shambles went:
Thy Foreskin now is clipped, but the next Dart
Will pierce thee (Man of Sorrow) to the heart;
And yet nor Spears, nor Whips, nor Nails, nor Thorns,
Are so tormenting as unworthy scorns.
Thus in the rigor of exacting Law,
Blood from thy Infant-flesh the Priest does draw;
Blood from thy side does after spring, that we
Might from sanguineous Rites be ever free.
Water suffices to the same intents,
And Bread and Wine more kinder Elements;
Our Sacramental Dues are easy, mild,
Which will not hurt in the duty the least child:
Take then them not in opere, in fact,
But let us do what those sweet Rites exact:
Be circumciz'd in Heart, our Will's the Knife,
Whetted by Grace, the Mulct is a new Life.
Besprinkled Facesintimate cleans'd Hearts,
And bread and Wine Faith unto Blood converts.
Easy conversion! who can less require?
But he that died, that it should be no higher.
The torment of Redemption, that was His,
Ours are the fruits of that hard purchased Bliss:
No longer, Jew, gash thy unmeriting skin,
The Wounds that are expected are within.
A sad and contrite spirit, Tears and Sighs,
Such Sacrifices will ascend on high,
Grateful and pleasing: Christian, be thou sure
To wash too, after Lavor and the Ewre:
It is not often dipping is required;
Wash often, as Naaman did, and yet be mir'd;
Unless Repentance cleanse the Hands and Heart,
And a good Life, by Hysops purging Art,
Render thee born a new; you are still a Jew;
All A^ana, nay Jordan will not do.
Sign, are but outward Covenants, and take place,
If they be seconded with inward Grace.
His Circumcision and my Baptism's naught,
Unless we are washed and circumciz'd in thought.
Upon the Epiphany.
THough in a Manger laid Portentous! then
Heavens did declare for thee, and wisest Men;
A proper Star (pracursor of thy Birth)
Blazons thy Lineage to the duller Earth;
Concentrick to thy self thy Star does move,
Only to the Cradle of the God of Love.
Astrologers, be your conjectures thus?
We will allow your Art judicious:
But if like Balaam (as too like, I fear,
For gain you will cant) then Asse-rebuke beware.
If your Stars tell what after shall arise,
And point out Christ again, you may be wise:
Have you not found it in some obscure sky?
Which makes this noise for a Fifth Monarchy,
That all the Kings of the Earth are troubled more
About this news, then Herod was before.
Take heed of such predictions, but chief,
When you see men in arms for that belief:
Whom Broughton has made mad, and ready stand.
To take Commissions, give no Command:
All listed Officer in martial
Equipage, only want the General.
How bloody was his first approach? what drumming
And Trumpets shall we have at his next coming?
Then Infants went to wrack, now Men must fall;
For Saints must rule, and they are a portion small:
Few are that number, but a little flock,
What Hecatombs of Goats must to the block,
That these beloved Sheep may have their full,
And plump their bare-bone sides with sinners wool?
But not so hasty, friends, before that day
Most horrid signs the Heavens will display:
The Sun (Body of Light) must darkened be,
No borrowed beams the Moon shall clarify:
When her Light-fountain's out, Heav'n-quakes shall turn
Stars from their Orbs, which then shall downward burn,
And the vast frame of that Unequal, and round
Above our heads, shall crumble to the ground,
The ground to nothing, as at first, then see
If that the Lightnings volatility
You can discern, and tell us where it goes,
Your observations we will not oppose:
But you and I, alas, (all but a few)
Who shall pass death by a translation new;
Shall, like Ezekiel's Vision, dry bones lie,
Look to be raised from mortality:
But then how naked shall we be, how far
From any thoughts of an unnatural war?
That we shall Mountains wish, and highest Hills
To cover us, for acting here such Ills.
For as at Herod's Inquisition
And bloody Quest, away fled Mary's Son:
And as when Peter drew the revengefull sword,
No countenance was given by his Lord,
But a V ae Gladio, and a certain doom
Pronounced upon blood-drawing men to come:
So will his second coming be, to right
The suffering Christian, punish them that fight;
That (will he, will he) will not be controlled,
But say, His Kingdom shall in this world hold,
These men are Star-gazers led out of the way,
With whom false Ignes fatui do play,
And run them into pit-falls; but beware,
Come regulate your motions by this Star.
This Star, the Gentiles conduct let it be,
The Badge and Order of Christianity:
This Star our Phosphorus, which did fore-run
The rising of the Eternal Righteous Son,
Which does enlighten that which rules the day,
And clears all Heathen Ignorance away:
Let stars the Wise men lead, and Wise men Fools;
Let Shepherds teach their Sheep, Pastors the Schools;
So that this Stars renowned Epiphany,
An Universal Guide to Christ may be,
Upon the Conversion of S. Paul.
IS Saul among the Apostles? what, that Saul,
Who men and women to the Judge did hale?
Who held the clothes of those accursed ones,
Did devout Stephen unto death with stones?
It Is strange, but it is he: Stephen, no doubt,
Thy dying words this wonder brought about.
When at thy Vision of the Acts 7. 60.
Trinity
Thou pray'dst, that charge might not against him lie:
How potent are the words of martyred Saints,
Who from the Scaffold can obtain such grants,
Which shall convert their enemies! such words,
Like those of thy late crucified Lord's,
Are of a vast effect: Father forgive,
(They know not what their malice does contrive)
Did intimate, that Providence ore-rules
All humane Projects, bad men are the Tools,
Whereby it works, unseen, the greatest good;
VVho'd think a Salve should rise from shedding blood?
What Judas, Pilat, Jews, act against thy Son,
Proves their own Guilts, the worlds Redemption.
Thus the Salvation of Mankind was struck
(As Light once out of Darkness, Chaos-muck)
From flints and stony hearts, and blessed events
May issue yet from bloody Presidents.
Who could imagine a blood-thirsty Saul
Should mount a Pulpit, and turn preaching Paul?
But many are not called, like Saul, few are,
We must not then presume, or mischiefs dare,
Upon some singular Examples; Saul
And one Thief are precedents, that is all:
S. Aug.
Two that no man despair, and yet but two,
That no man should presume like acts to do:
Then view this form, Champion of the Devil,
Commissioned from the Synagogue for evil:
The High Priests Letters in his pockets are;
And what these Warrants for? such special care,
Have, Secrecy and Guards; alas, to seize
Poor people at their holy Services.
Now to Damascus, full of bitter spleen,
(His sword then his enraged heart less keen)
He and his Troopers march; poor upper rooms,
Look to your selves and Votaries, Saul comes;
But his design is frustrate, for a Light
This Fury and his Firebrands does benight:
See the struck man, whose eyes did sparkle now
With rage, has never an eye his way to show:
The Horseman is dismounted, hurled to the ground,
And his Horse-party all in a sad sound.
How weak is humane force, when Heaven will fight!
One Angel puts an Assyrian Host to flight:
A word or two's an army of such force,
Enough to scatter a good Troop of Horse.
Trust not in wrong and robbery, trust not
In Horse, nor Guns, nor Iron Chariot:
Look upon Pharaoh and his vanquished Host,
By weakest means a heap of waters lost:
Look upon furious Saul, who did rejoice,
His work so nigh confounded with a voice.
Look on Belshazzar, Fortunes Tennis-ball,
Dis-Emperor'd by a writing on a wall.
Thus is this Heroes in an instant quelled,
The Billow-brook, with so much malice swelled,
Tame as his persecuted souls, he is led
To Ananias for new eyes to's head:
It is in vain to kick against such pricks,
Which wound the striker, hurt the person kicks:
New light with his new eyes appears, the man
Is changed a very perfect Christian,
A Soldier for the Cross, to which he stood
Stout to the last, and with his life made good:
Read his Engagements, what set Battles he
In person passed, and got the victory:
How many dangers both of Sea and Land,
Tempests and Starvings, Frosts and Iron bands,
Torments, Imprisonments, Scourges, Stocks and Stones,
What had he not of Persecutions?
At Lystra some, at Ephesus come see
His prize with Beasts, oh Inhumanity!
In Chains led through Jerusalem, and beat;
His death so longed for, some forswore their meat,
They Will fast for ever, but his blood they will have;
Religious Murderers! what Food they crave?
But that all mischief might be heaped on thee,
Nero, thou Prince of vast Impiety;
Paul is reserved for Rome, there is the stage,
Where this most active Saint shall feel the rage
Of that fierce Lion, who had burnt his Rome,
And quenched the Flame with Christian Martyrdom:
He plays and sings away their lives, what other
Usage from one the murderer of's Mother?
Peter and Paul in one day felt his rage,
Two Saints not paralleled in any age.
Saint Peter crucified with reverst head,
A bashful Martyr in that honored Bed.
Saint Paul indulged, as learned Seneca,
Bled by high courtesy his life away:
So, because He a Roman was by Birth,
The Ax dispatched his headed Corpse to the earth.
Upon the Purification of the Blessed Virgin.
THe first and only birth of the chaste Womb,
Is by a long used Rite to the Temple come,
A holy Offering to his Luke 2, 23
Father: he
Was offered thus from all Eternity.
The Priest for ever, the Melchisedeck,
Both Priest and Sacrifice without a speak:
Now in the Temple, on the Cross anon,
Offered, but not in show, as Abraham's son:
Who by a bleating Proxy died, this Lamb
Dies pers'nally, relieved by no Ram.
In this all Sacrifices, Bulls and Goats,
(Whose impure blood, and insufficient throats
Had neither worth, nor virtue) ceased; the Creature
Was then redeemed by the death of the Creator.
The Type unto the Antitype gives place,
This only is the Holocaust of Grace.
But what! had Mary's Virgin-womb just cause
To give submission to these women's Laws?
Who had Lucina's help, or rather none,
(The Holy Ghost being present cause alone,
Both of Conception and Delivery,
Mary was laid without their Midwifery)
No need of them, of this same Rite no need,
For Defaecation after produced Seed
Of a Piamen; but as her great Heir
Endured the Knife when eight days ended were;
Then took Baptismall washing, when from Above
Father in Voice was Witness, Spirit in Dove:
So all these Ceremonies were undergone,
Not for Necessity, or Good thereon
Unto His sacred Person, but to show
What We, not He, unto the Law did owe:
He was the Sampler of Obedience,
A scandal made, but never gave offense
To any Order, or Professions: thus
In's Flesh he pleased the Jew, in Water Us.
So Mary mirror of her sex appears
To the Priest, and the common Thanksgiving hears,
Veyl'd as the Jewish custom was; this done,
She does present her Dove and Pigeon,
The poor child's commutation, and never
That Superstition thought, which they did there.
Then with a lowly duty to the place,
She had retired, but Simeon, full of Grace,
And full of Prophecy, takes up the Child
In's arms (as much as his old arms could weild)
Then sings a Nunc Dimittis.
Swan-like note, "Lord, let me die,
"Dissolve me in this instant, Lord, whilst I
"Have my Salvation in my arms, the Light
"Which does dispell the Gentiles long dark night,
"The Glory of thy people Israel
"Is in my feeble arms now visible.
So ended this old Custom, and the Priest,
The Antheme sung, dissolved, and was with Christ.
A Hymn of the Resurrection.
I.
ARise, arise, Dead soul, arise,
Alas! I cannot ope' my eyes.
The heavy Lethargy of sin
Hangs on my faculties within.
II.
Arise, arise, thy Savior's rose,
Sin, Death, and Hell are conquered foes;
Why do thou yield to enemies,
Whose stings are lost? arise, arise.
III.
Then lend thy hand, thou blessed First-fruit
Of those who sleep in the Land of the Mute:
Say thou, Come forth; and quickened thus,
My soul shall rise like Lazarus.
IV.
All Cords of Vanity I Will break,
Propt up by thee; their ties are weak:
Like unshorn Sampson I Will make way
Through every Sin, and Dalilah.
V.
But if thou do thy Grace substract,
Alas, I can no noble act,
Unless it be to pull on me
My ruin and mortality.
VI.
Yet from those Ruins and Grave-stones
By thee shall rise my naked bones;
And from their Charnel-houses all
Come forth, new clad, at thy last Call,
VII.
Those heaps of skulls with hollow eyes,
Unhair'd, un-flesh'd, shall clothed rise:
Dead tongues shall sing, their song shall be,
My Lord is rose, we will follow thee.
Hymnus Ascensionis.
I.
THe Lord's ascended, see the Fiends,
And their captived Black Prince does clear the air;
A cloud of all his martyred Friends
Receive him, while the amused world does stare.
II.
Gone in a Cloud, but in a Glory
Returns, with all his shining Heavenly Host,
In such a pomp, this worlds vainglory
United never could make, could never boast.
III.
Gaze not Apostles, gaze no more,
But lift your hearts up after, not your eyes;
He is not gone, but on this score,
To make good all his Royal Promises.
IV.
As they continued all devout,
Praying and Fasting, and with one accord,
(Three things pretended by our rout,
Which never yet accorded, but in the Sword.)
V.
At the good time of Pentecost,
The very time we now call Whitsontide,
In fiery-Tongues the Holy Ghost
On them descended, on his Church abide.
VI.
No more Descents, no other Light,
Unless by him who can himself disguise
Into an Angel for deceit,
As at this day's apparent to our eyes.
Upon the Pentecost.
I.
O Holy Spirit! help me to indite,
No pen can of thee, unless by thee, write:
Inspired by thee, rude Fishermen speak high,
Meaner proportions, lower Gifts ask I.
II.
Not such a bright Irradiation,
As was t'enlighten every Nation:
When the whole world was dumb, and deaf, and blind,
It was high time that fiery Tongues then shined.
III.
The lisping of those tongues is speech enough,
We well may see by that Light's twinkling snuff:
For with their persons that exceeding light
(Except some glimmerings) is extinguished quite.
IV.
Those, twelve inspired, Illustrious Heads were all
Thy Churches Rulers Apostolical;
And their Successors are the envied Stars,
At which both Heresy and Scisme make wars.
V.
To out that Light derivative from them,
How fierce these men blew off Jerusalem;
And when the Jew could not extinguish it,
He gave the Light to subtle Mahomet:
VI.
Who blew that Light into a twofold flame,
And dimmed Christ's, and blew up his own name;
So that his Taper is of double twist,
A Mahomet extolled, a deprest Christ.
VII.
Yet still the Light does shine, do what you can,
Either by Talmud, or by Alcoran.
Others (I shame to name it) have this Light,
But in dark Lanthorns keep it from our sight.
VIII.
Or, as when Whirlwinds raise the numerous dust,
The interposed Atoms 'twixt us thrust;
And the bright beams of the eclipsed Sun
Darkened by magnified tradition.
IX.
But 'ware of little bellows, these at last*
Have, with some help, made a most dangerous blast:
Sectarian Puffers joined to the Jesuit,
Have e'n blown out our once Apostolic Light.
X.
Come then, and re-instate thy Candlestick,
Come Holy Ghost, thy Church is more then sick;
Dead as to sight; re-quicken her again,
And make Apostacy's Invasions vain.
XI.
Let Ignes fatui to their Fens return,
Let nothing but the Lamp of the Temple burn,
And let the Church-moths, that in numbers fly
About the light, be singed, and after die.
Upon the Festival of the Blessed Trinity, falling upon May 29. 1659.
WElcome thou double Jubilee; such things
Are dark, the Mysteries of God and Kings:
Uncomprehended that, and this unseen,
Yet we believe they are, shall be, have been.
Enthroned Elders fall, and worship Thee,
Most Sacred and Eternal Trinity:
But our exalted Elders pull down Kings,
And do themselves create Omnipotent things:
Yet we, who love the Old Revelation,
Do as those Beasts (which did surround the Throne,
Not ruin it) cry a perpetual Song
To God, and for the King: O Lord, how long?
Tri-unity and Uni-trinity
Shall stand, and a perpetual Basis be:
Not so of Kings, whose delegated Crowns
Are in subjection to the Doners frowns.
By me Kings reign, is Gods Commission,
And he pulls down, and sets up alone:
Yet do the Heathen rage, and do strange things,
Disturb the Offices and Rights of Kings,
Murder their Persons, and the Heir throw out,
(Kings are no better then Their Lord, no doubt;)
Yet shall the Anthem still the Beast become,
These Christ's both are, and were, and are to come.
Is there an Evil (that of punishment,
Or vengeance) on a cursed Nation sent,
And is it not from him who raises Seas,
And can as soon the peoples rage appease?
Boast not thy self, thou high Babelick-man,
The Lord has hooks for thee (Leviathan;)
And though thou swell in thy conceited height,
With Asies thou must forage this same night:
Nor with a multitude go on, the cause
Is not by number good, but by the Laws:
The earth the lowest of the people will
Open, and rise against such as their Kings kill.
What is it for a season, a short day,
A vapouring Massinello for to play?
Murder and plunder, burn and spoil, and then*
Be made a laughing stock of God and men?
Much better they (who not being given to change,
Nor State, nor their Religion) never range
From the Old way, in which they firmly stood,
(These sixteen hundred years accounted good)
That touch not Aarons Censers, nor provoke
The Earth it self with Sacrllege to choke:
That dare not rob nor God, nor man, but give
God what is Gods, and wish the King long live:
That will not fast man's blood away, nor eat
A Widows House, nor God's, for pure Manchet:
That to their minds perpetually call
Saphira's and her Ananias fall.
Think upon that, and Dathan, and Abiram,
And wave the Masters of blew Adoniram;
That think of Sampson, and that tragic house,
Which ruined all that there kept rendezvous;
Suspecting every hour the like mishaps
May fall on them, or else high thunderclaps:
Move not the Father, it is the Lord of Hosts,
Come kiss the Son, grieve not the Holy Ghost.
Thus if we do, we keep a Jubilee,
In honor of the Blessed Trinity.
Upon S. Andrews Day.
BRother of Peter in thy double trade,
A Fisher first, then Fisher of men made.
How virtuall was thy call? how high thy rise?
What nets will serve to make a soul a prize?
Long time and hearing now is requisite,
It Is not a cast, and draw; one fishing-night,
And so to market: baits and many hooks
The Pulpit anglers use, that is many books.
Thy Master was a walking Library,
(Himself Apollo, All Divinity.)
That Mount-spoke Sermon, full of Doctrines choice,
Not read from charge, but uttered by that voice,
(Had Pondus in i verbis and vocem fata sequuntur.
weight and destiny) was the best Lecture;
The Holy Spirit was thy notes Collector:
So Fishermen instructed, so made fit,
Needed nor rational, nor other Writ
For a direction safe; when he that sent
Empowered, and made through sufficient.
He was the only Tryer, tryes the reins
And heart, whose feat crazed covetous man profanes
With simple and ridiculous Quaere's, such
Which are but snares, and a time-serving couch.
Thus they run Crab-like, counter, backward all
To the Erudition Apostolical:
Which made them Orators, and men of parts,
But these renounce, as profanation, Arts;
As if the practice must be retrogade,
And Andrew forced to turn to his first trade,
(From whence he once was called) to catch by the net,
And Paul must leave the learned Gamaliel's feet,
And mount a Tent, and work Divinity,
Not through his own, but through his needles eye:
The Cast was from the Nets (I take it;) these
Are both for Barkin Church and Barkin Seas.
There is no need the Spirit should divert
From men well qualified, and of desert,
Into a Cobblers stall, since Learning is
The Gift of God, an influence of His.
Fools are incapable of Earthly Rights,
And under Guardian for their want of wits:
How comes it, that the best Inheritance
Is managed, that of the soul, by Ignorance?
As if the blind should lead men in the way,
And Seers into Ditches, or astray.
Unlike Saint Andrew in this Call, let us see
Whether his followers in ought else you be.
Upon the Call straight Andrew left his nets,
The world, and profits are a bar, and lets
In Christian progress: Tell me (covetous Priest)
Do thou alike, who seizest all with Christ,
And more then is thine own, another's bread?
You follow true, as those sometimes were fed
By gainful Miracles; it is the good Loaves
And Fish, that makes so many preaching Droves.
Or can you follow in Saint Andrew's way,
And preach the Word in barren Scythia? Duplessis.

Where were no Livings, nor fat Benefice,
(The lures and baits of your known Avarice.)
New England left, America forsook,
There Is better fishing in Old England's Brook.
This fetched home Peter's, Hugh did understand
The Call of Bishops, Dean and Chapters Land.
Or can you in Achaia, with our Saint,
Endure the Prison, whips, and extreme want?
And for converting a Proconsuls wife, Maximilla, wife to Egeas, Proconsul of
Achaia.

(Not as your Hugh did) render up your life
On a slope Cross, the studied cruelty
Of fierce Egaeas, pain to magnify?
When any Priest, badg'd by Saint Andrew's Cross,
Shall be of life, or state, at either loss;
This on his Tomb an Epitaph be set,
The Fish not caught, he threw away the Net.
Upon Saint Thomas Day.
THomas, Apostle of a Dissident,
Peter after Apostasy is sent;
Distrust is a high crime, Denial worse,
Yet worst of all did Iudat.
He who had the purse.
Despair does barricado Heavens gate,
Such to themselves are their own early fate.
Few are reduced, who, for the love of Gold,
To part with a good conscience make bold
To entertain another God, (no less
Then so is that grand sin of Covetousness)
Is to shake hands with Christ; Mammon and He
Cannot go sharers in a Sovereignty.
Apostasy from fear, (as Peter's was)
Distrust upon a reasonable cause,
As was Saint Thomas his, may mercy find,
Which is bloc'd up in an impenitent mind.
For to despair, and think our sins above
Him that is infinite in Grace and Love,
Shuts out our general pardon; and lost hopes
End in Self-murders, Poisons, or in Ropes.
Thomas through humane frailty did diffide;
The stoutest Soldier in the battle tried,
Is fearful before engagement; but at sound
Of The Trump his spirits rise, fear falls to the ground.
Great promisers do soon and often nest fail,
When fear and trembling may the Fort assail.
Salvation is so wrought, for no man knows
Whether his feet may fail him as he goes:
Commanders that are sure of victories,
For fear of the worst do not neglect supplies.
Reserves in Christian warfare is good art,
And to secure the Rear a soldiers part.
Great heed take thou that stand, for a fall
May fatal prove, when fear will catch at all.
Fear has a fastness still, some certain hold,
Which those refuse that have been over-bold:
To rest unsatisfied is no such taunt,
As to deny after a glorious vaunt.
Come see then, Thomas, see the print of the Nails,
See his pierced side; this evidence prevails:
The evidence of things seen will once suffice,
More happy they believe above their eyes.
Let us no Obloquies upon him cast,
In Christ's acception all the errour's past:
No more look on him in his failings, there
He will (but like thy self) a man appear:
Nor are Saints weaknesses examples set
For men to follow, and destruction get
By precedent; but cautions they are,
Church-marks and buoyes, of which we must beware.
See our Apostle, how in India
Another piece of valor he does play:
See him converting Parthians and Medes,
Brachmans, Hircanians, opposing seeds
Of cursed Idolatry in Persian Land,
Where the Suns Idol at his sole command
Fell to the ground in cinders, while the Sun,
Regardless of the business, Westward run.
Come see him for this fact bound (as those Three,
Who did defy the like Idolatry)
And thrown into a Fiery Furnace, but
The noble Sun those Kitchin-flames out put
With its exceeding beams, and rescued this
Saint, though t'himself designed a sacrifice:
What Stars and Elements refuse to do,
Men dare attempt, for an accursed crew
Of Infidels with Spears and Cymitars Duplessis, Eusebius.
run
Upon the Saint, once rescued by the Sun.
So died our famed Apostle; Calvin hence
Began his Legend, not from's Diffidence.
Upon Saint Matthias Day.
Trained up with the Apostles from Saint John
The Baptist's Doctrines, thou at length art one,
One of an hundred, one of that resort,
Who after Christ's Ascent made Holy Court;
A Consistory of Votaries, still staying
For the Descent of the Holy Ghost in praying:
Initiate first in John's repentance; then
Consorting still with Apostollick men,
It was capacity enough: they err,
Who think one may shoot up a Presbyter,
(As Slips and Grafts are wont, whose secret growth,
Not their own selves, nor yet the Gardener know'th;)
Unlearned, undisciplined, from shop, or stall,
And start to Callings Apostolical.
Fishers indeed were called (the meanest trade)
But did not teach, till they were able made.
(...).
God-taught for many years, yet then not fit,
Until inspired by Tongues, their opened wit.
Called to their memories those Doctrines, which
Their Master taught in Parabolick speech.
Then, so enlightened, gifted by the God
Of VVisdome, who on their obtuse brains rode,
(As at the First Creation Forms were struck
Out of Opacous Chaos, and that Muck.)
What could they not unfold? what Mysteries
Of deepest Knowledge could not these Twelve Keys
Unlock, which could Heaven-doores or shut, or loose?
So with new gifts their old names they did lose.
But now a Cobbler (in existency)
And not translated to Divinity,
Nor able to translate, 'cause of a trade
Mean as was Peter's, will a Priest be made,
And venture at a Pulpit (very blew)
Not from Saint Peter's Chair, but from Saint Hugh.
Preparatory knowledge was required,
Even in those Twelve, which after were inspired;
When first sent forth with neither Scrip nor Shoes,
They did but only carry the good news
Of a Redeemer come, and bless the place
With peace, not yet accomplished with full Grace.
Time did produce that Consummation,
And in the interim this great thing done;
A new Apostle chosen, Psalm. 69. 25
Judas Seat
Was this day filled, the number made complete;
Not all alike in order, then no need
Of this high day's solemnizating deed:
One from inferior order is promoted,
And to succeed by holy lot is voted:
If equal, all the election had been vain,
Seventy as good as Twelve; no Chorah's train
Are amongst these, nor no Church-Leveller,
No self-exalting filthy Presbyter:
And yet the Congregation is all Holy,
But Priests and Deacons under these rule solely.
The Forms of Iew-Church-government remain,
The Offices, not Names, they do retain.
Then welcome to thy high Investiture,
Sacred Matthias, may thy Rites endure:
May a succession of such Pastors be
For ever in thy Churches Hierarchy:
And though the Apostles Names ceased with their Gifts,
(For time and custom names of Orders shifts,
And changes as it pleases) yet their power
Of Order-giving lasts to this hour,
Corrective, and directive right, and all
The ordinary power's Episcopal:
Making of Presbyters by laying Hands,
Is the continued practice of all Lands:
Unless since Calvin did get up and ride,
And set on Bishops his foul foot of pride:
E're since Rebellion in the Minor flocks
Has sprung, and One has caused many Knox of Scotland, and his Sectary's.
Knocks!
Yet the abused world does plainly see,
There is no peace but in this Prelacy.
Geneva's platformes, and new fangled stuff
Will end in its long Beard and little Ruff;
Whilst the Apostolic Successors shall
(As did their Predecessors) Martyrs fall.
And like Matthias stonn'd to death by the Jews, Dupl^ssis.
Matthias, Pastor of the Jews,
Be ruined by false men, hired to accuse
And swear that blasphemy, which all accord
A truth, that Christ was Son of the Living Lord.
Upon the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin.
NOw Israel's bereft of Isa. 9. 16.
both her Kings,
And an Usurper has command of things:
The promised Shilo comes, the Scepter rent
From Judah, then is Judah's Lion sent.
It is a good exchange, in the vacancy
Of a good King to have a Deity.
When humane Helps and God's known Deputies
Are snatched away, Himself is our supplies:
He does resume his Sceptres lent, but then
Woe to persidious and rebellious men.
It Is not the breaking Seals, or batt'ring Crowns
Subdues the Donor, he is above the Lowns,
And lets them act a while to their own wills,
That they may see from whence spring all their Ills:
Injustice, Murder, Liberty, (that Word,
And pure Religion, that can draw the sword
Upon their right Protectors) suffered are
To show the mischief of Religious war.
When did a pious Rebel e're come off
But with his own disgrace, and peoples scoff?
These Sovereigns Hail's and Ave's now set by,
Let us with Angels Mary gratify:
Though this great Salutation, so divine,
Is not allowed so much as in a Sign:
The Day indeed, as it referres to Rent,
Is not put down by Mayor nor Parliament.
Let Us keep it as we may, for Mary's Son
This day proclaimed, was the Redemption,
The Apolutr^sis, the general Pay,
Which solved the world of a smart reckoning day.
Surety and Payment too is this day's boon
Security and satisfaction:
For Surety's (as in Laws Municipall
Are in chief, Debtors, and obliged for all)
Bound for what they never drank (as we use say)
And yet the Judge enforces them to pay:
Our sums of sin were high, and not to be
Discharged but by a Surety that was free.
God did engage in's person to defray,
What all the world could not conjunctim pay,
Obedience for us, which we could not do,
And Death too, that we might not undergo:
The merit of his Person was above
Our Debt, he supererogates in love.
Then for his sake no single person hate,
Who bears Christ's name (as you have done of late;)
Nor suffer the memorial of her day
By beardless Ministers be swept away,
Who in a senseless zeal, some years since, run
Down both our Lady's Day and her Great Son;
And got a name unto his action due,
By Common Council, being styled a Ald. Ir -- Mayor, 1658.
Jew.
On Saint Marks Day.
FIrst Bishop, Mark of Alexandria,
And Patriarch of that ancient See; this day
Is dedicate unto thy memory,
Which does confirm the sacred Hierarchy;
An argument invincible, from whom
And Antioch we derive, and not from Rome.
Yet when the Latian Empire (after Persecutions under the first Emperors.
ten
Bloody Phlebotomies of martyred men)
Began to nauseate blood, and being filled
With such sad sights, did honor what they killed:
And the Spread Eagle to the Cross gave way;
(The Ensign which an Angel did display
To fighting Constantine) the Emperor
Being then the sole most Christian Governor,
And Rome the Mistress of the World; that See,
Above the rest, had the precedencie.
Not so from the beginning: 'twas but meet
The Seat of the Empire, and the Churches Seat,
Or Chair Apostolic, should be together,
The sacred Power of calling Synods thither,
Over its subject Priests, for unity,
And Order made the Roman chiefest See:
Thither appeals of grieved Churches came,
And thence the Fountain of that Bishops fame:
For bodies Oecumenicall without
A head would be, but monstrous without doubt:
Read the degrees and ranks the structure made,
By Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
which Church Government in Saint Paul is laid;
Apostles some, Evangelists, some Pastors,
Some Preachers, sub, and supra, all not Masters;
That had confusion been, 'twas fit the best
Of bodies should with the best form be blessed.
Ephesians. 4. 16.
Christ is the Head, by Joints and Sinews all
Compacted are those parts Synodicall:
No Linsey-woolsy Fabric, Checkered Fry,
Half Church, half Lay, a Chess-board frippery
Of Calvin's foisting lately in the lag
Of time, and good for nothing but the Which Judas kept.
Bag:
But since his petty pawns have had their play,
They dare give Allusion to Chess-play.
Check to Kings, and take away
Bishops and Nobles, Scepter and the Mitre
Are all thrown down by this upstart Presbyter.
Let all true Christians (as the Sea the Collect for the day.
Collect) pray,
Which was appointed for this great Saints day,
That our confirmed souls and settled mind
Be not like Wether-cocks, with every wind.
And puff of Doctrine carried into sin,
Nor yield to a new whim of Discipline:
But let us stand, as in a Soldiers station,
Fixed to the old way, once fixed in this Nation;
Fearing the fearful vengeance that does range,
And will arrest those that are given to change.
On Philip and James, called Minor, Son of Alpheus.
JAmes, Bishop of the Jews for thirty years,
Sat in that first of Councils, of Twelve Apostles.
Twelve Peers,
Who all were equal Rulers, yet the Chair
Was James's, sure he sat the President there.
All was then done in ordered decency,
Nor did the spirit of Presbytery
Then rise against their Fathers, and 'twas long
Before Aerius condemned of Heresy and Schism, for equalling Presbyters with
Bishops.
Aerianisme grew strong;
Which was rebellion against Bishops, and
Aerius a Heretic condemned does stand
Upon Record, and that great Councils edge
Was sharpened against that sin as Sacrilege:
So named they his design of Equalling a Bishop with a Presbyter.
levelling
A Bishop with a Priest, Subject and King:
Converted Jews oby'd their Bishops, shall
The English only make their Funeral?
And bury them alive? first damn their Votes,
Then take their Purses, rob them of their Coats?
A piece of Baseness acted in our days,
Becoming none but cursed Apostata's,
(Such as was Julian) whom the Son of God
Struck with an arrow, as in the Camp he rode.
But let Saint S. James his general Epistle, v. 2.
James himself our pattern be,
And in Affliction's school rejoice, as he.
What do we learn? do you ask the best Lecture?
Patience most harsh, Affliction's sweet Corrector.
To him that can endure and bear his Cross,
His very enemies are at a loss,
Their malice frustrate; Martyr, it is all one,
If thou can bear thy Cross, as if thou would none:
The patient man feels not his injury,
The torment's his that thus does punish thee.
Then let the Pharisees, and envious Sect,
And always vexing who would them detect;
Surprise thee from the Pulpit, where thou taught'st
Doctrines they like not, yet such as thou ought;
And raise this aged Preacher from his The Pulpit.
Cell
Unto the Temple's highest James threw headlong from the Temple, and stoned to
death. Dupl.
Pinnacle;
Thence throw him down, and then (most courteous ones)
Raise him a Buried by the Temple. Eusebius.
Sepulcher of those same stones
With which you beat his brains out, for with you
It Is use, to keep the Tombs of those you slew.
What says our Saint to this? blessed am I
Who can endure, James 1. 12.
my crown of Life is nigh.
Thus in Jerusalem they are made away,
Small difference 'twixt it and Scythia;
Where Philip after taught Samaritans,
Converted Eunuch and Magitians.
Acts c. 8.
Simon, whose name a brand perpetual stands
On those who buy the Laying on of Hands,
After so many wonders in all fights,
At last extirpated the Ebionites:
Twenty years preached this Holy Man, and gained
All Scythia, with Idolatry profaned,
Then in Hieropolis his stage of fate
Is raised; true Doctrine preached procures hate.
He that did doubt Christ's Deity as much
As Thomas did his Flesh until the touch;
He that with Thomas (sirnam'd Didymus)
Of Christ's Eternal Birth was Joh. 14. 8, 9.
dubious,
Dies in defense, and justifies the Son
To be God's only Generation
From all Eternity: the Cross his Banner,
With his head upwards, as Peter's was downward.
And crucified after his Lord's own manner.
Thus holy Men and Tyrants have like fate,
And few of these go down to the Dead's state
With dry and bloodless Death, but still they are
Sable, their Rubric in the Calendar.
Saint Barnabas Day.
THis is the Saint which Antioch does claim,
Not tutelary genius, it is his fame
To be chief Founder of the Christian Faith
By Paul, and him built up unto that height.
Thence first Disciples were called Christian,
(Would it had held till now as it began)
For since men would of Cephas be, and some
Of Paul; what rents are wrought in Christendom?
Had the first Heads, and Leaders of late Sects
Reflected on those self-denying Texts
Of Paul and good Apollos, we had never
Seen such Divisions, nor such Massacre
Of Christian blood. Now Hussites, Zuinglians, Thraskites,
Smectymnuans, names enough to fill a basket;
With Hugonots, Twissits and Calvinists,
Spiritual Captains of spiritual Lists,
Alarm all the world, which stands in awe
Of new Wat Tylers, Leyden, and Jack Straw.
Did these men die for us? O Base Reproach!
And well retorted by old Antioch!
Run back Religion, to thy ancient Head,
And shame to see thy self thus ravished,
Turned prostitute to every Holy Rout,
That in a change shall Saint-like cast about:
Repair to thy first Standard, that is the Cross,
Thy Arms are not for Victory, but Loss;
Success no sign of thy right Cause, no plea
Or flourish for a Visibility.
Nor dare thou cast on Providence, thy deeds,
Whereby Christianity it self now bleeds;
Prayers and tears were thy Artillery;
(Men are unweapon'd when they come to die.)
Such was the Martyrs armours, Patience,
Prayers for enemies, Life without offense.
What poor, or no resistance could these make?
Yet these so violent, that Heaven they take;
Their Regnum Christi non est de hoc mundo.
Kingdoms and their Saviors are alike,
Not of this world, for all the world not strike;
Not to get all the world hazard a Quid proderit universum mundum lucrari, and
animam perdere?
soul,
Which by the adventure must with Devils howl:
Nor (when a Healing the Cripple at Lystra, Act. 14.
God-like act was done, that all
The city would have sacrificed to Paul
And Barnabas) would they allow their votes,
Or be Canonized by such popular throats.
How different those and our new Pastors ways
Their half-ey'd sons can guess, like Barnabas.
They part from Paul (indeed) and Doctrines broach
Which Paul never owned, nor He of Antioch.
A Commemoration of Saint John the Baptist.
WElcome thou Martyr-Saint, I Will sing thy Fate,
Thy Birth, thy Life; to thee I dedicate
These studies, for to thee my College owes
Its name, and on this day thy Legend shows.
All of thee is miraculous, thy Death,
Thy Life, thy Birth, and motions before Breath:
Child of a barren womb, must needs fore-run
A Wonder, and foretell a Virgins Son:
A leaping Prophet in thy parents womb,
Thy self an Infant did thy Sire undumb.
So powerful was the name of John, but wrote,
It made a Prophet of a Mute: thus got,
And thus produced, what Wonders will succeed?
The first of Hermits, this in hairy weed,
Lives in a wilderness to unbeast men,
Out-does a Lessian Diet; the rule then
Was not in weight, but temperance; which shows
That abstinence all Physick-rules out-goes.
Locusts and Honey of the unhiv'd Be
Preserves, and meat dressed in a hollow tree.
The Current runs him sober drink, I fain
Would know, whether the German, or the Dane,
Or the out-toping Britain, drinks such Healths,
Even now, in their reformed Commonwealths.
Mark how Jerusalem runs forth to see
This prodigy of new sobriety!
Which Noah (though in the Flood preserved) did lose,
And Moses bred of the waters, did not choose:
But as at first Creation, on the waves
The Plastic Spirit moved, so here it saves.
What cannot water do? weakness is lost,
When that the Inmate is the Holy Ghost.
Water inflames, inspires, blows up, warms Grace,
And washes souls, but used to cleanse the face.
Besprinkled with such Holy Water, Jew,
Thou art re-born, and circumcised anew.
The Sacerdotal Knife cuts not the Evil,
These drops drive out the World, the Flesh, the Devil.
How highly ought this Sacrament be prized;
Be then baptized, but be not re-baptiz'd!
John was no Anabaptist; people came
But once to the Font, and Christ did just the same.
A seven-times washing was for Naaman,
One dipping will suffice a Christian:
Preparatory Graces bring in God,
He fits a lodging for his own abode;
First John, and then a Jesus; Penance has
The happiness to usher saving Faith.
Safe in thy Desert, had thou there remained,
Prophet, thy virtues to the Court's proclaimed,
Where thy rough Doctrines, thy Destructions are,
So did our Court dispatch a long-lived Parr.
His by a change of diet, no excess
Killed thee, the Court was a fine wilderness:
Herod the Beast of the Forest, whet his sword,
And did behead our Prophet for a word,
For a non licet to his lawless lust,
First to the prison, then the Axe thou must.
Methinks in these our later days I see
(Great Saint) thy now re-acted Tragedy;
Only our age out-strips that horrid thing,
And does behead not only Priest, but King.
Thou that but once, and that in the womb, did dance,
(For joy thy Savior to thee did advance)
Art at a dancing Ladies loose request,
Deprived of life, but by it higher blessed:
So that thy triple Baptism stands good,
By Water first, next Spirit, then by Blood.
On the Feast of Saint Peter.
WHat honor (Great Apostle) is not due
To thy renowned Confession? first you
(I am no Thover) started that great word
Which made that Article, Lord from the Lord,
And God of very God: no Flesh can tell
(Unless inspired) whence that great Issue fell.
The Eternal Generation was too high
For mortal reach, and is a Mystery
Revealed, not understood, the motions know
Of Divine actions in thick darkness go,
Or clothed in light that is inaccessible
(Hid by their brightness, Angels cannot tell,
Though they desire to peep into it) and
Shall our unequal souls hope t'understand?
Not Peter, while he spoke, did comprehend
Himself; if so, he would not denied it before his end.
Yet worthily thy name was changed, a Stone,
A Rock sirnam'd for this Confession,
And upon it, not thee, the Churches Faith
Is laid, may I believe, as Peter says.
I do believe by the same Grace, not boast
My self, but give the praise to the Holy Ghost.
Peter did so, the honest Fisherman
Nere dreamt of what the Petropolitan
And Denizens of Rome have since contrived,
Nor would have worn three Coronets had he lived:
The Chair Infallible, perchance that he
Might well have wished before's Apostacy.
How weak was the Man Peter, for to lay
A Basis on, should last until this day?
When that a wave, and something weaker too,
A pitiful wench made him his faith forego.
But weakness is made strong, when Tears precede,
And high Repentance washed away that deed.
I don't upbraid thy known Apostasy,
But balance it with their new Primacy,
Which Roman Catholics, kind souls, bestow
On thee, insensible of things below.
We all allow thee the First Confessor,
Where James was President in Chair and Power.
We all confess thee praised by Christ, when one
Was more beloved, the Eagle-ey'd Saint John.
We never deny to thee the Keys of Heaven;
But of those Keys there were, beside, Eleven:
We all applaud thy Heaven-dropt sheet, whereby
The Faith broke forth into Community.
We all confess thee Apostle of the Jews,
(Though now the Roman thee their Primate choose.)
Unkind repulse! when Paul to the Romans wrote
Alone, and to their Faith such honor got.
We allow thee Bishop of Christ's Flock,
Twelve equal Pastors, a most Royal stock.
Feed then, successive Angels, that is your care,
Feed the poor Lambs, they are Wolves that do them tear.
The Legend of Saint James, called Major, one of the Sons of Zebedee, and
Apostle of Spain.
ARt thou Red Lettered? Yes; the Almanac
Preserves thee; though the Holy Day we lack,
We keep the Bristol and other places.
Fair: 't had been good policy,
If that the Church (could it these times foresee)
Had made the Twelve Apostles Marts, then they
Might all, whereas now some, have a Saints day.
Dame Zebedee, so full of zeal, never thought
His Honor should to so low ebb be brought:
The right hand and the left was her bold boon,
And that in Heaven her sons, both James and John,
Might be advanced; how would the woman pout,
If she had known on earth they were put out,
And that he is denied the pay by some,
Of honor to his glorious Martyrdom.
Herod thy person murdered, Holy Saint,
Our mighty men of War thy Day: why may not
We hope to see, as in those days befell
Our Herod's, as that Acts c. 1.
Herod, fall as well.
It was not long before Revenge did seize
That Deify'd Orator, struck in a trice.
Pimme had not all the worms, it once may please
Vengeance to smite (not only Conscience)
But their Apostate body's with close Lice,
Who only spoil and murder solemnize:
But these and Herod differ in some things,
Herod kills Prophets, These both Them and Kings.
Herod imprisons for popular applause,
How many have been cooped upon that cause?
But by a finer word; Imprisoning
Securing's called, Robbing is Sequestring:
But Herod speeches it, and gives no praise
To God; O but these do in our good days:
There Is not a Murder, not a Plund'ring, but
They do the Pulpits with Thanksgivings glut.
Had you now lived (you Sons, sirnam'd, of Thunder)
Then fire from Heaven you could not have asked under,
Nor would have been denied; but it is as well,
Their fire is sure, if not Above, from Hell.
Upon the Legend of Saint Bartholomew.
THe Gospel's sound, though the whole world is run,
Now hear it preached, where Inmate is the Sun
On India's parched ground, the East, the West,
(Wealth that few Merchants get) and yet the best.
Who dare upbraid the Lord at latter day,
And say, this news did never come in's way?
Shall he be damned for what he could not know?
No, Arguer; thou shall not, if it be so:
No Gospel slighted, no Apostle slain,
No Faith rejected, no eternal pain:
God by no absolute Decree does list
Men to damnation (maugre Calvin's Twist.)
Conditional are his Decrees, and they
Mulcted alone, who gainsay, disobey.
We fondly therefore to Iamaica sent,
To convert Indians, (when for Gold'twas meant.)
Saint Bartholomew, full sixteen hundred years
Ago (as in Eusebius Chronicon appears)
Preached to those Heathen Folk; who did not weigh
The matter, so he went into Armenia.
What if the Indians prized more their Gold
Then this rich Margarite? will the reason hold?
(Because the Negroes will not Faith receive,
Because Apostle-taught, they will not believe:)
Is therefore God unjust? whose sentence is,
Whosoever believes in Christ, Salvation's his.
His acts of Grace and his good Pardons be
In Law and Gospel never Covenant-free.
Repent, and be secure, proud Nineve,
Believe, and enter my Felicity:
They therefore put the Obex, they bolt out
Themselves, who are or Reprobate, or doubt.
Armenia shall rise up against India
And thank her for her Refuse, she will say
Our King converted by Saint Bartholomew,
His Folly our great Idol overthrew:
And we exampl'd by a pious Prince,
Received the Faith, and have been Christians since.
We honor him as our Great Saint, and boast,
That e're his Sacred person touched our coast:
But it proved bloody to him, for a King
Astiages by name (O horrid thing!)
Apostate to the Faith, and full of spite
To those that did, and would continue right
(After so many wondets done, such shoales
Of preaching Bartholomew's converted souls)
Condemned this Saint to a most cruel end,
Duplessis.
Flayed him alive, and raw to the earth did send.
But thou, Great Saint, art one of the Twelve, that shall
Luc. 22. 30.
Judge the whole world, thy Savior will exalt
Thee for a witness of his Judgment last,
When sentence on all Flesh by him is past.
Then shall Astlages and the Jews see
Him whom he flayed, they cast out, Acts 5. 28.
glorified be.
Upon Saint Matthew Apostle and Evangelist.
FRom the Receipt of Custom called? what? leave
Excise and Tax-money, the Banck? and cleave
To Poverty and Preaching? Blessed Saint!
Thou came alone, and did companions want.
Few of that tribe will live on parables,
The scent of Gain a great deal better smells
Then the perfumes of Prayer, though the Incense fly,
And please the Nostrils of a Deity:
Heaven and earth too, the Lawyer will content
To barter this for that, he will not indent:
Sell all? leave all? give to the poor? be poor?
Give him his parchments, farewell Savior.
O bunch of Camel-wealth! damned Avarice!
That stops the narrow pass of Paradise;
That strait-ey'd Needle cannot entered be,
Till all that Mountain of Monopoly
Be wire-drawn into such slender lines,
A Spider works not smaller, finer twines.
Thus stretched, and beat, and crushed, impaired, and lank,
He may arrive to the Elysian-bank;
For Charon will not ferry in his light
Cork-vessel any Fare of heavy weight:
Spirits are all his passengers, no gross
Usurers, nor gluttons abominous:
Such Loads will sink his Boat, and themselves too,
And then in Styx they will stick, amongst a crew
Of Snakes and Vipers, in most noisome mud,
Which like themselves never was, never can be good,
Matthew forsakes these cloggs, this heavy lead
Casts off, 'twas but his Foy, his own God-speed.
Wrestlers and Racers strip unto the shirt,
Any superfluous weight will do them hurt:
Away with Luggage and Impediment,
A Wife, a Farm, Honor, Merriment,
May lose the Goal. Run, run, Atlanta, fly,
And let those rubs, the Golden Apples lie:
A Christian life is Race and Warfare too,
A strict Militia we undergo:
Hard Duty, little Pay, strong Enemies,
A passage blocked with Blood and Injuries:
Yet all must be encountered, all overcome,
Or else no Laurel, no Elysium.
Our Banner is the Cross, the Standard died
In Gules of our chief Captain crucified,
Like General, like Soldiers, so he
Was made triumphant first, and so must we:
Whether the Indies, or The two places where S. Matthew preached and converted;
in the later he was murdered.
Ethiopia
Be our sad Field (there was Saint Matthew's day;
There he did fight his last) we must march on,
The word is Martyrdom, the Van is gone,
And the prime Leaders of the Front are seen
Blazoned with Crosses, Swords and Axes keen,
With Sawes and poisoned Cups, and Gridirons hot,
Caldrons of boiling Lead (all to the pot)
And we, the following Rear, must track by track,
Tread the same way, and end in the same Rack.
All Is but a death, the acute Stone, the Gout,
Ulcers in Reins and Bladder bring about
Their Persecutors fate. But oh! they die
Not once, but are revived to misery.
Death after death, a second Fate does seize
Those, besides tortures of consciences.
When quiet are the passages of Saints,
Their ends are Charity, and no Complaints.
Forgiveness fills their mouths, Praises their heart,
The Tyrant's hurried hence, but these depart.
Upon the Festival of S. Michael.
WHat? Wars in Heaven? Angels disagree?
Ovid hence took his Gigontomachie,
Or else from Babel: so that Pelion,
Pindus and Ossa (batteries of stone)
Were these bold Builders Babel, that whereby
They thought to have scaled Olympus 'bove the sky.
Unequal force! like Titans saucy Race,
Instead of Juno a void cloud embrace*
So Satan, and Abaddon, and his train
Conspired against the Highest (all in vain.)
Michael does muster up his Holy Host,
(Who in their confirmation only boast)
Propt by Divinity and their Chieftains power,
That Grand Devourer they did soon devour.
Scattered those Legions of unjust array,
Who took up arms, as Lucifer bid say,
For God, and Hierarchy, and Covenant took
To make him glorious, but it was but a hook,
A snare, a Devil-trepan to list gulled sprights,
And cozen them of their eternal Rights.
Dethroning was the intent; the Juncto-Devils,
When they cry peace and truth, contrive all evils.
But Michael understood their cloak'd design,
And did the Underminers undermine.
God and his Angels, was the Devils word,
For God alone this Angel drew the sword.
No power concurrent, no nor Parliament,
Nor any trick of Satan's slye Invent,
(As that their God should lesser be in power
Then all his Angels, and then each one more.)
These Engines would not serve, for Michael
Knew their false coynage, Art for to rebel,
And hating daubed Hypocrisy worse far
Then their Hostility and open War,
Bade the Usurper and his specious tail
Avaunt, and in Gods name he did prevail.
Down fell that Fiery General and's crew,
And Michael did his Victory pursue;
Left not a Devil there, not to accuse,
(Whom first he did mislead, and then traduce.)
But woe to us! us Men! since this defeat
Expulsed Satan makes the Earth his seat,
And makes base men his Agents, which outdo
In villainy him and his Angels too:
He and his fellow-Dragons about fly,
Armed with all malice and malignity,
Against the Seed of the Woman; which blessed Seed,
Though bruised in the Heel, yet broke the Vipers head;
Yet wounded, not subdued, he fights in blood,
And his last station far a while makes good.
Heaven given for lost, and routed of all bliss,
To people Hell his dire ambition is:
And to enlarge that Kingdome's his desire,
Though King and subjects all must dwell in fire.
The world being his de facto, there he spied
The Lamb's most fair, but yet distressed Bride,
(Her Bridegroom for a time in Heaven contained)
His spotless Spouse he hoped to have profaned,
Made her Adultresse, and abjure her Head,
(Because not seen) and take another bed.
But she stood chaste and firm, defied his suit,
Then Lust turned Rage, and he did cast about
How to confound, whom he could not persuade;
(All Stratagems in vain) he will invade:
Her and her children this pursuer drives;
Into the Wilderness, yet there she thrives;
Short grass is sweet; afflictions smooth the face,
Nothing so fair as persecuted Grace.
The blubbered eyes of Saints their Ceruse proves,
The choicest Unguent which their High God loves.
See how her children (pretty Lambkins) run,
(Not a whole skin their plundered backs upon)
Some worried by fierce Wolves and Dogs of prey,
As in the wilderness they pass away:
Nor heeds the Serpent, though he knows full well,
And his cursed Emissaries too can tell,
They should not hurt nor wrong these Little Ones,
Because that Angels are their Guardians,
And intimate their sufferings in God's ear,
Who Is slow to wrath, but will not long forbear:
It Is for a time and times; but then come woes
To this poor persecuted woman's Foes.
Amen say Heavens, Angels fill the Quire,
Triumphant be the Church that is purged by Fire,
That through the Wilderness and bloody Sea,
Shall with her Bridegroom keep long Iubilee.
Upon Saint Lukes Day, Physician and Evangelist.
NO Calling is exempt from Grace; why, Priest,
Do thou exclude? when an Evangelist
Of a Physitian's made, who can deny
This to be true Religio Medici?
See, our decry'd profession here is purged,
Let Atheism never against us more be urged,
Cleans'd and baptized in thee (most eloquent Saint)
We bid those foul aspersions avaunt.
Then for our lives, who ever lived with less
Then Gallen, and renowned Hypocrates,
Who not by Lessius or Cornarus weight,
(Measures of abstinence deviz'd of late)
Did scale out Diet; that is tyranny,
These were the standards of sobriety:
And as a Prince in Physic should, they both
Obliged their willing Patients by an oath:
A voluntary Sacrament, and why
Is not this too Religio Medici?
Fasting and abstinence are Harbingers
To Divine Gifts, the one the other infers.
No Devil with his tricks can circumvent
A fasting John, or Jesus in his Lent.
And those fast always, who do sparing feed,
Then are Physicians a most sacred Seed.
It is the staple Doctrine of my Art,
Which to our loss, to the world we do impart:
Be temperate and live; be temperate,
And be an Hercules, be wise, be that,
And be a Saint; Angels will be our guests,
If we do treat them with such frugal Feasts.
Physicians Diet is like Angels Food,
A very little, but it is very good.
Now for our Acts, Saint Luke his Book of Acts
Shall be our Era and our first Epacts.
To thee (Divine Historian) we owe
What of our Saviors Life and Death we know:
None has so fully wrote; and learned Saint Paul
Calls thine his Gospel, as if that were all.
Saint Paul had not been known, but that for thee,
To thee we owe the Church-Chronologie.
Not such a History does Livy write,
Compared with thee deep Tacitus is light.
Where such a piece can any Annals boast,
As the Descending of the Holy Ghost?
When all the sacred Apostolic Quire
Spoke all Tongues with Tongues, out of Mouth in Fire;
Not Jupiters escapes, nor the Iliads,
Nor he who wrote of wandering Trojan Lads,
Comes near Saint Paul's escapes and voyages,
Aenea's Storms in famous Virgil's dress
Sounds not so high as thy Saint Paul's dire wrack,
When his wind-beaten Barque did bulge and crack
Into a thousand pieces; when Heaven powers
Another Sea into the Main in showers:
When Lightning was instead of Sun, and the air
In sheets of flashes had its lights repair:
When Thunder did with noise of high winds vie,
And did all voices, but Saint Paul's, outcry.
Then in that Storm the greatest Light was he,
He like a Rock in all that tyranny
Of winds and Sea, stood unremov'd, and brought
Each soul to Land, each splinter was a Boat;
And his all-shatter'd Ship came safe to bank,
Each passenger was shipped but on a plank.
So floated this great Navy of one Bark,
And Paul the Pilot of that swimming Park.
When such an Orator as thy Saint Paul?
Or such Oration as from him did fall?
The famed Philippicks of Demosthenes,
And Cicero's Catalines, and Anthony's
(Gallant, but fatal speeches) have ^o name
With his Oration of eternal fame.
Whose killing words and language Spirit-shook
The gaudy Felix.
Governor, that bribes had took,
And made a Agrippa.
King his Convert. These (Saint Luke)
Are the great subjects of thy worthy Book.
Physician (...), let me
In Physic and in Gospel follow thee,
E'ne unto Roman Martyrdom, when all
But thee alone forsook The Apostle The second of Paul to Timothy.
Paul.
On Simon and Jude's Day.
BRothers in Blood, and Blood (a double Die)
For Martyrdom is a Nativitie
Justly in Church-account, Thaddaean Race,
Of meanest Parentage, of meaner Grace.
We shall not blazon now your Fishing-coates,
Your Church-Nobility's not from your Boats,
But Pulpits, not unlike your Trades before,
Fish-nets for souls almost in every shore.
How many at a Cast Saint Peter caught!
Acts 4. 4.
Five thousand from a Sermon, mighty draught!
Simon, no less adventure did thou make
In Egypt, where thy holy baits did take
That superstitious people; won by thee,
To leave their manifold Idolatry.
Thence to Jerusalem thou art recalled,
And James thy brother stoned, there installed
Bishop in's place, remain in Persia,
Or come unto the Jews, the same's your pay,
This is the wages, this good Bishops fate,
(That on the Altar, not on the Trencher wait)
To hang like St. Simon crucified under Atticus.
Simon, or like's brother St. Jude muder'd at E. dessa. Dupless. Eusebius.
Jude,
Be murdered by a Pagan multitude.
Old Crucify in vulgar mouths is loud
Still, and as high as for our Saviors blood,
Whom in his Priests they daily crucify,
And till he come last will this tyranny.
Then in that Monarchy (be it called the Fifth)
He that was first lift up will these up-lift
Unto Tribunals, seats of Glory, where
All their accusers naked shall appear
In thousand horrors of confused mind,
Looking for shelter-mountains, but none find:
Wishing the Seas vast entrails would receive
Their souls; or, that they are at all, they grieve:
Annihilation were a kindness, all
Twisse's distinctions metaphysicall
Give not a grain of comfort: Not to be
Is better then to be in misery.
Better be never born, then born for Hell,
And for God'sglory in pains lasting dwell.
The Millstone in the Sea (if it could hold
The swallowed captive) that wretch rather would,
Then for's The general Epistle of Jude.
Apostasy, and hating Light,
Lie in the blackness of the darks of Night.
Upon All Saints Day.
WIll you behold this glorious company
In Earth or Heaven first? there cannot be
(Take all Imperial pomp) so rare a show,
Whether the Scene above be, or below.
Let then their first Representation be,
As they stood here in the vale of misery,
In the Church-Militant: how they appear
With cheerful looks, but ragged every where?
Poor in Apparel, but in Mat. 5. 3.
Spirit more,
You Will meet him in the streets and at your door,
In Tears, in Sighs, in many doleful tone
Ver. 4.
Bemoaning others, none does them bemoan:
Ver. 5.
Calm as the Lew at Sea, yet themselves blown
By Envy's blasts and Sequestration
Upon the Quicksands of deep Wants, yet then
They are still meek and most becalmed men:
Nay, though their Lenten faces, and dry cheeks,
And shrivel'd stomachs for cold water seeks,
(And get it not) their hunger does increase,
And they thirst on; but it is for Ver. 6. Ver. 7.
Righteousness.
The mercy that they cannot find, they give,
They will not hurt the poorest worm alive:
For Ver. 8.
innocence is in their Hearts and Hand,
No Wool, no Snow so white on Cotswold-lands,
As are their thoughts and actions; their eyes
And often lift-up hands are known to'th'skies;
And in Contentions and Domestic Jarres,
Or when Ambition raises Civil Wars,
For Ver. 9.
Peace is all their Intercession:
No armed Petitioners, which will not lay down,
Unless they have their wills; which when they have got,
They are undone and ruined by the Vote.
No, these, though in their just requests denied,
Rest with repulsed content, and satisfied:
Or if a Verse 10.
Persecution on them fall,
They don't recalcitrate, but take it all.
Call 'um Malignants, Enemies to the State,
(Words on good Christians stamped too much of late)
A Sigh perchance is sent, or look on high,
But not a word provoking, rather die;
And for the Name of Jesus, and his Truth,
They Verse 11.
suffer gladly, open not the mouth.
Thus in their lower garments they appear,
Now in their upper Robes, triumphant tire,
Please to behold them: Those, those tattered things,
The scorn of the world, the foot-balls of proud Kings;
Those are the persons now arrayed in Rev. 7. 9.
white,
In garments which surpass the brightest light;
With Ensigns of their blood-got Victories,
Palms in their hands; these are the Martyrs, these
They whom despightfull men did hale like Rogues,
And hurrie up and down to Synagogues,
Unto high Courts of Justice; first by throats
Of people murdered, then by Judges votes.
How hear they now? another hue and die
Their actions bear: Hark! there it is Loyalty:
What here was Treason called: Disturber here
Is there a Laureat for a Peacemaker:
The Innovator here is there on high
With Angels all in Uniformity,
All in one voice; one sacred Anthem's sung,
That holy Quire, and sacred Saints among.
The Spirit there, though present, and still by,
Likes their set Form and holy Liturgy.
Amen begins the Hymn, Amen concludes,
And this is chanted out by multitudes,
And tongues, and people of a several show,
Who learned these Anthems (they there use) below.
Where Is their accusers now? they are slunk away,
And not a man has any thing to say:
The mouth of all Iniquity is shut,
And Satan to perpetual silence put.
What shall we do? who live in the sad age,
Where all these Combatants were on the Stage;
Some flying up in fire, some flowing on
In streams of their own blood to the Lambs Throne;
We follow must, and with long steps adore
These Hero's, that shall never suffer more.
Who never shall thirst, nor hunger, nor drop tear,
But with the Lamb keep Iubilean year.
Upon the Prohibited Festival of the Nativity of our Savior.
WHat? are our prayers refused? and do the Jews
Prevail? that we decry this High day's News?
Born, and not owned? it is Covenanted well,
'Twixt Rabbi Presbyter and A Jew, who would have bought Saint Paul's Church for
a Synagogue.
Israel.
We shall join Synagogues in time, and say,
No Christ come yet, as well as No Christ's Day.
Who could imagine things should alter thus?
That an Index Expurgatorius
Should pass upon the Calendar, and Red
Letters expunged, and Black be hallowed?
The very Horn-books censures undergo,
Because they do begin with Christ-cross-row.
The times were not so stingie once, but cried,
Mass, I defy thee, but allowed Christ-tide.
A Generation now starts up so holy,
That counts all Festivals (but two) mere folly,
Saint Rent day, and Saint Gunpowder; the rest,
As superstitious Figments, are suppressed.
Not so these sixteen hundred years, till now,
As if a light from Hell had broken through,
And a new voice of sense quite contrary
Had cried, Saul, Saul, why do thou honor me
Chim cham, Enthusiasmes; Bells do backward ring
With Motto's changed, Honor no God, no King.
O for an Athanasian spirit, that
Durst now stand up, and these new Arrians flat!
Or that the Swedish Sword had found the way
To weed Socinus from Cracovia!
Blessed Reformation, had it so gone on,
And beat into their heads the first of John:
A Sword is best Expositor for brains,
Who poison Scripture with divine Rats-banes:
But Jews have shipped them over in Dantz' boats,
And we (like Brutes) have swallowed Polish Oats.
Crellians and Crollians, and Socinians we,
And any thing but Catholics may be.
Thus Hersie does burgeon, since the Creed
In the suppressed Liturgy does bleed.
But Jew, do thou by an unaltered Law,
(As if the Persian did thy conscience awe)
Still keep a Passover? and solemnize
That day, the day from Aegypts tyranny,
(The Type of this day's birth) and we to wipe
Out of our Calendars the Antitype?
Why don't we keep this Festival as well?
Is a day from Egypt good, and not from Hell?
Did Abraham joy through Faith's dim Perspective
To see in after-thousand years Christ live?
And we, who from the true Apostolic See
Deduce an uncontrolled Chronology,
(Like Job in bitterness of soul) defy
And damn the day of this Nativity?
Are our own births and days but on repute,
'Cause none our Mothers can, nor Clerks confute?
And shall the Mother Church of the whole world
In this one computation be controlled?
Senseless contest! when her Authority
For the altered Sabbath good we grant to be:
We give her Faith to the Resurrection,
But for the Birth of Christ her verdict's gone.
Abhor, my soul, this base confederacy
(Praeludium to a Sanedrim) when I
A Synod see, and Iudaisme go on
From the denial of the day to the Son.
Let us in Chorus join with Angels, they
No share in the Anthem have who hate the Day.
Let us with Eastern Sages come from far,
Worship the Babe discovered by a Star:
And let the mad Apostates of the Age
Get Gold and Myrrh, but never be counted Sage.
A MEDITATION Upon the Churches pious Observation OF LENT.
THis is that portion of the year, in which (as the Prophet says) the Lord
calls for Fasting and Mourning, Sackloth and Ashes, the usual Rites of the
Jewish Penitence; wherein we Christians (as well as they of the Circumcision)
should forsake our beds of Pleasure, and boords, not only of excess, but
convenient food, to the dismantling and attenuating the body, that the soul
being made active and unclogg'd of the load of her unweildy scabbard, may be
more expedite in the exercise of holy duties. He that is to go a great journey
(says Minutius Felix) does not load himself, but lighten his garments, lest
the balast of his obese and heavy body should sink him in the way. Ships that
are for speed and sail are not big bottomed, but gaunt, and made neat for
their quicker dispatches. No man seeing a Flemmin and a Spaniard, both dressed
for a Race, would ever imagine that the Dutchman should come first to the Goal;
wherefore with great care and wisdom has the Church of England called the
first day of this Quadragesimal Fast, Ashwednesday, Dies Cinerum, a day of the
most low prostration of our Mind and Flesh to all acts of Humiliation. In my
University it is the day of convoking or convening our determining Batchelors
(the Lamb-skin hopes which the Mother lately yean'd into the first degree of
Academick honor.) These Cyens, Grafts of early learning, meet at a Latin
Sermon, where the Concionator excites them gravely and appositely to both
sobrieties, the abstinence from Lusts and Meats, the Nerves and Sinews of the
other, that these young men might be (as Solomon wished his) Rememberers of
their Creator in the days of their youth; with which severe pickle if that age
be seasoned, you have a Poets warrant, Servabit odorem testa diu and aliquid
haerebit.
Their whole life will smell of the ingredients if it took a due and handsome
tincture.

This introductory Sermon is the Parent of many more, solemnly performed in
another Pulpit at S. Peter's in the East, and so held on till the Religious
grief of the whole Lent ends in a joyful Resurrection Sermon in that place,
and two at S. Mary's, which all are and have bin of late years most excellently
repeated by two successive admirable sons of Pia Matter Students of All Souls,
and Magd. Coll.
memoria: Which circumstances premised, I shall to the matter of this
Meditation, which is the things for which we fast, and from which we fast. Our
Savior could not be imagined to undertake the latter part of this, whose pure
and guiltless soul, as it could not be tainted, so it needed none of these
auxiliaries for its pious support. Holiness it self, essential Purity, wants
no Fulcra Pietatis; those props are for us mortals made of fragile composures,
which are apt to faell and break, if not corroborated and strengthened by
continual covers and shields of Grace and Prayers. And for the things for
which we fast (unless it were the glory of his Father) Christ also needed not
to have undergone this miraculous Lent, which no man could ever keep but
himself, although some do not forbear to think and say that any man butterest
up in Grace may attain to such perfection. It were to be wished indeed, but
never to be hoped for; therefore the Montanists of old, and the Racovians of
late; and the Roman Catholics, pretenders to highest Discipline may prescribe
much, but never can take this Dose of Penance, nor observe the Rules they teach
others: Nor was this Example of our Savior set for an adaequate Rule, to be
imitated either by his Apostles, which were otherwise assisted then any of us,
or by any of us, who though our spirits perchance may be willing, yet he knows
our flesh is weak; Deus non requirit ab homine, quod non habet, and our
measures of Grace are proportioned to our capacities. If we are by Divine
assistances holy men, yet men are men still, and not Gods. Let no Pharisaicall
presumption delude us into a wilderness; for the experience of our strength
and spiritual valor, for fear Satan, that vigilant spy of all our devotions,
smell out the pride or hypocrisy which first were of his instilling, and while
we think to be Similes altissimi, like Christ in this duty, fall down and
worship (what he never could) the Devil himself. In my small observation I
never found the most Atlantic professors, both in Civil and Religious
resolution and practice, those Hectors for Monarchy, and the Hierachy in times
of peace, I found them fall in the days of temptation most sadly. Saint Peter's
verbal magnanimity and great challenge; what a poor come off has it? how does
it end? This Dimock for Christ lays down the Cudgels at the Quaerie of a poor
Damosel, and turns an Apostate of a Cavalier, until a Cock (the valiant'st of
creatures) allarum'd his affrighted heart, and made him know that it is not
good to crow before the Christian Engagement be begun: it is not he that puts
on, but he that puts off the armor, knows the success of the battle. This
diversion pardoned, I shall succinctly touch (for I intend a speech rather then
a Tract) the Res substrata, or subject of a Fast: And first, the things we fast
for, are Faith, assistances of Grace, and for gifts of Prayer, whereby so
assisted, we may persevere in that Christian state wherein we find our selves,
for not only resolutions of amendment of our lives, but real changes. For
both charities, that principal of the love of God and our Neighbor, which
indeed is the summary of the Law, and the other lesser of the hand, which will
be opened and enlarged, as the heart is enflamed within; for fire is of a
dilating and expansive property, which no clutch'd fist can ever hold. We
fasted also, or should, for Righteousness, Justice, Meekness, Temperance,
Obedience, Patience, Thankfulness, and all Christian and Moral Virtues; and if
we fast soundly, He that only can quench that thirst and appease that
appetite, will distill into your dry floores such comfortable showers, as the
dew of Sion and Hermon hills cannot excel in fragrancy nor fertility. This is
to fast for life, for everlasting life, and the Bread of life that came down
from Heaven, will again descend by his Spirit into your hearts, and fill you
full of all spiritual joy and assurances of Heaven, which are only certified
to us by our constant sanctification, ietched out in fear and trembling. A
Christian is always under a Caveat, in his most Souldierly posture upon his
armor, this is the Word, Cave pedibus miles; look to thy foot, take heed lest
thou fall: The whole Armoury of S. Paul is but little enough to defend these
Militia-men against three such enemies, which sometime lie in Ambuscadoes,
sometime attempt them with open hostility, and batteries, and dangerous onsets,
besides underminings: wherefore knowing you are to fight, whether in the
Wilderness, in a single Duel, or in Campania, in the open Field, or Pickeering,
that is, against one particular vice; Cape arma, sta in procinctu; be
harnassed, be girt, and let the word be Sit Deus nobiscu^; let God be with us,
and then you shall so fast and so fight, that a joyful victory will follow, or
quick delivery, which is as good. Which hints unto me the second things from
which we are to fast, which are most excellently enumerated in that singularly
well composed Prayer of the Letany of our Churches Liturgy, wherein we pray God
to deliver us from all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Crafts and
Assaults of the Devil: Which if avoided, by necessary consequence Gods wrath
and everlasting damnation will be escaped. And take the concluding Prayer into
your Fasts, and say, From all Sedition and privy Conspiracy (begot by and
arising) from false Doctrine and Heresy, and from hardness of Heart (which is
now called tenderness of Conscience) and contempt of Gods Word and
Commandments, (which is now called The new Light) Good Lord deliver us. Thus
fast and you shall obtain, not out of the work done by you, which is
acceptable, but in his fasting, who is only gracious, and in whose merits all
our lame and imperfect works are sanctified.

For by his holy Incarnation our flesh is purified, by his holy Nativity and
Circumcision our new life is raised, and our old Adam buried; by his Baptism,
Fasting and Temptation, our Fonts, our Abstinence, our Trials, are all made in
some measure holy, so in the procession of his glorious Merits.

By his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, our Sufferings,
Plunderings and Martyrdomes are crowned; by his precious Death and Burial, by
his Resurrection and Ascension, our pious Exits and goings out of the sad Stage
of this World, our Sursum corda, our lifted-up souls, our awakenings from the
Lethargy and Death of our past Sins, are gracious with his Father, and
beneficial to our selves. And by the coming of the Holy Ghost we are fortified
and double guarded, entrenched and pallissado'd against all the malice of our
invading enemy, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Fear not little
Garrison, though you fast a while, relief is coming, yea, and by a party of
Horse, by an Army, such as Elias was upon the Mountain, greater in number then
your enemies. Fear not, besieged soul, for God will rescue thee, and he shall
bring you forth from this Garrison of the World, with Colors flying, Drumms
beating, and all but your Moneys, which must be left behind; that bunch in the
Camels back, which must be crushed, and pash'd, and wire-drawn, before you can
be fitted to take that narrow pass, the eye of the needle; and then look before
you the strait way of Christian Discipline, the Gauntlet run, what joy do you
enter into! what variety of Heavenly Mansions! where every Soldier for his
earthly services has a Patrimony, which cannot be taken from him, which cannot
suffer waste, but is upon improvement for ever, where every Soldier has a
Medall of his Chieftaines Donation, the Seal of the Everliving God, which is
the Badge of his fidelity, and a perpetual and indelible character of his
Loyalty to his Master: No more shall be heard the word of Indigent Officers, or
any such Sarcastick sound against them; for they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more; neither shall the Sun of Persecution, nor any heat of
Oppression light on them: But the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne
shall lead them to Fountains of living waters, and God shall wipe away Rev. 7.
16.
all tears from their eyes.

Amen.
A MEDITATION ON THE PASSION Of Our SAVIOR.
I Do present Your Royal Highness with such a Scene of Sorrow, such a
Tragedy, as that Age only beheld, and no Age after it shall see, The Prince of
Peace, the Councellor, Murdered by his own People, Crucified at his own Gates:
Was there any Sorrow like this Sorrow? which is magnified by the Dignity of his
Person, by the Baseness of his Accusers, the Falsenesse of the Accusations,
the Impudence of his Judges. From which unjust Tribunal, those that loved him
fled: at whose sufferings the ashamed Sun withdrew its light, testifying by its
miraculous opacity and darkness, that the God of Light was extinguished, the
Earth opened; and had not the God of Mercy and Love forbad, would have
swallowed the Nation, as it did once before a part of them, whilst his
helpless Spectators (the ever Blessed Virgin his Mother, with his beloved
Disciple) stood by pierced at the heart to see him so pierced, to see her Son
(the Son of God) so roughly and barbarously butchered, by those who lived, and
moved, and had their Being from him, while God looked through the Cloud,
permitting (what was from Eternity designed) Men and Devils to act a piece of
Wickedness, which was the ruin of the Contrivers, the Devils fatal overthrow,
the destruction of Jerusalem, the abandoning of the Jews, and Redemption of
the whole World.

Pardon me Sir, if in honor to my Saviors Sufferings, I undertake what would
ask the pen of the most Ready Writer, and he only could truly blazon that
Princely Prophet, from whose Loins (as to the Flesh) he was descended.

I had need of a Protection Royal, nay an Army Royal, for a Guard, while I
enter upon the History. As many Enemies has Christ himself as had his Father
David, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck; the Philistines, with they of Tire,
Hagarens, Moabites and Ishmalites, and a number of confederate and associate
Conspirators united against the Tribe of Judah; So against this Lion of that
Tribe are combined Marcionites, Ebionites, Eutichians, Nicolaitans, Arrians,
Socinians, and a Hidra of Schismatics, all of them either enemies of his
Humanity or Divinity. These crucify not his Person on the Cross, but his
Natures in their Heretical Writings: they untext the Gospel of S. John, and
with false and pitiful glosses would persuade their Sectaries that Tempus erat
quando non suit, that there was some time when he was not, and so labor to
null his Eternal and coessential Being with his Father before all Worlds,
deprive him of his just Right of Creation of the World, testified by that
Eagle-ey'd Evangelist, who says, directed by the Holy Ghost: By him all things
were made, John 1. 3.
and without him nothing was made that was made; who being the Wisdom of his
Father, was the most accomplished Agent through the Holy Spirit to effect that
stupendous Unequal that hoops in this lower Orb. And how bravely were these
Blasphemies introduced by the assassination of a most Christian King Aurelius
Or Moritius.
, and that murder proving successeful, per scelera sceleribus iter est, they
march in a procession of wickedness, and straight stab the Deity of him that
is anointed for evermore: That inhuman butchery got an Empire to Phocas, and a
triple Crown to his sacrificing Boniface the Third.
Priest, who ever since usurps the Purple Robe; a fit Die and eternal Testimony
of his Blood-got Supremacy over his fellow-Bishops. These crucify the
Scriptures, as the Jews did Christ, and expunge the sense, though not the
words: and whereas the letter says, None shall be greater then another, they
say, one shall, and is above them all; nay not only their Apostolic
Overseers, but in Ecclesiasticis, over Emperors and Kings. Well gratified (old
Phocas) that by the base acquisition of a Diadem, straight did part with the
best Flower in it. No such Regimen was left by our Savior, nor no such Vicar,
nor no such Peter, with a brandisht Sword, no such Boanerges, with a sublunary
Fire, Cellars of Gunpowder and spiritual Ammunition, that shall more
expeditely conveigh three estates to heaven, then Elias fiery Chariot; yet this
usurpation still obtains upon some Princes, who for politic ends, or for fear
of Raviliacks and Jesuited Daggers, or which is* worse, for covetous and
ambitious designs, suffer that Christ that is in them, to have his head stuck
with Thorns, and his mouth embittered with this damnable Doctrine, the Lees of
the Cup of the Lady of Babylon.

How far short are our Sectarians at home, who hold not forth indeed a Golden
Cup, but a worse, an Against the Commandments.
Antinomial Cup; which if the Princes of this World drink, the rough emetick
will make them void all the just prerogatives belonging to their sacred
Authorities. Up comes first the Militia, without which Kings are as powerful as
our Savior with his Reed in his hand. Arundinem pro Sceptro, they must hold
forth a Bulrush instead of a Scepter. The next reach or strain of this
vomitary Purge, is Potestas vitae and naecis, without which there can be no
Magistrate, the Administration of Justice, the Dispensations of Rewards and
Punishments, being the Charter of God, delegated to his servant the King, for
the encouragement of the good, and punishment of evil persons. The third
operation is as bad, which fetches all his jurisdiction Ecclesiastical up at
one heave, and throws that precious Right into the Classical Basin first, and
then into the great Caldron of a Provincial Synod, in which his own head must
boil, if he dissent from that Consistorian sentence and Assembly suffrage. What
Jew, what Loyolist of Ignatius could ever desire more? These are the Abisgah of
our Adonirams and Adonijah's humble petition to his Majesty, and let his answer
be (as I hope his wisdom is) like Solomon's, ask the Kingdom also to be
tripartite and divided betwixt Abiathar a covenanting Presbyter, and Ioab the
Son of Zervia, a traitorous General: So let the King serve them as Solomon
did, who dare to entreat him from his power with bended knees, and hands lift
up to Heaven, yet carry short swords to destroy the loyal Abners, the Kings
most trusty and well-beloved friends. So let the King displace such Abiathars,
who not subscribing to the enacted Laws of the Land, under pretense of weak
conscience, have the consciences to disturb the Peace of the Land, and affront
the Government thereof. There is no fear, Royal Sir, that your Majestic
Brother should want Zadocks, Orthodox and Loyal Priests: For look, Sir, in the
Cave, where God has hid from cruel persecution five thousand, who never bowed
to the Baal of those days, nor fell down to worship the Calfe, though made of
the Earrings, Whistles, Bodkins and Silver Spoons of the deluded Sisters of
the Nation. Let them bite upon the bit, and stoop to the sentence of the house
of Eli and Abiathar, till they snap at a morsel of bread out of the inferior
tables belonging to your High Priests. If upon any threats or solicitations,
these Prerogatives be parted with, then take heed of a Toll, and crucifige,
away with him, crucify him; as your Martyred Father says in (...), Kings once
divested of their power, are soon imprisoned, and then murdered.

For truly, Royal Sir, the Lives of Princes run almost parallel with their
Saviors: Their whole Reigns are but continued Passions. Damocles did well in
his Item of Regal Care and Danger to suspend a naked Sword with the point
downward, by a slender twist over his head as he sat at table.

How early was thy Persecution, my dear Redeemer, when thy Cradle was not free
from a murtherous Herod, whose life he so much thirsted for, that many
Hecatombs of Infants were musthered for fear Thy tender Person should escape.
That stream of Innocent Blood was praeludium to the Death of the Lamb, that
the Red Sea wherein thou did float to Egypt, which harbored Thee in Thy
flight, the only Goshen of the Land. No Pharaoh's daughter now to suckle this
Divine Exile, but Angels were thy Rockers and Nurses, and the Apis of Egypt, I
mean the Cow, was prostrate, and fed the only Via Lactea, or milky way to
Heaven. Herod dead, and the Wise men thy Worshippers, Star-guided home, thou
did return to thy Jerusalem, a while to preach, anon to die. It Is true
indeed, the loaf-fed multitude, very pious by qualmes and fits, especially when
their bellies are full, would have made an earthly Prince of the King of
Heaven: But Thou that knew the danger of such Principalities, did fly
from a Scepter with more have then Richard the Third came to it, of whom it is
storied, That he came from the womb with his feet forward, and he made wicked
speed, and in a crimson flood swom to the Crown, which he did not long enjoy,
the Duke of Richmond soon after avenging the blood of his slain Kindred in
Bosworth Field, which was his just Aceldama. Just got Diadem, Regal
Inheritances are insecure, but ill acquired Thrones never sit safe, and Tyrants
seldom make a dry end, but are wet and bedewed in blood to their graves.
Neque enim Lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
It Is just the Inventers of great Torments have
The Executions they to others gave.


There is a Bull for a Phalaris, nay his own Bull, a Thomaris for Cyrus, a
Gibbet for Haman, an Axe for a Bloody Rump, and a Pole Rampant higher then the
rest for an aspiring Oliver. Our Savior said, His Kingdom was not of this
world, he was Lord over it, Lord Paramount, and these the Fifth Monarchists,
who so much contend for his reign upon earth, though they make themselves only
his subjects, shall never see their adopted King, whom the Heaven of Heavens
must contain, until all Kingdoms, Levellers and all, are levelled with the
Earth. He came not to wear a Crown of Gold, but Thorns, which made his head so
many Fontinells of blood, every prick opening an Orifice, whence issued
salvation to the world. In the Garden this bloody Fight began, when by his
strong apprehension of the imminent danger, he sweat thick drops of blood, the
sovereign water of that Garden: then he prayed, that man of sorrow deprecated,
that that Cup might pass. Vox hominem sonat; the Prayer shows him Man, but his
Suffering and his Submission, God: not My will, not the will of me, as Man, for
what man can court Death? but thine and my will, as God, be done. Therefore his
(...), his vehement Groaning and Weeping were the strong and emphatick
Emanations of his sad Soul, laden with the Sins of the whole earth, as a Cart
is laden with sheaves, in which are millions of millions of Grains, the
complicated vices of the Seed of Adam; so was this Winepress-treader burdened,
who alone trod the Grapes in garments sprinkled with his own Blood. Can we
hear this, and not compassionate? weep Daughters of Jerusalem a little for
him, but more for your selves, for whose defections, whose spiritual
Fornications, for whose Pride and Luxury, Covetousness and Hypocrisy: this
Hen (that so often would have gathered you as Chickens under his healing wings)
is pulled and torn to pieces, hash'd by barbarous Soldiers and tumultuous
villains. If we can, let us with watery eyes follow the pomp and prowess of
his Sufferings: through Water and Tears Objects are magnified, but this Show
cannot be made greater by any Optic helps. The God that made us is as much
above our decyphering as comprehension, and no Painter, no Apelles can draw the
lines of this Representation, so strong the Agony, Luke 22. 43.
so vehement, that an Angel is sent to strengthen the Man (the God for a time
withdrawn.) The Angel no sooner gone (O take not from us those Guardians!) see
a multitude comes, and Judas, a Devil and his Legions: Verse 47.
The Traitor now acts his part, this holy Cutpurse, this Pious uses man, whose
love to money made him verbally good to the poor. He was more thirsty and
saving for a box of precious Ointment then for the Lords Anointed: For with a
Kiss (the sign and seal of highest Affection) this false Apostle betrays the
Lord of Life to certain Death; for thirty pieces of Silver sells the King of
Righteousness to the Devils Emissaries. Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia
cogit,
Pectora.


A purse of Gold, and a million of money shall preponderate and outweigh
plighted Allegiance, covenanted Fidelity, and a King (if Queen Argent command)
shall be delivered to the merciless cruelties of implacable Beasts.

Now the Rout have him and Soldiers, Captains and Chief Priests, a
combination of Murderers, (but a Jewish High Court of Justice) they first
privately in the close Committee Verse 52.
vote him to death, and in mockery of the Law bring false witnesses against him
in the Court. As Judas was bribed to betray his Person, so these mercenary
mouths swear his Guilt, accuse him of a Fact he never did, nor they never knew.

This is the known Artifice against all good and loyal men in every Age: When
their Virtues and Actions grow either suspected and hateful to the State, then
Sparge res voces, Virg. (...).

In vulgum ambiguas and quaerere conscius arma,
If Lies will not prevail,
Tumults and Soldiers do it without fail.
So the Renowned Prelate, the noble Earl of Archbishop Laud.
Strafford, and his Sacred Majesty of ever Blessed memory, were belyed out of
their lives, and Armies raised to defend the lawless Execution.

But the Jews may not put any man to death, that morsel of sweet revenge and
Regal Power was not permitted to their Elderships; they might accuse stoutly,
but could not sentence: That Jurisdiction was the sole Privilege of the
Supreme Power, which at that time was Tiberius the second Emperor from Caesar,
so then to Pilate his Governor under him, was this Innocent Person led by
malicious Persecutors, whose charge is, that he was an Innovator, a
Sabbath-breaker, an Enemy of Caesar's, I, there it went; for Pilate was to look
to that above all other accusations: the first device of his intention to
change Religion, was to open the peoples throats, who though they understand
little in the point, yet they are always very fierce for the Word, and are
very jealous of losing that indeed they never had; but all these aggregated and
accumulated Treasons would not reach to his life: it is strange they had not
begged the murder, and enacted it with a salvo Law to their own necks, Ne
trahatur in exemplum.
But that trick was reserved for our Modern Jews, who far out-did these of the
Text: Luke* 33. 34.
For our Savior begs pardon and forgiveness for these, excusing them to God,
because of their ignorance, They knew not what they did; and the Apostle
afterward apologizes for them, If you had known, you would not have crucified
the Lord of Life; but our Hirudines, our King-Leeches, the Eldership of the
late Model knew that Charles the first was their King, had sworn Faith and
Allegiance to him, and yet in pursuance of a blessed Covenant, suffered their
fellow-Foxes to worry that Lamb of the Land to death. Their hypocritical
excuse is nothing, That they never intended the business should go on to Blood:
But, Qui nolunt occidere quenquam,
Posse volunt.
Many there are who will not kill,
But wish the power to do it still.


Is it the Axe only destroys? do not the Accusers, do not the Witnesses, do
not the Despoylers of the Fences of Innocence do as much as the Executioner? He
is more excusable then the other, for being an appointed Minister for that
purpose; he does the commands of Superiors, and let them look to it, whosoever
were the Authors and Abettors, who brought him to the block.

But observe, I pray, what a league of love is struck in the very height of an
intended murder, Herod and Pilate, two public Ministers of the Emperial
State, are this day cemented into a fresh amity by the blood of Christ,
Sectarians and Soldiers, Cromwell, Bradshaw and Ireten could not hugg closer
in private then these great Officers did in public; Quos opinio divisit,
scelus hoc conjunxit;
whom diversities of Religions did divide, a prosperous Mischief does unite. O
fatal Friendship! for by this confederacy the Lord of Heaven and Earth was
exalted to the shameful death of the Cross, see him pendent in his own Air,
which when he made it was good, but desires to be now as it was before struck
out of Chaos; Haec est illa dies quae magnae conscia caedis,
Exitio Christum (virgo Beata) dedit:
This is that fatal day, and conscious hour,
Virgin, which killed thy Son our Savior.
See here the Type of that Brazen Serpent, long ago raised up in the
Wilderness, which saves even those that fixed him to the Cross, that saved the
Trooper Longinus, who, converted at the sight of his Sacramental Blood, and
Miracles of the Passion, was baptized at the Wound himself made in his side;
sovereign is the Blood of Sovereigns; so the blooddipt Hankerchief of a
scoffing Soldier proves a Cure to the Kings Evil, when they had done all Evil
unto him. The Scoffs, the Taunts, Revilings of stony hearted Spectators were
greater piercings to him then that of the Spear, that was Vinegar to his ears,
more sharp and acid then that of the Sponge; a sad draught to drink his last
in; yet in that Salutem propinavit mundo, he drank Saving Health to the whole
World. And so, Exit Regum optimus,
Vitaque cum gemitu fugit exornata sub umbras.
But what a Scene is in that last Catastrophe? The Sun withdrew his light, the
Temple rent assunder, the Graves opened. Let me a little paraphrase here: so
was it (under correction) at the departure of our King? The Light, which was
more precious then the Suns, the Gospel, was for a time clouded and extinct:
Darkness, worse then Egyptian, surrounded us, no Goshen, but here and there a
light, like ignes fatui, the Wise and Learned of the Land wandered up and down
in Fields and Dens; the Routed Glowworms of this Land shone for all that in
this obscurity. Temples rent not only, but pulled down, or violated by
Horsedung, and what is worse, Dungmen. Graves opened, and the bodies of new
Saints straight appeared, which no man ever knew before. These Graves were
truly open Sepulchers, which devoured Widows Houses, Royalists Estates,
Church, Kings and Bishops Lands. See now what a Pharaoh's Dream is new
interpreted: the lean Kine, the meanest, basest and worst wretches of the land,
eat up the Fat, the Rich, the Fortunate; and what becomes of the lowing of
these Oxen? the bleating of these Sheep? Alas, ye fools, ye saw not the
handwriting on the wall; your Mean Tekel was then set up, and your fatness
only prepared you for the slaughter. Saginati in caedem, -- Mischiefs feed
Like Beasts, till they be fat, and then they bleed.


A MEDITATION Upon the 29th. of May, being His Majesty's Birthday, and Day of
Restoration, and upon the Fifth of November, being the day of the General
Deliverance of the King and Parliament from the Gunpowder-Treason.
IF the noise of Joy were not as loud as that of Treason, we should not on this
day hear the news of our own Redemption (said a learned Archdeacon of Christ
Church) and to quote an eminent Prelate of the same House, I shall borrow a
little Preface from him also, and say, Sicut infra sic supra, Sicut extra sic
intra, as the Mine of the first Treason was in a cellar, and below the House,
so the second, which was no less in intention, and higher in execution, was in
the House it self, where depraved and most wicked persons out-gunpowdered the
Popish Conspirators. What those intended, these acted, and the Conclave was but
the Antimasque to the Consistory. If ever Lenthall the faithless Speaker spoke
any thing true, it was, that the Presbyterians were and are the mortal enemies
to Monarchy. This was no extorted confession, but the words of a dying sinner,
afraid, of the account he was to make to him by whom Kings reign. His vast
Estate could not quiet a troubled conscience, nor will Brandywine, though it
intoxicate for the present, comfort or relieve a Harrison, or a Hugh Peter's.
Sir Henry Vane saying he died a Presbyterian, showed he died a Rebel in Grain,
and in his confession aggrevated his Sin against God, and entailed to that
Faction. I believe the Prick-ear'd Knight thought to see a new War out of the
Elysian fields, where he, Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw, are dancing a Fiery
Morris, and the three Furies playing upon severe instruments to their deplored
Changes. Let not any man or party think, that evil is, or ought to be done,
that good may come of it, when it is contrary to the express words of the
Text: no man is able, or can, or must bring good events out of bad actions;
it is only God can do that, and always does, who overruling all designs, and
suffering high mischiefs for ends best known to himself, does, and
providentially did confound the Presbyterian Contrivances by an Anabaptistical
Army, and that Army by an Indigent Rump, and an almost beggared City, and the
sound rather then the power of an Army, and so restored without a blow, a most
Heroic Prince to the Rights which every one of those Factions had deprived his
Father of. Who, I pray, but God blasted the Councils of Achitophel, dethroned
the hotspur Absalon, intrapped the politic Adonijah and his Second, Ioab, the
revolted Captain of the Host of Israel? Men may plot, but God orders the event:
What are the tutelary Angels of Kingdoms for, but to execute his Will, and to
overruled the mad enterprises of ambitious, covetous and blood-thirstymen? Nor
do I write this because of the joyful event only, but in the midst of the
Usurpers glory it was my faith, though I could not assure my self the sight of
it, that it would be brought to pass.

These are thy Doing, O God, and it is wonderful in our eyes; let our hearts
be enlarged with thankfulness, as thy favors are amplified above our deserts.
Honorable mention is made by the Parliament for the 29th. of May, and in
everlasting memory will be the fifth of November. Here the Grandfather, Uncle
and Father of our King was preserved from the blow of unruly fire; and now the
joy of our hearts, the breath of our nostrils wonderfully brought in into a
gasping and almost expiring Kingdom: Ezekiels Vision acted to the life, bones,
carcases, Skelitons, are re-enlivened, reflesh'd, and walking, not like trees,
but trees reverst, men indeed, Royalists, the reputed offscouring of this
Nation, in Feathers, Velvet Jumps, and Gold Belts, as if it had been their
Resurrection day: an Army, but a month ago in pay against their Prince, the
loyal Reer-guard of his Majesty's person: Red-coats, that routed him at
Worcester, and my heroic Duke at Dunkirk, houting and shouting loud Vive le
Roy's, tossing their caps for joy that he was come again to them, whom God
would exalt. The Devils extorted confession of our Savior was the effect of a
Divine Power, and these Acclamations were the Finger-work of God, who can turn
the hearts of men as it pleases him best, who stills the raging of the people,
and allayes the foaming of the Sea. Let us therefore cry Salvation to him that
sits on the Throne, and sets in the Throne: Let our Amen be as a clap of
Thunder, and our Hallelujahs as the roaring of the Sea. Let the harmony of our
Souls outvoice the Organs, and let the Anthem of all true Englishmen be, as
that sometimes of the Angels at the Birth of Christ, so now at his Restitution
to this Island, Glory be to God on high, good will to men, and peace on earth.

Let the Discontented no more repine at what the Lord has brought about; let
them not fight against Heaven, but imitate this story of Philip, the husband of
Queen Mary, who when he heard of the loss of his formidable Armado, dispersed
and scattered by the Fleet of Queen Elizabeth (but as it was related to him by
a Tempest) he patiently said, He did not send his Navy to fight against God
Almighty.

The 29. of May be ever as the Spring it self for Glory, a day of all
Ornaments, Feasts, and Jubilee, for two such great Blessings, a Prince born,
and a Prince reborn without a Baptism of Blood to his Crown of Inheritance.

Caesar came to a Dictator-ship through a Pharsalia Field of Blood. But here
was no Feri faciem Miles, Strike at their faces Soldiers, but rather a Parce
civibus, an Act of Indemnity, which every Citizen should wear in their hats, to
expiate for the Libellous Petitions they sometimes so carried. In that Oblivion
let the triumphs for two seditious Barrabbas's Burton and Bastwick be for ever
forgot, and let the cursed Hue and Cry maker be forgiven, and his. Exit
Tyrannoru^ ultimus be washed out of his conscience, as it is exploded from the
Statue. Let the Crucifige of the Soldiers be drowned in their Vivat Rex, and
let the Powder of the Petropolitans be buried in the earth from whence it is
made, even in that cellar where it was barrell'd up for King and Parliaments
destruction. Let the Restoring of a true persecuted Church inform the Roman
Catholics, that This is Mother of the true Children, the Common Prayers add
good Preaching, which the Dragon of Huntington, General under the great Dragon
in the Apocalypse, pursued into the Wilderness: But see how she sits, most
eminent, most conspicuous; O may she continue so for ever; and let her Priests
be clothed with Righteousness, as with a Surplice, and with meekness and
liberality as in Scarlet Robes and rich Mitres. And you my loving friends of
the Clergy, raise your selves high by good examples, lives and hospitalities
in the opinion of the people; and do not as the Giants of old, who by heaps of
mountains fought against Heaven, do not not you, I say, by piles of multiplied
steeples think so to ascend thither: But as you are Soldiers of the Church
Militant, remember the advice of S. John Baptist's to the Caesareans; or if you
like best the Text of the Apostle, Let a Bishop or Presbyter be the husband of
one wife; which in the Rhemish interpretation, or in the literal, is good; or
as the Poet says, Pectora nostra duas non admittentia curas.
Yet do not, I beseech you, misunderstand me, for I am not against Pluralities,
where they are conferred upon deserving and suffering persons, but I am really
against Plus-plurimalities.

And so I conclude these well intended Meditations, desiring your Royal
Highness gracious encouragement, whereby I may be warmed into another Work.

FINIS.

