Imprimatur.

Febr. 28 th, 1688/89. Guil. Needham.

THE CATALOGUE Of all the DISCOURSES PUBLISHED Against Popery, During the Reign
of King JAMES II.

BY THE Members of the Church of ENGLAND, And by the Non-conformists.

WITH THE Names of the Authors of them.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, next Door to the Black Bull
in the Old-Bailey. MDCLXXXIX.

A CATALOGUE Of all the Discourses Published against POPERY, BY THE Members of
the Church of England, and by the Non-conformists, during the Reign of King
JAMES the Second, etc.
IT will not be improper, to premise to this Catalogue, an Account of those
Treatises against Popery, which were undertaken, and part of them published
near the end of the Reign of King Charles the Second. It is not unknown to the
World, how great a Care, and truly Christian Concern the Clergy of London in
particular, did discover for the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and for a
happy Union of all moderate Protestants within this Nation; nor with what
Moderation and Calmness, Learning and Plainness several Tracts and Casuistical
Discourses were Penned for that good purpose, and how successful they were, by
the Blessing of God, to the lessening our Differences, and removing needless
Scruples, and persuading great Numbers to return and unite themselves to their
Parish Churches.

This happy Success gave them hopes of reducing by the same Method, the Papists
among us, and put them upon designing and writing for their sakes, a Set of
Tracts wherein the Controversy was to be fairly and calmly stated betwixt Us
and the Church of Rome, and such Arguments and Reasons used, as might convince
all conscientious Papists of the Errors and Danger in their Church.

Of these, the following were published before the end of the Reign of King
Charles the Second:

1. A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Part I. Written by Dr.
Stratford, Dean of St. Asaph.

2. The Second Part of the same Discourse, by the same learned hand, from whom
we expect ere long the Third and Last Part.

3. A Persuasive to an Ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion. Written by Mr.
Nich. Clegatt.

4. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. By Dr. Tillotson, Dean of
Canterbury.

5. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be Received, and what is to be Rejected. By Dr. Patrick, Dean
of Peterburgh.

6. The Protestant Resolution of Faith: being an Answer to three Questions,

I. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church, for the true Sense
of Scripture?

II. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ, to this day, makes a Church,
which has this Visible Succession, an Infallible Interpreter of Scripture?

III. Whether the Church of England can make out such a Visible Succession?

By Dr. Sherlock, Master of the Temple.

7. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith, with respect especially
to the Romish Pretense of such a One as is Infallible. By Dr. Tenison, Vicar of
St. Martin's in the Fields.

8. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? By Dr. Hascard, Dean of Windsor.

9. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. By
Dr. Clagett, late Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grey's Inn.

10. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England: in which it is shown, that
whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational Provision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the Church
Established by Law amongst us. By Dr. Stanley, Clerk of the Closet to her
Majesty.

11. A Discourse concerning Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. By Mr. Williams,
Rector of St. Mildred's Poultrey.

12. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship; or a
Scripture Proof of the Unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any
other Being besides the Supreme God. By Dr. Sherlock.

13. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the Church
of England. By Dr. Cave, Canon of Windsor.

14. A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host* By Mr. Pain, Rector of
St. Mary White-chappel.

15. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints. By Dr. Freeman, Rector of
St. Ann Aldersgate.

16. A Discourse concerning Auricular Confession, as it is prescribed by the
Council of Trent. By Dr. Goodman, Archdeacon of Middlesex.

Thus far had the Clergy proceeded with these Discourses at the Death of King
Charles the Second: and now, upon the Accession of a King of the Romish
Persuasion to the Throne, they were quickly forced to change their Method, and
to be upon the Defensive Part, their Protestant Religion being freely struck at
under the Countenance of a King of their own Communion, by the Romish Priests;
and heavy things laid to their charge for having Calumniated and
Misrepresented the King's Religion: They little feared any opposition from the
Clergy of the Church of England, since they could not but judge them so
cautious at least, as not to face such inevitable Danger, and mark themselves
out for Destruction, by daring so much as to mutter any thing, much less write
against the King's Religion, which it would have been very happy for the
Priests (who have come off so shamefully since) if they could have made it
High Treason at first, which I am confident they wanted no will to do.

However, our Clergy valued their Religion and their Church much more than
their own Safety, or worldly Interest; and a Romish Priest could not sooner
begin the Quarrel, and open the way to that large Controversy which has been
managing ever since, by charging our Church with Calumny and Mis-representation
of the Church of Rome, than he met with an Answerer, who did indeed deserve the
Honor of being the Leader of our Clergy, in this large Controversy, wherein
so many have been forced to engage.

I will first give an account of the Controversy with him who wrote the first
Book, called, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, and then proceed with
my Catalogue as Methodically as I can. In Answer to that Book was first written,

17. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc. By
Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's.

18. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants; being a Reply to the
Reflections upon the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly
Represented. By Dr. Sherlock.

19. Remarks on Popery Misrepresented, with reference to the Deposing
Doctrine. By Mr. A. Seller of Plymouth.

20. An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery; containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux's, late Bishop
of Condom, Exposition of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images. By Dr. Sherlock.

21. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference between the
Representer and the Answerer. By Dr. Sherlock.

22. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply. By Dr. Clagett.

23. A Catechism truly Representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome, with an Answer to them. By Mr. Williams.

After this, the Author of a Papist Misrepresented and Represented, was
pleased to venture on* in a Second Part to the same strain, which he published
under the Title of the Catholic Representer, and Weekly in single Sheets; the
Answers to which were these:

24. The Papist Represented, and not Misrepresented: being in Answer to the
first Sheet of the second Part of the Papist Misrepresented and Represented,
and for a further Vindication of the Catechism truly Representing the Doctrines
and Practices of the Church of Rome. By Mr. Williams.

25. The Papist Represented, and not Misrepresented: being in Answer to the
second Sheet of the second Part of the Papist Misrepresented and Represented,
in the Point of their Praying to the Cross. By Mr. Williams.

26. Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers: being a Defense
of the Dublin Letter, in Answer to the third Chapter of the second Part of the
Papist, etc. By Mr. Patrick, Preacher at the Charter House.

27. Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin, to her Indiscreet Worshippers.
Translated from the French, and published with an Ingenious Preface. By J.
Tailor, Gent.

28. A Letter to the Mis-representer of Papists, in Answer to the fourth Sheet
of the second Part of the Papist, etc. By Mr. James Tailor.

29. The Papist Represented, and not Misrepresented: being in Answer to the
fifth and sixth Chapters of the second Part of the Papist, etc. as far as
concerns Praying to Images and the Cross. By Mr. Williams.

30. The Peoples Right to Read the Holy Scriptures asserted; in Answer to the
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of the second Part of the
Papist, etc. By Dr. Stratford.

Upon the publishing of the two Papers said to be written by King Charles the
Second, in favor of Popery, and found in his strong Box by the late King, and
the other Paper written by the late Duchess of York, there was an Answer
written to the Arguing Part of them, with all the Decency and Respect that was
due to the Names which the Papers bore.

31. An Answer to some Papers lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. By Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's.

32. A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

33. The Difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods; in Answer to a
Book written by a Romanist, and entitled, The Protestant's Plea for a
Socinian. By Dr. Tenison.

34. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in Matters of Religion. By
Dr. Sherlock.

35. An Answer to a late Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert, and a
Protestant. By Dr. Sherlock.

36. A second Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert, and a Protestant;
showing why he cannot believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, though he do
firmly believe the Doctrine of the Trinity. By Mr. Kidder, Rector of St.
Martin's Outwich.

37. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared as to
Scripture, Reason, and Tradition: In a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a
Papist. Part I. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

38. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, etc. Part II.
By Dr. Stillingfleet.

39. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Faith. By Mr. Wake, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grey's
Inn.

40. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, etc. with Reflections upon
his Pastoral Letter. By Mr. Gilbert, Minister of Peterburgh.

41. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. By Mr. Wake.

42. A second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against the New Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindicator.
Part. I. In which the Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux's
Exposition, is fully vindicated; the Distinction of Old and New Popery
Historically asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in point of
Image Worship, more particularly considered. By Mr. Wake.

43. An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy: with a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer; showing, That the
Vindicator [of the Bishop of Meaux] has utterly ruined the New Design of
Expounding and Representing Popery. By Dr. Clagett.

44. A second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against the New Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, and his Vindicator.
Part II. In which the Romish Doctrines concerning the Nature and Object of
Religious Worship, of the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images and
Relics, are considered, and the Charge of Idolatry made good against those of
the Church of Rome, upon the account of them. By Mr. Wake.

45. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England, in Answer to those
who reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to
be a Catholic Church, upon their account. By Dr. Hicks, Dean of Worcester.

46. Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney,
upon his Consensus Veterum; wherein the Absurdity of his Method, and the
Weakness of his Reasons are shown, his false Aspersions upon the Church of
England are wiped off, and Her Faith concerning the Eucharist, proved to be
That of the Primitive Church: Together with Animadversions upon Dean Boileau's
French Translation of, and Remarks upon Bertram. By Mr. Gee, Rector of St.
Benedict Paul's Wharff.

About the time of the publishing of the abovementioned Discourses, some of the
Romish Priests were for changing the Method of managing the Controversy
betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome, for leaving off Writing,
and set Answers in Print, which they were now grown sick of, and for betaking
themselves to Verbal Conferences, hoping for more success by their Tongues,
than by their Pens. Mr. Peter Gooden, a Secular Priest, was pleased to single
out himself for such purposes; but for his fitness or abilities, no body could
find any, except this may be reckoned one, that though he was Master of very
little or no Learning at all, yet he wanted not the Gift of Assurance to
encounter the very learned Men among us. On February the 21 st, 1686, he had
a Conference with Dr. Clagett about Transubstantiation, which with two Papers
that passed after the Conference betwixt Dr. Clagett and him, shall be
published shortly, with a Volume of the Doctor's Sermons now in the Press. This
Conference has been kept private hitherto; but that which made more noise in
the World, was Mr. Gooden's Conference about Oral Tradition, about the same
time with Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's; a Conference that was famous
for nothing but the Noisiness of the Priest while it was managing, and his
Vanity after it was over, together with that of his Second, famous John
Sergeant, which were the occasion of these following learned Tracts.

47. A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of
P.'s. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

48. A Second Letter to Mr. Gooden, in Answer to two Letters lately published
concerning the Conference at the Dean of Paul's. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

49. A Letter to a Friend; Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of
Paul's, in Answer to the Arguing Part of his First Letter to Mr. G. By Mr.
Else of Nottingham-shire.

50. Scripture and Tradition Compared: in a Sermon Preached at
Guild-Hall-Chappel. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

51. A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith,
in Answer to J. Sergeant's Catholic Letters. By Dr. Stillingfleet.

52. An Historical Discourse concerning Tradition. By Mr. Williams.

53. The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious
Assaults of Mr. John Sergeant, in his Second Catholic Letter. In four
Dialogues. By Mr. Else of Nottingham-shire.

54. The Council of Trent Examined and Disproved by Catholic Tradition, in the
main Points in Controversy betwixt Us and the Church of Rome; with a
particular Account of the Times and Occasions of introducing them. Part I. To
which a Preface is prefixed concerning the true Sense of the Council of Trent,
and the Notion of Transubstantiation. By the Dean of St. Paul's.

The other Part we may expect ere long.

One of the greatest Arguments insisted on by the Romish Priests, to prove
theirs to be the Catholic Church, is from the Notes of the Church, every one
of which they did loudly pretend was to be found among them; upon this occasion
it was that several of the Clergy of London did undertake the Consideration of
the Notes of the Church as laid down by Bellarmine himself, and showed in the
following Method, how little reason the Romish Church had to pretend to the
true Notes of a Catholic Church.

55. A brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; with some
Reflections on Cardinal Bellarmine's Notes. By Dr. Sherlock.

56. An Examination of Bellarmine's First Note concerning The NAME of
CATHOLIC. By Dr. Freeman.

57. An Examination of Bellarmine's Second Note concerning ANTIQUITY. By Dr.
Patrick.

58. An Examination of Bellarmine's Third Note concerning DURATION. By Mr.
Williams.

59. An Examination of Bellarmine's Fourth Note concerning AMPLITUDE or
MULTITUDE, and VARIETY of BELIEVERS. By Dr. Fowler, Rector of St. Giles's
Criple-gate.

60. An Examination of Bellarmine's Fifth Note concerning The SUCCESSION of
BISHOPS. By Dr. Thorp, Canon of Canterbury.

61. An Examination of Bellarmine's Sixth Note concerning AGREEMENT in DOCTRINE
with the PRIMITIVE CHURCH. By Mr. Pain.

62. An Examination of Bellarmine's Seventh Note concerning UNION of the
MEMBERS among THEMSELVES, and with the HEAD. By Dr. Clagett.

63. An Examination of Bellarmine's Eighth Note concerning SANCTITY of
DOCTRINE. By Dr. Scott, Rector of St. Peter Poor.

64. An Examination of Bellarmine's Ninth Note concerning EFFICACY of the
DOCTRINE. By Mr. Linford, Rector of St. Edmond's Lombard Street.

65. An Examination of Bellarmine's Tenth Note concerning HOLINESS of LIFE. By
Dr. Tenison.

66. An Examination of Bellarmine's Eleventh Note concerning The GLORY of
MIRACLES. By Mr. Resbury, Minister of Putney.

67. An Examination of Bellarmine's Twelfth Note concerning The LIGHT of
PROPHECY. By Dr. Clagett.

68. An Examination of Bellarmine's Thirteenth Note concerning CONFESSION of
ADVERSARIES. By Mr. Kidder.

69. An Examination of Bellarmine's Fourteenth Note concerning The UNHAPPY END
of the CHURCH's ENEMIES. By Dr. Stratford.

70. An Examination of Bellarmine's Fifteenth Note concerning TEMPORAL
FELICITY. By Dr. Grove, Rector of St. Andrew Undershaft.

71. A Vindication of the brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church,
in Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Use and great Moment of the Notes
of the Church, as delivered by Cardinal Bellarmine, (de Notis Ecclesiae)
Justified. By Dr. Sherlock.

72. A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmine's Second Note of the Church
(ANTIQUITY) against the Cavils of the Adviser. By Mr. Tully, Preacher at
Newcastle upon Tine.

I believe I shall oblige some of my Readers, if I adververtise them, that
there is a complete Table to the whole Set of these Tracts about the Notes of
the Church, published by Mr. Chiswel, who printed all the several Tracts
themselves.

73. A full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church, relating
to the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the Belief of Transubstantiation, being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers, pretending the contrary. By Mr. Patrick.

74. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass. By Mr. Pain.

75. An Historical Treatise written by an Author of the Communion of the Church
of Rome, touching Transubstantiation, wherein is made appear, that according to
the Principles of that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.
Published by Mr. Wake.

76. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the sixth Chapter of St. John.
By Dr. Clagett.

77. Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist; wherein is showed, That the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.
Written by Mr. de la Placette, and Translated and Published by Dr. Tenison.

78. A brief Discourse of the Real Presence. By Dr. Henry More, late Fellow of
Christ's College, Cambridge.

79. A brief Declaration of the Lord's Supper. Written by Dr. Nicholas Ridley,
Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment. With some Determinations and
Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author. Published by Mr.
Wharton, Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

80. Diallacticon Viri Boni and Literati, etc. Written by Dr. Poynet, Bishop of
Winchester, in Edward the Sixth's days, and published by Mr. Pelling, Rector of
St. Martin's Ludgate.

81. Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture: or, the Protestant's Answer to
the Seeker's Request. By Robert N -- n, Esquire

82. The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic Letter to the Seeker: or, a
Vindication of the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request. By Mr. Williams.

83. The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation Demonstrated. By Mr.
Samuel Johnson.

84. The School of the Eucharist; Translated and Published with an excellent
Preface. By Dr. Clagett.

85. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host. By Mr. Wake.

86. A Reply to two Discourses lately printed at Oxford, concerning the
Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Holy Eucharist. By Dr. Aldrich, Canon
of Christ-Church, Oxford.

87. A Defense of the Reply to two Discourses lately printed at Oxford,
concerning the Adoration, etc. By Dr. Aldrich.

88. A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind, in Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux, of Communion, etc. By Mr. Pain.

89. A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have Erred; by
showing that the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have in all their
Decrees touching Communion in One Kind, contradicted the received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ. By Dr. Whitby, Precentor of Salisbury.

90. The Lay-Christian's Obligation to Read the Holy Scripture. By Dr.
Stratford.

91. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith. Writ by Reginald
Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the Year 1450.
Published with a Preface, by Mr. Wharton.

92. An Answer to the Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures
directly Authorizing their Tenets. By Dr. Sherlock.

93. A Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, in Answer to Protestancy Destitute of Scripture Proof. By
Dr. Sherlock.

94. An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of
England. By Mr. Williams.

95. A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address presented to the
Ministers of the Church of England, in Reply to a Pamphlet abusively Entitled,
A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith.
By Mr. Williams.

96. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith; with an Answer to the
Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English Reformation, in a Book
that came lately from Oxford, the first Part about Councils, written by --
Hutchison, Esquire the rest by Dr. Clagett.

97. An Historical Examination of the Authority of General Councils, showing
the false Dealing that has been used in the Publishing of them; and the
Difference amongst the Papists themselves about their Number. By Mr. Jenkins,
Fellow of St. John's College, in Cambrige.

98. A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom. By Dr. Clagett.

99. A second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme
Unction, to the Vinditator of the Bishop of Condom. By Dr. Clagett.

100. Two Discourses; of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. By Mr. Wake.

101. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress
are Historically considered. By Mr. Wharton.

102. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works. By the Reverend Mr.
Allix.

103. The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome: Written by the Author of
the Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, and Translated and Published by
Dr. Tenison.

104. A Treatise in Confutation of the Latin Service practiced, and by the
Order of the Council of Trent, continued in the Church of Rome. By Dr. Whitby.

105. A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic
Church: wherein most of the Controversies relating to the Church, are briefly
and plainly Stated. Part I. By Dr. Sherlock.

The Author did intend, and we hope will ere long gratify the World with the
Second Part of this Discourse concerning the Church.

106. The Pillar and Ground of Truth; a Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely Claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St.
Paul in 1. Tim. III. 11, 15. By Dr. Patrick.

107. A Discourse concerning Penance, showing how the Doctrine of it, in the
Church of Rome, makes void true Repentance. By Mr. Allix.

108. A short Discourse concerning the Church's Authority in Matters of Faith.
By Ignotus.

109. A Plain and Familiar Discourse, by way of Dialogue, betwixt a Minister
and his Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church. By Dr. Freeman.

110. A few Plain Reasons, why a Protestant of the Church of England should not
turn Roman Catholic. By the Bishop of Lincoln.

111. Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist; in a Letter to a Romish
Priest. By Ignotus:

112. The Country Parson's Admonition to his Parishioners; with Directions how
to Behave themselves, when any one designs to Seduce them from the Church of
England. By Dr. Asheton, Rector of -- in Surrey.

113. The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. By Dr. Asheton.

114. A Defense of the Plain Man's Reply. By the same Hand.

115. A Defense of the Country Parson's Admonition. By the same Hand.

116. Monsieur Claude's Conference with the Bishop of Meaux. Translated and
published by Ignotus.

117. A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side,
notwithstanding the Uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that their
Religion is the surest Way to Heaven. By Mr. Bolieu, Chaplain to the Lord
Chancellor Jeffreys.

118. An Historical Discourse concerning the Necessity of the Ministers
Intentions in Administering the Sacrament. By Mr. Allix.

119. A Sermon on St. Mark's Day. By Dr. Patrick.

120. An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium; wherein is shown, that
Antiquity (in relation to the Points of Controversy set down by him) did not
for the first five hundred Years Believe, Teach, and Practice, as the Church of
Rome does at present Believe, Teach, and Practice. Together with a Vindication
of the Veteres Vindicati, from the Attempts of the Author of Transubstantiation
Defended. By Mr. Gee.

About this time a more diverting Project was set on foot by the Papists, to
make the Clergy obnoxious to the Government, or to ruin their Reputation among
their own People: The Representer, who had mis-carried so much in his Attempt
of putting Varnisht Popery upon us, is known to have had no small share in the
New Project; which was to Represent our Pulpits as perpetually filled with
Untruths and Calumnies, with odious Representations and Characters of Popery:
this was done under the specious Pretense of giving Good Advice to the Pulpits;
in hopes, no doubt, that the Government would have done as Queen Mary did,
Silence the Preachers, who took such liberty of striking at the King's Person
through his Religion.

But if this failed, then to try the other part of the Project, which was to
have persuaded the Protestants of England, that notwithstanding the present
Opposition of the Clergy, there was in reality a very good Agreement between
the Church of England and the Church of Rome; and this was to have got the
People to have silenced their Clergy by running away from them as Papists in
their hearts: But both parts of this very Hopeful, but very Unchristian
Project, were successively defeated by these following Tracts:

121. An Apology for the Pulpits, in Answer to Good Advice to the Pulpits, etc.
By Mr. Williams.

122. Pulpit-Popery, True Popery; in Defense of the Apology, and in Answer to a
Book entitled, Pulpit-Sayings, or the Characters of a Pulpit-Papist Examined.
By Mr. Williams.

123. A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome* By Dr.
Sherlock.

124. The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
Opposition to a late Book entitled, An Agreement between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome. By Mr. Williams.

125. A Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium, from the Charge of Popery, in Answer to a late
pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England. By
Mr. Gee.

Concerning the Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome, and their
Infallibility, these Discourses were published:

126. A Sermon preached upon St. Peter's Day: Printed at the Desire of some
that heard it, with some Enlargements, by a Divine of the Church of England. By
Dr. Patrick.

127. The Catholic Balance; or, a Discourse determining the Controversies
concerning

I. The Tradition of Catholic Doctrines.

II. The Primacy of St. Peter, and the Bishop of Rome.

III. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a Christian State.

By Mr. Hill of Kilmanton, Somersetshire.

128. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion; with an Answer to Mr. Sclater's
Reasons, and the Collections of the Nubes Testium. By Mr. Pelling.

129. Sure and Honest Means for the Conversion of all Heretics; and Wholesome
Advice and Expedients for the Reformation of the Church. Translated, and
Published with a Preface, by Mr. Wake.

130. Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe. Published by Ignotus.

131. A Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy. Part I. In Answer to a Treatise
entitled, St. Peter' s Supremacy faithfully Discus'd, according to Holy
Scripture, and Greek and Latin Fathers: And to Dr. Godden's Sermon of St.
Peter, Preached before the Queen Dowager. By Dr. Stratford.

132. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility,

I. Whether the Church of Rome Believe it?

II. Whether Jesus Christ, or his Apostles ever Recommended it?

III. Whether the Primitive Church knew, or used that way of deciding
Controversy?

By Ignotus.

133. An Answer to a Book entitled, Reason and Authority, or the Motives of a
late Protestant's Reconciliation to the Catholic Church: With a brief Account
of Augustine the Monk, and Conversion of England. By Dr. Bembridge, Fellow of
Trinity College in Cambridge.

134. A Vindication of the Church of England from the foul Aspersions of Schism
and Heresy unjustly cast upon her by the Church of Rome. In two Parts. By Mr.
Altham, a Minister in Essex.

135. An Answer to a late printed Paper, given about by some of the Church of
Rome, in a Letter to a Gentleman. By Mr. Williams.

136. Notes upon Lucilla and Elizabeth. By Dr. Sherlock.

137. The State of the Church of Rome, when the Reformation Began, as it
appears by the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their
Own. By Dr. Clagett.

138. Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation, lately printed at
Oxford, and on the Oxford Theses. In two Parts. By Dr. Burnet, Clerk of the
Closet to his Majesty.

139. An Answer to the Considerations which obliged Dean Manby to embrace what
he calls the Catholic Religion. By Mr. King, Chancellor of St. Patrick's
Dublin.

140. An Answer to the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the
Reformation, lately printed at Oxford. By Mr. Atterbury, Student of
Christ-Church.

141. Animadversions of Mr. W.'s Discourse of Church Government. In two Parts.
By Mr. Smalridge.

142. The Reformation of the Church of England Justified, according to the
Canons of the Council of Nice, and other General Councils, and the Tradition of
the Catholic Church, being an Answer to a Paper reprinted at Oxford,
entitled, The Schism of the Church of England Demonstrated, etc. By Dr.
Saywel, Master of Jesus-Colledge, Cambridge.

143. The Queries offered by T. W. to the Protestants concerning the English
Reformation. Reprinted and Answered by Dr. Clagett.

Concerning Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, and the Idolatry of
the Church of Rome in general, these following Discourses were published:

144. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints;
with an Account of the Beginning and Rise of it among Christians; in Answer to
Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the Fourth Age in his Exposition, and Pastoral
Letter. By Dr. Clagett.

145. Speculum B. Virginis: a Discourse of the Due Praise and Honor of the
Virgin Mary. By Dr. Hicks.

146. The Primitive Fathers no Papists; in Answer to the Vindication of the
Nubes Testium. To which is added, An Historical Discourse concerning Invocation
of Saints, in Answer to the Challenge of F. Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. By Mr. Gee.

147. An Account of the Life and Death of the B. Virgin, according to Romish
Writers, with the Grounds of the Worship paid to her; and a Preface in Answer
to the Apology for the Contemplations on the Life and Glory of Holy Mary. By
Mr. Fleetwood, Fellow of King's College, Cambridge.

148. The Life of St. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi, a Carmelite Nun; with a Preface
of the Nature, Causes, Concomitants, and Consequences of Ecstasy and Rapture;
and a brief Discourse added about Discerning and Trying Spirits, whether they
be of God. By Dr. T. Smith, Fellow of Magdalene-Colledge, Oxford.

149. The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, in the Traditions of
that Church concerning her Life and Glory, and in the Devotions paid to her as
the Mother of God: Both showed out of the Office of that Church, the Lessons on
her Festivals, and from their allowed Authors. Part I. Wherein two of her
Feasts, her Conception and Nativity are Considered. By Mr. Patrick.

150. A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, in Answer to his Letter to a
Peer of the Church of England, clearing a Point in a Sermon preached at
Chester, in Answer to a Postscript joined unto the Answer to Nubes Testium. By
Mr. Gee.

151. A Second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply.
By Mr. Gee.

152. An Abridgement of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of
God, with the Approbation of the Doctors at Paris, etc. To which a Preface is
added, concerning the Original of the Story. Published by Dr. Clagett.

153. A Third Letter to F. Lewis Sabran, Jesuit; wherein the Defense of his
Challenge concerning Invocation of Saints, is Examined and Confuted. By Mr. Gee.

154. A Letter to the Superiors (whether Bishops or Priests) which Approve or
License the Popish Books in England; particularly to those of the Jesuits
Order, concerning Lewis Sabran, a Jesuit. By Mr. Gee.

155. The Fallibility of the Roman Church Demonstrated from the manifest Error
of the second Nicene and Trent Councils; which assert, That the Veneration and
Honorary Worship of Images, is a Tradition Apostolical and Primitive. By Dr.
Whitby.

156. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, concerning Images; with an
Answer to the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet, entitled, Nubes
Testium; in a Letter to a Person of Quality. By Mr. Pelling.

157. A Third Letter to a Person of Quality; being a Vindication of the former,
in Answer to a late Pamplet entitled, A Discourse of the Use of Images. By Mr.
Pelling.

158. A Discourse concerning the Second Council of Nice, which first
Introduced, and Established Image Worship in the Christian Church, Anno Dom.
787. By Dr. Comber, Praecentor of York.

159. A Discourse concerning Transubstantiation and Idolatry; being an Answer
to the Bishop of Oxford's Plea relating to those two Points. By Dr. G. Burnet.

160. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a late Author's
[viz. the Bishop of Oxford] true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and
Confuted. By Mr. Wake.

Concerning the Validity and Canonicalness of the Orders of the Church of
England, and the Uncertainty of those of the Church of Rome, we have had these
following Tracts written:

161. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in which it is
Demonstrated, that all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice
of the Primitive and Greek Churches, are still retained in our Church; in
Answer to a Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of
our Orders; and given to a Person of Quality. By Dr. Burnet, Nominated Bishop
of Salisbury.

162. Concio ad Clerum habita coram Academia Cantabrigiensi Jun. 11o. 1687,
etc. ubi Vindicatur Vera and Valida Cleri Anglicani, ineunte Reformatione,
Ordinatio. Cui accessit Concio habita Jul. 3o. 1987. de Canonica Cleri
Anglicani Ordinatione Latin reddita and aucta: annexum est Instrumentum
Consecrationis Matthew. Parker Archiep. Cantuar. By Mr. Thomas Brown, Fellow of
St. John' s College, Cambridge.

163. A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England, as by Law
Established; against some scattered Objections of Mr. Webster of Linne. By Mr.
Milbourn, Minister of Yarmouth.

164. A Plain Answer to a Popish Priest, Questioning the Orders of the Church
of England; drawn up for the Satisfaction of his Parishioners. To which is
annexed (in the second Edition) an Answer to the Oxford Animadverter's
Reflections. By Mr. A. Seller.

165. A Defense of the Ordinations and Ministry of the Church of England; in
Answer to the Scandals raised or revived against her, in several late
Pamphlets, and particularly in one entitled, The Church of England truly
Represented, etc. By Mr. Whitfield, F. of K. C. Came.

166. The Validity of the Orders of the Church of England, made out against the
Objections of the Papists, in several Letters to a Gentleman of Norwich, that
desired Satisfaction therein. By Dr. Prideaux, Prebendary of Norwich.

167. Roman Catholics Uncertain, whether there be any true Priests, or
Sacraments in the Church of Rome: evinced by an Argument urged and maintained
(upon their own Principles) against Mr. Edw. Goodal of Prescott in Lancashire.
By Mr. Marsden, Vicar of Walton in Lancashire.

About Michaelmas 1687, one of the Jesuits of the Savoy, Father Pulton, was for
signalizing himself in a Conference with Dr. Tenison, the Minister of that
Parish, wherein this Jesuit was seducing an ignorant young Youth: one would
have thought that the ill success which Mr. Peter Gooden the Secular Priest met
with at the Conference at the Dean of St. Paul's, when the Gentleman for whose
sake it was, declared himself satisfied, and settled in the Church of England,
might have cautioned Father Pulton from any further Attempts of this nature:
but some men can no more see their own Ignorance, than their own Faults. A
Conference was held, and was the occasion of these following Books:

168. A true Account of a Conference held about Religion, at London, Sept. 29,
1687, between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Thomas Tenison, D. D. By Dr. Tenison.

169. Mr. Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: or, a
Just Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account; his True
and Full Account of a Conference, etc. his Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T.'s Rule of Faith. By Dr. Tenison.

170. The Vindication of A. Crassener, Schoolmaster of Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Schoolmaster in the Savoy. By Mr.
Cressener.

171. The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum: or, an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, Considered in its false Reasonings and Quotations. There are
added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the first to the Defender of the
Speculum, the second to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences. By Mr.
Wharton.

172. An Answer to the Letter of the Catholic Soldier, in a Letter from C. D.
to A. B. the Examiner of his Speculum. By Dr. Tenison.

173. The Missionaries Arts Discovered: or an Account of their Ways of
Insinuation, their Artifices and several Methods of which they serve themselves
in making Converts; With a Letter to Mr. Pulton, challenging him to make good
his Charge of Disloyalty against Protestants: And an Historical Preface,
containing an Account of their introducing the Heathen Gods in their
Processions, and other Particulars relating to the several Chapters of this
Treatise. By Mr. H. a Divine of the Church of England.

174. A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. Part I. By Dr. Sherlock.

175. The Second Part of the Preservative against Popery: Showing how contrary
Popery is to the True Ends of the Christian Religion. Fitted for the
Instruction of Unlearned Protestants. By Dr. Sherlock.

These two last Books gave very great distaste to the Romish Priests, as one may
reasonably gather from the strange Answers that were made to them by Mr. Sabran
a Jesuit, who procured thereby an Antagonist for himself that he will always be
famous for, who made him this following Reply:

176. A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery: in Reply to a
Jesuit's Answer; wherein the R. Father's Reasons are fully Confuted. By W.
Giles, a Protestant Footman.

177. A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery: in Answer
to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. By Dr. Sherlock.

178. The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome Demonstrated in some Observations
upon the Life of Ignatius Loyala [Founder of the Jesuits Order.] By Mr.
Wharton.

179. Purgatory proved by Miracles: Collected out of Roman Catholic Authors.
With some remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints.
Published with an Ingenious Preface concerning Miracles. By Mr. Sam. Johnson.

180. A fourth Letter to a Person of Quality; being an Historical Account of
the Doctrine of the Sacrament, from the Primitive Times to the Council of
Trent, showing the Novelty of Transubstantiation. By Mr. Pelling.

181. Thirty Plain, but Sound Reasons, why Protestants differ from Popery. By
Ignotus.

182. A Discourse wherein is held forth the Opposition of the Doctrine,
Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and
Characters of the Christian Faith. By Dr. G. Burnet.

183. Pope Pius's Creed with Comments. By Mr. Altham.

184. The Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no Articles of the
Christian Faith. By the same Author.

185. Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others; with Reflections on a Book
called Pax Vobis. By Mr. Linford.

186. A Dialogue between two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism,
called, A short Catechism against all Sectaries. By Mr. Rawlett, late Preacher
at Newcastle upon Tine.

187. The Plausible Arguments of the Romish Priest, answered by an English
Protestant. By Dr. Comber, Precentor of York.

188. An Historical Relation of several Great and Learned Romanists that have
embraced the Protestant Religion. By Ignotus.

189. A Pacifick Discourse of the Causes and Remedies of the Differences about
Religion, which distract the Peace of Christendom. By Dr. Thomas Smith.

190. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy. Printed
at Oxford. By Mr. Tully.

191. A Request to Roman Catholics to Answer the Queries upon these their
following Tenets:

I. Their Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.

II. Their taking away the Cup from the People.

III. Their withholding the Scriptures from the Lays.

IV. The Adoration of Images, etc.

By Mr. Gourdon of Scotland.

192. The Judgment of Private Discretion in Matters of Religion, Defended in a
Sermon at St. Paul's Covent Garden. By Mr. Kidder.

193. A Plain Defense of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the meanest
Capacity: being a full Confutation of The Net for the Fishers of Men. By Mr. H.
Author of the Missionaries Arts, etc.

194. The Protestant and Popish Way of Interpreting Scripture, impartially
Compared, in Answer to Pax Vobis, etc. By Dr. Grove.

195. Some Queries to Protestants answered: and an Explication of the Roman
Catholick's Belief, in four great Points Considered:

I. Concerning their Church.

II. Their Worship.

III. Justification.

IV. Civil Government. By Mr Altham.

196. A brief Account of the first Rise of the Name Protestant, etc. By Ignotus.

197. The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of
his turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. By Mr. Else.

198. Two short Discourses against the Romanists. By Mr. Dodwell,
History-Professour at Oxford.

199. A Letter to a Lady, furnishing her with Scripture-Testimonies, against
the principal Points and Doctrines of Popery. By Ignotus.

200. A Treatise of Traditions. In two Parts. By Dr. Whitby.

201. The Judgment of Archbishop Cranmer, concerning the Peoples Right to, and
Discreet Use of the Holy Scriptures. Published with a Preface. By Mr. Gee.

202. A Letter of Enquiry to the Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus.
Written in the Person of a Dissatisfied Roman Catholic. By J. Tailor, Gent.

203. An Answer to a Book printed at Oxford, called, Pietas Romana and
Parisiensus. By Mr. Harrington of Oxford.

Having thus given a just Catalogue of all the Books that have come to my
knowledge, I will end with giving the List of the Tracts written upon the
excellent Design of the Clergy of this City, of Considering all the Places of
Scripture which Papists cite for their several Doctrines.

204. POPERY not Founded on SCRIPTURE, or the TEXTS which Papists cite out of
the BIBLE, for the Proof of the Points of their Religion, Examined, and showed
to be alleged without Ground. The Introduction by Dr. Tenison.

205. The TEXTS which Papists cite out of the BIBLE, for the Proof of their
Doctrine concerning The Obsuscurity of the Holy Scriptures, Examined. By Dr.
Fowler.

206. The TEXTS Examined which Papists cite out of the BIBLE for the Proof of
their Doctrine concerning The Insufficiency of Scripture, and Necessity of
Tradition. By Mr. Williams.

207. The TEXTS Examined which Papists cite out of the BIBLE, to prove The
Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Pope over the whole Church. Part I. By Dr.
Patrick.

208. The Second Part of the TEXTS Examined, which Papists cite out of the
BIBLE to prove The Supremacy of St. Peter, etc. By Dr. Patrick.

209. The TEXTS Examined which Papists cite out of the BIBLE for the Proof of
their Doctrine of Infallibility. By Mr. Tully.

210. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Worship of Angels and Saints
departed. Part I. By Dr. Freeman.

211. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Worship of Angels, etc. Part II.
By Dr. Freeman.

212. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Worship of Images and Relics.
By Mr. Gee.

213. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Seven Sacraments, and the Efficacy of
them. Part I. Concerning the Sacraments of Confirmation and Penance. By Mr. Gee.

214. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Seven Sacraments, etc. Part II.
Concerning the Sacraments of Orders, Matrimony and Extreme Unction, and their
Efficacy. By Mr. Gee.

215. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Sacrifice of the Mass. Part I. By
Mr. Kidder.

216. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Sacrifice of the Mass. Part II.
By Mr. Kidder.

217. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Transubstantiation. By Mr. Williams.

218. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Auricular Confession. By Mr. Linford.

219. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Satisfactions. Part I. By Mr.
Gascarth, Rector of Allhallows Barkin.

220. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Satisfactions. Part II. By Mr.
Gascarth.

221. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Purgatory. Part I. By Mr. Brampston,
Lecturer of St. Martin's Ludgate.

222. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Purgatory. Part II. By Mr. Brampston.

223. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. Part I.
By Dr. Scott.

224. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning Prayers, etc. Part II. By Dr. Scott.

225. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Celibacy of Priests, and Vows of
Continence. Part I. By Mr. Pain.

226. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Celibacy of Priests, etc. Part
II. By Mr. Pain.

227. The TEXTS Examined, etc. concerning The Visibility of the Church. By Mr.
Resbury.

228. The TEXTS Examined which Papists cite out of the BIBLE for the Proof of
their Doctrine of Merits. By Mr. Linford.

There will be Published two Tables to the whole Set of these several TEXTS, by
Mr. Chiswel the Publisher of them.

Having now dispatched the Catalogue of the several Books published against
Popery by the Members of the Church of England, I must, according to my Design,
pass now to those published by our Nonconformist Brethren against Popery
during King James the Second's Reign; which, according to my best Information,
are these:

^^^ Transubstantiation a peculiar Article of the Roman Catholic Faith; which
was never owned by the Ancient Church, or any of the Reformed Churches; in
Answer to a late Discourse called, Reasons for Abrogating the Test. By Mr.
Goodwin of London.

^^^ A plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the
Church of Rome, with the Sandy Foundations it is built upon, and the Arguments
that do clearly Evert and Overturn it. By Mr. Pendleberry of Lancashire.

These are all I find written by the Non-conformists, except we must reckon
among them the Book written by the late Henry Care: Whether he was a Member of
the Church of England, or a Dissenter, I cannot tell; however, I am sure
neither Party ought to be ashamed of the Book, which does very well deserve a
place in this Catalogue, and is called,

A Modest Enquiry, Whether St. Peter was ever at Rome, and Bishop of that
Church. By Mr. H. Care.

I need not here to beg our Nonconformist Brethren's Pardon for this Slender
Account of their Writings against POPERY, during the Reign of King James the
Second, because I have used great Diligence to attain an exact Account of them:
however, if there be any Discourses written by them, but omitted in this
Catalogue, or if any of those in the Catalogue whose Authors Names I could not
recover, do belong to them: If either the Authors, or any Friends for them,
will be pleased to send the Titles of the Books, with the Author's Name, to Mr.
R. Baldwin, the Publisher of this Catalogue, they shall be inserted into the
next Edition of this Catalogue, if it have one.

And the same Request is made to the Members of the Church of England.

The END.

